

A KEY
TO THE PSALM








A KEY TO THE PSALMS:
BEING A
TABULAR ARRANGEMENT,
BY WHICH THE PSALMS ARE EXHIBITED TO THE EYE ACCORDING TO A
GENERAL RULE OF COMPOSITION PREVAILING IN THE HOLY SCRIPTURES.
BY THE LATE
REV.THOMAS BOYS, M.A.,
OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.
EDITED, WITH INTRODUCTION, NOTES AND AN APPENDIX ON THE STRUCTURE
OF THE PSALMS AS A WHOLE,
BY THE
REV. E. W. BOLLINGER, D.D.
WITH PREFACE AND MEMOIR BY THE REV. SYDNEY THELWALL, B.A.


.LONDON:
Printed by George Berridge and Co.,
179 & ISO, Upper Thames Street.


CONTENTS.
Preface and Memoir ... ... ••• ••• ••• ••• ••• vn x
Introduction •• • x * xxv^
The Psalms 1
Appendix.: The Structure of the Psalms as a whole ... ... 117 158




PREFACE AND MEMOIR.
T HAVE been asked to prefix to this book a brief Memoir of Thomas Boys. Always
premising that I can only do this “ to the best of my knowledge and belief,” I
gladly comply; for the remembrance of those “ who have spoken to us the word of
God,” that, “observing the end of their conversation,” we may “imitate their faith,’"
is a Scriptural injunction.
Thomas Boys, the only son of Admiral Boys, of Ramsgate, was born on the i/th
of June, 1792. Educated at Tunbridge School, he went thence to Trinity College,
Cambridge, where he gained his scholarship in his Freshman’s year, a great thing at
Trinity. However, severe study so affected his health that he gave up the idea of
competing for honours, and came out “Captain of the Poll” —that is, first of all the
men of that year who took the Ordinary Degree —hundx*eds of marks ahead of the
second man. He must have been very young at this time; for in 1813 or 1814 he was
serving under the Iron Duke in the Peninsula. Probably it was thought that, with
an Admiral for his father and a General for his uncle, his “prospects” in the service
were hopeful. But April of the year 1814 saw the battle of Toulouse, and the end of
that awful war of which Hapier has given us so graphic a history. Thus Boys had
little opportunity of winning distinction. Distinction he had won, though, already ;
for, lad as he was, he had volunteered to conduct some treasure very near, if not
through, the enemy’s lines, and succeeded in doing it; and a sabre-cut above the eye
was another distinction, of a practical and honourable (if painful) kind. Had this been
all, the book to which this forms the preface might never have been written; or it
might have been some one else’s privilege to find that key of David which unlocks so
many treasures of his cabinet. But, in 1841, there appeared a volume called “ The
Protestant Annual”; and in that volume the gem is a short tale, of thrilling interest,
entitled “ The Confessional: by an Old Campaigner.” I could wish to reproduce that
tale here ; for to abridge it would be to spoil it. It must suffice to say thus much about
it: that it relates certain incidents, connected with the Peninsular War, in which the
writer, a Jew, “Isaac,” and his wife, “Rebecca,” and a young Portuguese officer,
Luis da M , are the central figures; that it is “ a tale of mystery and of treachery ;
and that it contains, as I believe, the real history of Mr. Boys’s conversion “ from dark-
ness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God. ” The battle of Toulouse, then,


not only ended, for him, that particular war, but his military career altogether He
enlisted under a new Captain. The weapon of steel was exchanged for “ the sword of
the Spirit.” The gallant young lieutenant became a gallant “officer of Jesus Christ.”
And so deeply did he feel the superiority of his later over his earlier service, that
when, at the Duke of Wellington’s funeral in 1852, he, as one of the surviving veterans,
was awarded a place of honour in the Cathedral, he would not consent to go till he had
ascertained that, being a Clergyman, he would be excused from wearing “ a mourning
sword.”
Whether it were tlxe incidents connected with “Isaac and Rebecca” which kindled
his sympathy for “Israel after tlie flesh,” and his zeal for the Hebrew tongue, or no,
certain it is that he became so expert a Hebraist that the palm of Hebrew scholarship
in England was, as years went on, said to lie between him, Tregelles (a pupil of Boys’s,
I fancy) and McCaul; and that he not only became officially connected with the
Society for Promoting Christianity among the Jews, particularly with their Educational
Institution in Palestine Place, and editor of their “Expositor,” but maintained his
interest in that wonderful People to the last. With the Jews’ Society was connected
another scholar of Trinity College, Cambridge,—my father, the Rev A. S. Thelwall.
He, throwing up all Cambridge prospects, had gone, as a Deacon, ordained to this
special post, in 1819, at Simeon’s urgent request, to undertake the double duty of
Chaplain to the English residents and Missionary to the Jews, at Amsterdam,
Between him (the first clergyman to be thus a missionary to the Jews) and Boys
there soon sprang up a friendship which, cemented by common sympathies and com-
mon persecutions, never ceased. To those two men, reared, as so many of our Reformers
were, at Cambridge (which, says even the worldly Whig Macaulay, “ had the honour
of educating the Bishops whom Oxford had the honour of burning”), was granted by
God the distinction of detecting the insidious beginnings of that neology which is now
(as Boys wrote to me long years afterwards) “established in the land”; and of
opposing it, and, along with it, Romanism, especially in its Puseyite developments, with
all their power. And here let me record my sad and deep suspicion that the treatment
accorded to these “two witnesses” and their scanty band of comrades, accorded, too,
by the Evangelical party itself as well as by others, goes very far toward accounting for
the state of that party, and the state of the Church of England at large, nor, perhaps,
of the Church of England only, at this time. Their fidelity to their principles was
shown, for instance, by their attachment to the Trinitarian Bible Society; in connection
with which Boys (as Editorial Superintendent) spent two years at Lisbon, revising the
Portuguese translation of the Bible ; and of which my father was a well-known secretary;
and by their vigorous- championing of “ sound doctrine from the pulpit, on the
and in the press. Yet so little was either of them appreciated that the one could say he


bad not received money enough from Church preferment to pay his college expenses,
moderate as they were; and Boys never had a church entrusted to him till his old
friend Babbage, the famous mathematician, took a small pamphlet which he had pub-
lished—l think on some astronomical topic —to Blomfield, who was then Bishop of
London, and said;—“ My Lord, it is a disgrace to us that the man who could write
such a pamphlet as that should be without preferment among us.” And how did the
Bishop act P He appointed him, now no longer in the prime and vigour of life, to a
new Church, one of the so-called Peel Churches, in Wenlock Road, Hoxton, for which
he was quite unsuited. A most inconsiderate appointment it was; for such a district
as that wanted, not a profound scholar, long and sorely tried by domestic sorrows and
systematic neglect and nnkindness, but a young man in the full buoyance of health
and energy, like the Apostles when they entered on their work. And that was the
only “ Preferment ”he ever held. Retiring from the active duties of it when
threatened with paralysis in the ptilpit, he continued nominally Incumbent till
his death. But how many in that district knew their privilege in having such a man
as its first Vicar, or their danger in opposing and vexing him, is a question which may
be suggested, but cannot be answered, in these pages. Various parishes he had served,
at different times, as Curate, or as Assistant:—such as Crayford and North Cray, in
Kent; Widford, in Hertfordshire; High Wycombe, Bucks, when Charles Bradley was
in charge there; St. Dunstan’s-in-the-West, Fleet Street; St. Mark’s, Myddelton
Squai’e, where the present Lord Chancellor will probably remember him well. But
this was his sole Incumbency. Perhaps, indeed, the place where for years he became
best known - and best appreciated - was the Reading-room of the British Museum.
There, his tall form and capacious head were daily conspicuous; and, while his ample
stores of knowledge were to some extent worthily admired, his stately courteousness,
keen humour, and grave power of checking any unseemly speech, found acknowledg-
ment even where the capacity of appreciating his deep spirituality was lacking.
To enumerate all his literary efforts is quite beyond my power. Indeed,
I suppose there is no man living who could enumerate them; because so much was
done anonymously. But the two works most intimately related to this present
volume were his Tactica Sacra, published in 1824, and his Key to the Booh of Psalms
(which has suggested the title of the present work), published in 1825. From
1827 —1830 he edited that masterly periodical, The Christian Review and Clerical
Magazine. What led to his discovery (or re-discovery) of the great principle of
Parallelism, or (as he preferred to call it) Correspondence, I know not. But a
little consideration of the many illustrations of that principle with which our own
bodies furnish us will of itself go far to show us how true to nature the principle is;
and whenever we get hold of anything that is true to nature as God made it, not as


sin lias deformed it, we may he pretty sure we are on a right track. Others, no
doubt, as he readily admits, had done more or less in the same path before him.
But, to my mind, he is by far the greatest master of the subject (as, indeed, he is one
of the most suggestive commentators on Holy Scripture, ancient or modern) whom
I know. As he “went up higher” on the 2nd of September, xBBo, in his 89th year,
this, it will be seen, is a posthumous giving to the Church of Christ some of the fruits
of his labours. But Dr. Bullinger, into whose hands the editorship has fallen, and
who, in fact, suggested the publication, has entered so fully into the subject, and is
so well qualified to deal with it, that it seems as if he had been specially chosen of
God to the task. That he should be Secretary of that Bible Society in connection
with which Mr. Boys, as we have seen, revised (or re-made) the Portuguese trans-
lation of the Scriptures, and that he should have been the first to affix to this trans-
lation marginal references, are coincidences not unworthy of remark by such as love
to trace “the finger of God” in the occurrences of daily life. Dom Pedro, if I mistake
not, publicly, in the market-place of Lisbon, thanked Mr. Boys for his version, and
said, while shaking hands with him, “What will my Catholic subjects think of my
shaking hands with a heretic P” What reception will be awarded to this “ Key ”by
Protestant scholars and students remains to be seen.
SYDNEY THELWALL.
Westleigh Vicarage,
North Devon.


INTRODUCTION.
r PHE works of the Lord are perfect; and the greatest of His works is His Word.
1 We are not of those who put these in opposite camps, as though they were
antagonistic the one to the other; or as though it were our great business to reconcile
the Word of God with His Works; hut we put God’s Word at the head of His
Works as the greatest and most important of them all. If we understand the Word,
it is comparatively of little importance whether we understand the Works ; for it
is the Word and not the Works which is “able to make us wise unto salvation.”
(2 Tim. iii. 15.) There cannot possibly be any contradiction between them, seeing
that they both proceed from the same Author.
“The Works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
therein.” The Microscope and the Telescope are both necessary; and, while they
have both been employed in seeking out the Works, they have not been equally
employed in searching out the Divine Word. For the most part the Microscope is
used; and single words, verses, and isolated passages are buried in a vast accumulation
of the words, notes and thoughts of commentators; while the Telescope is but little
used; and Students read on, forgetful and unmindful of the fact that each line and
each verse are only members of some larger structure, and that these larger structures
are only parts of others that go to make up a perfect whole. The Word thus corres-
ponds, in the perfection of its structure, to all the other Works of God.
Jehovah has been pleased to reveal Himself to man: and He has employed not
the words of angels, but human words, words pertaining to the Earth ; but they are
“ pure words,” and they are perfectly constructed. Sometimes they are put into
peculiar forms (or “figures”) for the purpose of special emphasis; but they are
always pure and perfect.
Many of the phenomena connected with their structure have been observed from
the earliest times, but it was De Rossi,* a most learned Jew of the 16th century, who
first published a vast mass of ancient Jewish learning bearing on the Sacred Text, in
his remarkable work, Meor Enajim {i.e., The Light of the Eyes). Bishop Lowth has
given an English translation of chapter lx.,f which deals with the construction of
words and lines. He also developed the doctrine of what he called Parallelisms , and
showed how in two or more lines word answers to word. These he divided into three
classes :
(1) Synonymous or gradational, e.g.,
'■ My soul doth magnify the Lord :
My spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour/’ (Luke i. 46, 47-)
Here, “spirit” answers to “soul,” “rejoice” answers to “magnify,” and “the Lord
answers to “God my Saviour. ’
* See article Rossi, Kitto's Biblical Cyclopedia, vol. iii. p. 702.
+ See Lowth’s Translation of Isaiah, Preliminary Dissertation, p. xxviii. (15th Ed., 1857).


(2) Antithetic (or opposite), e.g.,
‘ 1 Faithful are the wounds of a friend;
But deceitful are the kisses of an enemy.” (Prov. xxvii. 6.)
Here we have “deceitful” as the opposite of “faithful,” “kisses” as the opposite of
“wounds,” “enemy” as the opposite of “friend.”
(3) Synthetic, or Constructive , where the parallelism consists only in the
similar form of construction, e.g.,
“ The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul:
The testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple.
The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart:
The commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.
The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for ever:
The judgments of the Lord are true and righteous altogether. (Ps. xix. 7 —9.)
Bishop Jebb (in his Sacred Literature ) carried this principle further. He extended
the doctrine of Parallelism with reference to the Old Testament, and applied its
principles to the Hew, grouping a number of lines into paragraphs or stanzas. This
led to the discovery of a fourth class of parallelisms, which could not be seen until a
number of lines were thus brought together. He called this “ Introversion ;” where, with
any number of lines the first answers to the last, the second to the penultimate, and so
throughout, till we come to the two corresponding lines in the middle.
It was reserved for Thomas Boys, who was indeed indebted for some of his first
lights to former writers, really to develope and apply the principles which they had
formulated. Those principles, which had heretofore been applied only to short passages,
he applied to long ones; and he arranged whole chapters and books, as Bishops Lowth
and Jebb had arranged verses. He discarded the word Parallelism as altogether
inadequate; and preferred the word u Correspondence as more satisfactory, combining
and describing all the phenomena. “ Poetry,” also, as it had hitherto been called, was
found to be inadequate; inasmuch as precisely the same phenomena, the same perfection
of structure, and the same orderly arrangement are found in Genesis, the Historical
Books, the Gospels and the Epistles; in Old and New Testaments alike.
It will readily be granted that the sacred writers must have had a method of some
kind. It is difficult to imagine, and absurd to suppose, that the arrangements which we
discover are purely the result of accident. Every human writer has some order and
method; we cannot deny this, therefore, to the holy men of old. The Holy Ghost, by
Whom they were moved, has displayed order and arrangement in all the other works
of God: why should we not expect to find the same in the Word which He inspired ?
Whether the arrangement and design existed in the mind of the human instrument or
only in the mind of the Spirit, Who dictated, cannot be determined. One thing we do
know; and that is that the sacred penmen were not always fully aware of the purport of
that which they wrote (1 Peter i. 10, 11). It is equally possible, therefore, that the
words and their order were not understood by them to their full extent. Indeed, in
some Scriptures we discover an arrangement so marvellous and complicated that it
could hardly have been present, in all its parts, to the mind of the sacred writer at the
moment of writing it. It may be, also, that, as in the other works of God, there might
be latent perfections, to be discovered in after ages for the confirmation of the faith of
His People, and of the Truth of His Wbrd.
If this be so, then the duty and advantage of studying this subject do not need
enforcement. It must subserve a useful purpose, and we cannot ignore or neglect it


without loss to ourselves. It is by no means merely a matter of criticism or curious
disquisition, but a sacred thing. It will he the duty of everyone who aspires to
undeistand the Whrd of God, to procure all obtainable information respecting it.
And here it ought to be stated, that, to pursue the study of this subject thoroughly,
a knowledge of the original languages is indispensable. Ho translation transfers, or can
transfer, all the arrangements and correspondences. Indeed, from the fact that the
translators did not themselves perceive them, it is impossible they should preserve them;
while, on the other hand, undesigned and accidental correspondences may be discovered
in a translation, which in the Original have nothing that answers to them, and are
therefore without Divine authority. In some of the shorter and verbal arrangements
no rendering can accurately reproduce the symmetry of the original in another
language. But still there is much, very much, that an English Bible student may
accomplish; more perhaps than he will ever have time to discover or power to digest.
Great will be the reward of all who are led to devote any of their energies to this
study. Even ■when they fail to make a desired discovery, search for it will not be
fruitless; for the very act of searching for it will be a new reading of the Scriptures,
full of new delights.
The “arrangements” are almost invariably connected with the sense of the
passages, and this sense is generally unimpaired in translation. Where the corres-
pondence is of a more delicate and less obvious kind, there the discovery is often of
the greatest value in helping us to the true meaning of the passage. The corres-
pondence may not be at once seen, because the meaning of one or both passages taken
separately is not understood. But, when they are taken together, and placed one over
against the other, each becomes clear from the other’s light.
All the arrangements come under one of three forms ; but, as the third is only a
combination of the other two, these are really reduced to two fundamental forms:
(0 Alternate; (2) Introverted. We will give a few examples of each; merely
premising that the use of certain letters and signs is purely arbitrary, and for the
sake of convenience. Corresponding members are marked by the same letter; one in
Roman type (A), the other in italic type (A). These must be read together and com-
pared. Where there are more than two members, the letters are numbered (A 1 , A 2,
&c.), or corresponding Greek letters are employed. Until any can show a better
method, we must continue to use those employed by Thomas Boys. We ought,
perhaps, to note further here, by way of explanation, which will serve for the whole
book, that the first part of a verse is indicated thus 1-, the last part thus -1, and, if it
is necessary still further to divide it, a middle or inner part is indicated thus, -1-.
The words which mark the correspondence we print in darker type.
(i.) Alternate Arrangements.
a | The vile person shall no more be called liberal,
b | nor the churl said to be bountiful.
a For the vile person will speak villany, and his heart will work iniquity, to practise
hypocrisy, and to utter error against the Lord, to make empty the soul of the
hungry, and he will cause the drink of the thirsty to fail.
b I The instruments also of the churl are evil: he deviseth wicked devices to destroy
| the poor with lying words, even when the needy speaketh right. (Is. xxxii, 5 —7.)
In a. and a., the vile person ; a., negative, and a., positive. In b. and h., the churl;
b., negative, and 6,, positive.


a | A new heart also will I give you,
b 1 and a new spirit will I put within you ;
a I and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you an
1 heart of flesh.
b 1 And 1 will put my spirit within you. (Ezeb. xxxvi. 26, 27.)
In a. and a., the promise of a new heart; in b. and 6., the promise of a new spirit.
a 1 Cursed is the man that trusteth in man, &e.
b | For he shall he like the heath in the desert, &c.
a 1 Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord, &c.
b 1 For he shall he as a tree planted by the waters, &c. (Jer. xvii. 5—8.)
In a. and a., we have trust; in b. and b., comparison.
a 1 And he overthrew those cities,
b 1 and all the plain,
a | and all the inhabitants of the cities,
b | and that which grew upon the ground. (Gen. xix. 25.)
Here we have, in a. and a., the cities and their inhabitants ; while in b. and b., we
have the plain and its produce.
a 1 Grant me the place of this threshingfloor ;
b | and I will build an altar therein unto the Lord :
a 1 thou shalt grant it me for the full price :
b 1 and the plague shall be stayed from the people. (1 Chron. xxi, 22.)
Here we have, in a. and a ., David’s request; while in b. and b., we have his
design.
It will be observed in all these and other instances that, a., being in correspondence
with a., b. is practically in a parenthesis, and we may read on from a. to a., without any
break in the sense. So with b. and b., which maybe read in connection with each other,
a., being practically in a parenthesis.
We have a beautiful example of this in Hebrews i. and ii. These two chapters are
arranged in an alternate structure of four members, thus :
a | Heb. i. t, 2-.
b | -2—14.
a 1 Heb. ii. I—4.1 —4.
6 | s—lB.
Here we have —
a | God speaking.
b 1 The Sou—God—“better than the angels.”
a | God speaking.
b 1 The Son—Man—“lower than the angels.’’
How, it will be observed that a. begins with “ therefore ” (ii. 1) ; but this “ there-
fore ”is consequent, not on the end of b. (i. 14), but on the end of a. (i. 2-). If “ God
who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the
prophets, hath in these last days spoken unto us by His Son. . . . Therefore we ought
to give the more earnest heed to the things which we have heard, lest, &c.” So also
the “ for” with which b. begins (ii. 5) is consequent, not on the end of a. (ii. 4), but on
the end of b. (i. 14) : —“Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for
them who shall be heirs of salvation ? . . . . For unto the angels hath he not put in
subjection the world to come, &c.” Thus, the intervening member is practically in a
parenthesis.


Again:—
a | I have planted,
b | Apollos watered,
c | but God gave the increase.
a | So then neither is he that planteth any thing,
b | neither he that watereth ;
c | but God that giveth the increase. (i Cor. iii. 6,7.)
(2) Introverted Arrangements.
a | Make the heart of this people fat,
b | and make their ears heavy,
c 1 and shut their eyes ;
c 1 lest they see with their eyes,
h | and hear with their ears,
a [ and understand with their heart. (Is. vi. 10.)
Here, in the extreme members, a. and a., we have the heart; in b. and h., the ears;
and in c. and c., the eyes.
a | Follow not that which is evil,
b 1 but that which is good.
b | He that doeth good is of God :
a | He that doeth evil hath not seen God. (3 John 11.)
Here, in the extremes a. and a., we have evil, and negatives j while in the central
members, b. and 6., we have good, and positives.
a | Holding faith,
b | and a good conscience;
b 1 which some having put away,
a | concerning the faith have made shipwreck. (1 Tim. i. 19.)
Here we learn from the correspondences that, it is a good conscience which is put
away, and that the shipwreck is concerning the faith.
a | They saw that the gospel of the nucireumcision was committed unto me,
b 1 as the gospel of the circumcision was unto Peter:
b j for he that wrought effectually in Peter to the Apostleship of the circumcision,
a | the same was mighty in me toward the Gentiles. (Gal. ii. 7,8.)
In a. and a., we have St. Paul’s commission to the Gentiles; in b. and b., St. Peter’s
commission to the Jews.
a | Blessed be God,
b j even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ;
b | the Father of mercies,
a | and the God of all comfort. (2 Cor. i. 3.)
In a. and a., Deity; in b. and h., Paternity,
a | If God spared not the natural branches,
b | take heed lest He also spare not thee,
c 1 Behold therefore the goodness
d ] and severity of God:
d | on them which fell, severity ;
c | but toward thee, goodness, if thou continue in His goodness;
b | otherwise, thou also shalt be cut off.
a I And they also, if they abide not still in unbelief, shall be graffed in : for God is
I able to graff them in again. (Rom. xi. 21 23.)
Here we may express the Correspondence by marking the descriptive terms in the
form of a “ Skeleton,” according to the plan adopted throughout the Psalms :
a | The natural branches,
b | “ thee.”
c | goodness
d | severity.
d | severity,
c | goodness.
• b | “ thee.”
a j The natural branches.


Again a I And now also the axe is laid unto the root of the trees ; therefore every tree
I which bringeth not forth good fruit is hewn down, and cast into the Are.
b | I indeed baptize you with water unto repentance;
c | but lie that cometh after me is mightier than I,
c | whose shoes I am not worthy to bear.
h 1 He shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and with fire ;
a I whose fan is in his hand, and he will throughly purge his floor, and gather his
1 wheat into his garner; but he will bum up the chad: with unquenchable lire ’
(Matt. iii. 10 —12.)
The following “ Skeleton” will describe the correspondences :
a | "Warning,
b j Baptism.
c 1 Christ and John.
c ( Christ and John.
b | Baptism.
a | Warning,
It will be observed that in a. and a., the Lord is referred to : in a., as a hewer of trees;
in a., as a winnower of corn; in a., we have the axe of the hewer; and in a., the fan of the
winnower. In a., we have the distinction between good and bad trees ; in a., the distinction
between wheat and chaff. In both a. and a., we have the imminence of the danger
from the same avenging fire. With all these contrasts, there is the one correspondence
of “ warning.”
In c. and c., we have the superiority of Christ to John.
In b. and &., the superiority of our Lord’s baptism to John’s.
a | We know that thou art true
b j and carest for no man,
h | for thou regardest not the person of men,
a | but teachest the way of God in truth. (Mark xii. 14.)
In a, and a., we have truth; b. and ?>., independence, or impartiality.
a | Jesus saith unto him, Rise, take up thy bed, and walk,
b | And immediately the man was made whole,
c J and took up his bed, and walked;
d | and on the same day was the sabbath.
d | The Jews therefore said unto him that was cured, It is the sabbath day:
c | it is not lawful for thee to carry thy bed.
b 1 He answered them, He that made me whole,
a j the same said unto me, Take up thy bed, and walk. (John v. B—n.)
In d. and d., we have the sabbath; in c. and c., the bed carried; in b. and b., the
man made whole; in a. and a., the words of our Lord.
a | And he gave him none inheritance in it, no, not so much as to set his foot on:
b 1 yet he promised that he would give it to him for a possession,
b | and to his seed after him,
a j when as yet he had no child. (Acts vii. 5.)
In a. and a., we have the double obstacle; in b. and h ., the double promise.
a And the Lord God called unto Adam, and said unto him, Where art thou ? And he
said, I heard thy voice in the garden, and I was afraid, because I was naked ; and I
hid myself. And he said, Who told thee that thou wast naked ? Hast thou eaten of
the tree, whereof I commanded thee that thou shouldest not eat ? And the man said,
b The woman whom thou gavest to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
And the Lord God said unto the woman, What is this that thou hast done ? and the
woman said,
c | The serpent beguiled me, and I did eat.
c ] And the Lord God said unto the serpent, Because thou hast done this, &c.,
b | Unto the woman he said, 1 will greatly multiply thy sorrow and thy conception; &c.
a j And unto Adam he said, Because thou hast hearkened unto the voice of thy wife, &c.
(Gen. iii. 9 19.)
In a. and a., we have the man; in b. and h., the woman; in c. and c., the serpent.


a [ And she conceived, and bare Cain, and said. I have gotten a man from the Lord.
b | and she again bare his brother Abel.
b ] and Abel was a keeper of sheep,
a 1 but Cain was a tiller of the ground,,
c I And in process of time it came to pass, that Cain brought of the fruit of the ground
1 an offering unto the Lord.
d | And Abel, he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof.
d | and the Lord had respect unto Abel and to his offering :
c 1 but unto Cain and to his offering he had not respect. (Gen. iv. 1—5.)I — 5.)
In each of the above instances we have Cain in the extreme members, and Abel
in the central.
The last two members, d. and c., form a separate introversion by themselves; which
is by no means an unusual case :
d e | And the Lord had respect
f 1 unto Abel, and to his offering:
c f | And unto Cain, and to his offering,
e 1 he had not respect.
Again: —
a | Till thou return unto the ground;
b I for out of it wast thou taken:
b | for dust thou art,
a 1 and unto dust shalt thou return. (Gen. iii. 19.)
Here the correspondence is not so much in words as in the subjects. In a. and a.,
the end of man ; in h. and 6., his origin,
a | For my thoughts are not your thoughts,
h | neither are your ways my ways, saith the Lord.
b | For as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways,
a | and my thoughts than your thoughts. (Is. Iv. 8,9.)
In a. and a., thoughts; in b. and 6., ways.
a I Therefore shall Zion for your sake he ploughed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become
I heaps,
b 1 and the mountain of the house as the high places of the forest.
b 1 But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house of the
I Lord shall he established in the top of the mountains, &c.
a | For the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem.
(Micah iii. 12 ; iv. 1,2.)
In a. and a., Zion; in b. and 6., the mountain of the house of the Lord.
a 1 And he shall take the cedar wood, and the hyssop, and the scarlet ;
b ] and the living bird ;
c 1 and dip them in the blood of the slain bird, and in the runuing water,
d 1 and sprinkle the house seven times.
d | And he shall cleanse the house,
c | with the blood of the bird, and with the running water,
b | and with the living bird,
a | and with the cedar wood, and with the hyssop, and with the scarlet.
(Lev. xiv. 51, 52.)
In a. and a., the cedar wood, &c.; in b. and &., the living bird; in c, and c., the
blood of the bird, and the running water; in d. and d., the house.


a | i-. Sliem.
b | -i-. Ham,
c | -i. and Japheth.
c 1 2 — 5. The sons of Japheth.
b | 6 —20. And the sons of Ham.
a 1 2i — 31, Unto Shem also, &c. (Gen. x. 1 31.)
In a. and a., Shem, and his sons; in b. and b., Ham, and his sons; in c. and c.,
Japheth, and his sons, respectively.
a | And the LOED said unto Moses,
b 1 the man shall be surely put to death ;
c | they shall stone him with stones,
d 1 all the congregation, without the camp.
d | And they brought him forth, all the congregation, without the camp,
c | and stoned him w ith stones,
h | and he died;
a | as the LOED commanded Moses. (Num. xv. 35, 36.)
In a and a. we have the injunction of the Loan to Moses; in b. and h., the death
of the offender; in c. and c., the mode of putting him to death; in d. and d., his
executioners, and the place of his execution.
a 1 Arise,
b 1 shine ; for thy light is come,
c | and the glory of the LOED is risen upon thee.
d 1 For, behold, the darkness shall cover the earth,
d | and gross darkness the people;
c | but the LOED shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee.
b | And the Gentiles shall come to thy light,
a 1 and kings to the brightness of thy rising. (Isa. lx. 1 3.)
In a. and a., we have the rising of Israel; in b. and b., the light of Israel; in c.
and c., the glory of the Lord ; in d. and d., the darkness of the earth and its inhabitants.
a I As well the stranger, as he that is born in the land, when he blasphemeth the name of
j the Lord , shall be put to death.
b 1 And he that killeth any man shall surely be put to death.
c | And he that killeth a beast shall make it good ; beast for beast,
d I And if a man cause a blemish in his neighbour ; as he hath done, so shall it
j be done to him;
d 1 Breach for breach, eye for eye, tooth for tooth: as he hath caused a blemish
1 in a man, so shall it be done to him again,
c j And he that killeth a beast, he shall restore it:
b | And he that killeth a man, he shall be put to death.
a 1 Ye shall have one manner of law, as well for the stranger, as for one of your own
j country: for I am the Loud your God. (Lev. xxiv. -16—22.)
Here, in a. and a., we have the stranger; in b. and b., the killing of man ; in c. and c.
the killing of a beast; in d. and d., the causing of a blemish.
Sometimes these arrangements are of considerable service to us in the explanation
of difficult passages, and in the unravelling of such as are complicated. Notice a few
examples: —
a | The incense that ye burned in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem,
b | ye, and your fathers, your kings, and your princes, and the people of the land,
h 1 did not the Lord remember them,
a 1 and came it not into his mind? (Jer. xliv. 21.)
Here we at once perceive that the “ them” in b., refers to b., viz., to “ your fathers,
&c. So also the “it ”of a., refers, not to the idolatry of b., but to the “incense of a.
a ] Then Balak the son of Zippor, king of Moab, arose and warred against Israel,
b ] and sent and called Balaam the son of Beor to curse you:
b | But I would not hearken unto Balaam ; therefore he blessed you still: _
a 1 so I delivered you out of his hand. (Josh. xxiv. 9, 10.)
Here Balak is the subject of a., and Balaam is the subject of b.: therefore the
reference of a. is to Balak, out of whose hand Grod delivered Israel.


a | And ye shall make no league with the inhabitants of this land ;
b | ye shall throw down their altars:
h | but ye have not obeyed my voice :
a | why have ye done this ? (Judges ii. 2.)
In a., we have a thing forbidden, and in h., we have a thing commanded. The
guilt of the Israelites, in each particular, appears in b. and a. In b., they had not done that
which was commanded (b.); while in a., they had done that which was forbidden (a.).
a ( We have heard a rumour from the Lord,
b 1 and an ambassador is sent among the heathen,
h | Arise ye, and let us rise up against her in battle.
a 1 Behold, I have made thee small among the heathen: thou art greatly despised.
(Obad. -1, 2.)
It is not too much to say that this passage is unintelligible until we see it explained
by its structure. The words of b., are the words of the embassage mentioned in b.;
while in a., we have no longer the words of the ambassador, but of the Lord, who is
mentioned in a. Thus, in a., we have the “rumour” of a.; while in b., we have the
embassage sent among the heathen.
a | And he called the name of the place Massall,
b | and Meribah,
b 1 because of the chiding of the children of Israel,
a | and because they tempted the Lord. (Ex. xvii. 7.)
The place was called Massah (non) because of their tempting (DHD3) the Lord ;
and Meribah because of their chiding (n^).
To turn again to the New Testament: we come upon the simplest form of narrative,
and yet we discern the most perfect arrangement:—
a I And when he was come out of the ship, immediately there met him out of the tombs
| a man with an unclean spirit,
b | who had Ms dwelling among the tombs ;
c ] and no man could bind him, no, not with chains :
d 1 because that he had been often bound with fetters
e 1 and chains,
e 1 and the chains had been plucked asunder by him,
d 1 and the fetters broken in pieces:
c 1 neither could any man tame him.
b I And always, night and day, he was in the mountains, and in the tombs, crying, and
I cutting himself with stones.
a 1 But when he saw Jesus afar off, he ran and worshipped him. (Mark v. 2—6.)
Here we have, in e. and e., the chains of the person possessed;
in d. and d., his fetters;
in c. and c., the difficulty of binding and taming him;
in b. and 6., his places of resort, and habits;
in a. and a., his meeting with Jesus.
We must now come to the third class of arrangements, which, as we have said, is
a combination of the other two.
(3) Alternate and Introverted combined.
In these cases the general arrangement may be alternate, while some of its
members may consist of an introversion; or the general arrangement may be an
introversion, while some of its members may consist of alternations.


Take an example from Matt. xiii. 54 —58. Here, and throughout the work, we
employ capital letters for the general arrangement, and small letters for the subsidiary
members of it: —
A 1 a | And when he was come into his own country,
I b 1 he taught them in their synagogue,
B 1 insomuch that they were astonished, and said,
C | Whence hath this man this wisdom, and these mighty works ?
D I c 1 Is not this the carpenter’s son ?
I d| is not his mother called Mary ?
D I c | and his brethren, James, and Joses, and Simon, and Judas?
1 d 1 And his sisters, are they not all with us ?
C | Whence then hath this man all these things ?
B 1 And they were offended in him,
A a 1 But Jesus said unto them, A prophet is not without honour, save in his own
I country, and in his own house.
h 1 And he did not many mighty works there because of their unbelief.
(Matt. xiii. 54 —58.)
Here, while the arrangement as a whole is an Introversion, the members A. and A.,
D. and D., consist each of two members, which are strictly alternate. This produces
the combined result. In D., we have the father and mother of Jesus ; in D., his brethren
and sisters : that is, his father and brethren (males) in c. and c.; his mother and sisters
(females) in d. and d.
In C. and (7., we have the corresponding enquiries.
In B. and ß., the effect of his teaching; that is, in 8., astonishment, and in 8.,
offence.
In A and A., the extreme members, the correspondence is twofold, as it is in the
central members, D. and D.: a. answering to a., and b. to b. With regard to a. and a. ;
a., relates to our Saviour’s coming “into his own country”; a., to the treatment he
there met with. With regard to b. and b ., these refer to two things that generally
went together in our Lord’s ministrations, namely, in b., His teaching , and in 1., the
working of miracles.
These examples will suffice to illustrate the great principles which are found to
prevail in the structure of the Holy Scriptures. Several of the Epistles have been
completely set forth in Greek and English by Thomas Boys in his Tactica Sacra,
published in 1824, viz., the two Epistles to the Thessalonians, the second Epistle of
St. Peter, and the Epistle to Philemon. By a careful study of the marks made in his
Greek Testament, the Epistle to the Hebrews has recently been completed, and the
whole of these we hope to publish if we receive sufficient encouragement to enable us to
do so. Ho greater proof of Inspiration could be furnished than the most elaborate
and complicated, yet perfect, structure of the second Epistle of St. Peter. As we gaze
upon it, it seems impossible to imagine that all its details were fully present to the
mind of that human instrument who was perceived to be “ unlearned and ignorant ”
(Acts iv. 13).
Enough has been said to show the object of the present work. In 1825 Thomas
Boys published his Key to the Book of Psalms. It contained only sixteen examples,
with a full dissertation on the principles involved, and many illustrations, some of
which, with his remarks, we have given above. He lived to complete nearly the
whole of the Psalms, but it is not until now that they have been published. We
believe that this is the first time that such a work has been laid before the public:


for, writing in 1886, in a preface to The Paragraph Psalter , Dr. Westcott, tlie present
Bishop of Durham, recorded his testimony —“As far as I am aware, no attempt has
been made to exhibit the general structure of the Psalms.” This refers, of course, to
their being musically treated. But a most cursory reference to that work will show
the immense difference between the results respectively obtained.
It will be noticed that in the arrangement of the Psalms, some of the members are
long, and consist of a number of verses. We believe that in each such case there is a
perfect plan and structure, if we could only discover it. In many cases we have done
this; but in a supplementary manner, so as not to interfere with the more concise view
which the shorter and more condensed arrangement affords ; we have generally
repeated the words of the member, that its plan may be exhibited to the eye. It may
be taken for granted that all the longer members of the correspondences admit of
subdivision, and form complete arrangements of their own.
It may be that the correspondence is not so clearly marked in some cases as it is
in others ; and that the corresponding members may not seem exactly to resemble
each other in every point; but still, a correspondence is evident, either in their lead-
ing topics, in their relative situations, or in their leading or final terms. In a Scrip-
ture where the structure is alternate,
A 1
B|
*\
A. and A., may be two prayers; while B. and B , may be two thanksgivings. Or A. and
A., may be two exhortations , while B. and 8., may be two reasons or inducements.
Or A. and A , may be two addresses to the Almighty ; while B. and 8., may be, not
addresses, but merely descriptions of His attributes, operations or judgments. Thus,
though in each of these cases (A. and A., and B. and 8 ., respectively) there may not be
an exact resemblance in every particular, yet there is a perfect and essential correspon-
dence. They correspond in their relative situations, and on further examination they
will probably be found to correspond also in their leading terms. That is to say,
A. and A , will be found to begin or end with similar words or phrases, and so too
with B. and B.
Such is the character of the correspondences and resemblances which are now to
be exhibited in the Psalms. The advantage of knowing and observing them is indis-
putable and incalculable. They will tell us what was the particular plan of the com-
position ; what is the object and purport; where the various topics begin, and where
they terminate, and at what point they are resumed. For this reason the present
work may be correctly called “A Key to the Psalms.” It will be observed that the
arrangements are such as exist in the Psalms; they are not plans made for them, but
are those of the sacred writers; not that finality is claimed in each particular case.
There are evident traces in the Author’s manuscript that he was not, himself, always
perfectly satisfied. In one or two cases the word “ doubtful ” is written in pencil,
either by his own or some other hand. Some were evidently left for further
consideration, while a few were left incomplete, and one (Ps. cxix.) was not touched,
beyond a few pencil-marks in his Bible.
In all cases, what the Author is responsible for, and what the Editor is responsible


for, is clearly indicated. All editorial additions are marked (Ed.), or are put in square
brackets, thus, [...].
One liberty has, however, been taken. We have removed all emendations from
the text, giving them in notes where necessary or important.
This brings us to the question of the text, which might be thought an indifferent
matter. We decided to give the Authorised Version ; but from what Bible should we
take it ? In which edition should we find it ? It is not generally known that there
is no edition in current use that exactly represents that of 1611. The spelling has
been entirely remodelled ; many changes have been introduced, no one can tell when,
or by whom, or by what authority! Some are evidently cases of intentional correction,
others are clearly from negligent oversight. Not to incur undue responsibility
ourselves, we decided to adopt the current text of the Authorised Version, as it is
printed by the Revisers in The Parallel Bible of 1885. But we have indicated in the
notes where this differs verbally from the original edition of 1611. The only case in
which we have varied from this is in the type employed in printing the Divine Names
and Titles.
It is well known that though our Triune God is one Lord, yet many names and
titles are used to set forth the various relationships which he sustains to the creatures
of His hand. Just as with ourselves: a person has a name by which he is known to and
addressed by strangers , another by which he is known to his friends , another by which
he is known to relatives , and yet another used only in the bosom of his family , unknown,
it may be, by all beside.
So with the Divine Being: there are many names, each of which bespeaks some
peculiar relationship. These, though common to the whole Bible, abound in the
Psalms. But the Authorised Version does not preserve them, either by uniformity of
type or consistency of translation. Take, for example, the following passages from the
Psalms: —
“As for the El, his way is perfect: the word of Jehovah is tried : he is a buckler to all those
that trust in him. For who is Eloha save Jehovah ?or who is a rock save our Elohim ? It is
the El that girdeth me with strength.” (Ps. xviii. 30—32.)
“Jehovah liveth; and blessed be my rock; and let the Elohim of my salvation be exalted.
It is the El that avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me.” (Ps. xviii. 46, 47.)
“ El, Elohim, Jehovah, hath spoken, and called the earth from the rising of the sun unto the
going down thereof.” (Ps. 1,1.)
“ Sing unto Elohim, sing praises to his name: extol him that rideth upon the heavens by his
name, Jah, and rejoice before him.” (Ps. Ixviii. 4.)
“ When Shaddai scattered kings in it, it was white as snow in Salmon, The hill of Elohim
is as the hill of Bashan ; an high hill as the hill of Bashan The chariots of Elohim are
twenty thousand, even thousands of angels Adonai is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place.
Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts for men
[or in Adam] ; yea ,for the rebellious also, that Jah, Elohim might dwell among them. Blessed
he Adonai, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the El of our salvation. Selah. He that is
our El is the El of salvation; and unto Elohim # Adonai belong the issues from death.”
(Ps. Ixviii. 14 —20.)
“Will Adonai cast off for ever? and will he he favourable no more? . . . Hath El forgotten
to be gracious ? . . . And I said, This is my infirmity : hut I will remember the years of the right
hand of Elyon. . . . Thy way, 0 Elohim, is in the sanctuary: who is so great an El as our
Elohim ? Thou art the El that doest wonders: thou hast declared thy strength among the
people.” (Ps. Ixxvii. 7 —14.)
“ For who in the heaven can he compared unto Jehovah ? tv ho among the sons of El can be
* Written in Heb. Jehovah, but to be read Elohim, as in Ps. Ixix. 6.


likened unto Jehovah ? El is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints, and to be had in
reverence of all them that are about him. 0 Jehovah, Elohim of hosts, who is a strong
Jah like unto thee?” (Ps. Ixxxix. 6—B-.)
“The hills melted like wax at the presence of Jehovah, at the presence of the Adon of the
whole earth.” (Ps. xcvii. 5.)
“ For Jah hath chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar treasure. For I know
that Jehovah is great, and that our Adonim is above all Elohim.” (Ps. cxxxv. 4,5.)
These examples will be sufficient to show the importance of preserving these
Divine names. This we have endeavoured to do, not by altering the translation of the
Authorised Version, but by merely changing the types. To keep this change within
the smallest possible limits, we have preserved the plan observed in the Authorised
Version, where “Lord” is already used for Jehovah, and “God” for Elohim,
printing the names as follows :
1. El = God.
2- Eloha = GOD.
3* Q'n Elohim = God, as in the*A.Y.
4* i’PiT, Jehovah = Lord, as in the A.Y.
5- rr, Jah = LORD.
6- j™, Adon = lord.
7• Adonim = L-o-r-d.
8. Adonai = Lord, as in the A.Y.
9- mco, Messiah is translated “ the Anointed,” which words we have printed in capital
letters.
10. Elyon is generally, but not always, translated “ Most High.” This we have
always printed in capital letters and indicated the other translations in the notes.
11. Shaddai is translated, the Almighty. It is so printed, and pointed out in the notes.
The types, therefore, will always tell the reader exactly what the Divine Name is
in the Hebrew: and, if he bears in mind the following explanations, he need never be at
a loss for the key to this important subject.
1. EL God. In arriving at true knowledge concerning any word or expres-
sion in the Hebrew Scriptures it is necessary to note its first occurrence, as it is
generally important in helping us to fix on its essential meaning. El is probably a
primitive word, but so adapted as to form a participle of the verb bw and b'w, to he
strong, powerful, mighty. Hence it is always associated with the Deity as the source of
all power and might. Its first occurrence is in Gen. xiv. 18—20, in combination with
{■•l% (see No. 10), i.e., El-Elyon, El Most-High. The source of the Patriarch’s
str ngth was the Mighty God (Is. x. 21). And that Blessed One, when he became
“ a worm and no man,” and was humbled to “ the dust of death,” cried to the same
Mighty God as the source of His strength —Ps. xxii. x. —El-i, El-i, “My God, my
God.” (Matt, xxvii. 46.)
2. ELOHA (niV«), GOD. This is the singular form of Elohim (see No. 3). It
denotes abstract Deity, the one living and true God, who alone is worthy of
adoration. The name is always used with reference to “ the eternal power and
Godhead” as opposed to all false gods; and with reference to His power and
beneficence as opposed to the workings and characteristics of demons. It occurs
*57 times: the first of which is in Deut. xxxii. 15
kicked . . . then he forsook Eloha which made him, and lightly esteemed the Rock
of his salvation. They provoked him to jealousy with strange gods, with abomina-
tions provoked they him to anger. They sacrificed unto devils, not to Eloha ; to


Elollim ‘whom they knew not, to new gods that came newly up, whom your fathers
feared not. Of the Rock that begat thee thou art unmindful, and hast forgotten
El that formed thee.” Here, Eloha is the one true God, alone to be worshipped,
while El is the mighty Creator.
Neh. ix. 17, jB, is a beautiful example of His beneficent acts: “Thou art
Eloha ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness,
and forsookest them not. Yea, when they had made them a molten calf, and said, This
is thy Elollim.” Eloha therefore is the Adorable One.
3. ELOHIM God. This is the plural of “Eloha,” and occurs 2,700
times. It is from the same root as “El” and “Eloha,” and conveys the same idea of
power and might , but it is distinguished from them in its use by the Holy Spirit. El
denotes the source of all power ; Eloha denotes the eternal power and Godhead as the
alone object of worship ; while Elohlm is the displayer of that power in creation.
Gen. i. 1 (its first occurrence) teaches us this: “In the beginning Elollim created the
heaven and the earth.”
Our relationship to these titles is thus clearly defined. El is the source of our
power, the Mighty God; Eloha is the object of our worship, the Adorable One;
Elohlm is our Creator. Of course, each is true of all the three titles, inasmuch as
each name belongs and refers to one and the same Person; but each defines our
peculiar relationship to Him. Elohlm is related to me only as a Creator. Whenever
this title, therefore, is used of the Divine Being, it implies the God of power and
creation, and marks our relation to Him as such.
4 Jehovah (nirr), Lord. Prom its possible derivation it denotes the self-
existing One; He who was, and is, and ever will be; He who has continuous and
absolute existence. Whenever it is used it implies the covenant relation which He
sustains to the works which He has created. We can say “my God” (or my Elohim),
but not my Jehovah, because Jehovah is my Elohim. We can say, “the God (or the
Elohim) of Israel,” but not the Jehovah of Israel, for Jehovah is the covenant God
of Israel.
Jehovah is the “ I am,” and this name tells of the eternal unchanging presence of
a covenant God. (See John viii. 58; Ex. xxxiv. 6,7, 10.)
He appeared to the Patriarchs by the name of El Shaddai* (see below No. 11),
Ex. vi. 2. He was not knownf by the name Jehovah to them.
Its first occurrence is in Gen. ii. 4; (c/. iii. 22), in combination with Elollim
(see No. 3), and probably the compound (and all the compounds have their own
peculiar signification) may have special reference to Eden; as Jehovah has to the
Exodus; and Jehovah-Elohim-Shaddai (the Lord God Almighty) to the restored nation.
Jehovah, then, defines our covenant relationship to the Divine Being, as distinct
from a mere creature relationship. See the beautiful illustrations in 2 Chron. xviii. 31;
xix. 6, 7 ; and compare Psalms xiv. and liii.
5- JAH (rr), LORD, is composed of the first two letters of the word Jehovah,
* viz,, Gen. xvii. I; xxxv. 11 ; and xlviii. 3.
f means to perceive, to understand. Not merely to know of, or know about, but to discern
and know fully and experimentally. Thus tbe patriarchs did not know Him. They knew of His
name, but they were not aware of all that it meant and involved for them.


and is possibly an abbreviation of it, containing the essence of its meaning in a
concentrated form. Its first occurrence is Ex. xv. 2, in the first Song, a Song of
Redemption; and seems to be thus specially associated with Redemption -work in
all its fulness as to origin and design. It occurs forty-nine times {i.e., seven times
seven), forty-three of which are in the Psalms. The other six are Ex. xv. 2; xvii. 16;
Is. xii. 2 ; xxvi. 4 ; xxxviii. 11 (twice). All these may be studied with special reference to
its distinctive use. One who can use it, is one who can call the Divine Being, not merely
Jehovah {i.e., my God), but my covenant God who has Redeemed me.
6. ADON (p"»«), lord. This is always printed “ Lord” in the A.V. To distinguish
it from No. Bwe have printed it, in the Key, without the capital letter. It is from the
unused root jin, to he low, humble, or inferior (hence, ps a foundation,base,pedestal,threshold).
Then transitively, to make low or humble; to determine, dispose, rule. Hence Adon means
ruler, master, determiner, commander. Its first occurrence fixes its meaning, Gen. xviii. 12,
where Sarah calls Abraham her Adon (1 Pet. iii. 6). The word, therefore, expresses our
acknowledged deferential position in relation to the Deity, Adon is the common word
for superiority of position, whether as wife to husband, master to servant, or king to
subject, &c., both Divine and Human. When used of the Divine Being it has the
article Ha-AdOH.
Its use will be easily seen from the following passages :
In Ex. xxiii. 17; xxxiv. 23, it is combined with Jehovah, “Thy males shall
appear before the Adon Jehovah”* {i.e., the Covenant God, who is also thy Ruler
and therefore issues this command).
Josh. iii. 11, 13 ; and Zech. vi. 3, we read of “the Adon of all the earth.”
Ps. xcvii. 5 ; Mic. iv. 13 ; Zech. iv. 14: “ the Adon of the whole earth.”
Ps. cx. 1: “ Jehovah said unto ray Adon.” (See Matt. xxii. 43, 44.)
Ps. cxiv. 7 : “ Tremble thou earth at the presence of Adon, at the presence of the
Eloha of Jacob” (that is, tremble thou earth at the presence of thy Ruler, at the
presence of the Adorable One of Jacob).
In Is. i. 24; iii. 1; x. 16, 33 ; xix. 4; Mai. iii. 1: “ Thus saith the Adon, Jehovah
of Hosts.”t
These are all the occurrences; and they relate specially to Jesus, who was made low,
and “ humbled Himself. J” and on this very account was “ made (Ha-Adon) lord.” See
Acts ii. 36 and Phil. ii. 10, 11. Jehovah He could not be “ made ”; that He ever was
and ever will be. But because of His wondrous humiliation all power was given unto
Him in heaven and in earth, and He will presently exercise that power on earth as in
heaven, as so many of the Psalms testify.
7. ADONIM (o*Hn)> L-o-r-d, is the plural of “Adon.” Its first occurrence is
Gen. xix. 2, 18. It is the plural of majesty and excellence, and carries with it all that
* This combination is always read by the Jews as “ Lord God.”
t The word Host, or Hosts, is used of armies, angels, stars, &c. See Ps. xxxiii. 6 ;
xliv. 9; and Ixviii. il, “ the company (of women).” The first occurrence of the verb is Ex. xxxyiii. 8,
where it is used twice in connection with women. Compare i Sam. ii. 22.


relates to “Adon,” only in a greater and higher degree. Perhaps ownership may he
more strongly implied. All the instances occur in the Psalms except the following:—
Deut. x. 17. “For Jehovah your Elohim, is Elohim of Elohim, and Adonim of
Adonim, the great El, the mighty, and the terrible, which regardeth
not persons, nor taketh reward,”
Neh. hi. 5. “ The work of their Adonim.”
viii. 10. “Holy unto our Adonim.”
x. 29. “Jehovah our Adonim.”
Is. li. 22. “ Thus saith thy Adonim, Jehovah ; and thy Elohim.”
B. ADHNAI Opm), Lord. This title (unlike Adon and Adonim) is used exclusively of
the Divine Being. There are grave differences of opinion among grammarians as to the
precise nature and form of the worH. There can be little doubt, however, that when
the sacred, ineffable word “ Jehovah” came to be regarded as so sacred that it was
considered sacrilege to pronounce it according to its original and proper pronunciation,
its vowel points were used with the word “Adon” with the possessive pronoun,
and thus Adonee (*?'w), my Lord, became Adonai (w). This is the reason why the
manuscripts of the Hebrew Bible so frequently have Adonai, where the printed text
has Jehovah, and vice versa. Adonai occurs about 430 times; and the Massorah gives
a list of 134 places where it stands alone, instead of the word Jehovah.
Wherever, therefore, we have this word Adonai by itself, we are to understand it
as though it were read Jehovah.
These three words may therefore be thus distinguished:— Adon is the lord in
power and rule. AdOllilll is the L-o-x’-d, as owner and proprietor. While Adonai is
Jehovah, the Lord in the relationship of covenant blessing.
9. MESSIAH (mpo), The Anointed. This title of Jesus is generally thus
translated. It is from miia, to anoint , dedicate. The Greek is X/Hcrrds, because He is
the Saviour, anointed, and appointed, by the Father. Ps. ii. 2 is directly referred to
the Saviour in Acts iv. 26, &c.
10. ELYON (ply), The Most High. This name is from rf», to he high, lofty.
Elyoil is the High and Lofty One inhabiting eternity. “ God over all, blessed for ever.”
“ The Highest.” It occurs 33 times, 22 of which are in the Psalms.* It sets forth
the sublimity of the Deity as high above all; as Elohim does His creation relation-
ship; Jehovah, His covenant relationship; and Shaddai, His bounty and His all-fulness
of blessing for man.
11. Shaddai ('■nr), The Almighty. It is from the unused root rrrr, to moisten ,
bedew, give drink to, to suckle. Hence -nr, the breast of a woman. Shaddai, therefore,,
denotes not so much the power or might of the Deity, as the fulness of His resources,
His richness and bounty. Shaddai is the All-bountiful One. The first occux’rence of
this name (Gen. xvii. 1) gives us its meaning. For fifteen years there had been no
appearance of God to Abram, and no Divine communication. Abram had obtained a
son after his own will, and our attention is drawn to the Divine displeasure by the
silence of Heavexx in Gen. xvi. 16, and xvii. 1. Whexx God at length appeared, He
revealed Himself by a new title, “El Shaddai,” the All-bountiful One, intimating that
supply was to be sought—even the supply in fulfilment of the Divine promise —< nly
in Divinely -sanctioned ways, and not by human devices. Gen. xvii. 1, “I am
* The English “ Most High” in Ps. lyi. 2, and xcii. 8, is another word, ai'n ( marom ), lifted up,.


El Shaddai, walk before me,” &c, When God was calling Abraham to walk before
Him in the path of faith and dependence, the name which he used of Himself told
Abraham of the relationship which He would sustain toward him, as one Almighty
in resources to support and defend him, and to supply all his need. So, likewise, when
we are commanded (2 Cor. vi. 14 —18) to come out from evil associations and walk
before God, as Abraham did, and to be separate, the title chosen is that which was
used with Abraham, and for the same reason, “ Ye shall be my sons and daughters,
saith the Lord Almighty.”
See also Gen. xxviii. 3; xxxv. 11 ; xliii. 14; xlviii. 3; xlix. 25; Ex. yi. 3 ; and
Ezek. x. 3. These are all the places where Shaddai occurs in combination with El.
It occurs without El in Hum. xxiy. 4, 16; Ruth i. 20, 21; Ps. Ixviii. 14; xci. 1
Three times in the prophets —Is. xiii. 6; Ezek. i. 24; Joel i. 13; and 31 times in Job.
We lose the force of Ruth i. 20, 21, by not rendering thus : “ The All-bountifal hath
dealt very bitterly with me”; “The All-bountiful hath afflicted me.” So also
Joel i. 13: “It shall come as a destruction ( tiy) from the All-bountiful (’jc)”
Compare “the wrath of the Lamb” (Rev. vi. 16, 17).
Shadilai is not only invariably translated the Almighty, but the Almighty is
never used as the translation of any other Hebrew word.
The Titles of the Psalms form too large a subject to enter upon here, but a care-
ful study of the Appendix will show one of the uses of the Titles, especially the names
of the Sacred Penmen, in helping to determine the correspondences of the groups in
the different Books.
It is not the object of this work to furnish a commentary, or even exegetical notes.
It will lay the foundation for new studies and new works, and thus prove the truth of
the Saviour’s words: —“ Herein is that saying true . . . other men laboured, and ye
are entered into their labours.” (John iv. 38.)
E. W. BELLINGER.
Bremgarten,
Woking.


ERRATA.
Psalm x. 3, page 9, for Lord read Lord.
Psalm xxxvii. 13, page 34, for Lord read Lord.
Psalm Ixxiv. 8, page 68, for God read God.
Psalm cxy. 18, page no, for the Lord read THE LORD.


A KEY TO THE PSALMS.
ssalm i.
A i Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor standetli
in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful. 2 But his delight
is in the law of the Lord ; and in his law doth he meditate 1 day and night.
3 And he shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth
his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not wither; and whatsoever he doeth
shall prosper.
B 4 The ungodly are not so : but are like the chaff which the wind driveth away.
5 Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the
congregation of the righteous.
A | 6 For the Lord knoweth the way of the righteous :
B | but the way of the ungodly shall perish.
Psalm I. — The Skeleton.
A | I—3. The godly.
B | 4, 5. The ungodly.
A | 6-. The godly.
B | -6. The ungodly.
The first two members, A and B, admit of the following subordinate arrangement:—
A a 1 Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor
standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the scornful.
b 3 But his delight is in the law of the Lord : and in his law doth he meditate
day and night. 3 And be shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of
water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season; his leaf also shall not
wither;
c 1 and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper,
B c I 4 The ungodly are not so:
h | but are like the chaff which the wind driveth away.
a 5 Therefore the ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the
congregation of the righteous.
The Skeleton of A and B.
A Ia | 1. The godly blessed in not standing among the ungodly,
b | 2, 3-. Comparison (dm *:>).
c 1 -3. Prosperity.
B c | 4-. The contrary.
h | -4. Comparison (dm o).
I a 1 5. The ungodly punished in not standing among the godly.
1 “ Meditate ” is the same word in the Hebrew as “ imagine ” in Ps. ii. I. — (Ed.)


ssalm ii.
A I Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine 1 a vain thing ? 2 The kings
of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the
Loud, and against his Anointed, saying , 3 Let ns break their bands asunder, and
cast away their cords from us.
B 4He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in
derision. 3 Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his
sore displeasure.
0 6 Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion. 7 I will declare the
decree: the Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I
begotten thee. 8 Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. 9 Thou
shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a
potter’s vessel.
A | 10 Be wise now therefore, 0 ye kings : be instructed, ye judges of the earth.
B | 11 Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.
C 12 Kiss” the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his
wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust in him.
Psalm II. — The Skeleton.
A j I—3.1 —3. Mankind [and their speech].
B | 4, 5. The Lord [and His reply].
C | 6 —9. The Son [and His declaration].
A | 10. Mankind [spoken to].
B | 11. The Lord [to be feared].
0 | 12. The Son [to be submitted to].
IDsalm in.
A Psalm of David, when he fled from Absalom his son.
A a i Lord, how are they increased 3 that trouble me! many 4 are they that rise up
against me. ”
b | 2 Many there he which say of my soul, There is no help 5 for him in God. Selah.
c 3 But thou, 0 Lord, art a shield for me; my glory, and the lifter up of
mine head. r
B 4 I cried unto the Lord with my voice, and he heard me out of his holv
hill. Selah. J
-B | 3 I laid me down and slept; I awaked; for the Lord sustained me,
A a 6 I will not be afraid of ten thousands 6 of people, that have set themselves
against me round about-.
h | 7 Arise, 0 Lord; save me, O my God:
c for thou hast smitten all mine enemies upon the cheek bone; thou hast
broken the teeth of the ungodly. 8 Salvation helongeth unto the Lord:
thy blessing is upon thy people. Selah.
1 “Imagine, ”is the same word in the Hebrew as “ meditate ”in Ps. i. 2. (Ed.)
2 See Gen. xli. 40, “ be ruled ” —margin “kiss.” — (Ed.)
8 multiplied. 4 what multitudes. 8 salvation. 0 multitudes on multitudes.


A a | 1. Numbers of enemies against me (*ktf).
h | 2. No salvation (they say),
c| 3. Thou my help. (Experience : 2nd person.)
B| 4. Prayer answered. (Experience : 3rd person.)
B |5- Confidence justified. (Experience: 3rd person.)
A a| 6. Numbers of enemies against me (*h>).
b | 7-. Save me (I say).
1 c ! -7, 8. Thou my help. (Experience : 2nd person.)
Observe the obvious connection of c with c, rather than with h.
ssalm iv.
To the chief Musician on Neginoth, A Psalm of David.
A i Hear me when I call, 0 God of my righteousness: thou hast enlarged me when
I was in distress ; have mercy upon me, and hear my prayer.
B a| 2 oye sons of men, how long will ye turn my glory into shame?
b [ how long will ye love vanity, and seek after leasing? Selah.
Bag, But know that the Lord hath set apart him that is godly for himself: the
Lord will hear when I call unto him.
h 4 Stand in awe, and sin not : commune with your own heart upon your
bed, and be still. Selah. 5 Offer the sacrifices of righteousness, and put
your trust in the Lord.
A 6 There he many that say, Who will shew us any good? Lord, lift thou up the
light of thy countenance upon us. 7 Thou hast put gladness in my heart, more
than in the time that their corn aud their wine increased. 8 I will both lay me
down in peace, and sleep: for thou, Lord, only makest me dwell in safety.
Psalm IY. — The Skeleton.
A | 1. Address to Jehovah.*
B a 1 2-. Address to the sons of men ; referring to the Psalmist.
b | -2. Ditto, referring to themselves.
B a| 3. Address to the sons of men : referring to the Psalmist.
h | 4, 5. Ditto, referring to themselves.
A | 6—B. Address to Jehovah.
Note. —ln Psalm iii. we meet for the first time the word “Selah.” It seems impossible to
speak positively as to its meaning. As to its use, it is often found at the end of a member, and is
thus connected with the structure. It seems to connect, by a pause, two thoughts, the former
receiving additional emphasis in the latter, especially where the Psalm ends with “ Selah.” See
Psalm xxiv. 4, and xxv. I: also Ivii. 3, &c. “ Selah ” occurs 71 times in the Psalms :17 times in
Book i, 30 times in Book ii., 20 times in Book iii., and 4 times in Book v.
In sixteen of the Psalms it occurs once (vii., xx., xxi., xliv., xlvii., xlviii., 1., liv., lx., Ixi., Ixxv.,
Ixxxi., Ixxxii., Ixxxiii., Ixxxv., cxliii.). In fifteen Psalms it occurs twice (iv., ix., xxiv., xxxix.,
xlix., lii., Iv., Ivii., lix., Ixii., Ixvii., Ixxvi., Ixxxiv., Ixxxvii., Ixxxviii.). In seven Psalms it
occurs three times (iii,, xxxii,, xlvi., Ixvi., Ixviii., Ixxvii., cxl.), and in one Psalm it occurs four
times , viz., Ps. Ixxxix. But never in a Psalm without a Title.
In Hah. iii. it also occurs three times, bringing up the total number of its occurrences to 74
times in the Old Testament.— (Ed.)
* A and A refer to Jehovah, while B and B refer to “ the sons of men.”


ssalm v.
To the chief Musician upon Nehiloth, A Psalm of David.
A i Give ear to my words, 0 Lord, consider my meditation. 2 Hearken nntb the
voice of my cry, my King, and my God; for nnto thee will I pray.
B3 My voice shalt thou hear in the morning, 0 Lord ;in the morning will I
direct my prayer unto thee, and will look up.
C 4 For thou art not a God that hath pleasure in wickedness : neitner shall
evil dwell with thee. 5 The foolish shall not stand in thy sight:
G Thou hatest all workers of iniquity. 6 Thou shalt destroy them that speak
leasing: the Lord will abhor the bloody and deceitful man.
B 7 But as for me, I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy: and
in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy temple.
A 8 Lead me, 0 Lord, in thy righteousness because of mine enemies; make thy way
straight before my face. 9 For there is no faithfulness in their mouth; their
inward part is very wickedness; their throat is an open sepulchre; they flatter
with their tongue. 10 Destroy thou them, 0 God; let them fall by their own
counsels; cast them out in the multitude of their transgressions; for they have
rebelled against thee. 11 But let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice:
let them ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them: let them also that love
thy name be joyful in thee. 12 For thon, Lord, wilt bless the righteous; with
favour wilt tlaou compass him as with a shield
Psalm Y.—The Skeleton.
A | 1,2. Prayers and plea ('3).
B | 3. Promise [of prayer, private],
C | 4, 5- Negative [claims].
C | -5, 6. Positive [claims].
B ( 7. Promise [of worship, public].
A | B —l 2. Prayers and pleas (*3, *3, ’3).
The sixth member, A, may be thus arranged: —
A a 8 Lead me, 0 Lord, in thy righteousness because of mine enemies; make thy
way straight before my face.
b 9 For there is no faithfulness in their mouth; their inward part is very
wickedness; their throat is an open sepulchre; they flatter with their
tongue.
a 10 Destroy thou them, 0 God; let them fall by their own counsels; cast
them out in the multitude of their transgressions;
b | for they have rebelled against theo.
a 11 But let all those that put their trust in thee rejoice: let them ever shout
for joy, because thou defendest them: let them also that love thy name be
joyful in thee.
!3 12 For thou, Lord, wilt bless the righteous; with favour wilt thou compass
him as with a shield.
Skeleton of A.
a | 8. Petitions, for himself.
b( 9. Plea {*3). His enemies’ condition (present).
a | 10-. Petitions, concerning his enemies.
b | -io. Plea (*3). Their rebellion (past),
a | 11. Petitions, for the righteous.
/3 ( 12. Pleas (*3) Jehovah’s goodness (future).
Observe how these three petitions in A correspond with the three in A, which has only one plea.— (Ed )


|)salm vi.
To the chief Musician on Neginoth upon Sheminith, A Psalm of David.
A i O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.
2 Have mercy upon me, 0 Lord; for I am. weak: O Lord, heal me; for my bones
are vexed. 3 My soul is also sore vexed: but thou, O Lord, how long? 4 Return,
O Lord, deliver my soul: oh save me for thy mercies’* sake. 5 For in death
there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who shall give thee thanks?
B | 6 I am weary with my groaning;
C | all the night make I my bed to swim;
G 1 I water my couch Avith ray tears.
B 7 Mine eye is consumed because of grief; it waxeth old because of all mine
enemies.
A 8 Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; for the Lord hath heard the voice
of my weeping. 9 The Lord hath heard my supplication; the Lord will receive
my prayer. 10 Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed: let them
return and be ashamed suddenly.
Psalm Vl. —The Skeleton
A | I—s.1 —5. Prayer offered.
B | 6-. Exhaustion.
C 1 -6-. Weeping.
G | -6. Weeping.
B 1 7. Exhaustion.
A 1 B—lo. Prayer answered.
The first member, A, may be thus arranged: —
A A c I 1 O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot
I displeasure. 2 Have mercy upon me, 0 Lord;
and | for I am weak:
c | O Lord, heal me;
and | for my bones are vexed. 3 My soul is also sore vexed:
b | but thou, O Lord, how long?
.1 k| 4 Return, 0 Lord, deliver my soul: oh save me for thy mercies’ 1 sake.
8 1 3 For in death there is no remembrance of thee:
B | in the grave who shall give thee thanks ?
The Skeleton of A.
A A c 1, 2-. Prayer (supplicatory),
and | -2-, Plea, *3 (positive).
c | -2-. Prayer (supplicatory).
and I -2, 3-. Plea, *3 (positive).
B j -3. Quedion.
A | k 1 4. Prayer (supplicatory),
1 8 15-. Plea (negative).
B | -5. Question.
The last member, A, may also be arranged thus:—
A gI 8 Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; .
h for the Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping. 9 The Lord hath heard
my supplication;
h the Lord will receive my prayer.
tj 10 Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed: let them return and be
ashamed suddenly.
The Skeleton op A.
A g | 8-. Enemies addressed,
b | -8, 9-. Plea, »3 (past).
h | -9. Plea, (future).
g | 10. Enemies pleaded against.
1 No apostrophe before editions of 1769. Probably, in ed. 1611 “ menies ’ was used lor
singular. Heb. is “ -mercy's” —(Ed.)


s)salm vii.
Shiggaion of David, which he sang unto the Lord, concerning the words of Cush the Benjamite.
A ( 1 0 Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust:
B [ save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me:
C 2 Lest he tear my soul like a lion, rending it in pieces, while there is none to
deliver.
D 3 0 Lord my God, if I have done this ; if there be iniquity in my hands ;
4 If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me;
D (yea, I have delivered him that without cause is mine enemy;)
C I 5 Let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it; yea, let him tread down my
I life upon the earth, and lay mine honour in the dust. Selah.
B 6 Arise, O Lord, in thine anger, lift up thyself because of the rage of mine
enemies : and awake for me to the judgment that thou hast commanded. 7So
shall the congregation of the people compass thee about: for their sakes
therefore return thou on high. 8 The Lord shall judge the people : judge me,
0 Lord, according to my righteousness, and according to mine integrity that is
in me. 9 Oh let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end; but establish
the just: for the righteous God trieth the hearts and reins.
A 10 My defence is of God, which saveth the upright in heart. 11 God judgeth the
righteous, and God is angry with the wicked every day. 12 If he turn not, he will
whet his sword he hath bent his bow, and made it ready. 13 He hath also
prepared for him the instruments of death; he ordaineth his arrows against the
persecutors. 14 Behold, he travaileth with iniquity, and hath conceived mischief,
and brought forth falsehood. 15 He made a pit, and digged it, and is fallen into
the ditch which he made. 16 His mischief shall return upon his own head, and
his violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate. 17 I will praise the
Lord according to his righteousness: and will sing praise to the name of the
Lord most high.
Psalm Vll,— The Skeleton.
A | 1-. Trust.
B j -i. Prayer.
C f 2. Evil apprehended.
D | 3, 4-. Misdeeds suffered )
D | - 4 . Good performed \ su PP<>sdions.
C | 5. Evil apprehended.
B | 6 —9. Prayer.
A | 10 —17. Trust.
The seventh member, B, admits of the following subordinate arrangement:
B a 6 Arise, 0 Lord, in thine anger, lift up thyself because of the rage of mine
enemies : and awake for me to the judgment that thou hast commanded. 7So
shall the congregation of the people compass thee about : for their sakes
therefore return thou on high.
b | 8 The Lord shall judge the people :
a judge me, 0 Lord, according to my righteousness, and according to mine
integrity that is in me. 9Oh let the wickedness of the wicked come to an
end ; but establish the just:
h | for the righteous God trieth the hearts and reins.
The Skeleton oe B.
B a|6, 7. The second person,
b | 8-. The third person.
a | -8, 9-. The second person.
b | -9. The third person.
Note, i 5. A, B, C, D, D , C, the second person. 6 —9. B, the second and third person
alternately, 10 —17. A, the third person.


iJsalm vin.
To the chief Musician upon Gittith, A Psalm of David.
A | i 0 Lord o-u-r L-o-r-d, how excellent is thy name in all the earth!
B a | who hast set thy glory above the heavens.
b 2 Out of the month of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength
because of thine enemies, that thou mightest still the enemy and the
avenger.
B a 3 When I consider thy heavens, the work of thy fingers, the moon and the
stars, which thou hast ordained ;
b 4 What is man, that thou art mindful of him ? and the son of man, that
thou visitest him ? 3 For thou hast made him a little lower than the
angels, and hast crowned him with glory and honour. 6 Thou madest
him to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou hast put all
things under his feet: 7 All sheep and oxen, yea, and the beasts of the
field ; 8 The fowl of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatsoever
passeth through the paths of the seas.
A 1 9 0 Lord o-u-r L-o-r-d, how excellent is thy name in all the earth !
Psalm YIII. —The Skeleton.
A | 1-. Excellence.
B a | -1. Greatness of God.
b| 2. Condescension.
B a 1 3. Greatness of God.
h | 4—B. Condescension.
A] 9. Excellence,
ssalm ix.
To the chief Musician upon Muth-labben, A Psalm of David.
A i (k) I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole heart; (n) I will shew forth all thy
marvellous works. 2 («) I w r ill be glad and rejoice in thee : («) I will sing praise to
thy name, O thou Most High. ;
B 3 (l) When mine enemies are turned back, they shall fall and perisb at thy
presence. 4 For thou hast maintained my right and my cause ; thou satest in
the throne judging right. 3 (j) Thou hast rebuked the heathen, 1 thou hast
destroyed the wicked, 2 thou hast pat out their name for ever and ever.
6 (n) O thou enemy, destructions are come to a perpetual end: and thou hast
destroyed their cities ; their memorial is perished with them. 7 (l) But the
Lord shall endure for ever: he hath prepared his throne for judgment. 8 (i) And
he shall judge the world in righteousness, he shall minister judgment to the
people in uprightness. 9 (l) The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a
refuge in times of trouble. 10 (l) And they that know thy name will put their
trust in thee: for thou, Lord, hast not forsaken them that seek thee.
A 11 (t) Sing praises to the Lord, which dwelleth in Zion: declare among the people
his doings.
B 12 When he maketh inquisition for blood, he remembereth them :ho forgetteth
not the cry of the humble. 13 (n) Have mercy upon me, 0 Lord ; consider my
trouble which I suffer of them that hate me, thou that liftest me up from
the gates of death; 14 That I may shew forth all thy praise in the gates of the
daughter of Zion: I will rejoice in thy salvation. 13 (to) The heathen 1 are sunk
down in the pit that they made: in the net which they hid is their own foot
taken. 16 The Lord is known by the judgment which he executeth : the wicked'
is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah. x 7 (') The wicked
shall be turned into hell, and all the nations that forget God. x 8 (and) bor the
needy shall not alway be forgotten : the expectation of the poor shall not perish
for ever. 19 (p) Arise, 0 Lord ; let not man prevail: let the heathen be judged
in thy sight, 20 Put them in fear, 0 Lord : that the nations may know
themselves to be but men. Selah.
1 ona. a yun.


A ! 1,2. Thanksgiving.
B| 3 10. Excision of wicked. Judgment. Deliverance.
A | n. Thanksgiving.
B | 12 —20. Excision of ■wicked. Judgment. Deliverance.
The second, member, B, may be thus arranged:—
Ba 3 When mine enemies are turned back, they shall fall and perish at thy
presence.
n I c | 4 For thou hast maintained my right and my cause ;
and | thou satest in the throne judging right.
a 3 Thou hast rebuked the heathen, thou hast destroyed the wicked, thou
hast put out their name for ever and ever. 6 0 thou enemy, destructions
are come to a perpetual end : and thou 1 hast destroyed cities ; their memorial
is perished with them.
b and 7 But the Lord shall endure for ever: he hath prepared his throne
for judgment. 8 And he shall judge the world in righteousness, he
shall minister judgment to the people in uprightness.
c 9 The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed, a refuge in times
of trouble. 10 And they that know thy name will put their trust in
thee: for thou, Lord, hast not forsaken them that seek thee.
The Skeleton of B.
B a | 3. Excision of wicked.
B I c 1 4-. Deliverance.
| and | -4. Judgment.
a j 5, 6. Excision of wicked.
B | d|7, 8. Judgment.
I c | 9, 10. Deliverance.
The fourth member, B, may be thus arranged : .
B F i 12 When he maketh inquisition for blood, he remembereth them: he
forgetteth not the cry of the humble,
k 13 Have mercy upon me, 0 Lord; consider my trouble which I suffer
of them that hate me, thou that liftest me up from the gates of death :
1 14 That I may shew forth all thy praise in the gates of the daughter
of Zion: I will rejoice in thy salvation.
Gl5 The heathen are sunk down in the pit that they made: in the
net which they hid is their own foot taken.
Hl6 The Lord is known by the judgment which he executeth : the
wicked is snared in the work of his own hands. Higgaion. Selah.
H 17 The wicked shall be turned into hell,
g | and all the nations that forget God.
fij 18 For the needy shall not alway be forgotten: the expectation of the
I poor shall not perish for ever.
h 19 Arise, 0 Lord ; let not man prevail : let the heathen be judged in
thy sight. 20 Put them in fear, 0 Lord :
I | that the nations may know themselves to be but men. Selah.
The Skeleton of B.
B F i | 12. Remembrance,
k | 13. Prayer.
1 j 14. Effect of prayer granted.
0)15. The nations [dus].
h ( 16. The wicked [jmn].
H | 17-. The wicked [o*jmn].
G 1 -17. The nations [ddj],
F i | 18. Remembrance.
k | 19, 20-. Prayer.
I | -20. Effect of prayer granted.
. -Note. !The sense of the passage is restored by putting a full stop after “ end,” inasmuch as
in v, 6 the pronoun “ Thou” refers to the Lord. He it is who cuts off the wicked.


Itaalm x.
A ('?) Whj s fanciest thou afar off, O Lord? why hidest thou thyself in times of trouble?
2 The wicked in his pride doth persecute the poor: let them 1 be taken in the
devices that they have imagined.
B a 3 Tor the wicked boasteth of his heart's desire, and blesseth the covetous,
whom the Lord abhorreth. 4 The wicked, through the pride of his counten-
ance, will not seek after God: God is not in all his thoughts. 5 His ways
are always grievous; thy judgments are far above out of his sight: as for all
his enemies, he puffeth at them.
b 6 He hath said in his heart, I shall not be moved: for I shall never be in
adversity.
Bay His mouth is full of cursing and deceit and fraud: under his tongue is
mischief and vanity. 8 He sitteth in the lurking places of the villages: in
the secret places doth he murder the innocent: his eyes are privily set
against the poor. 9 He lieth in wait secretly as a lion in his den: he lieth
in wait to catch the poor; he doth catch the poor, when he draweth him into
his net. 10 He croucheth, and humbleth himself, that the poor may fall by
his strong ones. 2
& I 11 Me hath said in his heart, God hath forgotten: he hideth his face; he
j will never see it.
A 1 2 (p) Arise, O Lord; 0 God, lift up thine hand; forget not the humble. 13 Where-
fore doth the wicked contemn God? he hath said in his heart, Thou wilt not
require it. 14(1) Thou hast seen it; for thou beholdest mischief and spite, to
requite it with thy hand: the poor committeth himself unto thee; thou art the
helper of the fatherless. 15 (tlf) Break thou the arm of the wicked and the evil
man: seek out his wickedness till thou find none. 16 The Lord is King for ever
and ever: the heathen are perished out of his land. 17 (n) Lord, thou hast heard
the desire of the humble: thou wilt prepare their heart, thou wilt cause thine ear
to hear: 18 To judge the fatherless and the oppressed, that the man of the earth
may no more oppress.
Psalm X.- -The Skeleton.
A | 1, 2 Application and complaint.
Bla | 3 s.Details of the wicked [pride],
I b 1 6 His inward communings [concerning himselfl.
B \ a \ 7 —lo. Details of the wicked [oppression].
I b 1 11. His inward communings [concerning God].
A j 12—18 Application and complaint.
1 Lit , They shall. See verses 16—18. A and A correspond in their endings; A predicting,
and A declaring the destruction of the wicked. —Ed.
2 a c 1 7. Mouth, tongue.
d | 8-. Comparison to beast of prey,
c | -8. Eyes.
d | 9, 10. Comparison to beast of prey.
Psalms ix. and x. are linked together by an irregular alphabet running through the two
acrosticallv, as indicated (Psalm x. beginning with “ Lamed” (b), which is the beginning of the last
half of the alphabet); also by x. having no title ; by Psalm ix. ending with “ Selah,” implying a
pause between that and another portion, and by the repetition of similar w T ords and phrases. The
“Koph” (p), in ix, 19, instead of the repeated “ Kaph ” (3) of v. 18, calls our attention to its
repetition in x. 12, which begins with the same word and with the same prayer.-— (Ed.)


Itealnt xi.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
A iln the Lord put Imy trust: how say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to your
mountain ?
B 2 For, 10, the wicked bend their bow, they make ready their arrow upon the
string, that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart.
B 3 If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?
A | 4 The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lord’s throne is in heaven;
C I His eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men,
D | 5 The Lord trieth the righteous:
E but the wicked and him that loveth violence his soul hateth.
E 6 Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible
tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup.
I) | 7 For the righteous Lord loveth righteousness;
C | his countenance doth behold the upright.
Psalm XI. —The Skeleton.
A [ i. My confidence.
B 1 2. My danger.
B | 3. My danger.
A | 4-. My confidence.
C 1 -4. Beholding.
D | 5-. The righteous.
E ] -5. The wicked.
E 1 6. The wicked.
D | 7-. The righteous.
C | -7. Beholding.
|)salm xii.
To the chief Musician upon Sheminith, A Psalm of David.
A 1 Help, Lord; for the godly man ceaseth; for the faithful fail from among the
children of men.
Ba 2 They speak vanity every one with his neighbour: with flattering lips and
with a double heart do they speak,
b 3 The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that speaketh
proud things: 4 Who have said, With our tongue will we prevail; our
lips are our own: who is lord over us?
C | 5 For the oppression of the poor,
D 1 for the sighing of the needy,
E | now will I arise, saith the Lord;
C | I will set him in safety from him that puffeth at him.
B a 6 The words of the Lord are pure words: as silver tried in a furnace of
earth, 1 purified seven times.
b 7 Thou shalt keep them, 0 Lord, thou shalt preserve them from this
generation for ever.
A | 8 The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted.
to, or pertaining to, the earth, i.e v the world. Gen. i. I. The passage is explained by
the well-known figure of Ellipsis, thus;—•
a c | The words of Jehovah are pure words
d | As silver tried in a furnace :
c | Words pertaining to the earth,
d 1 But purified seven times. — (Ed.)


A | i. Decrease of good.
B I a | 2. Falsehood [man’s words].
I bl 3, 4. Threat of excision.
C | 5-. Oppression.
D | -5-. Sighing.
D | -5-. I will arise (for sighing).
(7 1-5. I will deliver him (from oppression).
B I a | 6. Truth [Jehovah’s words].
I b| 7. Promise of deliverance.
A | 8. Increase of bad.
|)salin xiii.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
1 A ( 1 How long wilt thou forget me, 0 Lord ? for ever ?
B ( how long wilt thou hide thy face from me ?
C 2 How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart
daily ? how long shall mine enemy be exalted over me P
2 A| 3 Consider and hear me, 0 Lord my God:
B | lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death;
G 4 Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him; and those that
trouble me rejoice when 1 am moved.
3 D | 3 But I have trusted in thy mercy ;
E | my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation.
E 1 6 I will sing unto the Lord,
D | because he hath dealt bountifully with me.
Psalm XIII.—The Skeleton.
1 A | 1-. “Forget.”
B | -1. Darkness.
C | 2. Afflictions, enemy.
2 A | 3-. Remember.
B | -3. Lighten.
G | 4. Afflictions, enemy.
3 D [ 5-. Past.
* E | -5. Future.
E 1 6-. Future.
D | -6. Past.
Note. —i. Complaint. 2. Prayer, 3. Confidence.
Observe also that A, B, and A, B, refer to the Lord, while C and C refer to David’s
enemy. —(Ed.)


xiv.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
A j The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. They are corrupt, they have
done abominable works, there is none that doeth good. 2 The Lord looked down
from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did under-
stand, and seek God. 3 They are all gone aside, they are alt together become
filthy: there is none that doeth good, no, not one. 4 Have all the workers of
iniquity no knowledge P who eat up my people as they eat bread, and call not
upon the Lord.
B 5 There Avere they in great fear: for God is in the general ion of the righteous. 1
6 Ye have shamed the counsel of the poor, 2 because the Lord is his refuge.
C 7 Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion ! when the Lord bringeth
back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.
Psalm XIY. —The Skeleton.
A j I—4.1 —4. The wicked.
B | 5, 6. A righteous individual [addressed].
C | 7. The righteous people.
The first member, A, admits of the following subordinate ari’angement:
A a | The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.
b | They are corrupt, they have done abominable works,
c | there is none that doeth good.
and | 2 The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men,
and | to see if there were any that did understand, and seek God.
cj 3 They are all gone aside, they are all together be omc filthy: there is
I none that doeth good, no, not one.
h | 4 Have all the workers of iniquity no knoAvledge P who eat up my people as
\ they eat bread,
a [ and call not upon the Lord.
Skeleton of A.
A a | 1-. Denial of God.
b | -i-. Depravity.
c | -1. General depravity [“none”],
and | 2-. Approach made on the part of God.
and | -2. Approach looked for on the part of man.
c | 3. General depravity [“none”].
b | 4-. Depravity.
a j -4. Neglect of God.
|)salm xv.
A Psalm of David.
A j i Lord, who shall abide in thy tabernacle P who shall dwell in thy holy hill P
B a 2 He that w'alketh uprightly, and worketh righteousness, and speaketh the
truth in his heart.
b 3 He that backbit eth not with his tongue, nor doeth evil to his neighbour,
nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbour.
B a 4 In whose eyes a vile person is contemned; but he honoureth them that
fear the Lord.
—b | He-i&a/ sweareth to Ms own hurt, and chingeth not. 5 He that putteth
, I not out his money to usury, nor taketh reward against the innocent.
A | He that doeth these things shall never be moved. ~
Note.—Compare Psalm liii.
1 The righteous man. 2 The poor man.


A | i. Stability [and permanent residence].
B a| 2. Positive ,
b | 3. Negative
B a | 4- Positive [qualities],
6 j -4, 5-. Negative '
A 1 -5. Stability [and permanent residence],
ipsalin xvi.
Michtam of David.
A | 1 Preserve me, O God: for in thee do I put my trust.
B a 2 omy soul, thou hast said unto the Lord, Thou art my Lord: my goodness
extendeth not to thee;
b 3 But to the saints that are in the earth, and to the excellent, in whom is
all my delight.
B a| 4 Their sorrows shall be multiplied that hasten after another god :
b their drink offerings of blood will I not offer, nor take up their names into
my lips.
A 5 The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest
my lot. 6 The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly
heritage.
C c 7 I will bless the Lord, who hath given me counsel : my reins also instruct
me in the night seasons.
and | 8 I have set the Lord always before me:
e | because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved.
D f | 9 Therefore my heart is glad, and my glory rejoiceth:
g | my flesh also shall rest in hope.
D f 1 10 For thou wilt not leave my soul in hell;
g | neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.
C c | ii 'Thou wilt shew me the path of life:
and | in thy presence is fulness of joy;
e | at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.
Psalm XVI.— The Skeleton.
A | 1. Trust iu God.
B Ia | 2. True God preferred,
i b 1 3. Saints preferred.
B \ a 1 4-. False god rejected.
b | -4. Wicked rejected.
A 1 5, 6. Trust in God
A may be thus expanded :
A a | 5-. The Lord my portion and
b | -5. The maintainer of mx’ lot.
h [ 6-. The giving of the lot.
a | -6. The goodly portion.—(Ed.)
C 0)7. The Lord my Teacher,
and | 8-. The Lord before me.
e | -8. The Lord at my right hand. [u'o'o]
D If | 9-. Inner man.
g | -9. Outer man.
• D I / | 10-. Inner man.
I g | -10. Outer man.
C c 1 11-. The Lord my Teacher.
and | -11-. I before the Lord.
e | -ir. I at the Lord’s right hand.


Itealm xvn.
A Prayer of David.
A i Hear the right, 0 Lord, attend unto my cry, give ear unto my prayer, that goeth
not out of feigned lips. 2 Let my sentence come forth from thy presence; let
thine eyes behold the things that are equal. 3 Thou hast proved mine heart;
thou hast visited me in the night; thou hast tried me, and shalt find nothing; I
am purposed that my mouth shall not transgress. 4 Concerning the works of
men, by the word of thy lips I have kept me from the paths of the destroyer.
5 Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not. 6 I have called
upon thee, for thou wilt hear me, 0 God: incline thine ear unto me, and hear my
speech.
B a 7 Shew thy marvellous loving-kindness, 0 thou that savest by thy right
hand them which put their trust in thee from those that rise up ngainst them.
8 Keep me as the apple of the eye, hide me under the shadow of thy wings,
b 9 From the wicked, that oppress me, from my deadly enemies, who com-
pass me about.
c 10 They are inclosed in their own fat: with their mouth they speak
proudly. 11 They have now compassed us in our steps : they have set
their eyes bowing down to the earth;
C | 12 Like as a lion that is greedy of his prey,
C | and as it were a young lion lurking in secret places.
B a | 13 Arise, 0 Lord, disappoint him, cast him down: deliver my soul
h from the wicked which is thy sword: 14 From men which are thy hand,
O Lord, from men of the world,
c which have 1 their portion in this life, and whose 2 belly thou fillest with
thy hid treasure: they are full of children, and leave the rest of their
substance to their babes.
A 15 As for me, I will behold thy face in righteousness: I shall be satisfied, when I
awake, with thy likeness.
Psalm XVII. — The Skeleton.
A | I—6.1 —6. I, (“As for me,” verses 4 and 6). [Righteousness.]
B a|7, 8. Prayer for deliverance,
b | 9. From enemies.
c | 10. Description of them.
D | 12-. Comparison.
D | -12. Comparison.
B a [ 13-. Prayer for deliverance.
b ( -13, 14-. From enemies.
c | -14. Description of them.
A | 15. I, (“ As for me”.) [Righteousness.]
The Editor suggests the following expansion of A: —
Adi Hear the right, 0 Lord, attend unto my cry, give ear unto my prayer, that
goeth not out of feigned lips. 2 Let my sentence come forth from thy presence;
let thine eyes behold the things that are equal,
e 3 Thou hast proved mine heart; thou hast visited me in the night; thou hast
tried me, and shalt find nothing; I am purposed that my mouth shall not
transgress. 4 Concerning the works of men, by the word of thy lips I have
kept me from the paths of the destroyer.
e 5 Hold up my goings in thy paths, that my footsteps slip not.
and 6 1 have called upon thee, for thou wilt hear me, 0 God: incline thine ear
unto me, and hear my speech.
Skeleton of A.
Ad [ 1, 2. Prayer. (“ Hear me.” “ Thine eyes.”)
e | 3, 4. Purpose that mouth shall not transgress. (*a 44j>»
e j 5. Purpose that footsteps shall not slip. iididj *54)
and 1 6. Prayer, (“ Hear me.” “ Thine ear.”)
1 They have. 2 And their.


Itealm xviii.
A a | 1 I will love thee, O Lord, my strength.
b j 2 The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and my deliverer; my God, my strength, in whom
( I will trust; my buckler, and the horn of my salvation, and my high tower.
B 3 I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised : so shall I be saved from mine
enemies. The sorrows of death compassed me, and the floods of ungodly men made me
afraid. 5 The sorrows of hell compassed me about: the snares of death prevented me. 6 In
my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God: he heard my voice out of his
temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears. 7 Then the earth shook and trembled;
the foundations also of the hills moved and were shaken, because he was wroth. 8 There
went up a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured : coals were kindled
by it. 9 He bowed the heavens also, and came down: and darkness was under his feet.
10 And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly; yea, he did fly upon the wings of the wind.
11 He made darkness his secret place; his pavilion round about him were dark waters and
thick clouds of the skies. 12 At the brightness that ions before him his thick clouds passed,
hail stones and coals of fire. 13 The Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the Highest
gave his voice; hail stones and coals of fire. 14 Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered
them ; and he shot out lightnings, and discomfited them. 15 Then the channels of waters were
seen, and the foundations of the world were discovered at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of
the breath of thy nostrils. 16 He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of many
waters. 17 He delivered me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me : for they
were too strong for me. 18 They prevented me in the day of my calamity : but the Lord was
my stay. 19 He brought me forth also into a large place; he delivered me, because he
delighted in me.
C 20 The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness; according to the cleanness of
my hands hath he recompensed me. 21 For I have kept the ways of the Lord, and have not
wickedly departed from my God. 22 For all his judgments were before me, and I did not
put away his statutes from me. 23 I was also upright before him, and I kept myself from
mine iniquity. 24 Therefore hath the Lord recompensed me according to my righteousness,
according to the cleanness of my hands in his eyesight.
G 25 With the merciful thou wilt shew thyself merciful; with an upright man thou wilt shew
thyself upright; 26 With the pure thou wilt shew thyself pure; and with the froward thou
wilt shew thyself froward. 27 For thou wilt save the afflicted people; but wilt bring down
high looks.
B 28 For thou wilt light my candle : the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness. 29 For by
thee I have run through a troop; and by my God have I leaped over a wall. 30 As for God, his
way is perfect : the word of the Lord is tried : he is a buckler to all those that trust in him,
31 For who is GOD save the Lord ? or who is a rock save our God ? 32 It is God that girdeth
me with strength, and maketh my way perfect. 33 He maketh my feet like hinds’ feet, and
setteth me upon my high places. 34 He teacheth mj r hands to war, so that a bow of steel is
broken by mine arms. 35 Thou hast also given me the shield of thy salvation: and thy right
hand hath holden me up, and thy gentleness hath made me great. 36 Thou hast enlarged my
steps under me, that my feet did not slip. 37 I have pursued mine enemies, and overtaken
them : neither did I turn again till they were consumed. 38 I have wounded them that they
were not able to rise : they are fallen under my feet. 39 For thou hast girded me with
strength unto the battle : thou hast subdued under me those that rose up against me. 40 Thou
hast also given me the necks of mine enemies; that I might destroy them that hate me.
41 They cried, but there was none to save them ; even unto the Lord, but he answered them
not. 42 Then did I beat them small as the dust before the wind : I did cast them out as the
dirt in the streets. 43 Thou hast delivered me from the strivings of the people; and thou hast
made me the head of the heathen : a people whom I have not known shall serve me. 44 As
soon as they hear of me, they shall obey me ; the strangers shall submit themselves unto me.
45 The strangers shall fade away, and be afraid out of their close places. 46 The Lord liveth ;
and blessed he my rock; and let the God of my salvation be exalted. 47 It is God that
avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me. 48 He delivereth me from mine enemies :
yea, thou liftest me up above those that rise up against me : thou hast delivered me from the
violent man.
A aI 49 Therefore will I give thanks unto thee, 0 Lord, among the heathen, and sing praises unto
I thy name.
bI 50 Great deliverance giveth he to his king; and sheweth mercy to his Anointed, to
I David, and to his seed for evermore.
This Psalm is incomplete in the MS.: the Editor is responsible for the following.
Skeleton of Psalm XVIII.
A [ a I i. The Lord spoken to, in love.
I b| 2. The Lord spoken of, as the Deliverer.
B | 3—19. Deliverance from enemies.
C | 20—24. Equity of the Lord’s dealings (with me).
C I 25—27. Equity of the Lord’s dealings (with others).
B 1 28—48. Victory over enemies.
A I a | 49. The Lord spoken to, in praise.
I I | 50. The Lord spoken of, as the Deliverer.


The second member, B, may be thus arranged :
B D cI 3 I will call upon the Lord, who is toorfhy to be praised; so shall Ibe saved from mine
I enemies.
dj 4 The sorrows of death compassed me, and Ihe floods of ungodly men made me afraid
d| 5 The sorrows of hell compassed me about: the snares of death prevented me
c6ln my distress I called upon the Lord, and cried unto my God: he heard my Voice out
| of his temple, and my cry came before him, even into his ears.
Ele I 7 Then the earth shook and trembled; the foundations also of the hills moved and were
| shaken because he was wroth.
I f I 8 There went U P a smoke out of his nostrils, and fire out of his mouth devoured • coals
| were kindled by it.
g| 9 He bowed the heavens also, and came down: and darkness wat under his feet
h j io And he rode upon a cherub, and did fly:
h | yea, he did fly upon the wings of the wind.
3 I 1 1 He made darkness his secret place; his pavilion round about him were dark
I waters and thick clouds of the skies.
/12 At the brightness that ivas before him his thick clouds passed, hail stones and coals
ot hre. • 13 Ihe Lord also thundered in the heavens, and the Highfst gave his voice •
hail stones and coals of fire. 14 Yea, he sent out his arrows, and scattered them • and
he shot out lightnings, and discomfited them,
e I 15 Then the channels of waters were seen, and the foundations of the world were
I | discovered at thy rebuke, O Lord, at the blast of the breath of thy nostrils.
I F ; 1 116 He sent from above, he took me, he drew me out of many waters. 17 He delivered
| me from my strong enemy, and from them which hated me :
k j for they were too strong for me.
I &j 18 They prevented me in the day of my calamity •
i I but the Lord was my stay. 19 He brought me forth also into a large place • he
! ! ! delivered me, because he delighted in me.
Skeleton of B.
B D c | 3. David’s call for deliverance; and confidence,
a I 4. Compassed by sorrows > compare
and | 5. Compassed by sorrows ik and It.
c I 6-. David’s call for deliverance; and answer
E e | 7. Wonders on earth,
f | 8. Fire from heaven,
g | 9. Darkness in the heavens,
h | 10-. The Lord’s speedy succour.
h | -10. The Lo v d’s speedy succour,
j g i ii. Darkness in the heavens.
/ | 12—14. Fire from heaven.
I e | 15. Wonders on earth.
F i | 16, 17-. The Lord’s deliverance
k | -17. Compassed hy enemies ) compare
k | 18-. Compassed hy enemies id and and.
i | -18, 19. The Lord’s deliverance.
The fifth member, B, may be thus arranged;—
B 1 28 For thou wilt light my candle : the Lord my God will enlighten my darkness. 29 For by
nee I have run through a troop ; and by ray God have I leaped over a wall. 30 As for God
is way is perfect: the word of the Lord is tried :heis a buckler to all those that trust in
rum. 31 hor who ts GOD save the Lord ?or who is a rock save our God?
m 32 It is God that gjrdeth me with strength, and maketh my way perfect. 33 He maketh
my feet like hinds feet, and setteth me upon my high places. 34 He teacheth my hands
to war, so that a bow of steel is broken by mine arms. 35 Thou hast also given me the
shield of thy salvation . and thy right hand hath holden me up, and thy gentleness hath
made me great. 36 Thou hast enlarged my steps under me, that my feet did not slip
37 I have pursued mine enemies, and overtaken them; neither did I turn again till thev
were consumed. 38 I have wounded them that they were not able to rise: they are fallen
under my feet. 39 For thou hast girded me with strength unto the battle :
n thou hast subdued under me those that rose up against me. 40 Thou hast also giyen me
the necks of mine enemies ; that I might destroy them that hate me. 41 They cried but
there ivas none to save them; even unto the Lord, but he answered them not 42 Then
did I beat them small as the dust before the wind : I did cast them out as the dirt in the
streets.
° u h °G h fA d l liv !r d me from the strivin S s of the people; and thou hast made me
the head of the heathen : a people whom I have not known shall serve me. 44 As soon
as they hear of me, they shall obey me : the strangers shall submit themselves unto me.
;i <J 4 ? the strangers shall fade away, and be afraid out of their close places.
l L\AnTf L <°r 5 and b 'f sed be rock 1 and let the God of my salvation be exalted.
to | 47 It %s God that avengeth me,
n J and subdueth the people under me.
0 I 48 He delivereth me from mine enemies: yea, thou liftest me up above those that rise
I u p against me : thou hast delivered me from the violent man.


Skeleton or B.
B 1( 28—31. Help in general.
m I 3 2 39-. Preparation for battle, and vengeance on enemies.
n I ~39—4 2 - Subjugation of enemies.
0 I 43 —45- Deliverance,
I | 46. Help in general,
in | 47-. Vengeance on enemies.
n | -47. Subjugation of enemies
0 | 48. Deliverance,
xix.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
A I T l ie heavells declare the glory of God ; and the firmament sheweth his
handy work. 2 Day unto day uttereth speech, and night nnto night she wet h
knowledge. 3 There is no speech nor language, where their voice is not heard.
4 Iheir line is gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the
world.
B In them 1 hath he set a tabernacle for the sun, 5 Which is as a bridegroom
coming out of his chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a race. 6 His
going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it •
and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof.
A 7 The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is
sure making wise the simple. 8 The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the
fii : -r e Co , mmari dHient of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. 9 The fear
ot the Lord is clean, enduring for ever : the judgments of the Lord are true and
righteous altogether. 10 More to be desired are they than gold, yea, than much
fane gold: sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb.
B 11 Moreover by them 1 is thy servant warned: and in keeping of them there is
great reward. 12 Who can understand his errors? cleanse thou me from
secret faults. 13 Keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins ; let them
not have dominion over me : then shall I be upright, and I shall be innocent
from the great transgression. 14 Let the words of my mouth, and the
meditation of my heart, be acceptable in thy sight, 0 Lord, my strength and
• my redeemer.
Psalm XlX.— The Skeleton.
A | I—4-.1 —4-. The heavens.
B | -4 —6. The sun in them (dui).
A | 7 —lo. The scriptures.
B | 11 —14. Thy servant in them (Dim).
1 cm, in them. The same word in v. 4 and v. 11.
A wonderful truth is brought out by a pencilled jotting in the author’s Hebrew Bible, to the
effect that many of the words in A and B are astronomical terms, and refer to the Sun and the
Heavens, which are the subject of A and B. Thus in B, inw “ warned ',” v. 1 1, is from vn, to be
bright, to shine, make light: then, to teach, to admonish. DiaiTD, “keeping,” v. 11, is from
to he stiff, rigid , as a fence, to keep, observe, watch , as the heavens, or for the morning, Ps. exxx. 6 ;
Is. xxi. 11: also as the heavenly bodies observe God’s ordinances. PilM'Jtlr, “errors,” r. 12, is from'
to wander, as the planets do. 31m, “ keep back ”v. 13, to hold back, restrain. “ hare
dominion over” v. 13, from hwo, to rule. Spoken of the sun and moon in Gen, i. 18, “ The sun to
rule the day, &c.,” Ps. cxxxvi. 8, 9. Also in A, ni'iro, “converting ,” v. 7is from iw, to turn,
be turned, return, as the sun in the heavens. reny, “ testimony,” v. 7, is from 1131, to turn back,
return , to go over again, repeat, reiterate, say again and again; hence, a witness; spoken of the
sun in Ps. Ixxxix. 37 as “the faithful witness in heaven.” iiJDNJ, “sure,” v. 7, is from (on, to
stay, be lasting , endure; “faithful,” ns the sun, the witness in heaven, Ps. Ixxxix. 37. j-iTmd,
“ enlightening,” v. 8, is from Tim, to be or become light, to shine, be bright, to give light as the sun,
Gen. i. 15, 17, 18 ; Is. lx. 19; Ezek. xxxii. 7. Observe also that in A, v. 4, is used by the Holy
Spirit, of the gospel in Rom. x. 18, thus uniting the two subjects and linking them together.— (Ed.)
The term “ Scriptures,” as representing and describing A, is weak, and fails to convey the
fulness of the combined Law, plus Testimony, plus Statutes, plus Commandment, plus Godly fear,
plus Judgments. The soul, in all this, is as the sun in the heavens! How small a key (Dim, verses
4 and 11) to open such a magnificent arrangement.— (Ed.)


xx.
To the chief Musician, a Psalm of David.
A 1 The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble; the name of the God of Jacob defend
thee; 2 Send thee help from the sanctuary, and strengthen thee out of Zion;
3 Remember all thy offerings, and accept 1 thy burnt sacrifice; Selah. 4 Grant
thee according to thine own heart, and fulfil all thy counsel.
B 5 We will rejoice in thy salvation, and in the name of our God we will set up
our banners:
C | The Lord fulfil 2 all thy petitions.
G 6 Now know I that the Lord saveth his Anointed; he will hear him from
his holy heaven with the saving strength of his right hand.
B 7 Some trust in chariots, and some in horses: but we will remember the name
of the Lord our God. 8 They are brought down and fallen: but we are risen,
and stand upright.
A | 9 Save, Lord: let the king hear us when we call.
Psalm XX. —The Skeleton.
A | I—4.1 —4. Prayer.
B | 5-. Trust for ourselves.
C 1 -5. Trust for the Anointed one.
C | 6. Trust for the Anointed one.
B | 7, 8. Trust for ourselves.
A 1 9. Prayer.
1 Margin, “ turn to ashes." The Lord accepts a sacrifice by consuming it with fire from
heaven: the fire falling on the substitute instead of upon the offerer. So the Lord accepted
Abel’s offering, Gen. iv. 4, “ had respect ”to it, and Heb. xi. 4, “ testifying of his gifts.” The fire
on the altar was from heaven, Lev. ix. 24, and when sacrifices were accepted away from this fire
on the altar, the fire of the Lord fell specially from heaven. See Jud. vi. 21, 1 Kings xviii. 38,
1 Chron. xxi. 26, and 2 Chron. vii. I. —(Ed.)
2 Wifi fulfil


ipsalm xxi.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
A i The king shall joy in thy strength, 0 Lord ; and in thy salvation how greatly
shall he rejoice !
B A 2 Thou hast given him his heart’s desire, and hast not withholden the
request of his lips. Selah. 3 For thou preventest him with the blessings
of goodness: thou sottest a crown of pure gold on his head. 4 He asked
life of thee, and thou gavest it him, even length of days for ever and ever.
5 His glory is great in thy salvation: honour and majesty hast thou laid
upon him.
B c 6 For thou hast made him most blessed for ever: thou hast made him
exceeding glad with thy countenance.
and 7 For the king trusteth in the Lord, and through the mercy of the
Most High he shall not be moved.
B A 8 Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies : thy right hand shall find out
those that hate thee. 9 Thou shalt make them as a fiery oven in the time
of thine anger: the Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire
shall devour them. 10 Their fruit shalt thou destroy from the earth, and
their seed from among the children of men.
B and n For they intended evil against thee: they imagined a mischievous
device, which they are not able to perform.
c 12 Therefore 1 shalt thou make them turn their back, when thou shalt
make ready thine arrows upon thy strings against the face of them.
A | 13 Be thou exalted, Lord,in thine own strength: so will we sing and praise thy power.
Psalm XXI. —The Skeleton.
A | 1. Messiah strong in his Father’s strength.
B a | 2 —5. The Lord’s dealings with the king.
b Ic| 6. Reward, inn'irn
j d| 7. Merit. idid'-I)!
B A | B—lo.8 —10. The Lord’s dealings with his enemies.
s and | 11. Guilt, o—
c | 12. Punishment. , ionnrn *3. —ditjq
A | 13. Messiah strong in his own strength.
Verses 2 — 5, a, may he thus arranged— (Ed.)
a e) 2. The grant of what was asked.
fj 3, The crown of salvation which was more than was asked. (“OOTpn)
e j 4. The grant of life which was asked.
/ | 5. The honour and majesty which was more than was asked.
1 *3, “/or,” as in verses 6, 7 and u.


|)salm xxii. 1
To the chief Musician upon Aijeleth Shahar, A Psalm of David.
X A iMy God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me ? why art thou so far from helping me,
and from the words of my roaring ? 2 omy God, I cry in the daytime, but thou hearest
not; and in the night season, and am not silent.
B | 3 But thou art holy, O thou that inhahitest the praises of Israel.
B I 4 Our fathers trusted in thee : they trusted, and thou didst deliver them. 5 They cried
I unto thee, and were delivered ; they trusted in thee, and were not confounded.
A j 6 But lam a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of the people.
y C a 7 All they that see me laugh me to scorn : they shoot out the lip, they shake the head
saying, 8 He trusted on the Lord that he would deliver him: let him deliver him,
seeing he delighted in him.
b 9 But thou 2 art he that took me out of the womb : thou didst make me hope token
I teas upon my mother’s breasts. 10 I was cast upon thee from the womb ; thou
art my God from my mother’s belly. 11 Be not far from me ; for trouble is near ;
for there is none to help.
1) c 12 Many bulls have compassed me : strong bulls of Bashan have beset me
round. 13 They gaped upon me with their mouths, as a ravening and a
roaring lion.
and 14 lam poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint: my heart
is like wax; it is melted in the midst of my bowels. 15 My strength is
dried up like a potsherd ; and my tongue cleaveth to my jaws; and thou
hast brought me into the dust of death.
D c I 16 For dogs have compassed me : the assembly of the wicked have inclosed
I me : they pierced 3 my hands and my feet.
and | 17 I may tell all my bones:
C a | they look and stare upon me. 18 They part my garments among them, and cast lots
| upon my vesture.
b 19 But be not thou 2 far from me, 0 Lord : omy strength, haste thee to help me.
20 Deliver my soul from the sword ; my darling from the power of the dog.
21 Save me from the lion’s mouth : for 4 thou hast heard me from the horns of the
unicorns.
Z Ej22 I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation will I
I praise thee.
F | 23 Ye that fear the Lord, praise him ;
G e | all ye the seed of Jacob, glorify him ; and fear him, all ye the seed of Israel.
f I 24 For he hath not despised nor abhorred the affliction of the afflicted ; neither
| hath he hid his face from him; but when he cried unto him, he heard.
E I 25 My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation: I will pay my vows before them
1 that fear him.
FI 26 The meek shall eat and be satisfied: they shall praise the Lord that seek him :
I your heart shall live for ever.
Ge 27 All the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the Lord : and all the
I kindreds of the nations shall worship before thee.
/ j 28 For the kingdom is the Lord’s : and he is the governor among the nations,
e 29 All they that be fat upon earth shall eat and worship: all they that go down
to the dust shall bow before him: and none can keep alive his own soul.
30 A seed shall serve him ; it shall be accounted to the Lord for a generation.
31 They shall come, and shall declare his righteousness unto a people that shall
be born,
c f ) | That 5 He hath done this.
1 This and Ps, Ixix. are parallel in their structure, and the Editor has followed Ps. Ixix.in addina-
here, X, Y, Z.
2 iIMN'O “ hut Thou,” v. g. hj-in'i “ but Thou,” v. 19. —(Ed.)
3 The structure, here, seems to confirm the reading of the printed Hebrew Text, niO “ as a linn. ”
(instead of Vito “ they pierced ”) : verse 12 (c) speaking of two animals, “bulls ” and “ a lion,” and
v. 16 (c ) answering it with two animals, “ dogs ” and “ a lion,” the former being in the plural, and
the latter in the singular, in each case. Hezekiah (Is. xxxviii. 13) supplies the verb “ they will break
up.” —(Ed.)
4 There is no “for” in the Hebrew. This last ejaculation leads on to the third)
division. —(Ed.)
5 “ For ” *D, as in verses 24 (f), and 28 (/).


X A|l, 2. Desertion.
B | 3. Goodness.
B | 4, 5. Goodness experienced.
A | 6. Desertion experienced.
Y Cla| 7, 8. Enemies.
| b | 9—ll. But Thou.
D | c ) 12,13. They. Beasts surround-
I d I 14, IS- I- [ing.
D j 0 | 16. They. Beasts surrounding.
I d | 17-. I.
C I a | -17, 18. Enemies.
I b | 19—21. But Thou.
Z E I 22. I.
E | 23-. The righteous.
G I e | -23. Israel in genera] (^3).
I f | 24. The reason (>3).
E | 25. I.
F | 26. The righteous.
G e ( 27. The world in general ()>3).
/ | 28. The reason ('3).
e I 2 9’3 r --The world in gcneral(b2).
</> | -31. The reason ('3).
|)salm xxiii.
A Psalm of David.
A 1 The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. 2 He maketh me to lie down in
green pastures : he leadeth me beside the still waters. 3 He restoreth my soul;
he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for his name’s sake.
B 4 Yea though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil: tor thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me.
B 5 Thou prepares! a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou
anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over.
A 6 Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life: and I will
dwell in the liouse of the Lord for ever.
Psalm XXIII. —The Skeleton,
A | I —3. Third person, “ He.” )
B| 4. Second person, “ Thou” ) biiee P*
B| 5. Second person, “ Thou.” ) „
A| 6. Third person, “He.” ( Servant.
Note.— A and A speak only of supply, while B and B speak of danger. There is also an
alternation in positives and negatives. Further, in each of the four members there are two leading
nouns:— °
I | Food and drink (“pastures ” and “ waters”).
2 | Bod and staff.
3 1 Food and drink (“ table ” and “ cup ”).
4 | Goodness and mercy.
Again, in— A | The Lord is spoken of.
B | The Lord is spoken to.
B ) The Lord is spoken to.
A | The Lord is spoken of.—[S.T.]
The Editor appends a further note, calling attention to the fact that, as the shepherd does
everythin;/ tor his sheep, so Jehovah is engaged in all His attributes and titles as “ the great
{Shepherd” of His people. Hence:—
In v. I we have Jehovah Jieeh (Gen. xxii. 14), “The Lord will provide:” that is whv
“ 1 shall not want.” J
In v. 2 we have Jehovah Shalom (Judges vi. 24), “ The Lord send peace,” leading beside
the waters of quietness, rest or comfort (v. 4).
In v. 3 we have Jehovah Rophi (Ex. xv. 26), “ The Lord that healeth thee ” for “He
restoreth (or reviveth) my soul (or life).”
In v. 3 we have Jehovah Tsidkentj (Jer. xxiii. 6, xxxiii. 16), “ The Lord our righteousness ”
guiding me in “ paths of righteousness.”
In v. 4 we have Jehovah Shammah (Ez. xlviii. 35),“ The Lord is there :” for in “ the valley
of the shadow of death . . . Thou art with me.” J
In v. 5 w r e have Jehovah Nissi (Ex. xvii. 15), “The Lord my banner,” and Jehovah
Sabaioth (i Sam. i, 3, &c.) “ The Lord of Hosts,” against all “ mine enemies.”
Inv. 5 w 7 ehave Jehovah Mekaddisdchem (Ex. xxxi. 13, &c.}, “The Lord that sanctiheth
you,” anointing my head with oil.
Note also that in Ps. xxii. we have “ the Good Shepherd ” (John x. 11) in death ;in Ps xxiii
we have “the Great Shepherd” (Heb. xiii. 20), in resurrection ; while in Ps. xxiv. we have “the
chief Shepherd” (1 Pet. v. 4), in ijlonj. —(Ed.)


Psalm xxiv.
A Psalm of David.
A 1 The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that dwell
therein. 2 For he hath founded it upon the seas, and established it upon the
floods.
B 3 Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord ? or 1 who shall stand in his holy
place ?
C 4 He that hath clean hands, and a pure heart; who hath not lifted up his
soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. 5 He shall receive the blessing
from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his salvation. 6 This is
the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, 0 Jacob. Selah.
A 7 Lift up your heads, oye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and
the King of glory shall come in.
B | 8 Who is this King of glory?
G | The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle.
N 9 Lift up your heads, oye gates; even lift them, up, ye everlasting doors: and
the King of glory shall come in.
1 | 10 Who is this King of glory ?
3 The Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory. Selah.
Psalm XXIY.— The Skeleton.
A | 1,2. Right to Earth.
-B | 3. Questions.
C | 4—6. Answer.
A \ 7. Right to Heaven.
B | 8-. Question.
C | -8. Answer.
n | 9. Right to Heaven,
i | 10-. Question.
Psalm xxv.
A Psalm of David.
A 1 (A) Unto thee, 0 Lord, do I lift up my soul. 2 omy God, (n) I trust in thee :
let me not be ashamed, let not mine enemies triumph over me. 3 (:) Yea, let
none that wait on thee be ashamed: let them be ashamed which transgress
without cause. 4 Ri) Shew me thy ways,o Lord; teach me thy paths. 3 (n) Lead
me in thy truth, and teach me: for thou art the God of my salvation; on thee do
I wait all the day. 6 (t) Remember, 0 Lord, thy tender mercies and thy loving-
kindnesses; for they have been ever of old. 7 (n) Remember not the sins of my
youth, nor my transgressions: according to thy mercy remember thou me for thy
goodness’ sake, 0 Lord.
B 8 (t£>) Good and upright is the Lord: therefore will he teach sinners in the way.
9 (’) The meek will he guide in judgment: and the meek will he teach his way.
i° (and) All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto such as keep his
covenant and his testimonies.
C | 11 (?) For thy name’s sake, 0 Lord, pardon mine iniquity; for it is great.
B 12 (and) What man is he that feareth the Lord? him shall he teach in the way
that he shall choose. 13 (j) His soul shall dwell at ease; and his seed shall
inherit the earth. 14 (and) The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him;
and he will show them his covenant.
net. 16 (s) Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me; for lam desolate and
afflicted 17 (v) The troubles of my heart are enlarged: 0 bring thou me out of
my distresses. 18 (l) Look upon mine affliction and my pain ; and forgive all my
sins. 19 (“)) Consider mine enemies; for they are many; and they-Rate me with
cruel hatred. 20 (tp) 0 keep ray soul, and deliver me: let me not be ashamed; for
I put my trust in thee. 21 (n) Let integrity and uprightness preserve me; for I
Avait on thee. 22 (5) Redeem Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.
I lu edit, of 1611 “ and who shall stand.” Changed to “ or ”in editions subsequent to 1769. — (Ed.)


A | I —7. Supplicatory.
B 1 B—lo. Didactic.
C | 11. Supplicatory.
B | 12 —14. Didactic.
A | 15 —22. Supplicatory.
This is an acrostic Psalm, but not perfect. Its anomalies excite attention, and'show that
everything is not sacrificed to the alphabet. The 21 letters (instead of 22) —three sevens —give
prominence to the central letter (b) and verse. The double n (v. i, 2), and the double (v. 18, 19,
same word Msn in each case), emphasises the looking up of the soul, and the looking down of God in
answer. The fact that Ps. xxiv. ends with “ Selah ” connects xxiv. 4 with these verses, xxv. 1,2,
and 18, 19. (See Note on Ps. iii.) The first and last verses are also made to stand apart, and
out of the regular sequence.— (Ed.)
ssalm xxvi.
A Psalm of David.
A | 1 Judge me, 0 Lord ;
A for I have walked in mine integrity : I have trusted also in the Lord ; therefore
I shall not slide.
B | 2 Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart.
B 3 For thy lovingkindness is before mine eyes: and I have walked in thy truth.
4 I have not sat with vain persons, neither will Igo in with dissemblers. 5 1 have
hated the congregation of evil doers ; and will not sit with the wicked. 6 I will
wash mine hands in innocency : so will I compass thine altar, O Lord : 7 That
I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy wondrous
works. 8 Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where
thine honour dwelleth.
C 9 Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men : 10 In whose
hands is mischief, and their right hand is full of bribes. *
G | 11 But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity:
I) | redeem me, and be merciful unto me.
B 12 My foot standeth in an even place: in the congregations will I bless the
Lord.
Psalm XXVI. —The Skeleton.
A | 1-. Prayer.
A | -i. Profession (*3 and «b).
B | 2. Prayer.
B | 3 —B. Profession (*D and nh).
€ | 9, 10. Prayer,
C | 11-. Profession.
D | -11. Prayer.
I) 1 12. Profession.
Note in verses 4 and 5 :
a 1 Past, “ have.’’
b | Future, “ will.”
a 1 Past, “ have.”
h 1 Future, “will.” —(Ed.)


Itealm xxvii.
A Psalm of David.
A i The Lord is my light and my salvation; whom shall I fear ? the Lord is the
strength of my life; of whom shall 1 be afraid? 2 When the wicked, even mine
enemies and my foes, came upon me to eat up ray flesh, they stumbled and fell.
3 Though an host should encamp against me, my heart shall not fear: though
war should rise against me, in this will Ibe confident. 4 One thing have I desired
of the Lord, that will I seek after; that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all
- the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in his
temple. 5 For in the time of trouble he shall hide me in his pavilion: in the
secret of his tabernacle shall he hide me ; he shall set me up upon a rock. 6 And
now shall mine head be lifted up above mine enemies round about me: therefore
will I offer in his tabernacle sacrifices of joy; I will sing, yea, 1 will sing praises
unto the Lord.
A 7 Hear, 0 Lord, when I cry with my voice: have mercy also upon me, and
answer me. 8 When thou saidst, Seek ye my face; my heart said unto thee,
Thy face, Lord, will I seek. 9 Hide not thy face far from me; put not thy
servant away in anger: thou hast been my help ; leave me not. neither forsake
me, 0 God of my salvation.
B | 10 When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me up.
B 11 Teach me thy way, O Lord, and lead me in a plain path, because of mine
enemies. 12 Deliver me not over unto the will of mine enemies: for false
witnesses are risen up against me, and such as breathe out cruelty.
C 13 I had fainted, unless I had believed to see the goodness of the Lord in the laud
of the living. 14 Wait on the Lord : be of good courage, and he shall strengthen
thine heart: wait, I say, on the Lord.
Psalm XXVII.—The Skeleton.
A | i —6. The Lord spoken of.
A | 7 —9. Spoken to (7, 8, positive ; 9, negative).
B | 10. Spoken of.
B j 11, 12. Spoken to (ir, positive; 12, negative).
C | 13, 14. Spoken of.
|)salm xxviii.
A Psalm of David.
A i Unto thee will I cry, 0 Lord my rock; be not silent to me : lest, if thou be
silent to me, I become like them that go down into the pit. 2 Hear the voice of
my supplications, when I cry unto thee, when I lift up my hands toward thy
holy oracle. 3 Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the workers of
iniquity, which speak peace to their neighbours, but mischief is in their hearts.
4 Give them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of their
endeavours ; give them after the work of their hands ; render to them their desert.
B 5 Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his
hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up.
B 6 Blessed be the Lord, because he hath heard the voice of my supplications.
7 The Lord is my strength and my shield; my heart trusted in him, and lam
helped: therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth ; and with my song will I praise
him. 8 The Lord is their strength, and he is the saving strength of his
Anointed.
A 9 Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance: feed them also, and lift them up
for ever.
Psalm XXVIII.—The Skeleton.
A | I—4.1 —4. The Lord spoken to. [Prayer.]
B | 5. Spoken of. [Concerning the Wicked.]
B | 6 —B. Spoken of. [Thanksgiving.]
Aj 9. Spoken to. [Concerning the Eighteous.]


|3salm xxix.
A Psalm of David.
A 1 Give unto the Lord, O ye mighty, 1 give unto the Lord glory and strength.
2 Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name; worship the Lord in the
beauty of holiness.
13 3 The voice of the Lord *« u pon the waters: the God of glory thundereth : the
Lord vs upon many waters. 4 The voice of the Lord is powerful ; the voice of
the Lord is full of majesty. 5 The voice of the Lord breaketh the cedars ; yea,
the Lord breaketh the cedars of Lebanon. 6 He maketh them also to skip like
a calf; Lebanon and Sirion like a young unicorn. 7 The voice of the Lord
divideth the flames of fire. 8 The voice of the Lord shaketh the wilderness;
the Lord shaketh the wilderness of Kadesh 9 The voice of the Lord maketh
the hinds to calve, and discovereth the forests ;
A [ and in his temple doth every one speak of hu glory. 2
B JO The Loud sitteth upon the flood; yea, the Lord sittoth King for ever.
1 x The Lord will give strength uTo his people; the Lord will bless his people
with peace.
Psalm XXIX.—T re Skeleton.
A | 1,2. Exhortation to praise (unpTi'nm).
15 I 3—9"- Braise rendered (3—B, inanimate; g, animate).
UA j -9. Exhortation to praise (“von, lio'iil).
A | 10, 11. Praise rendered (10, inanimate; 11, animate).
1 Sons of El. —(Ed.)
2 And in His temple speak to every one of His glory.— (Ed.)
Psalm xxix. is the sequel to Psalm xxviii., being the fulfilment of the promise in xxviii. 7. It
further corresponds by contrasting the “voice” of David (xxviii. 6) and the “ Voice of the Lord »»
(xxix. 3—9); and by showing how the Lord is and will he the “strength” of His people. Compare
xxxiii. 7 and xxix. n. The ■word “ Jehovah” occurs four times in the first member, A, and four
times in the last (.Z?) ; while there are seven “ voices” and three “ Jehovah’s ” in 13, answcring-the
one to the other alternately.— (Ed.)
B a | 3-. The Voice of the L ord on the waters,
a | -3. The Lord thunders on the waters.
b | 4, 5-. The Voice of the Lord (three times) in power and majesty, on trees.
b | -5, 6. The Lord thunders on the forests.
c | 7, 8-. The Voice of the Lord (twice) in fire and on wilderness.
c ( -8. The Lord thunders on the wilderness.
d 1 9-. The Voice of the Lord in creation. — (Ed.)


Itealm xxx.
A Fsalm and Song at the dedication of the house of David.
A i I will extol tliee, 0 Lord ; for thou hast lifted me up, and hast not made my foes
to rejoice over me.
B a | 2 0 Lord my God, I cried unto thee,
h and thou hast healed me. 3 0 Lord, thou hast brought up my soul from
the grave: thou hast kept me alive, that I should not go down to the pit.
c 4 Sing unto the Lord, oye saints of his, and give thanks at the remem-
brance of his holiness.
C 5 For his anger endareth 1 hut a moment; in his favour is life: weeping
may endure for a night, bat joy cometh 2 in the morning.
C 6 And in my prosperity I said, I shall never be moved. 7 Lord, by
thy favour thou hast made my mountain to stand strong; thou didst
hide thy face, and I was troubled.
B a 8 1 cried to thee, 0 Lord; and unto the Lord I made supplication. 9 What
profit is there in my blood, when I go down to the pit? Shall the dust
praise thee? shall it declare thy truth? 10 Hear, 0 Lord, and have mercy
upon me: Lord, be thou my helper.
b 11 Thou bast turned for me my mourning into dancing: thou hast put off
my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness;
c | -12 To the end that my glory 3 may sing praise to thee, and not be silent,
A | 0 Lord my God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever.
Psalm XXX. —The Skeleton.
A| 1. Thanksgiving promised, [ms* yDOViK]
B a | 2-. The Psalmist’s cry to God.
b | -2, 3. The relief obtained,
c| 4. Songs of praise. [*not]
C | 5. Sudden change from adversity to prosperity.
C \ 6, 7. Sudden change from prosperity to adversity.
B a | B—lo. The Psalmist’s cry to God.
& ( 11. The relief obtained.
c | 12-. Songs of praise, [-por]
A J -12. Thanksgiving promised, [yn» ... rnrr]
1 Endured. 2 Came.
~ -i J rJ ? e trans l at °rs * iave inserted the word “my” in italics, but we are not told, in v. 12, whose
n ? lo Qr l was to sing unto the Lord. Does not the Holy Spirit tell us in 2 Cor. viii. 23, where He
• the glory of Christ ” ? The “ saints ” who are exhorted to “ sing unto the Lord ”
c [v. 4J are the glory mentioned in c ( v. 12). Thus the structure aids us in interpretation:
c j 4. Sing unto the Lord, 0 ye saints of His.
yrr fj 12 ~ To the end that Thy glory, i.e., the saints, may sing praise to Thee.
\Ve meet, indeed, with the expression, “My glory,” in other Psalms; but there the Hebrew is
nna ; not, as here,


s)salm xxxi.
To the chief Musician. A Psalm of David.
A i In thee, O Lobd, do I put my trust; let me never be ashamed: deliver me in thy righteousness
2 Bow down thine ear to me; deliver me speedily; be thou my strong rock, for an house of
defence to save me. 3 For thou art my rock and my fortress; therefore for thy name’s sake lead
me, and guide me. 4 Pull me out of the net that they have laid privily for me : for thou art my
strength. 5 Into thine hand I commit my spirit: thou hast redeemed me, 0 Lord God of truth.
6 I have hated them that regard lying vanities: but I trust in the Lord.
B 7 I will be glad and rejoice in thy mercy: for thou hast considered my trouble; thou hast
known my soul in adversities; 8 And hast not shut me up into the hand of the enemy : thou
hast set my feet in a large room.
A 9 Have mercy upon me, 0 Lord, for lam in trouble ; mine eye is consumed with grief, yea, my
soul and my belly. 10 For my life is spent with grief, and my years with sighing :my strength
faileth because of mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed. 11 I was a reproach among°all
mine enemies, but especially among my neighbours, and a fear to mine acquaintance : they that
did see me without fled from me. 12 lam forgotten as a dead man out of mind: lam like a
broken vessel. 13 For 1 have heard the slander of many: fear was on every side: while they
took counsel together against me, they devised to take away my life. 14 But I trusted in thee,
O Lord : I said, Thou art my God. 15 My times are in thy hand : deliver me from the hand of
mine enemies, and from them that persecute me. 16 Make thy face to shine upon thy servant:
save me for thy mercies’ 1 sake. 17 Let me not be ashamed, 0 Lord ; for I have called upon thee:
let the wicked be ashamed, and let them be silent in the grave. 18 Let the lying lips be put to
silence; which speak grievous things proudly and contemptuously against the righteous. 2
Ji 19 Oh how great is thy goodness, which thou hast laid up for them that fear thee ; which thou
hast wrought for them that trust in thee before the sons of men! 20 Thou shalt hide them in
the secret of thy presence from the pride of man : thou shalt keep them secretly in a pavilion
from the strife of tongues. 21 Blessed he the Lord : for he hath shewed me his marvellous
kindness in a strong city. 22 For I said in my haste, lam cut off from before thine eyes :
nevertheless thou heardest the voice of my supplications when I cried unto thee. 23 O love
the Lord, all ye his saints : for the Lord preserveth the faithful, and plentifully rewardeth the
proud doer. 24 Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your heart, all ye that hope in
the Lord.
Psalm XXXI. — The Skeleton.
A | I—6. Prayer.
B | 7, 8. Benefits received.
A | 9—lß. Prayer.
B | 19—24. Benefits received.
The first and third members, A and A, may be thus arranged and compared: —
AAII In thee, 0 Lord, do I put my trust ; let me never be ashamed : deliver me in thy
I righteousness. 2 Bow down thine ear to me; deliver me speedily:
b c be thou my strong rock for an house of defence to save me. 3 For thou art my rock
and my fortress ; therefore for thy name’s sake lead me and guide me. 4 Pull me out
of the ret that they have laid privily for me ; for thou art my strength,
and I e | 5 Into thine hand I commit my spirit: thou hast redeemed me, 0 Lord God of truth,
f | 6 I have hated them that regard lying vanities : but I trust in the Lord.
A B C g Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am in trouble : mine eye is consumed with grief,
yea , my soul and my belly. 10 For my life is spent with grief, and my years with
sighing; my strength faileth because of mine iniquity, and my bones are consumed,
ill was a reproach among all mine enemies, but especially among my neighbours, and
a fear to mine acquaintance: they that did see me without fled from me. 12 lam
forgotten as a dead man out of mind : I am like a broken vessel. 13 For I have heard
the slander of many : fear was on every side : while they took counsel together against
me, they devised to take away my life.
and f | 14 But I trusted in thee, 0 Lord : 1 said, Thou art my God.
e I 15 My times are in thy hand: deliver me from the hand of mine enemies, and
| from them that persecute me.
A l 6 Make thy face to shine upon thy servant: save me for thy mercies’ 1 sake. 17 Let me not
be ashamed, O Lord ; for I have called upon thee : let the wicked be ashamed, and let them
be silent in the grave. 18 Let the lying lips be put to silence ; which speak grievous things
proudly and contemptuously against the righteous. 2
The Skeleton of A and A.
A a| 1, 2-. “ Ashamed” (1). “Thine ear” (2).
b c | -2—4. “ For ” ('5 twice),
and | e 1 5 “Into Thine hand.”
I f|6. “ But I trust.”
A 11 c | 9—13. “For” (*3 thrice).
and I / | 14. “ But I trusted.”
I e | 15. “ In Thy hand.”
A ' 16—18. “Thy face” {l6). “Ashamed” (17).
1 See note on Ps. vi. 4. 2 The righteous one.


Itealm xxxii.
A Psalm of David, Maschil.
A a 1 Blessed is he xvaose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered. 2 Blessed
is the man nnto whom the Lord imputeth not iniquity,
b | and in whose spirit there is no guile.
B c 3 When I kept silence, my bones waxed old through my roaring all
the day long. 4 For day and night thy hand was heavy upon me:
my moisture is turned into the drought of summer. Selah.
and 5 I acknowledged my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not
hid. I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord; and
thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Selah. 6 For this shall
every one that is godly pray unto thee in a time when thou mayest
be found : surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come
nigh unto him. 7 Thou art my hiding place; thou shalt preserve
me from trouble; thou shalt compass me about with songs of
deliverance. Selah.
C 8 1 will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt
go: I will guide thee with mine eye.
C 9 Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule, which have no under-
standing : whose mouth must be held in with bit and bridle,
lest 1 they come near unto thee.
B c ( 10 Many sorrows shall he to the wicked:
and | but he that trusteth in the Lord, mercy shall compass him about.
A a | 11 Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice, ye righteous :
h | and shout for joy, all ye that are upright in heart.
Psalm XXXII.— The Skeleton.
A I a ( 1, 2-. The justified.
I b | -2. The sanctified.
L> I c | 3, 4. Trouble.
Id | 5—7. Deliverance. 3
C| 8. Dens loquitur. 2 [Promise.]
C| 9. Deus loquitur. 2 [lnjunction.]
B \ c \ 10-. Trouble.
and | -10. Deliverance. 3
A I a | 11-. The justified.
■ h { -11. The sanctified.
Shorter Skeleton.
A ( I—7.1 —7. David speaks.
D ( 8. God speaks.
B | 9. God speaks.
A | 10, 11, David speaks.
1 “ Lest,” i.e., otherwise lliey come not near to help, nvp, to help. See Ps. xxxiv. 18, cxlv. 18,
Neh. xiii. 4. Dent. iv. 7.—(Ed.)
- i.e., God speaks. 3 Compure v. -7 with v. -10. d and (/both end with “compass...about.”— Ed.


xxxiii.
A Rejoice in the Lord, 0 ye righteous: for praise is comely for the upright.
2 Praise the Lord with harp: sing unto him with the psaltery and an instrument
of ten strings. 3 Sing unto him anew song; play skilfully with a loud noise.
B 4 For the word of the Lord is right; and all his works are done in truth. He
loveth righteousness and judgment: the earth is full of the goodness of the
Lord. 6 By the word of the Lord were the heavens made ; and all the host of
them by the breath of his mouth. 7 He gathereth the waters of the sea
together as an heap: he layeth up the depth in storehouses.
A 8 Let all the earth fear the Lord: let all the inhabitants of the world stand in
awe of him.
B| 9 For he spake, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast.
C 10 r I he Lord bringeth the counsel of the heathen to nought: he maketh the
devices of the people of none effect. 11 The counsel of the Lord standeth for
ever, the thoughts of his heart to all generations.
Di 2 Blessed is the nation whose Giod is the Lord ; and the people whom he hath
chosen for his own inheritance.
G 13 The Lord looketh from heaven ; he beholdeth all the sons of men. 14 From
the place of his habitation he looketh upon all the inhabitants of the earth.
15 He fashioneth their hearts alike ;he considereth all their works. 16 There is
no king saved by the multitude of an host: a mighty man is not delivered by
much strength. 17 An horse is a vain thing for safety: neither shall he deliver
any by his great strength.
D 18 Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, upon them that
hope in his mercy ; 19 To deliver their soul from death, and to keep them
alive in famine. 20 Our soul waiteth for the Lord : he is our help and our
shield. 21 For our heart shall rejoice in him, because we have trusted in his
holy name. 22 Let thy mercy, 0 Lord, be upon us, according as we hope in
thee.
Psalm XXXIII. —The Skeleton.
A ( I—3.1 —3. The People of God exhorted to praise the Lord.
B J 4 —7. Inducements.
A | 8. Mankind in general exhorted to fear the Lord.
B | 9. Inducements.
C 1 10, 11. Mankind in general.
D | 12. The People of God.
C | 13 —17. Mankind in general.
T> | 18—22. The People of God.
The member, C (verses 10 and 11), admits of the following subordinate arrangement:—
C a | 10-. The counsel of the heathen,
b | -10. The thoughts of the peoples.
a | 11-. The cournsel of the Lord opposed to it.
h | -11, The thoughts of the Lord opposed to them.


Itealm xxxiv.
A Psalm of David, when he changed his behaviour before Abimelech; who drove him away, and he
departed.
A 1 (n) I will bless the Lord at all times: his praise shall continually he in my
mouth. 2 (n) My soul shall make her boast in the Lord : the humble shall hear
thereof, and be glad.
B ( 3 (j) 0 magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together.
A 4 ("1) I sought the Lord, and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears.
5 (il) They looked unto him, and were lightened: and their faces were not
ashamed. 6 (t) This poor man cried, and the Lord heard him, and saved him out
of all his troubles. 7 (n) The angel of the Lord encampeth round about them
that fear him, and delivereth them.
B 8 (id) O taste and see that the Lord is good : blessed is the man that trusteth in
him. 9 (’) 0 fear the Lord, ye his saints: for there is no want to them that
fear him. 10 (D) The young lions do lack, and suffer hunger: but they that
seek the Lord shall not want any good thing. 11 (b) Come, ye children,
hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the Lord. 12 (a) What man
is he that desireth life, and loveth many days, that he may see good ?
13 (3) Keep thy tongue from evil, and thy lips from speaking guile. 14 (and) De-
part from evil, and do good; seek peace, and pursue it.
C 13 (y) The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous, and his ears are open unto
their cry.
D 16 (9) The face of the Lord is against them that do evil, to cut off the remem-
brance of them from the earth.
Gl7 (v) The righteous cry, and the Lord heareth, and delivereth them out of all
their troubles. 18 (p) The Lord is nigh unto them that are of a broken heart;
and saveth such as be of a contrite spirit. 19 (n) Many are the afflictions of the
righteous: but the Lord delivereth him out of them all. 20 (w) He keepeth all
his bones: not one of them is broken.
D 21 (n) Evil shall slay the wicked : and they that hate the righteous shall be
desolate.
D 22 (q) The Lord redeemeth the soul of his servants : and none of them that trust
in him shall be desolate.
Psalm XXXTY. —The Skeleton.
A | 1, 2. I, they.
B | 3. Ye and I.
A | 4—7. I, they.
B | B—l 4.8 —14. Ye and I.
C | 15. The righteous.
D | 16. The wicked.
C | 17 —20. The righteous.
D | 21. The wicked.
3 | 22. The righteous.
The Author has not included verse 22 in this Psalm, The Editor has ventured to arrange
it as above.
Ps. xxxiv. is acrostic, on the model of xxiv., with 1 omitted and a duplicated (v. 16 and 22' ;
verse 22 thus stands outside the alphabet, and sums up the whole Psalm.— (Ed.)


Psalm xxxv.
A Psalm of David.
A | i Plead my cause, 0 Lord, with them that strive with me:
A | fight against them that fight against me.
B | 2 Take hold of shield and buckler, and stand up for mine help.
B 1 3 Draw out also the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute me :
C | say unto my soul, I am thy salvation.
C 4 Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my soul: let them be turned
back and brought to confusion that devise my hurt. 5 Let them be as chaff before the
wind: and let the angel of the Lord chase them, 6 Let their way be dark and slippery;
and let the angel of the Lord persecute them. 7 For without cause have they hid for me
their net in a pit, which without cause they have digged for my soul. 8 Let destruction
come upon him at unawares ; and let his net that he hath hid catch himself: into that very
destruction let him fall. J
D 9 And my soul shall be joyful in the Lord : it shall rejoice in his salvation. 10 All my bones
shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which deliverest the poor from him that is too strong
for him, yea, the poor and the needy from him that spoileth him?
E 1 11 False witnesses did rise up ; they laid to my charge things that I knew not.
F | 12 They rewarded me evil for good to the spoiling of my soul.
F 13 But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing was sackcloth: I humbled my soul
with fasting ; and my prayer returned into mine own bosom. 14 I behaved myself as
though he had been my friend or brother: I bowed down heavily, as one that mourneth
for his mother. 15 But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together ;
yea, the abjects gathered themselves together against me, and I knew it not; they did tear
me, and ceased not: 16 With hypocritical mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with
their teeth. 17 Lord, how long wilt thou look on ? rescue my soul from their destructions,
my darling from the lions. 18 I will give thee thanks in the great congregation: I will
praise thee among much people, ig Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully
rejoice over me: neither let them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause.
E 20 For they speak not peace: but they devise deceitful matters against them that are quiet in
the land. 21 Yea, they opened their mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, aha, our eye
hath seen it. 22 This thou hast seen, 0 Lord : keep not silence : 0 Lord, be not far from me.
23 Stir up thyself, and awake to my judgment, even unto my cause, my God and my Lord.
24 Judge me, 0 Lord my God, according to thy righteousness ; and let them not rejoice over
me. 25 Let them not say in their hearts, Ah, so would we have it : let them not say, Wo
have swallowed him up. 26 Let them be ashamed and brought to confusion together that
rejoice at mine hurt: let them be clothed with shame and dishonour that magnify themselves
against me. 27 Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favour my righteous cause : yea,
let them say continually, Let the Lord be magnified, which hath pleasure in the prosperity of
his servant. 28 And my tongue shall speak of thy righteousness and of thy praise all the
day long.
Psalm XXXY.— The Skeleton.
A | 1-. Prayer for self. [Defensive.]
A | -1. Prayer against enemies. [Offensive.]
B | 2. Prayer for self. [Defensive.]
B | 3-. Prayer against enemies. [Offensive.]
C | -3. Prayer for self.
C | 4 —8. Prayer against enemies.
D | 9, 10. Prayer for self [and Praise].
E | 11. False witnesses.
F | 19. Evil for good.
F | 13 —19. Evil for good.
E | 20 —28. False witnesses.
Psalm XXXY.— Skeleton in Brief,
1 —10. Prayer.
11 — 28. False witnesses. Evil for good.


Tlio sixth, member, C, admits of the following internal arrangement:—
C aj 4 Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after my soul: let them be turned
I back and brought to confusion that devise my hurt.
b | 5 Let them be as chaff before the wind : and let the angel of the Lord chase them,
h 1 6 Let their way be dark and slippery: and let the angel of the Lord persecute them.
a 7 For without cause have they hid for me their net in a pit, which without cause they
have digged for my soul. 8 Let destruction come upon him at unawares; and let his net
that he hath hid catch himself : into that very destruction let him fall.
The Skeleton of C.
C a 1 4. Prayer for the destruction of those who devise evil,
b ) 5. The Angel of the Lord.
h | 6. The Angel of the Lord.
a j 7, 8. Prayer for the destruction of those who devise evil.
F and E may be thus arranged and compared :
Fz 13 But as for me, when they were sick, my clothing teas sackcloth: I humbled my soul
with fasting; and my prayer returned into mine own bosom. 14 I behaved myself as
though he had been my friend or brother: I bowed down heavily, as one that mourneth
for his mother. 15 But in mine adversity they rejoiced, and gathered themselves together :
yea, the abjects gathered themselves together against me, and I knew it not; they did tear
me, and ceased not: 16 With hypocritical mockers in feasts, they gnashed upon me with
their teeth.
c j 17 Lord, how long wilt thou look on ?
D | rescue my soul from their destructions, my darling from the lions.
E f j 18 I will give thee thanks in the great congregation : I will praise thee among
| much people.
g I 19 Let not them that are mine enemies wrongfully rejoice over me: neither
j let them wink with the eye that hate me without a cause.
Ez 20 For they speak not peace : but they devise deceitful matters against them that are
quiet in the land. 21 Yea, they opened their mouth wide against me, and said, Aha, aha,
our eye hath seen it.
° | 22 This thou hast seen, 0 Lord :
v keep not silence : 0 Lord, be not far from me. 23 Stir up thyself, and awake to my
judgment, even unto my cause, my God and my Lord. 24 Judge me, 0 Lord my
God, according to thy righteousness;
e (J and let them not rejoice over me. 25 Let them not say in their hearts, Ah,
so would we have it: let them not say, We have swallowed him up._ 26 Let
them be ashamed and brought to confusion together that rejoice at mine hurt:
let them be clothed with shame and dishonour that magnify themselves r against
me. 27 Let them shout for joy, and be glad, that favour my righteous
cause: yea, let them say continually, Let the Lord be magnified, which hath
pleasure in the prosperity of his servant.
/1 28 And my tongue shall speak of thy righteousness and of thy praise all the
j day long.
The Skeleton of F and E.
F z | 13 —16. Evil for good. Leading topic (as in F).
c | 17-. The Lord seeing. (n«in)
D 1 -17. Prayer for deliverance.
E If | 18. Praise promised.
g | ig. Triumph of ungodly deprecated.
E z | 20, 21. False witnesses. Leading topic (as in E).
c | 22-. The Lord seeing, (nnw)
•D | .22 —24-. Prayer for deliverance.
E I g | -24—27. Triumph of ungodly deprecated.
1 / | 28. Praise promised.
z, may be arranged thus: —
z h | 13. The Psalmist in his fast.
i | 14. The Psalmist in his sympathy.
i | 15. His foes in their callousness.
h | 16. His foes in their feast. (S.T.)


|)salm xxxvi.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David the servant of the Lord.
A C t J ans^ r . ession of the wicked saith within my heart, that there is no fear of
God before his eyes. 3 For he flattereth himself in his own eyes until his
and 3 7 he hSrieftofft h b tefUl ‘ 3 J, he 7° rds of his rnou th are iniquity and
his bed he ir 6 WIS6 ’ an \ io d ° good - He deviseth mischief upon
s bed, he setteth himself m a way that is not good; he abhorreth not evil.
B cloud? ° L ?! D ’ iS “ the !'? ave , ns; and faithfulness reacheth unto the
-reat deet oln 11 t e h USneSS “ hke , the S reat mountains; thy judgments are a
peat deep. O Lord thou preservest man and beast. 7 How excellent is thv
lovmgkmdness ° God! therefore the children of men put their trust unde?
the shadow of thy wings 8 They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fat-
i h ° U ; shalt make tliem drink of tlie river of thy pleasures.
9 For with thee is the fountain of life: in thy light shall we see light
B 1 o 0 continue thy loyingkindness unto them that know thee; and thy righteous-
ness to the upright in heart. J s
A 11 Let not the foot of pride come against me, and let not the hand of the wicked
aXZl™otbeLwetori ß e. the W ° rkerS °' ink l uit y fallen: the y -e cast down,
Psalm XXXYI.—The Skeleton.
■A- ( I—4.1 —4. The malice of the wicked, viiy va.
B I , s r?- The mercies of the Almighty. (Righteousness, v. 6. Loving-
I kindness, v. 5, 7. yiDti.) 5
B I Prayer for the mercies of the Almighty. (Lovingkindness, v. 10-.
| Righteousness, -10.)
A 11, 12. Prayer against the malice of the wicked, t (v. 12).
Effects of prayer in v. 11. Also v. 12 refers with v, 11 to A. For
ipbi dui means ‘pin, v. 4, where rcDrv.
The second member, B, may be thus arranged:—
B a 5 Thy mercy, 2 0 Lord, is in the heavens; and thy faithfulness reacheth unto
the clouds. 6 Thy righteousness is like the great mountains; thy judgments
are a great deep: 3
a | 0 Lord, thou preservest man and beast,
b | 7 How excellent is thy lovingkindness, 2 O God !
h therefore the children of men put their trust under the shadow of thy wings.
They shall be abundantly satisfied with the fatness of thy house ■ and
thou shalt make them drink of the river of thy pleasures,
c I 9 For with thee is the fountain of life:
c j in thy light shall we see light.
The Skeleton of B.
B a | 5, 6-. Attributes of the Almighty.
a | -6. Benefits to His creatures,
b | 7-, Attributes of the Almighty.
b | -7, 8. Benefits to His creatures,
c j 9-. Attributes of the Almighty,
c 1 -9. Benefits to His creatures.
c
1 Lovingkindness. 2 yion.
3 Note, in a, we have—
d | 5-. Heavens ) H
d | - 5 . Clouds ) Meavens-
e I 6-. Mountains ) p ~ ,
e I -6. Deep J Earth.-(ED.)


xxxvii.
A Psalm of David,
A a 1 (k) Fret not thyself because of evildoers, neither be thou envious against the workers of
iniquity. 2 For they shall soon be cut down like the grass, and wither as the green herb.
3 (l) Trust in the Lord, and do good; so shalt thou dwell in the land, and verily thou shalt
be fed. 4 Delight thyself also in the Lord ; and he shall give thee the desires of thine heart.
5 (j) Commit thy way unto the Lord ; trust also in him ; and he shall bring it to pass. 6 And
he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the light, and thy judgment as the noonday.
7 (t) Best in the Lord, and wait patiently for him : fret not thyself because of him who
prospereth in his way, because of the man who bringeth wicked devices to pass. 8 (it) Cease
from anger, and forsake wrath : fret not thyself in any wise to do evil. 9 For evildoers shall
be cut off: but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall inherit the earth. 10 (l) For yet
a little while, and the wicked shall not be : yea, thou shalt diligently consider his place, and
it shall not he. 11 But the meek shall inherit the earth ; and shall delight themselves in the
abundance of peace.
bl 2 (>) The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth. 13 The
Lord shall laugh at him : for he seeth that his day is coming. 14 (n) The wicked have
drawn out the sword, and have bent their bow, to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay
such as be of upright conversation. 15 Their sword shall enter into their own heart,
and their bows shall be broken.
B 16 (id) A little that a righteous man hath is better than the riches of many wicked.
17 For the arms of the wicked shall be broken : but the Lord upholdeth the righteous.
18 (*) The Lord knoweth the days of the upright: and their inheritance shall be forever.
19 They shall not be ashamed in the evil time: and in the days of famine they shall
be satisfied. 20 (p) But the wicked shall perish, and the enemies of the Lord shall he
as the fat of lambs : they shall consume; into smoke shall they consume away. 21 (b) The
wicked borroweth, and payeth not again: but the righteous sheweth mercy, and giveth,
22 For such as he blessed of him shall inherit the earth ; and they that he cursed of him
shall be cut off. 23 (o) The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord : and he
delighteth in his way. 24 Though he fall, he shall not be utterly cast down : for the
Lord upholdeth him with his hand. 25 (j) I have been young, and noiv am old; yet have
I not seen the righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. 26. He is ever merciful,
and lendeth; and his seed is blessed. 27 (and) Depart from evil, and do good ; and dwell
for evermore. 28 For the Lord loveth judgment, and forsaketh not his saints; (i>b) they
are preserved for ever: but the seed of the wicked shall be cut off. 29 The righteous shall
inherit the land, and dwell therein for ever. 30 (a) The mouth of the righteous speaketh
wisdom, and his tongue talketh of judgment. 31 The law of his God is in his heart;
none of his steps shall slide.
A | 13 2 The wicked watcheth the righteous, and seeketh to slay him. 33 The Lord will not
j leave him in his hand, nor condemn him when he is judged.
I a I 34 (p) Wait on the Lord, and keep his way, and he shall exalt thee to inherit the land : when
1 I the wicked are cut off, thou shalt see if.
835 ("0 I have seen the wicked in great power, and spreading hirmelf like a green bay
tree. 36 Yet he passed away, and, 10, he ivas not: yea, I sought him, but he could not
be found. 37 (id) Mark the perfect man , and behold the upright: for the end of that
man is peace. 38 But the transgressors shall be destroyed together : the end of the
wicked shall be cut off. 39 (ni) But the salvation of the righteous is of the Lord :he
is their strength in the time of trouble. 40 And the Lord shall help them, and deliver
them : he shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them, because they trust in him.
Psalm XXXVII.— The Skeleton.
A I a | 1— 11. Admonition, and arguments in support.
I b 1 12 —ls. Designs of the wicked against the righteous, and their defeat.
B | 16 —31. The righteous and the wicked contrasted.
A \ h ( 32, 33. Designs of the wicked against the righteous, and their defeat.
I a | 34 Admonition, and arguments in support.
Ad 1 35 —4°- The righteous and the wicked contrasted.
Psalm xxxvii. is acrostic: but it differs from some others in having four lines (two couplets) assigned
to each letter, except 1 (v. 7), 2 (r. 20), and p (v. 34), which each have three lines (or a triplet).
Further, these three letters occur in remarkable places:—the first, T, is the seventh verse from the
beginning; the last, p, is the seventh from the end; while the middle letter of the three, D, is in the
middle of the ivhole Psalm! — (Ed.)
“a,” may be thus expanded— (Ed.) :
a c|d | 1. “ Fret not.” (mnn i«)
I e[ 2. “ For.” (*2)
F | 3 —5- Trust, delight, commit.
F | 6, 7-. Trust, rest, wait.
CI d | -7, 8. “ Fret not.” (“innn
e( 9, 10. “For.” (*2)
“ b,” may be thus expanded :
b g | 12. Designs,
h j 13. Defeat.
g | 14. Designs (sword and bow).
h | 15. Defeat (sword and bow).


|)salm xxxviii.
A Psalm of David, to bring to remembrance. 1
A | i 0 Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath : neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure.
B a 2 For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presseth me sore.
3 There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger; neither is there
any rest in my bones because of my sin. 4 For mine iniquities are gone
over mine head: as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me. 5 My
wounds stink and are corrupt because of my foolishness. 6 lam troubled;
lam bowed down greatly; Igo mourning all the day long. 7 For my loins
are filled with a loathsome disease : and there is no soundness in my flesh.
8 lam feeble and sore broken: I have roared by reason of the disquietness
of my heart. 9 Lord, all my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not
hid from thee. 10 My heart panteth, my strength faileth me: as for the
light of mine eyes, it also is gone from me.
b 11 My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore ; and my kinsmen
stand afar off. 12 They also that seek after my life lay snares for me:
and they that seek my hurt speak mischievous things, and imagine
deceits all the day long. 13 But I, as a deaf man, heard not; and I was
as a dumb man that openeth not his mouth. 14 Thus I was as a man
that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs. 15 For in thee,
0 Lord, do I hope: thou wilt hear, 0 Lord my God. 16 For I said,
Hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoice over me : when my foot slippeth,
they magnify themselves against me.
B a 17 For lam ready to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me. 18 For
I will declare mine iniquity; I will be sorry for my sin,
b 19 But mine enemies are lively, and they are strong: and they that hate
me wrongfully are multiplied. 20 They also that render evil for good are
mine adversaries ; because I follow the thing that good is.
A 2i Forsake me not, 0 Lord : 0 my God, be not far from me. 22 Make haste to
help me, 0 Lord my salvation.
Psalm XXXYIII. — The Skeleton.
A | 1. Prayer.* [*>»]
B a | 2—lo. Sin and its consequences. [*3]
b | 11 —16. Treatment from man.
B a | 17, 18. Sin and its consequences. [>3]
b | 19, 20. Treatment from man.
A | 21, 22. Prayer.
1 Compare the title of Psalm Ixx.
* Observe the order in the petitions of A and A taken together. While A refers to chastisements
from God, A, refers to persecutions of man. Thus :
A c 1 Do not chastise me. ) The petitions of A referring
d | For thy chastisements are heavy upon me. \ to a, (v. 2 —10).
A d 1 So are the persecutions of my fellow creatures. ) The petitions of A referring
c ] Do not leavte me to them, but deliver me. ) to a, {v. 19, 20).


ssalm xxxix.
To the chief Musician, even to Jeduthun, A Psalm of David.
A i I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue : I will keep my
mouth with a bridle, while the wicked is before me. 2 I was dumb with silence,
I held, my peace, even from good; and my sorrow was stirred. 3 My heart was
hot within me, while I was musing the fire burned: then spake I with my tongue,
B 4 Lord, make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is;
that I may know how frail I am.
C 3 Behold, thou hast made my days as an handbreadth; and mine age is as
nothing before thee:
D verily every man at his best state is altogether vanity. Selah. 6 Surely
every man walketh in a vain shew: surely they are disquieted in vain : he
heapeth up riches , and knoweth not who shall gather them.
E A c| 7 And now, Lord, what wait I for ?
and | my hope is in thee.
B e | 8 Deliver me from all my transgressions :
f | make me not the reproach of the foolish.
A | 9 I was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because thou didst it.
B | 10 Remove thy stroke away from me:
G | I am consumed by the blow of thine hand.
B 11 When thou with rebukes dost correct man for iniquity, thou makest his
beauty to consume away like a moth: surely every man is vanity. Selah.
B Be | 12 Hear my prayer, 0 Lord, and give heed unto my cry;
f | hold not thy peace at my tears:
A d for lam a stranger with thee, and a sojourner, as all my fathers
were.
c 13 0 spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence,
and be no more.
Psalm XXXIX. —The Skeleton.
A | I—3.1 —3. Dumbness.
B | 4. Speech.
C | 5-. Tried by Thy dispensation (I).
D j -5, 6. Mankind in general.
E a c | 7-. Departure.
and 1 -7. Hope in Thee.
b e | 8-. Supplication,
f | -8. Deprecation.
A | 9. Dumbness.
B | 10-. Speech.
C | -10. Suffering under Thy judgments (I).
D | 11. Mankind in general.
E b e | 12-. Supplication.
/1 -12. Deprecation.
ad \ -12. Hope in Thee.
c | 13. Departure.


ipsalm xl.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
A i I waited patiently for the Lord; and he inclined nnto me, and heard my cry.
2 He brought me up also out of an horrible pit, out of the miry clay, and set my
feet upon a rock, and established my goings. 3 And he hath put anew song in
my mouth, even praise unto our God:
B | many shall see it, and fear, and shall trust in the Lord.
B 4 Blessed is that man that maketh the Lord his trust, and respecteth not the
proud, nor such as turn aside to lies.
A | 5 Many, 0 Lord my God, are thy wonderful works which thou hast done, and thy
I thoughts which are to us-ward: they cannot be reckoned up in order unto
I thee: if I would declare and speak of them , they are more than can be numbered.
C 6 Sacrifice and offering thou didst not 1 desire; mine ears hast thou opened: burnt
offering and sin offering hast thou not required.
D a | 7 Then said I, Lo, I come:
b ( in the volume of the book it is written of me,
-D a | 8 I delight to do thy will, omy God:
b | yea, thy law is within my heart.
G 9 I have 1 preached righteousness in the great congregation: 10, I have not
refrained my lips, O Lord, thou knowest. 10 I have not hid thy righteousness
within my heart; I have declared thy faithfulness and thy salvation: I have not
concealed thy lovingkindness and thy truth from the great congregation.
E c e 11 Withhold not thou 2 thy tender mei-cies from me, 0 Lord: let thy
lovingkindness and thy truth continually preserve me.
f 12 For innumerable evils have compassed me about: mine iniquities
have taken hold upon me, so that I am not able to look up; they are
more than the hairs of mine head; therefore my heart faileth me.
and | 13 Be pleased, 0 Lord, to deliver me: 0 Lord, make haste to help me.
E 14 Let them be ashamed and confounded together that seek after
my soul to destroy it; let them be driven backward and put to
shame that wish me evil. 15 Let them be desolate for a reward
of their shame that say unto me, Aha, aha.
F r 6 Let all those that seek thee rejoice and be glad in thee: let
such as love thy salvation say continually, The Lord be magnified.
E C| f| 17 But lam poor and needy;
( e | yet the Lord thinketh 3 upon me:
and I thou art my help and my deliverer; make no tarrying, 0 my God.
Psalm XL.— The Skeleton,
A | I—3-.1 —3-. Deliverance.
B | -3. Trust.
B | 4. Trust.
A | 5. Deliverance.
C | 6. What Thou hast and hast not done.
D a | 7-. Devotedness.
b | -7. Reason.
2) a j 8-. Devotedness.
h | -8. Reason.
C | 9, 10. What I have and have not done.
Ejc I e | 11. The Lord’s care for me (future).
If | 12. Distress.
D j 13. Prayer.
F ( 14, 15. Against enemies.
F j 16. For friends.
E cl / ] 17-. Distress.
I e | -17-. The Lord’s care for me(future).
D | -17. Prayer.
1 Observe the alternations of negative and positive in C. — (Ed.)
C c | g-. Positive. (What I have preached.)
d 1 -9, 10-. Negative, (What I have not hid.)
c | -10-. Positive. (What I have declared.)
d 1 -10, Negative. (What I have not concealed)
2 Thou wilt not withhold. 3 The Lord will think.


Itealm xli.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
A i Blessed is he that considereth the poor: the Lord will deliver him in time of
trouble. 2 The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive; and he shall be
blessed upon the earth : and thou wilt not deliver him unto the will of his enemies.
3 The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou wilt make all
his bed in his sickness.
B 1 4 I said, Lord, he merciful unto me : heal my soul; for I have sinned against
| thee.
C a| 3 Mine enemies speak evil of me,
h 1 When shall he die, and his name perish ?
c 6 And if he come to see me, he speaketh vanity : his heart gathereth
iniquity to itself ; ivhen he goeth abroad, he telleth it.
C a 7 All that hate me whisper together against me: against me do they devise
my hurt.
h 8 An evil disease, say they , cleaveth fast unto him: and now that he
lieth he shall rise up no more.
c 9 Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom 1 trusted, which did eat of
my bread, hath lifted up his heel against me.
B 10 But thou, 0 Lord, he merciful unto me, and raise me up, that I may requite
them.
A 11 By this I know that thou favourest me, because mine enemy doth not triumph
over me. 12 And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest me
before thy face for ever.
13 Blessed he the Lord Grodof Israel from everlasting,
and to everlasting. Amen, and Amen.
Psalm XLI. —The Skeleton.
A j I—3.1 —3. Divine favour. Preservation from enemies.
B | 4. Prayer.
C a | 5-. Enemies. Their cabals.
b | -5. Enemies. Their evil speaking,
c | 6. A false friend.
C a| 7. Enemies. Their cabals.
h| 8. Enemies. Their evil speaking.
c | 9. A false friend.
B 1 10. Prayer.
A ] 11, 12. Divine favour. Preservation from enemies.
13. The concluding ble-sing to the First Book of the Psalms.
The first member, A, may be arranged thus— (Ed.) :
Ad | I-. Blessing.
e | -1. Deliverance.
f | 2-. Reviving.
and | -2-. Blessing.
e I -2. Deliverance.
1 v
/| 3. Reviving,
The last Psalm (xli.) of the first book, like the first Psalm (id, begins with nnm, “ Blessed I ”
Also the second Psalm (ii.) of this book, and the last but one (xl.) are both quoted as refeiring to
the Messiah in the Epistle to the Hebrews.


ssalm xlii.
To the chief Musician, Maschil, for the sons of Korah.
AND
|)salm xliii.
A i As the hart panteth after the water brooks, so panteth my soul after thee,
0 God. 2 My soul thirsteth for God, for the living God: when shall I come and
appear before God ?
B a 3 My tears have been my meat day and night, while they continually say
unto me, Where is thy God ? 4 When I remember these things , I pour out
my soul in me :
b for I had gone 1 with the multitude, I went 1 with them to the house of God,
with the voice of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept holyday.
D 5 Why art thou cast down, omy soul ? and whig art thou disquieted
in me ? hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise him for the help of
his countenance.
B a 6 omy God, my soul is cast down within me: therefore will I remember
thee from the land of Jordan, and of the Hermonites, from the hill
Mizar. 7 Deep calleth unto deep at the noise of thy waterspouts: all thy
waves and thy billows are gone over me.
h I 8 Yet 2 the Lord will command his lovingkindness in the daytime, and in
I the night his song shall he with me, and my prayer unto the God of my life.
C 9 I will say unto God my rock, Why hast thou forgotten me ? why go I
mourning because of the oppression of the enemy? 10 As with a sword iu
my bones, mine enemies reproach me; while they say daily unto me, Where is
thy God ?
D 11 Why art thou cast down, omy soul ? and why art thou disquieted
within me ? hope thou in God: for I shall yet praise him, who is the
health of my countenance, and my God.
C :PSaim llltl. Judge me, O God, and plead my cause against an ungodly
nation: 0 deliver me from the deceitful and unjust man. 2 For thou art the
God of my strength: why dost thou cast me off ? why go I mourning because
of the oppression of the enemy ?
A 3 O send out thy light and thy truth : let them lead me; let them bring me unto
thy holy hill, and to thy tabernacles. 4 Then will I go unto the altar of God,
unto God my exceeding joy : yea, upon the harp will I praise thee, 0 God my God.
A 5 Why art thou cast down, 0 my soul P and why art thou disquieted
within me ? hope in God: for I shall yet praise him, who is the
health of my countenance, and my God.
Psalms XLII. and XLIII.— The Skeleton.
HA I xlii. 1, 2. Desire for the Temple.
B Ia | 3, 4-. Grief.
| b | -4. Hope.
I) | 5. Address to soul.
Id a | 6, 7. Grief.
h | 8. Hope.
C 9, 10. Appeal.
I) | 11. Address to soul.
C | xliii. 1,2. Appeal.
A j 3, 4. Desire tor the Temple.
A J 5. Address to suui.
1 I will go. 2 Omit the word “Yet.”


|)salm xliv.
To the chief Musician for the sons of Korah, Maschil.
X A i We have heard with our ears, 0 God, our fathers have told us, what work thou didst
in their days, in the times of old. 2 How thou didst drive out the heathen with thy
hand, and plantedst them ; how thou didst afflict the people, and east them out.
B I 3 For 1 they got not the land in possession by their own sword, neither did their own
| arm save them :
C I but 1 thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou
j hadst a favour unto them.
B | 4 Thou art my King, 0 God : command deliverances for Jacob.
A I 5 through thee will we push down our enemies: through thy name will we tread them
j under that rise up against us.
B | 6 For 1 I will not trust in my how, neither shall my sword save me.
C 7 But 1 thou hast saved us from our enemies, and hast put them to shame that
hated us.
■D 18 In God we boast all the day long, and praise thy name for ever. Selah.
T E| 9 But thou hast cast off, and put us to shame; and goest not forth with our armies.
FlO Thou makest us to turn back from the enemy: and they which hate us spoil
for themselves. 11 Thou hast given us like sheep appointed for meat; and hast
scattered us among the heathen.
E \ 12 Thou sellest thy people for nought, and dost not increase thy wealth by their price.
A’l 13 Thou makest us a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and a derision to them
that are round about us. 14 Thou makest us a byword among the heathen, a
| shaking of the head among the people.
Z G| 15 My confusion is continually before me,
H ( and the shame of my faca hath covered me,
G \ 16 for the voice of him that reproacheth and blasphemeth;
II | by reason of the enemy and avenger.
J J 1 7 XU this is come upon us; yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt
falsely in thy covenant. 18 Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps
declined from thy way ;
K I 19 Though thou hast sore broken us in the place of dragons, and covered us with
| the shadow of death.
I 20 If we have forgotten the name of our God, or stretched out our hands to a strange
God ; 21 Shall not God search this out ? for he knoweth the secrets of the heart.
A 122 lea, for thy sake are we killed all the day long; we are counted as sheep for the
I slaughter. 1
X LI 23 Awake, why sleepest thou, 0 Lord? arise, cast as not off for ever. 24 Wherefore
| mdest thou thy face, and forgettest our affliction and our oppression ?
M I 25 For our soul is bowed down to the dust:
M | our belly cleaveth unto the earth.
L J 26 Arise for our help, and redeem us for thy mercies’ 2 sake.
„ . Psalm XLIY.— The Skeleton.
11, 2. y Thee our fathers cast out. | a|s. By Thee will we put down.
B | 3.. Not their own sword, &c. (’D, for.) R| 6. Not my own sword, &c. (*5, for.)
C | -3. But Thy right hand, &c. ('5, but.) c| 7. But Thou, &c. (»D, but.)
D | 4. Thou our confidence, I) | 8. Thou our confidence.
r^ou casl us off. (Positive and negative 9-, -9.)
E | 10, 11. Thou hast delivered us to our enemies (foes).
F | 12. Thou hast cast ns off. (Positive and negative, 12-, -12.)
F | 13, 14. Thou hast delivered us to our enemies (neighbours).
G ( 15-. [Consciousness of shame. Inward.
H | -15. Appearance of shame. Outward.
(J | 16-. Impression made by voice of enemy. Inward, (b'lpo)
I il | -16. Impression produced by appearance of enemy. Outward,
1 I | 17, 18. Righteousness.
K | 19. Calamities. (“ Thou,” compare v, 12.)
II 20, 21. Righteousness.
K | 22. Calamities. (Enemies, compare v. 13, 14.)
L | 23, 24. Prayer.
M | 25-. Affliction.
M | -23. Affliction.
L | 26. Praver.
■ * ri or, i, 2S . ee T te t » The author has not supplied the terminology of «. 13 and x 6 but has
indicated a shorter description of the whole Psalm, which we may express as follows.— 5 ' DUC nas
X | I—B.1 —8. God our help.
Y | 9—14. Us.
Z 1 15, 16. Me.
Y | 17—22. Us.
X j 23—26. God our help,—(Ed.)


|)salm xlv.
To the chief Musician upon Shoshannim, for the sons of Korab, Maschil, A Song of loves
I ° f ‘he things wlxicH I have made teaching the
B blessed ° f = ***% is p ?T d infco th ? lips : therefore God hath
uiesseu rnee lor ever. 3 Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty, with thv adorv and
rMiteousness • P f° S P because of truth and meekness and
;M ® . Sn ® SS ’ and , thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things. 5 Thine arrows are sham
is for h p 6art ° f kIDK 8 ® nemies 5 whereby the people fall under thee. 6 Thy throne 0 God P
for ever and ever: the sceptre of thy kingdom is a right sceptre 7 Thou lovest
oifof C Z\i eS o 1 e f t ef ° re G ° d ’ th y God hath anointed thee with the
p*. g a . ess above thy fellows. 8 All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes and cassia
out of the ivory palaces, whereby they have made thee glad. * ’ ’ ’
B qufenln -^ld'oMl'nhrr^ 6 ,nT g h ° n ° urable women : upon thy right hand did stand the
also gd f oph , IC V Hearken, O daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear- Web
beautJ Lr, P S l and , thy J h r e > 11 S ° sI “ U «>• W"g greatly Lire Tv
ZrTi'J JZ :.L n ! r WOrshl P th ™ h ,™' 12 A "‘> the daughter ot Tyre shall Z
there with a gift even the rich among the people shall intreat thy favour n The kind’s
unt?thTk?n^L g raW U nt of^" 1 ™? f wrou g ht gold. 14 She shall be brought
brought unto thee T^W- t r e ?^ WOrk: tbe Vl . r g ias her companions that follow her shall be
infnfbi w j l h gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter
make the earth ° f fatherS Shall be thy children ’ whora thoa
| thee 1 aVdever!" 6 *** rem6mbered in all generations: therefore shall the people praise
Psalm XLY. —The Skeleton.
A | 1. The Psalmist.
B | 2—B. The King.
B | g—l 6. The Queen and her ladies.
A | 17. The Psalmist.
The second and third members, B and B, may be arranged thus
e ! I 2 Thou art fairer than the children of men: grace is poured into thy lips :
and | therefore 1 God hath blessed thee for ever.
b I 3 Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty, with thy glory and thy
majesty 4 And in thy majesty ride prosperously because of truth and meekness
| and righteousness; and thy right hand shall teach thee terrible things.
B I Th . in ® arrows are sharp in the heart of the king’s enemies; whereby the
I people fall under thee. 9
A ° I 6 Th / thron ®- 0 , God ’ is . for ever and ever; the sceptre of thy kingdom is a right
I ceptre. 7 Ihou lovest righteousness, and hatest wickedness :
and ) therefore 1 God thy God, hath anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
ellows. 8 All thy garments smell of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia, out of the ivory
| palaces, whereby they have made thee glad.
® g I 1 I 9 Kings daughters were among thy honourable women;
I k ( upon thy right hand did stand the queen in gold of Ophir.
h 10 Hearken, 0 daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thine
own people, and thy father’s house % 11 So shall the king greatly desire thy
1 beauty : for he is thy L-o-r-d ; and worship thou him.
f | 1 2 And the daughter of Tyre shall be there with a gift;
F | even the rich among the people shall intreat thy favour.
E 9 I I J 3 The king’s daughter is all glorious within: her clothing is of wrought o-old 3
1 14 She shall be brought unto the king in raiment of needlework :
i I the virgins her companions that follow her shall be brought unto thee. 1? With
I gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought: they shall enter into the king’s palace.
h I 16 Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou mayest make princes
| m all the earth. r
The Skeleton of B and B.
B alc | 2 . The merits of Christ.
I d 1 -2. His Reward, (p
b | 3, 4. His sword and its effect
b | 5. His arrows and their effect.
A I c | 6, 7-. The merits of Christ.
| and 1-7, 8. His Reward, (p
Beg I i 1 9-. Female attendants. | [King addressed :
I k | -9. The Queen’s apparel, j Queen described.]
h | 10, 11. The Queen addressed.
f | 12-. A suppliant.
f | -12. Suppliants.
fa I k 1 13, 14. The Queen’s apparel. ) [Quern described;
Ii | -14, 15. Female attendants. S King addressed.]
h 1 16. The Queen addressed.
In a pencilled jotting the Author says: “ Perhaps v. 12 goes with v, xo and 11, and refers to -16.”
1 p bl) 2 So that all. 3 See St. Peter’s allusion to this in 1 Peter iii. -3, 4-; v. 4- refers to v. 13 here.


Itealm xlyi.
To the chief Musician for the sons of Korah, A Song upon Alamoth.
A | i God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.
B a 2 Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, 1 and though the
mountains be carried into the midst of the sea;
b 3 Though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains
shake with the swelling thereof. Selah.
C 4 There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God,
the \io\y place of the tabernacles of the Most High.
G 5 God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved : God shall help
her, and that right early.
B 6 | 6 The heathen raged, 2
a | the kingdoms were moved 1 : he uttered his voice, the earth melted.
A | 7 The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.
D| 8 Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he hath made in the
I earth.
E 1 9 He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth;
E he breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; he burnetii the
chariot in the fire.
E 10 Be still, and know that lam God: I will be exalted among the heathen, I
will be exalted in the earth.
M 1 11 The Lord of hosts is with us ; the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.
Psalm XLYI.— The Skeleton.
A | i. Our resource. God our refuge.
B I a I 2 , 1 Th e earth moved, (fflio) ) D de fi e d.
| bI 3. The waters roar. ) 0
C | 4. Resource of the Holy City.
C | 5. Resource of the Holy City.
B \ ! } I 6 -. The heathen roared. j D realised .
|a | -6. The kingdoms moved, ( , udo) 1 0
A |7. Our resource. God our refuge.
D| 8. Address. (p«l).
E ( 9-. Wars ended in the world.
E | -9. Wars ended in the world.
J) 1 10. Address, (pm)
m 1 11. Our resource. God our refuge.
In the MS. the Skeleton and Text did not agree, so we have carried out a pencilled note which
said “ alter.” Note that B and B set forth God’s operations on behalf of His people and Zion;
while I) and E set forth His operations in the world at large. Hence Psalm xlvii. answers to
1) and E, and Psalm xlviii. answers to B and B.
We may farther arrange D and E as follows :
D I c | 8-. Behold God in His works,
and | -8. Desolations in the earth.
E I c | 10. Know God in Himself.
j and | -10. Exaltation in the earth.— (Ed.)
'moved, toio, as in v. 6. 2 roared.


xlvii.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm for the sons of Korah.
A l a I 1 0 c !J a P your hands, all ye people; shout unto God with the voice of triumph.
I b| 2 For the Lord Most High is terrible; he is a great King over all the earth.
B 3He shall subdue the people under us, and the nat : ons under our feet.
4 He shall choose our inheritance for us, the excellency of Jacob whom
he loved. Selah.
C | 3 God is gone up with a shout, the Lord with the sound of a trumpet.
A a | 6 Sing praises to God, sing praises: sing praises unto our King, sing praises.
h 7 For God is the King of all the earth: sing ye praises with understanding!
8 God reigneth over the heathen: God sitteth upon the throne of his
holiness.
B j 9 The princes of the people are gathered together, even the people of the
I God of Abraham:
G | for the shields of the earth belong unto God: he is greatly exalted.
Psalm XLVII. —The Skeleton.
A Ia | 1. Exhortation to praise.
| b| 2. Inducements.
B | 3, 4. The people.
C | 5. Exaltation (nh>) (trumpet)
A I a I 6. Exhortation to praise.
I b|7, 8. Inducements.
B | 9-. The people.
C j -9. Exaltation (nh>) (shield).
|)salm xlviii.
A Song and Psalm for the sons of Korah.
A ( i Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised
B in the city of our God, in the mountain of his holiness. 2 Beautiful for situa-
tion, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the
city of the great King.
C | 3 God is known in her palaces for a refuge.
D I 4 F 'or, 10, the kings were assembled, tbey passed by together. 3 They
saw rt, and so they marvelled; they were troubled, and hasted away.
I 6 Fear took hold upon them there, and pain, as of a woman in travail.
1) | 7 Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with an east wind.
C 8 As we have heard, so have we seen in the city of the Loud of hosts, in the
city of our God: God will establish it for ever. Selah. 9 We have thought
of thy lovingkindness, O God, in the midst of thy temple. 10 According to
thy name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the earth: thy right hand
is full of righteousness. 11 Let mount Zion rejoice, let the daughters of
Judah be glad, because of thy judgments.
B 12 Walk about Zion, and go round about her: tell the towers thereof. 13 Mark
yerwell her bulwarks, consider her palaces; that ye may tell it to the genera-
tion following.
A 14 For this God is our God for ever and ever: he will be our guide even unto
death.
Psalm XLVIII. —The Skeleton.
A | 1-. The Lord,
B | -1, 2. The Lord’s city. Zion.
C | 3. The Lord’s goodness to His city.
D | 4—6. The overthrow of adversaries.
D | 7. The same figuratively.
G | B—ll. The Lord’s goodness to His city.
B ( 12, 13. The Lord’s city. Zion.
A j 14. The Lord.
Lote. We have slightly developed the Skeleton arrangement as indicated by the author in
pencilled marks. In a and b note the alternation of “God” and “King.” Note also the double
parallels in B and B, teaching us that the people will be subdued (B) when the princes are gathered
together (B) ; and that His “ inheritance ” (B) is “ the people of the God of Abraham (B).” —(Ed.)


ssalm xlix.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm for the sons of Korah.
II 1 Hear this, all ye people ; give ear, all ye inhabitants of the world : 2 Both
I low and high, rich and poor, together.
THEMA II 3My mouth shall speak of wisdom ; and the meditation of my heart shall he
of understanding. 4 I will incline mine ear to a parable : I will open my
dark saying upon the harp.
A a j 5 Wherefore should I fear in the days of evil,
| ivhen the iniquity of my heels shall compass me about ?
b 6 They that trust in their wealth, and boast themselves in the multitude of their riches ;
7 None of them can by any means redeem his brother, nor give to God a ransom for him :
8 (For the redemption of their soul is precious, and it cea-seth for ever :)
9 That he should still live for ever, and not see corruption.
c 10 For he seeth that wise men die,
likewise the fool and the brutish person perish,
and and 1 leave their wealth to others.
11 Their inward thought is, that their houses shall continue for ever,
and their dwelling places to all generations ;
they call their lands after their own names.
B | 12 Nevertheless man being in honour abideth not: he is like the beasts that perish.
Ad I 13 This their way is their folly :
I yet their posterity approve their sayings. Selah.
c 14 Like sheep they are laid in the grave ;
death shall feed on them ;
and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning;
and their beauty shall consume in the grave from their dwelling.
h 15 But God will redeem my soul from the power of the grave :
| for he shall receive me. Selah.
a 16 Be not thou afraid when one is made rich, when the glory of his house is increased ;
17 For when he dieth he shall carry nothing away: his glory shall not descend after him.
18 Though while he lived he blessed his soul; and men will praise thee, when thou doest
well to thyself.
19 He shall go to the generation of his fathers; they shall never see light.
B | 20 Man that is in honour, and understandeth not, is like the beasts that perish.
Psalm XLIX.— The Skeleton.
THEM i I 2 ' people to hear.
I 3, 4. I will speak.
A a| 5. Why fear ? [Couplet.]
b j 6 —9. No redemption for the worldly. [Quatrain, alternate.]
c | 10-. Death. [Couplet.]
and | -10, 11. Worldly wisdom. [Quatrain, introverted.]
B | 12. Man compared to the beasts. [Couplet.]
Ad | 13. Worldly wisdom. [Couplet.]
c | 14. Death. [Quatrain, inverted.]
h | 15. Redemption for the psalmist. [Couplet.]
a| 16 —l9. Pear not. [Quatrain, alternate.]
B | 20. Man compared to the beasts. [Couplet.]
1 They leave. Note that the couplets and quatrains in A and A are alternate in their
order, while the couplet in the one member is answered by the quatrain in the other member.— (Ed.)
The Thema, or prelude, consists of two successions, of a direct quatrain, followed by an introverted
one; anticipating the form of the Psalm itself. — (Ed.)
I > II
i Hear. 2 Low. 3 Mouth. 4 Ear...
People. High. Wisdom. Parable.
Give ear. Rich. Heart. Dark saying.
Inhabitants. Poor. Understanding. Harp,


Itealm l.
A Psalm of Asaph,
A J 1 The mighty 1 God, 2 even the Lord, 3 hath spoken, and called the earth from the rising of the sun
| unto the going down thereof.
B | 2 Out of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God hath shined.
B I 3 Our God shall come, and shall not keep silence : a fire shall devour before him, and it shall
j be very tempestuous round about him.
A 4He shall call to the heavens from above, and to the earth, that he may judge his people.
5 father my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice,
o And the heavens shall declare his righteousness : for God is judge himself. Selah.
people, and I will speak ; 0 Israel, and I will testify against thee ; I am God, even
thy God. 8 I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices or thy burnt offerings, to have been continu-
ally before me. 9 I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he goats out of thy folds. 10 For
every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. 11 I know all the fowls
ot the mountains : and the wild beasts of the field are mine. 12 If I were hungry, I would not
tell thee : for the world is mine, and the fulness thereof. 13 Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or
drink the blood of goats ? 14 Offer unto God thanksgiving ; and pay thy vows unto the Most
High : 15 And call upon me in the day of trouble : I will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify me.
D 16 But unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or that
thou shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth ? 17 Seeing thou hatest instruction, and
castest my words behind thee. 18 When thou sawest a thief, then thou consentedst with
him, and hast been partaker with adulterers. 19. Thou givest thy mouth to evil, and
thy tongue frameth deceit. 20 Thou sittest and speakest against thy brother; thou slanderest
thme own mother s son. 21 These things hast thou done, and I kept silence ; thou thoughtest
that I was altogether such an one as thyself : but I will reprove thee, and set them in order
before thine eyes.
T> 22 Now consider this, ye that forget GOD, lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.
C j 23 Whoso offereth praise glorifieth me ; and to him that ordereth his conversation aright will I
| shew the salvation of God,
Psalm L.—The Skeleton.
A | 1. The Lord calling.
H | 2. The Lord appearing.
B | 3. The Lord appearing.
A | 4—6. The Lord calling.
C | 7—15. His people. Ends with promise.
D | 16—21. The wicked. Ends with threat,
D | 22. The wicked. Ends with threat.
C | 23. His people. Ends with promise.
The first and second members of the second part, C and D, may be arranged and contrasted thus;
C aI 7 Hear, Omy people, and I will speak ; 0 Israel, and I will testify against thee : lam God,
I even thy God.
b 8 I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices or thy burnt offerings, to have been continually
before me. 9 I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor he goats out of thy folds. 10 For
every beast of the forest is mine, and the cattle upon a thousand hills. 11 I know all the
fowls of the mountains : and the wild beasts of the field are mine. 12 If I were hungry,
I would not tell thee : for the world is mine, and the fulness thereof. 13 Will I eat the
flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of goats P
c I 14 Offer unto God thanksgiving; and pay thy vows unto the Most High : 15 And call
| upon me in the day of trouble : I will deliver thee, and thou shaft glorify me.
D a I 16 But unto the wicked God saith, What hast thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou
I shouldest take my covenant in thy mouth ?
h 17 Seeing thou hatest instruction, and castest my words behind thee. 18 When thou sawest
a thief, then thou consentedst with him, and hast been partaker with adulterers. 19 Thou
givest thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue frameth deceit. 20 Thou sittest and speakest
against thy brother; thou slanderest thine own mother’s son.
c I 21 These things hast thou done, and I kept silence ; thou thoughtest that I was altogether
I such an one as thyself: but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine eyes.
The Skeleton of C and D.
C a| 7. Address fo His people. Owns them. D a I 16. Address to the wicked. Disowns them,
h I B—l 3. Services rejected. h | 17 —20. Sins exposed,
c 1 14, 15. Promise. c | 21. Threat.
Note. — A may be arranged thus: — (Ed.)
A d| 4 He shall call to the heavens from above,
e | and to the earth, that he may judge his people.
e | 5 Gather my saints together unto me; those that have made a covenant with me by sacrifice.
d| 6 And the heavens shall declare his righteousness: for God is judge himself. Selah.
The Skeleton of A.
A d | 4.. God’s call to the heavens,
e | -4. Judgment of His people.
0 | 5. Gathering of His people.
d I 6. The heavens’ declaration of God, the righteous judge.
1 El, 2 Elohim, 3 Jehovah hath spoken.
4 Query.—Does A refer to the church, as C does to Israel, and D to the wicked ?— Ed.


ssalm li.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David, when Nathan the prophet came unto him, after he had
gone in to Bath-sheba.
A x Have mercy upon me, 0 God, according to thy lovingkindness: according
unto the multitude of thy tender mercies blot out my transgressions. 2 Wash
me throughly from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin.
B 3 For I acknowledge my transgressions: and my sin is ever before me.
4 Against thee, thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: that
thou mightest he justified when thou speakest, and be clear when thou judgest.
3 Behold, I w T as shapen in iniquity; and in sin did my mother conceive me.
C a 6 Behold, thou desirest truth in the inward parts: and in the
thou shalt make me to know wisdom,
b 7 Purge me with hyssop, and I shall he clean: wash me, and I shall be
whiter than snow. 8 Make me to hear joy and gladness; that the
hones which thou hast broken may rejoice.
A 9 Hide thy face from my sins, and blot out all mine iniquities, to Create in me
a clean heart, 0 God; and renew a right spirit within me. 11 Cast me not away
from thy presence; and take not thy holy spirit from me. 12 Restore unto me
the joy of thy salvation; and uphold me with thy free spirit.
B 13 Then will I teach transgressors thy ways; and sinners shall be converted
unto thee.
G h 14 Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, 0 God, thou God of my salvation:
and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. 13 0 Lord, open
thou my lips; and my mouth shall shew forth thy praise.
a 16 For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou delightest
notin burnt offering. 17 The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a
broken and a contrite heart, 0 God, thou wilt not despise.
/3 t 8 Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion: build thou the walls of
Jerusalem. 19 Then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righ-
teousness, with burnt offering and whole burnt offering: then shall they
offer bullocks upon thine altar.
Psalm LI. —The Skeleton.
A | 1,2. Prayer.
B | 3 —5. Own sinfulness.
C Ia | 6. What the Lord will delight in.
b | 7, 8. Prayer, and consequences of granting it.
A | g —l 2. Prayer.
B 1 13. Other sinners.
Cl b | 14, 15. Prayer, and consequences of granting it.
a 1 16, 17. What the Lord delights in.
y 8 | 18, 19. Prayer, and consequences of granting it.
The sixth member, G, may be arranged thus: —
G c 14 Deliver me from bloodguiltiness, 0 God, thou God of my salvation: and
my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. 15 0 Lord, open thou my
lips; and ray mouth shall shew forth thy praise,
and 16 For thou desirest not sacrifice; else would I give it: thou delightest not
in burnt offering.
and 17 The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart,
0 God, thou wilt not despise.
c 18 Do good in thy good pleasure unto Zion: build thou the walls of Jerusalem.
19 Then shalt thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness, with bm-nt
offering and whole burnt offering: then shall they offer bullocks upon thine
altar.
The Skeleton of C.
C c | 14, 15. Prayer, and consequences of granting it.
and I 16. What the Lord will not accept.
and I 17. What the Lord will accept.
c 1 18, 19. Prayer, and consequences of granting it.


ipsalm lii.
To the chief Musician, Maschil, A Psalm of David, when Doeg the Edomite came and told Saul, and
said unto him, David is come to the house of Ahimelech.
A i Why boastest thou thyself in mischief, 0 mighty man ? the goodness of God
endureth continually. 2 Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs; like a sharp rasor,
working deceitfully. 3 Thou lovest evil more than good; and lying rather than
to speak righteousness. Selah. 4 Thou lovest all devouring words, 0 thou,
deceitful tongue. 5 God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee
away, and pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of
the living. Selah.
B 6 The righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him : 7 Lo, this is the
man that made not God his strength; but trusted in the abundance of his riches,
and strengthened himself in his wickedness.
C 8 But lam like a green olive tree in the house of God: I trust in the mercy of
God for ever and ever. 9 I will praise thee for ever, because thou hast done it:
and I will wait on thy name; for it is good before thy saints.
Psalm Lll.— The Skeleton.
A | I—s.1 —5. The wicked.
B( 6, 7. The righteous (plural).
C|B, 9. A righteous individual.
The first member, A, may be thus arranged:—
A a 1 Why boastest thou thyself in mischief, 0 mighty man? the goodness of
God endureth continually,
b | 2 Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs; like a sharp rasor, working deceitfully
cI 3 Thou lovest I eTl .‘ , m ? re th “ i- ,
I and lying rather than to speak righteousness. Selah.
h I Thou lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue.
a 5 God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, and pluck
thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of the living. Selah.
The Skeleton op A.
A a | 1. The mercy of God abused,
b | 2. The tongue [positive].
c | 3. Loving | mom than truth j [comparative].
h | 4. The tongue [positive],
a | 5. The wrath of God to be apprehended.
Itealm liii.
To the chief Musician upon Mahalath, Maschil, A Psalm of David.
A 1 The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God. Corrupt are they, and have
done abominable iniquity: there is none that doeth good. 2 God looked down
from heaven upon the children of men, to see if there were any that did
understand, that did seek God. 3 Every one of them is gone back : they are
altogether become filthy; there is none that doeth good, no, not one. 4 Have the
workers of iniquity no knowledge ? who eat up my people as they eat bread: thev
have not called upon God.
B 5 There were they in great fear, where no fear was: for God hath scattered the
bones of him that encampeth against thee: thou hast put them to shame, because
God hath despised them.
C 6Oh that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion! When God bringeth
back the captivity of his people, Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad.


Psalm LITI.— The Skeleton.
A | i—4, The wicked.
B 1 5. A righteous individual (addressed).
C | 6. The righteous people.
The first member, A, may be arranged thus: —
A a | The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God.
b | Corrupt are they, and have done abominable iniquity:
c | there is none that doeth good.
and | 2 God looked down from heaven upon the children of men,
and ] to see if there were any that did understand, that did seek God.
c 3 Every one of them is gone back: they are altogether become filthy ;
there is none that doeth good, no, not one.
b 4 Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge ? who eat up my people as
they eat bread:
a 1 they have not called upon God.
The Skeleton of A.
A a | 1-. Denial of God.
b | -1-. Depravity,
c | -1. General depravity [“ none ”].
and | 2-. Approach made on the part of God.
and | -2. Approach looked for on the part of man.
c 1 3. General depravity [‘‘none’’].
h | 4-. Depravity.
a | -4. Neglect of God.
|)salm liv.
To the chief Musician on Neginoth, Maschil, A Psalm of David, when the Ziphims came and said to
Saul, Doth not David hide himself with us ?
A i Save me, 0 God, by thy name, and judge me by thy strength. 2 Hear my
prayer, 0 God ; give ear to the words of my mouth.
A 3 For strangers are risen up against me, and oppressors seek after my soul:
they have not set God before them. Selah.
B | 4 Behold, God is mine helper: the Lord is with them that uphold my soul.
B | 5 He shall reward evil unto mine enemies; cut them off in thy truth.
C| 6 I will freely sacrifice unto thee : I will praise thy name, 0 Lord ; for it is good.
C 7 For he hath delivered me out of all trouble : and mine eye hath seen his
desire upon mine enemies.
Psalm LlV.—The Skeleton.
A ( 1, 2. The Lord.
A j 3. Enemies.
B | 4. The Lord.
J 5 | 5. Enemies.
C | 6. The Lord.
C | 7. Enemies.
Observe the progress of sense in A, B and C, also in A, £ and C.


s)salm lv.
To the chief Musician on Neginoth, Maschil, A P*alm of DaviJ.
A a i Give ear to my prayer, 0 God; and hide not thyself from my
supplication, a Attend unto me, and hear me: I mourn in my
complaint, and make a noise; 3 Because of the voice of the
enemy, because of the oppression of the wicked:
b I for they cast iniquity upon me, and in wrath they hate mo.
4 My heart is sore pained within mo: and tho terrors of C
death are fallen upon me. 5 Fearfulness and trembling are
come upon me, and horror hath overwhelmed mo. 6 And I
said, Oh that I had wings like a dove! for then would I fly
away, and be at rest. 7 Lo, then would I wander far off, and
remain in the wilderness. Selah. 8 I would hasten my
r> -m esca P e * rom the windy storm and tempest,
xj cI 9 Destroy, O Lord, and divide their tongues:
and | for I have seen violence and strife in the city.
xo Day and night they go about it upon the walls thereof: D
mischief also and sorrow are in the midst of it. 1 r Wickedness
is in the midst thereof: deceit and guile depart not from her
streets. 12 For it was not an enemy that reproached mo; then
1 could have borne it: neither was it he that hated mo that did
magnify himself against me; then I would have hid myself
from him: 13 But it was thou, a man mine equal, my guide,
and mine acquaintance. 14 Wo took sweet counsel together,
and walked unto the house of God in company.
■B c 13 Let death seize upon them, and let them go down quick
into hell:
and | for wickedness is in their dwellings, and among them.
16 As for me, I will call upon God; and the Loud shall save G
me. 17 Evening, and morning, and at noon, will I pray, and
cry aloud: and he shall hear my voice.
I A a 18 He hath delivered my soul in peace from tho battle that was
against me:
b | for there were many with me.
19 God shall heai’, and afflict them, even he that abideth of old. I)
Selah. Because they have no changes, therefore they fear not
God. 20 He hath put forth his hands against such as bo at
peace with him: he hath broken his covenant. 21 The words
of his mouth were smoother than butter, but war was in his
heart: his woi’ds weie softer than oil, yet were they drawn swords,
22 Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: K
he shall never suffer the righteous to be moved.
23 But thou, O God, shalt bring them down into tho pit of A
destruction: bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half
their days;
but I will trust in thee. | ]{
Psalm LY. —The Skeleton.
A | a | i— 3-, Prayer for self.
I b | -3. Plea, *3
4—B. The righteous. | C
B I c | 9-, Prayer against enemies.
| and j -9. Plea. ,3
10 —14. The wicked. ) D
B I c | 15-. Prayer against enemies.
I d (-15. Plea. *3
16, 17. The righteous. | 0
A | a | 18-. Prayer for self,
( 6 | -18. Plea. *3
19—21. The wicked. | D
22, The righteous. | K
23-. The wicked. | A
D
. .f n th'B Psalm we have the first instance of a doable subject. Prayers and pleas are alternated with descriptions
of the righteous and the wicked. On the one side the prayers and pleas are introverted, while on the other the two
classes are strictly alternate; the one in the singular number, the other in the plural. —(Ed.)


13s aim lvi.
To the chief Musician upon Jonath-elem-rechokim, Michtatn of David, when the Philistines took him
in Gath.
A i Be merciful unto me, 0 God: for man would swallow me up ; he fighting daily
oppresseth me. 3 Mine enemies would daily swallow me up: for they he many
that fight against me, 0 thou most High. 1
B a | 3 What time lam afraid, I will trust in thee.
b[4 In God I will praise his word, in God I have put my trust; I will not
fear what flesh can do unto me.
A 5 Every day they wrest my words : all their thoughts are against me for evil.
6 They gather themselves together, they hide themselves, they mark my steps,
when they wait for my soul.
Ba 7 Shall they escape by iniquity ?in thine anger cast down the people, 0 God
8 Thou tellest my wanderings : put thou my tears into thy bottle : are they
not in thy book P
b 9 When I cry unto thee , 2 then shall mine enemies turn back: this I know;
for God is for me. io In God will I praise his word :in the Loud will I
praise his word, u In God have I put my trust: I will not be afraid
what man can do unto me.
0
al2 Thy vows are upon me, O God: I will render praises unto thee, 13 For
thou hast delivered my soul from death: wilt not thou deliver my feet from
falling, that I may walk before God in the light of the living ?
Psalm LVI. — The Skeleton.
A | 1, 2. Complaint.
B a | 3. God spoken to )
J- Trust,
b| 4. God spoken of. )
A | 5, 6. Complaint.
B a 17,8. God spoken to. \
h | 9 —ll. God spoken of. > Trust.
a | 12, 13. God spoken to. ,
1 cno, Maroom, Exalted One ; not ph>, Gnelion.
2 Omit the italics, “ unto thee


Ifcalm lvii.
To the chief Musician. Al-taschith, Michtam of David, when he fled from Saul in the cave.
a i Be merciful unto me, 0 God, be merciful unto me: for ray soul trusteth in
thee: yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these
calamities be overpast. 3 I will cry unto God Most High ; unto God that
peifoimeth all things for me. 3 He shall send from heaven, and save me from
his ZoTand' hisTSh* WO " W SWalI ° W me Up - Selah - God Sha “ Send torth
b 4 My soul is among lions: and I lie even among them that are set on fire
sharp ° f whose teetil are s P ears and arrows, and their tongue a
E thf eatth U 6Xalted ’ ° G ° d ’ above the lieay ens; let thy glory be above all
A b ! haw 6 d,vZ Z ls ?'‘i f f ° r - my S * epS; my soul is bowed down : they
I t/Zletf mt ° * he midSt Wh6reof they are “len
a 7 My heart is fixed, 0 God, my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise
n I wfn 6 Up -’ m L g V awake ’ P salter J and harp : I myself will awake early.
9 I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people: I will sing unto thee amono-
the cloudT’ IO F ° r tIJ m6rCJ W gr6at Unto the lieavens , thy truth unto
B all the earth eXalfced ’ ° G ° d ’ ab ° Ve the lie avens: let thy glory be above
Psalm LVII.— The Skeleton.
AI a | I—3. Address to the Lord ( v . -3, “mercy” and “truth”). [no«i icn]
1 b| 4. Hunted animal.
B | 5. Be Thou exalted.
A I b| 6. Hunted animal.
! a I 7—lo. Address to the Lord ( v . 10, “mercy” and “ truth”), [now, nen]
B ( 11. Be Thou exalted.
In A and A we may compare a and a thus:—
a c 1 Be merciful unto me, 0 God, be merciful unto me : for my soul trusteth in
thee: yea, in the shadow of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these
calamities be overpast.
and 2 I will cry unto God Most High ; unto God that performeth all things for
me. 3 He shall send from heaven, and save me from the reproach of him
that would swallow me up. Selah. P
e | God shall send forth his mercy and his truth.
a c[ 7 |ly heart is fixed, 0 God, my heart is fixed :
and I will sing and give praise. 8 Awake up, my glory; awake, psaltery and
harp; I myself will awake early. 9 I will praise thee, 0 Lord, among the
people ; I will sing unto thee among the nations.
e | 10 For thy mercy is great unto the heavens, and thy truth unto the clouds.
The Skeleton of a and a.
a c| 1. Repetition.
and | 2, 3-. I will cry.
e | -3. Mercy and Truth.
a c | 7-. Repetition.
I "7 — 9 • I will sing. 9. I will praise, I will sing.
e | 10. Mercy and Truth.


ssalm lyiii.
To the chief Musician, Al-taschith, Michtam of David.
A iDo ye indeed speak righteousness, 0 congregation? do ye judge uprightly, oye
sons of men? 2 Yea, in heart ye work wickedness; ye weigh the violence of
your hands in the earth. 3 The wicked are estranged from the womb : they go
astray as soon as they he horn, speaking lies. 4 Their poison is like the poison of
a serpent: they are like the deaf adder that stoppeth her ear; 5 Which will not
hearken to the voice of charmers, charming never so wisely. 6 Break their
teeth, 0 God, in their mouth: break out the great teeth of the young lions, O
Lord. 7 Let them melt away as waters which run continually : when he hendeth
his how to shoot his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces. BAs a snail which melteth,
let every one of them pass away : like the untimely birth of a woman, that they may
not see the sun. 9 Before your pots can feel the thorns, he shall take them away
as with a whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath.
810 The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance :he shall wash his
feet in the blood of the wicked.
B 1 r So that a man shall say, Yerily there is a reward for the righteous :
A | verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth.
Psalm LYIII. —The Skeleton.
A | I—9.1 —9. The wicked and their judgments, (pMI, -2).
B | 10. The righteous [and their rejoicing].
B 1 11-. The righteous [and their reward].
A | -11. The wicked (judged), (p»i, -11).
The first member, A, may be thus arranged:—
A a IDo ye indeed speak righteousness, 0 congregation ? do ye judge uprightly, O
ye sons of men? 2 Yea, in heart ye work wickedness; ye weigh the violence
of your hands in the earth. »
b 3 The wicked are estranged from the womb : they go astray as soon as they
be born, speaking lies. 4 Their poison is like the poison of a serpent: they
are like the deaf adder that stoppeth her ear; 5 Which will not hearken to
the voice of charmers, charming never so wisely.
a 6 Break their teeth, 0 God, in their mouth: break out the great teeth of the
young lions, 0 Lord.
b 7 Let them melt away as waters which run continually: when he hendeth
his how to shoot his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces. 8 Asa snail which
melteth, let everyone of them pass away: like the untimely birth of a woman,
that they may not see the sun. 9 before your pots can feel the thorns, he
shall take them away as with a whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath.
The Skeleton of A,
A a ( 1, 2. Address to the wicked.
b | 3 —5. Wicked spoken of. (Comparisons, '105).
a | 6. Address to the Lord.
h | 7—9. Wicked spoken of. (Comparisons, 103).
Of this first member, A, we may also point out the features of b and b, where the wicked are
spoken of. — (Ed.): —
b and [3. As to their birth.
e | 4-. Like poison of serpent,
c | -4, 5. Deaf to a voice.
h e | 8-. Like water and snail.
and | -8. As to their birth.
c | 9. Carried off by a whirlwind.
Psalm Iviii., like Psalm lii., falls into three
heads:—
I i—9. The wicked.
II 10. The righteous.
J 111 11. A righteous individual.
In verses 2 and 10 we have :
v. 2. f | Internal (heart).
g | External (hands).
v. 10. / j Internal (heart).
g | External (feet).


lix.
To the chief Musician, Al-taschith, Miohtam of David ; when Saul sent, and they watched the house
to kill him.
A i Deliver me irorn mine enemies, omy God: defend me from them that rise up
against me. 2 Deliver me from the workers of iniquity, and save me from bloody
men. 3 For, 10, they lie in wait for my soul: the mighty are gathered against
me; not for my transgression, nor for my sin, 0 Lord. 4 They run and prepare
themsehes “without my fault: awake to help me, and behold. 3 Thou therefore,
0 Lord God of hosts, the God of Israel, awake to visit all the heathen ; be not
merciful to any wicked transgressors. Selah.
B 6 They return at evening: they make a noise like a dog, and go round about
the city.
C 7 Behold, they belch out with their mouth: swords are in their lips : for who,
say they , doth hear ?
D a 8 But thou, O Lord, shalt laugh at them ; thou shalt have all the
heathen in derision. 9 Because of his strength will I wait upon thee:
b for God is my defence. 10 The God of my mercy shall prevent me :
God shall let me see my desire upon mine enemies.
A 11 Slay them not, lest my people forget: scatter them by thy power; and bring
them down, O Lord our shield. 12 For the sin of their mouth and the words of
their lips let them even be taken in their pride: and for cursing and lying which
they speak. 13 Consume them in wrath, consume them , that they 77?ay not be:
and let them know that God ruleth in Jacob unto the ends of the earth. Selah.
B 14 And at evening let them return; and let them make a noise like a dog, and
go round about the city.
C j 15 Let them 1 wander up and down for meat, and grudge if they be not
| satisfied.
D a 16 But I will sing of thy power 2 ; yea, I will sing aloud of thy mercy
in the morning:
h for thou hast been my defence and refuge in the day of my trouble.
17 Unto thee, O my strength, will I sing: for God is my defence,
and the God of my mercy.
Psalm LIX. —The Skeleton.
A | I—s.1 —5. Prayer.
B | 6. Comparison to a dog.
C| 7. Doggish quality; barking. (pira* run)
Dla | 8, 9-. Psalmist’s trust in God. (nnNi)
j b | -9. lleason for it. (o) [God my defence.]
A | 11 —13. Prayer.
B | 14. Comparison to a dog.
C | 15. Doggish quality; greediness, (pirr non)
JD Ia | 16-. Psalmist’s trust in God. ('Jmi)
| h | -16, 17. Reasons for it. (*a, »3) [God my defence.]
Note in 1) the double expression of trust in a (16-), and the two grounds of the trust in h
(-16, 17).—(Ed.)
1 They will.
2 Strength, as in v. 9.


Itealm lx.
To the chief Musician upon Shushan-eduth, Michtam of David, to teach; when he strove with
Aram-naharami and with Arara-zobah, when Joab returned, and smote of Edom in the valley of
salt twelve thousand. J
A r 0 God thou hast cast us off, 1 thou hast scattered us, thou hast been displeased •
O turn thyself to us again. 2 Thou hast made the earth to tremble; thou hast
broken it: heal the breaches thereof ; for it shaketh. 3 Thou hast shewed thy
people hard things : thou hast made us to drink the wine of astonishment 4 Thou
hast given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be displayed because of
the truth. Selah. 5 That thy beloved maybe delivered; save 2 with thy right
hand, and hear me.
B a 6 God hath spoken in his holiness; I will rejoice, I will divide Shechem,
and mete out the valley of Succoth. 7 Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is
mine; Ephraim also is the strength of mine head; Judah is my lawgiver;
b 8 Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I cast out my shoe : Philistia,
triumph thou because of me. 9 Who will bring me into the strong city ?
who will lead me into Edom?
A 1 o Wilt not thou, 0 God, which hadst cast us off 1 ? and thou, O God, which didst not
go out with our armies Pll Give us help from trouble : for vain is the help 2 of man,
B a | 12 Through God we shall do valiantly:
h | for he it is that shall tread down our enemies.
Psalm LX.—The Skeleton.
A | I—s. Prayer. [God the object of address.]
B | a b 6 | B,' j [God the subject of address.]
A | 10, 11. Prayer. [d',iP>«] [God the object, &c.]
B\a\ 12-. Jewish, ; , ~ . . , „ ,
| b | -12. Heathen. J [ God the subject, &c.j
. above is according to pencilled notes in the MS., though" a more simple arrangement was
originally written, thus :
A ( I—s.1 —5. Spoken to. Desertion, trust, prayer.
B | 6—9. Spoken of. [Divine prowess.]
A I 10, 11. Spoken to. Trust, desertion, prayer.
B\ 12. Spoken of. [Divine prowess.]
1 unrijt. 2 “Save,” rurunn, v. 5 ; Salvation, romrn, v. 11,
|)salm lxi.
To the chief Musician upon Neginah, A Psalm of David.
A | 1 Hear my cry, O God;
B | attend unto my prayer.
A 2 From the end of the earth will I cry unto thee, when my heart is overwhelmed:
lead me to the rock that is higher than I. 3 For thou hast been a shelter for me,
and n strong tower from the enemy. 4 I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever:
I will trust in the covert of thy wings. Selah. 5 For thou, 0 God, hast heard
my vows: thou hast given me the heritage of those that fear thy name.
B 6 Thou wilt prolong 1 the king’s life : and his years as many generations. 7He
shall- abide before God for ever : O prepare mercy and truth, which may
preserve him. 8 So will I sing praise unto thy name for ever, that I may daily
perform my vows. J
Psalm LXl.—The Skeleton.
A | 1-. Cry.
B ( -1. Prayer.
A [ 2 —5. Cry. [“Yows,” “name,” v. 5.]
A|6 —8. Prayer. [“Name,” “vows,” v. 8]
1 Prolong Thou.
2 Let him abide.


The third member, A , admits of the following arrangement:—
A & 2 i rom the end of the earth will I cry nnto thee, when my heart is
overwhelmed : lead me to the rock that is higher than I.
b | 3 For thou hast been a shelter for me, and a strong tower from the enemy.
a 4 I will abide in thy tabernacle for ever: I will trust in the covert of thy
wings. Selah.
b 5 For thou, 0 God, hast heard my vows: thou hast given me the heritage
of those that fear thy name.
The Skeleton of A.
A a| 2. Resolution. (Future.)
b| 3. Reason. (Past.)
a | 4. Resolution. (Future.)
h] 5. Reason. (Past.)
The fourth member, B , may be ax-ranged thus: —
B c| 6 Thou wilt prolong 1 the king’s life 2 : and his years as many generations.
and 7 He shall abide 3 before God for ever: 0 prepare mercy and truth, which
may preserve him.
and 8 So will I sing praise unto thy name for ever,
c | that I may daily perform my vows.
The Skeleton of B.
B c| 6. Temporal preservation. (*o', n*o»)
d| 7. Eternal preservation. (nbii>)
and j 8-. Eternal services, (ijlb)
c ( -8. Temporal services, (av ov)
1 Prolong Thou. 2 Add days to the king’s days. 3 Let him abide.
ssalm iiXii.
To the chief Musician, to Jeduthun, A Psalm of David.
A i Truly my soul waiteth upon God: from him cometh my salvation. 2 He only
is my rock and my salvation; he is my defence; I shall not be greatly moved.
A 3 How long will ye imagine mischief against a man P ye shall be slain all of
you : as a bowing wall shall ye be , and as a tottering fence. 4 They only
consult to cast him down from his excellency: they delight in lies: they bless
wdth their mouth, but they curse inwardly. Selah.
B 3 My soul, wait thou only upon God; for my expectation is from him, 6 He
only is my rock and my salvation : he is my defence ; I shall not be moved. 7 In
God is my salvation and my glory : the rock of my strength, and my refuge, is
in God.
B 8 Trust in him at all times ;ye people, pour out your heart before him : God is
a refuge for us. Selah. 9 Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of
high degree are a lie: to be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter than
vanity. 10 Trust not in oppression, and 1 become not vain in robbery: if riches
increase, set not your heart upon them.
C 11 God hath spoken once; twice have I heard this ; that power belongeth unto
God. 12 Also unto thee, O Lord, belongeth mercy: for thou renderest to every
ma,n according to his woi-k.
Psalm LXII. —The Skeleton.
A | 1, 2. Trust in God.
A|3, 4. Speaks to and of man (to, v. 3; of, v. 4).
B | 5 —7. Trust in God.
B ] B—lo.8 —10. Speaks to and of man (to, v. 8 ; of, v. 9; to, v. 10).
C | 11, 12. Trust in God.
1 This word, “ and,” added in editions of A.V. since 1629. — (Ed.)


Itealm lxiii.
A Psalm of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah.
A | i 0 God thou art my God ; early will I seek thee;
A my soul thirsteth for thee, my flesh longeth for thee in a dry and thirsty land, 1
where no water is; 2To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee
in the sanctuary.
B | 3 Because thy lovingkindness is better than life, my lips shall praise thee.
B | 4 Thus will I bless thee while 1 live: I will lift up my hands in thy name.
praise thee with joyful lips :
C 6 When I remember thee upon my bed, and 2 meditate on t hee in the night
watches.
G 7 Because thou hast been my help, therefore in the shadow of thy wings will I
rejoice. BMy soul followeth hard after thee : thy right hand upholdeth me.
E 9 But those that seek my soul, to destroy it, shall go into the lower parts of the
earth. 1 10 They shall fall by the sword : they shall be a portion for foxes.
F | 11 But the king shall rejoice in God;
F | every one that sweareth by him shall glory:
F 1 but the mouth of them that speak lies shall be stopped.
Psalm LXIII. —The Skeleton.
A | 1-. God’s goodness, and consequent resolution.
A | -i, 2. I.
B | 3. God’s goodness, and consequent resolution.
B 1 4- I-
C | 5. God’s goodness, and consequent resolution.
C 1 6. I.
D | 7, 8. God’s goodness, and consequent resolution.
E | 9, 10. The wicked, —as far as I am concerned.
F | 11-. My hope in God. [The king.]
A l l -ii'. The hope of all in God. [The king.]
E [ -n. The wicked in general.
verse -1. pMii, verse -9. Observe the connection of thought.— (Ed.)
2 Supply “J ivill" instead of “and.”


lxiv.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
A A c i Hear my voice, 0 God, in my prayer: preserve my life from fear of the
enemy.
and 2 Hide me from the secret counsel of the wicked; from the insurrection
of the workers of iniquity:
B [ 3 Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their hows to shoot
their arrows, even bitter words: 4 That they may shoot in secret
| at the perfect: suddenly do they shoot at him, and fear not.
A d 5 dhey encourage themselves in an evil matter: they commune of laying
snares privily; they say, Who shall see them ? 6 They search out
iniquities ; they accomplish a diligent search :
c | both the inward thought of every one of them, 1 and the heart, is deep.
B 7 But God shall shoot at them with an arrow ; suddenly shall they be
wounded, 8 So they shall make their own tongue to fall upon themselves:
B all that see them shall flee away. 9 And all men shall fear, and shall declare the
work of God; for they shall wisely consider of his doing.
C 10 The righteous shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him ; and all the
upright in heart shall glory.
Psalm LXIV.— The Skeleton. [Compare Psalms lii. and Iviii.]
A | 1— 8-. The openly wicked and ungodly.
B | -8,-9. Mankind in general.
C | 9, 10. The righteous.
The first member. A, is arranged thus :
A aI c | 1. Prayer against the enemy (singular).
I d| 2. Prayer against enemies (plural).
B|3, 4. Their attempt to wound, (ovn)
A \ d| 5, 6-. Enemies (plural).
I c | -6. The enemy (singular).
B | 7, 8-. They shall be wounded, (yti)
ssalm lxv.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm and Song of David.
A 1 Praise waiteth for thee, 0 God, in Sion: and unto thee shall the vow be
performed.
B | 2 0 thou that hearest prayer, unto thee shall all flesh come.
A 3 Iniquities prevail against me : as for our transgressions, thou shalt purge them
away. 4 Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto
thee , that he may dwell in thy courts: we shall be satisfiedVith the goodness of
thy house, even of thy holy temple. 5 By terrible things in righteousness wilt
thou answer us, 0 God of our salvation;
B who art the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are afar off
up6n the sea: 6 Which by his strength setteth fast the mountains; being
girded with power: 7 Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of their
waves, and the tumult of the people. 8 They also that dwell in the uttermost
parts are afraid at thy tokens : thou makest the outgoings of the morning and
evening to rejoice. 9 Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou greatly
enrichest it with the river of God, which is full of water : thou preparest them
corn, when thou hast so provided for it. 10 Thou waterest the ridges thereof
abundantly : thou settlestthe furrows thereof : thou makest it soft with showers:
thou blessest the springing thereof. 11 Thou crownest the year with thy
goodness; and thy paths drop fatness. 12 They drop upon the pastures of
the wilderness: and (he little hills rejoice on every side. 13 The pastures
are clothed with flocks; the valleys also are covered over with corn ; they shout
for joy, they also sing.
1 The man.


Psalm LXY. —The Skeleton.
A 1 i . The People of the Lord.
B | 2. The world in general.
A I 3-5-. The People of the Lord.
B i - 5 —13- The world in general.
The third member, A, may be arranged thus :
A a| 3 Iniquities prevail against me :
b | as for our transgressions, thou shalt purge them away.
a 4 Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee ,
that he may dwell in thy courts :
h we shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, even of thy holy
temple. 3 By terrible things in righteousness wilt thou answer us,
0 God of our salvation ;
The Skeleton of A.
A a | 3-, Singular,
b | -3. Plural.
a | 4-. Singular.
h | -4, 5-. Plural.
We may also suggest the following arrangement for B— (Ed.):—
B c who art 1 the confidence of all the ends of the earth, and of them that are afar
oft upon the sea :
and 6 Which by his strength setteth fast the mountains; being girded with
power . / Which stilleth the noise of the seas, the noise of their waves
and the tumult of the people.
c 8 They also that dwell in the uttermost parts are afraid at thy tokens: thou
makest the outgoings of the morning and evening to rejoice.
and 9 Thou visitest the earth, and waterest it: thou greatly enrichest it with
the river of God, which is full of water: ihou preparest them corn when
thou hast so provided for it. 10 Thou waterest the ridges thereof
abundantly: thou settlest the furrows thereof; thou makest it soft with
showers: thou blessest the springing thereof. 11 Thou crownest the year
with thy goodness; and thy paths drop fatness. 12 They drop uvon the
pastures of the wilderness: and the little hills rejoice* on every side
13 The pastures are clothed with flocks ; the valleys also are covered over
with corn; they shout for joy, they also sing.
The Skeleton of B.
B c [ -5. God, the Confidence of all afar off. A
,1 , T ANARUS, ,_ , f God spoken of.
and | 6, 7. The power of God. )
c | 8. God, the Fear of all afar off (Thou shalt cause fear). A
and | 9—13- The goodness of God (Thou shalt bless). ) Go<l spo^en to '
1 Thou art , as in 11. Y.


IJsalm lxvi.
To the chief Musician, A Song or Psalm.
AI 1 Make a joyful noise unto God, all ye lands: 2 Sing forth the honour of his
I name: make his praise glorious.
B 3 Say unto God, How terrible art thou in thy works ! through the greatness of
thy power shall thine enemies submit themselves unto thee.
C 4 All the earth shall worship thee, and shall sing unto thee ; they shall sing
to thy name. Selah.
D 3 Come and see the works of God: he is terrible in his doing toward the
children of men. 6He turned the sea into dry land: they went through
the flood on foot: there did we rejoice in him. 7 He ruleth by his power
for ever; his eyes behold the nations: let not the rebellious exalt them-
selves. 1 Selah.
A 8 0 bless our God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be heard :
9 Which holdeth our soul in life, and suffereth not our feet to be moved.
B 10 For thou, O God, hast proved us: thou hast tried us, as silver is tried.
11 Thou broughtest us into the net; thou laidst affliction upon our loins.
1 2 Thou hast caused men to ride over our heads; we went through fire and
through water; but thou broughtest us out into a wealthy place.
G 13 I will go into thy house with burnt offerings : I will pay thee my vows,
14 Which my lips have uttered, and my mouth hath spoken, when I was in
trouble. 13 I will offer unto thee burnt sacrifices of fatlings, with the incense
of rams ; I will offer bullocks with goats. Selah.
D 1 6 Come and hear, all ye that fear God, and I will declare what he hath
done for my soul, j 7 I cried unto him with my mouth, and he was extolled
with my tongue. iS If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not
hear me: 19 But verily God hath heard me; he hath attended to the voice
of my prayer. 20 Blessed he God, which hath not turned away my prayer,
nor his mercy from me.
Psalm LXYI. —The Skeleton.
A | 1,2. Exhortation to praise.
B | 3. Address. God’s works in the world. >
C| 4. Address. Promise for the world, j s l )o^en t- 0,
D | 5 —7. “ Come and see,” &c. (D'TiDit, v. 7.)
A | 8, 9. Exhortation to praise.
B | 10 —12. Address. God’s dealings with His People. 1
C | 13 —15. Address. Promise for himself. j God spoken to.
D | 16—20. “ Come and hear,” &c. (TDM, v. 20.)
1 They that turn away shall not exalt themselves. D'-non, v. 7. See *vd!t, v. 20. Compare
Ps. Ixviii. 6 and 18 ; where see Ixx. and Heb. ill. 16 Also Ps. Ixviii. B.— (Ed.)
C a | 13-, Offerings.
b 1 -13. Yows.
h | 14. Vows.
a | 15. Offerings.
Also I) c I 16. God.
d | 17. I.
d | 18. I.
c | 19, 20. God.


Itealm Lxvii.
To ilie chief Musician on Neginoth, A Psalm or Song.
A a i God be merciful unto us, and bless us; and cause bis face to sbine upon us;
Selah.
b 2 That thy way may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all
nations.
B c| 3 Let the people praise thee, 0 God; let all the people praise thee,
and | 4 O let the nations 1 be glad and sing for joy:
C | for thou shalt judge the people righteously,
C | and govern the nations upon earth. Selah.
B c | 5 Let the people praise thee, 0 God; let all the people praise thee.
and | 6 Then shall the earth yield her increase;
A a | and God, even our own God, shall bless us. 7 God shall bless us;
b | and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.
Psalm LXVII. —The Skeleton.
A a J 1. God be merciful to us.
b | 2. Effects.
B c| 3, Let the people bless the Lord. [o'oj), peojdes.']
| and | 4-. Effects. [D»o«h, nations.']
C | -4-. Address to God. peoples .]
C | -4. Address to God. nations. ]
B I c | 5. Let the people bless the Lord.
and | 6-. Effects.
A a | -6. God be merciful to us.
h | -7. Effects.
Observe the order of the words in B repeated and observed in the address to God in C and C
B c| 3. peoples.
and | 4-. nations.
C | -4-. peoples.
C | -4. nations.
1 Then shall the nations, as in d (», 6, “ Then shall the earth ”).


spsaltn lxviii.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm or Song of David.
Y I Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered; let them also that hate him flee
before him. 2 As smoke is driven away, so drive them away: as wax melteth
before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.
Z 3 But let the righteous be glad; let them rejoice before God: yea, let them
exceedingly rejoice.
A I 4 Sing unto God, sing praises to his name : extol him that rideth upon the heavens by his name
1 JAH, and rejoice before him.
B aj 5 A father of the fatherless, and a judge of the widows, is God in his holy habitation.
| 6 God setteth the solitary in families ; he bringeth out those which are bound with chains:
b | but the rebellious dwell in a dry land.
c 7 0 God, when thou wentest forth before thy people, when thou didst march through
the wilderness; Selah : 8 The earth shook, the heavens also dropped at the presence
of God ; even Sinai itself was moved at the presence of God, the God of Israel. 9 Thou,
O God, didst send a plentiful rain, whereby thou didst confirm thine inheritance, when
it was weary. 10 Thy congregation hath dwelt therein: thou, 0 God, hast prepared
of thy goodness for the poor,
and 11 The Lord gave the word; great was the company of those that published if.
12 Kings of armies did flee apace : and she that tarried at home divided the spoil.
13 Though ye have lien among the pots, 1 yet shall ye be as the wings of a dove
covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold. 14 When the Almighty 2
scattered kings in it, it was white as snow in Salmon.
C 15 The hill of God is as the hill of Bashan; an high hill as the hill of Bashan.
16 Why leap ye, ye high hills ? this is the hill which God desireth to dwell in;
yea, the Lord will dwell in it for ever.
C 17 The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels : the Lord
is among them, as in Sinai, in the holy place. 18 Thou hast ascended on high,
thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts for men; yea, for the
rebellious also, that THE LORD 3 God might dwell among them.
B a I 19 Blessed be the Lord, who daily loadeth us with benefits, even the Gon of our salvation.
| Selah. 20 He that is our God is the God of salvation; and unto God 4 the Lord belong
j the issues 5 from death.
b2l But God shall wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of such an one as
goeth on still in his trespasses. 22 The Lord said, I will bring again from Bashan, I will
bring my people again from the depths of the sea: 23 That thy foot may be dipped in
the blood of thine enemies, and the tongue of thy dogs in the same.
c 24 They have seen thy goings, O God; even the goings of my God, my King, in the
sanctuary. 25 The singers went before, the players on instruments followed after;
among them were the damsels playing with timbrels. 26 Bless ye God in the
congregations, even the Lord, from the fountain of Israel. 27 There is little Benjamin
with their ruler, the princes of Judah and their council, the princes of Zebulun, and
the princes of Naphtali.
and 28 Thy God hath commanded thy strength: strengthen, 0 God, that which thou hast
wrought for us. 29 Because of thy temple at Jerusalem shall kings bring presents
unto thee. 30 Rebuke the company of spearmen, the multitude of the bulls, with
the calves of the people, till every one submit himself with pieces of silver: scatter
thou the people that delight in -war. 31 Princes shall come out of Egypt; Ethiopia
shall soon stretch out her hands unto God.
A 32 Sing unto God, ye kingdoms of the earth ; O sing praises unto the Lord ; Selah : 33 To him
that rideth upon the heavens of heavens, which were of old ; 10, he doth send out his voice, and
that a mighty voice. 34 Ascribe ye strength unto God : his excellency is over Israel, and his
strength is in the clouds. 35 0 God, thou art terrible out of thy holy places : the God of Israel
is he that giveth strength and power unto his people. Blessed be God.
Psalm LXYIII. — The Skeleton.
T I 1, 2. The wicked. ■)
Z | 3. The righteous, j 1
A| 4. “ Sing unto God,” &c. [Exhortation to praise, four lines.]
B a | 5—6-. Mercies [to His People],
h | -6. Judgments [on the wicked].
c | 7 — lo. Goings in the wilderness. [Nine lines.]
and | 11—14. Preaching of the Gospel, &c. [Four verses, prophetical.]
C 1 15, 16. The hill of God.
C I 17, 18. The chariots of God.
B a I ig, 20. Mercies [to His People, four lines].
h | 21 —23. Judgments [on the wicked].
c | 24 —27. Goings in the sanctuary. [Nine lines.]
and | 28—31. Success of the Gospel, &c. [Pour verses, prophetical.]
A | 32—35. “ Sing unto God,” &c. [Exhortation (o praise.]
The third members of B and B, viz., c and c, admit of the following subordinate arrangement—(Ed.):—
c e| 7. Goings in the wilderness,
f | 8. Accompaniments,
g | 9. Address,
h | 10. Thy congregation.
c e | 24. Goings in the sanctuary.
/ | 25. Accompaniments.
g 1 26. Address.
h | 27. The congregation.
1 When ye shall have lain between the two sheepfolds, ye shall be adorned as the wings, &c., i.e., reclining in
peace after war.
3 Jah. 4 "ehovah ; lit., “ Unto Jehovah Adonai belong the issues from death.” 5 The bringing forth,
as in a, v. -6.


ssalm lxix.
To the chief Musician upon Shoshannim, A Psalm of David.
X A i Save me, 0 God ; for the waters are come in unto my soul. 2 I sink in deep mire, where
there is no standing: lam come into deep waters, where the floods overflow me. 3 lam
weary of my crying: my throat is dried: mine eyes fail while I wait for my God. 4 They
that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of mine head : they that would
destroy me, being mine enemies wrongfully, are mighty : then I restored that which I took
not away.
B 5 0 God, thou knowest my foolishness ; and my sins are not hid from thee. 6 Let not
them that wait on thee, 0 Lord God 1 of hosts, be ashamed for my sake: let not those
that seek thee be confounded for my sake, 0 God of Israel.
C 7 Because for thy sake I have borne reproach ; shame hath covered my face. 8I am
become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mother’s children. 9 For
the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up ; and the reproaches of them that reproached
thee are fallen upon me. 10 When I wept, and chastened my soul with fasting, that
was to my reproach. 11 I made 2 sackcloth also my garment; and I became a proverb
to them. 12 They that sit in the gate speak against me; and I was the song of the
drunkards.
Al3 But as for me, my prayer is unto thee, 0 Lord, in an acceptable time : 0 God, in the
multitude of thy mercy hear me, in the truth of thy salvation. 14 Deliver me out of the
mire, and let me not sink : let me be delivered from them that hate me, and out of the
deep waters. 15 Let not the waterflood overflow me, neither let the deep swallow me up,
and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me. 16 Hear me, 0 Lord; for thy loving-
kindness is good: turn unto me according to the multitude of thy tender mercies. 17 And
hide not thy face from thy servant; for I am in trouble: hear me speedily. 18 Draw
nigh unto my soul, and redeem it: deliver me because of mine enemies,
B j 19 Thou hast known my reproach, and my shame, and my dishonour: mine adversaries
I are all before thee. „
C | 20 Reproach hath broken my heart; and I am full of heaviness : and I looked for
I some to take pity, but there was none ; and for comforters, but I found none. 21 They
| gave me also gall for my meat; and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
Y D 22 Let their table become a snare before them : and that which should have been for their
welfare, let it become a trap. 23 Let their eyes be darkened, that they see not; and make
their loins continually to shake. 24 Pour out thine indignation upon them, and let thy
wrathful anger take hold of them. 25 Let their habitation be desolate ; and let none
dwell in their tents.
E I 26 For they persecute him whom thou hast smitten; and they talk to the grief of those
| whom thou hast wounded.
I) I 27 Add iniquity unto their iniquity : and let them not come into thy righteousness.
| 28 Let them be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be written with the righteous.
E j 29 But lam poor and sorrowful: let thy salvation, 0 God, set me up on high. 3
Z FI3O I will praise the name of God with a song, and will magnify him with thanksgiving.
j 31 This also shall please the Lord better than an ox or bullock that hath horns and hoofs,
G a[ 32 The humble shall see this, and be glad : and your heart shall live that seek God. 4
h j 33 For the Lord heareth the poor, and despiseth not his prisoners.
F | 34 Let the heaven and earth praise him, the seas, and every thing that moveth therein.
q h 1 35 For God will save Zion, and will build the cities of Judah; that they may
1 dwell there, and have it in possession.
aI 36 The seed also of his servants shall inherit it: and they that love his name shall
I dwell therein.
1 Jehovah.
2 1 gave. See note, page 63.
8 Though lam poor and sorrowful : Thy salvation, O God, shall set me up on. high. (In contrast
to E, v. 26, see the Skeleton.)
4 InA. Y. 1611, “ seek good.” Changed to “ God ”in edition of 1617.


Psalm LXlX.—The Skeleton.
X I—2l. Prayer.
Y 22—29. Imprecation.
Z 30—36. Praise.
X A | 1-—4. Prayer.
B | 5,6. Appeal.
C | 7—12. Treatment received.
A | 13—18. Prayer,
j? | 19. Appeal.
C j 20, 21. Treatment received.
Y D | 22—25. Imprecation. They.
F 1 26. The Psalmist. They would hurt whom thou hast afflicted, fmtool
D | 27, 28. Imprecation. They. v '
E | 29. The Psalmist. Thou wilt relieve whom they have hurt. (a«iD)
Z F | 30, 31. I will praise.
G Ia | 32. Promise to God’s servants.
1 b | 33. The Lord’s dealings, (o) [Reason.]
F | 34. Let creation praise.
G \ h | 35. The Lord’s dealings. (*3) [Reason.]
j a | 36. Promise to God’s servants.
A and A may be thus arranged and compared. - (Ed.):
A c | 1 Save me, 0 God;
and I for the waters are come in unto my soul. 2 I sink in deep mire, where there is no
| standing; 1 am come into deep waters, where the floods overflow me
e I 3 ! am weary of my crying : my throat is dried : mine eyes fail while I wait for
| my God.
f 4 They that hate me without a cause are more than the hairs of mine head: they
that would destroy me, beiruj mine enemies wrongfullv, are mighty: then I restored
that which I took not away.
A cI 13 But as for me, my prayer is unto thee, 0 Lord, in an acceptable time: 0 God, in the
| multitude of thy mercy hear mo, in the truth of thy salvation.
cl 14 Deliver me out of the mire, and let me not sink : let me he delivered from them that
hate me, and out of the deep waters. 13 Let not the waterflood overflow me, neither let
the deep swallow me up, and let not the pit shut her mouth upon me.
c j 16 Hear me, 0 Lord ; for thy lovingkindness is good : turn unto me according to the
I multitude of thy tender mercies. 17 And hide not thy face from thy servant; for I
|am in trouble : hear me speedily. 18 Draw nigh unto my soul, and redeem it:
f | deliver me because of mine enemies.
The Skeleton of A and A.
A c | 1-. Salvation. A c | 13. Salvation.
and 1 -1, 2. Mire and waters. and | 14, 15. Mire and waters,
e | 3. Desire after God. e | 16-18-. Desire after God.
f | 4. Enemies. /1 -jg. Enemies.
The following arrangement of C and Cis suggested by pencilled notes in the MS.— (Ed.):—
C g ! 7 Because tor thy sake I have borne reproach ; shame hath covered my face.
h 8 lam become a stranger unto my brethren, and an alien unto my mother’s children.
9 For the zeal of thine house hath eaten me up; and the reproaches of them that
reproached thee are fallen upon me. 10 When I wept and chastened my soul with
fasting, that was to my reproach.
1 I 11 I made sackcloth also my garment; and I became a proverb to them. 12 They
j that sit in the gate speak against me ;
k | and I was the song of the drunkards.
C ff J 20 Reproach hath broken my heart; and I am full of heaviness :
h | and I looked for some to take pity, but there teas none; and for comforters, hut I
j found none.
i | 21 They gave me also gall for my meat;
k | and in my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink.
The Skeleton of C and C.
C g( 7. I, reproached, (nsnn)
h | B—lo. Destitution.
i | 11,12-. Igave. (par ronMi, v.n)
k | -12. Drunkards.
C g | 20-. I, reproached, (nsnn)
h | -20. Destitution,
i | 21-. They gave, (mtn i:rv'>,v.2i
k | -21. Drink.
Note.—The correspondence of verses n and 21 is shown and determined by the accents. In
each we have Moonach ( J ), Moonach Athnach ( A ).
There are also correspondences between Psalms Ixix. and xxii. Both end exultingly.—Ed.


Ipsalm lxx.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David, to bring to remembrance.
A I 1 Make haste , O God, to deliver me; make haste 1 to help 2 me, O Lord.
B 2 Let them he ashamed and confounded that seek 3 after my soul: let them be
turned backward, and put to confusion, that desire my hurt. 3 Let them be
turned back for a reward of their shame that say, Aha, aha.
B 4 Let all those that seek 3 thee rejoice and he glad in thee; and let such as love
thy salvation say continually, Let God be magnified.
A 3 But lam poor and needy: make haste 1 unto me, 0 God: thou art my help 2 and
my deliverer; O Lord, make no tarrying.
Psalm LXX.— The Skeleton.
A | 1. Himself.
B | 2,3. His enemies.
B | 4. His friends.
A | 5. Himself.
Note.—A and A are homogeneous, while B and B are antithetical: thus in B (v. 2) the
enemies “seek me,” “and desire my hurt.” While in B (v. 4) the friends “seek Thee,” and
“ love Thy salvation.” Indeed, in B and B the petitions and the persons to whom they refer may
be thus exhibited—(Ed.)
B a | Let them be ashamed and confounded,
a | That seek after my soul,
h | Let them be turned backward, and put to confusion,
b | That desire my hurt,
c 1 Let them he turned back for 0 reward of their shame,
c | That say, Aha, aha
B d | Let them rejoice and he glad in Thee,
d | All that seek Thee,
e | And let them say continually, Let God he magnified,
e 1 That love Thy salvation.
' 1 rwtrt, “ make haste,” v. 1 and 5.
2 nw, “my help” v. 1. And in verse 5, “to my help.”
3 Verse 2, *irEO wpio, “ that seek after my soul”; verse 4, ympio, “ that seek Thee.”


lxxi.
A ! A In thee, 0 Lord, do I put my trust: let me never be put to confusion.
2 Deliver me in thy righteousness, and cause me to escape: incline thine ear
unto me, and save me. 3 Be thou my strong habitation, whereunto I may
continually resort: thou hast given commandment to save me; for thou art
my rock and my fortress. 4 Deliver me, omy God, out of the hand of the
wicked, out of the hand of the unrighteous and cruel man. 5 For thou art my
hope,
B e 0 Lord God 1 : thou art my trust from my youth. 6By thee have I been
holden up from the womb: thou art he that took me out of my mother’s
bowels;
f my praise shall he continually of thee. 7 Iam 2 as a wonder unto
many; but thou arf my strong refuge. 8 Let my mouth be filled 4
with thy praise and with thy honour all the day.
g 9 Cast me not off in the time of old age; forsake me not when my
strength faileth. 10 For mine enemies speak against me; and they
that lay wait for my soul take counsel together, 11 Saying, God
hath forsaken him : persecute and take him; for there is none to
deliver him. 12 0 God, be not far from me: 0 my God, make
haste for my help.
B c 13 Let them be 5 confounded and consumed that are adversaries
to my soul; let them be 5 covered with reproach and dishonour
that seek my hurt,
and 14 But I will hope continually, and will yet praise thee more
and more. 15 My mouth shall shew forth thy righteousness
and thy salvation all the day; for I know not the numbers
thereof. 16 I will go in the strength of the Lord God 1 :
I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of thine
only.
A B e | 17 0 God, thou hast taught me from my youth:
f | and hitherto have I declared 6 thy wondrous works.
g 18 How also when lam old and grayheaded, O God, forsake me not;
until I have shewed thy strength unto this generation, and thy power
to every one that is to come.
A 19 Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high, who hast done great things:
0 God, who is like unto thee! 20 Thou, which hast shewed me great and
sore troubles, shalt quicken me again, and shalt bring me up again from the
depths of the earth. 21 Thou shalt increase my greatness, and comfort me on
every side.
B and 22 I will also praise thee with the psaltery, even thy truth,
0 my God: unto thee will I sing with the harp, 0 thou
Holy One of Israel. 23 My lips shall greatly rejoice when
1 sing unto thee; and my soul, which thou hast redeemed.
24 My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the
day long:
c for they are confounded, for they are brought unto shame
that seek my hurt.
Psalm LXXI.— The Skeleton.
A A 1 I—s-.1 —5-. Trust in the Lord.
b e 1 -5, 6-. Youth. (Past.)
f | -6—B. Promise. [Present praise.]
hg | 9 —12. Old age. (Future.)
B I c | 13. Confusion of enemies.
and | 14 —16. Return for mercies.
A B e ( 17-. Youth. (Past.)
/ |-17. Promise, [Present praise.]
(j | 18. Old age. (Future.)
A | ig—2l. Trust in the Lord.
B | and | 22 —24-. Return for mercies.
I c | -24. Contusion of enemies.
E
Jehovah. 2 1 was. 8 Wast. 4 My mouth shall be filled. s They shall be. 0 Will I declare.


ssalm lxxii.
A Psalm for Solomon.
TIIEMA | 1 Give the king thy judgments, 0 God, and thy righteousness unto the king’s son.
A 2He shall judge thy people with righteousness, and thy poor with judgment. 3 The moun-ains
shall bring peace to the people, and the little hills, by righteousness. 4 He shall judge the
poor 01 the people, he shall save the children of the needy, and shall break in nieces the
oppressor. 1
I They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure, throughout all generations.
6 He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass: as showers that water the earth.
7 In his days shall the righteous flourish; and abundance of peace so long as the moon
endureth. BHe shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends
0 „ B i- e ‘?’ r , They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him ; and his enemies
shall lick the dust. 10 the kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents ; the kin"-s
ot bheba and Seba shall offer gifts. ”
C | 11 lea, all kings shall fall down before him : all nations shall serve him.
A 12 F° r 116 n shall deliver the needy when he erieth ; the poor also, and him that hath no helper
13 He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the needy. 14 He shall
redeem their soul from deceit and violence: and precious shall their blood be in his sight.
A ] 5 -^ n d he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba: prayer also shall be made
for him continually; and daily shall he be praised. 16 There shall be an handful of corn
in the earth upon the top of the mountains; the fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon -and
they of the city shall flourish like grass of the earth.. 17 His name shall endure for ever :
his name shall be continued as long as the sun :
C | and men shall be blessed in him : all nations shall call him blessed. 1
18 Blessed he the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only doeth wondrous things.
19 And blessed he his glorious name for ever : and let the whole earth be tilled with
his glory ; Amen, and Amen. 20 The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended.
Psalm LXXII.— The Skeleton.
THEM A j 1. [Prayer for Messiah’s reigjj.]
A | 2 —4. Messiah’s goodness to the poor.
B I 5~~ 10 - Other attributes [see arrangement below].
C | 11. General adoration.
■A | 12 —14. Messiah’s goodness to the poor.
B I T 5 —17-- Other attributes [see arrangement below].
C | -17. General adoration.
18—20. Concluding Blessing of the Second Book.
Ihe second and fourth members, B and B, may be arranged thus :
B a | 5 They shall fear thee as long as the sun and moon endure, throughout all generations.
b 6 He shall come down like rain upon the mown grass : as showers that water the
earth. 7ln his days shall the righteous flourish ; and abundance of peace so lono- as
the moon endureth.
c 8 He shall have dominion also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the
earth. 9 They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him ; and his enemies
shall lick the dust.
and I 10 The kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall bring presents: the kin°-s of Sheba
| and Seba shall offer gifts.
H \ and 1 !5 And he shall live, and to him shall be given of the gold of Sheba :
c | prayer also shall be made for him 2 continually ; and daily shall he be praised.
h 16 There shall be an handful of corn in the earth upon the top of the mountains • the
fruit thereof shall shake like Lebanon : and they of the citv shall flourish like grass of
the earth.
a | 17 His name shall endure for ever: his name shall be continued as long as the sun ; and
j men shall be blessed in him: all nations shall call him blessed.
The Skeleton of B and B.
B a| 5. Eternity. B
b | 6, 7. Agricultural prosperity.
c | 8, 9. Power over the world in general.
’ and I 10. Gifts.
and | X 5-. Gifts.
c | -15. Power over his People,
h | 16. Agricultural prosperity,
a 1 17-. Eternity.
1 Yea, all nations shall be blessed in Him—shall call Him blessed- 2 To him, or towards him.


lxxm.
A Psalm of Asaph.
A. | i Truly God is good to Israel, even to such as are of a clean heart.
B( 2 But as for me, my feet were almost gone; my steps had well nigh slipped.
C | 3 For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of the wicked.
D 4 For there are no bands in their death; but their strength is firm. 5 They are not
in trouble as other men ; neither are they plagued like other men. 6 Therefore pride
compasseth them about as a chain 1 ; violence eovereth them as a garment. 7 Their
eyes stand out with fatness: they have more than heart could wish. 8 They are
corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression: they speak loftily. 9 They set
their mouth against the heavens, and their tongue walketh through the earth.
10 Therefore his people return hither 2 : and waters of a full cup are wrung out to them.
11 And they say, How doth God know ? and is there knowledge in the Most High '<
12 Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world ; they increase in riches.
E 13 Yerily I have cleansed my heart in vain, and washed my hands in innocencv.
14 For all the day long have I been plagued, and chastened every morning. 15 If
I say, I will speak thus ; behold, 1 should offend against the generation ot thy
children. 16 When I thought to know this, it teas too painful for me; 17 Until I
went into the sanctuary of God ; then understood I their end.
D 18 Surely thou didst set them in slippery places: thou castedst them down into
destruction. 19 How are they brought into desolation, as in a moment ! they are
utterly consumed with terrors. 20 Asa dream when one awaketh; so, 0 Lord, when
thou awakest, thou shalt despise their image.
C | 21 Thus 3 my heart was grieved, and I was pricked in my reins.
B | 22 So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was as a beast before thee.
A 23 Nevertheless lam continually with thee: thou hast holden me by my right hand. 24 Thou
shalt guide me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory. 25 Whom have I in
heaven but thee f and there is none upon earth that I desire beside thee. 26 My flesh and my
heart fuileth: but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever. 27 For, 10, they
that are far from thee shall perish : thou hast destroyed all them that go a whoring from thee.
28 But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord God, 1 that I may
declare all thy works.
Psalh LXXIIL-—The Skeleton.
A | 1. Distinguishing mercies to the righteous.
B l) 2 |3 M &y r dS»nteJt (,) | “ L ” j [occupation with others, compare Ps,
D I 4 ,-' 2 - Prosperity of the wicked. ‘‘They.” eTi 3 -i6. The result: distraction.
C | 21. My discontent. (»3) |„ j „
B | 22. My error, (on'i) )
A | 23 —28. Distinguishing mercies to the righteous.
The fourth member, D, admits of the following arrangement. —(Ed.): —
D aj 4 For there are no bands in their death: but their strength is firm. 5 They are not in
| trouble as other men ; neither are they plagued like other men.
ii a | 6 Therefore pride compasseth them about as a chain 1 ; violence covereth them us a garment.
[ | 7 Their eyes stand out with fatness : they have more than heart could wish.
b I 8 They are corrupt, and speak wickedly concerning oppression: they speak loftily,
j 9 They settheir mouth against the heavens,and their tongue walketh through the earth.
Bn | 10 Therefore his people return hither : and waters of a full cup are wrung out to them.
b| 11 And they say, How doth God know ? and is there knowledge in the Most High ?
a | 12 Behold, these are the ungodly, who prosper in the world ; they increase in i-iches.
Skeleton of D.
D A|4, 5. The prosperity of the wicked. (Chiefly negative.)
and Ia | 6, 7. Their pride and fulness.
I b|B, 9. Their speech.
B I a | 10. Their pride and fulness.
I h | 11. Their speech.
A | 12. Their prosperity. (Positive.)
Skeleton of A.
A d | 23 —26. I, (ok'i, 23-.)
e I 27-. They that are “ far from Thee.”
e ( -27. They that go from Thee.
and | 28. I. (*j«'i, 28-.)
1 Or necklace.
2 i.e., to us. Said by the wicked of the righteous.
3 for, as in v. 3. 4 Jehovah.


ssalm lxxiv.
Maschil of Asaph.
A i 0 God, why hast thou cast us off for ever? why doth thine anger smoke against
the sheep of thy pasture? 2 Remember thy congregation, which thou hast pur-
chased of old; the rod of thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed; this mount
Zion, wherein thou hast dwelt. 3 Lift up thy feet unto the perpetual desolations;
even all that the enemy hath done wickedly in the sanctuary. 4 Thine enemies
roar in the midst of thy congregations; they set up their ensigns for signs. 5 A
man was famous according as he had lifted up axes upon the thick trees. 6 But
now they break down the carved work thereof at once with axes and hammers.
7 They have cast fire into thy sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down the
dwelling place of thy name to the ground. 8 They said in their hearts, Let us
destroy them together: they have burned up all the synagogues of God in the
land. 9We see not our signs: there is no more any prophet; neither is there
among us any that knoweth how long. 10 0 God, how long shall the adversary
reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme thy name for ever? 11 Why withdrawest
thou thy hand, even thy right hand? pluck it out of thy bosom.
B 12 Bor God is my King of old, working salvation in the midst of the earth.
813 Thou didst divide the sea by thy strength: thou brakest the heads of the
dragons in the waters. 14 Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces, and
gavest him to he meat to the people inhabiting the wilderness. Thou didst
cleave the fountain and the flood; thou driedst up mighty rivers. 16 The day
is thine, the night also is thine: thou hast prepared the light and the sun.
17 Thou hast set all the borders of the earth: thou hast made summer and
winter.
A 1 18 Remember this, that the enemy hath reproached, 0 Loud, and that the foolish
1 people have blasphemed thy name. 19 0 deliver not the soul of thy turtledove
i unto the multitude of the wicked: forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever.
20 Have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth are full of
the habitations of cruelty. 21 O let not the oppressed return ashamed: let the
poor and needy praise thy name. 22 Arise, O God, plead thine own cause;
remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily. 23 Forget not the voice
of thine enemies: the tumult of those that rise up against thee increaseth con-
tinually.
Psalm LXXIY. —The Skeleton.
A[ 1 —ll. Thy People, Thine enemies. Prayer. &c.
B | 12. Divine prowess (third person). j [Adoration.]
B 1 13 —17. Divine prowess (second person). )
A 1 18 —23. Thy People, Thine enemies. Prayer, &e.
The first member, A, admits of the following arrangement: —
A l a 1 O God, why hast thou cast us off for ever? why doth thine anger smoke
against the sheep of thy pasture ?
b 2 Remember thy congregation, which thou hast purchased of old; the rod of
thine inheritance, which thou hast redeemed; this mount Zion, wherein thou
hast dwelt.
c 3 Lift up thy feet unto the perpetual desolations; even all that the enemy
hath done wickedly in the sanctuary.
c 4 Thine enemies roar in the midst of thy congregations; they set up their
ensigns for signs. 5 A man was famous according as he had lifted up
axes upon the thick trees. 6 But now they break down the carved work
thereof at once with axes and hammers. 7 They have cast fire into thy
sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down the dwelling place of thy
name to the ground. 8 They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them
together: they have burned up all the synagogues of God in the land,
i b 9We see not our signs- there is no more any prophet: neither is there among
us any that knoweth how long.
a 1 o 0 God, how long shall the adversary reproach ? shall the enemy blaspheme
thy name for ever? 11 Why withdrawest thou thy hand, even thy right
hand? pluck it out of thy bosom.


The Skeleton of A.
A a | I. Questions.
b| 2. Prayer for People. (Return to us.)
c | 3. Prayer against enemies.
c | 4—B. Complaint against enemies.
h| 9. Complaint for People. (Thou hast abandoned us.)
I a | 10, 11. Questions.
The third member, B, may be arranged thus: —
B h | 13 Thou didst divide the sea by thy strength:
i | thou brakest the heads of the dragons in the waters.
i 14 Thou brakest the heads of leviathan in pieces, and gavest him to bo meat
to the people inhabiting the wilderness,
h | 15 Thou didst cleave the fountain and the flood: thou driedst up mighty rivers.
k | 16 The day is thine, the night also is thine:
1 | thou hast prepared the light and the sun.
I | 17 Thou hast set all the borders of the earth:
h 1 thou hast made summer and winter.
The Skeleton of B.
B h | 13-. Division of waters (sea),
i ! -13. Heads broken.
i I 14. Heads broken.
h | 15. Division of waters (rivers).
Heaven.
I | 17-. Earth. )
k 1 -17. Summer and winter. ) Jlir *
The fourth member, A, may be arranged thus; —
A a 18 Remember this, that the enemy hath reproached, O Lord, and that the
foolish people have blasphemed thy name.
i! m 19 0 deliver not the soul of thy turtledove unto the multitude of the
wicked: forget not the congregation of thy poor for ever.
n 20 Have respect unto the covenant: for the dark places of the earth
are full of the habitations of cruelty.
B m 21 0 let not the oppressed return ashamed: let the poor and needy praise
thy name.
n 1 22 Arise, 0 God, plead thine own cause:
A remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily. 23 Forget not the
voice of thine enemies: the tumult of those that rise up against thee increasetb
continually.
The Skeleton of A.
A A | 18. Remember thine enemies’ reproach.
nI m | 19. Deprecation. The poor. [Thy friend-.]
n 1 20. Prayer. The wicked. [Thine enemies.]
BI m | 21. Deprecation. The poor. [Thy friends.]
( n | 22-. Prayer. The wicked.
A 1 -22, 23. Remember thine enemies’ reproach.


ipsalm lxxy.
To the chief Musician, Al-taschith, a Ptalm or Song of Asaph.
A all Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks: for that thy name is
I near thy wondrous works declare.
b | 2 When I shall receive the congregation I will judge uprightly.
B c| 3 The earth
and | and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved:
B c| I bear up the pillars of it. Selah.
and 4 I said unto the fools, Deal not foolishly : and to the wicked, Lift not up the horn ;
5 Lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck. 6 For promotion
cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south. 7 But God
is the judge: he putteth down one, and setteth up another. 8 For in the hand of
the Loro there is a cup, and the wine is red; it is full of mixture ; and he poureth
out of the same : but the dregs thereof, all the wicked of the earth shall wring
them out, and drink them.
A a| 9 But I will declare for ever; I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.
bI 10 All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off; but the horns of the righteous shall be
1 exalted.
Psalm LXXY. —The Skeleton.
A | a | 1. Thanks.
1 b|2. “ I will judge uprightly.”
B 1 c | -3. The earth.
j and 1 -3-. Its inhabitants.
B i c | -3. The pidars of the earth.
Id 1 4—B. Addiess to its inhabitants.
A Ia I 9. Thanks (praises).
I b 1 10. I will judge uprightly.
ssalm lxxvi.
To the chief Musician on Negmolh, A Psalm or Song of Asaph.
A I I In Judah is God known: his name is great in Israel. 2 In Salem also is his tabernacle, and
j his dwelling place in Zion.
B 3 There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shiejd, and the sword, and the battle. Selah.
4 Thou art more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey. 5 The stouthearted are
spoiled, they have slept their sleep : and none of the men of might have found their hands.
6 At thy rebuke, 0 God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a dead sleep
7 Thou, even thou, art to be feared : and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry ?
8 Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven; the earth feared, and was still,
9 When God arose to judgn en , to save all the meek of the earth. Selah. 10 Surely the
wrath of man shall praise thee : the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain.
A In Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God: let all that be round about him bring presents unto
| him that ought to be feared.
B j 12 He shall cut off the spirit of princes: he is terrible to the kings of the earth.
Psalm LXXYI.—The Skeleton.
A I 1,2. His People.
B | 3—lo. The world.
A I 11. His People.
B | 12. The world.
The first and second members, A and B, may be arranged thus: —
AI a | 1-. Judah. Smaller, but more grace.
1 b | -1. Israel. The greater.
I 6 | 2-. Salem. The greater.
|a | -2. Zion. Smaller, but more grace.
B c| 3 There brake he the arrows of the bow, the shield, and the sword, and the battle. Selah.
and | 4 Thou art more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey,
eI 5 The stouthearted are spoiled, they have slept their sleep : and none of the men of
J might have found their hands,
c | 6 At thy rebuke, 0 God of Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a dead sleep.
dI 7 Thou, even thou, art to be feared : and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art
I angry ?
e 8 Thou didst cause judgment to bo heard from heaven; the earth feared, and was still,
9 When God arose to judgment, to save all the meek of the earth. Selah. 10 Surely the
wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of wrath shalt thou restrain.
The Skeleton of B.
B 0| 3. Arrows, si i<Td, sword and battle.
, d| 4. Thou. (Two epithets.)
e j 5. Wicked defeated.
c | 6. Chariot aid hon-e.
dI 7 Thou. (Two eid'bets.)
t ( S—,lo. Wicked defeued.


ssalm lxxyii.
To the chief Musician, to Jeduthun, A Psalm of Asaph.
A Ii I cried unto God with my voice, even unto God with my voice; and he gave ear unto me.
I 2 In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord: my sore ran in the night, and ceased not : my
j soul refused to be comforted. 3 I remembered God, and was troubled : I complained, and my
( spirit was overwhelmed. Selah. 4 Thou boldest mine eyes waking : I am so troubled that
I cannot speak. 5 I have considered the days of old, the years of ancient times, 6 I call to
remembrance my song in the night: 1 commune with mine own heart: and my spirit made
I diligent search.
15 | 7 Will the Lord cast off for ever ? and will he be favourable no more ? 8 Is his mercy clean
j gone for ever ? doth his promise fail for evermore ? 9 Hath God forgotten to be gracious P
I hath he in anger shut up his tender mercies ? Selah,
A I 10 And 1 said, This is ray infirmity : but I icill remember the years of the right hand of the
I Most High, ii I will remember the works of THE LORD : surely I will remember thy
! wonders of old. 12 I will meditate also of all thy work, and talk of thy doings.
B 13 Thy way, 0 God, is in the sanctuary : who is so great a God as our God? 14 Thou art
the God that doest wonders: thou hast declared thy strength among the people. 15 Thou
hast with thine arm redeemed thy people, the sons of Jacob and Joseph. Selah. 16 The
waters saw thee, 0 God, the waters saw thee ; they were afraid : the depths also were
troubled. 17 The clouds poured out water: the skies sent out a sound : thine arrows also
went abroad. 18 The voice of thy thunder teas in the heaven: the lightnings lightened
the world: the earth trembled and shook. 19 Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the
great waters, and thy footsteps are not known. 20 Thou leddest thy people like a flock by
the hand of Moses and Aaron.
Psalm LXXYII. —The Skeleton.
A | I—6.1 —6. Introductory meditation. [nn*m«]
B | 7 —g. Address.
A | 10 —12. Introductory meditation. [itt-PUt**]
B | 13 —20. Address.
The Editor suggests the following supplementary description of the same structure: —
A | 1— 6. Self occupation,
B | 7 —9. Its result —misery.
A | 10—12. Occupation with God.
B | 13 -20. Its result —happiness. (See Psalm Ixxiii. for a similar cause and effect.)
The Author evidently intended to give an arrangement of the fourth member, B, and from a few
pencilled marks in his Bible, we suggest the following construction:—
B a a | 13 Thy way, 0 God, is in the sanctuary : who is so great a God as our God ?
b 14 Thou art the God that doest wonders: thou hast declared thy strength among the
people. 15 Thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people, tire sons of Jacob and
Joseph. Selah.
B c I 16 The waters saw thee, 0 God, the waters saw thee ; they were afraid : the
J depths also were troubled.
and i 17 The clouds poured out water: the skies sent out a sound: thine arrows
j also went abroad.
n \ cl jlB The voice of thy thunder was in the heaven: the lightnings lightened
j the world;
| c | the earth trembled and shook,
a I 19 Thy way is in the sea, and thy path in the great waters, and thy footsteps are not
j known.
h 1 20 Thou leddest thy people like a flock by the hand of Moses and Aaron.
The Skeleton of B
B AI a | 13. God’s way in the sanctuary.
I b j 14, 15. Redeeming His People, the sons of Jacob and Joseph.
BI c | 16. The earth. (Fear and trouble.)
Id 1 17. The Heavens. (Clouds and skies)
Hi and 1 18-. The Heavens. (Thunder and lightning.)
I c | -18. The earth. (Trembling and shaking.)
A ! a | 19. God’s way in the sea.
I 1 b | 20. Leading His People by the hand of Moses and Aaron,


ipsalin lxxvm.
Matchil of Asaph.
X i Give ear, omy people, to my law: incline your ear.s to the words of my mouth. 2 I will open my mouth in a
parable: I will utter dark sayings of old : 3 Which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us. 4We
will not hide them from their children, shewing to the generation to come the praises of Ihe Loud, and his strength,
and his wonderful works that be hath done. 5 For he established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in
Israel, which he commanded our lathers, that they should make them known to their children: 6 That the
generation to come might know them, even the children which should be born; who should arise and declare them to
their children: 7 That they might set their hope in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his
commandments:
IS afl 8 And might not be as their fathers, a stubborn and rebellious generation ; a generation that set not their
| heart aright, and whose spirit was not stedfast with God.
g | 9 The children of Ephraim, being armed, and carrying bows, turned back in the day of battle,
hI 10 They kept not the covenant of God, and refused to walk in his law j xi And forgat his works, and
I his wonders that he had shewed them.
B | 12 Marvellous things did he in the sight of their fathers, in the land of Egypt, in the field of Zoan.
c 13 He divided the sea, and caused them to pass through ; and he made the waters to stand as an
heap. 14 la the dajtime also he led them with a cloud, and all the night with a light of fire.
15 He clave the rooks in the wilderness, and gave them drink as out of the great depths. 16 He
brought streams also out of the rock, and caused waters to run down like rivers.
D 17 And they sinned yet more against him by provoking the Most High in the wilderness.
18 And they tempted God in their heart by asking meat, for their lust. 19 Yea, they spake
against God; they said, Can God furnish a tab’e in the wilderness? 20 Behold, he smote the
rook, that the waters gushed out, and the streams overflowed; can he give bread also? can he
j provide for his people?
E 21 Therefore the Lord heard this, and was wroth; so a fire was kindled against Jacob, and
anger also came up against Israel; 22 Because they believed not in God, and trusted not in
his salvation:
X 23 Though be had commanded the clouds from above, and opened the doors of heaven, 24 And
had rained down manna upon them to eat, and had given them of the corn of heaven. 25 Man
did eat angels’ food: he sent them meat to the full. 26 He caused an ea-d wind to blow in the
heaven; and by his power he brought in the south wind. 27 He rained flesh also upon them as
dust, and feathered fowls like as the sand of the sea: 28 And he let it fall in the midst of their
camp, round about their habitations.
5129 So they did eat, and were well filled: for he gave them their own desire; 30 They were
| not estranged from their lust.
e I But while their meat was yet in their mouths, 31 The wrath of God came upon them, and
I slew the fattest of them, and smote down the'chosen men of Israel,
t 1 32 Eor all this they sinned still, and believed not for his wondrous woiks.
jj 1 33 Therefore their days did he consume in vanity, and their years in trouble,
C iI 31 When he slew them, then they sought him; and they returned and enquired early
I after God.
k| 35 And they remembered that God was their rock, and the high! God their
1 redeemer.
D I 1 | 36 Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth,
I m | and they lied unto him with their tongues.
D\ II 37 For their heart was not right with him,
j m j neither were they stedfast in his covenant.
(J iI 38 Rut he, being full of compassion, forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not: yea,
I many a time turned he bis anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath.
k I 39 For he remembered that they were but flesh ; a wind that passeth away, and cometh
I not again.
JB a /| 40 How oft did 1 hey provoke him in the wilderness, and grieve him in the desert!
g| 41 Yea, they turned back and teup r ed God, an I limited the Holy One of Isra and.
h | 42 They remembered not his hand, nor the day when he delivered them from the enemy.
b 43 How he had wrought bis signs in Egypt, and his wonders in 'he field of Zoan : 44 And had turned
their rivers into blood ; and their floods, that they could not drink. 45 He sent divers sorts of flies
among them, which devoured them; and frogs, which destroyed them. 46 He gave also their increase
unto the caterpiller, and their labour unto the locust. 47 He destroyed their vines with hail, and
their sycomore trees with frost. 48 He gave up their cattle also to the hail, and their flocks to hot
thunderbolts. 49 He cast upon them the fierceness of his anger, wrath, and indignation, and trouble,
by sending evil angels among them. 50 He made a way to his anger ;he si ared not their soul from
death, but gave their life over to the pestilence; 51 And smote all the firstborn in Egypt; the chief
of their strength in the tabernacles of Ham :
0 52 But made his own people to go forth like sheep, and guided them in the wilderness like a flock.
53 And he led them on safely so that they feared not: but the sea overwhelmed their enemies.
54 And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary, even to this mountain, which his right
hand had purchased. 55 He cast out the heathen also before them, and divided them an inheritance
by line, and made the tribes of Israel to dwell in their tents.
d56 Yet they tempted and provoked the Most High God, and kept not his testimonies : 57 But
turned back, and dealt unfaithfully like their fathers : they were turned aside like a deceitful
bow. 58 For they provoked him to anger with their high places, and moved him to jealousy
with their giaven images.
E 59 When God heard this, he was wroth, and greatly abhorred Israel; 60 So that he forsook the
tabernacle of Shiloh, the tent which he placed among men; 61 And delivered his strength into
captivity, and his glory into the enemy’s hand. 62 He gave his people over also unto the
sword; and was wroth with his inheritance. 63 The fire consumed their young men; and
1 their maidens were not given to marriage. 64 Their priests fell by the sword; and their
widows made no lamentation.
yi 63 Then the Lord awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason o’ wire. 66 And he
smote his enemies in the hinder parts ; he put them to a perpetual reproach. 67 Moreover he refused the tabernacle
of Joseph, and chose not the tribe of Ephraim: 68 But. chose the tribe of Jndah, the mount Zion which he
loved. 69 And he built his sanctuary like high palace--, like the earth w.iich he hath established for ever, 70 He
< hcse David also bis servant, and took him from the sheepfolds :71 From f dlowing the ewes great with young he
brought him to feed Jacob his people, and Israel his inherit ince. 72 S 1 he fed them according io the integrity of
bis heart; and guided them by the ekilfulness of his hands.
i The Most High.


Psalm LXXYIII. —The Skeleton.
A | i—7. Mosaic institution, (Giving of the Law).
B| A f| 8. Offences. -s
g | 9. Turning back. C [lsrael’s offence.]
h | 10, 11. Forgetfulness. '
B 1 12. Mercies in Egypt.
c i J 3 — J 6. Mercies in bringing to Canaan. (Drink.)
D 1 17 —20. Sin.
e 1 21, 22. Wrath.
XI 23 -28. Mercies in bringing to Canaan. (Meat.)
8 1 29, 30-. Sin.
e I ’3°) 3i* Wrath,
t | 32. Sin.
V I 33- Wrath.
Cl i I 34. Repentance of Israel.
I k | 35. Remembrance of Israel.
D|l| 36- Mouth. \ (Posifcive )
I m ) -36. Lied. ) v
B | 1 1 37- Haart ' ] (Negative.)
I to | -37. Did not deal truly. )
C | 1 | 38. Repentance of the Lord.
k | 39. Remembrance of the Lord,
i? A f | 40. Offences. -n
g | 41. Turning back. > [lsrael’s offence.
h | 42. Forgetfulness. '
8 143 5 - Mercies in Egypt.
0 | 5 2 —55- Mercies in bringing to Canaan.
* I 56-58. Sin.
E I 59' '64. Wrath.
| 65 —72. Davidic institution. (Giving of Temple and Monarchy).*
The first member, A (the Mosaic institution, and giving of the Law), may be arranged thus :
A nil Give ear, O my people, to my law: incline your ears to the words of my mouth. 2 I will
I open my mouth in a parable : I will utter dark sayings of old:
o ) 3 Which we have heard and known, and our fathers have told us.
p I 4 We will not hide them from their children, shewing to the generation to come the
( praises of the Lord, and his strength, and his wonderful works that he hath done.
I n | 5 For he established a testimony in Jacob, and appointed a law in Israel,
(• 1 which he commanded our fathers, that they should make them known to their children :
p 6 That the generation to come might know them, even the children which should be born;
who should arise and declare them to their children : 7 That they might set their hope
in God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his commandments.
The Skeleton of A.
An | 1, 2. The Law.
o | 3. Taught us by our fathers,
p | 4. To be taught posterity by us.
n | 5-. The Law.
0 | -5. Taught us by our fathers.
p | 6, 7. To be taught posterity by us.
* This Pcalm illustrates the putting away of commandment going before, and the bringing in of a better.
Note that in B, there is are lup'ieatiou of some of the members which does rot appear in B. The author has
the-efore not extended the symbols, hut has, as in some similar instances, repeated the letters in Greet or in others
of the same class. Thus f, rc, i>, e, he has used the Greek S, e ; and fur the S and ehe has used t and r). So that
c and x answer to each other, as do n, S and t; and e and ij.—(Ed.)


Itealm lxxix.
A Psalm of Asaph.
A i 0 God, the heathen are come into thine inheritance; thy holy temple have
they defiled; they have laid Jerusalem on heaps. 2 The dead bodies of thy
servants have they given to he meat unto the fowls of the heaven, the flesh of thy
saints unto the bea-Js of the earth. 3 Their blood have they shed like water
round about Jerusalem; and there was none to bury them.
B 4 We are become a reproach to our neighbours, a scorn and derision to them
that are round about us.
A 5 How long, Lord? wilt thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like
fire ? 6 Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and
upon the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name. 7 For they have
devoured Jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place. 8 0 remember not against us
former iniquities : let thy tender mercies speedily prevent us : for we are brought
very low. 9 Help us, O God of our salvation, for the glory of thy name: and
deliver us, and purge away our sins, for thy name’s sake. 10 Wherefore should
the heathen say, Where is their God ? let him be known among the heathen in our
sight by the revenging of the blood of thy servants which is shed. 11 Let the
sighing of the prisoner come before thee; according to the greatness of thy power
preserve thou those that are appointed to die;
B i 2 And render unto our neighbours sevenfold into their bosom their reproach,
wherewith they have reproached thee, 0 Lord. 13 So we thy people and sheep
of thy pasture will give thee thanks for ever: we will shew forth thy praise to
all generations.
Psalm LXXIX. —The Skeleton.
A | I—3.1 —3. The'heathen.
B | 4. Our neighbours.
A | s—ll.5 —11. The heathen.
B | 12, 13. Our neighbours.
The third member, A, may be arranged thus:—
A a 5 How long, Lord ? wilt thou be angry for ever? shall thy jealousy burn like
fii-e ?
b 6 Pour out thy wrath upon the heathen that have not known thee, and upon
the kingdoms that have not called upon thy name 7 For they have
devoured Jacob, and laid waste his dwelling place.
c 8 0 remember not against us former iniquities: let thy tender mercies
speedily prevent us : for we are brought very low. 9 Help us, 0 God of
our salvation, for the glory of thy name: and deliver us, and purge away
our sins, for thy name’s sake.
a | 10 Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is their God ?
b let him be known among the heathen in our sight by the revenging of the
blood of thy servants which is shed.
cii Let the sighing of the prisoner come befoi’e thee; according to the
greatness of thy power preserve thou those that are appointed to die.
The Skeleton of A.
A a | 5. Question.
b j 6, 7. Prayer against heathen,
c | 8, 9. Prayer for selves.
a | 10-. Question.
b | -10. Prayer against heathen.
I c | n. Prayer for selves.


ssalm lxxx.
To the chief Musician upon Shoshannim-Eduth, A Psalm of Asaph.
A 1 1 Give hear, 0 Shepherd of Israel, thou that leadest Joseph like a flock; thou
that dwellest between the cherubims, shine forth. 2, Before Ephraim and Benja-
min and Manasseh stir up thy strength, and come and save us. 3 Turn us again,
0 God, and cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.
B 1 4 0 Lord God of hosts, how long wilt thou be angry against the prayer of thy
people? 5 Thou feedest them with the bread of teai’s; and givest them tears
to drink in great measure. 6 Thou makest us a strife unto our neighbours:
and our enemies laugh among themselves.
A’ 7 Turn us again, O God of hosts, and cause thy face to shine; and we shall be
saA T ed.
B- 8 Thou hast brought a vine out of Egypt: thou hast cast out the heathen, and
planted it. 9 Thou preparedst room before it, and didst cause it to take deep
root, and it filled the land. 10 The hills were covered with the shadow of it,
j and the boughs thereof were like the goodly cedars.* j t She sent out her
boughs unto the sea, and her branches unto the river. 12 Why hast thou
then broken down her hedges, so that all they which pass by the way do pluck
her? 13 The boar out of the wood doth waste it, and the wild beast of the
field doth devour it.
A s .14 Return, we beseech thee, 0 God of hosts: look down from heaven, and behold,
and visit this vine f ; 15 And the vineyard which thy right hand 1 hath planted,
and the branch that thou madest strong for thyself.
B ! 16 It is burned with fire, it is cut down: they perish at the rebuke of thy
countenance.
A 1 17 Let thy hand be upon the man of thy right hand, 1 upon the son of man whom
thou madest strong for thyself. 18 So will not we go back from thee: quicken
us, and we will call upon thy name. 19 Turn us again, 0 Lord God of hosts,
cause thy face to shine; and we shall be saved.
Psalm LXXX.— The Skeleton.
A 1 1 I—3.1 —3. Prayer, (People.)
B 1 | 4—6. Representation. (People.)
A 2 17. Prayer. (People.)
B 2 1 B—l 3.8 —13. Representation. (Vine.)
A 3 | 14, 15. Prayer. (Vine and Vineyard.)
B 3 | 16. Representation. (Vine and People.)
A 4 | 17 —19. Prayer. (People.)
* The caiars of El.
f 0 Elohim of Hosts, once more regard from heaven, once more behold, once more visit this
vine, v. 14.
1 Compare this expression with Gen. xlviii. 13 —19, and the mention of Ephraim, Benjamin,
and Manasseh in v. 2 of this Psalm.
In the MS., the author has cancelled his original sk leton, and given another, which he pre-
ferred in pencil. But this is incomplete, the lettering not being affixed to the different members.


ssalm lxxxi.
To the chief Musician upon Gittith, A Psalm of Asaph.
A 1 Sing aloud unto God our strength : make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob.
2 Take a psalm, and bring hither the timbrel, the pleasant harp with the psaltery.
3 Blow up the trumpet in the new moon, in the time appointed, on our 1 solemn
feast day.
B 4 For this was a statute for Israel, and a law of the God of Jacob. 5 This he
ordained in Joseph for a testimony, when he went out through the land of Egypt:
where I heard a language that I understood not. 6 I removed his shoulder from
the burden: his hands were delivered from the pots.
C a| 7 Thou calledst in trouble,
b and I delivered thee; I answered thee in the secret place of thunder: I
proved thee at the waters of Meribah. Selah.
A 8 Hear, omy people, and I will testify unto thee : 0 Israel, if thou wilt hearken
unto me ; 9 There shall no strange God be in thee; neither shalt thou worship
any strange God.
B 1 10 I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the land of Egypt:
G a | open thy mouth wide,
b | and I will fill it.
1
D| 11 But my people would not hearken to my voice ; and Israel would none of me.
E 12 So I gave them up unto their own hearts’ lust: and they walked in their
own counsels.
J) |l3 Oh that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways !
E 14 I should soon have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their
adversaries. 15 The haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto
him: but their time should have endured for ever. 16 He should have fed them
also with the finest of the wheat: and with honey out of the rock should I have
satisfied thee.
Psalm LXXXI. —The Skeleton.
A | I—3.1 —3. Exhortation to worship the true God.
B 1 4 —6. Deliverance from Egypt.
C 1 a | 7-. Application [to God, by His People],
i b | -7. Answer [from God].
A | 8, 9. Exhortation not to worship any false GoJ.
B | 10-. Deliverance from Egypt.
C I a | -10-. Application [by God, to His People].
I b | -10. Answer [from God].
D | 11. Refusing to hear.
> E | 12. Consequences.
1) | 13. Hearing.
E | 14 —16. Consequences.
*uan Dvb, not a day “ devised in the king’s own heart.”
Note. —ln another work the author points out that Ps. lxxxi. admits of another arrangement.
A | i—s. Exhortation to praise Giod, and reason for so doing.
B | 6 16. God’s dealings with His People.


Itealm lxxxii.
A Psalm of Asaph.
A | i God standeth in the congregation of the mighty 1 ; he judgeth among the gods. 2
B 2 How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked ?
Selah. 3 Defend the poor and fatherless : do justice to the afflicted and needy.
4 Deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked.
C | 5 They know not, neither will they understand;
C | they walk on in darkness: all the foundations of the earth are out of course.
B 6 1 have said, Ye are gods 2 ; and all of you are children of the Most High.
7 But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.
A 1 8 Arise, 0 God, judge the earth: for thou shalt inherit all nations.
Psalm LXXXII. —The Skeleton.
A | i. The Lord.
B | 2 —4. The mighty spoken to.
C | 5-. Spoken of (negative).
C | -5. Spoken of (positive).
B 1 6, 7. The mighty spoken to.
A j 8. The Lord.
1 El.
2 Elohim.


|3salm lxxxiii.
A Song nr Psalm of Asaph.
A | 1 Keep not thou silence, 0 God: hold not thy peace, and be not still, 0 God.
B a 2 For, 10, thine enemies make a tumult: and they that hate thee have lifted
up the head. 3 They have taken crafty counsel against thy people, and
consulted against thy hidden ones.
b 4 They have said, Come, and let us cut them off from being a nation;
that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance.
a 5 For they have consulted together with one consent: they are confederate
against thee: 6 The tabernacles of Edom, and the Ishmaelites; of Moab,
and the Hagarenes; 7 Gebal, and Ammon, and Amalek; the Philistines
with the inhabitants of Tyre; 8 Assur also is joined with them: they
have holpen the children of Lot. Selah.
Beg Do unto them as unto the Midianites; as to Sisera, as to Jabin, at the
brook of Kison: 10 Which perished at En-dor: they became as dung for
the earth. 11 Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb: yea, all their
princes as Zebah, and as Zalmunna:
b | 12 Who said, 1 Let us take to ourselves the houses of God in possession.
c 13 omy God, make them like a wheel; as the stubble before the wind.
14 As the fire burneth a wood, and as the flame setteth the mountains on
fire; 15 So persecute them with thy tempest, and make them afraid with
thy storm.
Al 6 Fill their faces with shame; that they may seek thy name, 0 Lord. 17 Let
them be confounded and troubled for eyer; yea, let them be put to shame, and
perish : 18 That men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art
the Most High over all the earth.
Psalm LXXXIII. — The Skeleton.
A | 1. Vindicate Thyself.
B a|2, 3. Combination of enemies.
b | 4. What they have said.
a | s—B.5 —8. Combination of enemies.
B c ] 9 —11. Punish them. Comparisons.
b | 12. What they have said.
c | 13 —15. Punish them. Comparisons.
A | 16—18. Vindicate Thyself.
The last' member, A, may be thus arranged: —
A d 1 16 Fill their faces with shame;
e | that they may seek thy name, 0 Lord.
dl7 Let them be confounded and troubled for ever; yea, let them be put to
shame, and perish;
elB That men may know that thou, whose name alone is JEHOVAH, art the
Most High over all the earth.
The Skeleton of A.
A d | 16-. Prayer.
e | -16. Effect of granting it.
and | 17, Prayer,
e | 18. Effect of granting it.
1 Who have said, (viom, as mV 4.)


ssalm lxxxiv.
To the chief Musician upon Gittifch, A Psalm for the sons of Korah.
A a j How amiable are thy tabernacles, 0 Lord of hosts ! 2My soul longeth, rea
even fainteth for the courts of the Lord : my heart and my flesh crieth out for
the living God. 3 Yea, the sparrow hath found an house, and the swallow a
nest for herself, where she may lay her young, even thine altars, O Lord of hosts,
my King, and my God. 4 Blessed are they that dwell in thy house : they will
be still praising thee. Selah.
b 3 Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee; in whose heart are the ways
of them. 6 Who passing through the valley of Baca make it a well; the
rain also filleth the pools. 7 They go from strength to strength, every one of
them in Zion appeareth before God.
B | 8 0 Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer: give ear, 0 God of Jacob. Selah.
B | 9 Behold, 0 God our shield, and look upon the face of thine Anointed.
A a 10 For a day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had rather be a door-
keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.
b 11 For the Lord God is a sun and shield: the Lord will give grace and
glory: no good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.
12 O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man that trusteth in thee.
Psalm LXXXIY. — The Skeleton.
A j a | I—4.1 —4. Blessedness of dwellers.
b | 5 —7. Blessedness of approaehers.
B | 8. Prayer.
B | 9. Prayer.
A [a | 10. Blessedness of dwellers (a). [*d “for.”]
h | 11, 12. Blessedness of approaehers (b). [>3 “for.”]
The Editor offers the following arrangement of “ a” as an illustration of the way in
which the sense of a passage is made clear by observing its structure. Here,
in “ and,” we observe that the “ altars ” are connected with the Psalmist’s desire , as
in“ and,” and not with the swallow’s nest. Let “and ” and “and” be read connectedly ;
“ e ” and “ e ” being thus practically in a parenthesis.
Note also that in “A” we have the grounds of the blessedness mentioned in A :
“a” answering to “ a,” and “ b ” answering to “ b.”—(Ed.)
a c | 1 How amiable are thy tabernacles, 0 Lord of hosts!
and 2 My soul longeth, yea, even fainteth for the courts of the Lord : my heart
and my flesh crieth out for the living God.
e | 3 Yea, the sparrow hath found an house,
e | and the swallow a nest for herself, where she may lay her young,
and ( even thine altars, O Lord of hosts, my King, and my God.
c I 4 Blessed are they that dwell in thy house: they will be still praising thee.
I Selah.
The Skeleton of “a.”
a c | 1. “ Thy tabernacles.”
and j 2. Desire for the courts of the Lord.
e j 3-. As the sparrow.
e j -3-. As the swallow.
and | -3. Desire for the altars of the Lord.
c | 4. “ Thy house.”
Bishop Jebb ( Sacred Lit., p. 33) makes the sense of “b” (vv. 3 —7) clearer, by
observing the structure, in which singular corresponds with singular , and plural with
plural :■ —
b f | 5-. Blessed is the man whose strength is in Thee ;
g | -5. The passengers in whose hearts are the ways ;
h [ 6-. In the valley of Baca [they] make it a spring;
h | -6. The rain also filleth the pools ;
y I 7-. They go from strength to strength,
f | -7. He shall appear before God in Zion.


ssalm lxxxv.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm for the sons of Korah.
A I Lord, thou hast been favourable unto thy land : thou hast brought back the
captivity of Jacob. 2 Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of thy people, thou hast
covered all their sin. Selah. 3 Thou hast taken away all thy wrath: thou hast
turned thyself from the fierceness of thine anger.
Ba 1 4 Turn us, 0 God of our salvation, and cause thine anger toward us to cease,
b 3 Wilt thou be angry with us for ever ? wilt thou draw out thine anger
to all generations ? 6 Wilt thou not revive us again: that thy people
may rejoice in thee?
B a | 7 Shew us thy mercy, 0 Lord, and grant us thy salvation.
h 8 1 will hear what God the Lord will speak; for he will speak peace
unto his people, and to his saints: but let them not turn 1 again to folly.
A 9 Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him; that glory may dwell in our
land. 10 Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed
each other. 11 Truth shall spring out of the earth; and righteousness shall look
down from heaven. 12 Yea, the Lord shall give that which is good ; and our land
shall yield her increase, t 3 Righteousness shall go before him; and shall set us
in the way of his steps.
Psalm LXXXV— The Skeleton.
A | I—3. Mercies (to the land, v. 1).
B a 1 4. Prayer.
bl 5, 6. Question.
B I a 1 7. Prayer.
b ] 8. Answer.
A | g —13. Mercies (to the land, v. 9, 11).
The first member, A, may be thus arranged; (Ed.)
A A c 1 1-. Jehovah’s favour.
and 1 -1. Turning of captivity.
b 1 2- Iniquity forgiven.
b 1 -2. Sin covered.
c 1 3-. Jehovah’s favour.
and 1 3. Turning away of anger.
i That they turn not.


ssalm lxxxvi.
A Prayer of David.
A i Bow down thine ear, 0 Lord, hear me: for lam poor and needy. 2 Preserve
my soul; for lam holy; O thou my God, save thy servant that trusteth in thee.
3 Be merciful unto me, 0 Lord: for I cry unto thee daily. 4 Rejoice the soul of
thy servant: for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul. 5 For thou, Lord, art
good, and ready to forgive; and plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon
thee. 6 Give ear, 0 Lord, unto my prayer; and attend to the voice of my
supplications.
B a | 7 In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee :
h | for thou wilt answer me.
C | 8 Among the gods there is none like unto thee, 0 Lord;
C | neither are there any works like unto thy works.
Bag All nations whom thou hast made shall come and worship before thee,
O Lord; and shall glorify thy name.
h | 1 o For thou art great, and doest wondrous things : thou art God alone.
A 11 Teach me thy way, O Lord ; I will walk in thy truth : unite my heart to fear
thy name. 12 I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and I will
glorify thy name for evermore. 13 For great is thy mercy toward me : and thou
hast delivered my soul from the lowest hell. 14 O God, the proud are risen
against me, and the assemblies of violent men have sought after my soul; and
have not set thee before them. 15 But thou, 0 Lord, art a God full of compassion,
and gracious, longsuffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth. 16 0 turn unto
me, and have mercy upon me ; give thy strength unto thy servant, and save the son
lof thine handmaid. 17 Shew me a token for good; that they which hate me may
I see it , and be ashamed: because thou, Lord, hast holpen me, and comforted me.
Psalm LXXXYI. —The Skeleton.
A I I—6.1 —6. Prayer.
B Ia | 7-. I will seek Thee,
b | -7. Reason. (*3)
C | 8-. God incomparable.
C | -8. His works incomparable.
B I a | g. All will seek Thee.
I b | jo. Reason. (*3)
A | 11—17. Prayer.
The last member, A, may be arranged thus: —
Ale 11 Teach me thy way, O Lord; I will walk in thy truth: unite my heart to
fear thy name. 12 1 will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart: and
I will glorify thy name for evermore,
and 13 For great is thy mercy toward me : and thou hast delivered my soul from
the lowest hell.
e 14 0 God, the proud are risen against me, and the assemblies of violent
men have sought after my soul;
e and have not set thee before them.
and 15 But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious, longsuffer-
ing, and plenteous in mercy and truth.
c r 6 O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me; give thy strength unto thy
servant, and save the son of thine handmaid. 17 Shew me a token for good;
that they which hate me may see it, and be ashamed ; because thou, Lord, hast
holpen me, and comforted me.
The Skeleton of A.
A c | 11, 12. Prayer, and consequences of granting,
and | 13. Goodness of God. [Plea.]
el 14-. Wickedness of man to the Psalmist.
e I -14. Wickedness of man Godward.
and | 15. Goodness of God. [Pleas.]
I c | 16, 17. Prayer, and consequences of granting.
The Editor would point out the double prayer and consequence in c: —
c f | 11-. Prayer. “Teach me.”
g | -11-. Promise. “I will walk.”
/ | -n. Prayer. “Unite my heart.”
g | 12. Promise. “I will praise, I will glorify.”
V


sgalm lxxxvii.
A Psalm or Song for the sons of Korah.
A i His foundation is in the holy mountains. 2 The Lord loveth the gates of Zion
more than all the dwellings of Jacob.
B | 3 Glorious things are spoken of thee, 0 city of God. Selah.
A 4 I will make mention of Rahab and Babylon to them that know me: behold
Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia; this man was born there. 1 5 And of Zion it
shall be said, This and that man was born in her 1 : and the highest 2 himself shall
establish her. 6 The Lord shall count, when he writeth up the people, that
this man was born there. 1 Selah.
R 7 As well the singers as the players on instruments shall he there 3 ; all my
springs are in thee.
Psalm LXXXVII.— The Skeleton.
A | 1,2. Zion spoken of.
B 1 3. Spoken to.
A 1 4—6. £ion spoken of.
B 1 7. Spoken to.
The Author supplies the following translation, which is worthy of preservation
A I 1 His foundation is in the holy hills. 2 The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more
than all the dwellings of Jacob.
B| 3 Glorious things are spoken of thee, 0 thou city of Elohim. Selah.
A 4 I will remind Rabab [Egypt] and Babylon to know me. (Ps. xxii. 2/.)
Behold, 0 Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia;
This man shall be born there.
3 And to Zion a MAN shall speak ;
And a man shall be born in her:
And lie (His name), being no other than the Most High, shall establish her.
(Isa. ix. 6, 'TOj !?k.)
6 Jehovah shall record when he writeth the people (i.e., shall enter in His book,
when he writeth in it the places of every people and their predetermined habita-
tions) (Acts xvii. 26) ; That this man shall be born there. Selah. (Isa. ix. 6.)
B 7 And, singers as well as players shall say
All my springs are in thee.
1 Observe in A— :dw rib 4- The MosT HlGn>
:nn nb* up«i, 5.
; mr ‘tV m, 6.
The wise men came first to Jerusalem asking for Jesus.
Omif the italics “shall be there." [Comparison with T» shows that the correspondence
requires Revised L“AI springs are in thee” is one of the “ glorious
things ” that are spoken to Zion.]


|)salm lxxxviii.
A Song or Psalm for the sons of Korah, to the chief Musician upon Mahalath Leannoth, Maschil of
Heman the Ezrahite.
A i O Lord God of my salvation, I have cried day and night before thee: 2 Let
my prayer come before thee: incline thine ear unto my cry;
B 3 For my soul is full of troubles: and my life draweth nigh unto the grave.
4 I am counted with them that go down into the pit: I am as a man that hath
no strength: 5 Free among the dead, like the slain that lie in the grave,
whom thou rememberest no more: and they are cut off from thy hand. 6 Thou
hast laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in the deeps.
C 7 Thy wrath lieth hard upon me, 1 and thou hast afflicted me with all thy
waves. Selah.
D 8 Thou hast put away mine acquaintance far from me; thou hast made
me an abomination unto them; lam shut up, and I cannot come forth.
9 Mine eye mourneth by reason of affliction:
A Lord, I have called daily upon thee, I have stretched out my hands unto thee.
10 Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? shall Ihe dead arise and praise thee?
Selah. 11 Shall thy lovingkindness be declared in the grave ?or thy faithful-
ness in destruction? 12 Shall thy wonders be known in the dark? and thy
righteousness in the land of forgetfulness? J 3 But unto thee have I cried, O
Lord; and in the morning shall my prayer prevent thee. 14 Lord, why castest
thou off my soul ? why hidest thou thy face from me ?
B 15 lam afflicted and ready to die from my youth up : while I suffer thy terrors
1 am distracted.
G 16 Thy fierce wrath goeth over me 1 ; thy terrors have cut me off. 17 They
came round about me daily like water; they compassed me about together.
D 18 Lover and friend hast thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance
. into darkness.
Psalm LXXXVIII. —The Skeleton.
A | 1, 2. Prayer. _ A \ -9 —14. Prayer.
B I 3 —6. Complaint. Dissolution near. B | 15. Complaint. Dissolution near.
CI 7. Complaint. Wrath. Waves. C | 16, 17. Complaint. Wrath, Water.
D| 8, 9-. Complaint. Destitution. D | 18. Complaint. Destitution.
In another work the Author remarks — u compare this with Ps. cxlii., and compare the
headings.” He also gives a further arrangement of A:
A a | Lord, I have called daily upon thee, I have stretched out my hands unto thee,
b 10 Wilt thou shew wonders to the dead? shall the dead arise and praise
thee? Selah. 11 Shall thy lovingkindness be declared in the grave? or
thy faithfulness in destruction? 12 Shall thy wonders be known in the
dark? and thy righteousness in the land of forgetfulness?
a 13 But unto thee have I cried, 0 Lord; and in the morning shall my prayer
prevent thee.
h | 14 Lord, why castest thou off my soul? why hidest thou thy face from me?
The Skeleton of A.
A a | -g. Affirmative or declaratory,
b | 10 —12. Interrogative,
a | 13. Affirmative or declaratory.
h 1 14. Interrogatory.
He remarks also that the two leading topics of the whole Psalm may be further sim-
plified by exhibiting it in four members: —
E | A (1, 2). Prayer.
F | b, c, and (3 —9-). Complaint.
E | a (.9 —14). Prayer.
F | b, c. and (15—18). Complaint.
1 The same word in verses 7 and 16,


ssalm lxxxix
Maschil of Ethan the Ezrahite.
A 1 1 I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever : with my mouth will I make known thy faithful-
Iness 1 to all generations. . ,
B a 2 For I have said, 2 Mercy shall be built up for ever: thy faithfulness shplt thou establish in
the very heavens. 3 I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my
servant, 4 Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to all generations.
b 5 And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O Lord : thy faithfulness also in the
congregation of the saints. 6 For who in the heaven can be compared unto the Lord ? who
among the sons of the mighty* can be likened unto the Lord ? 7 God is greatly to be
feared in the assembly of the saints, and to be had in reverence of all them that are
about him. 8 0 Lord God of hosts, who is a strong LORD like unto thee ? or to thy
faithfulness round about thee ? 9 Thou rulest the raging of the sea : when the waves
thereof arise, thou stillest them. 10 Thou hast broken Bahab in pieces, as one that is
slain ; thou hast scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm. 11 The heavens are thine,
the earth also is thine: as for the world and the fulness thereof, thou hast founded them.
12 The north and the south thou hast created them : Tabor and Hermon shall rejoice in
thy name. 13 Thou hast a mighty arm : strong is thy hand, and high is thy right hand.
14 Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne : mercy and truth shall go before
thy face. 15 Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: they shall walk, O Lord,
in the light of thy countenance. 16 In thy name shall they rejoice all the day : and in
thy righteousness shall they be exalted. 17 For thou art the glory of their strength :^ TIC
in thy favour our horn shall be exalted. 18 For the Lord is our defence ; and the Holy
One of Israel is our king.
Bn 19 Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy one, and saidst, I have Laid help upon one that is
mighty; I have exalted one chosen out of the people. 20 I have found David my servant; with
my holy oil have I anointed him: 21 With whom my hand shall be established: mine arm
also shall strengthen him. 22 The enemy shall not exact upon him ; nor the son of wickedness
afflict him. 23 And I will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that hate him.
24 But my faithfulness and my mercy shall he with him : and in my name shall his horn be
exalted. 25 I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers. 26 He shall
cry unto me, Thou art my father, my God, and the rock of my salvation. 27 Also I will make
him my firstborn, higher 4 than 5 the kings of the earth. 28 My mercy will I keep for
I him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand, fast with him. 29 His seed also wil
I make to endicre for ever, and his throne as the days of heaven. 30 If his children
forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments; 31 If they break my statutes, and keep not
my commandments ; 32 Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity
with stripes. 33 Nevertheless my lovingkindness will I not utterly take from him, nor saner
my faithfulness to fail. 34 My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out
I of my lips. 35 Once have I sworn by my holiness that 1 will not lie unto David. 36 His seed
shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me. 37 P shall be established for ever
as the moon, and as a faithful witness in heaven. Selah.
b 38 But thou hast cast off and abhorred, thou hast been wroth with thine Anointed.
39 Thou hast made void the covenant of thy servant: thou hast profaned his crown by
casting it to the ground. 40 Thou hast broken down all his hedges ; thou hast brought
his strong holds to ruin. 41 All that pass by the way spoil him : he is a reproach to his
neighbours. 42 Thou hast set up the right hand of his adversaries; thou hast made all
his enemies to rejoice. 43 Thou hast also turned the edge of his sword, and hast not
made him to stand in the battle. 44 Thou hast made his glory to cease, and cast his
throne down to the ground. 45 The days of his youth hast thou shortened: thou hast
covered him with shame. Selah. 46 How long, Lord ? wilt thou hide thyself for ever i
shall thy wrath burn like fire ? 47 Remember how short my time is ; wherefore hast
thou made all men in vain ?48 What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death.
shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah. 49 Lord, where are thy
former lovingkindnesses, which thou swarest unto David in thy truth ? 5° Remembei,
Lord, the reproach of thy servants; how Ido bear in my bosom the reproach of all the
mighty people ; 51 Wherewith thine enemies have reproached, 0 Lord ; wherewith they
have reproached the footsteps of thine Anointed.
A| 52 Blessed he the Lord for evermore. Amen, and Amen.
Psalm LXXXIX.—The Skeleton.
A | 1. Eternal praises.
B Ia | 2 —4. The Lord speaks.
b | 5 —18. The Psalmist speaks.
B I a | 19—37. The Lord speaks.
h 1 38— 51- The Psalmist speaks.
A | 52. Eternal praises.
b, verses s—lß,5 —18, may be exhibited thus :
b c |5- Second person.
and | 6, 7. Third person, '3.
c | 8 l7. Second person.
and | 18. Third person, *3.
1 Seven times is God’s roiDK ( Emm ah), “faithfulness,” reiterated in this Psalm. In verses I, 2,
5,8, 24, 33, 49 (in thy truth). #
2 For Thou saidst. The Ixx. Vulg., Syriac, Jerome and many manuscripts read Thou saidst,
instead of *n3OM, “I have said.” This corresponds with mn, “ thou spakest,” at the beginning of a.
(Ed.) ’ 3 The sons of Elohim. 4 The Most High. 5 Over,


s)salm xc.
A Prayer of Moses the man of God.
A i Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations. 2 Before the
mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world
even from everlasting to everlasting, thou art God. *
B 3 Thou turnest man to destruction; and sayest, Return, ye children of men.
4 lor a thousand years in thy sight are hut as yesterday when it is past, and as a
watch in the night, 5 Thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are as a
sleep : in the morning they are like grass which groweth up. 6ln the morning it
nourisheth and groweth up; in the evening it is cut down, and withereth. 7 For
we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled 8 Thou
hast set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance,
y oi all our days are passed away in thy wrath; we spend our years as a tale
that is told. 10 The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by
reason of strength they he fourscore years, yet is their strength labour and sorrow;
for it is soon cut off, and we fly away. 11 Who knoweth the power of thine anger ?
even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath.
C 12 S° teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom.
13 Return, O Lord, how long? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants.
14 O satisfy us early with thy mercy; that we may rejoice and be glad all our
dajs. 13 Make us glad according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted us, an I
the years wherein we have seen evil. 16 Let thy work appear unto thy servants,
and thy glory unto their children. 17 And let the beauty of the Lord our God
be upon us: and establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of
our hands establish thou it.
Psalm XC. —The Skeleton,
A | 1, 2. Adoration.
B | 3 —n. Complaint.
C | 12 —17. Prayer.
These three members may be thus more fully set forth: —
A a | 1 Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place
b J in all generations.
c 2 Before the mountains were brought forth,
c or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world,
h | even from everlasting to everlasting,
a | thou art God.
B and | 3 Thou turnest man to destruction; and sayest, Return, ye children of men.
i 4 For a thousand years in thy sight are hut as yesterday when it is past, and
as a watch in the night,
e 5 Thou carriest them away as with a flood ; they are as a sleep : in the morning
they are like grass which groweth up. 6 In the morning it flourisheth, and
groweth up; in the evening it is cut down, and withereth.
k | / For we are consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled,
f j 8 Thou hast set our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy
| countenance.
1 9 lor all our days are passed away in thy wrath: we spend our years as a
tale that is told. '
g 10 The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by reason of
strength they he fourscore years, yet is their strength labour and sorrow;
m | for it is soon cut off, and w r e fly away,
h 11 Who knoweth the power of thine anger? even according to thy fear, so is
thy wrath.
C n 12 So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto wisdom,
q I 1.3 Return, 0 Lord, how long ? and let it repent thee concerning thy servants,
o 14 0 satisfy us early with thy mercy ; that we may rejoice and be glad all our
days. 13 Make us glad according to the days wherein thou hast afflicted us,
and the years wherein w r e have seen evil,
r | 16 Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their children,
p 17 And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us : and establish thou
the work of our hands upon us ; yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.


Psalm XC. —The Skeleton.*
A a | i-. Thou art our dwelling place,
b | -I. In time.
c | 2-. Before the mountains.
c | -2-. Before the world.
h | -2-. In eternity.
a | -2. Thou art God.
B d| 3. Representation,
i 1 4. Reason. *3
e | 5, 6. Representation.
kI 7. Reason. *3
f ( 8. Representation.
1( 9. Reason. *3
g 1 10-. Representation.
m | -10. Reason. >3
h | 11. Representation.
C n | 12. Us.
q | 13. Thy servants.
0 | 14, 15. Us.
r | 16. Thy servants,
p | 17. Us.
The Author indicates another arrangement of the Psalm as a whole, hut does not
give it. The Editor has endeavoured to carry it out: —
A 1 Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations. 2 Before the
mountains were brought forth, or ever thou hadst formed the earth and the world,
even from everlasting to everlasting,"thou art God.
B | 3 Thou turnest man to destruction;
C [ and sayest, Return, ye children of men.
A 4 For a thousand years in thy sight are hut as yesterday when it is past, and as
a watch in the night.
B 3 Thou carriest them away as with a flood; they are as a sleep: in the moxming
they are like grass which groweth up. 6ln the morning it flourisheth, and
groweth up; in the evening it is cut down, and withereth. 7 For we are
consumed by thine anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled. 8 Thou hast set
our iniquities before thee, our secret sins in the light of thy countenance. 9 For
all our days are passed away in thy wrath: we spend our years as a tale that
is told. 10 The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by reason
of strength they he fourscore years, yet is their strength labour and sorrow; for
it is soon cut off, and we fly away. 1 r Who knoweth the power of thine anger ?
even according to thy fear, so is thy wrath.
C 12 So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts unto
wisdom. 13 Return, 0 Lord, how long? and let it repent thee concerning
thy servants. 14 0 satisfy us early with thy mercy; that we may rejoice and
be glad all our days. 15 Make us glad according to the days wherein thou
hast afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen evil. t 6 Let thy work
appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their children. 17 And let the
beauty of the Lord our God be upon us: and establish thou the work of our
hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish thou it.
The Skeleton.
A | 1, 2. The eternal years of Jehovah.
B | 3-. The perishableness of man.
C | -3. Jehovah’s life-giving word. (Declaratory.)
A | 4. The eternal years of Jehovah.
B | s—ll.5 —11. The perishableness of man.
C 1 12 —17. Jehovah’s life-giving word. (Supplicatory.)
* The Editor is responsible for the wording of the skeleton of A.


ssalm xci.
A He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the
shadow of the Almighty. 1 2 I will say of the Lord, He is my refuge and my
fortress: my God; in bim will I trust.
B a 3 Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the fowler, and from the
noisome pestilence. 4 He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his
wings shalt thou trust: his truth shall be thy shield and buckler.
b 5 Thou shalt not be afraid for the terror by night; nor for the arrow that
flieth by day; 6 Nor for the pestilence that walketh in darkness; nor for
the destruction that wasteth at noonday. 7 A thousand shall fall at thy
side, and ten thousand at thy right hand; hut it shall not come nigh thee.
8 Only with thine eyes shalt thou behold and see the reward of the
wicked.
A 9 Because thou hast made the Lord, which is 2 my refuge, even the Most High, thy
habitation;
B h 10 There shall no evil befall thee, neither shall any plague come nigh
thy dwelling. 11 For he shall give his angels charge over thee, to keep
thee in all thy ways. 12 They shall bear thee up in their hands, lest thou
dash thy foot against a stone.
a 13 Thou shalt tread upon the lion and adder: the young lion and the dragon
shalt thou trample under feet. 14 Because he hath set his love upon me,
therefore will I deliver him: I will set him on high, because he hath known
my name. 15 He shall call upon me, and I will answer him: I will he with
him in trouble; I will deliver him, and honour him. 16 With long life
will I satisfy him, and shew him my salvation.
Psalm XCL—The Skeleton.
A 1 1,2. The Person described.
B al3, 4. Blessings promised. (Positive.)
b 1 5 —8. Blessings promised. (Negative.)
A | g. The Person described.
B h\ 10—12. Blessings promised. (Negative.)
a | 13 l6. Blessings promised. (Positive.)
1 Shaddai. Omit the italics, “which is”


ssalm xcii.
A Psalm or Song for tlie sabbath day.
A a i It is a good thing to give thanks unto the Lord, and to sing praises nnto thy
name, 0 Most High : 2 To shew forth thy lovingkindness in the morning,
and thy faithfulness every night, 3 Upon an instrument of ten strings, and
upon the psaltery 5 upon the harp with a solemn sound,
b 4 For thou, Lord, hast made me glad through thy work : I will triumph in
the works of thy hands,
c j 5 O Lord, how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep.
B d| 6 A brutish man knoweth not; neither doth a fool understand this.,
e 7 When the wicked spring as the grass, and when all the workers
of iniquity do flourish; it is that they shall be destroyed for ever :
8 But thou, Lord, art most high for evermore.
C f 9 For, 10, thine enemies, O Lord, for, 10, thine enemies shall
perish;
g j all the workers of iniquity shall be scattered.
D | 10 But my horn shalt thou exalt like the horn of an unicorn;
D j I shall be anointed with fresh oil.
C f 1 11 Mine eye also shall see my, desire on mine enemies,
g and mine ears shall hear my desire of the wicked that rise up
against me.
B and 12 The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree 1 : he shall groAV
like a cedar in Lebanon.
e 13 Those that be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in
the courts of our God. 14 They shall still bring forth fruit in old
age; they shall be fat and flourishing;
A a | 15 To shew that the Lord is upright:
b | he is my rock,
c j and there is no unrighteousness in him.
Psalm XCII—The Skeleton.
A| a | I—3. The praise of the Lord, nrnnb, lofc TJiiV
b | 4. What He is to me.
c | 5. His attributes.
B | and j 6. A wicked individual,
j e|7, 8. The wicked.
C If | 9-. Thine enemies.
g | -9. Workers of iniquity.
D ] 10-. Distinguishing favour to me. [Future.]
J) | -10. Distinguishing favour to me. [Past, see Heb.]
C I/] H-. Mine enemies.
I g J -11. Doers of evil.
li | and 1 12. A righteous individual.
c J 13, 14. The righteous.
A a 1 15-. The praise of the Lord.
h | -15-. What He is to me.
c 1 -15. His attributes.
1 See 1 Kings, yi. 29.


ipsalm xciii.
A The Lord reigneth, 1 he is clothed with majesty; the Lord is clothed with
strength, wherewith he hath girded himself; the world also is stablished, that it
cannot be moved. 2 Thy throne is established of old ; thou art from everlasting.
B ,3 The floods have lifted up, 0 Lord, the floods have lifted up their voice; the
| floods lift up their waves.
B 4 The Lord on high is mightier than the noise of many waters, yea, than the
mighty waves of the sea.
A | 5 Thy testimonies are very sure: holiness becometh thine house, 0 Lord, for ever.
Psalm XCIII. —The Skeleton.
A 1 1,2. The Lord. Eternity.
B| 3. The floods’ voices. The floods’ waves.
B| 4. The waters’ noise. The waves’ might.
A\ 5. The Lord. Eternity.
1 There are three Psalms that commence with the words “The Lord Reigneth,'’ viz., xciii.,
xcvii., and xcix. They each end with a reference to holiness. Ps. xciii., “Holiness becometh
Thine house, 0 Lord, for ever.” Ps. xcvii., “ Give thanks at the remembrance of His holiness;”
and the third Psalm (xcix.) has it three times: “It is holy” (f. 3), “He is holy” ( v . 5), “The
Lord our God is holy ” (v, 9).
This fact seems to say to us that when the Lord reigns all will be holy; that when His
kingdom comes, His name will he hallowed on earth as it is in heaven. “In that day there shall
be upon the hells (or bridles) of the horses, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD ; and the pots in the
Lord’s house shall be like the howls before the altar. Yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah
shall be holiness unto the Lord of hosts” (Zech. xiv. 20, 21-). “Her merchandise and her hire
shall be holiness to the Lord” (Is. xxiii. 18).
Is this why the four living creatures who call for the judgments which will issue in the Lord’s
reign do so with the threefold cry of these three Psalms, “ Holy, holy, holy”? (Rev. iv. 8). — (Ed.)


xciv.
[THEMA.]
0 Lord God, to whom vengeance helongeth; 0 God, to whom vengeance
belongeth, shew thyself. 2 Lift np thyself, thou judge of the earth :
render a reward to the proud.
A a 3 Lord, how long shall the wicked, how long shall the wicked triumph ?
4 How long shall they utter and speak hard things ? and all the workers of
iniquity boast themselves ?
b 3 They break in pieces thy people, 0 Lord, and afflict thine heritage.
6 They slay the widow and the stranger, and murder the fatherless. 7 Yet
they say, THE LORD shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it.
B c 8 Understand, ye brutish among the people : and ye fools, when will
ye be wdse P 9 He that planted the ear, shall he not hear P he that
formed the eye, shall he not see ? 10 He that chastiseth the heathen,
shall not he correct ? he that teacheth man knowledge, shall not he
know ?11 The Lord knoweth the thoughts of man, that they are
vanity.
and 12 Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O LORD, and teach -
est him out of thy law ; 13 That thou mayest give him rest from
the days of adversity, until the pit be digged for the wicked.
14 For the Lord will not cast olf his people, neither will he for-
sake his inheritance. 13 But judgment shall return unto right-
eousness : and all the upright in heart shall follow it. 16 Who
will rise up for me against the evildoers ? or who will stand up for
me against the workers of iniquity ?17 Unless the Lord had been
my help, my soul had almost dwelt in silence. 18 When I said,
My foot slippeth; thy mercy, 0 Lord, held me up. 19 In the
multitude of my thoughts within me thy comforts delight my soul.
A a I 20 Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frameth
1 mischief by a law ?
h 21 They gather themselves together against the soul of the righteous, and
condemn the innocent blood.
B and 22 But the Lord is my defence; and my God is the rock of my
refuge.
cI 23 And he shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and shall cut
them olf in their own wickedness; yea , the Lord our God shall cut
I them off.
Psalm XCIY. —The Skeleton.
1, 2. Thema. [Prayer.]
Aal3, 4. Question. 1 Concerning the wicked,
b 1 5 —7. Statement. )
B c | B—ll.8 —11. The wicked.
and | 12 —19. The Psalmist.
Aa | 20. Question. 1 Concerning the wicked.
h | 21. Statement. )
B' and | 22. The Psalmist.
c 1 23. The wicked.
“c” (verses 8—11) may be thus arranged.—(Ed.)
c e I 8-. Command,
f | -8, Question.
/] 9, 10. Questions.
e | 10. Assertion.


Itealm xcv.
A a 0 come, let us sing unto the Lord ; let us make a joyful noise to the rock
of our salvation. 2 Let us come before his presence with thanksgiving, and
make a joyful noise unto him with psalms.
b | 3 For the Lord is a great God, and a great King above all gods.
B 4 In his hand are the deep places of the earth : the strength of the hills is
his also.
C | 5 The sea is his,
G | and he made it:
B | and his hands formed the dry land.
A a 6 0 come, let us worship and bow down: let us kneel before the Lord our
maker.
6 1 7 For he is our God; and we are the people of his pasture, and the sheep of
his hand.
D lo day if ye will hear his 1 voice, 8 Harden not your heart, as in the provocation,
and as in the day of temptation in the wilderness :
E | 9 When 2 your fathers tempted me, proved me, and saw my 1 work.
I) 10 Forty years long was I grieved with this generation, and said, It is a people
that do err in their heart, and they have not known my ways:
B \ 11 Unto whom- I sware in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest.
Psalm XCY.— The Skeleton.
A a|l, 2. Exhortation to worship,
b | 3. Reason. [*:>]
B | 4, The earth is His.
C | 5-. The sea is His.
C | -5-. He made the sea.
A | -5. He made the earth.
A j a | 6. Exhortation to worship.
1 Christus loquitur.
2 "urn. The same word in verses 9 and 11. w<; in Heb. hi. u.


ssalm xovi.
A 0 sing unto the Lord anew song: sing unto the Lord, all the earth. 1 2 Sing
unto the Lord, bless his name; shew forth his salvation from day to day.
3 Declare his glory among the heathen, his wonders among all people.
B 4 For the Lord is great, and greatly to be praised; he is to be feared above all
gods. 5 For all the gods of the nations are idols: but the Lord made the
heavens. 6 Honour and majesty are before him: strength and beauty are in
his sanctuary.
A 7 Give unto the Lord, oye kindreds of the people, give unto the Lord glory and
strength. 8 Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name: bring an offering,
and come into his courts. 9 O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness: fear
before him, all the earth. 1 10 Say among the heathen that the Lord reigneth: the
world also shall be established it shall not be moved: he shall judge the
people righteously. 11 LET THE HEAVENS REJOICE, AND LET THE
EARTH BE GLAD; 2 let the sea x’oar, axxd the fulness thereof. 12 Let the
field be joyful, and all that is therein: then shall all the traces of the wood rejoice
13 Befox’e the Lord:
B I for he cometh, for he cometh to judge the earth: he shall judge the world with
righteousness, and the people with his truth.
Psalm XCVI. — The Skeleton.
A | I—3.1 —3. Exhortation to glorify God.
B j 4—6. Inducements. [*a]
A 1 7 —13-. Exhortation to glorify God.
B | -13. Inducements, [o]
1 Ps. xcvi. is a call to “all the earth ” (r. 1) to sing the “ new song,” and Ps. xcvii. is the
answer to that call. The praise is for what God is in relation to the earth, and in His coming for
judgment. — (Ed.)
2 On verse 11, the Massorah has a ruhrick calling attention to the name of Jehovah in an
acrostic form in a complete sentence of four consecutive words, D'otril 11-iouA “ Let
the heavens rejoice, and let the earth he glad.” This is the grand climax of God’s purposes which
the Psalms as a whole set forth and declare.— (Ed.)


ipsalnt xcvii.
A a | The Lord reigneth 1 ;
b | let the earth 2 rejoice ; let the multitude of isles be glad thereof.
B c| 2 Clouds and darkness are round about him;
and | righteousness
e [ and judgment are the habitation of his throne.
B c 3 A fire goeth before him, and burneth up his enemies round about.
4 His lightnings enlightened the world: the earth saw, and trembled.
5 The hills melted like wax at the presence of the Lord, at the
presence of the Lord of the whole earth.
and 6 The heavens declare his righteousness, and all the people see his
glory. 7 Confounded be all they that serve graven images, that
boast themselves of idols : worship him, all ye gods. 3
e 8 Zion heard, and was glad; and the daughters of Judah rejoiced
because of thy judgments, 0 Lord.
A a g For thou, Lord, art high 3 above all the earth: thou art exalted far above all
gods, io Ye that love the Lord, hate evil: he preserveth the souls of his
saints; he delivereth them out of the hand of the wicked.
b ii Light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.
12 Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous; and give thanks at the remem-
brance of his holiness.
Psalm XCVII.— The Skeleton.
A a | i-. The Lord reigneth.
.b | -I. Joy and gladness.
B c | 2-. Clouds, &c.
and | -2-. Righteousness,
e | -2. Judgment.
B o | 3 —5. Lightnings, &c.
and | 6, 7. Righteousness.
e ] 8. Judgment.
A a| g, 10. The Lord reigneth.
h | 11, 12. Gladness and joy.
1 See note on Psalm xeiii.
2 Psalm xcvii. is the answer to Psalm xcvi., which was a summons to sing the new song given
to “ all the earth.” — (Ed.)
3 a note in pencil says, “ Some doubt as to v. 7,” i.e., we presume as to whether it should not
go with v. 8, instead of with v. 6. —(Ed.) 4 Most High,


ssalm xcviii.
A Psalm.
A [ i 0 sing unto the Lord anew song;
B for he hath done marvellous things: his right hand, and his holy arm, hath
gotten him the victory. 2 The Lord hath made known his salvation; his
righteousness hath he openly shewed in the sight of the heathen. 3 He hath
remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of Israel; all the ends
of the earth have seen the salvation of our God.
A. 4 Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all the earth 1 : make a loud noise, and
rejoice, and sing praise. 3 Sing UII I O the Lord with the harp; with the harp,
and the voice of a psalm. 6 With trumpets and sound of cornet make a joyful
noise before the Lord, the King. 7 Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof ; the
world, and they that dwell therein. 8 Let.the floods clap their hands: let the hills
be joyful together 9 Before the Lord;
B for he cometh to judge the earth : with righteousness shall he judge the world,
and the people with equity.
Psalm XCVIII.— The Skeleton.
A 1 1-. Exhortation to glorify God.
B 1--3.1 —3. Inducements. [*3]
A 1 4—9-. Exhortation to glorify God.
B | -9. Inducements. [*d]
The Editor carries out a pencilled hint: —
In B, A, and B, the arrangement appears to be similar in each. First, a text, then the expansion of it.
In B The Text, -1. “ Marvellous things.”
The expansion, 2,3. What they are.
ra, | 2-. His salvation made known.
h | -2. To the heathen, —righteousness.
I h | 3-. To Israel, —mercy and truth,
la | -3. His salvation made known.
In A The Text, 4. “ Praise.”
The expansion, 5 —9. How it is to he made.
{o [ 5 —6-. With instruments of man.
and | -6. “ Before the Lord.”
c | 7, 8. With instruments of nature.
and | 9-. “ Before the Lord.”
In B The Text, -9-. “He cometh.”
The expansion, -9. On purpose to judge.
{e | -9-. The world.
f | .g., "With righteousness, (n)
e 1 -9-. The people.
/ | -g. With equity, (n)
1 Psalm xcviii. is another summons to “all the earth” (v. 4), to sing “ the new song. But
this time it is for what God has done for “ the house of Israel” {v. 3). — (Ed.)


|)salm xcix.
A a The Lord reigneth 1 ; let the people tremtle: he sitteth between the cherubims;
let the earth be moved. 2 The Lord is great in Zion; and he is high above
all the people. 2
b | 3 Let them praise thy great and terrible name; for it is holy.
a | 4 The king’s strength also loveth judgment;
b thou dost establish equity, thou executest judgment and righteousness in
Jacob.
B | 3 Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool; for he is holy.
A c 6 Moses and Aaron among his priests, and Samuel among them that call upon
his name; they called upon the Lord, and he answered them. 7 He spake
unto them in the cloudy pillar: they kept his testimonies, and the ordinance
that he gave them.
and 8 Thou answeredst them, 0 Lord our God: thou wast a God that forgavest
them, though thou tookest vengeance of their inventions.
B 9 Exalt the Lord our God, and worship at his holy hill; for the Lord
our God is holy.
Psalm XCIX.—The Skeleton.
A a | r, 2. The Lord spoken of. Tjo mn*
h | 3. Spoken to.
a | 4-. The Lord spoken of. pn
b | -4. Spoken to.
B | 5. Exhortation to praise.
A I c | 6, 7. The Lord spoken of.
I d| 8. Spoken to.
li | 9. Exhortation to praise.
The Author gives the following arrangement of A and B, in which it will be
observed that the Lord and the People are referred to alternately:
e | 1-. The Lord reigneth.
e | -i-. Let the people tremble.
f 1 -1-. He sitteth between the cherubims.
/ | -1. Let the earth be moved.
g | 2. The Lord is great in Zion, and he is high above all people.
g | 3. Let them praise Thy great and terrible name, for it is holy.
h | 4. The king’s strength also loveth judgment; thou dost establish equity, thou
executest judgment and righteousness in Jacob.
h | 5. Exalt ye the Lord our God, and worship at his footstool; for He is holy.
“c” (verses 6 and 7) may be thus extended:—
c i | 6-. Moses and Aaron among His priests,
k | -6-. and Samuel among those that call upon His name;
Jc | -6. 'Calling upon Jehovah, He answered these who called (k).
i 7. In the pillar of cloud He spake to those (i), and they kept His testimonies
and the ordinance that He gave them.
“ and ” (verse 8) may be thus represented:—
( hast answered them.
Jehovah, Elohim, Thou j A God ( forgiving, ) Thou wast to
(. ( but taking vengeance on their deeds ) them.
1 Psalm xcix is the earth’s response to the summons of Ps. xcviii. to sing the new song in praise
for what God has done for Israel.—(Ed.) See note on Ps. xciii.
2 ln A.Y., edition 1611, it was “all people.” In edition of 1612 (not 16130 r 1648) and since
1769, “ all the people.”—- Ed.)


o.
A Psalm of praise.
Ala i Make a joyful noise unto the Loed, all ye lands. 2 Serve the Loed with
gladness :
1 b 1 come 1 before his presence with singing.
B 3 Know ye that the Lord he is God: it ts he that hath made us, and not
we ourselves; we are his people, and the sheep of his pasture.
A hj 4 Enter into 1 his gates with thanksgiving, and into his courts with praise :
a | be thankful unto him, and bless his name.
B 5 For the Lord is good; his mercy is everlasting ; and his truth endureth
to all generations.
Psalm C. —The Skeleton.
Alai 1,2-. Exhortation to worship the Lord.
b | -2. Exhortation to enter into His presence.
Bj 3. What the Lord is. (Three propositions.)
A j b 1 4-. Exhortation to enter into His presence.
\ a I -4. Exhortation to worship the Lord.
B ! 5. What the Lord is. (Three propositions.)
1 -iKi, “ come,\v . 2-; “Enter into? v. 4.
ci.
A Psalm of David.
A1 I will sing of mercy and judgment: unto thee, 0 Lord, will I sing. 2 I will
behave myself wisely in a perfect way. 1 0 when wilt thou come unto me . Iwi
walk within my house with a perfect heart.
B 3 I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes 2 : I hate the work of them that
turn aside 3 ; it shall not cleave to me. 4 A froward heart shall depart from me:
I will not know a wicked person. 5 Whoso P slandereth his neighbour,
him will I cut off 4 : him that hath an high look and a proud heart will not i suiter.
A 6 Mine eyes shall he upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell with me:
he that walketh in a perfect way, 1 he shall serve me.
B 7 He that worketh deceit 3 shall not dwell within my house : he that telleth lies
shall not tarry in my sight. 2 8 I will early destroy 4 all the wicked of the land ;
that I may cut off all wicked doers from the city of the Lord.
Psalm Cl.— The Skeleton.
A I 1,2. What I will do. [D*on pi, “ perfect way.”]
B | 3—5. What and whom I will discountenance.
A 16.' What I will do. [onon pb “ perfect way.”]
Aj7, 8. What and whom I will discountenance. [nnw]
Observe that the subject of A and A is non, “ mercy’’; and in B and A, mij "
In Psalm xcvii. it was pnv, “ righteousness,” and uauno, judgment. In B, A, and E there
similar alternation of the Ist and 3rd persons :
B a | 3-. First person, “I.”
b 1 -3, 4-. Third person, “ it.”
a 1 -4. First person, “I.”
h j 5. Third person, “him,” “him.”
A c ] 6-. First person, “ mine.”
and 1 -6. Third person, “he.”
B e I 7, Third person, “he,” “he.”
f | 8. First person, “ I,” “I.”
, „,, n IT , ,my,” verses 2 and 6. ! TO toS "before mine eyes.” v.
a. 7 . -dot' aside," v. y, mi rm, “wo <n Si
“destroy” v. 8.


ssalm on.
A Prayer of the afflicted, when he is overwhelmed, and poureth out his complaint before the Lord.,
A a i Hear my prayer, O Lord, and let my cry come unto thee. 2 Hide not thy
face from me in the day when I am in trouble; incline thine ear unto me: in
the day when I call answer me speedily.
h 3 For my days are consumed like smoke, and my hones are burned as an
hearth. 4 My heart is smitten, and withered like grass ; so that I forget to
eat my bread. 5 By reason of the voice of my groaning my bones cleave to
my skin. 6I am like a pelican of the wilderness : lam like an owl of the
desert. 7 I watch, and am as a sparrow alone upon the house top. 8 Mine
enemies reproach me all the day; and they that are mad against me are
sworn against me. 9 For I have eaten ashes like bread, and mingled my
drink with weeping, 10 Because of thine indignation and thy wrath: for
thou hast lifted me up, and cast me down. 11 My days are like a shadow
that declineth ; and I am withered like grass.
B 1 2 But thou, 0 Lord, shalt endure for ever ; and thy remembrance unto
all generations.
C r 3 Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion : for the time to favour
her, yea, the set time, is come. 14 For thy servants take pleasure in
her stones, and favour the dust thereof. 15 So the heathen shall fear
the name of the Lord, and all the kings of the earth thy glory.
16 When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory.
1 7 He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their
prayer. 18 This shall be written for the generation to come : and the
people which shall be created shall praise THE LORD. 19 For he
hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary ; from heaven did
the Lord behold the earth; 20 To hear the groaning of the prisoner;
to loose those that are appointed to death; 21 To declare the name
of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem ; 22 When the
people are gathered together, and the kingdoms, to serve the Lord.
A b|23 He weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my days,
a | 24 I said, 0 my God, take me not away in the midst of my days:
B thy years are throughout all generations. 23 Of old hast thou laid the
foundation of the earth: and the heavens are the work of thy hands.
26 They shall perish, but thou shalt endure: yea, all of them shall wax old
like a garment; as a vesture shalt thou change them, and they shall be
changed: 27 But thou art the same, and thy years shall have no end.
C 28 The children of thy servants shall continue, and their seed shall be
established before thee.
Psalm Oil. —The Skeleton.
A a | 1, 2. Prayer. {[“Mydays.”]
b | 3 —ll, Affliction. Days cut short. )
B | 12. Eternity of God.
C | 13 —22. His mercies to His people.
A b | 23. Affliction. Days cut short. ) j- <( ,j a ys.”]
a | 24-. Prayer. 1
B 1 -24 —27. Eternity of God. [“ Thy years.”]
C 1 28, His mercies to His people.


The Author by a few pencil marks indicates that C may be further arranged. The
Editor gives the arrangement with the skeleton:
C c 1 13 Thou shalt arise, and have mercy upon Zion ;
and for the time to favour her, yea, the set time, is come. 14 For thy servants
take pleasure in her stones, and favour the dust thereof,
e 17 So the heathen shall fear the name of the Lord, and all the kings of
the earth thy glory.
cl 6 When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory. 17 He
will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise their prayer. 10 ims
shall be written for the generation to come: and the people which shall be
created shall praise THE LORD.
and 10 For he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary; from heaven
did the Lord behold the earth; 20 To hear the groaning of the prisoner;
to loose those that are appointed to death ;21 To declare the name of the
Lord in Zion, and his praise in J erusalem ;
e 22 When the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms, to serve
j the Lord.
The Skeleton of C.
C c 1 13-. The Lord’s mercy upon Zion,
and | -13, 14. The reason, (o)
e j 15. The effect on the heathen. (ob»)
c j 16—18. The Lord’s mercy upon Zion.
and 1 19—21. The reason, (o)
e | 22. The effect on the peoples. (rroV»»)
The Editor ventures to submit another arrangement of C
ri f( £ Thou shplt arise, and have mercy upon Zion : for the time to favour her,
yea, the set time, is come. 14 For thy servants take pleasure in her stones,
and favour the aust thereof,
o- 1 So the heathen shall fear the name of the Lord, and all the kings of
1 the earth thy glory.
and hi 16 When the Lord shall build up Zion, he shall appear in his glory,
i I 17 He will regard the prayer of the destitute, and not despise
1 their prayer.
E j 18 This shall be written for the 1 generation to come:
E | an d the 2 people which shall be created shall praise THE LORD.
D h 10 For he hath looked down from the height of his sanctuary;
from heaven did the Lord behold the earth;
il 2O To hear the groaning of the prisoner; to loose those that are
1 appointed to death ;
c / 1 21 To declare the name of the Lord in Zion, and his praise in Jerusalem;
g 1 22 When the people are gathered together, and the kingdoms, to serve
1 the Lord.
The Skeleton of 0.-“ Grace and Glory” (Psalm taziv. u.)
C c If 1 13, 14- Favour to Zion.
1 g | 15. Favour to the heathen.
n I h 1 16. The Lord in glory, in Zion.
1 i 1 17. The Lord in grace with the needy.
e j 18-. These mercies for a generation to come,
E | _iß. And for a People to be new-created.
D | h 1 19. The Lord in glory, in Zion.
1 i j 20. The Lord in grace with the needy.
C 1/1 21. Favour to Zion.
1 (j 1 22. Favour to the heathen.
1 a generation. 2 a People.


ssalm cm.
A Psalm of David.
A i Bless the Lord, 0 my soul: and all that is within me, bless his holy name.
2 Bless the Lord, omy soul, and forget not all his benefits; 3 Who forgiveth
all thine iniquities; who healeth all thy diseases; 4 Who redeemeth thy life
from destruction; who crowneth thee with lovingkindness and tender mercies;
5 Who satisfieth thy mouth with good things; so that thy youth is renewed like
the eagle’s.
B 6 The Lord executeth righteousness and judgment for all that are oppressed.
7 lie made known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the children of Israel.
C | 8 The Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and plenteous in mercy.
D | 9 He will not always chide: neither will he keep his anger for ever.
E 10 He hath not dealt with us after our sins ; nor rewarded us according
to our iniquities.
F 1 r For as the heaven is high above the earth, so great is his mercy
toward them that fear him. 12 As far as the east is from the west, so
far hath he removed our transgressions from us. 13 Like as a father
pitieth his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him.
D 14 For he knoweth our frame ; he remembereth that we are dust, 13 As
for man, his days are as grass: as a flower of the field, so he flourisheth.
16 For the wind passeth over it, and it is gone; and the place thereof
shall know it no more.
C 17 But the mercy of the Lord is Horn everlasting to everlasting upon them
that fear him, and his righteousness unto children’s children; 18 To such
as keep his covenant, and to those that remember his commandments to do
them.
B 19 The Lord hath prepared his throne in the heavens; and his kingdom ruleth
over all.
A 20 Bless the Lord, ye his angels, that excel in strength, that do his command-
ments, hearkening unto the voice of his word. 21 Bless ye the Lord, all ye his
hosts ;ye ministers of his, that do his pleasure. 22 Bless the Lord, all his works
in all places of his dominion: bless the Lord, 0 ray soul.
Psalm GUI. —The Skeleton.
A 1 I—s.1 —5. Exhortation to bless.
B 1 6, 7. The Lord’s kingdom of grace.
C | 8. Merciful goodness.
D| 9. Sparing goodness. (Time.)
E | 10. Pardoning goodness.
E\ 11—13. Pardoning goodness.
D | 14 —16. Sparing goodness. (Time.)
C 1 17, 18. Merciful goodness.
B 1 19. The Lord’s universal kingdom.
A | 20 —22. Exhortation to bless.


ssalm civ.
A 1 Bless the Lord, 0 my soul. .
B 0 Lord my God, thou art very great; thou art clothed with honour and majesty.
2 Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment; who stretchest out the
heavens like a curtain :
B 3 Who layeth the beams of his chambers in the waters: who maketh the
clouds his chariot: who walketh upon the wings of the wind: 4 Who
maketh his angels spirits; his ministers a flaming fire: 3 Who laid the
foundations of the earth, that it should not be removed for ever.
C 6 Thou coveredst it with the deep as with a garment: the waters stood above
the mountains. 7 At thy rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder they
hasted away. 8 They go up by the mountains; they go down by the valleys
unto the place which thou hast founded for them. 9 Thou hast set a bound
that they may not pass over; that they turn not again to cover the earth.
C 10 He sendeth the springs into the valleys, which run among the hills.
11 They give drink to every beast of the field: the wild asses quench theii
thirst, 12 By them shall the fowls of the heaven have their habitation, which
sing among the branches. 13 He watereth the hills from his chambers :
D 1 the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works.
I) 14 He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service ot
man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth; 15 And wine that
maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine, and bread
which strengthened man’s heart. 16 The trees of the Lord are full of sap;
the cedars of Lebanon, which he hath planted; 17 W r here the birds make
their nests: as for the stork, the fir trees are her house. 18 The high hills
are a refuge for the wild goats; and the rocks for the conies. 19 He
appointed the moon for seasons: the sun knoweth his going down.
E 20 Thou makest darkness, and it is night: wherein all the beasts of the forest
do creep forth. . r
E 21 The young lions roar after their prey, and seek their meat from Hod.
22 The sun ariseth, they gather themselves together, and lay them down in
their dens. 23 Man goeth forth unto his work and to his labour until the
evening. _
F 24 0 Lord, how manifold are thy works ! in wisdom hast thou made them all:
the earth is full of thy riches. 25 So is this great and wide sea, wherein
are things creeping innumerable, both small and great beasts. 26 There
go the ships; there is that leviathan, whom thou hast made to play therein.
27 These wait all upon thee; that thou mayest give them their meat in due
season. 28 That thou givest them they gather: thou openest thine hand, they
are filled with good. 29 Thou hidest thy face, they are troubled : thou takest
away their breath, they die, and return to their dust. 30 Thou sendest forth
thy spirit, they are created; and thou renewest the face of the earth.
F 3 1 The glory of the Lord shall endure for ever; the Lord shall rejoice in
his works. 32 He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth: he toucheth the
hills, and they smoke.
A 33 I will sing unto the Lord as long as I live: I will sing praise to my God while
I have my being. 34 My meditation of him shall be sweet; I will be glad in the
Lord. 35 Let the sinners be consumed out of the earth, and let the wicked be no
more. Bless thou the Lord, omy soul. Praise ye THE LORD 1 .
Psalm ClV.—The Skeleton.
A | J-. The Lord to be praised.
B | -1, 2. The Lord spoken to. } [The firsf and GeTl . p 3 _ 5 .
B 1 3 —5. Spoken of. )
C | 6-9. Spoken to. 7 The second and Gen . i. 6-8.
C 1 10 —13-. Spoken of. )
D | -13. Spoken to. \ The third and f oU rth days, Gen. i. 9—19.
D | 14—19. Spoken of. )
E 2 fh° k 3 en spoke„ of. ] The f f ' h ** Hen 1 2 °“ 23 ‘
F | 24-30. Spoken to. ] The and Gen . p 24 _ 3I
F | 31, 32. Spoken of. ) # -
A | 33 —35. The Lord to be praised. The day, Gen.ii. i 3- See XCII J
1 This is the first “ Hallelujah: ” and the Talmud and Midrash call attention to the significance of
the fact that it is connected with the final overthrow of the wicked. So also is the first Hallelujah of
the Apocalypse. See Rev. xix, i, 2. —(Ed.)


ssalm cv.
A 0 give thanks unto tlie Lord; call npon his name: make known his deeds
among the people. 2 Sing nnto him, sing psalms nnto him: talk ye of all his
wondrous works. 3 Glory ye in his holy name; let the heart of them rejoice
that seek the Lord. 4 Seek the Lord, and his strength: seek his face evermore.
5 Remember his marvellous works that he hath done; his wonders, and the
judgments of his mouth; 6 0 ye seed of Abraham his servant, ye children of
Jacob his chosen. 7 He is the Lord our God: his judgments are in all the earth.
B 8 He hath remembered 1 his covenant for ever, the word 2 which he com-
manded to a thousand generations. 9 Which covenant he made with Abraham,
and his oath unto Isaac; 10 And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law, and
to Israel for an everlasting covenant: xi Saying, Unto thee will I give the
land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance: 12 When they were but a few
men in number; yea, very few, and strangers in it.
C a 13 When they went 3 from one nation to another, from one kingdom to
another people;
b 14 He suffered no xnan to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings
for their sakes; 15 Saying , Touch not mine anointed, and do my
prophets no harm.
c 16 Moreover he called for a famine upon the land: he brake the
whole staff of bread,
and j 7 He sent a man befoi’e them, even Joseph, who was sold for a
servant: 18 Whose feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in iron:
19 Until the time that his word came: the word of the Lord
tried him. 20 The king sent and loosed him; even the ruler of the
people, and let him go free. 21 He made him lord of his house,
and ruler of all his substance: 22 To hind his princes at his
pleasure; and teach his senators wisdom.
C a | 23 Israel also came 3 into Egypt; and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.
b 24 And he increased his people greatly; and made them stronger 4
than their enemies.
c 2 5 He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtilly with
his servants.
and 26 He sent Moses his servant; and Aaron whom he had chosen.
27 They shewed his signs among them, and wonders in the land of
Ham. 5 28 He sent darkness, and made it dark; and they rebelled
not against his word. 29 He turned their waters into blood, and
slew their fish. 30 Their 0 land brought forth frogs in abundance,
in the chambers of their kings. 31 He spake, and there came
divers sorts of flies, and lice in all their coasts. 32 He gave them
hail for rain, and flaming fire ixx their land. 33 He smote their
vines also and their fig trees ; and brake the trees of their coasts.
34 He spake, and the locusts came, and caterpillers, and that with-
out number, 33 And did eat up all the herbs in their land, and
devoured the fruit of their ground. 36 He smote also all the first-
born in their land, the chief of all their strength. 37 He brought
them forth also with silver and gold: and there was not one feeble
person among their tidbes. 38 Egypt was glad when they departed:
for the fear of them fell upon them. 39 He spread a cloud for a
covering; and fire to give light in the night. 40 The people asked,
and he brought quails, and satisfied them with the bread of heaven.
4 1 He opened the rock, and the watei’S gushed out; they ran in the
dry places like a river.
B 42 For he remembered 1 his holy promise, 2 and Abraham his servant. 43 And
he bi'ought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with gladness: 44 Ami
gave them the lands of the heathen: and they inherited the labour of the
people; 415 That they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws.
A | Praise ye THE LORD.
1 -or, the same word in verses 8 and 42 2 “in, translated “word,” v. 8 ; “promise,” v. 42.
3 Literally, “ and they went” v. 13 (i); “ and Israel came,” v. 23 (x). 4 dvj) means to be strong in
number. 5 Seven plagues enumerated. So, in Ps. cvi., seven sins in the wilderness. G “The”
in edition of 1611. Printed “Their” in editions of A.Y. since 1648.


Psalm CY.—The Skeleton.
A | I—7.1 —7. Exhortation to praise the Loud.
B 1 B—l 2.8 —12. God’s covenant with Abraham, and His faithfulness in remembering it.
C a 1 13. Journeyings of the People of God.
b | 14, 15. Favour, and protection from enemies,
c 1 16. Affliction.
and | 17 —22. Mission of Joseph; and subsequent deliverance in Egypt.
C « | 23. Journeyings of the People of God.
h | 24. Favour, and protection from enemies,
c | 25. Affliction.
and I 26—41. Mission of Moses and Aaron; and subsequent deliverance from
1 Egypt.
B [ 42 —45-. God’s covenant with Abraham, and His faithfulness in remembering [and
I performing] it
A | -45. Exhortation to praise THE LORD.
Note.— That A and A are hortatory, and in the second person plural. All the rest of the
Psalm is in the third person. In B and Bwe have God’s remembrance of His covenant; but
in B it is in promise (“I ivill give”), while in Bit is in performance {“and He gave”). C and
C consist of narrative: in Cwe have the history of the patriarchs (as recorded in Genesis), and
in C'the corresponding history of the nation (as recorded in Exodus). — (Ed.)
The two members, B and B, may be thus arranged:— (Ed.)
B e | B—lo.8 —10. The Covenant remembered,
f 1 11. The land given,
g | 12. The People described.
B e | 42, 43. The Covenant remembered.
f | 44. The land inherited.
g | 45-. The People described.
The two members, “ d ” and “ d,” may also be further arranged : — (Ed.)
d h | 17. The sending of the deliverer,
i | 18, 19. His trial by the word,
k 1 20 —22. The deliverance.
d h | 26. The sending of the deliverers.
1 I 27 —36. Egypt’s trial by the word {v. 27, margin,
1 “ Heb. words of his signs ”).
k | 27 —41. The deliverance.


Itealm cvi.
A | Praise ye THE LORD,
B O give thanks unto the Lord ; for he is good : for his mercy endureth for ever. 2 Who can utter the mighty acts
of the Lord ? who can shew forth all his praise ? 3 Blessed are they that keep judgment, and he that doeth
righteousness at all times.
C 4 Remember me, O Lord, with the favour that thou bearest unto thy people : O visit me with thy salvation ;
5 That I may see the good of thy chosen, that I may rejoice in the gladness of thy nation, that I may glory
with thine inheritance.
D a 6 We have sinned with our fathers, we have committed iniquity, we have done wickedly. 7 Our fathers
understood not thy wonders in Egypt; they remembered not the multitude of thy mercies; but provoked
him at the sea, even at the Red sea.
h 8 Nevertheless he saved them for his name’s sake, that he might make his mighty power to he known,
g He rebuked the Ked sea also, and it was dried up: so he led them through the depths, as through the
wilderness, to And he saved them from the hand of him that hated them, and redeemed them from
the hand of the enemy, n And the waters covered their enemies: there was not one of them left.
12 Then believed they his words; they sang his praise.
El f cI 13 They soon forgat his works; they waited not for his counsel: 14 But lusted exceedingly
I in the wilderness, and tempted God in the desert.
and 1 15 And he gave them their request; but sent leanness into their soul,
c 1 16 They envied Moses also in the camp, and Aaron the saint of the Lord.
and I 17 The earth opened and swallowed up Datban, and covered the company of Ahiram. 18 And
| a fire was kindled in their company ; the flame burned up the wicked.
o e 19 They made a calf in Horeb, and worshipped the molten image. 20 Thus they changed
their glory into the similitude of an ox that eateth grass. 21 They forgat God their saviour,
which had done great things in Egypt; 22 Wondrous works in the land of Ham, and
terrible things by the Red sea.
f | 23 Therefore he said that he would destroy them,
g I had not Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach, to turn away his wrath, lest
I he should destroy them.
E 2 F lk I 24 Yea, they despised the pleasant land, they believed not his word: 25 But murmured in
I their tents, and hearkened not unto the voice of the Lord.
I SI 26 Therefore he lifted up his hand against them, to overthrow them in the wilderness :
| |27 To overthrow their seed also among the nations, and to scatter them in the lands.
a e I 28 They joined themselves also unto Baal-peor, and ate the sacrifices of the dead.
| 29 Thus they provoked him to anger with their inventions:
;/ | and the plague brake in upon them.
g 30 Then stood up Phinehas, and executed judgment: and so the plague was stayed.
31 And that was counted unto him for righteousness unto all generations for
evermore.
E ;i <l> xI 32 They angered him also at the waters of strife,
tI so that it went ill with Moses for their sakes ; 33 Because they provoked his spirit, so that
| he spake unadvisedly with his lips.
P e 34 They did not destroy the nations, concerning whom the Lord commanded them :
35 But were mingled among the heathen, and learned their works. 36 And they served
their idols : which were a snare unto them. 37 Yea, they sacrificed their sons and
their daughters unto devils, 38 And shed innocent blood, even the blood of their sons
and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the idols of Canaan; and the land
was polluted with blood. 39 Thus were they defiled with their own works, and went a
whoring with their own inventions.
<j> 40 Therefore was the wrath of the Lord kindled against his people, insomuch that he
abhorred his own inheritance. 41 And he gave them into the hand of the heathen;
and they that hated them ruled over them. 42 Their enemies also oppressed them,
and they were brought into subjection under their hand.
7 | 43 Many times did he deliver them;
1) a | but they provoked him with their counsel, and were brought low for their iniquity.
b 44 Nevertheless he regarded their affliction, when he heard their cry: 45 And he remembered for
them his covenant, and repented according to the multitude of his mercies. 46 He made them also to
be pitied of all those that carried them captives.
rC I 47 Save us, O Lord our God, and gather us from among the heathen, to give thanks unto thy holy name, and
I to triumph in thy praise.
B| 48 Blessed he the Lord God of Israel from everlasting to everlasting: and let all the people say, Amen.
A 1 Praise ye THE LORD.
Psalm CVl.— The Skeleton.
A | 1-. Hallelujah.
B | -I—3. Exhortation to bless.
C | 4, 5. Prayer.
D Ia | 6, 7. Sin.
I b 1 B—l 2. “Nevertheless.”
El f c 1 13, 14. Sin. (Departure from God.)
and | 15. Punishment.
c 1 16. Sin.
and | 17, 18. Punishment.
G e | ig—22. Sin. (Idolatry.)
f | 23-. Punishment,
g 1 -23. Deliverance. (Moses.)
\ E 2 F I k I 24, 25. Sin.
I 5 I 26, 27. Punishment.
0 e | 28, 29-. Sin. (Idolatry.)
/1 -29. Punishment.
g | 30, 31, Deliverance. (Phinehas.)
E 3 $I x I 32-- Sin.
r I -32, 33. Punishment. , , ,
P e i 34—39. Sin. (Idolatry.) [Followed the heathen,]
<j> | 40—42. Punishment. [Given into the hand of the heathen.]
7 1 43-. Deliverance. (The Lord.)
D|a| -43. Sin.
I b | 44—46. “ Nevertheless.”
C | 47. Prayer.
B | 48-. Exhortation to bless.
A 1 -48. Hallelujah.


ssalm cyii.
A1 O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy 1 endnreth for ever, 2 Let the
redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he hath redeemed from the hand of the enemy ; 3 And
gathered them out of the lands, from the east, and from the west, from the north, and from
the south.
B a 4 They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way ; they found no city to dwell in.
5 Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them. 6 Then they cried unto the Lord
in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distresses. 7 And he led them
forth by the right way, that they might go to a city of habitation,
a 1 8 Oh that men would praise the Lord/cu- his goodness, and/or his wonderful works
Ito the children of men ! 9 For he satisfieth the longing soul, and filleth the hungry
I soul with goodness.
b 10 Such as sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, being bound in affliction and
iron; 11 Because they rebelled against the words of God, and contemned the counsel
of the Most High: 12 Therefore he brought down their heart with labour; they
fell down, and there was none to help. 13 Then they cried unto the Lord in their
trouble, and he saved them out of their distresses. 14 He brought them out of dark-
ness and the shadow of death, and brake their bands in sunder.
b 15 Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and/or his wonderful works
to the children of men! 16 For he hath broken the gates of brass, and cut the bars
of iron in sunder.
c 17 Fools because of their transgression, and because of their iniquities, are afflicted.
18 Their soul abhorreth all manner of meat; and they draw near unto the gates of
death. 19 Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he saveth them out of
their distresses. 20 He sent his word, and healed them, and delivered them from
their destructions.
c 21 Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and/or his wonderful works
to the children of men ! 22 And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving, and
declare his works with rejoicing.
and 23 They that go down to the sea in ships, that do business in great waters;
24 These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. 25 For he com-
mandeth, and raiseth the stormy wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof. 26 They
mount up to the heaven, they go down again to the depths; their soul is melted
because of trouble. 27 They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and
are at their wit’s end. 28 Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he
bringeth them out of their distresses. 29 He maketh the storm a calm, so that the
waves thereof are still. 30 .Then are they glad because they be quiet; so he
bringeth them unto their desired haven.
and 31 Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and/or his wonderful works
to the children of men! 32 Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the
people, and praise him in the assembly of the elders.
B i e | 33 He turneth rivers into a wilderness, and the waterspriags into dry ground;
1 34 A fruitful land into barrenness, for the wickedness of them that dwell therein.
e 35 He turneth the wilderness into a standing water, and dry ground into water-
springs. 36 And there he maketh the hungry to dwell, that they may prepare a
city for habitation ; 37 And sow the fields, and plant vineyards, which may yield
fruits of increase. 38 He blesseth them also, so that they are multiplied greatly;
and suffereth not their cattle to decrease.
f 39 Again, they are minished and brought low through oppression, affliction, and
sorrow. 40 He poureth contempt upon princes, and causeth them to wander in the
wilderness, where there is no way.
/ I 41 Yet setteth he the poor on high from affliction, and maketh him families like
| a flock.
AI 42 The righteous shall see it, and rejoice : and all iniquity shall stop her mouth. 43 Whoso is
| wise, and will observe these 2 things, even they shall understand the lovingkindness 1 of the Lord.
Psalm CYII. — The Skeleton.
A | I—3.1 —3. Jehovah’s lovingkindness (“iDfl) to be acknowledged.
B a | 4—7. Distress, Prayer, and Deliverance. (Wanderers in wilderness.)
a | 8, 9. Praise and Reason ('2).
b ( jo—l4. Distress, Prayer, and Deliverance. (Rebels.)
b | 15, 16. Praise and reason, ’2.
c | 17—20. Distress, Prayer, and Deliverance, (Fools.)
c | 21, 22. Praise and injunction,
and | 23 —30. Distress, Prayer and Deliverance. (Wanderers on deep.)
and | 31, 32. Praise and injunction.
B e 1 33—34. Judgment.
e I 35 — 38- Lovingkindness.
f | 39, 40. Judgment.
/ | 41. Lovingkindess.
A | 42, 43. Jehovah’s lovingkindness (iDh) to be understood.
The Editor is responsible for this Psalm, as the MS. was unfinished. Note that in Bwe have
‘particular instances of the Lord’s lovingkindness (introverted), while in B we have more general
instances (alternate), 1 ion lovingkindness, in verses l and 43. 2 A.Y. Ed. 1611, “ those things”;
Eds. since 1762, “these things.”


ssalm cviii.
A Song nr Psalm of David.
A i 0 God, my heart is fixed; I will sing and give praise, even with my glory.
2 Awake, psaltery and harp : I myself will awake early. 3 I will praise thee, 0
Lokd, among the people: and I will sing praises unto thee among the nations.
4 For thy mercy is great above the heavens : and thy truth rearJieth unto the
clouds. 3 Be thou exalted, 0 God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all
the earth ; 6 That thy beloved may be delivered : save with thy right hand, and
answer me.
B 7 God hath spoken in his holiness; I will rejoice, I will divide Shechem, and
mete out the valley of Succoth. 8 Gilead is mine ; Manasseh is mine ; Ephraim
also is the strength of mine head; Judah is my lawgiver; 9 Moab is my
washpot; over Edom will I cast out my shoe ; over Philistia will I triumph.
10 Who will bring me into the strong city ? who will lead me into Edom P
A 11 Wilt not thou, O God, ivho hast cast us off ? and wilt not thou, 0 God, go forth
with our hosts ? 12 Give us help from trouble : for vain is the help of man.
B 13 Through God we shall do valiantly : for he it is that shall tread down our
enemies.
Psalm CVIII— The Skeleton.
A 1 I—6. God spoken to. (D*riP«)
B | 7 —10. God spoken of. (own)
A | 11, 12. God spoken to. (a'nbw)
B | 13. God spoken of. (D'nP^n)
The second and fourth members, B and B , correspond thus —(Ed.); —
B al7, 8. Israel.
b 1 9, 10. The heathen.
B a | 13-. Israel.
I | -13. The heathen.


ssalm cix.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
A i Hold not thy peace, 0 God of my praise ; 2 For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of
the deceitful are opened against me : they have spoken against me with a lying tongue. 3 They
compassed me about also with words of hatred ; and fought against me without a cause.
4 For my love they are ray adversaries: but I give myself unto prayer. 5 And they have
rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love.
B 6 Set thou a wicked man over him: and let Satan stand at his right hand. 7 When he
shall be judged, let him be condemned : and let his prayer become sin. 8 Let his days be
few ; and let another take his office. 9 Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow.
10 Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg : let them seek their bread also out of
their desolate places. 11 Let the extortioner catch all that he hath ; and let the strangers
spoil his labour. 12 Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let there be
any to favour his fatherless children. 13 Let his posterity be cut off; and in the
generation following let their name be blotted out. 14 Let the iniquity of his fathers be
remembered with the Lord ; and let not the sin of his mother be blotted out. 15 Let them
be before the Lord continually, that he may cut off the memory of them from the earth.
16 Because that he remembered not to shew mercy, but persecuted the poor and needy man,
that he might even slay the broken in heart. 17 As he loved cursing, so let it come unto
him: as he delighted not in blessing, so let it be.far from him. 18 As he clothed himself
with cursing like as with his garment, so let it come into his bowels like water, and like oil
into his bones. 19 Let it be unto him as the garment which covereth him, and for a girdle
wherewith he is girded continually. 20 Let this he the reward of mine adversaries from the
Lord, and of them that speak evil against my soul.
A 21 But do thou for me, 0 God 1 the Lord, for thy name’s sake: because thy mercy is good,
deliver thou me. 22 For lam poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me. 23 lam
gone like the shadow when it declineth; lam tossed up and down as the locust. 24 My knees
are weak through fasting ; and my flesh faileth of fatness. 25 I became also a reproach unto
j them : token they looked upon me they shaked their heads. 26 Hel p me, 0 Lord my God : 0 save
jme according to thy mercy ; 27 That they may know that this is thy hand ; that thou, Lord,
I hast done it. 28 Let them curse, but bless thou:
B when they arise, let them be ashamed; but let thy servant rejoice. 3 29 Let mine adversaries
be clothed 'with shame, and let them cover themselves with their own confusion, as with a
mantle. 30 I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth ; yea, I will praise him among the
multitude. 31 For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from those that
condemn his soul.
Psalm CIX. —The Skeleton.
A | I—s.1 —5. Prayer for self, and complaint.
B j 6—20. Prayer against enemies. (Ends on D'Hirti.)
A | 21 —27. Prayer for self, and complaint.
B | 28 —31. Prayer against enemies. (EndsWQj ’aQuno iWirp.)
The third member, A, may be thus arranged — (Ed.) :
A a | 21-. “ Thy name’s sake.”
b i -21. “ Thy mercy.”
c | 22-. My poor condition,
and | -22. My heart wounded.
e | 23-. Comparison to a shadow. (2)
e | -23. Comparison to a locust. (3)
and | 24. My body fainting,
c | 25. My poor condition.
h | 26. “ Thy mercy.”
a i 27, 28. “ Thou.”
The last member, B, may be arranged thus:—
B f j -28-. When they arise let them be ashamed ;
g j -28. But thy servant shall rejoice.
f | 29 Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover themselves with their
| own confusion, as with a mantle.
g 30 I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth ; yea, I will praise him among the
multitude. 31 For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from those
that condemn his soul.
The Skeleton of B.
B f | -28-. They,
g | -28. I.
/1 29. They.
y I 30—31- I-
1 Jehovah.
2 but thy servant shall rejoice.


ssalm cx.
A Psalm of David.
A i The Lord said unto my lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine
enemies thy footstool.
B | 2 The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion;
C rule thou in the midst of thine enemies. 3 Thy people shall he willing in
the day of thy power, in the beauties of holiness
D | from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth.
A 4 The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever after the
order of Melchizedek.
B | 5 The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his wrath.
G 6 He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead
bodies; he shall wound the heads over many countries.
I) | 7He shall drink of the brook in the way 1 : therefore shall he lift up the head.
Psalm CX. —The Skeleton.
A | 1. What Jehovah has uttered. [Contrast xxxvi. I.]
13 | 2-. What he [Jehovah] will do.
C 1 -2, 3-. Messiah’s enemies: mustering host.
D | -3. Refreshment. Dew. (amo)
A| 4. What Jehovah has uttered. [Compare cxxxii. n.]
B | 5. What he [»rm, Adonai, Messiah] will do.
C| 6. Messiah’s enemies. The campaign.
1) j 7. Refreshment. Brook, (bruo)
The third member, C, may be arranged thus:
C a | Rule Thou in the midst of Thine enemies,
b | Thy people shall be willing
a | In the day of Thy power, 2
b | In the beauties of holiness 2
1 From the brook in the way he shall drink. [See Ps. xxxvi. 8, the only other place where
drinking of the brook (brc) is spoken of.] D and D each begin with o, = 11 from A
2 “ Power” has reference to God’s enemies, and “ holiness ” to His people.— (Ed.)
ssalm cxi.
A Praise ye THE LORD. («) I will praise the Lord with my whole heart, (3) in
the assembly of the upright, and in the congregation.
B a 2 (:) The works of the Lord are great, (l) sought out of all them that have
pleasure therein. 3 (n) His work is honourable and glorious : (1) and his
righteousness endureth for ever. 4 (l) He hath made his wonderful works
to be remembered: (n) the Lord is gracious and full of compassion,
b 5 (to) He hath given meat unto them that fear him: (’) he will ever be
mindful of his covenant. 6 (0) He hath shewed his people the power of
his works, (b) that he may give them the heritage of the heathen.
B a 7 (and) The works of his hands are verity and judgment; (0) all his command-
ments are sure. 8 (and) They stand fast for ever and ever, (I)) and are done
in truth and uprightness.
b 9 (Q) He sent redemption unto his people: (k) he hath commanded his
covenant for ever: (p) holy and reverend is his name. 10 (l) The fear of
• the Lord is the beginning of wisdom : (u?) a good understanding have all
they that do h s commandments:
A j (n) his praise endureth for ever.
Psalm CXI. —The Skeleton.
A | 1. Praise.
B a | 2 —4. The works, &c., of Jehovah.
b 1 5, 6. His bounty, and the objects of it.
B a]7, 8. The works, &c., of Jehovah.
b | 9, 10-. His bounty, and the objects of it.
A j -10. Praise.


cxii.
A a Praise ye THE LORD. (A) Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord,
(n) that delighteth greatly in his commandments. 2 0) His seed shall he
mighty upon earth: (i) the generation of the upright shall be blessed.
3 (P) Wealth and riches shall he in his house:
b (l) and his righteousness endureth for ever. 4 (t) Unto the upright there
ariseth light in the darkness :
c (n) he is gracious, and full of compassion, and righteous. 5 (a) A good man
sheweth favour, and lendeth: (') he will guide his affairs with discretion.
B 6 (3) Surely he shall not be moved for ever: ( b ) the righteous shall be
in everlasting remembrance. 7 ( D ) He shall not be afraid of evil
tidings: (i) his heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. 8 (and) His heart
is established, he shall not be afraid, (p) until he see his desire upon
his enemies.
A c 1 9 (and) He hath dispersed, he hath given to the poor;
h | ( 'y ) his righteousness endureth for ever;
a | (p) his horn shall be exalted with honour.
B 10 (i) The wicked shall see it, and be grieved; (tff) he shall gnash with
his teeth, and melt away; (n) the desire of the wicked shall perish.
Psalm CXII.— The Skeleton.
A a | I—3-.1 —3-. Prosperity.
b ] -3, 4-. Righteousness,
c 1 -4, 5. Goodness.
B 1 6—B. Shall stand.
A c | 9-. Goodness.
I) | -9-. Righteousness.
a 1 -9. Prosperity.
B | io. Shall fall.
There is a marked correspondence between Psalms cxi. and cxii., which may be
thus exhibited. —(Ed.); —
A| 1 —3. His righteousness for ever.
Ps. cxi. Jehovah B ] 4—B. Gracious and full of compassion, and ever mindful of covenant.
C | 9, 10. His covenant and praise for ever.
A ) I—3.1 —3. His righteousness for ever.
3?s. cxii.
The man that B\4 B. Gracious and full of compassion, and in everlasting remembrance.
feareth Jehovah, , ~ .
C | 9, 10. Exalted in glory tor ever.


ssalm cxiii.
A | Praise ye THE LORD.
B | Praise, 0 ye seivauts of the Lord,
C | praise the name of the Lord.
C 2 Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth and for evermore.
3 From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same the Lord’s
name is to be praised.
B 4 The Lord is high above all nations, and his glory above the heavens. 5 Who
is like unto the Lord our God, who dwelleth on high, 6 Who humbleth him-
self to behold the things that are in heaven, and in the earth! 7He raiseth up
the poor out of the dust, and lifteth the needy out of the dunghill; 8 That he
may set him with princes, even with the princes of his people. 9 He maketh
the banen woman to keep house, and to he a joyful mother of children.
A 1 Pi •aise ye THE LORD.
Psalm CXIII. — The Skeleton.
A | 1-. Hallelujah.
B Praise the Lord. j [Exhortation given.]
C | -i. Praise the name of the Lord. )
CI2, 3. Praise the name of the Lord, j [Exhortati(m ob and i
B | 4—9-. Praise the Lord. ) L J J
A | -9. Hallelujah.
ipsalm cxiv.
A When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange
language ; 2 Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion.
B 3 The sea saw it, and fled: Jordan w r as driven back. 4 The mountains skipped
like rams, and the little hills like lambs.
B 5 What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest P thou Jordan, that thou wast
driven back ? 6 Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams ; and ye little hills,
like lambs ?
A 7 Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the lord, at the presence of THE GOD
of Jacob; 8 Which turned the rock into a standing water, the flint into a foun-
tain of waters.
Psalm CXIY. — The Skeleton.
A | 1,2. The Lord’s mercies to Jacob.
B | 3, 4. The Sea, the Land.
B | 5, 6. The Sea, the Land.
A ) 7, 8. The Lord’s mercies to Jacob.
The structure of A and A is worthy of notice, being very marked in the Hebrew.— (Ed.)
T o-nino- f tL \ Israel from Egypt,
t. 1. r. goi gor 1 | The house of Jacob from a people of strange language.
t, \ Judah His sanctuary,
r. 2. Became j i srae l ffig dominior *
rr r\ i Before the face of the Lord,
x. 7. rem , ‘ 1 ’ | Before the face of the God of Jacob.
o t *. t-u i The rock into a pool of water,
r. 8. Yho turneth j The flinty rock water sp ; ings<


ssalm cxv.
A a | Not unto us, 0 Lord, not unto us,
b 1 but unto thy name give glory, for thy mercy, and for thy truth s sake.
B c| 2 Wherefore should the heathen say, Where is now their God ?
and 3 But our God is in the heavens: he hath done whatsoever he
hath pleased.
Be 4 Their idols are silver and gold, the work of men’s hands. 5 They
have mouths, but they speak not: eyes have they, but they see not.
6 They have ears, but they hear not: noses have they, but they smell
not; 7 They have hands, but they handle not; feet have
they walk not: neither speak they through their throat. 8 They
that make them are like unto them; so is every one that trusteth in
them.
and 9 0 Israel, trust thou in the Lord : he is their help and their
shield, io 0 house of Aaron, trust in the Lord : he is their help
and their shield, n Ye that fear the Lord, trust in the Lord :he
is their help and their shield. 12 The Lord hath been mindful of
us : he will bless us; he will bless the house of Israel; he will bless
the house of Aaron. 13 He will bless them that fear the Lord,
both small and great. 14 The Lord shall increase you more and
more, you and your children, i 3 Ye are blessed of the Lord which
made heaven and earth. 16 The heaven, even the heavens, are the
Lord’s: but the earth hath he given to the children of men.
A a 1 17 The dead praise not THE LORD, neither any that go down into silence.
h 18 But we will bless the Lord from this time forth and for evermore.
Praise THE LORD.
Psalm CXY.— The Skeleton.
A a]i-. Negative. | Object of praise.]
b | -i. Positive. ) L
B c| 2. Heathen theology.
and 1 3. Israelitish [theology].
B c 1 4—B. Heathen theology.
and 1 9 —16. Israelitish [theology].
A a \ 17. Negative. ) . . n
. . > [The givers of praise.]
b | 18. Positive, j L
The Editor suggests the following arrangement of c. (Compare Ps. cxxxv. 15 18):
c e 1 4-. The idols.
f 1 -4. Their fabrication.
g 1 5-. Mouth without speech. (Singular.)
h 1 -5. Eyes without sight. (Heh. “Eyes have they.”)
i | 6-. Ears without hearing. (Heh., “ Ears have they.”)
k | -6. Nose without smell. (Singular.)
i 1 7-. Hands without handling. (Heh., “There are their hands.”)
h | _y_ # Feet without walking. (Heh., “There are their feet.”)
,j 1 -7. Throat without voice. (Singular.)
f 1 8-. The fabricators.
e | -8. The idolaters.


Itealm cxvi.
A I love the Lord, because he hath heard my voice and my supplications.
2 Because he hath inclined Ins ear unto me, therefore will I call upon him as long
as I live.
B 3 The sorrows of death compassed me, and the pains of hell gat hold upon me :
I found trouble and sorrow.
C a| 4 Then called I upon the name of the Lord 1 ;
b | 0 Lord, I beseech thee, deliver my soul.
c 5 Gracious is the Lord, and righteous; yea, our God is merciful.
6 The Lord preserveth the simple :
and | I was brought low, and he helped me.
A 7 Return unto thy rest, 2 O my soul; for 3 the Lord hath dealt bountifully with
thee. 8 For 3 thou hast delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and
my feet from falling, 9 I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.
B io I believed, therefore have I spoken : I was greatly afflicted : 11 I said in my
haste, All men are liars.
C a 12 What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me?
13 I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord. 1
14 I will pay my vows unto the Lord nowin the presence of all his people.
c | 13 Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his saints.
b 16 0 Lord, truly I am thy servant; lam thy servant, and the son of
thine handmaid:
and | thou hast loosed my bonds.
a 17 I will offer to thee the sacrifice of thanksgiving, and will call upon the
name of the Lord. 1 18 I. will pay my vows unto the Lord now in the
presence of all his people, 19 In the courts of the Lord’s house, in the
midst of thee, O Jerusalem. Praise ye the LORD.
Psalm CXVI. —The Skeleton.
A | 1,2. Acknowledgment and resolution (-2). A | 7 —9. Acknowledgment and resolution (9).
B | 3. Afflictions. B | 10, 11. Afflictions.
■ . r £ -I 0 a | 12. Promise.
C a| 4- Promise [of prayer]. c I ! S . The Lord’s goodness to
b | -4. Prayer, [roil* run] I p[j g people.
c| 5, 6-. The Lord’s goodness to b 1 16 .. P r . [ nw ni «]
' l IS peopl o * and | -16. Goodness to me.
and | -6. His goodness to me. I a | 1 y — 1 g p ro mise [ o f praise].
1 And upon the name of the Lord I will call nin'-mril). 2 viz. v. 1. 3 because.
Itealm cxvii.
A ( Praise ye THE LORD (from Psalm cxvi. -19).
B | 0 praise the Lord, all ye nations :
C | praise him, all ye people.
G | 2 For his merciful kindness is great toward us:
B j and the truth of the Lord endureth for ever.
A | Praise ye THE LORD.
Psalm CXYII. —The Skeleton.
A | Psalm cxvi. -19. Hallelujah.
B ( i-. The Lord.
C | -1. Him.
C | 2-. His.
B | -2-. The Lord.
A | -2. Hallelujah.
Without taking the “ Praise ye the Lord” from Psalm cxvi. -19, where it belongs in fulfilment of
the promise of v. 17, the Psalm stands more simply thus : —(Ed.)
A | 1. Praise to Jehovah from the nations.
B | 2-. For His merciful kindness I , „ ,
B I -2-. For His abiding truth ) unto Hls Pe0 P le -
A | -2. Praise to Jehovah.


ssalm oxviii.
A 0 give thanks unto the Lord ; for he is good : because his mercy endureth for
ever. 2 Let Israel now say, that his mercy endureth for ever. 3 Let the house of
Aaron now say, that his mercy endureth for ever. 4 Let them now that fear t e
Lord say, that his mercy endureth for ever.
B a 5 I called upon THE LORD in distress: THE LORD answered me and set
me in a large place. 6 The Lord is on my side; I will not fear: what can
man do unto me ? 7 The Lord taketh my part with them that le pme .
therefore shall I see my desire upon them that hate me. _ .
bBlt is better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in man. 9 It is
better to trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes,
clO Ad nations compassed me about: but in the name of the Lord wi I
I destroy them. 1 1 They compassed me about; yea, they compassed
me about: but in the name of the Lord I will destroy them. 12 They
compassed me about like bees; they are quenched as the fire ot thorns:
for in the name of the Lord I will destroy them,
and 13 Thou hast thrust sore at me that I might fall: but the Lord
helped me. .
a I 14 THE LORD is my strength and song, and is become my salvation.
b 1 < The voice of rejoicing and salvation is in the tabernacles of t e
righteous: the right hand of the Lord doeth valiantly. 10 Ihe rig it
hand of the Lord is exalted: the right hand of the doeth vahan }.
c I 17 I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of iHE LORD.
and 18 THE LORD hath chastened me sore; but he hath not given me
over unto death.
BEh 19 Open to me the gates of righteousness; I will go into them, and I
will praise THE LORD: 20 This gate of the Lord, into which the
righteous shall enter. .
i I 211 will praise thee: for thou hast heard me, and art become my salvation
P k I 22 The stone which the builders refused is become the head stone
of the corner. .
1 23 This is the Lord’s doing; it is marvellous in our eyes.
24 This is the day which the Lord hath made; we will rejoice
and be glad in it.
G 1 23 Save now, I beseech thee, O Lord ;
g I 0 Lord, I beseech thee, send now prosperity.
F fc 26 Blessed he he that cometh in the name of the Lord ;we have
blessed you out of the house of the Lord.
I 1 27 God is the Lord, which hath shewed us light :
E h I bind the sacrifice with cords, even unto the horns of the altar.
i2B Thou art my God, and I will praise thee; thou art my God, 1 will
exalt thee.
A 1 29 0 give thanks unto the Lord ; for he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever.
Psalm CX VIII.— The Skeleton
A | I—4.1 —4. Exhortation to praise.
Ba | 5 —7. The Lord my help [JAH],
b | 8, 9. General truth.
c | 10 —13. Future deliverance,
and | 13. Past deliverance.
a | 14 The Lord my help [JAH].
b | 15, 16. General truth,
c | 17. Future deliverance.
and 1 18. Past deliverance.
B E I h | 19, 20. Injunction.
i | 21. Praise promised.
f Ik | 22. Honour to Christ. Matt. xxi. \2.
1 1 23, 24. Blessings traced to the Lord.
g | 25-. Pi’ayer.
o J -25. Prayer.
F I fc | 26. Honour to Christ. Matt. xxi. 9
I | 27-. Blessings traced to the Lord.
-P I | -27. Injunction.
| i 1 28. Praise promised.
A 1 29. Exhortation to praise.


Itaalm cxix.
N ALE PH.
M A I 1 Blessed are the undeHled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord.
B 1 B1 1 es ? e(i are the F that kee P his testimonies, and that seek him with
tne wnole heart.
1 3 («) They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways.
I) 1 4 («) Thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.
A I 5 00 0 that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!
B mandments 1 ashamed ’ when 1 have respect unto all thy com-
° 1 \ 1111I 111 ?T* se th ? e , with uprightness of heart, when I shall have
learned thy righteous judgments.
I 80) I will keep thy statutes: 0 forsake me not utterly.
The Skeleton op ALEPH.
A | i. They that walk in the way. -\
B | 2. They are blessed.
C | 3. They are upright. rThird person. General.
D | 4. They are commanded to keep. J
A | 5. My ways.
B | 6. I shall not be ashamed. I
C(7. I will be upright. j First P erson - Individual.
D|B. I will keep. j
1 BETH.
1 A 9 (5) Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto
according to thy word.
B a | 10 (a) With my whole heart have I sought thee:
b | 0 let me not wander from thy commandments.
a 11 (a) Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against
thee. &
6 | 12 (a) Blessed art thou, 0 Lord: teach me thy statutes.
a 13 (a) With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.
14 (a) I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all riches.*
A 13 (a) I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy ways.
16 (a) I will delight myself in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word.
The Skeleton of BETH.
!2 A| 9. The way to be cleansed by Thy word. (Future.)
B a | 10-. What I have done. My heart,
b | -10. Prayer (negative).
« | 11. What I have done. My heart.
h | 12. Prayer (positive).
a | 13, 14. What I have done. My lips.
A \ 15, 16. My way shall be cleansed by Thy word. (Future.)
H


5 GIMEL.
3 All 7 G) Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live, and keep thy word.
18 (a) Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law.
iq (a) I am a stranger in the earth: hide not thy commandments from me.
B 20 (a) My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy judgments at
all times. 21 (a) Thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed, which do
err from thy commandments.
A 1 22 (a) Remove from me reproach and contempt; for i have kept thy
I testimonies. ~ , , j.,
B 22 (a) Princes also did sit and speak against me: out thy servant did
meditate in thy statutes. 24 (a) Thy testimonies also are, my delight and
my counsellors. .
The Skeleton of GIMEL
5 A I 17—19. Prayers and Reasons. .
A p | 20, 21. Two-fold statement, concerning himself and the wicked.
A 1 22. Prayer and Reason. . ~
B 1 23, 24. Two-fold statement, concerning the wicked and hiraselt.
1 DALETH.
”T A a| 2 5 (l) My soul cleaveth unto the dust;
b I quicken thou me according to thy word.
K c| 26 ('i) I have declared rny ways, and thou heardest me :
and 1 teach me thy statutes.
and 1 27 (i) Make me to understand the way of thy precepts;
c I so shall I talk of thy wondrous works.
A a 1 28 (A) My soul melteth for heaviness :
b I strengthen thou me according unto thy word.
Be 29 (i) Remove from me the way of lying: and grant me thy law
graciously. , ,
f 30 (i) I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgments have
I laid before we. 31 ("0 1 have stuck unto thy testimonies .
e I 0 Lord, put me not to shame.
/ I 32, (n) I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou
1 shait enlarge my heart.
The Skeleton of DALETH.
“7 AI a 1 25-. Depression.
1 b 1 .25. Prayer.
B c | 26-. Profession as to the past,
and 1 -26. Prayer.
and j 27-. Prayer.
c | -27. Profession as to the future.
A I a | 28-. Depression.
h | -28. Prayer.
B e J 29. Prayer.
f | 30, 31-. Profession as to the past.
e | -31. Prayer.
/1 32. Profession as to the future.
n he.
nlAj a 1 33 (n) Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes; and I shall keep it
j wit j the end.
b | 34 (i"0 Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law;
B i yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart. ;
C 3d (n) Make me to go in the path of thy commandments; for
therein do I delight.
B j 36 (n) Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.
A' a 37 (n) Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; and quicken thou
me in thy way. 38 (n) Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted
to thy fear. 39 (n) Turn away my reproach which I fear: for thy judg-
ments are good.
h 1 40 (n) Behold, I have longed after thy precepts: quicken me in thy
1 righteousness.


The Skeleton of HE.
AI a I 33- Eyes. Make me see Thy way.
I b I 34-- Mind. Give me mental comprehension.
B | -34. Heart.
C | 35. Feet. Practical walking. Prayer and Reason.
B | 36. Heart.
Aa I 39 ' Eyes * 37 T u ™ awa y* 38 Hold up Thy word to my eyes, mind, and heart
I 39 Cause my reproach to pass from my eyes. * *
b J 40. Mind. Its desires.
*) YAH.
1A f { ’l Le * 4 7 m< T es come also unto me > 0 Lord, even thy salvation,
according to thy word. J ’
B 42 0) So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me • for
i trust m thy word.
A I 43 0) And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth ;
B for I have hoped in thy judgments. 44 (i) So shall I keep’thy law con-
tinually for ever and evem 45 0) And I will walk at liberty: for I seek
thy precepts. 46 (l) I will speak of thy testimonies also before kings, and
will not be ashamed. 47 (1) And I will delight myself in thy command-
ments, which I have loved. 48 (i) My hands also will I lift up unto thv
commandments, which I have loved; and I will meditate in thy statutes.
The Skeleton op YAU.
1 A | 41. Prayer. Positive.
B | 42. Plea and reason.
A | 43-. Prayer. Negative.
A I -43 —48. Reasons and pleas.
T ZAIN.
A 1 49 (?) Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou hast caused
me to hope.
El S m |^ is is m J comfort in affliction: for thy word hath quickened me.
51 (1)1 he proud have had me greatly in derision: yet have I not declined
irom thy law.
A 2 I myself l remembered judgments of old, 0 Lord; and have comforted
B 2 53 0) Horror hath taken hold upon me because of the wicked that forsake
tny Jaw. 54 (?) Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of mv nil-
gnmage. 0 J
A 3 1 haVe remembered th 7 name > 0 Lord, in the night, and have kept thy
® I
The Skeleton of ZAIK
t A 1 ( 49. Remember Thou. (-0?)
E 1 i S°> 5 1 * Statement as to consequence.
A 2 j 52. I remembered. f*m3?)
E I 53; 54- Statement as to consequence.
A 3 | 55. I have remembered. (*mD?)
B ! | 56. Statement as to consequence. (nsa)


m pp rp pp
. • n T rißii • T Lave paid tLat I would keep tLy
nA 57 (n) Thm ' Lour with whole heart: he merciful
words. 58 (m l mtreatea i y thought on my ways, and turned
"LXttisLoLls 6ofn) I made Imste. aud delayed not to keep
B ,hy 6 of the wicked hare robbed me: hut I have not forgotten
b\Z (nLtoLrtLoToC; is full of thy mercy: teach me thy statutes.
The Skeleton of CHETH.
fr a |cv 60. Prayer. The Lord my portion.
0 B 1 7 6 i Statement. What the wicked cannot take away.
ai a 2 6"?. Prayer. The Lord my praise. .
B I 64. Statement and prayer. What the Lord gives.
oI A I 6< (id) Thou hast dealt well wtththyLLant 0 Loro,
I B'a I 66 (id) Teach me good judgment and knowledge : for i have believed
lt y 6 7 “"as afflicted I went astray : but now have I kept thy
71 a 1 art good, and doest good; teach me thy statutes.
11 a I A
h 69 (to) ihe proud nave roigea * g f grease
precepts with my whole heart. 7°(“) ihe , ir ,heart is as g >
L I delight in thy law. 71 (to) « good for me that 1 have been
afflicted* that I might learn thy statutes. „ ~ ■,
A I 7 c (») The law of thy mouth « better unto me than thousands of gold and
I 1 silver. The Skeleton of TBTH.
B A l 6S ;^tyTu?;m°e d nts g ood-teachme. (Prayer and reason.)
B a l^ 67^ Wr and reason.)
h | 69—71. Afflictions good, and result.
A 1 72. Thy law good.
, a 73 (0 Thy hands have made me and*ashioned me: give me understanding,
O when they see me; because I have
mAhy wurA that thy judgments are right, and that thou in
faithfulness hast afflicted me. . , » cnmfort
D 76 0) Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comto t,
according to thy word unto thy servant.
D77 (>) Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that i may live, tor tny
0 js'oLenht proud he ashamed; for they dealt perversely with me
without a cause: but I will meditate in thy precepts
B 79 (>) Let those that fear thee turn unto me, and those that have know
A 1 8o*0) £ S t myhoart be sound in thy statutes; that I be not ashamed.
The Skeleton of JOD.
1 A B 7 ) 3 74^ r p y salmist ami*others; statement and plea. (‘ 4 They that fear Thee.’)
C 1 75. Affliction. (“I.”)
D | 76. Thy merciful kindness.
B | 77. Thy tender mercies.
B°\ others! Prayer. (“ They that fear Thee.”)
A | 80. Prayer. (“ I.”)


S CAPH.
D A C 81 (and) My soul fainteth for tliy salvation: hut I hope in thy word.
o 3 (and) Mine eyes fail for thy word, saying,
I) j When wilt thou, comfort me ?
G 8 3 (3) For lam become like a bottle in the smoke; yet do I not forget
thy statutes. 84 (3) How many 1 are the days of thy servant ?
D | when wilt thou execute judgment on them that persecute me?
B E '1 8 5(?) Tll f P roud liaYe digged pits for me, which are not after thy law.
h I 86 (D) All thy commandments are faithful:
JE l | they persecute me wrongfully;
F 3 | help thou me.
H 3 | 87 (3) They had almost consumed me upon earth;
F I forsook not thy precepts. 88 (and) Quicken mo after thy loving-
kindness ; so shall I keep the testimony of thy mouth.
The Skeleton of CAPH.
5 A C j 81, 82-. Two complaints, with intervening plea.
D | -82. Question. When comfort me ?
G | 83, 84-. Two_ complaints, with intervening plea.
-D j -84. Question. When judge my persecutors ?
13 E 1 | 85. Enemies. “They,” “me.”
F 1 | 86-. Statement. “Thy.”
E 2 | -86-. Enemies. “They,” “me.”
F 2 | -86. Prayer. “Thou.”
E s | 87-. Enemies, “They,” “me.”
F 3 | -87, 88. Statement and Prayer. “ Thy,” “ Thy,” “ Thy.”
h LAMED.
h A 89 CO For ever, 0 Lord, 2 thy word is settled in heaven. 90 (h) Thy faith-
fulness is unto all generations : thou hast established the earth, and it abideth.
91 (p) They continue this day according to thine ordinances: for all are thy
servants.
B 92 (b) Unless thy law had been my delights, I should have perished in
mine affliction.
C 93 (b) I will never forget thy precepts : for with them thou hast quick-
ened me.
G 94 (b) lam thine, save me; for I have sought thy precepts.
B 95 CO The wicked have waited for me to destroy me: hut I will consider
thy testimonies.
A 96 CO I have seen an end of all perfection : hut thy commandment is exceed-
ing broad.
The Skeleton of LAMED.
A 1 89—91. The word perfect and eternal.
13 I 92. Affliction cannot destroy my delight in it.
C | 93. Statement and Reason. (*2)
C Y | 94. Statement and Reason. (*d)
B | 95. The wicked cannot destroy my meditation in ft,
A | 96. The word perfect and eternal.
The first member, A, may be thus arranged :
A a I 89-. Jehovah eternal. > rr /T > i • >
b I -89. His Word established. } The Heavens ( Ps - lxxxix - 37)-
a I 90-. Jehovah’s faithfulness eternal. )m. -n i • \
b 1 -90, 91. The Earth established. J lhe Earth ( Ps< lxxxlx * 4)-
1 nas, v. 84, is not a question, hut an exclamation, <l llow few /” Compare aw, v. 87,
2 For ever art Thou, 0 Lord.


72 MEM.
72 A a| 97 (and) 0 how love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day.
h 98 (o) Thou through thy commandments hast made me wiser than mine
enemies: for they are ever with me. 99 have more understanding
than all my teachers: for thy testimonies are my meditation. 100 (a) I
understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy precepts.
B 101 (and) I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that 1 might 1
keep thy word.
B 102 (a) I have not departed from thy judgments: for thou hast
taught me.
A a 103 (p) How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yra, sweeter than honey
to ray mouth!
b 104 (a) Through thy precepts I get understanding: therefore I hate
every false way.
The Skeleton of MEM.
to A a ] 97. The Word of God precious.
b 1 98—100. The source of understanding, and Reasons.
B 1 101. The Psalmist’s practice (positive), and motive.
B 1 102. The Psalmist’s practice (negative), and reason.
A a 1 103. The Word of God precious.
h 1 104. The source of understanding, and Consequence.
“b,” verses 98—100, may be thus arranged:
c 1 98-. Wiser than mine enemies. (Past.)
and 1 -98. Reason. (Present.)
c 1 99-. More than my teachers. (Past.)
and 1 -99. Reason. (Present.)
k | 100-. Wiser than the aged. (Future.)
8 1 -100. Reason. (Past.)
: NUN.
2 A a I 103 (3) Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.
b 106 (3) i have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep iy
righteous judgments.
B 107 (3) lam afflicted very much: quicken me, 0 Lord, according
unto thy word. 108 (3) Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill offer-
ings of my mouth, 0 Lord, and teach me thy judgments.
B 109 0) My soul is continually in my hand: yet do I not forget thy
law. no (3) The wicked have laid a snare for me : yet I erred not
from thy precepts.
A a in (3) Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for evei . foi they are
the rejoicing of my heart.
h 112 (3) I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes alway, even
unto the end.
The Skeleton of NUN.
2 A a | 105. The Word my light.
b | 106. Purpose to keep it.
B 107, 108. Affliction, and prayer.
B 109, no. Dangers (positive), and protestations (negative).
(Compare v. 109 with 1 Sam. xix $•)
AI a | 111. The Word my heritage and joy.
I b | 112. Purpose to keep it.
I A. V. Ed. 1611, “ that I may keep.” Eds. since 1638, “ that I might keep.”


D SAMECH.
D A xl3 (and) I hate vain thoughts : hut thy law do I love. 114 (and) Thou art mv
hiding place and my shield ; I hope in thy word.
B I "<5 (D) Depart from me, ye evildoers : for I will keep the commandments
I ot rny Hod.
C 116 (and) Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live • and let
me not be ashamed of my hope.
G 117 (D) Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe : and I will have respect
unto thy statutes continually.
B V 8 Thoa hwt trodden down all them that err from thy statutes : for
their deceit is falsehood. 119 (and) Thou puttest away all the wicked of the
earth Like dross: therefore I love thy testimonies.
A 1 120 (and) My flesh trembleth for fear of thee; and lam afraid of thy iudtr-
j ments. J J b
The Skeleton of SAMECH.
D A | 113, 114. Protestations, “I.”
13 j 115. Address to evildoers concerning God.
C | 116. Uphold me. From above or without. (u3ob)
C I ii 7* Uphold me. From beneath or within. (*jijid)
B j 118, 119. God addressed concerning evildoers.
A | 120. Protestations, “I.”
V AIN.
y A 121 (it) I have done judgment and justice: leave me not to mine oppressors.
122 (it) Be surety for thy servant for good: let not the proud oppress me.
B 123 (it) Mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the word of thy
righteousness.
C 124 (it) Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy, and teach me
thy statutes. 125 (it) lam thy servant; give me understanding, that
I may know thy testimonies.
A | 126 (it) It is time for thee, Lord, to work 1 : for they have made void thy law.
B 127 (it) Therefore I love thy commandments above gold; yea, above fine
gold. 128 (it) Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to
he right; and
G | 1 hate every false way.
The Skeleton op AIN.
y A | 121, 122. What I have done, and prayer (negative).
13 1 123. Desire for the Word.
0 | 124, 125. Thy servant’s prayer.
A | 126. Time lor the Lord to work, and plea (positive).
B j 127, 128-. Love for the Word.
(J | -128. Thy servant’s resolve.
D PE.
C A 129 (a) Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore doth my soul keep them.
130 (a) The entrance of thy words giveth light; it giveth understanding unto
the simple.
13 1 (a) I opened my mouth, and panted: for I longed for thy commandments
B 132 (a) Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do
unto those that love thy name.
B 133 (a) Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity have
dominion over me. 134 (a) Deliver me from the oppression of man: so
will I keep thy precepts. 135 (a) Make thy face to shine upon thy servant;
and teach me thy statutes.
A ] 136 (a) Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law.
The Skeleton op PE.
S A | 129, 130. Statements (concerning the word).
13 | 131, 132. Prayer. (Righteous).
B | 133 —135. Prayer. (Wicked.)
A 1 136. Statement (concerning the word.)
1 Might not this be rendered “It is time to work for the Lord," see John ix, 4, and
cf. the ixx. here.— (Ed.)


2 TZADDI.
A 1 137 0) Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments.
138 (y) Thy testimonies that thou hast commanded are righteous and very
faithful.
B l I 139 (y) My zeal hath consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten
j thy words.
A 2 | 140 (y) Thy word is very pure: therefore thy servant loveth it.
B 2 | 14 1 (y) lam small and despised: yet do not I forget thy precepts.
A 3 142 ( 'y ) Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is the
truth.
B 3 143 00 Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me: yet thy command-
ments are my delights.
A 4 144 00 The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting; give me under-
standing, and I shall live.
The Skeleton of TZADDI.
A 1 | 137, 138. Thy word righteous,
B 1 | 139. I, consumed.
A 2 | 140. Thy word pure.
B 2 j 141. I, despised.
A 3 j 142. Thy word truth.
B 3 | 143. I, consumed.
A 4 | 144. Thy word righteous.
P KOPH AND 1 RESH.
p A 143 (p) I cried with my whole heart; hear me, O Lord ; I will keep xhy
statutes. 146 (p) I cried unto thee; save me, and I shall keep thy
testimonies. 147 (p) I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried :
1 hoped in thy word. 148 (p) Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that
I might meditate in thy word. 149 (p) Hear my voice according unto thy
lovingkindness : O Lord, quicken me according to thy judgment.
B 130 (p) They draw nigh that follow after mischief ; they are far from thy
law. 151 (p) Thou art near, O Lord; and all thy commandments are
truth.
C 152 (p) Concerning thy testimonies, I have known of old that thou hast
founded them for ever.
1 A 133 (“)) Consider mine affliction, and deliver me : for Ido not forget thy law.
134 (3) Plead my cause, and deliver me : quicken me according to thy word.
B 1k K ("i) Salvation is far from the wicked; for they seek not thy statutes.
136 O) Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord : quicken me according to
thy judgments. 137 O) Many are my persecutors and mine enemies; yet
do I not decline from thy testimonies. 138 (l) I beheld the transgressors,
and was grieved; because they kept not thy word. 139 0) Consider how
I love thy precepts : quicken me, O Lord, according to thy lovingkindness.
C 160 (l) Thy word is true f rom the beginning: and every one of thy
righteous judgments endureth for ever.
The Skeleton of KOPH and RESH.
pA j 145—149. The Psalmist’s cry.
B j 150, 151. God near Psalmist. Foes nigh.
C 1 152. The Word established for ever.
A 1 153, 154. The Psalmist’s cry.
B | 135 —159. God far from wicked. Foes many.
CJ 160. The Word established for ever.


& SCHIN.
A 1 161 (tr) Princes have persecuted me without a cause : but my heart standeth
in awe of thy word.
B j 162 (ut) I rejoice at thy word, as one that findeth great spoil.
A (ty) I hate and abhor lying: but thy law do I love.
B I 164 (ty) Seven times a day do I praise thee because of thy righteous iudff-
| ments. J *
A 3 165 (m) Great peace have they which love thy law : and nothing shall offend
them.
B 166 (ttf) Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy commandments.
i. 6? (u?) My soul hath kept thy testimonies; and I love them exceedingly.
168 (ti>) I have kept thy pi’ecepts and thy testimonies : for all my ways are
before thee.
The Skeleton of SCHIN.
A 1 | 161. Contrastive statement.
B 1 | 162. Praise.
A 2 | 163. Contrastive statement.
B 2 | 164. Praise.
A 3 | 165. Contrastive statement.
B 3 | 166 —168. Prayer,
D TAIL
A 169 (n) Let my cry come near before thee, 0 Lord: give me understanding
according to thy word. 170 (n) Let my supplication come before thee:
deliver me according to thy word.
B 1 171 (n) My lips shall utter praise, when thou hast taught me thy statutes,
x 72 (n) My tongue shall speak of thy word: for all thy commandments are
righteousness.
A 2 I 1 73 0"0 Bet thine hand help me; for I have chosen thy precepts.
B 2 | i 74 0"0 I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord ; and thy law is my delight,
j *7.5 (P) Bet my soul live, and it shall praise thee; and let thy judgments
help me.
j B 3 | 176 (n) I have gone astray like a lost sheep ;
!A 4 | seek thy servant; for Ido not forget thy commandments.
The Skeleton op TAXI,
jn A 1 | 169, 170. Prayers (“Let,” “Let’) and pleas, 2 (“according,” “according”).
B 1 | 171, 172. Statements (Promises of praise, “I,” >3, »3).
A 2 J 173. Prayer (“Let”) and plea, >3.
B 2 | 174. Statements (“ 1 ”).
A 3 | 175. Prayers (“Let,” “Let”).
B 3 | 176-. Statement (“Confession, “I”).
A 4 | -176. Prayer and plea, >3.
Notes on Psalm CXIX.
The Author has left nothing in manuscript concerning this Psalm, and it was originally
intended to print it as it stands in all our printed Bibles. But the Editor has been led to offer an
arrangement of his own, with the following notes upon the structure of this Psalm.
It is one of the so-called acrostic Psalms. It consists of 176 Massoretic verses, divided into
twenty-two groups. Each group thus consists of eight verses, and each of these eight verses begins
with the same letter. For example, the first eight verses each begin with Aleph, m (A), the second
eight verses each begin with Beth, a (B), and so on through the alphabet. As the Hebrew alpha-
bet consists of hventy-tivo letters, there is thus one letter for each group. It is next to impossible
to carry this out in another language, except by a very free translation, or at the expense of
accuracy. It may, however, be illustrated ; for it so happens that the ninth portion (verses 6$ —72),
in which each verse begins in Hebrew with Teth, id (T), also begins in the Authorised Version with
the letter Tin every verse but two, viz., 67 and 71. If we change the word “Before” (v. 67)
to Till, and the words “It is” (v. 71) to ’ Tin, then it will exactly represent the Hebrew
original:—
65. Thou hast dealt well with thy servant, 0 Lord,
according unto thy word.
66. Teach me good judgment and knowledge :
for I have believed thy commandments.


6-. Till I ivas afflicted I went astray: j kept % word ,
68. Thou art good, and doest good; ftjr
69. The proud have forged a lie against me: my „ hole heart ,
7 0. Their heart is as fat as grease; k fty Uw
7.. ’Tit good for me that I have been afflicted;; fty statutcs .
73. The law of thy mouth is better unto rf and silrer
Another peculiarity in the structure of Ps. cxix. is the recurrence of Ten to
the “Ten Words” of the Law given at Sinai). These have been so variously numbered and cited
hv expositors that we prefer to give them on the authority of the Massorah. , t tt +
7 The llubrick, on verse 122, is as follows Throughout the whole of the great alphabet
[i e the Alphabetic Psalm, cxix.] there is in every verse one of the following ten expressions.
L, ’ (Derech P Way), m» (Eduth, Testimony). D'nfß (Pikkudeem, npm (Mitzvah,
dlmandnLnts), (Imrah, Saying), noin (Torah. (Mishpat a oommant
It ¥ Ue„asness), pn (Chok. Statutes). (Davar, Word), which correspond to th Ten Command
ments: except one verse in which there is none of these, viz., verse 122. ( assora ,
Gm! The of the Psalm is based on these “Ten Words,” and yet there are no vain
repetitions. We give a brief definition of each. . ..
1. “ Wav,” Tpi (Derech), from to tread with the feet, means the act of treading or wa
in,j ; a going, wag, or journeying. It occurs thirteen times, viz., verses I, 3,5, 14.
3 ’ 3 2 3 _’ “ 7 Testimonies,” rin? (Edoth), occurs fourteen times (always in plural). It is from tv, to
turn back again, go over again, to say again and again, reiterate, hence to testify. tot 1 ereore
means that the Law is the Lord’s own testimony and witness concerning Himself and His attribu .
, « Precepts,” Q'7?e (Pikkudeem) (only found in the Psalms) occurs twenty-one times (aiwajs
plural). It is from igß, to strike or light upon any person or thing ; hence, to goto see, to visit,
to inspect, to superintend: then to give the oversight, enjoin. The pikkudeem are t e man ats or
things which God has charged His people with, and enjoined upon them, „
4. “ Commandments,” ntp (Mitzvah) occurs twenty-two times (all plural but one). Irom
nu? to setup, constitute, appoint, to command. Hence, Mitzvah means a
5. “Word,” Pro* (Imrah) occurs nineteen times, and is rendered “Word.’ {“Hoi s
only once, cf. Ps. xii. 6, the only other place in the Psalms where the plural is found). Hence we
must give the verses, in order to distinguish it from No. 10, w (Davar), viz., verses t i 38, 41,
50, 58,67, 76, 82, 103 {pi.), 116, 123, 133, 140, 148, 154, 158, 162, 170 and 172. ewo
expressions for the one translation thus occur forty-two times (6 * 7). Imrah, is from . T ,
to bring forth, bring to light, hence to say. Unlike ™it is followed by the words spoken. Hence,
Imrah means a saying, the word by which a revelation is imparted, while Davar (No. ioj
refers to the substance or the subject-matter of that revelation.
6. “Law,” rrjin (Torah) occurs twenty-five times (always singular). It is from to projec,
and hence, to point out, to show (Prov. vi. 13), then to instruct, teach. The Torah contains t e
Instructions of Jehovah to His people, pointing out to them His will. _ . „
7. “ Judgment,” ©Binn (Mishpat) occurs twenty-three times (always in plural except tour
times). It is from tDE®, to set upright, erect (Germ, richten), hence, to judge. Mishpat means
- judgment. _ ,■.
8. “ Righteousness,” P 7? (Tzedek) occurs twelve times, 123, 142 (second), v. 144. 1 7 2 , ren
“ righteous ,” verses 7, 62, 106, 138, 160, 164 ; “ right,'’ verse 75 ; “justice,’ verse 121. Aso e
form npT2 (Tzedakah), verses 40 and 142 (first). It is from pjs, to be right, straight, t en,
upright, just, righteous. Hence, the noun means rightness, straightness, what is right and just.
9. “Statutes,” pn (Chok) occurs twenty-one times (always plural). It is from PPTJ, to xew,
hack, cut in, engrave, inscribe; hence, to decree. “Chok,” therefore, is a decree or oidinance.
10. “Word,” "127 (Davar) occurs twenty-four times (three of them in plural), and is rendere
“Word” or “Words” {viz., verses 9, 16, 17, 25, 28, 42 {twice), 43, 49, 57 {pl-)> 65, 74, 81, 89,
101, 105, 107, 114, 130 (pi.), 139 (pl.), 147, 160, 161, and 169. It is from w, to arrange in a
row, set forth, then to speak. It refers to the utterance, the subject-matter of the revelation, not
to the mode or words by which it is imparted.—(Ed.)


s)salm cxx.
A Song of degrees.
A 4 J | In r?Y distress 1 cried unto tbe Lord, and he heard me.
B C o ß Wu\ m J T*!’ ° LORD, fl>om Ji P s > an ' l from a deceitful tongue.
false tono? e a ? ? ° r what shall be done onto thee, thou
G 4 Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper.
£ M ° e IS t ? e L tbat 1 sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar!
6 My soul hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace
A I 7 1 am f or peace: but when I speak, they are for war.
Psalm CXX.—The Skeleton.
A | i. Treatment from the Lord.
B | 2. Soul, Lips, Tongue.
C | 3, Question.
C 1 4. Answer.
B | 5, 6. Mesech, Kedar, Soul.
X | 7. Treatment from men.
;• a . nd prayer a ? d Toestion are concerning the deliverance of the soul from lying
hps and a deceitful tongue. The answer in C and Eis in the reverse order 5 g
in perfect ori*?® ? EGKE ? s /- lhe y f e fifteen in number, and are doubtless arranged
in perfect order. Ihe eighth (cxxvu.) or central Psalm is the only one of them inscribed “for
. olomon. There are seven on either side, and in each seven, two are “ for David.” In each seven
cl?h sevenr e in f fhe JEH 7Tp T C TL tWe L ty ' f ° Ur !™ eS and “ jAH ” OUCe (in the third Psalm of
tacn se\en). In the ceulral Psalm Jehovah occurs three times.
Ihe word ’translated “ degrees” is from the root to ascend, go up. It is the usual word
th ? C t pt,,lty (E f a TA- 9) «a of up to the Feasts at Jerusalem These
liiT J -f a PP i :°P na f e to any past going up; and , prolcptically, to the great going up for which
■ f^ aits ; J . he oUt f a 7 d ±orill °f these Psalms corresponds with the inward mea'ning, for there
is a constant going up of the words by repetition, in the use of the figures Place, Epiploce, Polyptoton,
<aLau\ TihT' 1 a U ? find nowhere else to the same extent. There is also a constant
L h der H se Bsalrns in degrees, or related classes; for these fifteen Psalms
I L nrir? u fiVe S f S ? > ? ach set ihe^rst Psalm s P eak « of distress,
fLo Ll! ’- H " lty; th f. S f C0 T jrf s , ets forth Jehovah as the only hope; while the third describes
n g aU i P® ac ,® v 7 hlch Israel enters into, and enjoys in connection with Zion and Jeru-
Vl ° + D if ° r and ° f ?i Se f e meatlotied m the last Psalm of each set (except Ps. cxxxi.), and
in all the three Psalms of the last or fifth set.—(Ed.) 1 ”
Itealm cxxi.
A Song of degrees.
A | i 1 will lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence
B ( cometh my help.
B | 2 My help cometh
A | from the Lord, which made heaven and earth.
C 3 He will not suffer thy foot to be moved : he that keepeth thee will not slumber.
4 Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep.
1) | 5 The Lord is thy keeper: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand.
C | 6 The sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night.
I Ti he 4° RI) sbab P reserre fbee from all evil : he shall preserve thy soul.
8 Ihe Lord shall preserve thy going out and thy coming in from this time
forth, and even for evermore.
Psalm CXXI. — The Skeleton.
A ( 1-. Whence help expected.
B ( -1. Help.
B | 2-. Help.
A 1 -2. Whence help expected.
C ( 3, 4- Negative.
1) | 5. Positive.
C | 6. Negative.
D | 7, 8. Positive.
n „„ iP tf is , t , he of the same word; Epiploce is the repetition of the same word more than
pZL VJn ■ He of * he same word in different tenses, moods, numbers or cases;
Paronomasia is the repetition ot similar words.—(Ed.)


ssalm cxxii.
A Song of degrees of David.
A 1 i I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Loed.
B 1 2 Our feet shall stand within thy gates, 0 Jerusalem,
C | 3 Jerusalem is budded as a city that is compact together:
D 4 Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of THE LORD, unto the testimony
of Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord.
J) For there are set thrones of judgment, the thrones of the house of David.
C 1 6 Pray for the peace of Jerusalem:
B they shall prosper that love thee. 7 R eace within thy walls, prosperity
within thy palaces. 8 For my brethren and companions’ sakes, I will now say,
Peace he within thee.
A 1 9 Because of the house of the Lord our God I will seek thy good.
Psalm CXXII.— The Skeleton.
A | i. The House of the Lord.
B ] 2. Jerusalem spoken to.
C | 3. Jerusalem spoken of.
D 1 4. Description.
D | 5. Description.
C 1 6-. Jerusalem spoken of.
B 1 -6 —B. Jerusalem spoken to.
A j 9. The House of the Lord.
ssalm cxxiii.
A Song of degrees.
A a j i Unto thee lift lup mine eyes, 0 thou that dwellest in the heavens.
b [ 2 Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters,
h | and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress;
a j so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God,
B j until that he have mercy upon us.
B | 3 Have mercy upon us, 0 Lord, have mercy upon us:
A c | for we are exceedingly filled
and j with contempt.
c j 4 Our soul is exceedingly filled
and with the scorning of those that are at ease, and with the contempt of the
proud.
Psalm CXXIII— The Skeleton.
A a | 1. Eyes.
b 1 2-. Servants.
h j -2-. Servants.
a j -2-. Eyes.
B 1 -2. Mercy.
B J 3-. Mercy.
A c | -3-. Fulness.
and | -3. Contempt,
c 1 4-. Fulness.
and | -4. Contempt.


ssalm cxxiv.
A Song of degrees of David.
A i If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, now may Israel say; 2lf it
had not been the Loud who was on our side, when men rose np against us:
B 1 1 3 Then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us:
B 2 | 4 Then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul:
B & | 3 Then the proud waters had gone over our soul.
A 6 Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us as a prey to their teeth. 7 Our
soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers : the snare is broken, and
we are escaped. 8 Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and
earth.
Psalm CXXIV. — The Skeleton.
A f 1, 2. The Lord’s help.
B 1 [3. Danger. [n«]
B 2 |4. Danger. [*m]
B 3 1 5. Danger. [*m]
A 1 6—B. The Lord’s help.
ssalm cxxv.
A Song of degrees.
A i They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed,
hut abideth for ever. 2 As the mountains are round about Jerusalem, so the Lord
is round about his people from henceforth even for ever. 3 For the rod of the
wicked shall not rest upon the lot of the righteous; lest the righteous put forth
their hands unto iniquity.
B j 4 Do good, 0 Lord,
C j unto those that be good, and to them that are upright in their hearts.
C | 3 As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways,
B } the Lord shall lead them forth with the workers of iniquity:
A J hut peace shall be upon Israel.
Psalm CXXV. — The Skeleton.
A 1 I—3.1 —3. The security of God’s people.
B j 4-. The Lord.
C j -4. The upright.
C 1 5-. The perverse.
B | -5-. The Lord.
A | -5. The security of God’s people.


ssalm cxxvi.
A Song of degrees.
A i When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we were like 1 them that
dream.
B 2 Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing : then
said they among the heathen, The Lord hath done great things for them.
3 The Lord hath done great things for us ; whereof 2 we are glad.
A | 4 Turn again our captivity, 0 Lord, as 1 the streams in the south.
B 5 They that sow in tears shall reap in joy. 6He that goeth forth and weepeth,
bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his
sheaves with him.
Psalm CXXYL—The Skeleton.
A | i. Turning of captivity, and comparison.
B 1 2,3. Joy.
A | 4. Turning of captivity, and comparison.
B \ 5,6. Joy.
The second member, B, may be arranged thus :
B a| 2 Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with singing :
b | then said they among the heathen. The Lord hath done great things for them,
h | 3 The Lord hath done great things for us;
a 1 we are glad.
The Skeleton of B.
B a | 2-. Gladness.
b | -2. Great things.
& | 3-. Great things.
a 1 -3. Gladness.
And the fourth, B, thus :
B c | 5 They that sow in tears
and 1 shall reap in joy.
c j 6 He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing precious seed,
and j shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his sheaves with him.
The Skeleton of B.
B e | 5-. Sowing in tears,
and | -5. Reaping in joy.
c | 6-. Sowing in tears.
and | -6. Reaping in joy.
1 “ like,” as in v. I (3).
2 Omit the italics “ whereof” and read, as a separate sentence, “We are glad.”


ssalm cxxvii.
A Song of degrees for Solomon.
A | 1 Except the Lord build the house, they labour in vain that build it:
B except the Lord keep the city, the watchman waketh hut in vain.
B 2 It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows :
for so he giveth his beloved sleep.
A \ 3 Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: and the fruit of the womb is his
j reward.
C | 4 As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man;
D | so are children of the youth.
G | 5 Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them:
D | they shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate.
Psalm CXXYIL— The Skeleton.
A [ i-, House.
B ( -1, Watchman.
B | 2. Watchfulness.
A | 3 Household.
C | 4-. Arrows, *vaj (Metaphorical.)
D [ -4. Children, (Plain.)
C | 5-. Quiver, “113 (Metaphorical.)
D | -5. Children. (Plain.)
The second and third members, B and B, may be thus arranged:—(Ed.)
B a | except the Lord keep the city,
b | the watchman waketh but in vain.
B h j 2 It is vain for you to rise up early, to sit up late, to eat the bread of sorrows:
a J for 1 so 2 he giveth his beloved sleep. 3
The Skeleton of B and B.
B | a | -i-. The Lord our Watcher. (iaur)
I b | -1. Vain watching, (loim)
B [ b | 2-. Yain watching.
I a J -2. The Lord our Watcher.
1 Omit “/or.” 2 p “ Thus ,” leferring to what follows.
3 Remembering that the Heb. tom is an adverbial accusative, “ sleeping,” or “in sleep,” the
contrast comes out clearly:— “Thus He (who neither slumbers nor sleeps cxxi. 4) giveth to His
beloved—while they sleep'' Teaching us that others, with all their toil and watching, are not His
beloved, and therefore all their labour is in vain.
The word beloved, i'i* ( Yedid ), is the name given by God to Solomon (Yedidiah), “ beloved of
the Lord " (see 2 Sam. xii. 25). The word “ beloved " here is in the singular, “ his beloved one."
This is the central Psalm of the fifteen “ Songs of degrees ”: the one round which the others
are grouped—seven on either side. It is inscribed “ for Solomon”: and Solomon knew, by personal
experience, how God gave to him abundance of blessings, “ thus—even in sleep (1 Kings iii. 5 —15).
So God gives now to “His beloved.” Thus He gave to Adam (Gen. ii. 21, 22) a bride ; to
Abraham (Gen. xv. 12 —16) a seed innumerable, and builds up His spiritual house to all
generations.- (I'd.)


ssalm cxxviii.
A. Song of degrees.
A | i Blessed is every one that feareth the Lord ; that walketh in his ways.
B 2 For thou shalt eat the labour of thine hands : happy shall thou be, and it
shall he well with thee. 3 Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of
thine house : thy children like olive plants round about thy table.
A | 4 Behold, that thus shall the man be blessed that feardth the Lord.
B 5 The Lord shall bless thee out of Zion: and thou shalt see the good of
Jerusalem all the days of thy life. 6 Yea, thou shalt see thy children’s children,
and peace upon Israel.
Psalm CXXYIIL— The Skeleton.
A | 1. Third person.
B | 2,3. Second person.
A ] 4. Third person.
B | 5, 6. Second person.
Without altering these four divisions, the Editor offers the following extended arrangement;—
A | 1. Blessing. Spoken of.
B a | 2-. Thou. T
b | -2-. Thy wife. > Spoken to.
c 1 -2. Thy children. '
A |4. Blessing. Spoken of.
B a | 5-. Zion. T
b 1 -5. Jerusalem. > Spoken to.
c | 6. Children’s children. '
ssalm cxxix.
A Song of degrees.
A 1 Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth, may Israel now say:
2 Many a time have they afflicted me from my youth:
B 1 yet they have not prevailed against me.
A 1 3 The plowers plowed upon my hack : they made long their farrows.
B 4 The Lord is righteous :he hath cut asunder the cords of the wicked. 5 Let
them all he confounded 5 and turned hack that hate Zion. 6 Let them be as
the grass 2 upon the housetops, which withereth afore it groweth up. 7 "W”here-
with the mower filleth not his hand; nor he that bindeth sheaves his bosom.
8 Neither do they which go by say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you: we
bless you in the name of the Lord.
Psalm CXXIX.— The Skeleton.
A 1 1, 2-. Hostility.
B | -2. Failure.
A 1 3. Hostility.
B \ 4—B. Failure.
2 They shall he as the grass.
1 They shall all be confounded.


Psalm cxxx.
A Song of degrees.
A i Out of the depths liave I cried unto thee, 0 Lord. 2 Lord, hear* my voice : let
thine ears he attentive to the voice of my supplications, 3 If thou, LORD,
shouldest mark iniquities, O Lord, who shall stand P
B | 4 But 1 there is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be feared.
A 5 I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I hope. 6My soul
waiteth for the Lord more than they that watch for* the morning: I say, more than
they that watch for the morning. 7 Let Israel hope in the Lord:
B for with the Lord there is mercy, and with him is plenteous redemption.
8 And he shall redeem Israel from all his iniquities.
Psalm CXXX.— The Skeleton.
A | I—3, Looking to God.
B| 4. The reason. [»n]
A ( 5 7-. Looking to God.
B J -7, 8 The reason. [*d]
1 *D, 11 for," as in verse -7.
Psalm cxxxi.
A Song of degrees of David.
A | 1 Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine eyes lofty:
B | neither do I exercise 1 myself in great matters, or in things too high for me.
B 2 Surely I have behaved and quieted myself, as a child that is weaned of his
mother:
A | my soul is even as a weaned child.
G | 3 Let Israel hope in the Lord from henceforth and for ever.
Psalm CXXXI.— The Skeleton.
A | 1-. What lam not. My heart. ) ~
B J -1. What I have not done. I. 5
B I 2-. What I have done. I. )t, ...
, , { Positive.
A I -2. What I am. My soul. )
[C | 3. Post-scriptum.]
Psalms cxxx. and cxxxi. may be shown to correspond thus (Ed.) :
A ] I—6.1 —6. Prayer.
Psalm cxxx. „ , „ TT
B | 7, 8. Hope.
Psalm cxxxi. A I r ’ 2 * Pra r er -
B j 3. Hope.
1
1 Neither have I exercised.


ssalm cxxxii.
A Song of degrees.
A i Lord, remember David, and all his afflictions : 2 How he sware unto the Lord,
and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob; .
B 3 Sarely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my
bed; 4 I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids, 5 U
I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jaco .
C 6 Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah: we found it in the fields of the uood.
7 We will go into his tabernacles; we will worship at his footstool.
D 1 8 Arise, 0 Lord, into thy rest; thou, and the ark of thy strength.
E | 9 Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness,
F I and let thy saints shout for joy. .
G- 10 For thy servant David’s sake turn not away the face ot thin
Anointed. ~ , ... . , .. , ..
AI 11 The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David ; he will not turn from 1 ;
B Of the fruit of thy body will 1 set upon thy throne. 12 If thy children will
keep my covenant and my testimony that I shall teach them, t eir cll ren
shall also sit 1 upon thy throne for evermore.
GI 13 For the Lord hath chosen Zion; he hath desired it for his habitat .
J) 14 This is my rest for ever ; here will I dwell; for I have desired it. 5
will abundantly bless her provision; I will satisfy her poor with bread.
F \ 16 1 will also clothe her priests with salvation;
F I and her saints shall shout aloud for joy. , .•,
G 17 There will I make the horn of David to bud; 1 have ordained a
lamp for mine Anointed. 18 His enemies will I clothe with shame :
but upon himself shall his crown flourish.
Psalm CXXXII.— The Skeleton.
A | I, 2. David sware to Jehovah.
p ! , c. What David sware. , . r
C|6, 7. Search for and discovery of the dwelling-place. [vnU3mo7j
D 1 8. Prayer to enter into rest. [inniiDp]
E | 9-. Prayer for priests.
F I -g. Prayer for saints.
G | 10. Prayer for [the] Anointed. frnmnoj
A\ ti-. Jehovah sware to David.
J} j -n, 12. What Jehovah sware. _
C 1 13. Designation of the dwelling-place, [l7 mnob]
D 1 14, 15. Answer to prayer to enter into rest. [*nrroo]
E | 16-. Answer to prayer for priests.
F I -16. Answer to prayer for saints.
Q | 17, 18. Answer to prayer for [the] Anointed. [>mira7J
cxxxiii.
A Song of degrees of David.
A| r Behold,how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!
B a I 2 It is like* the precious ointment upon the head
b that ran down 3 upon the beard, even Aaron s beard: that went
the skirts of his garments;
B a I 3 As the dew of Herman,
h | and as the dew that descended upon the mountains ot Znon:
A j for there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.
Psalm CXXXIII.—The Skeleton.
A | 1. Blessings of unity. Good. Pleasant.
B | a | 2-. Comparison to ointment.
j h | -2. Descent of ointment. [TVm]
J? I a | 3-. Comparison to dew.
j b | -3-. Descent of dew. [wtr]
A 1 -3. Blessings of unity. Blessing. Life.
lln Ed. 1611, “ also shall sit in Eds. since 1762, “ shall also sit ”
* 3 , “ like” as in verse 3-, “ 3 W,as in verse -3, descended.


Itealm cxxxiv.
A Song of degrees.
A j i Behold, bless ye the Lord,
B all ye servants of the Lord,
B which 1 by night stand in the house of the Lord.
A | 2 Lift up your hands in the sanctuary, and bless the Lord.
C | 3 The Lord that made heaven and earth bless thee out of Zion.
Psalm CXXXIV.— The Skeleton.
A I i-. Exhortation to bless.
B | -i-. The persons exhorted.
B j -i. The persons exhorted.
A 1 2. Exhortation to bless.
[C 1 4. Post-scriptum.]
1 Ye which.
cxxxv.
A | Praise ye THE LORD.
B Praise ye the name of the, Lord ; praise him , Oye servants of the Lord. 2 Ye
that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of our God,
3 Praise THE LORD; for the Lord is good: sing praises unto his name; for
it is pleasant.
C a 4 For THE LORD hath chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his
peculiar treasure.
b 5 For I know that the Lord is great, and that o-u-r L-o-r-d is above all
gods. _ 6 Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven, and in
earth, in the seas, and all deep places. 7 He causeth the vapours to
ascend from the ends of the earth; he maketh lightnings for the rain;
he bringeth the wind out of his treasuries. 8 Who smote the firstborn
of Egypt, both of man and beast. 9 Who sent tokens and wonders into
the midst of thee, 0 Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his servants.
10 Who smote great nations, and slew mighty kings; ir Sihon king
of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan:
12 And gave their land for an heritage, an heritage unto Israel his people.
D | 13 Thy name, 0 Lord, endureth for ever;
D | and thy memorial, O Lord, throughout all generations.
C a 14 For the Lord will judge his people, and he will repent himself con-
hcerning his servants.
b 15 The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men’s hands.
16 They have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see
not; 17 They have ears, but they hear not; neither is there any breath
in their mouths. 18 They that make them are like unto them: so is
every one that trusteth in them.
B 19 Bless the Lord, 0 house of Israel: bless the Lord, 0 house of Aaron :
20 Bless the Lord, 0 house of Levi: ye that fear the Lord, bless the Lord.
21 Blessed be the Lord out of Zion, which dwelleth at Jerusalem.
A | Praise ye THE LORD.
Psalm CXXXV. —The Skeleton.
A | i-. Hallelujah.
B | --3.1 —3. Servants of the Lord, &c., exhorted to praise the Lord,
C I a | 4. The Lord’s dealings with His People.
| b | 5 —12. The Lord’s superiority over idols.
D I 13-. Address to the Lord.
D | -13. Address to the Lord.
C I a | 14. The Lord’s dealings with His People.
| b | 15—18. The Lord’s superiority over idols.
B | 19-21-. House of Israel, &c., exhorted to bless the Lord
A | -21. Hallelujah.
The Editor suggests the following arrangement of b ( v. 15 18) (compare Ps. cxv, 4 —8) :
b c | 15-. The idols.
and | -15. Their fabrication,
e | 16-. Mouth without speech,
f I -16. Eyes without sight.
/1 17-. Ears without hearing.
e | -17. Mouth without breath,
and | 18-. The fabricators.
c | -18. The idolaters.


ssalm cxxxvi.
A 0 give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good: for his mercy endureth for even
a Ogive thanks unto the God of gods; for his mercy endureth for ever. 3 0 give
thanks to the L-o-r-d of 1-o-r-d-s : for his mercy endureth for ever.
B 4 To him who alone doeth great wonders: for his mercy endureth for ever.
\ To him that by wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy endureth for ever
6 To him that stretched out the earth above the waters : for his mercy endureth
for ever. 7 To him that made great lights : for his mercy endureth for ever:
8 The sun to rule by day; for his mercy endureth for ever: 9 The moon and
stars to rule by night: for his mercy endureth for ever.
C a 10 To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn : for his mercy endureth for
ever:
h 11 And brought out Israel from among them; for his mercy endureth
for ever: 12 With a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm ; for
his mercy endureth for ever,
c 13 To him which divided the Red sea into parts: for his mercy
endureth for ever: 14 And made Israel to pass through the midst of
it: for his mercy endureth for ever ;
Dl5 But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea; for his
mercy endureth for ever.
Dl6 To him which led his people through the wilderness : for his
mercy endureth for ever.
a a M To him which smote great kings; for his mercy endureth for ever;
18 And slew famous kings; for his mercy endureth for ever; 191 Sihou
king of the Amorites ; for his mercy endureth for ever ;20 And Ug the
king of Bashan: for his mercy endureth for ever:
h ai And gave their land for an heritage : for his mercy endureth for ever:
22 Even an heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endureth
for ever.
c 23 Who remembered us in our low estate ; for his mercy endureth for
ever: 24 And hath redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy
endureth for ever.
B 1 25 Who giveth food to all flesh: for his mercy endureth for ever.
A 1 26 0 give thanks unto the God of heaven : for his mercy endureth for ever.
Psalm CXXXYL— The Skeleton.
A | I—3. Exhortation to praise.
B | 4 —9. General dealings.
C a I 10. Smote Egyptians. [rtDoV]
b 1 11, 12. Brought out of Egypt.
c | 13, 14. Deliverance in extremity.
D 1 15. Overthrow at Red Sea. (Pharaoh.) [Enemies.]
I) 1 16. Carried beyond the Red Sea through the wilderness. (His People.)
C a I 17 —20. Smote kings, [rDK&]
h | 21, 22. Brought into land of the kings.
c 1 23, 24. Deliverances in extremity.
B 1 25. General dealings.
A j 26. Exhortation to praise.
In B we have God’s works in creation, and in B His works in Providence; while in C and C we
"L H pir£two foregoing Psalms (cxvxv. and
will be seen that, while each is complete in itself, and has its own yet, taken
together, they admit of another and parallel arrangement, as follows {p, 33J- \ •)


Psalms CXXXV. and CXXXYL Compared.
A JSsalm txxxb. Praise ye THE LORD. Praise ye the name of the Lord; praise him, oye
servants of the Lord. 2 Ye that stand in the house of the Lord, in the courts of the house of
our God, 3 Praise THE LORD; for the Lord is good: sing praises unto his name; for it is
pleasant. 4 For THE LORD hath chosen Jacob unto himself, and Israel for his peculiar
treasure. 5 For I know that the Lord is great, and that o-u-r L-o-r-d is above all gods.
B 6 Whatsoever the Lord pleased, that did he in heaven, and in earth, in the seas, and all deep
places. 7 He causeth the vapours to ascend from the ends of the earth; he maketh lightnings
for the rain ; he bringeth the wind out of his treasuries.
C I 8 Who smote the firstborn of Egypt, both of man and beast. 9 Who sent tokens and
I wonders into the midst of thee, O Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his servants.
D I 10 Who smote great nations, and slew mighty kings; 11 Sihon king of the Amorites,
I and Og king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan :
E I 12 And gave their land for an heritage, an heritage unto Israel his people. 13 Thy
I name, O Lord, endureth for ever, and thy memorial, 0 Lord, throughout all generations.
F I 14 For the Lord will judge his people, and he will repent himself concerning his
I servants.
G 15 The idols of the heathen are silver and gold, the work of men’s hands. 16 They
have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have they, but they see not; 17 They have
ears, but they hear not; neither is there any breath in their mouths. 18 They that
make them are like unto them: so is every one that trusteth in them.
H 19 Bless the Lord, O house of Israel: bless the Lord, 0 house of Aaron:
20 Bless the Lord, 0 house of Levi: ye that fear the Lord, bless the Lord.
21 Blessed be the Lord out of Zion, which dwelleth at Jerusalem. Praise ye
THE LORD.
A ssalm txxxbi. 0 give thanks unto the Lord; for he is good : for his mercy endureth for ever.
2 O give thanks unto the God of gods; for his mercy endureth for ever. 3 0 give thanks to the
L-o-r-d of 1-o-r-d-s : for his mercy endureth for ever.
B 4 To him who alone doeth great wonders : for his mercy endureth for ever. 5 To him that by
wisdom made the heavens: for his mercy endureth for ever. 6 To him that stretched out the
earth above the waters: for his mercy endureth for ever. 7 To him that made great lights:
for his mercy endureth for ever: 8 The sun to rule by day ; for his mercy endureth for ever:
9 The moon and stars to rule by night: for his mercy endureth for ever.
C 10 To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn: for his mercy endureth for ever: 11 And
brought out Israel from among them : for his mercy endureth for ever : 12 With a strong
hand, and with a stretched out arm: for his mercy endureth for ever. 13 To him which
divided the Red sea into parts: for his mercy endureth for ever: 14 And made Israel to
pass through the midst of it: for his mercy endureth for ever: 15 But overthrew Pharaoh
and his host in the Red sea: for his mercy endureth for ever.
D 16 To him which led his people through the wilderness : for his mercy endureth for ever.
17 To him which smote great kings : for his mercy endureth for ever: 18 And slew famous
kings : for his mercy endureth for ever: 19 Sihon king of the Amorites : for his mercy
endureth for ever; 20 And Og the king of Bashan: for his mercy endureth for ever :
EI 21 And gave their land for an heritage ; for his mercy endureth for ever: 22 Even an
I heritage unto Israel his servant: for his mercy endureth for ever.
FI 23 Who remembered us in our low estate ; for his mercy endureth for ever : 24 And
I hath redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy endureth for ever.
0 | 25 Who giveth food to all flesh: for his mercy endureth for ever.
H | 26 0 give thanks unto the God of heaven : for his mercy endureth for ever.
Psalms CXXXY. and CXXXYL Compared. — The Skeletons.
”A | I—s.1 —5. Exhortation to praise.
B | 6, 7. Creative wonders.
C | 8, 9. Deliverance from Egyptians.
M«,r m J D | io, ii. Deliverance in wilderness, and journey.
‘ E | 12, 13. Gift to Israel, {nil [and meditative reflection].
F | 14. Goodness to His People.
G I 15 —18. False gods.
H | 19 —21. Praise.
A | I—3. Exhortation to praise.
B | 4—9. Creative wonders.
C | 10 —15. Deliverance from Egyptians.
a 9 , • D | 16—20. Deliverance in wilderness, and journey.
0 E | 21, 22. Gift to Israel, jrui [and meditative reflection].
F | 23, 24. Goodness to His People.
G | 25. The true God.
w H I 26. Praise.


oxxxvil
A By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, yea, we wept, when we remem-
bered Zion. 2 We hanged onr harps upon the willows in the midst thereof.
B 3 For there they that carried us away captive required of us a song ; and they
that wasted us required of ns mirth, saying , Sing us one of the songs of
C 1 4 How shall we sing the Lord’s song in a strange land ?
A £lf I forget thee, 0 Jerusalem, let my right hand forget her cunning. 6 If Ido
not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not
Jerusalem above my chief joy.
B j 7 Remember, 0 Lord, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem; who
I said, Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof.
0 8 0 daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed ; happy shall he he, that
rewardeth thee as thou hast served us. 9 Happy shall he be, that taketh and
dasheth thy little ones against the stones.
Psalm CXXXYIL— The Skeleton.
A|j, 2. Remembranee of Zion in sorrow. )
13 1 3. Wrongs. Speech of enemies. Plural.
C 1 4. Speech to enemies. J
A | 5, 6. Remembrance of Jerusalem in joy. Singular.
J} |7. Wrongs. Speech of enemies. Plural. (’Jib)
ClB, 9. Speech to enemies. Singular, (ni)
ssalm cxxxviii.
A Psalm of David.
A 1 I will praise thee with my whole heart: before the gods will I sing praise unto
thee. 2 I will worship toward thy holy temple, and praise thy name for Iby
lovingkindness and for thy truth : for thou hast magnified thy word above all thy
name 3ln the day when I cried thou answeredst me, and strengthenedst me
with strength in my soul.
B a | 4 All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord,
b [ when they hear 1 the words of thy mouth.
B a 1 5 Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord :
b | for great is the glory of the Lord.
A 6 Though the Lord be high, yet hath he respect unto the lowly: but the proud
he knoweth afar off. 7 Though I walk in the midst of trouble, thou wilt revive
me: thou shalt stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies, and
thy right hand shall save me. 8 The Lord will perfect that which concerneth
me: thy mercy, 0 Lord, endureth for ever: forsake not the works of thine own
hands.
Psalm CXXXYIIL— The Skeleton.
A j I—3. I. Praise promised and given.
13 | a | 4-. The kings. | 2nd person.
j b j -4. Reason. )
B\ u \ 5-. The kings. ) p erson>
i & 1 -5. Reason, [o] )■’ f
A 1 6—B. I. Praise promised and given.
Observe the alternations of persons continued in A:
A cj 6. 3rd person.
and j 7. 2nd person.
c j 8-. 3rd person.
and | -8. 2nd person.
1 For they have heard. ’3, “for,” as in verse -5*


|)salm cxxxix.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
1 P Lord, thou hast searched me, and known me. 2 Thou knowest my down-
sitting and mine uprising, thou understandest my thought afar off. 3 Thou com-
passest my path and my lying down, and art acquainted with all my ways. 4 For
there is not a word in my tongue, hut , 10, 0 Lord, thou knowest it altogether.
B a| 5 I hou hast beset me behind and before, and laid thine hand upon me.
b 6 Such knowledge is too wonderful for me; it is high, I cannot attain
unto it.
c 7 Whither shall Igo from thy spirit? or whither shall I flee 1 from thy
presence ? 8 If I ascend up into heaven, thou art there : if I make my
bed in hell, behold, thou art there. 9 If I take the wings of the morning,
and dwell in the uttermost parts of the sea; 10 Even there shall thy
hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. 11 If I say, Surely
the darkness shall cover me; even the night shall be light about me.
12 Yea; the darkness hideth not from thee; but the night shineth as
the day: the darkness and the light are both alike to thee.
a 13 For thou hast possessed my reins : thou hast covered me in my mother’s
womb.
6 [ J 4 I will praise thee; for lam fearfully and wonderfully made: marvellous
j are thy works; and that my soul knoweth right well.
c *5 M y substance was not hid from thee, when I was made in secret, and
curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the earth. 16 Thine eyes did
see my substance, yet being unperfect; and in thy book all my members
were written, ichich in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was
none of them.
B and 17 How precious also are thy thoughts unto me, 0 God ! how great is the
sum of them! 18 If I should count them, they are more in number than
the sand:
e | when I awake, I am still with thee.
e | 19 Surely thou wilt slay the wicked, 0 GOD :
and depart from me therefore, ye bloody men. 20 For they speak against thee
wickedly, and thine enemies take thy name in vain. 21 Do not I hate them,
0 Lord, that hate thee ? and am not I grieved with those that rise up against
thee? 22 I hate them with perfect hatred : I count them mine enemies.
A 23 Search me, O God, and know my heart; try me, and know my thoughts:
24 And see if there be any wicked way in me, and lead me in the way everlasting.
Psalm CXXXIX.— The Skeleton. 1
A | I—4.1 —4. Search.
B a | 5. Thy work.
b | 6. What I know not.
c I 7 —12. Omnipresence.
a | 13. Thy work.
h ( 14. What I know.
c | 15, 16. Omniscience.
B and | 17, 18-. What I love. ( s bi)
e | -i 8. Whom Thou lovest.
e | ig-. Whom thou lovest not.
and j -19—22. Whom I love not.
A j 23, 24. Search.
1 In Ed. 1611, “fly.” Eds. since 1629, “ Jiee.”


ssalm cxl.
To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.
A 1 i Deliver me, 0 Lord, from the evil man; preserve me from the violent man;
B 2 Which 1 imagine mischiefs in their heart; continually are they gathered
together for war. 3 They have sharpened their tongues like a serpent; adders’
poison is under their lips. Selah.
A 4 Keep me, 0 Lord, from the hands of the wicked; preserve me from the violent
man;
B who have purposed to overthrow my goings. 5 The proud have hid a snare
for me, and cords; they have spread a net by the wayside; they have set gins 2
for me. Selah.
C 1 6 I said unto the Lord, Thou art my God:
D 1 hear the voice of ray supplications, 0 Lord.
G 7 O God 3 the Lord, the strength of my salvation, thou hast covered my head in
the day of battle.
1) 8 Grant not, 0 Lord, the desires of the wicked: further not his wicked device;
lest they exalt themselves. Selah. 9As for the head of those that compass
me about, let the mischief of their own lips cover them. 10 Let burning coals
fall upon them: let them be cast into the fire; into deep pits, that they rise
not 4 up again. 11 Let not an evil speaker be established in the earth: evil
shall hunt 5 the violent man to overthrow him.
i the cause of the afflicted,
E I I that LoRD wiU maintain ( the right of the poor.
f the righteous shall give thanks unto thy name ;
A 1 13. Surely upr igbt shall dwell in thy presence.
Psalm CXL.— The Skeleton.
A 1 1 Prayer. C | 6-. Declaration.
B | 2,3. Description. D | -6. Prayer,
A | 4-. Prayer. C \ 7. Declaration.
B [ -4, 5. Description. D | B—ir.8 —ir. Prayer.
E | 12. The Lord’s goodness to the righteous.
JE 1 13. Their gratitude.
Note. —Observe D a| 8. Negatives (two).
b | 9, 10-. Positive.
a | -10, 11-. Negatives (two).
h 1 -11. Positive.
1 Who. s ln Ed. 1611, “g rinnes” Ed. 1613, “grins” Ed. 1762, “gins.”
3 Jehovah. 4 Let them not rise. 6 Let evil hunt.


|)salm cxli.
A Psalm of David.
A a 1 Lord, I cry unto thee : make haste unto me; give ear unto my voice, when
I cry unto thee. 2 Let my prayer be set forth before thee as incense ; and the
lifting up of my hands as the evening sacrifice.
b 3 Set a watch, 1 0 Lord, before my mouth; keep the door of my lips.
4 Incline not my heart to any evil thing, to practise wicked works with men
that work iniquity: and let me not eat of their dainties. 3 Let the righteous
smite me; it shall he a kindness: and let him reprove me; it shall he an
excellent oil, which shall not break my head:
c and [ for yet my prayer also shall he in their calamities
e 6 When 2 their judges are overthrown in stony places, 3 they shall
hear my words; for they are sweet.
B | 7 Our bones are scattered at the grave’s mouth,
B | as when one cutteth and cleaveth wood upon the earth.
A a 8 But mine eyes are unto thee, 0 God 4 the Lord: in thee is my trust; leave
not my soul destitute.
h 9 Keep 1 me from the snares 5 which they have laid for me, and the gins of the
workers of iniquity.
c e 1 10 Let the wicked fall 6 into their own nets,
and | whilst that I withal escape. 7
Psalm CXLI. — The Skeleton.
A a j 1, 2. I cry to Thee, help me.
h | 3 —5-. Prayer for preventing grace, mom, 3-.
c 1 and | -5. I yet.
j e| 6. Punishment of wicked.
B | 7-. Bones at the grave’s mouth.
B | -7. Wood on the earth.
A ajß. I look to thee, help me.
h j 9. Prayer for preventing grace. 9
c e | 10-. Punishment of wicked.
and j -10. I yet.
1 Guard. 2 Omit “ When.” 8 Insert “ and.” 4 Jehovah.
B ln Ed. 161 1, “ snare ” ;in Eds. since 1769, “ snares .”
6 The wicked shall fail. 7 Whilst that I yet escape.


ssalm cxlii.
Maschil of David; A Prayer when he was in the cave.
A i I cried mito the Lord with my voice ; with my voice unto the Lord did I make
my supplication. 2 I poured out my complaint before him ; I shewed before him
my trouble.
B | 3 When my spirit was overwhelmed within me, then tbou knewest my path.
C | In the way wherein 1 walked have they privily laid a snare for me.
D j 4 I looked on my right hand, and beheld, but there was no man that would
J know me : refuge failed me; no man cared for my soul.
A 3 I cried unto thee, 0 Lord : I said, Thou art my refuge and my portion in the
land of the living.
B | 6 Attend unto my cry ; for 1 I am brought very low:
G | deliver me from my persecutors; for they are stronger than I.
I) 7 Bring my soul out of prison, that I may praise thy name: the righteous
shall compass me about; for thou (-halt deal bountifully with me.
Psalm CXLII. —The Skeleton.
A J 1,2. Cry to the Lord.
B ] 3-, Deliverance from trouble.
| Statements.
C | -3. Enemies. )
D | 4. Desertion of friends.
A | 5. Cry to the Lord.
B | 6-. Deliverance from trouble. \
> Prayers and Pleas.
C | -6. Enemies. /
I) | 7. Return of friends.
In B and C note that the prayers and pleas correspond with the statements in B and C.
D may he thus arranged ;
D a ] 4-. Positive.
b | -4-. Negative. (}'«)
a 1 -4-. Positive.
h | -4. Negative, (j'h)
D may he thus arranged:—
I) c | 7-. Prayer.
and j -7-. Consequent praise.
c | -7-. Prediction.
and j -7. Reason for the praise and prediction. (S.T.)
1 When.


Itealm cxliii.
A Psalm of David.
A i Hear my prayer, 0 Lord, give ear to my supplications: in thy faithfulness
answer me, and in thy righteousness. 2 And enter not into judgment with thy
servant: for in thy sight shall no man living be justified. 3 For the enemy hath
persecuted my soul; he hath smitten my life down to the ground; he hath made
me to dwell in darkness, as those that have been long dead. 4 Therefore is my
spirit overwhelmed within me; my heart within ms is desolate.
B 5 I remember the days of old; I meditate on all thy works; I muse on the
work of thy hands.
B 6 1 stretch forth my hands unto thee ; my soul thirtieth after thee, as a thirsty
land. Selah.
A 7 Hear me speedily, O Lord : my spirit faileth : hide not thy face from me, lest
Ibe like unto them that go down into the pit. 8 Cause me to hear thy loving-
kindness in the morning; for in thee do I trust: cause me to know the way
wherein I should walk; for I lift up my soul unto thee. 9 Deliver me, O Lord,
from mine enemies: I flee 1 unto thee to hide me. 10 Teach me to do thy will;
for thou art my God: thy spirit is good; lead me into the land of uprightness.
II Quicken me, 0 Lord, for thy name’s sake; for thy righteousness’ sake bring
my soul out of trouble. 12 And of thy mercy cut off mine enemies, and destroy
all them that afflict my soul: for lam thy servant.
Psalm CXLIII. —The Skeleton.
A | I—4.1 —4. Petitions and pleas,
B | 5. Reflections.
B ) 6. Consequent conduct.
A 1 7 —12. Petitions and pleas.
The first member, A, may be thus arranged: —
A a 1 Hear my prayer, 0 Lord, give ear to my supplications : in thy faithfulness
answer me, and in thy righteousness,
b | 2 And enter not into judgment with thy servant :
h | for 2 in thy sight shall no man living be justified.
a 3 For 2 the enemy hath persecuted my soul; he hath smitten my life down to
the ground; he hath made me to dwell in darkness, as those that have been
long dead.
The Skeleton of A.
A a| 1. Prayer.
b | 2-. Deprecation.
h ) -2. The reason.
a | 3. The reason.
l ln Ed. 1611, “jiie ”; in Eds. 1616 (not 1617) and since 1629, “y?ee.” 2 *3.


cxliv.
A Pt,alm of David.
A i Blessed he the Lord my strength, which teacheth my hands to war, and my
finders to fight: 2 My goodness, and my fortress; my high tower, and my
deliverer; my shield, and he in whom I trust; who subdueth my people under
me. 3 Lord, what is man, that thou takest knowledge of him! or the son ot man,
that thou makest account of him! 4 Man 1 is like to vanity : 2 his days aie as a
shadow that passeth away. 2
B < Bow thy heavens, 0 Lord, and come down: touch the mountains, and they
shall smoke. 6 Cast forth lightning, and scatter them : shoot out thine arrows,
and destroy them. 7 Send thine hand from above; rid me, and deliver me out
of great waters, from the hand of strange children;
C 8 Whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of
falsehood
A 0 I will sing anew song unto thee, 0 God: upon a psaltery and an instrument of
ten strings will I sing praises unto thee. 10 It is he that giveth salvation unto
kings: who delivereth David his servant from the hurtful sword.
Bln Rid me, and deliver me from the hand of strange children,
C 1 whose mouth speaketh vanity, and their right hand is a right hand of falsehood:
D 12 That 1 our sons may he as plants grown up in their youth; that our daughters
may he as corner stones, polished after the similitude of a palace:
E | 13 That our garners may he full, affording all manner of store:
D that our sheep may hring forth thousands and ten thousands in our streets.
14 That our oxen may he strong to labour;
JE that there he no breaking in, nor going out; that there he no complaining in oui
streets.
E 1 13 Happy is that people, that is in such a case :
F 1 yeaf happy is that people, whose God is the Lord.
Psalm CXLIV.—The Skeleton.
A I I—4. Thanksgiving.
33 I c *1 PrS/VGr#
Cl 8. Description [of the “ strange children.” Their vain speaking].
A 1 9, 10. Thanksgiving.
J 3 I ii*“ Prayer.
c 1 -I*J. Description [of the “ strange children.” Their vain speaking].
D | 12. Sons and daughters. \
E 1 13-. Garners. ( rpp e va | n spe aking of the “ strange children.”]
B 1 -13, 14-. Sheep and oxen, l L r
E j -14. Streets. ]
F | 15-. Happy People. [Vain estimate.]
F 1 -15. Happy People. [True estimate.]
The three-fold division may be arranged thus (Ed.): —
1 I—ll.1 —11. Praise and prayer for deliverance from “ strange children.”
2 12 —14. Their vain speech and falsehood.
3 15. The false and true conclusions.
1 Man who is. 2 ! instead of : and 3 omit “ore.” ....
‘linn, translated “That,” at beginning of v. 12, is “Who.” The figure of ellipsis requires
the addition of the word say from vv. 8 and -n. Thus: “ Who say," vainly and falsely, that
happiness consists in outward and material prosperity. This is the vanity which their mouth
speaketh, while the Divine conclusion is nay, not “yea,” but “ Yea, rather, happy is that people
whose God is the Lord.” The large number of words in italics in vv. 12 14 shows that the
Translators experienced difficulty. But the figure of ellipsis, taken with the structure, . throw the
vain statements of the “ strange children” and their false conclusion in v. 15 into vivid, contrast
with the great truth of the Scriptural definition as to that in which true happiness consists. See
Ps, iv. 6, 7 ; cxlvi. 5, &c.— (Ed.)


ssalm cxlv.
David’s of Praise.
A 1 i (n) I will extol thee, my God, 0 king ; and I will bless thy name for ever and ever.
2 (n) Every day will I bless thee; and I will praise thy name for ever and ever.
B 1 3 (>) Great is the Lord, and greatly to be praised; and his greatness is
unsearchable.
A 2 4 (i) One generation shall praise thy works to another, and shall declare thy
mighty acts. 3 ;n)I will speak of the glorious honour of thy majesty, and of thy
wondrous works. 6 (i) And men shall speak of the might of thy terrible acts : and
I will declare thy greatness. 7 (t) They shall abundantly utter the memory of thy
great goodness, and shall sing of thy righteousness.
B 2 8 (n) The Lord is gracious, and full of compassion; slow to anger, and of great
mercy. 9 (a) The Lord is good to all: and his tender mercies are over all his
works.
A 3 10 (’) All thy works shall praise thee, 0 Lord; and thy saints shall bless thee.
II (n) They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power ;
12 ( b ) To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the glorious
majesty of his kingdom.
B 3 13 (and) Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endureth
throughout all generations. 14 (and) The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth
up all those that be bowed down. 15 (y) The eyes of all wait upon thee ; and thou
givest them their meat in due season. 16 (Q) Thou openest thine hand, and
satisfiest the desire of every living thing. 17 (v) The Lord is righteous in all his
ways, and holy in all his works. 18 (p) The Lord is nigh unto all them that call
upon him, to all that call upon him in truth. 19 ("1) He will fulfil the desire of
them that fear him: he also will hear their cry, and will save them. 20 (ttf) The
Lord preserveth all them that love him : but all the wicked will he destroy.
A 4 21 (n) My mouth shall speak the praise of the Lord : and let all flesh bless 1 his
holy name for ever and ever.
Psalm CXLY.—The Skeleton.
A 1 1 1, 2. Praise promised, from me. [Praise for Jehovah Himself.]
b 1 | 3. Praise offered.
A 2 | 4—7. Praise promised, from others and me. [Praise for Jehovah’s works.]
JB 2 j 8, 9. Praise offered.
A 3 1 10—12. Praise promised, from others, and Works. [Praise for Jehovah’s Kingdom.]
B 3 1 13—20. Praise offered.
A 4 1 21. Praise promised, from me and others.
The members A l , A 2, A 3 and 83,B 3 , may be thus arranged: — (Ed.)
A 1 a 1 1-. Thee.
b 1 -1. Thy name.
a ] 2-. Thee.
b 1 -2. Thy name.
A 2 c| 4. They shall,
and 1 5. 1 will,
c | 6-. They shall.
and 1 -6. 1 will.
k j 7. They shall.
A 3 e | 10, ii-. Glory,
f 1 -n. Might.
f j 12-. Might,
e j -12. Glory.
B 3 g I 13. Thou.
n | 3 14. He (see note).
g | 15, 16. Thou.
h j 17 —20. He.
Psalm cxlv. is one of the acrostic Psalms, in which each verse begins with the successive letter
of the Hebrew alphabet. It will, however, be seen that there are only twenty-one verses instead
of twenty-two, the fourteenth letter {Nun, 1) having through human infirmity dropped out of the
manuscripts. The verse is, however, preserved in the ancient versions of the Septuagint, Syriac,
Arabic and Ethiopic, and in one manuscript. It begins with the letter i, and reads thus:—“ The
Lord is faithful in all His words, and holy in all His works.” Here the structure comes to the
aid of textual criticism, and proves the propriety of inserting it, for in B 3 this verse (i) makes
the beginning of h correspond with the beginning of h, verse 17. — (Ed.)
1 Shall bless, 3-12*, as in v. 10, all flesh shall bless.”


ssalm cxlvi.
A Praise ye THE LORD. Praise the Lord, omy soul. 2 While I live will I
praise the Lord : I will sing praises unto my God while I have any being.
B a| 3 Put not your trust in princes, nor in the son of man,
b | in whom there is no help.
c 4 His breath goeth forth, he returneth to his earth; in that very day
his thoughts perish.
Ba 3 Happy is he that hath the God of Jacob for his help, whose hope is in the
Lord his God;
b I 6 Which made heaven, and earth, the sea, and all that therein is: which
[ keepeth truth for ever : 7 Which executeth judgment for the oppressed ;
j which giveth food to the hungry. The Lord looseth the prisoners:
8 The Lord openeth the eyes of the blind : the Lord raiseth them tnat are
bowed down: the Lord loveth the righteous: 9 The Lord preserveth
1 the strangers; he relieveth the fatherless and widow: but the way of the
j wicked he turneth upside down.
c 1 10 The Lord shall reign for ever, even thy God, 0 Zion, unto all
1 generations.
A | Praise ye THE LORD.
Psalm CXLYL— The Skeleton.
A j 1,2. Praise.
B a | 3-. Wrong trust,
b | -3. Powerless,
c | 4. Perishable.
B a | 5. Right trust [compare with cxliv. -15].
b 1 6 —9. Powerful [compare v. 9 with cxlv. 20].
c | 10-. Eternal [imperishable].
A J -10. Praise.


cxlvii.
A 1 Praise ye THE LORD: for it is good to sing praises unto our God; for it is
pleasant; and praise is comely. 2 The Lord doth build up Jerusalem; he
gathereth together the outcasts of Israel. 3 He healeth the broken in heart, and
bindeth up their wounds.
B 1 4He telleth the number of the stars; he calleth them all by their names.
5 Great is o-u-r L-o-r-d, and of great power: his understanding is infinite.
C 1 | 6 The Lord lifteth up the meek: he casteth the wicked down to the ground.
A' 2 | 7 Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving; sing praise upon the harp unto our God:
B 2 8 Who covereth the heaven with clouds, who prepareth rain for the earth, who
maketh grass to grow upon the mountains. 9 He giveth to the beast his food,
and to the young ravens which cry.
C 2 to He delighteth not in the strength of the horse; he taketh not pleasure in
the legs of a man. 11 The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear him, in
those that hope in his mercy.
A* 12 Praise the Lord, 0 Jerusalem; praise thy God, O Zion. 13 For he hath
strengthened the bars of thy gates; he hath blessed thy children within thee.
14 He maketh peace in thy borders, and filleth thee with the finest of the wheat.
SB* 15 He sendeth forth his commandment upon earth: his word runneth very
swiftly. 16 He giveth snow like wool: he scattereth the hoarfrost like ashes.
17 He casteth forth his ice like morsels : who can stand before Ids cold? 18 He
sendeth out his word, and melteth them : he causeth his wind to blow, and the
waters flow.
C 3 19 He sheweth his word unto Jacob, his statutes and his judgments unto
Israel. 20 He hath not dealt so with any nation : and as for his judgments,
they have not known them.
A 4 [ Praise ye THE LORD.
Psalm CXLYIL— The Skeleton.
A 1 | I—3.1 —3. Praise, and reason, (Kindness to Israel.)
B 1 | 4, 5. General operations. (Kingdom of nature.)
C 1 |6. Contrast. [What the Lord does.]
A 2 | 7. Praise,
I5 2 18, 9. General operations. (Kingdom of nature.)
C 2 1 10, 11. Contrast. [What the Lord delights in.]
A 3 | 12 —14. Praise, and reason. (Kindness to Israel.)
B 3 1 15 —18. General operations. (Kingdom of nature.)
C 3 | 19, 20-. Contrast. [What the Lord has shown.]
A 4 | -20. Praise.


sßalm cxlviii.
A | Praise ye THE LORD.
B a 1 Praise ye the Lord from the heavens: praise him in the heights.
b 2 Praise ye him, all his angels: praise ye him, all his hosts. 3 Praise ye
him, snn and moon: praise him, all ye stars of light. 4 Praise him, }e
heavens of heavens, and ye waters that he above the heavens.
c | 5 Let them praise the name of the Lord;
and for he commanded, and they were created. 6 He hath also stab-
lished them for ever and ever: he hath made a decree which shall
not pass.
B a | 7 Praise the Lord from the earth,
b ye dragons, and all deeps: 8 Fire, and hail; snow, and vapours 1 ; stormy
wind fulfilling his word: 9 Mountains, and all hills; fruitful trees, and
all cedars: 10 Beasts, and all cattle; creeping things, and flying fowl:
ix Kings of the earth, and all people; princes, and all judges of the
earth: J 2 Both young men, and maidens; old men, and children;
c | 13 Let them praise the name of the Lord:
and for his name alone is excellent; his glory is above the earth and
heaven. 14 He also exalteth the horn of his people, the praise of all
his saints; even of the children of Israel, a people neai unto him.
A 1 Praise ye THE LORD.
Psalm CXLVIII.— The Skeleton.
A 1 1-. Hallelujah.
B a | -1. Praise from the heavens, (Second person), [mn* n« 'Mn]
b 1 2—4. Enumeration of beings and things in the heavens,
c | 5-. Injunction to praise the Lord. (Third person.)
and j -5, 6. Inducements. *3
j] a | 7 _. Praise from the earth. (Second person), [nw rm 'obrt]
I | _7 — 12. Enumeration of beings and things in the earth,
c j 13-. Injunction to praise the Lord. (Third person.)
and 1 14-. Inducements. '3 (Earth, v. 7. Heaven, v. I.)
A 1 -14. Hallelujah.
I Vapour in ed. 1611. “ Vapours ”in editions since 1769.


ssalm cxlix.
A | Praise ye THE LORD.
B I Sing unto the Lord anew song, and his praise in the congregation of saints.
C 2 Let Israel rejoice in him that made him: let the children of Zion be joyful
in their King. J J
D | a | 3 Let them praise his name
I b | in 1 the dance :
B a ( let them sing praises unto him
h ( with the timbrel and harp,
G al^.^ e Lord taketh pleasure in his people: he will beautify the meek with
B 6 J^thpVl ntS be ? l0 7 : . l6t them Sin « aloud u Von their beds.
hnrJ ! T ghpra T of GoD be m their moutk - and a twoedged sword in their
nprvnlp / « I T e v CU i e + r ng r Ce the heathen ’ and punishments upon the
people, 8 lo bind their kings with chains, and their nobles with fetters of
saints 9 BXBCllte upon tliem the i U( % ment written: this honour have all his
A | Praise ye THE LORD.
Psalm CXLIX.—The Skeleton.
A | i-. Hallelujah.
-B | -i. Saints.
C | 2. Let the people rejoice in the Lord.
H a | 3~, Praise.
b | -3-. How.
D a | -3-. Praise.
h | -3. How.
C ( 4. The Lord rejoices in His people.
R | 5—9-. Saints.
A | -9. Hallelujah.
The order of the words in the Hebrew of v. 3, forms really an Introversion, thus :
D | 3-. Praise. “ Let them praise his name
E | -3-. How. with the dance:
A | ~3~‘ How. with the timbrel and harp
TANARUS) | -3. Praise. Let them sing praises unto him.”
1 3, with, same as in “ h," “with the timbrel, &c.”
cl.
A | Praise ye THE LORD.
B j Praise God in his sanctuary:
C praise him in the firmament of his power.
C 2 Praise him for his mighty acts: praise him according to his excellent
greatness.
B 3 Praise him with the sound of the trumpet: praise him with the psaltery and
harp. 4 Praise him with the timbrel and dance: praise him with stringed
instruments and organs. 5 Praise him upon the loud cymbals . praise him upon
the high sounding cymbals.
H| 6 Let every thing that hath breath praise THE LORD. Praise ye THE LORD.
Psalm CL.—The Skeleton.
A | i-. Praise the Lord.
B | -1-. The Sanctuary.
C | -1. Power.
C | 2. Might. Greatness.
B | 3~S- Instruments of the Sanctuaiy.
A | 6. Praise the Lord.
K




The Structure of the Book of Psalms as a whole.
TF the structure of each Psalm is perfect in itself, we may well expect to find the
same perfection in the arrangement of the one hundred and fifty Psalms as a whole.
Many attempts have been made from ancient times to discover this structure, and to
classify the Psalms ; but none of them is so satisfactory as to preclude another attempt.
It is certain that the present order in which we have the Psalms is the same as it
was when they were in the hands of our Lord, and were quoted repeatedly by Him,
and by the Holy Spirit through the Evangelists and Apostles. Indeed, in Acts xiii. 33,
the Holy Spirit by Paul expressly mentions “the second Psalm.” This puts us upon
sure ground.
There must be a reason therefore why “the second Psalm” is not, for example, the
seventy-second; and why the ninetieth (which is the most ancient of all the Psalms,
being a prayer of Moses) is not the first. Leaving the unsatisfactory ground of the
conjectures and theories of man (which are incapable of real proof), and confining
ourselves to internal evidence and Manuscript and Massoretic authority, we find that
in the Hebrew text, as we have it to-day, as well as in the ancient versions of it
(including the Septuagint, made more than 200 years 8.C.), the whole collection is
divided into Five Books, as follows :
Book I.—Psalms i.—xli., concluding with a Blessing and “Amen and Amen.”
Book ll.—Psalms xlii. —Ixxii., concluding with a double Blessing and “Amen and
Amen.”
Book 111. —Psalms Ixxiii.—lxxxix., concluding with a Blessing and “Amen and Amen.”
Book IV. —Psalms xc. —cvi., concluding with a Blessing and “Amen, Hallelujah.”
Book V. —Psalms evii.—cl., concluding with “Hallelujah.”
There are in all, seven “Amens” and twenty-four “Hallelujahs,” All the latter
are in Book V. except four, which are in Book IV.
The Midrash on Psalm i. 1, says:—“ Moses gave to the Israelites the five books of
the Law; and, corresponding to these, David gave them the five books of the Psalms.”
Here we have our very word “correspondence”; and our object is to trace it out, and
exhibit it to the eye, so that the Book of Psalms as a whole may be seen to have the
same perfection of structure as each of its individual Psalms.
Book I. (Psalms i.—xli.) is the GENESis-Book.
Book 11. (Psalms xlii. —Ixxii.) is the ExODUS-Book.
Book 111. (Psalms Ixxiii.—lxxxix.) is the LEVmcus-Book.
Book IV. (Psalms xc. —cvi.) is the NuMBERS-Book.
Book V. (Psalms evii.—cl.) is the DEUTERONOMY-Book.
To understand these five Psalm-Books, we must ascertain the distinctive character
of the Pentateuch-Books. This can be learnt, not from the names which man has


given to these hooks (in the Septnagint and Latin Vulgate), hut only from the names
which God has given to them in the Hebrew Canon. We shall find that while man’s
names and titles have been given on account of what he conceived to he the principal
events recorded in the hooks, God’s name points us to what is the real design and great
central commanding thought in the hooks. According to this we shall learn that
Genesis is the hook of the Beginning.
Exodus is the hook of Redemption.
Leviticus is the hook of The Sanctuary.
Numbers is the hook of The Wilderness.
Deuteronomy is the hook of The Law.
The five Psalm-Books correspond to these five Pentateuch-Books. The teaching
of each book is dispensational; i.e., it is teaching concerning the Counsels and Pur-
poses of God, past, present, and future ; and each Psalm-Book views these Counsels
and Purposes in their relation to the special character of the Pentateuch-Book. The
first Psalm in each Book is the key-note and epitome of the whole.
BOOK I— (PSALMS I.—XLL)— THE GENESIS-BOOK.
GENESIS is the Greek yeWis ( generation ), and is the name given to the hook
by the Septnagint translators, as descriptive of its subject-matter.
The Divine name for it is nwm “In the Beginning.” It is the hook of the
beginning : and in it we read of the beginning of the Earth, of Life, of Man, and of
Israel. It is the “seed-plot” of the whole Bible. Like the trees of Gen. i. 11, 12, its
“ seed is in itself.” It contains, in germ, type and prophecy, the essence of Divine
Revelation. It tells of the beginning of Life, and its types are the lives of indi-
vidual men.*
In the first Book of the Psalms we find that the leading thought corresponds with
that of the first hook of the Pentateuch. The purposes and counsels of God are
shown from the beginning to the end in relation to MAN. As Genesis begins with
the Divine blessing on Man (i. 28), so Psalm i. opens with “ Blessed is the man."
All blessedness for man is shown to consist in subjection to, and occupation
with, God’s Law. It is the Tree of Life to him: and, meditating on this, he becomes
like a well-watered tree in the Paradise of God. But in Gen. iii. Man rebelled against
that Law: and Ps. ii. describes the consequences of this rebellion, while Ps. iii. takes
its title from one who rebelled against God’s King. The Ruin can be repaired only
by THE MAN, Christ Jesus (“the Seed of the woman”): and in the Psalms of this
first Book (the second section) we see Him in His Atoning Work, which alone sets
man again in the blessedness which he has lost.
The first Book consists of forty-one Psalms. The central Psalm is xxi., which sets
forth the eternal life aud blessedness of God’s King. All that have titles (37) are
David’s —the man of God’s choice. The four without titles (i., ii., x. and xxsiii.) are
*So with the other Books. The types in Exodus are types of Redemption ; the types in
Leviticus are types of the Sanctuary ; while the types in Numbers are types of the Wilderness.


also probably David’s; for Ps. i. and ii. are David’s,* while x. and xxxiii. each follow
one by David, and, according to an ancient rule of interpretation, would be reckoned
as David’s.
Of the Divine Titles, Jehovah occurs 279 times, and Elohim only 48 times (9 of
which are joined with Jehovah). Note also the references to the events, &c., of Genesis
in this first Book.
The Book is divided into three sections, and may be arranged as follows: —
(1) Thej£rs£ (i. —viii.), concerning Man ;
(2) The second (ix.—xv.), concerning “The Man oe the Earth” (Antichrist).
(3) The third (xvi. —xli.), concerning The Man Christ Jesus.
(x) “MAN.”
A a i*. Man blessed and righteous, meditating in the Law of God. (References to
Paradise.)
b ii.* Rebellious man, vainly meditating against the Son of God, the anointed
King, through whom alone Blessing and universal dominion can be restored
( v. 12). (Heb. i. 5.)
B c iii. (David). Prayer (morning) in view of this rebellion (see v
title) : “ The Lord my Shield,” v. 3. / Enemies
d iv. (David). Prayer (evening) in view of this rebellion. C without.
“ How long P ” v. 2.
Bcv. (David). Prayer (morning) in view of this rebellion, v
“ The Lord my King,” v. 2. [ Sorrows
d vi. (David). Prayer (night) in view of this rebellion C within.
“ How long ? ” v. 3.
A a vii. (David). Man righteous and blessed, with Jehovah for his defence.
vv. 3,4, 8, 10.
h viii. (David). The rebellious subdued. The Divine Man exalted in the
earth. (Heb. ii. 6—9.)
(2) “THE MAN OF THE EARTH.”
C ix, x.f (David). “The Man of the Earth,” v. 18. Antichrist: his days,
character, and end. “The great Tribulation,” ix. 9, and x. 1. rren nta# “times of
trouble ,” the phrase occurring nowhere else!
D I xi., xii. (David). Prayer in view of that Tribulation h .
' Concerning the words
D xiii., xiv. (David). Prayer in view of that dribulation. r of the wicked.
(Compare xiv. 1 with x. 6, 11.) )
G 1 xv. (David). The perfect Man. The Christ. His character, and eternal abiding.
* Psalms i. and ii. are linked together by having no Titles, and by beginning and ending with
“ Blessed.” Without doubt they are both David’s, see Acts iv. 25.
t Psalms ix. and x. are linked together by having an irregular alphabet running acrostically
through the two.


(3) “THE MAN CHRIST JESUS.”
E e xvi. (David, Michtam*). The Man Christ Jesus taking His place of suffering :
Jehovah apportioning His lot.
f | xvii. (David). His prayer, and appeal to Jehovah.
g xviii. (David). His prayer answered with promise of final deliverance and
triumph.
F h xix. (David). His people’s acknowledgment of Christ —the Light
of Revelation—as the sun is the light of Creation.
i xx. (David). Their prayer, as they see in Christ their King
the hope of their own deliverance.
k xxi. (David). Their expectation answered, in the crowning
and exaltation of their King.
G 1 xxii. (David). The Atonement the Basis of all
Blessing. “The Good Shepherd” (John x. 11) in
Death.
m xxiii. (David). The Basis of present Blessing. “The
Great Shepherd” (Heb. xiii. 20) in Resurrection.
n xxiv. (David). The Basis of future Blessing.
“ The Chief Shepherd ” (1 Pet. v. 4) in Glory.
E e xxv. (David). Prayer with reference to “e.” (Ps. xvi.) The “ path ” and the
“way,” (Compare xxv. 4,8, 9, 10, 12 with xvi. n.)
/ xxvi. (David). Prayer with reference to “ f.” (xvii.) Integrity pleaded.
(Compare xvii. 1,3, 4.)
g xxvii., xxviii. (David). Prayers with reference to “ g.” (xviii.) Jehovah
the “ Rock” and Deliverer. His Prayer answered.
F h xxix. (David). His People’s praise for God’s glory in Creation.
(See Ps. xix.)
i xxx., xxxi. (David), xxxii. (David, Maschilf), xxxiii. Their
Praise for God’s Christ (for answer to Prayer of Ps. xx.),
Ps. xxxiii. 3. The first “New Song” in the Psalter.
h | xxxiv. (David). Their praise for His exaltation (see Ps. xxi.).
G I xxxv., xxxvi. (David). Prayer and Praise with refer-
ence to the Atonement. See Ps. xxii. (Ps. xxxvi.
is unique in its title.)
m xxxvii. (David). Instruction with reference to the
present blessing of Ps. xxiii.
n xxxviii.—xli. (David). God’s answer to the
question of xxiv. 3 (“Who shall ascend?”) see
xli. 12, “Thou . . . settest me before thy face
for ever.” All Blessing and Glory for man found
in the atoning work of “ the Man Christ Jesus.”
* This is the first “ Michtam ” Psalm. The others are Ivi.—lx. “ Michtam” is from oro,
to cut in , engrave (Ixx. a sculptured writing ; was the word for gravestone).
Hence “ Michtam,” like our “ Pesurgam,” points to the fact that all the Psalms which have that
word are _ Psalms connected with the hope of Resurrection. Compare avearr] of the Ixx. in
Is. xxxviii. 9. Thomas Boys, in a private letter, shows the beautiful connection between Ps. xvi.
9 —ll, and Acts ii. 25 —31 :
1. He lies down in the grave. v. -9. “My flesh also shall rest in hope.”
2. He rises from the dead. v. 10. “For thou wilt not leave my soul in Sheol; neither
wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption.”
3. He ascends. v, 11-. “ Thou wilt show me the path of life: ”
4. He arrives. v.-n-, “In thy presence is fulness of joy;”
5. He sitsdown on the Eternal Throne, v. -11. “At thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore.”
f Maschil, i.e., Instruction.


BOOK II. —(PSALMS XLII. —LXXII.) — THE EXODUS-BOOK.
EXODUS is the Greek e£oSos, and is the name given to the hook by the Septnagint
Translators as descriptive of its chief event —the going out of the Children of Israel
from Egypt. But the Bible title for it is nintp n.'wq, “And these are the names.’
The Book is thus called because it begins with the names of those who came into
the place whence they were redeemed and delivered from their ruined condition.*
Exodus is therefore the Book of Redemption : and Redemption is individual and
by name. It is the Book in which the Redemption of the People is first mentioned:
“ Thou in Thy mercy hast led forth the people which Thou hast Redeemed ; Thou
hast guided them in Thy strength unto Thy holy habitation.” (Exodus xv. 13). The
types of Exodus are also types of Redemption. The Divine title JAH (Hj), the
concentrated form of Jehovah, occurs for the first time in the book of Exodus (xv. 3) ;
and it also occurs for the first time in the Psalms in this second or Exodus-Book
(Psalm Ixviii. 4).
In this second book of the Psalms we find the subject-matter corresponding to
Exodus. Like the other books, its teaching is dispensational. In the Genesis-Book, Man
is the central thought; in this Exodus-Book, it is the XATIOX OP ISRAEL around
which the counsels and purposes of God are centred. It opens with the “ cry from
the depth of the Ruin, as Exodus does; and it ends with the Kiug reigning over the
redeemed nation (Ps. Ixxii.), brought “ again the second time from the four coincis
of the earth (Isaiah xi. 11); as it was brought the first time from Egypt; and made a
blessing to all the families of the earth.
Of the Divine names and titles : Elohim occurs 262 times (two of them with
Jehovah), El, 14 times, and Jehovah only 37 times. Xote the references to Sinai,
Miriam, and other events in Exodus in this second book.
It consists of thirty-one Psalms, divided into three parts, arranged as follows
(1) The first (xlii.— xlix.) concerning Israel’s Ruin (all Psalms for the Sons
of Korah, who escaped the Ruin of their Father in the wilderness;
Num. xxvi. 11).
(2) The second (1. —lx.) concerning Israel’s Redeemer.
(3) The third (Ixi. —Ixxii.) concerning Israel’s Redemption.
# There is more, however, than this. Not only does the Lord speak so pointedly of knowing
Moses “by name” (xxxiii. 12, 17), but Moses asks by what Name he is to speak of the God of
their fathers, to the Israelites (hi. 13), and the Lord reveals His Name (hi. 14, 15), while in vi. 3,
xxxiii. 19, and xxxiv. 5—7, He further proclaims it. So, again, of the “Angel” that was sent
before the People (xxih. 20), Jehovah said, “My Name is in Him” (xxiii. 21). Moses speaks to
Pharaoh in the Name of Jehovah (v. 23); and Pharaoh is raised up ‘ ‘ that My Name may be declared
throughout all the earth ” (ix. 16). It is in this Book that we first have the third Commandment
concerning the Name of the Lord (xx. 7). Bezaleel is said to have been “called” by name
(xxxi. 2), whereas a different phrase is used of Aholiab (xxxi. 6) both here and in xxxv. 30 and 34.
It is in Exodus also that we have the particular instructions as to the engraving of the names on
the shoulder-stones of the Ephod (xxviii. 9—12), and on the Breast-plate stones (15—21), which
were strictly carried out (xxxix. 6, 7 and 8 — 14). Thus “ the names of the children of Isiael
were borne before the Lord with the Redeeming Blood in the Holy of Holies. So that these names
appear at the beginning of Exodus, in connection with the Ruin ; and at the end in connection
with the Redemption “ before God in the Sanctuary ” ; while we have the Name of the Redeemer
proclaimed and celebrated throughout, “The Lord is His Name” (Ex. xv. 3).


(i) ISRAEL’S RUIN.
A xlii., xliii.* (Maschilf). The Ruin and “ Oppression of the enemy” (xlii. 9; xliii. 2)
realised. No help from man. Crying and Tears (Ex. ii. 23 ; iii. 7, 9 • v i. 9).
B ‘a | xliy. (Maschil). The cry to and/or the Deliverer or Redeemer (v. 23—26).
b 1 xlv. (Maschil). The Deliverer praised. The answer to the cry.
-B I a | xlvi. The cry to the Deliverer.
b | xlvii., xlviii. Praise for the Deliverer. (Compare xlviii. 8 and xliv. 1.)
A I xhx. The ruin and need of Redemption realised. No Redemption from man, but
I only from God, v. 16.
(2) ISRAEL’S REDEEMER.
C 1. (Asaph). God breaks the silence, and speaks from Heaven (as in Exodus from
the Burning Bush). He speaks to His People aud to the wicked. (See Heb. xii.
25, 26.)
D li. (David). The response of His People, conscious of their own Ruin Promise
to teach transgressors, v. 13.
D lii. I\. (David). Maschil; i.e., Instruction to the transgressors in fulfilment of
the promise of li. 13.
C Hi. lx. (David, Michtam). God’s People speak to Him in prayer, relating to
their deliverance from the Ruin. Michtam, telling of death and Resurrection
truth; See Hi. 13; Hii. 3; Iviii. 10, 11; lix. 16; lx. 5 ir, 12. (Compare lx. 8 margin
with Ex. viii. 9.)
(3) ISRAEL’S REDEMPTION.
E c I Ixi. Ixiv. (David). The People wait for their deliverance “from the end of
the earth,” which is only “ the work of God.” Ixiv. 9.
d | Ixv. (David). Zion waits for the blessing.
e | Ixvi., Ixvii Praise promised, and the trouble remembered. Ixvi. 10 —l2.
I | Ixviii. (David). The Answer. God arises. “ Blessed bo God,” v. 35.
A c Ixix. (David). The King waits for His deliverance (v. 14) from sufferings,
shame, and sorrow. The Trespass Offering.
d | Ixx. (David), The King waits for deliverance from enemies. “Make haste!”
6 I I XX T Praise promised (r. 22 —24). The trouble remembered ( v . 20).
F Ixxn. The Answer. The King reigns. “ Blessed be the Lord God ”
(r. 18). This was all his desire (2 Sam. xxiii. 5). The Redeemed
Nation blessed and a blessing to all nations.
+■♦l Tsalms xlii and xliii. are united by recurring Question and Answer, while xliii. is without
title, and goes with xln,
t Maschil, t.e., Instruction.
J As Ps. xxii. is the Sin Offering, and Ps. xl. is the Burnt Offering.


BOOK lII— (PSALMS LXXIIL—LXXXIX.)— THE LEVITICUS-BOOK.
LEVITICUS is, again, the title which man has given to this Book to indicate its
subject-matter, viz., the ordinances, &c., pertaining to the Levites. The title in the
Hebrew Canon is “ And he called.” It is the Book of the SANCTUARY. It tells
how God is to he approached, and teaches ns that none can worship except such as are
called, and whom “ the Father seeks to worship Him.” Hence it is written,“Blessed
is the man whom Thou choosest, and causest to approach unto Thee , that he may
dwell in Thy courts; we shall be satisfied with the goodness of Thy house, even of Thy
holy temple.’ The types in this hook are types of the Sanctuary, i.e., of Access and
Worship.
In this Leviticus-Book of the Psalms we find the corresponding thought. Its
teaching is dispensational as in the other books ; but in this the counsels of God are
seen, not in relation to Man , not in relation to the Nation, but in relation to the
SANCTUARY, which is mentioned or referred to in nearly every Psalm of this Book.
The Sanctuary is seen from its ruin to its establishment in the fulness of blessing.
The Book consists of only seventeen Psalms, which are divided into two sections:—
(1) The first (Psalm Ixxiii. —Ixxxiii.) the Sanctuary in its relation to Man.
(2) The second (Psalms Ixxxiv. —Ixxxix.) the Sanctuary in relation to Jehovah.
Consequently in theirs/, which is composed wholly of “Asaph” Psalms, Elohim
is mentioned 65 times (two of them with Jehovah), and Jehovah only 15 times; while
in the second (composed of 4 Korah, 1 David, and 1 Ethan), Jehovah is mentioned 50
times, and Elohim only 28 times (4 of which are joined to Jehovah) ; El, 5 times.
(r) THE SANCTUARY IN ITS RELATION TO MAN.
A Ixxiii. (Asaph). The effect of being away from the Sanctuary. Occupation of
heart with others, and consequent distraction.
B | Ixxiv. (Asaph, Maschil), The enemy in the Sanctuary.
C | Ixxv. (Asaph). God’s Anointed in the Sanctuary.
D | Ixxvi. (Asaph). Destruction of the enemies of the Sanctuary.
A Ixxvii. (Asaph). The effect of being away from the Sanctuary. Occupation of
heart with self, and consequent misery. Ixxviii. (Asaph, Maschil). Instruction
as to Psalms Ixxiii. and Ixxvii., showing how God forsook Shiloh ( v . 60), chose not
the tabernacle of Joseph ( v. 67), but chose Zion ( v . 68, 69).
B | Ixxix. (Asaph). The enemy in the Sanctuary.
C 1 Ixxx.—lxxxii. (Asaph). God in the Sanctuary.
D | Ixxxiii. (Asaph). Destruction of the enemies of the Sanctuary,


(2) THE SANCTUARY IN ITS RELATION TO JEHOVAH.
E 1 Ixxxiy., Ixxxv. (Korah). The blessedness of the Approachers to, and Dwellers in,
God’s Sanctuary.
F Ixxxyi. (David). Prayer before God (in the Sanctuary). Christ s humiliation
and suffering the secret and source of the blessing.
E 2 | Ixxxvii. (Korah), The blessedness of those born in Zion.
F Ixxxyiii. (Korah, Heman, Maschil). Prayer before God. Christs humiliation
and suffering the secret and source of the blessing.
E 3 Ixxxix. (Ethan, Maschil). The eternal blessedness of those who “know the joyful
sound” (v . 15). God in “the assembly of his saints” (v. 7). “Maschil,” or
Instruction as to God’s dealings in His Sanctuary, probably referring to the
whole of this Book,
BOOK IV. —(PSALMS XC.—CYI.)— THE NUMBERS-BOOK.
NUMBERS is again the name that man has given to the fourth book of the
Pentateuch, on account of the numberings recorded in chapters i. iii. and xxvi. It is
from the Latin Vulgate. The title in the Hebrew Canon is 15703, Le., In ihe
Wilderness.” This title covers all the events recorded in this Book. “Numbers,
therefore, is the Book of the WILDERNESS, and its types are wilderness types, or
types of our pilgrimage.
In the Numbers-Book of the Psalms we find the corresponding subject. It opens
with Psalm xc., “ A prayer of Moses,” —the man of the wilderness ! Its teaching, like
that of the other Books, is dispensational, with the EARTH as its central thought.
God’s Counsels and Purposes are celebrated with regard to the Earth, and the Nations
of the Earth, from the Ruin to the Glory; as in the other Books we have seen
them set forth with regard to (1) Man, (2) Israel, and (3) the Sanctuary.
Sin has come into the world, and ruined not merely Man, but the Earth itself :
“ Cursed is the ground for thy sake.” Sin has made the paradise of God a wilderness,
and death has filled it with sorrow and sadness. There is no hope for the Earth, and
no hope for the Nations of the Earth apart from Jehovah. The first and second
Psalms (xc. and xci.) set this forth, and give, as it were, the key-note and epitome of
the whole Book. Its figures are from this wilderness-world; as mountains, hills,
floods, grass, pestilence, trees, &c., &c., which the reader will notice for himself.
Happiness for the world will be found only when He “ whose right it is shall come
again to reign and “judge the world in righteousness.” In Christ, the coming King,
not only Israel, but all the nations of the earth will be blessed. This is the theme of
the Book. (See note on Psalm xcvi. 11.)
It consists, like Book 111., of seventeen Psalms, all of which are anonymous
(though not all without titles) except xc. (and xci.*), Moses’s, and ci., ciii., which are
David’s.
* If xci. be a Psalm of Moses (following Psalm xc.) then all the Scriptures quote d in our Lord’s
Temptation (even that which the evil one tried to quote) were from the writings of Moses!


Jehovah occurs 126 times, and Elohim 31 (10 of which are with Jehovah) ; El,
six times.
It is divided into three sections, as follows: —
(1) The first, Psalms xc. —xciv. Rest for the Earth desired. No hope for
the Earth till “ the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at
rest.”
(2) The second , Psalms xcv. —c. Rest for the Earth anticipated. “ Let the
heavens rejoice and let the earth be glad.” “ For He cometh to judge
the earth” (see xcvi. 11, note, page 92).
(3) The third, Psalms ci.—cvi. Rest for the Earth enjoyed. “ The Lord
hath prepared His throne in the heavens: and His kingdom ruleth over
all” (ciii. 19).
(1) REST FOR THE EARTH DESIRED.
A xc., xci. (Moses). Jehovah the only abiding place in a perishing world: and the
secret place of the Most High the only place of safety in it.
B xcii. The Sabbath day the only Rest in a wicked world, telling of that Sab-
bath-keeping to come, when the “workers of iniquity” shall be cut off ( v . 7,9,
11) and the righteous shall flourish (r. 12) in Jehovah their Rock and defence
( v - M)-
A xciii. Jehovah, mightier than all the floods of wickedness, shall yet establish His
everlasting throne in this wilderness-world, and reign in righteousness and true
holiness (see note on Ps. xciii.).
B xciv. Prayer to “ the Judge of the Earth ” (v. 2) to cut off “ the workers of
iniquity” (v . 4, 16, 23), and give the righteous rest ( v . 13 —13) in Jehovah their
Rock and defence ( v . 22).
(2) REST FOR THE EARTH ANTICIPATED.
C xcv. Exhortation for His people and sheep ( v . 7) “to come before His presence
with thanksgiving” (v. 2). For the Lord is “great” ( v. 3).
D a 1 xcvi. A summons to sing the “ New Song:” “for He cometh.”
b | xcvii. The New Song. “The Lord reigneth.”
D a | xcviii. A summons to sing the “New Song:” “for He cometh.”
h 1 xcix. The New Song. “ The Lord reigneth.”
G c. Exhortation for His People and sheep (v. 3) to “ come before His presence
with singing ” (r. 2). For the Lord is “good” (r. 3).


(3) REST FOR THE EARTH ENJOYED.
E' ci. (David). The Coming King and I lie principles of His future rule in the Earth.
The wicked cut off ( v . 5,8). “Mercy and Judgment” ( v. 1).
E | cii. The Eternal Creator ( v . 12, 24 —27). All else perishing ( v . 26).
E 2 [ ciii. (David). The Coming Kingdom and its Mercies and Judgment ( v . 4,6, 17, 19).
F | civ. The Eternal Creator ( v . 31). All else perishing ( v. 27—29).
E 3 cv., cvi. The Coming Kingdom illustrated hy the dealings of the King with
Israel in the past, in Mercy and Judgment (cv. 3, 7 ; cvi. 1, 3 —3).
BOOK V. — (PSALMS CVIL— CL.)—THE DEUTERONOMY-BOOK.
DEUTERONOMY is, again, Man’s name for this Book. It is from the Greek
Septuagint, and means “the second Law.” Itw T as given because Deuteronomy was a
repetition of the Law to the new generation. The title in the Hebrew' canon is oyyin nV«,
“These are the Words.” It is the Book which contains the words of God, and
almost wholly consists of the testimonies, statutes, and judgments, &c., of Jehovah. It
was from this Book that the Saviour made His three quotations, when He met the
tempter with the three-fold “It is written.” It follows the Book of the Wilderness,
and gives the reason for all the trials of their pilgrimage: —“ The Lord thy God led
thee these forty years . . . that He might make thee know that man doth not live hy
bread only, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord doth man
live.” (Dent. viii. 2,3.) The natural life, the giving of which is recorded in Genesis,
is nothing worth if man is not begotten hy the Word, and if the new natui'e thus given
is not nourished by the Word. Eor only thus can man he truly said to live.
Hence, in this Deuteronomy-Book of the Psalms we have the same leading subject.
Its teaching is like that of the other Books, dispensational; and it is grouped around the
WORD. All blessing for Man (Book i.), all blessing for Israel (Book ii.), all blessing
for Zion (Book iii.), all blessing for the Earth and its Nations (Book iv.), is bound up
in the Word and Law of God. The breaking of that Law had been the source of Man’s
sorrow, Israel’s dispersion, the Temple’s ruin, and Earth’s misery. It will yet be seen
that all blessing for Man, the gathering of Israel, the building of Zion, and restoration
for the Earth, is bound up with the Word of God, and with His Laws written by His
Spirit on the fleshy tables of the heart.
What a wonderful thing for one to be brought to say “Oh how I love Thy Law! ”
(Psalm cxix. 97*), when the breaking of that Law had brought in all the suffering }
But it will be noted that this is said only after (in Psalm cxviii.) the Resurrection
of the Righteous Magnifier of that Law has been celebrated.
This is the Theme of the Deuteronomy-Book of the Psalms. It consists of forty-four
Psalms, in which the title of Jehovah occurs 293 times; and Jah, 13 ; while Elohim
occurs only 41 times (4 of which are with Jehovah) ; El, 10 times; Eloha, twice.
While the structure of the other Books consists of two or three sections, this Book
is, like the Law of God itself, a perfect whole. It is the only Book which has an even
number of Psalms. Its first Psalm (cvii.), as is the case with the first Psalms of the
other Books, is at once its key-note and epitome.
*lt will be noted that the characteristic Psalm cxix. occurs in this book; as Ixxxiv. does in the
Leviticus-Book; and xc. in the Numbers-Book, &c.


“ He sent His Word, and healed them, and delivered them from their
Destructions”* (cyii. 20).
A j evii. The sending of the healing Word.
B c a cviii.—cx. (David’s). The true David’s deliverance and exaltation
(see cviii. 6).
b cxi.—cxiii. Praise. Three Hallelujah Psalms ; the first two beginning,
and the third beginning and ending, with “ Hallelujah.” (cxi. Praise
for Jehovah’s “Works” cxii. for His “Ways,” cxiii. for “ Himself .”)
d c | cxiv., cxv. Israel’s deliverance from Egypt (past).
d cxvi.—cxviii. Praise. Three Hallelujah Psalms ; the first two
ending with “ Hallelujah,” and the third beginning and
ending with “ 0 give thanks.”
A | cxix. The Law written in the heart. Jer. xxxi. 33.
B d c cxx. —cxxxiv. Israel's Deliverance from Dispersion (future).
Fifteen “ Songs of Degrees,” arranged in five threes. (See note
onp. 123, and extended arrangement onp. 158.)
d cxxxv., cxxxvi. Praise. (These two Psalms go together, and
form one arrangement. See them onp. 133.)
y j cxxxvii. Israel’s Deliverance from Babylon (past).
8 | cxxxviii. (David). Praise.
k cxxxix. (David). The Deliverance from their own evil heart.
(Ezek. xxxvi. 26-; Jer. xxxi 33-.)
r | cxi.—cxliv. (David). Prayer and Praise.
C a | cxlv. (David). The true David leading the praises of His People (cxliv. 9).
b cxlvi. —cl Praise. Five Hallelujah Psalms, each beginning and
ending with Hallelujah. (See the extended arrangement below.)
The last member, h., is an echo and reminiscence of the Five Books :
An Appendix of Five Hallelujah Psalms.
h cxlvi. Genesis; (Compare v. 4 with Gen. ii., v. 5 with Gen. xxviii., v. 6
with Gen. i., &c.)
cxlvii. Exodus. (Compare v. 4, “by their names,” with Ex. i. 1, “These are
the names ” ; v. 2 and 20, the building up of the Nation,
with Ex. i. 7 20; and v. 15, 19 with Ex. xx.)
cxlviii. Leviticus. (Compare v. 14, “a people near unto Him,’ with Lev. x. 3,
“I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me.” See
also Hum. xvi. 9, 10.)
cxlix. Numbers. (The Nations blessed and ruled by the Saints, v. 5—9,
Nura xiv. 21, xxiv. 17 —24.)
el. Deuteronomy. (Compare v. 2 with Deut. iii. 24.)
* rvn-i ((/roves, or pits') occurs only here, and in Lam. iv. 20. ihe two passages taken together
tell us that it is not merely the written Word which delivers from deep afflictions, but that the
Divine and Living Word, who was “ taken in their pits,” is the alone Deliverer of His People from
their graves.


Note. — The fifteen songs of degrees, c., may be thus arranged :
c E e | cxx. Distress and war. )
f | cxxi. Jehovah the only help. > Dispersion experiences,
g j cxxii. (David.) Peace in Jerusalem. )
E h | cxxiii. Affliction. \
i | exxiv. (David.) Jehovah the only help. > Enemies,
k | cxxv. Peace in Zion. j
o 1 | cxxvi. Affliction. )
m | cxxvii. (Solomon.) Jehovah the only help. | Jehovah,
n 1 cxxviii. Blessing and peace in Zion. )
E e | cxxix. Affliction. \
f | cxxx. Jehovah the only help. > Dispersion Experiences.
y | cxxxi. (David.) Peace and quietness, j
F h | cxxxii. Affliction. \
i 1 cxxxiii. (David.) Jehovah the only help. > The Anointed.
k | cxxxiv. Blessing in Zion. )


WORKS BY THE REV. E. W. BULLINGER, D.D.
Indispensable to all Ministers, Teachers, and Bible Students.
The Critical Lexicon & Concordance
to the English & Greek New Testament.,
Second and Cheaper Edition, large Bvo., 1034 pp., reduced from 30/- to 15/-
LONGMANS & CO., 39, Paternoster Row.
This Work is specially designed for those who have little or no knowledge of
Greek. It shows them at a glance the literal meaning of the Greek word by a mere
reference to the English word which translates it.
It is the result of nine years’ work. Professors, Divines. Ministers of various
Denominations, competent Critics, Editors of Leading Papers, unite in hearty approval.
“Admirable and elaborate.” — Prof. Plumptre, at Croydon Church Congress, 1877.
“ Sound and accurate.” — British Quarterly Review.
“A compilation which ought to find a place on the study-table of every English divine or
biblical scholar.” — Saturday Review.
“ A work of great industry and of great usefulness. We welcome a second edition.” — Record.
“We heartily commend this ... as supplying a need greatly felt in the present day. ... We
wish this book much success.” — The Christian.
“ It is, in fact, a book which no Bible student can afford to do without. ... A simple glance
through the work will convince anyone that it has very superior advantages over any other book of
its kind now before the public.” — The Christian Commonwealth.
“ The Christian Church owes much to the labours of such students of the Holy Scriptures as
Dr. Bullinger, Cruden and others.” — The Overland Mail.
“ Supplies a want long felt by Bible students.” — Prim. Meth. World.
“ A very valuable work. We strongly recommend it,” — Gospel Magazine.
“ A triumph of painstaking labour.” — The English Independent.
“ Both in design and execution the work is one calling for high praise.” —The Home Neivs.
“ It seems to us to supply a manifest and important want. A really useful book.” — The Guardian.
“Itis a herculean labour—at once a noble monument of unwearied perseverance and of untiring
industry.”— The Rock.
“ English readers of the New Testament .. . will do well to have it beside them.”— The Academy.
“ Reflects the greatest credit on the energy and industry of its author.” — The Spectator,
“ Supplies a real and widely-felt want. . . The author deserves the gratitude of biblical
students.” — Wesleyan Methodist Magazine.
“ It will be very useful.” —The Late Dr. Tregelles.
“ Accurate and scholarlike.” — The Dean of Wells.
« Greatly needed, and is indeed essential to the right understanding of the New Testament.”—
Dr. Angus.
“ Eminently scholarly and exhaustive.” —Dr. Westcott.
“ A useful work.”—The Dean of Canterbury.
“ Deserves every encouragement.”—Prof. Stanley Leathes.
“ Admirable and very valuable.”— Dr. Allon.
“ Must prove very useful .... your readers’ gratitude will be great.”— Dr. Moulton.
“ Happily arranged and prepared with the utmost care. Explained . . . with brevity, but with
much Christian discernment, depth, and freshness.” — Dr. Smeaton.
” Very valuable and elaborate.” — Dr. Scrivener.


THE IMPORTANCE OF ACCURACY IN THE STUDY OF
HOLY SCRIPTURE.
Fourth Edition. 36 pp. Demy Bvo, Coloured Wrapper. Reduced to 3d. (post free, 4d.).
Published by PARTRIDGE & CO., 9, Paternoster Row, E.C.
The following Works are published by the Author at 7, St. Paul’s
Churchyard, E.C.: —
TEN SERMONS ON THE SECOND ADVENT.
Preached at Oxford,
Price Three Shillings, post free.
CONTENTS.
I. The Importance of Prophetic Study (2 Peter i. 19).
11. The Interpretation of Prophecy (2 Peter i. 20, 21).
111. The Second Advent Pre-Millenial {lsa. xi. 9; Matt. xxiv. 37).
IV. No Millenium without Christ {Matt. xxiv. 29, 30).
Y. The Calling and Hope of “ The Church of God” {Eph. Hi. 8,9).
VI. The Church’s Motive for Service (I John in. 2,3).
YII. The Second Advent in relation to “the Jew” {Rom. xi. 25-29).
VIII. The Second Advent in relation to “the Gentile” {Dan. ii. 44, 45).
IX. The Resurrection of “the Just and of the Unjust” (1 Cor. xv. 22-24).
X. The Judgment of “ the Quick and the Dead ” (2 Cor. v. 10 ; Matt. xxv. 31, 32 ;
Rev. ax. 11-15).
Appendix : —The Beginning of the End.
four prophetic periods.
A Key to the “ Things which must shortly come to pass.”
“ Man’s Day.” 1 Cor. iv. 2.
“ The Day of Christ.” Phil. ii. 16.
“ The Day of the Lord.” Rev. i. 10.
“ The Day of God.” 2 Pet. Hi. 12.
Price Twopence, post free Threepence.
THE NAME of JEHOVAH IN THE BOOK OF ESTHER.
Its occurrences in four Aci’ostics, with their Lessons.
Price Twopence, post free Threepence.
GOD’S PURPOSE IN ISRAEL.
Price One Penny, post free Three-halfpence.
FIFTY ORIGINAL HYMN-TUNES,
Set to Appropriate Words.
Price Two Shillings, post free.
SIXTY-SIX OLD BRETON TUNES.
Collected and transcribed from the lips of Breton peasants; and harmonised in short
score, for the use of the churches of the Breton Evangelical Mission. These tunes
have never before appeared in this form, and most of them are printed for the first
time. Some of them are in the ancient Greek modes, and all of them are peculiarly
characteristic. Price Two Shillings, post free.




A KEY TO THE PSALMS.
The Hev. Dr. Bellinger has much pleasure in announcing that a new and
S “ B °° k ° f PBalmS “ n ° W b6ing Pr “ ted ’ ” d will be
Its object is to exhibit to the eye each Psalm, so printed as to display at one view
6 P r e ‘ £eCtlon ° f lts plan ’ the symmetry of its structure, and the point of its teaching.
1 here is a principle of construction which prevails in the Old and New Testa-
ments !on g recognised by Biblical scholars, and called “ parallelism ”; bnt this had
hitherto been noticed only in verses and short passages. It was reserved for the late
Rev. Thomas Boys to show that the same principle (which he terms “correspondence ”)
extends to whole chapters and even Books, and is not confined to those parts which
have been called “ Poetical,” but is found also to pervade the Historical and
Epistolary portions of the Word of God. In 1824 Mr. Boys published his Tactica
Sacra, m which he exhibited the structure of several of the Epistles; and in 1825 he
published his Key to the Booh of Psalms , in which he explained the whole subject, and
gave examples of sixteen of the Psalms which he had at that time arranged.
At Ins death, in 1880, he left certain materials, which have since been placed in the
lands of Dr. Bullmger, and have enabled him to arrange the whole of the Psalms,
and to issue them in a complete form.
I rom the specimen of one given herewith (Psalm cv.) it will be seen that it is
not a mere plan made for the Psalm; but that the plan is exhibited on which the
Psalm m actually constructed, showing that the words “ which the Holy Ghost
teacheth ” are not written with the imperfection which pertains to man’s writings,
but with an order, method, perfection and precision peculiar to themselves, and not
found in any mere human composition. The great central thought of each Psalm,
and the object of its teaching, is thus discovered and clearly brought out. A reference
to “the skeleton ” of this Psalm will explain the use of the letters employed, and show
how the subject of one member of it (marked by a Roman letter) corresponds with that
of the other (marked by an italic letter).
The work will consist of a Preface by the Rev. Sydney Thelwall, 8.A., Vicar
of Westleigh, North Devon, through whom, in God’s providence, Mr. Boys’s papers
have been preserved; and an Introduction by the Editor, giving a full explanation of
the principles and their application, which is necessary for a due understanding and
appreciation of the work; these will be followed by each Psalm in order, with its
“Skeleton” or Key, and such brief notes connected with its structure as may be
required; the work concluding with an Appendix, by the Editor, on the Psalms as a whole ,
showing that each Psalm is only a member of some larger arrangement, and exhibiting
the plan on which the one hundred and fifty Psalms are arranged (in their Books,
divisions, sections, &c.). The mutual relation of each Psalm will thus be set forth, ’
and the reason why it occupies the particular place assigned to it.
The lext will be printed from the Authorised Version; and, in the case of the
Divine Titles, the types will be so employed as to secure uniformity, and enable the
reader easily to distinguish each of the Divine Names and Titles: (Jehovah, Jah,
Adon, Adonai, Adonim, El, Elohim, Eloah, Elyon, Shaddai, and Messiah:) which will
all be explained in the Introduction.
1 he price of the wmrk will be Five Shillings , post free, and it will be published by
Di. Bullinger. All orders are to be sent to him, addressed, simply, Woking.
I lepayment is requested in order to save the time, trouble and expense involved in
the keeping of accounts, and in the collection of unpaid subscriptions after publication.
Friends are asked kindly to assist in the circulation of this prospectus among
Bible students. Extra copies of it will be gladly supplied for this purpose.


[Specimen
PSALM CY.
A 0 give thanks unto the Lord; call upon his name: make known his deeds
among the people. 2 Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him: talk ye of all his
wondrous works. 3 Glory ye in his holy name: let the heart of them rejoice
that seek the Lord. 4 Seek the Lord, and his strength: seek his face evermore.
5 Remember his marvellous works that he hath done; his wonders, and the
judgments of his mouth; 6 oye seed of Abraham his servant, ye children of
Jacob his chosen. 7 He is the Lord our God; his judgments are in all the earth.
B 8 He hath remembered 1 his covenant for ever, the word 2 which he com-
manded to a thousand generations. 9 Which covenant he made with Abraham,
and his oath unto Isaac; 10 And confirmed the same unto Jacob for a law, and
to Israel for an everlasting covenant: 11 Saying, Unto thee will I give the
land of Canaan, the lot of your inheritance: 12 When they were hut a few
men in number; yea, very few, and strangers in it.
0 a I 13 When they went 3 from one nation to another, from one kingdom to
I another people;
k 14 Be suffered no man to do them wrong: yea, he reproved kings
for their sakes; 13 Saying , Touch not mine anointed, and do my
prophets no harm,
c 16 Moreover he called for a famine upon the land: he brake the
whole staff of bread.
d 17 He sent a man before them, even Joseph, who was sold for a
servant: 18 Whose feet they hurt with fetters: he was laid in iron;
19 Until the time that his word came: the word of the Lord
tried him. 20 The king sent and loosed him; even the ruler of the
people, and let him go free. 21 He made him lord of his house,
and ruler of all his substance; 22 To bind his princes at his
pleasure; and teach his senators wisdom.
C a | 23 Israel also came 3 into Egypt; and Jacob sojourned in the land of Ham.
h I 24 And he increased his people greatly; and made them stronger 4
] than their enemies.
c 23 He turned their heart to hate his people, to deal subtilly with
his servants.
d 2 6 He sent Moses his servant; and Aaron whom he had chosen.
27 They shewed his signs among them, and wonders in the land of
Ham. 5 28 He sent darkness, and made it dark; and they rebelled
not against his word. 29 He turned their waters into blood, and
slew their fish. 30 Their 0 land brought forth frogs in abundance,
in the chambers of their kings. 31 He spake, and there came
p divers sorts of flies, and lice in all their coasts. 32 He gave them
hail for rain, and flaming fire in their land. 33 He smote their
vines also and their fig trees; and brake the trees of their coasts.
34 He spake, and the locusts came, and caterpillers, and that with-
out number, 3 5 And did eat up all the herbs in their land, and
devoured the fruit of their ground. 36 He smote also all the first-
born in their land, the chief of all their strength. 37 He brought
them forth also with silver and gold: and there was not one feeble
person among their tribes. 38 Egypt was glad when they departed:
for the fear of them fell upon them. 39 He spread a cloud for a
covering'; and fire to give light in the night. 40 The people asked,
' and he brought quails, and satisfied them with the bread of heaven.
41 He opened the rock, and the waters gushed out; they ran in the
dry places like a river.
B 42 For he remembered 1 his holy promise, 2 and Abraham his servant. 43 And
he brought forth his people with joy, and his chosen with gladness: 44 And
gave them the lands of the heathen: and they inherited the labour of the
people; 43 That they might observe his statutes, and keep his laws.
A | Praise ye THE LORD,


Pages. \
PSALM CV.—THE SKELETON.
A | i —7. Exhortation to praise the Loud.
B | 8 12. God’s covenant with Abraham, and His faithfulness in remembering it.
C a | 13. Journeyings of the People of God.
h | 14, 15. Favour, and protection from enemies,
c ( 16. Affliction.
d | 17—22. Mission of Joseph; and subsequent deliverance in Egypt.
G a | 23. Journeyings of the People of God.
b I 24. Favour, and protection from enemies.
c | 25. Affliction.
d I 26—41. Mission of Moses and Aaron; and subsequent deliverance in
I Egypt.
B I 42—45- God’s covenant with Abraham, and His faithfulness in remembering fand
I performing] it. ® L
A | -45. Exhortation to praise THE LORI).
1 13?, the same word in verses 8 and 42. -“in, translated “word,” v. 8 ; “promise,” v. 42
“ and they tvent,” r. 13 (1); “ and Israel came,” v. 23 (1). 4 avv means to be strong in
number. "Seven plagues enumerated. So in Ps. cvi., seven sins in the wilderness. (i “The”
in edition of 1611. Printed “Their” in editions of A.Y. since 1648.
Note.—That A and A are hortatory, and in the second person plural. All the rest of the
Psalm is in the third person. In B and It we have God’s remembrance of His covenant, but
in B it is in promise (“7 will give”), while in Bit is in performance {“and He gave ”). C and
C consist of narrative: in Cwe have the history of the patriarchs (as recorded in Genesis), and
in C the corresponding history of the nation (as recorded in Exodus).
N.B. — A short line after a verse number means the first part of a verse ; 45-. A short
line before means the last part, thus : -45. A short line each side means the middle part of a
verse : -45-








