

With the ?
A
KHOJA’S TOUR IN AUSTRALIA.




A
KHOJA’S TOUR IN AUSTRALIA.
BY
FAZULBHOY VISRAM,
JUSTICE OF THE PEACE, MEMBER OF THE CORPORATION, BOMBAY, AND
PARTNER IN THE FIRM OF Messrs VISRAM EBRAHIM & CO.,
(C&!? BOMBAY, CALCUTTA. CHX'i'XAGOS.&,. CUTTACK, COCOA A.OA, HAST COST, HAUBJ.TIUS, &0.)
.(Reprinted frm the . 'TIMES OF INDIA.)
S am lui|:
fIIHfBD AT THE TIMES OF INDIA STEAM PRESS.
1 885,


ADVANTAGES OF TRAVELS.
It drawa the grossness off the understanding,
And renders active and industrious spirits.
He that knows moat men’s manners must of necessity
Best know his own, and mend those by example.
’Tis a dull thing to travel like a mill horse,
Still in the place he was born in, lamed and blinded;
Living at home is like it. Pure and strong spirits,
That like the fire still covet to fly upward,
And to give fire as well as take it cased up and mew’d here,
I mean at home, like lusty mettled horses.
Only tied up in stables to please their masters,
Beat and their fiery lives in their own letters.
Beaumont and Fletcher.


MR FAZULBHOY VISRAM




PREFACE.
This hastily got-up little work has been chiefly
decided upon at the suggestions of various friends and
from divers motives ; but the latter do not include any
covetousness for fame nor claim for literary merit ; on
the contrary, such aspirations are entirely disclaimed.
The chief object of publishing these lines is merely to
place before the general reader a simple record of a
traveller’s ordinary doings abroad, and to give him
an idea how a well-timed trip extending over not more
than even three months could be made enjoyable and
advantageous in every way' —social, intellectual,
sanitary. Moreover, it is to be hoped that the
facilities, delights, safety and comforts of travelling at
sea as experienced by me, and which are available to
any one else as well, may awaken in the minds ot, at
least, educated natives of means, a desire of seeing
other countries and the incalculable advantages thereof.
These advantages and facilities are patent to Europeans
generally, and to a good many of native gentlemen
of India, too, and to them, as is natural, this diary may
be nothing more than possessing an ordinary interest.
But there exists a large number of native gentlemen
to whom travelling and its advantages are scarcely


known, and some are even unaware of the existence
of such a glorious country as Australia ! For instance,
some few have enquired of the author if he has been to
Vienna, thinking that this city is the capital of this
country instead of Austria ! To them especially these
pages may prove of some interest and even instruction,
and at the same time make them acquainted with a
valuable neighbouring country, which would afford
anyone some exceptional opportunities of learning,
enterprise, sociability, recruiting health, &c., &c. The
above remarks would perhaps apply more aptly to
Mahomedans, who, in spite of their glorious past, are
admittedly behind many communities in modern
civilization, including travelling. To illustrate this it
may be added, that, the author has been the first among
the Khojas, if not among all the Mahomedans of India,
to do even such an insignificant tour as to Australia and
Africa, just as his brother Mr. Hassumbhoy Visram was
probably the first Mussulman who lately accomplished
a tour round the world ; whilst among the Europeans
such travelling is an ordinary affair, and means is the
only thing that is considered to be necessary to be able
to undertake it. Besides, it now forms an essential
part of their education, and no person is supposed to
have acquired all the qualifications of a gentleman unless
he has done some proper independent touring. What
knowledge and experience of the world, quite different
to what acquired by book reading, it is capable of
imparting to human mind, and still bow many of us in
spite of our means have not got the courage to court it!
With these words this short preface is closed with


tho author s solicitude that this publication, his very
first venture, will meet with all due indulgence at the
hands of his readers for its faults, which must needs be
many.
The author further desires to acknowledge the very
hearty welcome and great courtesy which he received
everywhere from many esteemed friends, during his
stay in Melbourne, beautiful Sydney and Adelaide, and
he does not hesitate to say that any other native of India
visiting the Colony, if properly introduced, will
receive the same hospitable reception! Vale.
Since writing the above, the writer’s attention has been
drawn to an interesting article about Australia that
appeared in the Leisure Hour for July last, which
he has decided upon appending to this publication.
Ji is very concise and gives a number of statistics which
might be of use to some readers, although the author has
studiously avoided such heavy matter in the body of
this diary. J
FAZULBHOY VISRAM.
Bombay :
Breach Candy, Ist October 1885.




A KHOJA’S TRAVELS IN
AUSTRALIA.
Me. Fazulbhoy Vis ram, a leading member of
the Khoja community and a gentleman very
well-known in commercial circles throughout
the East, favours us to-day with the first instal-
ment of his travels to and in Australia. This
is the first time Mr. Fazulbhoy has left India,
and it is not often that such thoroughly novel
scenes have been presented to so shrewd and
observant a traveller. The papers, of which
there will probably be five or six, will be read
with interest here, and no doubt be quoted largely
in Australia, when the English people there will
have an unusually good opportunity of seeing
themselves as others see them. The writer is
largely interested in the foreign trade of Bom-
bay, especially with Zanzibar and the Mauritius,.


an d the information he will give us later o
about the possibilities of trade between f V ahJ
and Australia will have a real P iact j ic
His brother, it will be remembered gave ™ a
very interesting account a year O', "' 1 '“ 'h
Khoia’s iourney round the world. Mr. itosa
bhoy Frarnjee, C.X.E., has shown ns I.- -
£vnipmri7o and energy is possessed by the rarsees.
It is well however, for Bombay that these qualities
nit monopolized by any one section of out com-
munity.-(TiMES of India, 19 th January 188 o.)
No. I.
Saturday, September 6.
SsSilSli:?
chimneys and other towers occas ional showers
esque. Weather gloomy an y c i ent iy so to make
p\L r u/a....
anybody. Passed the barque Kedran coming in.


Sunday, September 7.
All awoke to a much better morning, clearer weather and
calmer sea, with a fresh south-wester, but the steamer is
rolling enough to keep us queer. Bather a dull Sunday
this, quite different to what we are used to on shore. There
is even no muster of sailors and no church, at least in the
morning. This, cannot be the usual state of things on
board, hut I may have to change my opinion before evening,
and right glad I shall be to do so, for we are already wishing
for anything for a change.
Well, after all, there was no church, no muster to-day s
the captain did not propose anything, and no passenger
insisted upon it. We long for many other things though.
Smart shower of rain at 9 p.m,
Monday, September 8.
After the heavy rain last night I got my bed upon the
poop and slept from 11 p.m. to 5 a,m„ when the noise
created by the deck washers and the awning cleansers roused
me rather abruptly. They manage to keep the crew conti-
nuously occupied with something or other, and the native
portion of it has to do the roughest part of the work
Glorious morning with a veritable “ sea of milk ” as wished
by our ladies when bidding me good-bye at Bombay. Every
one is looking better, and doing away with sea-sickness
apparently. We all wish now that we had a larger company
of passengers and some amusements on board to break the
monotony of life. We hope to get to Colombo to-morrow
afternoon, when we transfer ourselves to the Cathay, from
England, en route to Australia,


Tuesday, September 9.
Here we are in Colombo harbour at 12-45 p.m. The
Gaihay is already in, and we are proceeding alongside her
near the breakwater. The place does not look, at least
from outside, to be a charming one—a few houses (smallj
on shore and a number of steamers and sailing vessels are
visible in the harbour, which is quite open. After getting
inside the breakwater, however, we find ourselves almost
in a circle, composed of the breakwater (over which waves
of immense size continuously break) on one side, and the
town on the other. A good many more buildings are now
visible, and still more are looming behind the great range
of cocoanut trees which shut them out of view from the
harbour. But we are anchoring, and the lunch bell, too,
is ringing. At the same time lots of toneys and jolly-boats
approach us, and their occupants are hurrying up the steps
of the steamer. These people are rather curiously dressed
with a piece of white cloth of questionable cleanliness, wrap-
ped below the waist of each of them, and a banyan or sack
coat over it. Some of them wear a long oval-shaped soft
caps, somewhat similar to those worn by the Cabulese, and
the others are bareheaded. But they have got long hair,
oiled and combed and stuck down with a round crown-like
comb made of tortoise-shell. The poorer people do not put
on these circular things, and they can only be distinguished
from women by their beards and moustachios, J. he male
and female attires are almost similar to each other, and the
beardless youths, effeminate as they are, can be easily
mistaken for girls of corresponding ages. They are mostly
Cingalese and Tamils, and acknowledge the Mahomedan or
the "Buddhist faith. Some of them, however, are Christians,
and wear short coats on the upper part of their bodies and


hats on their heads. The lower dress is the same all
through without exception. But here we are accosted by a
fellow who has managed to come on board first of all. "He
is rather a good specimen of:-bnmanity, unlike the others,
muscular and of fine mien. He announces himself as a, dhobi,
and offers to wash our dirty linen within 24 hours. This
offer, however - , is declined, as so far we are only four days out
of Bombay. Then follows a regular swarm of persons who
turn out to be sellers of various articles, consisting of sap-
phires, cat’s-eyes, rubies, brilliants, “jumbo ivory” charms,
as they term them, and card and cigarette cases, &c., made
of tortoise-shells. There are paper-knives and shoe-horns
made of the latter material, as .also gold and silver puzzle
rings and other ornaments. Everything is of local manu-
facture,,and is most exquisitely made too. The articles are
certainly very creditable to the makers, who deserve to be
patronised ; but the sellers are evidently great cheats, and
would accept about one-fifth of the prices they begin with.
They are money-changers also, and they offer to buy our
English sovereigns at Rs, 12 each, and also to cash our
Bombay currency notes at a commission of 25 cents per
piece of Rs. ID, They will not sell any of their gold sove-
reigns for anything less than Rs. 12-8 each in spite of
our pleading that ours were as good as their own. They
will not accept our offer’s for any of the numerous articles,
and they won’t leave us either. They talk awfully, and in
English too, though in a mutilated form. But here come
the pliers of boats and launches, who offer to take us on
shore “at M. per head.” Worth buying, sir!” “Worth
looking at, sir!” “ Vaarygoot.-" “ Just look.;” and so on, cry
the pedlars ; but we leave them and proceed on shore. I am
not,anxious to buy anything as I am coming here again on
my return from Australia in route to old Bombay.


Well, here we are on the shore on terra firma once more,
and it is an agreeable change. We enquire about the trains
to Kandy, but they leave at 7 a,m. and 2 p.m,, respectively,
so we are unable this time to visit that pleasant place. The
Governor is there, and the elite too I suppose. Under the
circumstances, I take a first-class hurt (a four-wheeled
carriage resembling the wagonette) with a good Australian
horse, and take an immense drive about the town, visiting
the gubernatorial residence, the museum, the Galle Face
road, the public gardens, and most of the public places. The
heat is intense, the glare from the red earthy ground being
very great. The streets are not very wide, but they are long,
and lined with houses and villas on both sides. There are
gardens, but they do not contain anything beyond the
cocoanut trees, with the exception of a very few, whefein
some crotons and creepers Can be found. The very best
part of the town is that where the army barracks are
situated leading therefrom to the Galle Sea Face —a charm-
ing spot and deservedly popular. They have music here
Once a week (and also as often at the Cinnamon Gardens),
and every evening a large concourse of people can be seen.
The city is pretty clear and beautiful in some places. Indeed,
it is one of those deceptive places which, like Bombay, give
you no idea of their intrinsic merits when viewed from the
harbour. We do not transfer to the Cathay until to-
morrow, and both this steamer and the Ancona are waiting
for the Siam, bound from England to Madras and Calcutta.
The weather in the town during the day at present is as hot
as the Bombay summer, except at the Galle Sea Face, where
it is deliciously cool. They have had no rain for the last
month and a half, and consequently cholera has appeared
with the deficiency and deterioration of drinking water.


But cholera is all over the world now, and a little place like
Colombo has no right to be exempted from it. It would
seem that the more this fell disease is enquired into the wider
it spreads. I wish all success, however, to the Commission
(the medical officer of the Ancona calls it expedition) which
is being organized to find means for its—what shall 1 say ?
—suppression. Such a result will be eminently satisfactory
of course, but it is hardly possible to attain it.
Eetnrned home, i.e„ on board, at 8 p.m., after a most
exhaustive drive extending over five hours and as far as
Kolupitia and Bamlipatia (F), and dinner with some
(Bombay) Mahomedan friends. Weather at night time is
fairly cool. I might term the change as being rather
abrupt; indeed, the climate here is considered to be too
variable to suit people of weak constitutions.
Wednesday, September 10.
Eemoved luggage and all to the Cathay, which will carry
us hence to Australia. The Siam came in early this morning
from England. The P. &0. boats, without doubt, work
with railway punctuality, and the order as well as the
discipline on board is something marvellous. We are now
timed to leave for King George’s Sound by 4 p.m. to-day,
and hope under God to reach it in twelve running days.
Had breakfast in our new abode, and proceeded once more
to the shore in answer to a friendly call. In addition to the
places visited yesterday, the new and the old lunatic asylums
as well as the jail were “ done ” to-day, although we were
not permitted to see into the latter place. Curiously enough,
no one is allowed in here unless he has a friend or relative to


call upon. Luckily or unluckily, we did not know any of
the prisoners, and so we were deprived of the.opportunity of
looking into the Ceylon gaol. We went into the mad-houses,
however, and saw about 300 lunatics, half of whom were
females. We were also told that the jail contained about
1,000 prisoners. This would seem to show that the tendency
to insanity as well as crime is rather considerable in this part
of the wide, wide world. I then finished my letters and
telegrams to Bombay, and went over to the Grand Oriental
Hotel. A most lively scene presented itself to our view
here. Lots of tables were spread out in the great dining
hall, with beautiful surroundings, and a large number of
passsengers, belonging mostly to the three P. & O.
steamers in the harbour, were partaking of refreshments.
The place is altogether too good for a city like-this, and I
agree with my companion in wondering how it can be
permanently maintained. Another good hotel is the Galle
Face Hotel. It is very well kept up, too, and although
rather far from the business centre, is perhaps the best
place by reason of its beautiful situation on the sea. The
proprietors of these places must have some other sources of
revenue besides these hotels, because the earnings here could
not be very large after all. It is now verging on three
o’clock, and we must join the Cathay. We go on board
and find about 20 passengers, half a dozen of whom are of
the fair sex. They are mostly foreigners (the German
element preponderating), and form a gay company on the
whole. We shall now see how we get on with them. We
weigh anchor at 4-30 p.m. and resume our voyage. The
sea from outside the breakwater is rather high, and the
waves break over the vessel.


Thursday, September 11.
We had pretty heavy sea up to midnight yesterday, bat
this morning it is comparatively calm and cool. We sighted
dalle some time last night—at least we saw the light-house.
The whole company of passengers and officers sat down to
breakfast punctually at 9 a.m., and the meal lasted full
three-quarters of an hour. Plenty of gossipping and
flirting, and there is some love-making too, I fear. On the
table here (unlike on that of the Ancona) each passenger
has his place allotted to him beforehand, and every one of
us find our respective names on a card buried under the
plate. _ They have mutilated my name, and last night I
was diffident about appropriating my seat, when the cap-
tain came to the rescue and shouted “Show the gentleman
his seat,” and down I went into it. It is opposite my cabin,
and I like it. There is nothing but civility all round, and
it looks all the more striking to an Indian who is accus-
tomed to rather a different—shall I say uppish ?—treatment
at the hands of Europeans generally in his own country.
I will not say that of all the Europeans in India, for that
would be a sheer injustice to a good many honourable
exceptions, among whom I possess some of my most cherish-
ed and esteemed friends ; they are gentlemen thoroughbred.
The passengers are coming out in their true colours. This
morning I had a good many courteous nods and “ good
mornings” from most of them, and now a gentleman comes
over to me and says, “Wouldyou care to go down for the
run, sir? We have got up a sweep on board, one shilling
each. ” “ Don’t mind,” says I. “ Thanks, ” says he. I
trust more amusements will spring up ere long. They had
whist last night, and travelling will then be a pleasure
of a varying nature, of course.


Friday, September 12.
Beautiful morning with calm sea and glorious sunshine.
The Cathay does not roll a hit —she never did for the matter
of that. An Australian gentleman with us thinks that we
shall have fine weather throughout, and I hope he is right.
He also advises me to make a good stay in Australia, and has
promised to let me have a book about the colony. lam
going to commence reading Cornish’s “Under the Southern
Cioss,” but he calls it “ rubbish.”
I have lost my shilling in the sweep on the run of
yesterday, and the same gentleman approaches me again
with a similar request. I acquiesce in it, of course. I
learn for the first time that it is a wager on the steamer's
run, and they mean to have a sweep daily. My yesterday s
number was 243, and the Cathay did only 240 miles. So I
missed 30s. by three points I To-day lam told that I have
got 283 as my number, and I have no doubt that the steamer
will run so many miles, if not more. The numbers are
drawn by some of the lady passengers on board, and that is
the main attraction about it assuredly. It is very difficult
for our watches to give anything like correct time now-a-days,
although they are ostensibly carried for that purpose. I
have already had to advance my hitherto faithful time-keeper
20 minutes as far as Colombo and 15 more since. This
complaint can only be remedied, I presume, when we get on
land again, for watches are not aquatics after all.
Saturday, September 13.
Gymnastics, athletic, antics, flirtations, larking, dancing
and prancing, and nothing else ; but life is beginning to
savour abit of monotony on board after all, especially the work


ofpenning this journaL There can be hardly anything new
to write about now, so I fear I shall have to shut up till we
get to King George 5 ® Sound.
Sunday, SBPTEJtBEft 14.
~^ no^ler . Sunday on boardship. I scarcely find any
dinerence in it as compared with the last one, except that we
have this time a goodly number of passengers. We have
just had a very tame breakfast, and are all on deck, now
smoking or chatting. The piano is in full swing. There
was a smart shower of rain at 2-30 this morning, and now we
have a clear sky with a bright sunshine. The weather is
a little warmer though, and the thermometer in the captain’s
cabin on deck denotes 80* Fahr.
We have just had a muster of all hands on board, a for-
inality that was dispensed with on board the Ancona, last
Sunday. 1 hey are going to have a church service, too, and I
begin to feel that lam among Christians after all. The bell
has just commenced tolling, and there is a general rush into
the saloon. It is followed by the usual service which I
see is being carried on by singing with piano accompani-
ment, I might have attended it, too, but Ido not feel
myself in a religious frame of mind at present. And yet I
know it for a certainty that there are others in our marine
fraternity suffering from the same idiosyncracy, and still
they go for appearance sake, I fancy. At any rate, they must
be credited with a better command over their nerves than I
have. Two gentlemen passengers have just had a long yarn
with me upon various Indian matters, and eventually upon
religions in general. Upon this latter subject they seem to
have very pronounced views, savouring of the latest refor


tnations ; but down they go to the church. They put me a
variety of questions, such as the literal meaning of “Hindoos-
tban,” “ Mussulman,” “ Hindoo,” “ our religions doc-
trines, ” “the modes of worship,” &c„ &c., and carried on the
discussion in a most dispassionate, intelligent, and, I might
almost say, learned fashion. One of them is a Government
servant at Melbourne and the other a “ squatter ” I believe.
Tuesday, September 16.
I have finished reading “ Under the Southern Cross
a great mass of very interesting as well as useful informa-
tion about Australia, compiled from various sources.
The narrative of the trip itself is well-written, and its use-
fulness is materially enhanced by a most elaborate introduc-
tion therein of other important matters relating to the
colony. However, some of the statements made by the
author are taken exception to by a few old Australians to
whom I lent the book for perusal,. Sweet music on deck by
an American lady, 9.
No. II.
Tuesday, September 23.
This morning at 6 a.m. we sighted the Australian mainland;
but it was soon invisible, owing to hazy weather. In fact;
it has been raining cats and dogs s.nce last night, and this
moment the sea is roaring and heaving and breaking over
the steamer from all sides, as we are continually changing
our course. A strong piercing gale is blowing all the while,
making the temperature :,(56° in the cabin) bitterly cold.


Outside it is 50° Fahr. In this condition we approach
Albany, King George’s Sound. We enter the natural pas-
sage through a ring of big barren hills at 11 a.m. The
protection afforded to the place by this great range of hills
is very striking, indeed, and gave us many a hope of com-
plete security from the inclemency of the weather as soon
as we might get into the harbour, so we proceeded cau-
tiously, and when at a comparatively short distance from the
place where a couple of vessels were riding at anchor and a
range of buildings were visible facing the shore, a boat
tossing fearfully approached the steamer, and out jumped
the pilot, climbing up smartly by the rope ladder. I should
think his presence was rather unnecessary, as in about ten
minutes’ time we easily got at the anchorage. Imme-
diately afterwards a steam launch came alongside, and half a
dozen of us jumped into it in defiance of the weather.
The chance of standing on land again after a run of four-
teen days was too tempting to be missed. It took nearly
three-quarters of an hour to get to the wooden pier, and
every one was completely drenched by this time by the rain
and sea water combined. This was rather a cold reception
from Western Australia at least, and yet we were glad to set
our feet on the shore. No anxious reporters nor any eager
eyes met us, although in the case of Mr. Cornish of “ Under
the Southern Cross ”it was different. Without exchanging
a single word with anybody we proceeded to the telegraph
and post offices and despatched our telegrams and letters.
After that we hurried to a place of refreshment called the
London Hotel, and had our lunch there, though the pro-
prietress called it “ dinner.” The charge was half a crown
per head. Boiled eggs were sold at 2s. 6 d. per dozen and
beer Is. per pint. The establishment mainly exists by the


patronage of passengers to and fro. After that we com-
menced looking into a few of the shops in the range of
buildings which we were able to view from _ the sea. Be-
tween these shops there are some roads leading to dwelling
house in the rear, but they are immediately blocked by
hills, and that is an end to the town. The place is as
barren as Aden, and is a dull, inactive place. The
harbour looks like that of Delagoa Bay (Lorens Marques,
Africa), and ought to be a safe anchorage for vessels,
although it gave us a very scanty protection indeed. But
this is one of their worst days in the year,” a gentleman
belonging to the place remarked to me. For the first rime
I saw a couple of Australian aborigines, short, hardy-looking
fellows with thick curly hair, led by two police constables.
They were charged with stealing sheep, and were brought
down from a sheep station SOO miles from here. One of
them was lame, and yet both had to do that distance on
foot. This fact does not go to support the alleged desire
of the Government to preserve the old race, which is actually
dying out. There being nothing else worth visiting on
the shore, and as our time also was nearly up, we returned
on board the Cathay, from the deck of which the ladies and
those of the gentlemen passengers who did not think it
prudent to venture on shore hailed us with a cheer. We
all looked like a parcel of mortal beings rescued from a
wreck and in a wretched condition. But the Cathay is
our home for the time being, and we were soon enabled to
come up again in a perfectly dry condition, although some
had caught cold and had head-ache, and so they remained
in the snug cabins. But I, a native of India, remained
perfectly free from the effects of the nastiest of weather 1
ever saw. This fact rather surprised our European passen


gers, but it is true nevertheless. Telegram charges Bs. Id.
per word for India and Bs. per 15 words to Melbourne ;
50 per cent, discount on press messages. These figures
rather differ from those of Mr. Cornish, but they are true.
Sailed out again at 4-30 p.m.
Thursday, September 25.
This day is characterized by a great change in the
weather. Colonists on board declare that it gives “ a little
glimpse of the Australian climate.” If so, living there
must be charming at present. The sea has gone down a
great deal and the sun shines brightly enough, but its lustre
is still scarcely felt. A very cold breeze is blowing though
and the baths are chilly. They have lost all their Turkish
warmth in spite of the proximity of the engine. Run 243
miles and difference of time 19 minutes. There is great
liveliness visible on board to-day, and the ladies look
cheery and rosy—the result of improved weather. A
continuation of these pleasant conditions is unanimously
wished for. J
Friday, September 26.
Continued fine weather, but bitterly cold, of which every
one complains, especially the skipper. All try to come up
and sit on the deck with a view to bask in the sunshine
but it is too weak and the wind too cold to permit any one
to remain. Temperature 57° in the captain’s cabin and
everything—clothes, bed, blankets, even your breath—is
very cold, and there is a feeling of stiffness all over one. All
the European passengers complain of this, and so do I ; but
Ido not feel colder than they do, though it is colder thaa
what I have .experienced in Calcutta at 45° in December.


Saturday, September 27.
Weather much improved and more endurable this morning.
At 9 a.m. we passed a small island on our left and the
Kangaroo Island on our right. The latter consists of a long
range of barren hills, similar to those visible near dismal
Aden. Sea quite calm, and the Cathay is now making
about 12’6 knots the hour. Passed a fine iron sailing ship
in full sail. A most cheerful spirit pervading all the
passengers now with the glorious change in the weather.
Australians assert that they have usually this kind of weather
in their country about 200 days in the year.
By 2 p.m., as we are passing close to the Australian
mainland on our right (with a north-east course) some of
the passengers with good eyesight are able to see land loom-
ing in the distance right ahead of us, and supposed to he
Adelaide, or rather Glenelg. But at 3 p.m. the dim line of
hills are perfectly visible just as Malabar Hill is from
the Bombay sea. These breaks in our voyage are becoming
more frequent, and so make it more pleasant. The weather
is all that can be desired, cold enough to keep up one’s
spirits, and we are inspired with a hope that our reception at
Adelaide is likely to be far more agreeable than that at King
George’s Sound.
At 4-15 p.m. we entered the Glenelg harbour and dropped
anchor at 4-30 p.m. On the right side there is a long line
of tall but parched looking hills. The view is open on the
left, and the gulf is so wide that in bad weather the ship-
ping is without adequate protection. A number of very
large steam launches (one of them called the Mermaid) came
to take us on shore, and their very sizes would indicate the
state of the sea in time of bad weather and the unsuitability


<»f small boats here. In fact, sometimes the passengers
have to be handed down into these launches in a basket like
packages of goods. However, the sea just now is very calm
and the sun is shining in all its glory, although this glory
is of a rather limited character. This state of things enables
us to have a very clear view of the port of Glenelg, as we look
upon a score of beautiful buildings on shore. They are all
of white stone, having one or two stories and provided with
chimneys or low towers, and seem to have been very well
designed. A long range of hills back them, and with the
setting sun the effect is excellent.
At 5 p.m. we reach the wooden pier and walk over it to the
shore. Iron rails are also laid on it to carry goods or baggage
in open wagons. Passing on it you are informed by a
notification on a board to keep to your right. On the left
another pier of similar construction, but only about half the
length of the former, leads to the Adelaide Bath Company’s
premises. "We then pass through a wide street, and are at the
Adelaide, Glenelg and Southern Australia Railway Company’s
station within five minutes, and catch the 5-15 p.m. train
for Adelaide about seven miles distant. The train passes
through a plain of land which is not under cultivation, but
shows signs of a good soil, having patches of green grass and
being studded with a great number of olive trees. At short
iatervals we pass a number of stations, aud eventually the
train passes through the city of Adelaide as if it were a
tramway car. There is no fencing on either side, and
though passenger and carriage traffic appears to prevail to
a fair extent, yet we cross street after street without any
mishap whatsoever. In India accidents would be the order
of the day under these circumstances. We are thus landed
in the very heart of the city, and the sight presented to our


view is beautiful ia the extreme. Broad
excellent roads, and lofty and most tasteful J> o{
fl T.i . ™ ™ibk, tb.nppe. one
panel a couple ot mebd the same, and
having to my enquiry he
rPS K “i. a wSSnnd
in aflame hall with exquisite surroundings. Every o
rnsmm
The scene is most picturesquely compiete and rea y
Fnvonean At 8-45 p.m. we reach the Street Station of the
fa U Say company, and get into the train regretting
that our stay here could not be longer. Fein p
Adelaide under the best circumstances in point of time


Saturday night is a period of great gaiety and bustle here—
and weather ; but I am sure this place cannot fail to charm
a visitor at any time of the year. Its existence does not
date beyond half a century only, and the transformation is
most astonishing. They have only two classes of carriages
in the train (Ist and 2nd), and the former consist of two
dozen rows of seats on each side, capable of holding double
that number of passengers. The arrival and departure of
the mail is evidently an event of great interest here,
and a large number of people come to see us in and off.
And so we left at 10-30 p.m. for Melbourne. Port Ade-
laide is also discernible in the moonlight night.
Sunday, September 28.
Cloudy and chilly morning with drizzling rain, and
found -he skipper exclaiming, “ I wish we had now some
otthe Ked Sea weather, at which they (the passengers)
were at first growling.” This sort of weather is of course
unpleasant to everybody, but to-morrow we expect to
reach Melbourne in fine weather probably.
Eun 163 miles (in 13J hours), and difference in time
seven minutes.
Monday, September 29.
Tim morning broke to-day very cloudy, chilly, and rainy,
but the Australian mainland was still in sight to the joy
of all the passengers. At 11 a.m. we passed the Nabean
Point on our right and the Londsdale Point on the left side
and further on, on this side, we entered Hobson’s Bay at
Queens Cliff Point. The channel is rather narrow at the
Entrance, but very wide and long inside, being about four


hours’ steam to Melbourne. The hills all round here show
some signs of vegetation, but wear a poor appearance in
comparison with those of Hindustan. Run 304 mdes,
difference in time eight minutes, and temperature of the
atmosphere 58 degrees. Anchored off Williams Town at
3 p.m., whence a beautiful view could be had of the harbour
with all the steamers and ships in it, and the various wharves,
beyond that, the suburbs, and further on Melbourne is
visible in all its glory. Not being aware that the Cathay
would go quite alongside the wharf, I unwittingly got into
a small open jolly-boat with a view to get on shore with
all possible despatch. Tne weather continued wet and
chilly with the sea rather rough, and I was a little annoyed
when the sturdy boatman informed me that I was being
taken to Sandridge along with four other passengers,
whence a train could be had for Melbourne, the distance
being about a quarter of that from Williams Town. _ 1
accordingly did this, and on arriving at the unassuming
station of the Victoria Railway at a fare of 6a.
Cist class), that from Williams Town being Is. M., a cab
was taken possession of, which soon took me to Menzies
Hotel. It is a fine two-storeyed stone building, replete
with everything such a place should possess, and fitted out
on the latest system for the comfort of lodgers, in
fact, all Melbourne has the peculiar advantage of being
laid out in the latest fashion, in point of architecture, roads,
&c. and everywhere there is an air of freshness, advance-
ment, and elegance the moat striking. _ Nothing seem
wanting—nothing omitted. “ The right thing in the right
place ” is the order of the day. The picture is most perfect,
most European, and the city can bear comparison with any
ordinary Western dry, although its age is quite young.


verily ifc gives you a glimpse of perfect European life, and
yet it was only brought into existence within the
memory of many people. Meat, food, vegetables, and fruits
ot rare descriptions were supplied at the above hotel and it
was quite a treat after the meals we had on board. ’
Tuesday, September 30,
Cloudy and cold morning. After breakfast engaged a
hansom (at 3s. per hour) and had an extensive drive in
the till p.m. Visited all the people to whom I
was provided with letters of introduction, and they one
and all received me very kindly and courteously, placing
their entire services at my disposal. For these, however, I
have scarcely any need at present, as to-morrow I go on
to Sydney with the Cathay. But I return to Melbourne
over and next week, when I shall have a better oppor-
tunity of seeing Melbourne and judging of its people.
Ihe most strikingly beautiful streets are the Collin.
Bounce, and the King William. They are very wide with
paved footpaths or with ranges of lovely high buildings all
of more or less architectural pretensions on both sides
Innumerable carriages of all descriptions, all drawn by
powerful horsey including goods wagons driven by smart
drivers, run swiftly in the body of the street in admirable
order, whilst a host of male and female foot passengers
invariably patronise the paths on both sides unlike in India.
Of course the spectacle thus presented is the very acme of"
liveliness and activity, but is just the same in every direc-
tion, and lacks the great variety of Indian scenes, which
differ in almost every city. The climate is very good, and
every face that you see is rosy and blooming, though
scarcely handsome or beautiful. In the evening we proceeded


to the Botanical Gardens, hut were rather disappointed
with their aspect. They cover a large area of ground, but
contain neither a variety of plants and trees, nor show any
signs of proper care. In fact, a good deal of the land has
nothing but withered grass on it, and is only fit for grazing
purposes, but I should not he surprised if in a few years
time they are well laid out and made as attractive as any
place of the kind in the country. Every means is evidently
available for such a purpose. After dinner at 6 p.m. 1
proceeded to the Bijou Theatre, kept by Lewis, and wit-
nessed the performance of “ Pun on the Bristol, given 7
his company. The audience was wholly European, and the
play, though a bit too boisterous, was very mirth-inspiring
indeed, and every one seemed to enjoy it mightily. I here
are three other houses of amusement in full swing every
night, and are well patronised. In India, however go°da
company, the public only support it at the outset, and the
concern soon becomes a failure. No wonder that these places
are favoured with good houses, beautiful scenery, and first-
rate actors as well as actresses. Walked home at 11 P'm-
through the still wide-awake streets, with the huge shop
ablaze with gas and electric lights, and amidst the deafening
cries of newsboys, beggars, cabbies, and others.
III.
Wednesday, Octobee 1.
Proceeded once more, and perhaps for the last time, on board
the Cathmj, and started towards Sydney at half-past twelve
noon. Most of our European passengers left the steamer at


Melbourne, and their places have been taken up by a
fresh bevy of Colonials, who are evidently going out for
a sea trip with their families. All expenses here are rather
high, but signs of prosperity are visible on every face, house,
dress, &c. This time we joined the steamer at the Williams
Town wharf, which we approached by railway (fare Is.
5d.). After traversing several suburbs studded with pic-
turesque wood-houses with their little gardens and chimneys,
the train stopped on the wharf quite alongside the steamer.
As the Cathay is steaming outside we are able to get a still
better view of Melbourne amidst hills, and harbours, and
houses than on the day we arrived. This is due to much
clearer weather, but it is chilly all the same. Temperature
60° in the cabin. Sea rather rough outside Port Phillip
Heads, but that is getting an old story. Passed a magnificent
ship in full sail,
Thursday, October 2.
To-day being the Bukree Eed I had the usual Mahomedan
-Niinaj, which of course there was no one to share with me
from among the passengers. The Mussulman sailors turned
out, though, in clean clothes and persons. Weather clear and
nacre endurable to-day—not warm, but less cold. Passed one
ship and two steamers, the former being a delightful sight,
being in all the glory of sails. Sea much calmer than
yesterday. Eun 304 miles, and difference in time 20 minutes.
Friday, October 3.
Delightful weather this morning. The sun is beginning
to shake off his impotence, but so far his lustre is very
agreeable, and every one seems to enjoy basking in his
lustre. The Shannon (P. and 0.) must leave Sydney to-day


before we can get in, and consequently the Cathay is now
made to steam slower, about knots per hour. Passed
Botany Bay at 12-30 p.m, and entered Sydney Heads about
an hour later, when the pilot boarded us. And now a delight-
ful cruise into the harbour commenced, but not before a
further short stoppage, when the Health Officer paid us a
visit and minutely examined every one on board, including
the ladies. Fortunately there was no sickness, and so we
escaped quarantine. The Cathay resumed steaming along
under the guidance of the pilot, and after encountering
several most picturesque views from all sides we anchored
alongside a wharf at 4 p.m. and stepped on shore.
Proceeded to Petty’s Hotel, and had a prolonged walk
through some of the streets which have rows of beautiful
houses on both sides. The roads are much narrower than
those in Melbourne—in fact, they aie too narrow for the
proper passage of the great traffic observable everywhere.
Besides, there are ascents and descents all round, and
consequently two-wheeled carriages (cabs) are the chief
conveyances, being the lightest of all.
Saturday, October 4.
Weather rather hazy and close. Had a walk after
breakfast, and paid a visit to a tonsorial establishment. In
these places you have to call on your barbers ; they do not
call at your houses or hotels, but they give you a very com-
fortable shave all the same. Thence proceeded to the post
office and other public buildings (viz., the exchange,
clubs, hotels, &o)., eventually calling at the Union Bank of
Australia. Mr. D. Finlayson, the manager (an old
Bombay man), received me very kindly and offered
his services. 1 shall mainly utilize these by drawing some


cash from his bank in terms of the letter of credit. After
lunch my two new acquaintances —nay, friends, and the
best ones, too, I have picked up in the colony, Messrs.
D. and K. —met me and very kindly offered to take me to
a picnic given by the former and his sister. They had
chartered a launch, Pearl by name, and contemplated going
to one of the many pretty gardens skirting the harbour.
About a dozen young ladies with an equal number of
gentlemen had also been invited. So we joined them at
3 p.m. at a pier and were soon steaming away. It
was a lovely day, and we did not fail to notice every nook
and corner in the harbour. It is impossible to describe
the magnitude of the harbour, its natural defences, and
its picturesque situation. Writers like Anthony Trollope
have found themselves almost unable to pourtray its wonder-
ful, natural beauties. However strong the sea may
be outside the heads, you feel inside as if you were on board
a vessel in the Prince’s Dock, for instance, the water being
smooth and calm, like that of a pond or river. And yet
vessels drawing as much as 22 feet can enter it at low water.
This natural advantage has been well utilized, and the water
is skirted with wharves, stores, and warehouses. The harbour
is not a uniform expanse of water, but is broken up in all
directions into capacious open-mouthed bays by the numerous
promontories jutting out into it. These bays are harbours
in themselves, and some of them are the continuation of
other harbours or rivers which are navigable for several miles.
The watery indentations that encircle the city allow the
very heart of it to be reached from the water. Many of
the promontories have beautiful residences with charming
gardens built on them which are used as places of
residence or pleasure. It was to one of these gardens,


standing in all its glory amidst heavenly scenery, that our
picnic party proceeded. It contained dancing platforms,
swings, caves, rustic seats, all arranged in the style so well
cultivated by the English. After some preliminary amuse-
ments we adjourned to the tea table replete with many
sweets and fruits. They were delicious. And then the
Italian string band struck up, which was a signal for dancing.
There was no lack of singing, too, and some of the ladies
and gentlemen being gifted with good voices, the treat was
of no mean order. It was an indescribably charming
sight to see the members of our little party sitting on the
green ground indulging, one and all, in melodious music, or
betaking to the dancing platform. The moon, too, shone in
its fullest glory. About 9 p.m., however, a somewhat unwil-
ling move was made towards the little wharf—Pearl Bay —and
after a shrill whistle from the steamer all got on board.
Dancing and singing were resumed on the tiny deck, and the
musicians urged on to play. In this state we went on
skirting the harbour from one point to another, all so similar,
that it was impossible for a stranger to identify any. The
lights from the surrounding gardens or dwelling houses
and the ships and men-of-war with the powerfully bright
moon overhead lit up the surrounding hills and made the
luxuriant' foliage standing thereon most pleasingly visible.
If anything, the night scene was more enthralling, more
ravishing, more inspiring, than the day. It is by far the
best I have seen, and the Sydney people might well be
proud—as no doubt they are—of their glorious harbour,
which can, as it were, besides being replete with such wonders
of nature, accommodate the shipping of the whole world.
Batteries are placed on the most suitable points, and these
render the entrance of any hostile ship impossible. With


these sensations we landed onshore, every one mightily pleased
with the trip, as also with the rare goodness and courtesy
ef the youthful hosts, for whom songs were sung and hurras
given, and they deserved them. They are specimens of
good English breeding and good-naturedness with free, easy
manners.
Sunday, October 5,
Weather better to-day, temperature 70°. Sunday is most
rigidly observed in these climes. Dinner at 1 p.m., instead
of in the evening. All liquor shops are closed, although
an increase of 60 per cent, in drunkenness has taken
place since the Sunday Closing Act came into operation.
No mails or trains run to-day between any of the towns
and cities. In fact, the whole place is closed and all work
stopped, and there is an air of rest and repose about the
city. Every one meets you in Sunday clothing, and there
is not a single raggamuffin observable anywhere. It would
appear there are no poor, in the lowest sense of the term, here.
Curiously enough, a Sunday afternoon concert takes place
regularly at Sir Joseph Bank’s Pavilion, Botany, about six
miles from the heart of the city. The hours are 3-30 to
5 p.m. A number of ’busses and steam tram cars with
a multitude of gaily dressed men and women run to and
fro. Accordingly, I hired a cab and had a delightful
drive amidst most charming scenery of a mixed kind-
country and town I reached there punctually, and a “ bob
secured me admittance. Music rather poor, and the girls
blooming, but not pretty ; I left the concert when it was
about half over, and took a stroll in the adjoining gardens.
They are pretty well laid out with flower plants chiefly.
Close by is the sea and the Botany Bay, with a nice range
of hills, from one of which the explorer Captain Cook s


monument as well as the Sydney Heads are clearly visible.
Returned home at 6 p.m., when I had “ cold tea,” instead
of dinner, and went out for a walk with Mr. D. Traversed
a good many streets and went to Hyde Park and a Roman
Catholic Cathedral, where a service was being held with
beautiful music. All entering the church—and their num-
ber was large—dipped their hands in holy water near the
gate. A padre offered us seats, but that would have meant
detention (not to speak of contribution), so we preferred
standing in a corner, and left the premises within five
minutes. No gas, no time-ball, no clock chimes. Such is
Sunday out here. No steam launch excursions either.
Monday, October 6.
Beastly weather to-day. Foggy, cold, with drizzling
rain. Roads all muddy, but the paved footpaths are good,
and a great lot of people of all sexes are moving about.
Went out in a cab and had another three hours’ drive
about town, visiting the Picture Gallery, Observatory, &c.
Launches run about in the harbour taking out and bringing
in passengers and excursionists, from point to point, in spite
of the weather, which does not seem to interfere with any-
thing or anybody. We ourselves are going up to the Blue
Mountains to-night, returning during the daytime to-
morrow. We hope to enjoy the magnificent scenery up
there, of which we learn so much. The Picture Gallery is
worth a visit, but its;collection is by no means a large one
as yet. The officer in charge of the Observatory showed us
round, explaining every apparatus and contrivance with a
faithful attention to detail, which an expert only could
appreciate to its full extent. For us the view of the town
from the top of the tower was the most pleasing feature of


our visit there. Temperature 64°. They seem to have
no fixed weather here. It has changed materially every
day since I have been here. Postponed going to the Blue
Mountains owing to inclement weather. Visited the
Academy of Music to see the performance by Hissock’s
Christy Minstrels. It was very mirth-provoking from first
to last. There was a very fair audience under the climatic
circumstances.
Tuesday, October 7.
Weather dark and cloudy, with heavy showers of rain
in the morning. They seem to want rain here at present,
and it is as well that they get it, although it is rather hard
for travellers bent upon sight-seeing. The streets are all
muddy, and the navigation of the great eight-hour demon-
stration procession last evening was rather difficult.
Thermometer 65°. Went with Messrs. D. and N., accom-
panied by Mr. Hudson, to see Hudson Brothers’ (Limited)
Iron Works and Saw Mills, worth £300,000, and admired
their immense working power. Railway carriages made
and sumptuously furnished, and various kinds of machines
manufactured in the most artistic style. These Australians
must be a very go-ahead sort of people and manage to
make locally all their own things. Imports from outside
are shut out by heavy duties, whereas exports are allowed
to go out freely. Their resources are already immense, and
more are being discovered. Verily, young as these places
are, they are far in advance of old, old India. The above
works are situated at Clyde, about 14 miles from Sydney,
and thence we went over to Paramatta, the old capital of
New South Wales. It is a beautiful place, clad in its rural
and modern glory and tastefully laid out—just the spot


where one could have a proper rest from the worldly turmoil
and occupy himself with nature. Returned to town by the
harbour side in a steam launch, once more enjoying the
most charming scenery which Providence has bestowed here
so liberally.
Wednesday, October 8.
Despatched letters to India after breakfast, and after
lunch took a long stroll into the city, visiting the Post
Office, the Exchange, several furniture shops, and the Bota-
nical Gardens. These are far prettier and better kept than
at Melbourne, but they ought to be better-looking still.
There is plenty of room for improvement. Plants from
Japan are more abundant than anything else. Returned
to the hotel from the harbour side again. You cannot
avoid the harbour ; it penetrates to many parts of the
city, and first-rate steam launches are running about every-
where like cabs ; everywhere one has different views and
different scenery, and it is impossible to make out which is
the best, every point being thoroughly good ; nor can one
easily identify any particular point. This magnificent
harbour is the grandest sight in Sydney, which would be
rather poor without it. Weather warmer with rain and
sunshine alternately. Temperature 65° at 6 p.m. Took a
long stroll again after dinner, crossing many streets. Out-
side the Hyde Park a gentleman was addressing a concourse
of passers-by, condemning Mr. Stuart, the Premier’s policy
of cutting down the workmen’s wages. He said that he con-
sidered the latter’s illness from paralysis (which attacked
him two days ago, causing profound pain) as a just retribu-
tion from Providence. The speaker’s remarks were met
with mingled shouts of approbation and disapproval, and


he had eventually to “shut up,” owing to frequent interrup-
tion and some very cutting remarks from a rather rough
sort of fellow. This individual used some very hard words,
which, however, did nothing beyond provoking roars of
laughter on the part of the hearers. He in his turn con-
demned Mr. Wright, another member of the Legislative
Council, and concluded by terming the hon. gentleman
a ,j d scoundrel.” This is of course unpardonable, but it
shows the independent spirit of these people. Universal
suffrage entitles every person to vote and speak—a right
which is apparently very well handled by the people general-
ly, and that is more than we in India can say with refer-
ence to the more limited power of representation bestowed
upon us.
Thursday, October 9.
Cold, cloudy, and at intervals bright morning with cool
breeze. After breakfast visited the Sydney Arcade, which
has a handsome collection of various shops. At one of
these (Brake, the photographer), met the Maori King (of
New Zealand) in company of Mr. Quang Ta, who kindly
took me to his own office, where I had tea with His High-
ness. This formidable potentate has just returned from
England, but does not speak a word of English, and seems
otherwise unprofited by his trip to that civilized country.
He can do nothing beyond putting on an English dress and
admiring English ladies, and is frightfully tattooed and
dyed about the face. Later on proceeded again across the
harbour in a steam launch and landed at Manly Pier,
another picturesque spot which baffles description.
Weather horrid and rainy and rough, but it cleared up a bit
eventually. Returned at 3 p.m. and called on several


merchants, who received me with unvaried civility. In fact,
civility is a very strong feature of the Australian character;
and if you happen to enquire of anybody about
anything, he most cheerfully replies to your questions to
the best of his ability, and often goes out of his way to
show you a road or office, or any particular spot about town
if he is acquainted with the same. Two of the merchants
visited to-day were wine dealers, and they submitted
several classes of the colonial produce, such as hock, claret,
riesling, and other light wines, but a Mahomedan can
hardly be a good judge of these delicious drinks. I accord-
ingly asked them to pack up for me a bottle of each class
of the wines produced by them and undertook to obtain
for them the opinion of Indian connoisseurs. They taste
very nicely, indeed, and have fine flavour and colour, and I
for one do not see why they should not take in India as well as
any other brand. An auctioneer supplied me with a mass
of business information, but that will be introduced else-
where. Suffice it to say that the two countries (India and
Australia) can undoubtedly transact a very large amount of
remunerative business with each other. It simply requires
to be worked up by enterprising men.
Friday, October 10.
Delightful weather to-day, cool, clear and pleasant—the
best that I have seen since my arrival here. Visited
several business offices, and a conversation with various
merchants has satified me more than ever that business
relations between Australia and India can take enormous
proportions. This country has made the most wonderful
progress in the last ten years, and is likely to do so for at
least as many years more.


The -Town Hall also viewed by me to-day, is still in
course of erection, but promises to be a very pretty place
The rooms, hall, Ac., are laid out in a fine, comfortable
style, and the highest point of the clock tower is 242 stens
from the ground. I also called at some horse stables and
carnage factories, but their contents were rather dear
though good. In fact, dearness with goodness is the most
prominent feature of everything here. Little rain at 9 p.m.
IV.
Saturday, October 11.
mornin g’ with cold > strong wind blowing.
Visited the Pymont Sugar Works—an extensive factory,
refining about 700 tons of sugar per week, and having
machinery workshops, cooperage, charcoal-making, and
gunny Dag sewing machines, as well as carts, horses and
snipping wharves of its own. The company’s capital is one
million sterling, and it has sugar mills in various parts of
the colonies, and mostly Java, Queensland, Fiji and Formosa
sugars are refined into rather soft small chrystals in large
quantities here. The best quality is worth at present about
=t2o per ton. But it used to be somewhere about £42
before the present general stagnation in this commodity set
Called on Hon. Mr. Eagar, of the Treasury, but he was
away at the time. The offices are very nicely built of brown
stone, and possess some architectural pretensions. After
lunch went up to Coogee (and Baden-Baden Baths), which


is another delightful spot on the sea side, which is so won-
derfully good everywhere. There are two well kept hotels
there, and one of them stands in an exceptionally beautiful
situation. It has also a charming garden with refreshingly
green grounds. Yerily, Sydney deserves to be termed the
garden of Australasia. There is nothing to match it in
rural scenes and picturesque scenery.' We could not see
the Zoological Gardens on our way back. They close at
5 p.m. on Saturdays and altogether on Sundays-—just the
time when most people can go to a distant place like that.
People complain about early-closing—Saturday afternoon
and Sunday—in regard to more things than one, and 1 tor
one believe they are right. An excess of 60 per cent, in
drunkenness since this identical Sunday-closing ot grog-
shops was introduced would alone stamp it as a measure ot
hypocrites—not politicians. The “Zoo” gardens are well
situated, but the collection therein is very poor as yet. The
superintendent has promised to show me round on inesday.
Took a long walk through the principal Sydney streets for
three and a half hours, and to say that they presented a very
animated scene is to repeat an old story. Saturday night is
the great gala night observed here.
Sunday, October 12.
Nice warm weather, but a dull day, as Sunday usually is
out here. The streets are deserted and all the places closed.
It is too strictly observed here. At breakfast I could not
even get my habitual warm roll bread, “ because it was
Sunday.” The steam launches do not run on Sundays, and
yon cannot get a train to take you up to the or
any place of amusement, and you cannot utilize the time
which you can best spare once a week. This leads to many


desirable effects of course, but that is no business of outsider*
like me, I presume. Attended the religious services held by
the Y. M. 0. A. in the Opera House, and it was very sym-
pathetically conducted by an old clergyman with a chorus
consisting of nearly a dozen charming young ladies and
suitable music. The audience consisted largely of young
men of the middle class, and they were very attentive. I
was not recognized in my felt hat (which, of course, I had
to take off whilst in the house) and a book of sacred son*
was handed to me with which I followed the service. I
was really affected by it, and trust the other young men
went away with the same result. Returned home at 9-30
p.m, through the now dark and gloomy roads, where the
W jP assera- by looked like suspicious characters on a Sunday
Monday, October IS.
Called on several firms representing various professions.
Visited the jolly old skipper of the Cathay, too. He is still
complaining of the d—d cold. Weather very cloudy and
Mr. Dobson left Sydney by rail. Went to L ffiff at
the station, and saw the Pullman’s sleeping cars. The
former is an open stone-paved platform of an unprepossess-
mg appearance, and the latter have a double row of bunks
with curtains like those on board a steamer on one side and
seats on the other, leaving a passage between them from
end to end of the carriage. On the whole, the first and
second class railway carriages out here are inferior to those on
the Indian lines. They have no third class, but the people
generally are so thriving that they don’t want it. Besides,
those that cannot afford to have the railway luxuries, such
as they are, can take any first class steamer to Melbourne


for £2 (cabin) with the certainty of reaching there in 48
hours, and the pleasures of a sea voyage as well as a good
table into the bargain.
Tuesday, October 14.
Did nothing to-day, except call at a merchant’s office, the
P. and 0. office, and the Cathay. Rebooted for Bom-
bay going to Melbourne by the Cathay , and thence per
Paramatta to Bombay. The sight of the railway carriages
last night and the cost of travelling by them have quite
satisfied me that instead of going to Melbourne overland it
is to go by the sea route, which has its own peculiar advan-
tages over land-travelling. lam quite knocked up what
with sight-seeing and worrying after acquiring commercial
information. I do not believe that relaxation from
business to be followed by sight-seeing from day to day with
incessant arranging for it is the proper rest for an over-
worked man. It is a change, but it tares the brain
a good deal, especially that of an observant mind,
by reason of its necessitating the seeing of every
notable object and straining the brain in pondering
over the various ideas suggested by the same. In Sunday’s
account I observe I have omitted to notice a couple of per-
sonages rather remarkable in their way. One of them.
Captain W. J. Barry, is an old resident of Sydney, having
stayed here over 56 years already. He is 67 years of age,
and wonderfully strong and active, with the best memory.
He can recall every incident of his not uneventful life with
rare minuteness of detail and can recollect the time (short
in its way) when Sydney was in its infancy a piece of plain
waste land, where land could be obtained for a mere song
or about ss. an acre, even in localities where a foot of it is


now worth from £250 to £950 3 The pastoral as well a&
agricultural lands could still be obtained for about £S per
acre, but that could have been obtained gratis in Sydney’s
ancient time, which dates no further back than 1788 A.D.
And yet this colony, backward as it is compared with
Victoria, can beat India in many ways already, in spite of
our very old age and ancient history. Why, a period of 50
or 100 years in India could scarcely be characteristic of any
great progress in almost anything 3
Captain Barry has had the advantage also of seeing a good
deal of life in Europe and Asia, and in New Zealand. He
seems to have bad a life of thrilling vicissitudes amongst the
Maori people, all of which helms embodied in a neatly printed
volume of about 500 pages with adequate engravings entitled
“Up and Down: or 54 years’ Colonial Experience.” It is, in
fact, an autobiography. But, strangely enough, this man,
in full possession of his powers and talents, is now in the
most straitened circumstances, and has to earn his living by
public lectures and witty jokes only.
The other person is Professor .Sample, a fellow-lodger at
our hotel. He is the great horse trainer who has just held
a most successful exhibition in Victoria, and is now erecting
here a monster marquee with a view “ to do” New South
Wales. His lessons or exhibitions are very instructive and
interesting, and he can begin to acquire mastery within
seven minutes of the most vicious horse extant. He can
in due time render him docile as a lamb and subservient
as a dog, and can teach you, or at least give you
some lessons in the art for a couple of guineas, which
he offers to return to anybody who will say that
he had not got his money’s worth of instruction.


Moreover, the student is entitled to free admission to the
exhibition and a gift of the professor’s book on the subject,
He proposes visiting India ere long, and I have no doubt
that he will succeed in improving our poor knowledge of
horses as well as reclaiming some of our worst animals.
Wednesday, October 15.
Went np to the Blue Mountains as far as Wentworth
Falls, about 5,200 feet high (above sea level), where some
magnificent mountain scenery is to be seen. The
hills are all covered with an immense number of trees,
and the slopes and the valleys with the waterfalls, as well as
the rainbow visible through the falling water on a bright
day, present a view which is lovely in the extreme. The
zigzag railway did not interest me much : indeed, for the
matter of that the whole scenery is, after all, nob superior
to what we are used to see on the Ghauts between Khandalla
and Kurjnt. Going np there it may be noticed one arrives
at the reversing station, and on the turn towards Khandalla
one can see below on the left side the railway road previously
traversed. This is here called the zigzag, and we could
see a number of these arrangements when we reached the
summer. The country through which the train passed is
very fertile, and we traversed through dense forests of pine
and gum trees standing high on land refreshingly green
with grass from one end bo another. The suburbs and
townships are all laid ont beautifully with nice little houses
and gardens, indicative of exquisite taste. The weather
was warmer, bat the thermometer did not stand above
69°, and already every one seems to be exclaming, 41 very
hot, isn’t it ?” I wonder how they will bear it when their
summer reaches its maximum, which is 120°. But they


say that, however hot it may be here during the day, it is
nice and cool at night, and blankets are invariably used.
Besides, the heat is dry, and does not cause one to perspire.
On the 6th inst., it may be added, we had to abandon the
idea of going up to these industrial mountains as far as
Katoomba (a little further from Wentworth), because the
weather was said to be bitterly cold with about 12 inches
of snow on the ground ! This best illustrates the remark-
ably changeable character of the weather. There is no
doubt, however, the climate here on the whole is better
than that of India.
Thursday, October 16.
Bid nothing at all to-day, beyond taking exhaustive
walks in the town, of which one can never be tired. The
sun shone to-day rather smartly, heightening the tempera-
ture to 71° at 4 p.m. in the shade. Busy preparing
for leaving here to-morrow for Melbourne per Cathay. The
skipper and the doctor paid me a visit, and I may go with
them to the theatre to-night, although I am feeling seedy
and tired. And so I did go with Captain Fairtlough to
the Opera House to witness the performance entitled
“Woman against Woman,” by Miss Marie De Grey’s
London Comedy Company. She herself played the role
of Louise Perot, the leading character, and acquitted her-
self very well. But the play itself is not very interesting,
and is divided into so many as five acts, which are played
out in two hours. This renders the changes too abrupt to
be appreciated, and altogether it was a tame affair. How-
ever, the house was fairly full, as it has been from night to
night, which is more than Miss Grey would get at any of
the Indian places in spite of her being a general old favourite


with as. These English people, although they are in a
modified form here, must have their amusements after the
day’s work, and patronise them from beginning to end of
the season. Although Sydney has a much smaller popula-
tion than that of Bombay, yet she has about half a dozen
public places of recreation in full swing every night,
irrespective of minor events, the number of which is much
larger too. And we in India patronise a new company
well enough for the first few nights, and then it almost
invariably goes to the dogs.
Feiday, Octobeb 17.
Packed up and proceeded on board the steamer Cathay
once more. She steamed away at 12-30 noon with about
forty passengers. The weather to-day is very hot and the
sun scorching, the thermometer in the captain’s cabin
denoting 86°. It must be 90° in the shade on shore.
Yet the Sydneyites declare that their temperature at
120° (which is the maximum in the summer) is as good
as 70° in India. This must be a mistake, as I perspire
to-day (for the first time though) as much as if I were
at Bombay in April, and can feel the rays of the sun
as strongly too. But this heat may be “ drier ” and less
enervating than in India. "We steamed away along the
same pretty bays, and points, and villas, and gardens that
we noticed when coming in from Melbourne, and passed out
of the Sydney Heads, which seem like a gateway to the
great harbour, at about 1 p.m. We are skirting along the
land, the bright weather enabling us to recognize many a
familiar spot on the shore, notably the Ooogee and Botany
Bays, which remind us of the recent enjoyments we have
had in the well situated and charming villa hotels there.


Really Sydney is the garden of Australasia, and as its view
from the deck of the Cathay grows dimmer and dimmer,
one cannot help feeling a pang at separating from her, even
after a fortnight’s stay and doing the sights completely.
It is impossible to be tired of this place, whether in busi-
ness or pleasure. It is replete with the charms of both.
Saturday, October 18.
We have been proceeding very pleasantly at the rate of
about 12| knots with a calm sea—it was truly a Pacific
Ocean —until this morning, when the sky became threaten-
ingly cloudy and a cold chilly bead wind commenced blow-
ing with increasing vigour. This made quite a change in
our prospects ; the ocean was no longer pacific; the waves
began to beat against the steamer ; she is quite unsteady
and rolling ; the thermometer dropped down from 80° to 58 c ;
the decks are wet with rain and sea water, and the
spirits of the passengers are more or less damped. Rugs
and ulsters are resorted to by ladies and gentlemen alike.
The Cathay is a nice boat in her way. She is a royal
yacht in fact. She brought out the Duke of Connaught
and his lady last year. Her cabin accommodation is
excellent, but she is old, and the least bad weather
disagrees with her more than the generality of her sister-
hood. Her speed is consequently reduced to eight knots
per hour to-day against 12J yesterday ! Such is travelling
under the Southern cross. However, life on board presents
a strange contrast with that on the land. Here we are
having everything at ease ; while on the shore everything
is worry and bustle, even sight-seeing bringing on a feeling
of fatigue unknown on the sea. At 5 p.m. the weather
began to clear up, and soon afterwards the sun was cheer


fully shining out of a cloudless sky, and once more the old
Cathay is steady, and so are most of the passengers.
These sudden changes are very curious indeed, but they
do not seem to hurt anybody. This is, perhaps, their most
notable feature. On the day before we left Sydney the
maximum temperature in one of the suburbs was 81 c
and the minimum 38° !
The night is now perfectly clear, though dark, and the
stars are shining more brilliantly than ever I noticed in
India. We can clearly see from the ship’s deck the
“ Southern Cross,” “ Ryan’s Belt,” “ Canine ;Major,”
“ Canine Minor,” “ Ursa Major,” “ Ursa Minor,”
“ Magellan’s Cloud,” “ Evening Star,” “ and a host of lesser
fame (including the False Cross).”
V.
Sunday, October 19.
The clear dark last night has given birth to a fine sun-
shiny day. The temperature is still a shade under 60° in
the captain’s cabin, but it is quite endurable, nay, pleasant,
with the bright sun. Under these conditions we are abreast
of Queen’s Cliff, when the pilot’s yacht is sighted. The
pilot got into a boat immediately and soon boards the
Cathay with a “ good morning, gentlemen.” Soon after
we enter Hobson’s Bay through the Port Phillip Heads as
before. The Queen’s Cliff with its lighthouse and the three
or four-storeyed hotels is clearly visible. So is Buckle’s Cave


barely above the water. Here the explorer, after whom the
cave is named, is said to have put up fora considerable length
of time, and lived amongst the “ Blacks” as the aborigines
are called. On our other side (right) we notice the Nepean
Head and the Quarantine Station. Besides that, there is
nothing but a few fishing boats and low dismal hills and
the sea. At 3 p.m. we are still steaming along the ocean
like Hobson’s Bay with the hills looming in the distance
on both sides, bearing names such as Eliza Mountain,
Arthur Seat, &c. The entrance to the above bay is three
miles wide, whereas that of Port Jackson, Sydney, is three-
quarters of a mile. But there is none of that beautiful en-
trancing scenery here, and the passage is consequently
more or less monotonous. In the Sydney habour you can
cruise about for days without being tired.
Passed Balaclava, Easternwick, Brighton, St. Hilda, San-
drige (now called Port Melbourne), and moored alongside
the wharf at Williamstown at 4 p.m. Here we stepped
into the train which brought us into the heart of
Melbourne. The weather is charmingly clear, and even the
short walk from the railway station to the Scott’s hotel is
enjoyable. The atmosphere is clear with a bracing cool
air, and in one sense the long broad streets, without any
ups and downs, give a sort of relief after the narrow streets
of Sydney with their numerous ascents and descents. How-
ever, both places have their peculiar advantages, and both
are jealous of each other some way or other, A Sydney
man particularly would not tolerate a single word in favour
of the younger but far more go-ahead colony of Victoria,
nor would a Melbournian say a word in favour of New
South Wales beyond praising her glorious harbour, which
he cannot well help doing.


Soon after the Calhay was at anchor, the large crowd of
males and females, who were watching her arrival a long
time previously, unceremoniously walked on board and
were whirling round the deck and in the saloon. Some
were greeting their friends among the passengers, but their
number was small. The majority obstructed us very much,
and it was next to impossible to remove the luggage and get
on shore. Some strange feeling of curiosity must have
brought them thither, and it was aggravated by the day
being a Sunday, when many people think of loafing about.
Melbourne is a grand city, and it may be worth nothing,
that it is divided into three electoral districts called east,
west, and north. It is named after Lord Melbourne, who
was premier of Great Britain at the time it was founded.
In 1836 the present site was known as Bear Gross, and in
the month of Jane of that year merely comprised thirteen
buildings ! The city now abounds in edifices which rival
those of the older capitals of Europe, and which, though of
rapid and recent construction, are as substantial and en-
during as those of any place in the world ; the material,
blue stone, of which most of the warehouses and many of
the public buildings are in whole or in part constructed,
being, so to speak, of an imperishable nature. The most
noteworthy edifices are: the Treasury; the Houses of Parlia-
ment, with a library of 35,000 volumes; the new law courts,
which have cost £250,000 after nine years of construction;
the Free Library containing over 100,000 volumes;
the Post Office—an immense building; the Custom
House (which is near the spot where Fowkner moored the
little craft that was the pioneer of the fleets of merchantmen
that have ploughed the water of Hobson’s Bay) ; the Mint,
the University with the excellent museum attached and its


Gothic hall ; the Ormand Presbyterian College ; the new
Town Hall having the most spacious room in Australia,
capable of seating 2,000 persons, with one of the largest
and finest organs in the world, the new Congregational
Hall; St. Patrick’s Cathedral; the Independent Church
(a large building of brick and free stone of the Saracenic
style) ; Wesleyan Church with lofty spire ; the Baptise
Church ; the Exchange ; Victoria Hall, and many fine
hotel-buildings. Government House is a very conspicuous
and palatial building with a tower 145 feet high. Among
the banking houses, the Bank of Australia, the London
Chartered Bank (Greco-Italian style), the Bank of Victoria,
the Colonial Bank, the new Oriental Bank, and last, but
not least, the Union Bank of Australia, may be mentioned.
To the latter’s manager (Mr. Carberry, a Calcutta man
formerly belonging to the Bengal Bank) I had a letter of
introduction from an esteemed Bombay friend, Mr, Tod.
Mr. C. had the spirit of politeness which is becoming almost a
natural characteristic of the Australian, and was good enough
to offer me all possible attention and assistance. The
port of Melbourne is at Sandridge, a township 2 \ miles
distant, situated on Hobson’s Bay, and connected with the
metropolis by road and rail. Sandridge has two large and
commodious piers, jutting out a long way into the bay,
affording accommodation for a large fleet, and allowing
vessels of almost any size to berth alongside. Hobson’s
Bay has accommodation for 800 vessels. Port Phillip Bay
extends over 800 square miles, of which three-fourths is
available for anchorage. There is also access for vessels to
the very heart of the city by means of the river Yarra-Yarra
(which means flowing-flowing). The city is plentifully
supplied with all sorts of good conveyances, and very shortly


horse-trams will run. The theatres, gaols, asylums, parks,
gardens, &c., are all in excellent condition, and a descrip-
tion, however meagre, of some of them, will follow later
on. It is a grand city, and its worthy inhabitants have
every reason to be proud of it, as they are undoubtedly.
Monday, October 20.
Strange weather I The spell of yesterday was too good
to last. It has turned into what they call a “ hot wind
day,” to-day. But that was in the morning, and by about
10 a.m. the sky wore a very dark aspect ; the thunder
began to roll loudly, and it was followed by smart rain.
All is mud and water now, and navigation through the
streets is difficult. In dry weather the streets are all dust,
so Melbourne is unfortunate at least in point of these
results of weather. But otherwise, the climate does not
seem to harm anybody in spite of its freaks. At all events
no one complains of its sudden changes, and everybody
seems to face it without a murmur. These people must
have strong nerves. lam sure they have. My Sydney’s
friend, Mr. N„ came to receive me at Williamstown
yesterday, and Mr. D. gave me a call at the hotel and
soon chaperoned me for one of our long and exhaustive
Sydney walks. It lasted nearly four hours, and I returned
home quite tired at dinner time. We did not mind the
weather two straws and went from place to place with per-
fect nonchalance. We went up to a furniture shop by
means of a lift. This place had six storeys, and is a perfect
palace replete with all kinds of domestic furniture, carpets,
&c., valued from a pound to £2OO a-piece, and most
artistically arranged. The stock must be worth about
£50,000. Besides this we went to a carriage manufactory,


where some nice specimens of Victorian workmanship were
to be seen. They can manufacture in this country a good
many articles as nicely as in England, but a landau could
not be built under £2OO. A victoria can be had for £BS
to £IOO. I also saw Mr. Fitz Gibbon, the Town Clerk.
He introduced me to the Mayor (Mr. Smith), and kindly
invited me to a soiree at his house to-morrow. His worship
the Mayor was as kind and courteous as anybody in the
place. Every one here is very obliging and very civil, and
at least this one pleasing feature is a common characteristic
of all the Australian people.
Tuesday, October 21.
Very muddy morning and very dusty evening. Luckily
this great city has got very wide asphalted footpaths, which
are almost equal in width to the best streets of Sydney, and
walking on them is tolerable enough in wet weather. The
road metal gets pulverized very quick, and hence the
mud ; but this nuisance is also likely to be minimized ere
long, as the principal streets are being fast paved with gum-
wood blocks, such as are used in Sydney. Attended a
sugar auction sale to day, but it was rather a tame affair
owing to the slackness of the market. Most of the im-
ported goods are sold here by public auction, which is a
method straightforward enough, but would not work
satisfactorily enough in my country. In India it is gene-
rally considered that to dispose of any commodity (in good
condition) by auction means selling it at a sacrifice.
Many other auction sales in India also mean disposal of
condemned or defective things.
Proceeded to South Yarra in response to an invitation
from Mr. Fitz Gibbon (the Town Clerk), to attend an even


mg party given by him at his residence there. A selected
number of ladies and gentlemen were present, and each
guest was announced in a courtly fashion. The pro-
nouncing of my Indian name was rather an unusual matter
to the usherer, but he sang it out loudly enough for Mr.
Fitz Gibbon to hear, and he rushed to receive me with a
heartiness seldom met with before. “lam so glad to see
you, Mr. Yishram,” were the first words he exclaimed, and
immediately afterwards he proceeded to introduce me to a
good many of the ladies and gentlemen present. I was
soon at home chatting gaily enough all round. Even-
tually I was put in charge of a lady, whom I conducted to
supper. She was a regular treasury of information and
quite charmed me with her description of old Melbourne
with a cottage here and there, and of land given away for
a mere song, which is worth at present £I,OOO a foot with
a depth of 50 ft. to 1,000 ft. This is the price of land in
Collin-street, which is the most fashionable part of the town.
The amateur music at the party was good enough, but the
handling of the violin by M. Eeminey, the professional
Austrian, was simply wonderful. The Hungarian national
air was a very exciting affair, and this talented violinist
has obviously made a great hit here, as his opening concert
is looked forward to with great interest by everybody,
from the Governor downward I
Returned home at 1 a.m. in the best of spirits, which,
however, deprived me of sleep.
Wednesday, October 22.
Yes, the excitement of last night did veritably prevent
me from sleeping a wink, and this morning I am in a
wretched state of health. lam suffering from what they


call hero brain-fag, and no sorb of worry, business or
pleasure would do for me. But as the only thing wanted
was rest, brain workers, or over-workers rather, will bear
this in mind. Under these circumstances, I broke off my
engagement with a friend in Hathorn (with an apology of
course) to dine with him and then attend the Reminey con-
cert to-night. I went with my friend D. to his charming
villa at Mentone (14 miles by rail from here), and remained
there till the following morning. Very good surroundings,
an excellent fire, and delightful music with piano accom-
paniment at the hands of the ever cheerful and the nicest of
young ladies, Miss D,, altogether refreshed me for the
time being.
VI.
Thursday, October 23.
Returned from Mentone this morning with some reluc-
tance. I could have stayed there longer with great
advantage to my health amidst the comforts of a truly
English homo, and a very happy home too. What a
contrast between this domestic life and that of India ;
music, dancing, amusement, plays (not to speak of the
bright faces and exquisite surroundings) everything their
own at home, whilst an Indian gentleman has generally to
go out of home to get these necessaries of life ! But I had
to post letters and papers per Cathay, leaving to-day for
England via Bombay. The post closed at 10 a. m., so I
had to run up to Williamstown by train and post them on
board. And I was very glad that I did go, for although


I reached the steamer a little before she was leaving the
wharf, it gave me the opportunity of meeting the jolly old
skipper and wishing him lon voyage. He took charge of the
letters and photographs addressed to my brother, and soon
afterwards we parted, exchanging hearty “good-byes.”
In spite of the great attractions and the necessity for my
remaining longer here, I almost wished that I had returned
to India by the Cathay, because I was sure that everyone
on board would have truly done his best to make me com-
fortable. However, it is too late for that now, and I must
wait till the Parramatta is ready. .Returning to the boat I
had lunch with Mr. N. 8. and his sister, Mrs. D., in
Lonsdale Street. In the evening Mr. Wallen, chairman of
the Stock Exchange and editor of the Australian Banking
and Insurance Record, took me to his pretty villa at
Hathorne (four miles) by previous engagement, and here I
spent another quiet evening. Mrs. Wallen was very affable,
and the Misses Wallen very obliging. After dinner the
two Misses Wallen gave us a charming duet on the piano,
and soon after I took my leave. These young ladies have
just passed their Matriculation Examination, and are as
accomplished as they are pretty. Gardening, cultivating
of vegetables, and cattle-breeding are also practised in every
household here, and so we had the vegetables, creams,
butter, and flowers of Mr. Wallen’s own villa. These
occupations keep the mind free from the worldly worries
at the time, and a business-man can appreciate these
conditions of life very well after the day’s work. They
should make him fresh every morning for his work,
and prevent his break down. Mr. Wallen has been trying
this experiment for the last thirty years, and with success
too. Many Australians of sixty to seventy years of age


tell me that they have never known sickness. Almost
every one of the people one meets with hero look remark-
ably healthy and strong, and it is no wonder that they
should be strangers to illness. I almost think that, should
India continue to unsuit my health I feel I would give any-
thing to make this country my home. But, then, what
about my poor ‘‘oomau and chicks”? They cannot get on
here. Caste prejudices, religious customs, &c., Will bo
difficulties insurmountable.
P. S. —I find I have omitted to note my visit to the
Mint yesterday. It is a wonderful institution in its way,
as simple as it is perfect. Tens of thousands of ounces of
gold are melted every day and turned into coin. The self-
registering scales for correct or incorrect sovereigns are
unsurpassable,
Friday, October 24.
There is no mistake that the present whimsical Austra-
lian weather gave birth to-day to the finest day I have yet
seen here. It is bright, clear, and cool. The temperature
from morning to evening ranged between 55° to GO 0 . And
at these very points on a wet or cloudy or windy day, I
have felt the cold pretty smartly before ! To-day the feel-
ing is agreeably different. Yet some of my compeers at
luncheon were exclaiming, “ Quite warm, isn’t it?” But
this was a more formal, ceremonial saying than otherwise,
as many do not see anything like “ warmness” in to-day’s
weather. They will soon have enough of it, though ; the
summer will commence next mouth in pretty good
earnest, and 100° in the shade will be the order of the day
for months. Dr. R. Peel, grandson of Sir R. Peel, just
informs me that three days ago I was elected an honorary


member of the Athenaeum Club of this city, and 1 shall
always be welcome to use it as a home. It is a tip-top place,
and I was very glad to belong to it. I may now be able to
find some relief from the noise prevailing in this Scott’s
Hotel, where some extensive repairs are going on and early
every morning a great deal of “hammering” commences,
the first stroke falling on my very head as it were. At least
I feel it so at first on being disturbed from the sweet morn-
ing’s repose. In the afternoon I took a drive with a friend
and in abeautiful cab drawn by a strong horse to the Zoo
Gardens, a distance of nearly four miles. The gardens are very
well laid out indeed, and the collection of lions, panthers,
leopards, elephants, camels (the latter two fully capari-
soned in Indian style and ready for the use of visitors),
bears, jackals, wolves, kangaroos, eagles, peacocks,
ostriches, emus, cats, rats, rabbits, and pheasants, and a
great host of others“ too numerous to mention,” as the ad-
vertisers would say. A cockatoo at the very entrance is a fine
creature, and accosts many a visitor with a jolly “ Hallo”
in a clear human voice. Artistic cages and houses with
balconies and tiny gardens are built for the inmates of these
gardens, and they are fully worth the trouble involved in
the visit. At 5-30 I met Mr. George Webb at the above
club, over club, by appointment, and drove with him in his
carriage and pair, and with his wife and niece, to St. Kilda,
and had dinner with them. Mr. Webb is the leading Q.O.
here, and enjoys extensive practice at the local bar. Hehas,
moreover, travelled in India, and so we could understand
each other very well. He is one of the old settlers here, and
some extensive grounds that he bought at the above suburb,
which is now a very favourite watering place in the summer,
being on the sea side, at £25 per acre, arc now worth £4OO.


Returned home at 10-30 p.ra. by’bus up to Windsor, and
thence by rad to Melbourne, but not before I had received
a cordial invitation from Mr. and Mrs. Webb and the young
ladies to stay for the night and for a game of billiards with
the host and his two sons-in-law.
Saturday, October 25.
Another beautiful day to-day, although the Melbournians
style it as “one of our hot days.” But the temperature
cannot be more than 60°, and if this is a specimen of
their _ notorious hot wind days they have no terrors for me.
And in proof of what I mean I am just going off to Ballarat
(99| miles distant and 1,413 feet above sea), whence we
hope to return on Monday evening, after seeing its gold
mines and what not. Curious contradictions ! The wind
is growing hotter and the thermometer has increased to 76°.
The sun can now be felt, the dust gets into the eyes, and
a strange warm sensation is experienced about the neck
and ears. But I would not, however, be surprised if by
the evening the weather becomes again cool or cold. The
proposed trip to Ballarat is also given up, not owing to the
atmospheric phenomena (they are common enough here),
but in consequence of a pressing business engagement into
which my would-be companion has got himself. I am
not sorry for this, because it is pleasant enough, at least
for a traveller, to remain in town on Saturday evening.
The shops close at 2 p.m., but most of them re-open after
sunset and are objects of great admiration in the light of
electricity as well as gas. They are visited by tens of
thousands of males and females of all classes, and the
spectacle thus presented to the view is extremely lively
and exciting. The illuminations and the crowds of people,


except lacking our Indian variety, remind one of Bombay
on a Dewali night or some other occasion, such as the visits
of the Prince of Wales and the Dukes of Edinburgh and
Connaught. The shouts of the news-boys as well as
ice-cream and matches vendors are heard above the
general hubbub prevailing all round. Many gay young
people of both sexes are simply loafing about, and
even the police is powerless to check the escapades
of most of them. Liberty is their great defence, and
it is somewhat abused too. About 8 p.m. I made my
way through a dense crowd into the opera house, where
a great drama called “In the Banks” was to be produced
for the first time. The house was full to overflowing.
It is built on the system of our Theatre Boyal, Grant
Road, but is finished in a most gorgeous style. The
paintings, hangings and gold gildings are very pretty,
and must have cost a great deal of money. The scenery
is also most tasteful and appropriate. The dropscene,
however, is exactly similar to that of the Gaiety Theatre
at Bombay. The company is very powerful, and deserved
the boisterous applause showered upon it by the enthusiastic
audience. The play was very successful in every respect
for a first night. Such plaudits and such audiences are
unknown in India, and could only be understood by those
who have seen them here or in England. It is nothing
short of European life.
Sunday, October 26.
The city is all quiet for the Sabbath. It would come to
this state even without a Sunday, after the great dissipations
of last night. Nothing but tolling of church bells is audible
as I am writing this ; plenty of religious services are


advertised, and doubtless many people will go to church to
hear the music and see those present if for nothing else.
They had races and cricket and what not yesterday, and to-
day there are various band performances at the Zoo and
the Botanical Gardens and other places. There are no
midday dinner's either, so people here are not quite so
strict after all as their jealous brethren of Sydney. lam
worried to death by the question, “ What do you think of
Melbourne ?” daily put to me by a number of colonist
merchants, officials, cabbies, waiters, and others. Of course
it is a wonderful country, especially for its tender age, and
people are justly proud of it. But it is not pleasant for me
to remain chanting these words all day. 1 would rather
devote all the time thus wasted to praying !
I was strolling through the streets where all the noble
houses wore their usual aspect, but all the shops, offices,
&c,, were closed, and hardly anybody was moving about,
when suddenly I noticed a chemist’s shop in Collin Street
open. The chemist’s good feeling towards the sick people
has perhaps induced him to keep his large establish-
ment open. Young B. attends it, and he will close the
establishment at 2 p.m. “ People will become sick even
on Sunday and require medicine accordingly,” says he,
as I enter the place and accost him. We soon get
into conversation in the absence of anything else to do,
and I glean from him that his father was one of the
early settlers in the colony, and therefore a rich man, of
course. The ground in Collin Street with the shop
standing thereon has about a frontage of 25 feet, and he
would not part with it for £50,000 ! This would bring up
the value of ground in the most fashionable quarter at
■£2,OCO per foot, but Mr. B. does not care about parting


with it, and may name any figure for its price. The
actual rate, however, should be taken as £I,OOO, and that is
high enough for Young Melbourne. In Bombay the land
in the heart of the town is only worth about Es. 100 per
square yard ! I asked young Mr. B. what would be the best
thing for a traveller to see on a Sunday, and here his true
Australian feeling was aroused. It was vhat they calls
hospital Sunday to-day, and lots of people would be going
to the public gardens to hear the hand playing, after which
subscriptions would he collected for the benefit of the hospi-
tals in the colony. He was going to close the shop at
2 p.m., and having nothing to do in particular, would be
happy to call for me at the hotel and take me round. I, of
course, cheerfully, as well as thankfully, accepted the
offer.
VII.
Just as I and Mr. B. were about to start for the public
gardens, which we had made up our minds to visit, another
friend, Mr. N., turned up and invited me to tea at his
place at Toorak (about 10 minutes’ railway journey from
here). I felt a little puzzled with this overwhelming
kindness on every side. I did not like to refuse Mr. N.’s
hospitality, and could not leave Mr. B. Eventually 1 made
up my mind to kill two birds with one stone. We all jump-
ed into a wagonette and drove over to the Fitzroy Gardens
and the Botanical Gardens. The latter looked attractive
enough to-day with the fine weather, and the large con-
course of men, women and children scattered about in ail
directions, some flirting, some wooing, some playing, some


squatting on the ground, and some loafing about the hot-
houses and conservatories, all of which are very well kept ;
but these gardens cannot compare favourably with the
Sydney Botanical Gardens. Melbourneites, however, will
not admit this directly, but console themselves with the
theory that theirs have been made by man, and those of
Sydney by God, meaning the natural advantages the latter
have over the former by reason of their picturesque situa-
tion near the unsurpassable harbour. This is an admission
in itself of Sydney’s superiority over Melbourne in this
particular instance, and not an unfair one either. But to
return to my rambles. After issuing forth from the gar-
dens we took leave of young 8., and I resumed my drive
with Mr. N. to Toorak, and reached his snug little cottage
soon afterwards. The usual introduction having taken
place, we adjourned to the tea-table. The meal being over,
a look at the gardens was not a disagreeable task, especially
when they are the result of Mr. N.’s work alone. He has
not been aided by anyone, and the conservatory, the hot-
house, the bower, the poultry yard, the manuring, planting
and cutting are attended to by Mr. N. alone. The place
speaks volumes for my friend’s taste and fondness for
gardening. He can find immense relief in looking after
them mornings and evenings, and be fresh for office work
from day to day. The wife, daughters and sons attend to
the house-keeping, and the ladies also sing and play.
What a quiet, happy life ! How different to what we are
used to in India! No wonder these people are superior to
us in so many respects. A man with £SO per month lives
almost in the same way as one with £SOO. You can’t
make out the difference, unless it were by the number of
conveyances, horses, servants and the size of his residence.


The conditions of life are the same all round. At 7 p.m. I
expressed a desire to witness the religious service in the
local Anglican Church. Thither we repair accordingly,
Mr. and Miss N. chaperoning me. The former joins the
choir and the latter takes her seat next to me in order to
show me the different chapters in the prayer-book, and
thus enable me to follow the service accurately. The
building is a very lovely one. The ceremony commenced
in a very spirited manner led by a clean-shaved priest,
who was assisted by a number of gentlemen and boys all
dressed in white—at least they all wore a white shirt over
their ordinary dress, which was scarcely visible, and they
looked like Mahomedan Syeds in the cufnees. Some ladies,
unseen by the congregation (another resemblance to Maho-
medaus), joined in the singing, and an organ played suitably
to the sacred strains of music. So far so good. And here
the priest commenced a long and passionate exhortation to
charity, and continued for nearly three-quarters of an hour.
This was rather dragging and an infliction which we might
have been spared. It did not make us a whit more chari-
table than we were before he commenced the sermon, and
our contributions, when the tray was brought round, were
the same as they would have been without it. To-day’s
contributions in all the churches in Victoria go for the
benefit of the hospitals, in accordance with the annual
practice, and it is a notable fact that altogether about
£4,800 were collected throughout the colony. This result
is one of the most pleasing features of this event, and is a
great proof of the good feeling of the people. Every year
the amount thus subscribed is on the increase.
We returned to my friends’ abode at about 9 p. m., and
I soon wished him and his a hearty good-night, thanking


them all for a very pleasant evening. The night was clear
and moonlit, though not so bright as our Indian nights,
but what it lacked in this respect was made up by the
coldness of the weather. The temperature must be under
60. The warm clothes with an overcoat are quite agree-
able, and one feels quite braced up for anything.
Monday, October 27.
Another charming day. There arc neither hot nor cold
winds, and the weather is clear and invigorating. A
continuation of these conditions is wished for by everybody.
I continue rambling into all parts of the city, though the
stares invoked by my fez make me feel uncomfortable at
times. But I will minimize this inconvenience by putting
on a bell-topper—l can’t do anything of the kind in India—
and must put up with my tell-tale complexion. I visited
a friend at the treasury, who also invited me to pass an
evening with him and his lady. I dared not refuse point-
blank, because to refuse anything of the sort—even a
drink —is considered as tantamount to an insult by the
good people here. And yet I would not make a definite
appointment, for although I enjoy these social gatherings
ever so much, yet the ceremonies &c., attending thereon
tire me and retard the progress of my health. lam sure
they entail brain work, like many other things. I must
take things easy, but as yet I have not had an hour’s
quietude. lam always occupied with something or other.
The medico forbids it, but the temptation is too great and
the time too short to defer it. Under these circumstances
I tell my friend that I will do my best to turn up some
evening and give him a call. He suggests a day’s notice at
least, that he may invite some people, and young ladies, to


meet me, to sing me music, and would be disappointed if I
go away to Bombay without seeing them. How generous!
how kind ' Can anything surpass this uniform cordiality to
strangers ? Thereafter I called on somemerchants and had
a hearty business chat with them. I, for one, would be very
happy if I can bring about some business relation with
this country, which will also enable us to take a permanent
interest in it and afford opportunities to visit it again and
again. It is beyond a shadow of doubt that a great many
things could be exchanged between India and Australia
advantageously, and the writer will do his best to bring
about such a state of affairs. A visit to the places of a
couple of general warehousemen in Flinders Street showed
me at a glance the magnitude of their business. All kinds
of soft goods in great stock and most artistically arranged.
The value of the stock in each place must be over a
hundred thousand pounds. They are private houses, and
have factories for the manufacture of woollen cloths of
their own. These two shops alone can beat all the Bombay
houses put together. And here there is a number of other
places of the same kind too !
After dinner I accompanied some friends, who were good
enough to call for me at the hotel to the Athenreum Hall,
where a “ social evening ” was promised to men alone. It
is called the Liedertafel (table song), and the gathering
numbered over 500 members of the sterner sex. Smoking
and drinking were freely allowed in the great hall. A
number of small tables were provided, and they were all
occupied by small social parties. In other respects it was
nothing but an amateur concert, and the music was very
good. Some songs were sung by over fifty gentlemen at
a time, and the performances on the piano, flutes and the


zither were gems in themselves. All the best skill m vocal
and instrumental music was offered and secured for the
occasion. It was well utilized too, and altogether it afford-
ed a very welcome relaxation from the worries of the world.
This must be a very old institution, as to-night’s concert
was the l6otli of its kind, and they do not have more than
eight in the year. To half of these gatherings ladies are
also invited, on which occasion they are denominated
‘'dress concerts.” Full-dress is indispensable then, and no
smoking or drinking or swearing are allowed. Yesterday
a novel entertainment took place at the Town Hall, which,
however, was missed by me through sheer inadvertence.
It was an exhibition of gymnastics by the young ladies of
Melbourne. It is said to have been very entertaining, and
the muscular powers and aptitudes shown by the ruddy
young creatures speak well for the future generations of
this go-ahead place. Some of the exercises, clubs, dumb-
bells, &c,, were purely Indian, and a compliment to the
Eastern population—at least to the male portion of it; the
females do not count in such matters in India !
At lunch time to-day I was interviewed by a gentleman
on the staff of the Daily Telegraph. He subjected me to
a number of questions on Indian matters, which I replied
to as best I could. But as a merchant I was rather reti-
cent on questions of commerce. He wanted to know what
articles of merchandise could be exchanged between the
countries, which, however, I declined to relate definitely,
and advised him to Avaifc till he can find them in the
Custom’s Returns after we had given practical effect to
the same, as I hope we shall. It remains to bo seen now
what use he will make of the information thus obtained
by him from me.


Tuesday, October 28.
Continued fine weather. Paid a visit to the wa-x-works.
There were some very interesting, but almost awe-inspiring
spectacles. Life-like figures in was appropriately clothed,
and representing various personages, from kings and queens
to cannibal queens and murderers. The delusion so
complete that I almost mistook a number of admiring
spectators for the wax figures exhibited. They were so
still and quiet. You could only recognize the living from
their movements. After lunch I went for a drive with
Mrs. N., visiting Toorak, St. Kew, Richmonds, and
finally returning to Melbourne after looking into the
Exhibition Buildings. These are very capacious and
very fine, with a nicely laid oat garden on all sides.
On the ground floor the now empty courts still bear the
names of the distant cities which sent their articles to
the last Exhibition. The Indian Court bears the names
of Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Agra, Cashmir, Benares, &c.
From the tower of the buildings a most charming view of
the city is to be obtained, which gives some idea of its
expanse all round. The city is still expanding, and if it
only goes ahead, as it has hitherto done, one cannot imagine
to "what proportions it will reach in ten years more.
Assuredly there are signs of immense progress, and the
prospects of still higher prices for land are certain. Return-
ed home (hotel) at 6 p.m. and had dinner, and strolled out
again. On enquiring of the constable, he directed me to
the top of Bourke Street where the House of Parliament
is situated. Thither I accordingly repaired, and handed a
letter, with which I was favoured by an M. P., to the officer
who was requested to show me over the premises. At first
the officer in charge seemed to hesitate a bit, gently


expressing an opinion that perhaps the letter in question
meant that I should call during daytime to see the. building.
I said that I wanted to see the house in sitting. Ho'
appeared a little perplexed, and soon afterwards he conduct-
ed me into a room, where I explained to a gentleman who
I was and why I had come. That was enough. The mere
idea of being a stranger ensures you all attention at the
hands of these good people. The officer in question was
at once directed to conduct me to the Assembly chamber.
Here a most boisterous meeting was being held. Members
were talking and sitting with their legs stretched out on
the seats and with hats on their heads. Very little atten-
tion was paid to the speeches, as they were made one after
the other in the loudest possible voices by those of the
gentlemen who had to say anything on the subject under
discussion. The question at issue seemed to relate to a
contract for 50,000 tons of coal, in which some members
appeared to be directly, or rather indirectly, interested.
And certain deserved insinuations were made about them
as well as the Government. After having been a spectator
of this not very imposing meeting for over an hour, I issued
forth from the chamber, when the officer at the door asked
me if I would like to see the meeting of the Upper House.
I replied in the affirmative of course, as I was intent upon
seeing both, and was accordingly ushered in as “ a distin-
guished visitor from India. ” This was done by the officer
in charge of the Upper House, iu whose hands I was left
by toe functionary of the Lower House. Pie soon conducted
me to a velvet-covered seat, and a far more orderly gathering
of honourable gentlemen met my view. They were discuss-
ing some commercial subject, which especially embraced
the arbitrary and objectionable clause of the Bills of


hading as framed by the various steamer companies. The
co-operation of the local Chamber of Commerce was to bo
invited, and so on, and so forth. The speeches were very
tpriet, and intelligible, and to the point, interlarded at times
with mirth-provoking expressions, and bore a pleasing
contrast to those delivered in the Lower House, which is
otherwise called the Legislative Assembly and the upper
one the Legislative Council. All the members are elected
by the ratepayers, and the Government have no power of
nominating any of the members, 'these young colonies
possess a great many privileges which are yet unknown
in venerable India. The Parliament buildings are very
imposing and most tastefully built in a very plain
style. By the way, the reporter who interviewed me
from the Daily Telegraph office yesterday has had
something to say about me in to-day’s issue of the
paper, but he appears to have indented more upon his own
sources of information about me than the information I
vouchsafed him so scantily about India and matters
commercial.
VIII.
Wel'KE.sdM', October 29.
I paid another visit to the Picture Gallery and public
library building, with a view to looking more minutely into
the Technological Museum, also located therein. I devoted
over an hour to inspecting most of the models of gold mines,
samples of minerals, wool, machinery, arms, corals, glass,
china and earthenware, &c., &c., —a very interesting collec-
tion. I again had a cursory glance at the Picture Gallery,


arid returned to the hotel. After lunch Messrs. I), and B.
visited me, and I proceeded with the latter to Hathorn,
Surrey Hills and Box Hill Tower, a most enjoyable drive
through lovely suburbs and valleys, and enchanting views of
the'Camel’s Hump Hill|betwcen Mountain Maudon and the
Hanging Rock could be obtained from near the above tower.
I thence proceeded by rail to Mr. B.’s family residence at
Toorak. Went through the usual formalities with better
ease than before, and had tea with the family of six sons
and one daughter, besides the parents. After that I came
over to the city and visited the Age newspaper offices by
previous appointment, and inspected the wonderful printing
machinery in full work. The unfolding, moistening, print-
ing, and folding of the Leader newspaper at this office was
a work of great skill. The printing was effected by a plate
bearing the impression of the issue taken originally from
arranged type. About 17,000 copies had to be taken off of
this weekly paper before the printing of the daily Age com-
menced. The circulation of the latter is 59,000 copies,
which spread out will extend from here to Ballarat, a
distance of 100 miles, and yet they do not commence print-
ing this great issue before 3 every morning. Took leave of
the Age offices as well as Mr. and Master 8., who had
accompanied me, and retired to bed.
Thursday, October 30.
Cloudy weather in the morning, threatening rain, with
thermometer at 58°, but cleared up by noon. Proceeded to
the University and was shown over its buildings as well as
the Museum and the Botanical Gardens attached thereto for
the benefit of the students. The latter are more classically
arranged than the City Gardens, and are more interesting


scientifically though not so pretty looking. The Museum
contains many models of gold factories, the “ Welcome
JNugget” (a piece of quartz weighing 210 lbs,, yielding
2,700 oz. of gold), samples of minerals, stuffed animals and
birds from all parts of the world, as also many skeletons,
I returned home for lunch, and started immediately after-
wards to view the local paper mill. This is not a very
large institution, but it has a branch factory at Ballarat
producing live tons altogether per day (24 hours), and is
the only one of its kind. Bags, ropes, old gunny bags, as
well as paper are used in the manufacture by a process
which is simply perfect ; drawing paper, fruit paper, and
brown paper are the chief products. Thence I took a ’bus
to Sandridge, about four miles distant. I have hardly
travelled by ’bus as yet, but my to-day’s experiment fully
justified it. Besides being ridiculously cheap as compared
with other conveyances (even railway travelling included),
it introduces travellers to various kinds of people worth
studying, and also secures them unlooked-for advantages
and assistance. For instance, I enquired of a young fellow-
passenger as regards the whereabouts of the Sandridge glass-
works, which I intended to see. I find he is a lawyer, but
a very rough sort of fellow. “By gad, you could not have
asked a better man. My governor is a manager of one, and
I will take you to him,” says he. So we get out of the
carriage together, and he invites me to a drink in an adjoin-
ing public-house. He takes a formidable dose of whisky.
They all drink this or beer and sherry, ignoring their own
good wines altogether. Out of the priva'e residences I have
been invited to, only one possessed a white colonial wine for
domestic use. Well, I took a glass of ginger-ale after
explaining to my companion that I was a Mahomedan and


that I did not drink wines or spirits. But I did not
mention that many Mahomedans in India drink more than
even the Europeans. (I wish it were otherwise.) But I
have always been well without liquor, and so would most
of the admirers of alcohol, I dare say. “ I would have
taken you for a Spaniard or a Frenchman, if you had not
told me you were a Mahomcdan ; but you speak English
with less foreign accent, and, perhaps, your complexion is
darker than that of Europeans,” he exclaims as we stroll
along. After a few minutes’ walk, we approach a cottage,
which is the house of my chaperone, and adjoining it is
the glass factory. The old manager is not in, and the
works are at a standstill. They do not make anything
but bottles (aerated-water bottles), and I am shown over
the premises. The young man is awfully sorry that I
could not see the factory in working order, and also that
his father is out. “ I wish you had seen —I am a blunt
fellow—a d d fool compared to him ; haven’t got his
suave, and he would have embraced yon, ” and so on, he
goes on talking. Then he suggests I might see another
factory, which is a little further on, and is far more interest-
ing than theirs. I readily make up my mind, and enquire
for the direction in which it is situated. But my friend
again volunteers to accompany me, and off we go. The
admission was a matter of no difficulty ; it is easy enough
here everywhere for a stranger, and the task of inspection
commenced. These works (the Australian Glass Company)
are indeed far superior to the last just visited globes,
decanters, glasses, vases in flowered and frosted glass are
manufactured here in the best style. The samples we see
compare fully with the English-made articles, which are also
kept here to show the contrast. Sand is chiefly used with


the other usual ingredients, nearly all of which arc found in
the colony. Close by, a jute factory is also working. Every
industry is being rapidly developed by this young country.
My companion obligingly returned to town and escorted me
home, promising not to lose me yet, and again exhorting me
to try and see his father one of these days. After dinner I
again went out from the hotel, and looked round Bourke and
Elizabeth streets. These present an unusually excited scene
now-a-days owing to the great influx of people, owing to
its being the race week. It is astonishing to see the extra-
ordinary interest evinced here in racing. Every man and
woman has got the Derby and the Melbourne Cup on the
brain. The weather promises to be favourable, but great
anxiety prevails about it, lest it should mar the sport. Such
an eventuality will be considered to be something like a
calamity.
Fhiday, October SI.
After breakfast I drove over to the office of the Superin-
tendent of Police (white clothes detectives), and asked for
the services of an officer for to-night, expressing a wish to
see the “ shady side” of Melbourne. So far I have been
seeing everything that is good here, and it is impossible to
form a correct idea of any place without seeing its other
side. This functionary happily agrees with me in this view,
and places a detective at my disposal, who will call for me
at 8 p.m. In the meantime a friend suggests that I should
pay a visit to the Pentridge Gaol at Coburg, about five
miles from here. We accordingly go over to the Treasury
Buildings, where a number of offices representing various
departments are located, including that of the Inspector-
General of Prisons, We were shown into the room of this


high official, whose _ name is Brett. Our object is booh ex-
plained, and he enquired if I am connected with any official
department in India, and adds that generally no one is
allowed to see the gaol on any days except Tuesdays end
Thursdays. I argue that if they stuck to that rule it would
be impossible for me to see the place at all, as the former is
the “ Oup day,” when no one will think of doing anything
except going to the races, and on the latter day I leave for
Bombay, whereupon Mr. B. very obligingly writes out a
special order which authorizes me to see both the gaols
belonging to this city. I thank him for his kindness, and
start at once for Coburg. Unfortunately I reached there at
noon, when the prisoners knock off work and take their
meals. The governor of the gaol places two alternatives
before me, viz., either to be merely shown over the place at
once or to wait till 1-30 p.m., when the prisoners resume
their work. Without this the sight is not worth seeing, so
I choose the latter alternative, and promise to turn up
accordingly. The interregnum I devote to obtaining an
easy shave for 6d. at the adjoining “ Federal Shaving Saloon,”
and taking a look into the Argus newspaper over a lunch at
a hotel opposite to the Tensor’s high-sounding institution.
At 1-15 p.m. I make again for the gaol, and am immediately
led over the various parts of this great institution, being
transferred from officer to officer and from place to place.
It is indeed a wonderful place, and in the highest state of
efficiency. Cleanliness is the order of the day, and the
wants and comforts of the prisoners are well—too well—
studied. Each has a snug little room—it cannot be
called a cell-—with wash-stand, bed, and books. Besides
these, should he require any legitimate thing, he only has
to press a knob in the wall, which is connected with a bell,


and his call is answered as speedily as if he were ringing
for his own servants at home, if he had any. The bath-
rooms and W. C. as well as the lavatories will bear
comparison with those in any of the hotels. Good, clean
clothing, changed every week, and nourishing food is
supplied from the cook-room, the machinery of which is
worked by steam-power. In fact the prisoner has only to
behave himself, and there is nobody to keep him from the
enjoyment of this life, which is a kind of luxury to most
of the inmates. They miss the life as soon as they are
discharged from the gaol, and many have come back for
the twelfth or thirteenth time. In the city they have no
hearth or home, and no one will give them any employ-
ment, so to commit fresh crimes to return to the gaol
which gives them good shelter becomes their only desire.
Many industries are cultivated here, as well as religious and
other instructions imparted to the prisoners, and some of
them take kindly to these civilizing influences, at least
during their respective terms of imprisonment. A wool-
factory, tannery, boot-making, tailoring, blacksmiths’, tin-
smiths’, and carpenters’ establishments, are in full swing.
They are very well managed, and the work from all these
departments is considered to be inferior to none in the
colony. Bugs, blankets and coir matting and carpets
produced here find ready sale, and the orders are always
coming in. Some boots and shoes exhibited from here in
the last Calcutta Exhibition have brought a first class
certificate to the department, but the officer in charge
expected a medal, and is not satisfied with his award. I
advise him, as I have been advising many local traders, to
try the coming Bombay Exhibition, which will doubtless
show better appreciation of their articles and open wider


fields for their operations than has been the case with the
Calcutta show. Its speculative character detracted greatly
from its value, and people are glad to learn that Bombay
will hold an International Exhibition managed by the
people themselves. It should be properly advertised, and
I have no doubt Australia will, as it can, put in a far more
creditable appearance than she did even at Calcutta. M.
Jioubert is being interviewed by some of the reporters of
the press here, and whilst he gives a glowing picture of
India he makes certain erroneous remarks as regards the
obligations of the guarantors of our coming Exhibitions,
Here also he is considered to be nothing more than a
speculator. Well, to resume the remarks about this
township of a gaol I may add that it contains also am
admirable hospital, which has, however, no more than two
patients at present out of 540 prisoners. This speaks well
of the climate as well as the management and discipline
maintained ia the prison. The gymnasium is most appre-
ciated by the generally youthful prisoners. They belong
mostly to that dangerously increasing class of the population
here called the “ Larrikins,” Some of them were desperate
characters, and accosted us more oat of fun than respect;
others eyed us suspiciously and sneaked away. All seemed
quite content with their situations. No females are located
in this gaol, but are to be found in the other establishment
of its kind in the city. My special pass could enable me
to visit that as well, but I have no time to do so. Besides,
I am satisfied with the inspection of this place and its
Inhabitants. It cannot be surpassed by any other establish-
ment here or anywhere in the world 1 believe. So I returned,
had dinner, and visited the Theatre Royal, where the
* l Rivals” was to he played. Fine house and a large


audience, although the performance has already had a big ran.
Our plays in India do not run so long of course. This
comedy, entitled “ The Rivals,” seemed well mounted, but
abounded in rather strong language, which, however, was
obviously well approved by the visitors. Bather a carious taste,
isn’t it? The general idea is, that, the ladies here especially are
so free in their manners that they would not be tolerated any-
where in the mother-country. At'least so say some of the now
very limited number of admirers of the ‘‘ Old. Country,” as she
is called. I could not sit out this play, as I had that
appointment with the detective, and so loft the theatre at
10 pjn. and joined him accordingly. After a long ramble
I returned to my hotel and soon sought my bed, being
satisfied that, like all other places in the world, Melbourne,
too, has its shady side, about which the least said the better,
Collins Street and Bourke Street are the most fashionable
thoroughfares in Melbourne, and each has got by its side a
smaller road, called respectively Little Collin and Little
Bourke streets, and whilst you can enjoy your stroll with
perfect safety through the former two larger streets, the case
is just the reverse in the latter two, where there is every
chance of your being pounced upon by evil characters and
robbed.
IX.
Saturday, November I.
“Derby day,” “Card of the races,” &c., shouted the
street-boys as I issued from the hotel in the morning.


“ Glorious weather ; can’t complain of it this year,” say
some gentlemen among themselves. They seem to be pretty
well interested in the coming races this afternoon. Bat who
is not interested in them ? Men and women, boys and girls,
masters and servants, all talk about them, about the horses,
and back them freely. Every one is walking, or driving, or
riding past Collin Street towards the Spencer Street railway
station, whence a train leaves every five minutes for the
race-course overcrowded with passengers. I followed the
example thus widely set me and made for the station, got
into a carriage (fare 13s. to and fro with first class accorm
modation on the stand), and reached Newmarket at about
10 minutes to 1 p.m., when the races were to commence.
We soon made our way to the stand, and here a great scene
met our view. The stand is a grand building substantially
built, capable of holding 9,000 persons, and is crowded with
ladies in the most charming dresses and gaily dressed
gentlemen. The course is the best I have ever seen. The
Melbournians declare it is the best in the world. Soft and
smooth, it is visible all ronnd from even the platform of
this stand. Beyond the platform a large piece of green
fresh ground is utilized for promenading and band per-
formances. A little further a big shed is erected, under
which are to be found a couple of hundred small tables,
where visitors can have their lunch brought from home. On
the other side of the Grand Stand are the Members’ Stand,
weighing-room, stalls for the horses, lavatories, refreshment
bars, &c., and the great gap around the clock-tower showing
time is filled by betting people. The most noticeable among
these are the numerous book-makers with their badges,
shouting out at the top of their voices the odds they are
offering on the several horses. Behind the Grand Stand again


are tea and coffee rooms, as well as the Governor’s waiting:
room and the ladies’ wardrobe chambers, all richly furnished.
Over these rooms is what they call the Upper Stand,
whence a magnificent view of the course as well as of
Melbourne can be had. Then there is the hill attached to
it, whence the view is still more charming if possible, and
the number of people thereon is very large. The leading
event on the card was the Derby Race, for which about SO
horses turned up. It was a grand spectacle to see these
noble animals as they galloped past us ridden by daring
young jockeys and watched by some 80,000 people. The
race was capitally run, and won amidst great cheering.
Sunday, November 2.
After yesterday’s fatigue and excitement I got up rather
late this morning, and did not stir out of the hotel until
2 p.m., when Mr. N. agreeably surprised me by presenting
himself with a fine buggy (four-wheeled) and a pair of horses,
and offering to drive me over a part of the country. I readily
consented to this of course, and we were soon rattling on again.
The day was dusty with a cold wind driving right into our
face, but this little inconvenience was more than counter-
balanced by the charm of passing through beautiful suburbs
and lovely country. An hour-and-a-half’s drive brought us
to Mentone (14 miles), and we in our turn surprised our
friend, Mr, D., by this sudden appearance on a Sunday
afternoon. We were, however, in a hurry to get back to
town, as I intended to be present at a lecture on Materialism
at 7 p.m. So we rose to depart, but Mr. D. would not have
it. “You must have tea with us; the lecture is stuff
and nonsense,” he argues. Well, we give way, and soon
after (6 p.m.) the bell for tea (standing dinner) was


sounded. Two other ladies and as many gentlemen, besides
Mr. D., his sister, and myself, were at table. After some
desultory conversation a walk along the seaside, was pro-
posed and accepted. All were glad to warm themselves
a .bit by a brisk pace, and some of us had a run, which soon
brought us down to the seashore. There is a nice refreshing
breeze here, and I feel as if I wore walking on the sandy
path at Ohowpatty in Bombay on a December eve. “ A
little good luck, or rather pluck, would enable us to get on
the cliff yonder,” says Mr. D., and Mr. N. and myself are
soon making for the little island. A few minutes’ walk over
the rugged road enabled us to climb over this soft earthen
precipice, where there was nothing to see except a few
names carved on it here and there. We followed the exam-
ple thus set by our predecessors and began a move towards
home. A dead shark, a big rat, and some beautiful wild
flowers were all that we noticed on the return journey, which
was effected by a new path. We then provided ourselves
with great-coats, and cigars and] whisky for onr friend N.,
and got on the trap. The drive now appeared most enjoy-
able ; the moon was shining brightly ; the wind had become
less cold (or perhaps we were warmer), and the country
around looked enchanting. My friend N., who was driving
the carriage, soon forgot the road, and took us on to some
bush tracks. I had no inclination to assist him in finding
out the correct road, and was inwardly chuckling at this
chance of prolonging this delightful scene. “ Koo-i-i,” he
cries out in the aboriginal style to attract notice. An old
lady soon answers the call by emerging out of an adjacent
cottage. “If you please, madam, which is the road to Mel-
bourne?” asks my companion. “Lordbless you, sir, you are
just in the opposite direction, and must retrace your steps


about five miles to get to the main road on your left. You
might drive through the other tract, which will be a shorter
cut, but it is not safe at night to do so,” she says good-
naturedly. So we commenced driving back, and were again
near Mentone. We reached Melbourne about midnight and
1 parted with my generous friend after bidding him good-
bye and thanking him for the most enjoyable drive I have
ever had. He offers to repeat the experiment, an idea
which suits me very much, but other engagements would
not permit of my doing so.
Mohday, November 5.
I visited the Exhibition Building this morning again.
A jubilee Exhibition was opened here on Saturday last, and
visitors are admitted to it for a shilling a-piece. On enter-
ing the premises I found young Joubert, who had just re-
turned from India with his father, setting up various Indian
articles in a prominent part 'of the place secured by him.
They (the Jouberts) have always got exhibitions on the
brain. He offered to take me to see the Indian articles,
consisting of Dutch, Benares, Delhi, Kashmere, &c., work, but
as these were familiar enough to me, we hastened on to the
colonial courts, where some samples of the local produce
were expected to be seen. But I missed them, and found
furniture and glassware and other things not very interest-
ing. The only thing worth-seeing was the aboriginal courts,
where some life-size statues of naked black people—the
original masters of this valuable country—are to be seen
with appropriate surroundings of fine fern trees as well as
country weapons and huts. All of these figures of male and
female aborigines are hideous in appearance and wear a
diabolical as well as a stupid expression. “My Governor


would like to see you if you will wait a few minutes,'’ says
young Joubert. “Wc live just opposite to these buildings,
but the governor always remains here. lie is gone to the
town and will be back directly.” But he does not turn up,
and I have to call at Government House, so I leave, express-
ing an intention to call again if possible. I then drove off
to Government House after lunch by the St. Kilda road.
It is a stately building standing on an elevation, which makes
it conspicuous all over the city. H. E. was not in, having
gone to the Treasury Offices, as he invariably does every
Monday, so I had merely to undergo the formality of writing
my name in the visitors’ book.
Tuesday, November 4.
This morning ushers in the “ Cup day, ” the great event in
Melbourne. It is a fine clear day, promising to be worthy
of a national event. All offices, shops, and other places
of business arc closed. It is a Bank holiday—a Govern-
ment holiday. “No one will pretend to do any business
to-day,” declare the colonists. They wish each other <( com-
pliments of the season” on this auspicious day. The
Governors of the sister colonies of Adelaide and Tasmania,
with their families and suites, have come over to Melbourne
to witness this great race, and so have thousands of other
people. All the local hotels have not got a spare room,
nor have the boarding houses. Every available nook and
corner has been pre-engaged for the past fortnight. Queens-
landers, Newzealanders, Tasmanians, South Australians and
West Australians, cram every street, and all retail business
has been very brisk recently. The theatres and other
places of amusement and pleasure resorts have also been
well patronised. The interest taken in racing here is most


widespread and the enthusiasm most intense. Since 10 a. m.
people have boon moving in crowds towards the railway
station to get to Newmarket, where the race-course is
situated. Every two or three minutes a crowded —over-
crowded—train leaves the station, and yet the board over
the entrance shows the announcement to the large masses of
people outside that the “ platform is full.” The pleasure-
seekers are very orderly, but very impatient to get on to
the station and into the train, but no one can get at one
without missing at least half a dozen trains, if not more.
The greatest rush is being made through the station doors
and then through the carriage doors. “ First come, first
served, ” seems to be the motto for the day. But one has
to serve himself after all ; that in itself is not an easy task.
We start by the 12 o’clock train, and yet the crowd is as
great as ever. Nothing but racing and betting is talked of.
On arrival at Newmarket a wonderful spectacle meets the
eye. A huge mass of people swarm like bees on the elevated
ground behind the stand, called The Hill. About 30,000
people must be there. Then there is the Grand Stand, which
has been recently enlarged at an enormous cost, and which
is still too small to accommodate the increasing number of
patrons. The ladies have turned out in thousands in the
gaudiest and the gayest of costumes. The carriage enclosure
is full. So are the promenade grounds, the great luncheon
shed, the restaurants, tea and coffee rooms, the Upper Stand,
the Members’ Stand, the flats—every place in fact as far as
the eye can reach. 133,000 people are estimated to have
assembled, and the Turf Club will make about £15,000 for
entrance fees alone. The sport is adapted for racing by
nature. The most fastidious could not desire a better place
or better races. The stakes amount to £35,000 for the


spring season. Besides that, hundreds of thousands of
pounds are turned over by the book-makers and the public.
Some of the former are immensely rich. Every one is bet-
ting and bent upon making a fortune. Ladies are no
exception, and many sweeps are being organized by the
fairest of creatures, to which gentlemen are invited to con-
tribute in the sweetest of manners. And who could resist ?
But such an idea never strikes any one to-day. Everyone
has racing with all its concomitants on the brain. Twelve
to eighteen horses tun up for a race in gallant array. But
the excitement at the running for the Cup Race knows no
bounds. Every nerve and every eye are strained towards
the riders and the ridden. No one has any idea of the
winner. The book-makers in scores are shouting “ £I,OOO
to £IOO against such and such a horse.” They are simply
delirious. The horses, about twenty-five in number, start in
grand style. No false starts with those animals. All are
perfectly trained, and are as docile as lambs until they are
made to go. Then they are as brave as lions, and vie with
each other in the fiercest manner. The Australians have great
taste for horses. They joined in thousands Professor Sam-
ple’s class for the training and taming of this sagacious
animal. Well, from the start to finish of this extra-
ordinary race, the spectators watched it in breathless
silence, now and then broken by exclamations caused by
any alteration in the positions of the runners. After all, an
outsider, Malua, comes in a winner, and the rider receives
an ovation. Thundering cheers fill the air. “ Well done,
Inglis ’ (the rider’s name) is the cry from 133,000 throats.
After that a race with 28 horses on the card is to take
place, but the termination of the Gup Race has abated the
enthusiasm to a considerable extent. Many people are


already leaving the course. They have had sport to their
heart’s content apparently. Many people in the crowd lost
their friends, and even wives, and the mutual anxieties and
searches were very amusing to those wdio fared better. I
returned to the hotel at 6 p.m,, tired in body, if not in
mind. I may add that this morning a complimentary
season ticket was sent to me by the courteous Secretary
(Mr. Byron-Moore) of the Melbourne Turf Club, who also
kindly showed me over the Hill and the Grand Stand, &c.
X.
Wednesday, November 5.
I feel that my tour in Australia has somehow ended
to-day, and I have no desire to see anything more. I have
had plenty of opportunities of sight-seeing and of obtain-
ing glimpses into the domestic life of the people, which
I have availed of to a fair extent, but the thirst for more
has been insatiable. The witnessing of the Cup Eace
would seem, however, to be the acme of the aspirations of
the tourist here, and I for one somehow feel quite contented
to-day. The whole city would seem to be affected in
this way, and business is getting into order again and the
visitors are talking of leaving for their places at once.
Everyone has done his pilgrimage, and appears to have
eased his conscience just as an Indian pilgrim would feel
after accomplishing a most sacred pilgrimage to a religious
shrine.
Had lunch with Mr. F. and he invites me to see the
amateur rowing of Beach and Hanlan, the champion
scullers. I hesitate and make excuses, bub he remonstrates


irresistibly. After ail I consent, and we drive over to
Sand ridge. It is the Yacht Club ground, which also
contains several other establishments for the sale and hire
of boats. A salt water river, or rather rivulet, smoothly
flows by these appropriately situated bouses. The water
is very shallow and very dirty, bat quite suitable for boat-
ing purposes. It is well resorted to—these people cultivate
every taste in the most approved style. A great number
of amateurs are either rowing or sailing. There is Hanlan,
the world renowned ex-champion, handling his tiny boat
with marvellous dexterity. His every movement is watched.
No one can yet understand how the Australian, Beach,
could have ever beaten Hanlan as he did in Sydney
Harbour some time ago. But he is in splendid form, and
hopes yet to retrieve his loss. It is said he underestimated
his opponent’s power, and rowed indifferently in the last
champion race. Another will soon be organized, and the
question decided for ever. To-day they are practising
mere exhibition rowing, but Beach does not turn up. A
large concourse of eager people is lining the shore of the
river from end to end. Fruit and cigar sellers as well as
the newsboys are singing out their avocations in the most
boisterous fashion, and musicians are playing and begging
all round. Some other witty fellows are also earning money
in their own way. Altogether the spectacle is that of an
Indian fair, excepting, that, variety is lacking here. The
weather becomes all at once threatening after having been
close or muggy all day, so my friend and myself make a
move homewards.
I might have added before writing the above record of
my daily doings that a mutual friend conducted me to the
office of Sir W. J. Clarke, the well-known millionaire and


head of the English Freemasons here. Apart from other
things, I was introduced as “ one of us.” being a Free-
mason myself. There is no doubt that Freemasonry is of
great advantage to travellers especially. Sir William re-
ceived me very kindly, and is as simple as he is rich. He pre-
sented me with a portrait of himself, and offered to write to
his agent at Ballarat to show me round the place if I should
visit it. I thanked him for the courtesy and promised to
avail myself of the opportunity should 1 prolong my stay
here, and go over to that charming town. It is second to
Melbourne in Victoria in point of commercial importance
as well as natural and artificial beauty. As far as the
latter feature is concerned, it is astonishing to realize what
human enterprise can do in twenty-five years, which is the
ancient history of this place. Of course to the discovery of
abundant gold is to be mainly attributed its wonderfully
rapid development. After dinner I debated in my mind as to
what my future mode of procedure should be. The P. &0.
steamer Parramatta is leaving for Bombay, and Ido
not know whether I should stay another fortnight here or
go away by her. I have already spent a fortnight more in
Australia than I originally intended, and yet I am far
from being tired of it. My health has also not sufficiently
improved as yet. As a matter of fact I have not given it
an opportunity of doing so. The climate suits me ou the
whole, but I have kept myself moving about so much ever
since my arrival from Bombay that I have given myself no
rest, in spite of the advice of the medico. I have had rest
so far as abstaining from business is concerned ; but sight-
seeing not the less entails brain-work, though it be of
a different character. A number of people called at the
hotel for me to-day, thinking I shall be leaving these


shores to-morrow. Perhaps they are right. But I will
decide early in the morning, and can turn in for the night
under no fixed idea of parting so soon with the place which
has given me such a nice reception. But then, if I decide
in the morning upon remaining here further, what about
the letters ? They must be posted at 10 a.m. according
to the custom here, and there will be no time to write them,
bo I will have two strings to my bow, and be prepared
with the letters as well. Then either they or I go. Either
of us must vanish, that is certain enough. Accordingly I
start writing my budget of news for the dear folks at
Bombay, and finish it by 11 p.m. For this purpose I had
to give up an engagement of rather an important character,
viz., the ball at Government House. But one cannot ride
two horses at the same time. Alluding to the ball reminds
one of the scant courtesy met with at the Government
Houses in India. There, natives were, until lately, seldom
invited without some canvassing on their part. But if
once they are invited they are treated well enough. That’s
what I mean by the phrase, scant courtesy. In India native
gentlemen are generally not even allowed to put up in
the same hotel as the so-called European gentlemen. But
here it is not so. And I can vouch that it is not so in
Europe and America. Every gentleman is received with
open arms, and treated with impartiality, equality, cordiality,
and so on without any stupid distinctions. Perhaps it is
the native’s own fault if such distinctions are made between
them and their fellow-creatures from Europe, but for all
that Europeans should at least try to retain their
original instincts—the instincts of gentlemen. Moreover,
Liberalism or Liberal Conservatism is on the ascendant,
and that is a good sign. The prosperity of England and


India alike depends, to a great extent, upon the feeling
their people establish amongst themselves. And this again
rests with the heads of our respective Governments, and,
happily, there is every reason to expect good from these
sources as time wears on.
Thursday, November 6.
Dull uncomfortable weather. It won’t continue so for
any length of time ; but suppose it did ? There is no fixed
principle about it. No one can like such suffocating
weather. It can do good to nobody, invalids least of all.
Even the horses at Oaks day races will suffer. The steeple-
chases come off on the Bth instant. They are too far off,
perhaps, but I don’t care to see them. After the Cup day a
feeling has come over me that there remains now nothing
for me to see in Melbourne. I fancy I have seen it pretty
freely—commercially and socially, &c. If I stay any
longer here, it would be for simple, honest rest. But would
that not be marred by any such weather as to-day’s or by
the ceremonial inflictions consequent upon invitations from
friends in the suburbs ? To refuse them is considered to
be an insult here. You cannot even deny a drink offered
by anybody without offending him more or less. This,
however, undeniably shows that the invitations and offers
in question are well meant and perfectly sincere. They
are not mere conventionalities as is the case somewhere
else.
This is the train of thought I am in as I jump out of
my bed and prepare for breakfast after the usual prelimi-
naries. By this time a friend—one of the kindest I have
ever had —Mr. N., calls in and inquires how I feel this
morning. “ Deucedly uncertain,” 1 exclaim. It is the


weather you must go out to the hills ; it is going to be a hot
windy day, which will upset anybody, he adds. “ Well,
then, I will go out to Bombay, after all,” said I, and off I go
up to the room to pack up. The steamer will sail at noon
precisely, and I have no time to lose.
After getting all my traps ready, I said a hasty good-
bye to some of the friends whom I could easily look up,
and proceeded from the same station as before on to
Williamstown, where the Parramatta was preparing to
steam away. The weather was dull, cloudy, and deposing.
I felt in very low spirits, and as my friend, Mr. N., saw to
my luggage and proposed a parting drink, I could not help
feeling regret at the approaching separation from a place
which I begin to love. Everyone has been so kind and
obliging to me. The ehange has done me good on the
whole, and at the same time it has given me opportunities
of seeing European life and European enterprise of no
mean order. But India, too, has its attractions for me.
Very much so, indeed. By returning to Bombay I hope to
be so much set up by the remaining sea voyage of twenty-five
days that I may get into harness and assist my overworked
brother, return to my own domestic associations, and a lot
of other advantages which I would otherwise forfeit by any
prolonged absence. These are the considerations which
have more or less contributed to the struggle of uncertainty
going on within me for some days past and turned the scale
in favour of my bidding adieu to Autralia. But, hark ! the
usual bell is just ringing as a warning to the large number
of non-passenger visitors who have come on board for
some purpose or another. A move is immediately made
by them for the wharf. The vessel is soon unmoored and
we are gradually lost to the sight of those on shore,


winding our way in the same Hobson Bay, passing the same
scenery, and pursuing the same course as before. The pilot
leaves us at the Port Phillip heads, and we consign ourselves
to the ocean once more.
Saturday, November 8.
The sea near Adelaide is often very rough, and passen-
gers have often to be hauled down into the boats like
packages of goods, but it is as smooth as a pond as we enter
the Glenelg harbour at 8 a.m. We anchor about a mile
distant from the Garroll-wood pier, and a couple of steam
launches soon come up alongside. Some of the P. &0,
agency office people are the first to board us with the
information that as there is a large quantity of goods (wool
chiefly) to be shipped, the steamer will not sail before 1 a.m,
the next morning. This news is very cheerful indeed.
This will enable us to be on shore nearly 17 hours, which
include a Saturday evening too. The passengers one and all
are overjoyed at this news, and are soon on the deck ready to
land. A steam launch takes us to the pier at Glenelg,
whence, after* seeing to letters and telegrams, we soon get
into the first train for Adelaide. On arrival there we
disperse in suitable bands. I got only one companion, who
is a very agreeable young fellow. My new acquaintance
reciprocates my wish to do Adelaide as far as we can during
the short time at our disposal. The town looks very pretty,
and is excellently laid out. The streets are at parallel and
at right angles and yery straight. It is more like
Melbourne than Sydney in appearance. Some of the buildings
are very fine, indeed, and possess great architectural preten-
sions. But it has neither the bustle of Melbourne nor the
easy activity of Sydney. The principal streets are the King


William, the Handle, and the Hiudley. These contain all
the banks, offices, and noteworthy establishments of the
place. Indeed, their number and size are so great that one
cannot help wondering how they are supported in a
comparatively small town like this. It must either have a
large country in the interior or must have immediate and
great prospects of business. At least such is the idea that
a stray visitor having a cursory glance at it cannot help
forming. Its newspapers, hotels, and some other institu-
tions are superior to those of Sydney. Of course, the
latter’s great wealth and beauty lies in the harbour, and
that is simply unsurpassable. After treading the first
named two big, long streets and visiting therein some
mercantile offices, friends, clubs, the post office, and the
Town Hall (which possesses a fine organ and lofty tower
145 feet high), we walk into the Botanical Gardens.
These are very large and splendidly kept. The collection
of trees, plants, conservatories, hot-houses, and fern-houses,
with show-rooms of all kinds of colonial wood, are very
pretty. Thence we go over to the hospital, next door,
where we are welcomed and shown over by its good-
natured matron. It is very neat, and the arrangements
of all departments are perfect. A small subscription
is asked and given in aid of some fund. After this
we are requested to put our names in the visitors’
book with any remarks that we may have to make. I write :
il An excellent institution,” to which my companion adds,
“ and a credit to the city.” Next to this hospital is the
library and the picture gallery, which promise to be
ornaments to the place, but they are not quite complete as yet.
Then we lounge over to the University, and from the
university to the public library. This is a great boon


to the inhabitants, as may be judged from the large
number of them to be seen, there. The admission
is free, and books as well as papers from all parts
of the world are at the disposal of all who take the
trouble to go there. A little further on ia the
Government House, and as we get there without any extra
trouble or going out of the way, we take the opportunity of
putting down our names in the visitors’ book of his absent
Excellency, Sir William Robinson, who is enjoying the
races at Melbourne in common with his brother-Governors
and fellow-creatures of all the other colonies. All these
buildings I have mentioned are situated in one line of road
at the head of King William Street, and can be done with
one stroke, as it were. Some of the offices and shops in
the city will bear comparison with similar buildings ia
Melbourne. A plentiful supply of water is obtained from
reservoirs at Hope Yalley and Thorndon Park, which
derive their supply from the River Torrens, a weir being
thrown across the river and the water conducted by an
open aqueduct and 42-inch main to the reservoirs. These
reservoirs have a storage capacity of 870,505,000 and
140,000,000 gallons respectively ; the street mains reticu-
late through 159 miles of pipe. A metropolitan reservoir
capable of holding one million gallons of water has lately
been constructed on the park lands at North Adelaide.
The beautiful Botanical Gardens occupy an area of 40
acres. The gubernatorial residence is a fine battlemented
stone edifice with a tower 75 feet high. Around the city
there is a lot of pleasantly situated suburbs, all connected
with rail or tram with the centre of the city. By this
time it is 2 p.m., and we adjourn for lunch at the nearest
place—the South Australian Club Hotel. It is a fine


place, and the attendant at the bar very pleasant. She
recognizes me at once, although I am rather differently
dressed than upon the only other occasion she had seen me
here on our way to Melbourne. After lunch my friend pro-
poses to go to see the cricket match between the Australian
Eleven just returned from England and the Adelaide
Eighteen. I don’t feel inclined to sacrifice the whole and
the only afternoon we have here to witnessing the play,
and elect to remain in the city. This enabled me to see a
good bit more of it and to make sundry purchases of curios.
After dinner at the “ York Hotel,” which is the model of
a first class and not a very dear hotel, we patronize the
Theatre Royal. It is a fine place, built on the same
principle as mostotherplaces of that name, and is very similar
to the Melbournian edifice, with the addition of an excellent
saloon and bar at the back of the dress circle. There
are two more bars on the ground floor and also a “ saddling
paddock,” which name signifies nothing less than a resort
for gay young people of both sexes. The facilities for such
meetings between young people and for drinking are very
common—too common, in fact. They are availed of, too
very freely, and the results, I daresay, will soon tell upon the
population of these otherwise thriving colonies. This is
to be really deprecated. The play for to-night is what they
call “ The Bells,” to be followed by the farce entitled “ A
Winning Hazard.” The house is scarcely well filled, the
dress circle being almost empty. There is fair acting,
but the company is not so strong as any that I have seen
either in Melbourne or Sydney. We leave the theatre
without waiting for the “ farce.” I like a “ farce” by
itself, but not after a drama. There are two other places
of amusement besides this, but the Theatre Royal is


considered to be the best. It may be so here, but the
companies are inferior to those at the sister cities.
However, they are far better than those we are accustomed
to in India. It is as well that my travelling happens to
begin at the other end, or I would scarcely enjoy these
places, at least so far as their sights, amusements, and
conditions of life are concerned. Many tourists come here
after visiting Europe and America, and to them, perhaps,
the change is rather for the worse than the better. I have
done Africa on a previous occasion, and now I am seeing
a bit of Australia. These beat India in some respects,
and should I now go to the above two continents, they
will in their turn beat the two I have been visiting.
So there is every chance of my seeing things from good to
better instead of otherwise. After leaving the theatre we
proceeded to see the gay-looking streets of Adelaide.
They are particularly so on a Saturday night, as is the
case in every one of these places. The last time I saw
Adelaide was also on a fine Saturday night as to-day, and
so I could only see it at its best. If I had time I should
also like to see it at its worst. So we stroll on and on
through the throngs on the asphalted footpaths of the clean
well-metalled roads, looking here and there at a bril-
liantly illuminated shop or any other object worthy of
notice, until 11-30 p.m., when we proceed to the Victoria
Street Railway Station in the middle of the Victoria
Square, and catch the 11-45 train, which is the last for
Glenelg. It hurries us along through the heart of the
town just as an ordinary vehicle or ’bus would do, and we
are at the port in half an hour’s time. A short walk
over the wide, dreary road, and then over the wooden pier
lighted by a few lamps on either side brings us to the steam


launch. This takes us to the Parramatta in no time, and
the latter steams away at 1 p.m. towards Albany, King
George’s Sound, which is about 1,100 miles from here".
A last look at Glenelg through the moonlit night, and I
turn in.
XI.
Sunday, November 9.
A Sunday on board again, but after the stay on shore
the_ voyage commences afresh with us, with all its pre-
liminary features. The most prominent of these is the
dreaded sea-sickness. Many are hors de combat once more.
The church service was duly held in the music-room on
board, and some ladies and gentlemen tried to turn up.
It was made as complete as it could possibly be at the
hands of two full-fledged bishops, who happen to be among
our passengers. They have quite spread their religious
lustre over the whole of the ship, and there is a talk of
a short religious service on board every morning ! I only
trust that some of our rum chaps will be able to bear it
with Christian fortitude.
Monday, November 10.
Peals of thunder and flashes of lightning since 3 a.m.
this morning, and weather very foggy at 7 a.m. with the
sea “ getting on.” By noon it showed some signs of
“ going down,” and then only some of the young ladies
and gentlemen on board were on their legs again. This
was fortunately followed by the first manifestation of a


desire to get up some amusements. Dancing was the first
thing proposed. But the difficulty was about the musical
accompaniments. The piano in the ship’s music-room
could not be brought out on the deck, and it could not
be well heard if played from inside to the dancing outside.
Tuesday, November 11.
“ Very nice morning, isn’t it ?” say some of the passen-
gers. But the old folks object to the swell, which makes
the vessel roll a bit. They call it “ hills and valleys,”
the sight of which makes them sick. Luckily for them
this vessel and the weather are far superior to what we
had on the voyage towards Australia (per Cathay). The
swell we then had would be denominated “ mountains and
gulfs,” I expect. But so far some of us can neither see
the one nor the other. The feeling is merely the outcome
of their fertile brains.
Wednesday, November 12.
At 3-30 p.m. the West Australian mainland first burst
on our sight. It has a rugged coast, dismal, barren
mountains, and dangerous rocks. This very sight was
welcome enough coming out of India, when we saw it
after the long solitary voyage of fourteen days from
Colombo, but at present, coming as it is only about 84
hours after leaving beautiful Adelaide, it is very dispiriting,
to say the least. The weather at least was all that could
he desired, unlike what we had the last time in coming in.
As we neared the outer harbour, a dark object was espied
in the distance. This was the pilot boat, and we slackened
speed accordingly. It was soon alongside the steamer,
when a short old chap shouted out from below, “ Have


you got any sickness, captain “ Hone whatever,” replied
the skipper. Whereupon the pilot climbs up the Parra-
matta by the side ladder and asks for the ship’s doctor. “ A
clean bill of health, I suppose ?” he enquires again, and
on having an answer in the affirmative, he informs his
companion who waits in the boat, “ It is all right, Mr.
Williams,” and jumps, or rather limps on to the bridge to
steer us in by his great experience of the place, although
some of us feel that his presence is simply superfluous
owing to the perfectly safe character of the harbour. It
is so designed by nature, and although it lacks the
beautiful surroundings and charming scenery of the
Sydney harbour, it is a grand oval place, protected by
ranges of hills on all sides, and can be rendered impregnable
by the addition of the necessary fortifications. Moreover, it
is capacious enough to accommodate a vast quantity of
shipping. But, unfortunately, Western Australia requires a
miserable portion of its harbour for her own scanty require-
ments. It is by far the most neglected of all the Australian
colonies, and perhaps deservedly so. It has scarcely any
fertile land or mineral resources to develop. It produces
considerable quantities of sandal and jarrah woods, but
these cannot make her rich, far less enable her to compete
with Melbourne and Sydney, or rather Victoria and New
South Wales, where gold, silver, and other minerals, as
well as wheat cultivation, and sheep-breeding, so abun-
dantly exist. A land company has been lately floated
here, but it does not seem to have so far contributed
anything towards the development of the place, since blocks
of land in the interior can still be purchased at about
10 s. an acre, whereas in Malbourne it now costs £4OO per
acre. A fellow-passenger, a mining engineer by profession,


and mpassant, a brother of Mr. Cameron (Clan MacGregor),
the well-known war correspondent of the Standard, makes a
guess that the land in this part of Australia shows signs of
possessing tin ore, and any one can make a beginning for
its discovery by entailing upon himself a very small
investment by acquiring land at the above infinitesimal
price. Whilst we are thus conversing, we reach the inner
harbour of Albany and anchor at 5-30 p.m. Most of the
passengers do not even care to go on shore, but a few of
us do. The same steam launch takes us on shore as before
and lands us on the wooden pier for Is. per head (the rate
at night will be 2s„ and in rough weather double these
figures as the notice on the board shows in black and white).
The building we proceed to is the one with two or three
stories, where the Court and Telegraph as well as Post
Offices are jointly located, and we see to our letters and
telegrams. Thence we stroll over the road facing the sea,
and enquire for the P. and 0. Agency premises. An ill-
looking fellow, reminding one of the treadmill, on being
questioned, offers to show them to us for “ a bob.” This is
scarcely necessary, because a few paces bring us to our des-
tination ; but this little incident is a striking contrast to
the obliging character of the people of the other colonies I
have just been to. They will take pleasure in assisting
strangers, seeking any information, by going out of their
way from motives of pure disinterestedness, whilst here
pecuniary compensation is stipulated for the same services !
Mr. Hassall, the P. and 0. Agent, is the only man of
standing in this poor place ; and he is a right, good man
too, if not the “ King of Albany,” as he is popularly
dubbed. He has still great hopes of Western Australia
becoming an important colony yet. The railway to the


capital city Perth, nearly 300 miles from the fort, will be
completed very shortly, and is likely to be the means of
developing the colony after all. As at present the popula-
tion is very small, and labour scanty as well as dear, which
renders the growing of wheat impracticable, and also the
want of carriage is a great desideratum evidently. The
P. and 0. steamer gets only about 200 bales of wool as
the cargo outwards from her against thousands from
Sydney, Melbourne, and even Adelaide. The population
of the whole colony is about 30.000 souls, out of which
Perth boasts of 4,000, Freemantle 3,000, and Albany 800.
The latter is to Perth what Glenelg is to Adelaide. From
Albany a traveller can take a coach for Perth at about £6, or
he can proceed by sea to Freemantle in a smart little steamer
for £4. The latter journey takes 48 hours, and is by far the
more comfortable, not to say the less expensive of the two.
From Freemantle Perth is 11 miles, and can be reached by
rail. So far this colony’s requirements of all kinds are very
limited ; in fact, too small for any vessel to come from a
foreign port with a direct cargo of anything. Consequently,
she has to indent upon Melbourne for all rice, sugar, jams,
clothes and other necessaries of life. Things at Melbourne
are dear enough and they ought to be more so here, but
the hotel charge is 6s. for board and lodging per diem
against 12s. at Sydney or Melbourne. At about 11 p.m. we
returned by the same route and means cn board the
Paramatta and were agreeably surprised to hear that the
Governor of Western Australia, H. B. Sir Napier Broome,
K.0.M.G., had just arrived on our steamer with the pilot
boat and was going with us as a passenger to Europe. His
wife preceded him about six weeks ago, and he has now
taken six months’ leave of absence to rejoin her at home.


During this time the Chief Justice will be the acting
Governor. Besides having the Hon. Mr. Thurston, the
Chief Secretary of Fiji at present (who goes home to confer
about the New Guinea Protectorate), Mr. Loftus (son of
Lord Loftus, Governor of N. 8. W.), a couple of bishops and
other lesser stars, there is His Excellency of this colony
among the passengers, and we now ought to have some
“style” amongst the passengers. With these prospects we
steam out of this great harbour at 11-15 p.m., and resume
our voyage Colombowards.
Thursday, November 13.
The main portion of the passengers are becoming alive
to the necessity of minimising the monotony of travelling
which must now soon come over all of us. A committee of
ladies and gentlemen has just been formed to organise
suitable amusements on board from day to day. The first
thing they do is to get up a grand sweep on the vessel s
run for the 13 hours up to noon to-day. The conditions are:
Subscription Is. a-piece, or 3 tickets for half a crown,
and all numbers to be put up by auction, half the proceeds
of which are to go to the pool. The latter is its most
interesting feature to me as being different to what we used
to have on board the Cathay during the voyage
out. It enables the winner to claim the amount of
the pool in addition to the value of the sweep. The total
comes to a pretty little sum. The run being the most
uncertain one, no number was specially favourite, ticket
No. 185 was sold for 2s. 9 cl. only, and as it happened to be
the number of miles run, the holder became the w PJ ner 0 *
£4 75., which was the total amount of the Mynum-
ber was 114, and as it fetched 2s. 6d. in the auction, Is. off.


came back to my pocket against the shilling subscribed
by me. Some were sold as low as 6d., and some as high as
6s. each. The auction was a source of a good deal of fun
especially when the ladies’ tickets'were put up. The amateur
young auctioneer appeared to sell the ladies by their names
instead of their tickets!
Saturday, November 15.
The “committee” organised a concert with a tempting
programme, which came off pretty successful/ in the music
room to-night. All available talent was freely offered and
duly utilized. We have some charming ladies among the
passengers, who can sing and play well, but their voices
are not powerful enough to touch the high notes. Amongst
the gentlemen, too, an amateur violinist with a coup!e°of
piano players and fairly good voices, are to be found, and
taken all in all the affair came off very creditably to all
concerned. It was quite a refreshing sight to see the
music room filled by the audience. Ladies led by gentle-
men, fans moving, and opera glasses brought into use, and
several people lounging about here, there, and every-
where, with perfect nonchalance, and just as if they were in
a place of amusement on land. Most of the singers were
heartily applauded, and encores were demanded. Eventually
the concert was wound up at 9-80 p.m., when “God save the
Queen” was _ given by the entire company of passengers,
standing with uncovered heads. After this was over a
move was made to the quarter deck, which was covered all
round with canvas and illuminated with several kerosine
lamps. The light thus afforded was considered to be
rather deficient. Perhaps that was the case, but it was
notably the opinion (most emphatically expressed) of a few


of our people who cannot be satisfied with anything and
will not make allowances for the conditions of life on board.
Most of us think it a lucky thing to have all these comforts
during a sea voyage. Several games, such as the musical
chair, post hunt, the ring, some rhyming, &c., were now
played on the deck in question, in which the Governor of
Albany and our other noted passengers, with all the ladies,
took part and created great fun for themselves as well as
for the lookers-on. A good many other things have been
arranged for the next week; for instance, wheel-barrow
race, potato race, ladies’ quoits, ladies’ tug-of-war. chalking
deck, high jump, walking race, obstacle race, wide jump,
ladies’ egg-and-spoon race, 100 yards flat race, one mile
walking, gent’s quoits and tug-of-war, &c. An illustrated
serio-comic journal is also to be started under the name
of the “ Parramatta Seme.” “ The editor will be glad to
receive articles, short stories, jokes, poems, riddles, and
advertisements. The first number will appear as soon as
sufficient matter is to hand. Advertisements, no charge,
received by C. Combs, Agent.” Such is the introductory
notice posted under the “ editor’s box ”at the entrance to the
saloon, and many of us are getting up contributions. Some
of the ladies are busy preparing drawings, &c., for the paper
in question. I shall be sending in something too, I fancy.
Another subject on the tapis is the holding of an auction
sale of fancy goods, curios, photos, &c„ the proceeds to be
given to the Merchant Seamen’s Orphan Asylum and the
Society for the Support of Aged Merchant Seamen. The
committee invite contributions for the same, which, I
have reason to believe, will be as gladly given as accepted.
A dramatic entertainment is also to be given by the stewards
and other hands belonging to the ship, and a subscription


is being raised for their benefit as well as for the prizes to
be given for the sports and athletics. This would give
an idea of life on board a good steamer with a good company
of passengers as well as good 'weather.
Sunday, November 16.
A muster of all the men on board (numbering about 120)
was held this morning. They were all cleanly dressed and
the captain looked a very important personage as he walked
the deck escorted by two of the officers in full uniform, reciting
the name of each man and returning the salutation given by
him. Soon after the inevitable religious service was held
with all accompaniments, followed by a sermon by one
of the bishops, who, by the way, thanked those ladies and
gentlemen who provided us last night with the treat of
the concert, and said he hoped we should have similar
entertainments “on future occasions.” A church service
is held every morning, and it is specially long and loud
on Sunday and well attended from various reasons
beyond those of mere piety—to see and to be seen, recrea-
tion and flirtation being some of them.
XII.
Monday, November 17.
Some dancing was announced for to-night at 8 p.m.,
and it commenced punctually to the minute. Several
ladies and gentlemen took part in it, and one or two pairs,
especially that consisting of Sir Napier Broome and Mrs’.
Adams, exhibited themselves cleverly. But now and then
it was rather marred by the occasional rolling of the vessel,
which threw the dancers m masse on one side or the other


of the steamer. The spectacle thus afforded was very funny
if not childlike. This was followed by many a flirtation and
gallantry, and many youthful pairs retired to convenient
nooks and corners, observed or unobserved, by prying eyes,
such as mine, for instance. The piano in the music room
was presided over by a lady, wife of Colonel Humphrey,
and two of the ship’s stewards assisted the music by
playing on flutes. Yet the music was not heard distinctly
enough on the quarter deck. “ God save the Queen ” was
struck up at 10 p.m., up to which time also dancing was
continued, and then the whole company of ladies and
gentlemen (excepting a few missing pairs ) sat up chatting
and singing until 11 p. m. The best features of these
amusements is that it is possible for a company of
passengers to be able to have them whilst travelling. Under
their influence as well as that of good weather, and in a
fine steamer, one almost feels as if he were enjoying himself
on the land instead of on the ocean. That's very interest-
ing, indeed, and fit to be noted down, especially by us, the
natives of India, who usually travel little, and that too in a
different style. A proper knowledge of the European mode of
touring and its immense advantages (of education and ex-
perience) should give an impetus to our taste for travelling.
Tuesday, Novembek 18.
It was a great day with us to-day, as the various sports
came off. These commenced at 10-30 a.m., and with long
intervals were not concluded until 5 p.m. The ladies’ egg-
and-spoon as well as potato races were childish affairs, and
perhaps fit for women only, and yet some of the competitors
fainted over the events. The obstacle race was an event
which placed the best man at great disadvantage, or rather


aftorded the worst man an unfair advantage over the
former. The most honest events were the jumping and
walking races. Jn the former a young passenger made
two nice bounds of 15 feet 7 inches and 16 feet 5 inches.
Every one took great interest in the sports ; the members
of the committee were here, there, and everywhere, with
the medals on their breast denoting their high positions.
The course was kept clear by a gentleman" with a big
saloon bell, the starter did his duty with a flag in his hands,
banners flew over the starts and finishes, and everything
was conducted as methodically as any big event on the
wide, wide world from which we are temporarily banished.
After dinner, a smoking concert was held in the smoking
room between 7 and 8 p.m. No ladies were admitted
thereto, and that set the gentlemen as well as their
tongues perfectly free. The chairman, after a brief
introduction, called upon several passengers for songs, and
some very good ones were given.
At 9 p.m., an event occurred in the saloon which should
have precedence over the last occurrence on the score of
priority. During the hours of 7 and 8 p.m., when the
smoking concert was in full swing, a fellow-passenger
quietly went round and invited us in the name of Sir F. N.
Broome to have a glass of wine with His Excellency in the
saloon in honour of his 42nd birth-day. Of course we
•cordially responded to the invitation.
Wednesday, November 19.
Yesterday’s amusements were resumed to-day by 10 a.m.
The first events were ladies’ 100 yards, a running race
and a potato race. These mostly ended in dead heats and
will have to be run over again. The gentlemen’s wheel


barrow races then came on, and they were considered to
be rather rough on the “ barrows,” coming as they did
so soon after the usual heavy ship breakfast at 9 a.m.
In the high jump four feet ten inches were cleared.
Thursday, November 20.
The church service, which had to be abandoned for the
last two days in favour of the sports (much to the chagrin of
the clergymen with the passengers on board), was resumed
this morning, and subsequently the Bishop, in the course of
a sermon, deprecated the growing tendency to gambling and
playing evinced by people uow-a-days (especially on board
this steamer). In the course of a long conversation, desired
and obtained with me by his lordship’s son on a variety of
matters, he laid the greatest stress on the certainty (from
his point of view) of the whole world embracing Christianity
at some future date he could not fix upon. I, of course, was
completely at variance with him on this head, as our religion,
however similar to the Christian in some respects, propagates
quite a different theory, but I had to express my disinclina-
tion immediately afterwards to carry on a religious discussion
or even a conversation with anybody. You don’t know
where and when these may end.
To-day saw the dehut of our long-talked-of paper called
the Parramatta Screw. The get-up was considered to be
creditable under the circumstances, and some of the
riddles and conundrums and articles and advertisements, as
well as drawings, were very droll and very amusing.
Drawings of all hats and caps (including my “fez”) worn
on board were contributed by a lady. A leader descriptive
of our passage, the latest Egyptian telegrams received as
far as Albany, as well as a chronicle of all the sports and


entertainments on board, were also included in the contents.
I contributed a couple of articles on Chinese opium quar-
ters (they exist to a large extent in Melbourne and Sydney),
and. the blundering use of our languages made by the
natives of England in India, but they were sent in too late
to be inserted in the first number, and will, with a great
deal of other matter crowded out, appear in the second
edition to be out ere long. Some suggest that the issue of
the journal should be continued bi-weekly until the steamer
gets to London, when all the numbers could be printed at
some newspaper office and a copy sent to each of the
passengers (subscribers), wherever they may be. The first
number had to be issued in a pamphlet form in manuscript,
and was read beforethe whole company of the passengers
by Mr. Thurston, Chief Secretary of the Fiji Islands. He
commenced with a very interesting as well as amusing
speech ( extempore ) of his own, with various remarks also
during the process.
A grand fancy ball came off after 8 p.m., invitations to
which were very laconically issued as follows :—“ Dress as
you please or come as you are.” The heavens seemed to be
opposed to this event, as heavy rain set in soon after
dancing had commenced, but our folks were determined to
have it to the end under the protection of the heavy canvas
awnings. Some of the ladies’ dresses were very pretty,
but the gentlemen drew upon the lascars for their clothing,
except three, who appeared in Japanese and Javanese
costumes. A. rich supper with claret cup was provided by
the steamer (all glory to the P. and 0. Co.), and if anybody
wanted anything beyond these articles he had to order it
on his own account. The ball was closed at 11-15 p.m.
with the dance called Sir Eoger de Ooverley, but some of


the male passengers thereafter adjourned to the smoking
room and remained up till 1 a.m. They concluded with
a very boisterous “ Eule Britannia.”
Friday, November 21.
The auction sale of contributions for the benefit of some
seamen’s associations which was to come off to-day has been
postponed to to-morrow at 2-30 p. m., and the property
will be on view after 10-30 a.m. As I write this, bills are
being posted with the intimation that “ they have arrived”
(it used to be “ they are coming” previously), and the
punkah boys are going the round of the steamer with big
advertisements hung out backwards and forwards on their
persons. Of course all these announcements relate to the
long-expected peformance to-night by the Soi desani, “Ori-
ental Minstrel Troupe.” This came off at 8 p.m., and was
not concluded before 10 p.m. The following is the pro-
gramme : —■
“ Startling Announcement ! —Parramatta Palace, the best
and nearest place of amusement in the Indian Ocean.
For one night only, commencing Friday Eve, November
21st, 1884, precisely. The Oriental Minstrel Troupe beg to
announce that by kind permission of Captain Gadd they will
make their second appearance for the first time this season
as above in their great aesthetic entertainment. This
troupe cannot appear again, as they were all engaged at
great expense in London to fulfil a long engagement at
Holystone. The following talented artistes will appear:—
Mr. E. Orud, Prime Falso Tenor, from the Eoyal
Italian Opera, Botany.
Mr. Pomme de Serre Meer Phu, in his great delineation,
“ An Irish Stew. ”
Mr. Goddard, the less said of him the better,


The Great Atkinson. The only specimen.
Herr Thorsby Yaudomer und Blizun, the Dutch thunder*
storm Ist prize, Amsterdam Exhibition.
Oscar Wilde Bandilands, Esq., agent for Mrs. Winslow’s
Soothing Syrup.
The inimitable Cornelius, the missing link.
Shaw, the Wondrous Writer to the Commissioners of Lunacy.
And a full chorus, noise, superbs, sailors, scenery, band,
electric stewards. A life gunner, and a non-exhaustive cow,
&c., &c., &c.
Ladies are earnestly requested not to throw bouquets,
boots, or bottles on the stage, as such marks of approbation
seriously affect the nerves of the minstrels.
Parents are warned that raw spirits will not be supplied to
children under the age of one month for their own consump-
tion. All children found loitering will be given in charge of
the bar-keeper, who will sort and number them. If they
are not claimed within a week, they will be disposed of to
defray expenses.
In consequence of the rush the front seats on the last
occasion will be placed outside the doors to save confusion.
Full Sergeants, Johnstone and Thorpe, of the Parramatta
Constabulary, will be in attendance to prevent order,”
Opinions op the Press,
The World, — if We have never heard of them,”
Truth. — “ Nothing would give us greater pleasure than
attend their funerals.”
Times.' —“ Why not send them to frighten the Mahdi P”
Belly Daily Graph. —“ During the crush we lost our
mother-in-law.”
Police Neivs. —“ They are all wanted,”


_iY. B. —These are genuine, and have not been tampered
with to give undue praise.
Doors open at 8 p.m.; commence at 8-15.
Admission outside, gratis ; Admission inside, free;
The stage was erected on the forward hatchway, and was
decorated with flags, carpets, &c. In front of it the
auditorum was arranged with deck seats and passenger
chairs. Police officers kept order, and orange girls, soda-
water vendors, “ all hot” sweetmeatmongers went round
the assemblage during the intervals. Some of the songs
and conundrums were perfectly original and interesting
locally. Our steward, or rather the minstrel, gave a grand
recitation from “ Thomas O’Brien,” and lastly a farce of
a landlord was rather cleverly rendered to the great delight
of the full house. By the time the performance was over,
the weather became very threatening, and a heavy shower,
lasting about an hour, came down, during which we passed
a ship rather in too close proximity. It was just the
night for us to run into her, but the vigilant officer on
the bridge, as also the man on the look-out forward, espied
her and whistled and signalled with lights, and so averted
what might have been a calamity.
Saturday, November 22.
The intended auction of sundry articles commenced at
2-30 p.m., and lasted till 5 p.m. The collection was not
very good, as the passengers are not expected to carry
about many extra things, and so the contributions were
quite insignificant. However, the spirit for charity ran
high (as it seems to do during a voyage), and the attend-
ance at the sale was very fair, but the prices realized for
some of the articles were nearly ten to thirty times the real


value. For instance, the manuscript copy of the first
number of the Parramatta Screw was knocked down at
£3-3-0, and a lady’s fan fetched £l-17-0. The latter could
not have cost the fair donor more than Is. 6d., but the
buyer was the youngest bachelor (a veritable ladies’ man)
on board, and it must be quite a valued souvenir to him.
After dinner we had the usual smoking concert, in which
Sir F. N. Broome also joined.
Sunday, November 23.
There was church service at 10-30 a.m. to-day, conducted
by the Bishop of Bathurst and Rev. Mr. Dunstern, followed
by a sermon by Rev, Mr. McQueen. I attended the service
and found the latter an eloquent and powerful speaker, his
address being of considerable length and delivered without
any notes. There was the additional attraction of the ladies
joining in the music, but the congregation seemed scarcely
disposed to appreciate even these blessings with all the
comfortable surroundings from a religious point of view.
For instance, whilst we were subsequently sitting in the
smoking room, the Bishop sent some religious tracts for
distribution amongst us, but the bearer was met with shouts
of “ Ohuck’em out?” His lordship has apparently “gob
his eye” upon me in particular. He lent me a small book
from the pen of Sir William Muir, entitled “ The Rise and
Decline of Islam.” I read it as a matter of course, but the
writer is evidently prejudiced against Mahomedanism, and
treats it simply from a Christian point of view of a bigoted
kind. I consider and give weight to anything written by
an impartial observer, without his being biased one way or
the other. Besides, the author of the above book has been
carried away into many inaccuracies and exaggerations, and


I noted down all these briefly on the margin of the book
and returned the same to the Bishop, thanking him for the
loan. He asked me if I was at all interested in its perusal,
to which I refrained from giving a direct answer, but merely
referred him to my notes thereon, and expressed my
inability to discuss the matter further.
Moxday, November 24.
At dinner to-night Sir Napier Broome proposed the
health of Captain Gadd, thanking him on behalf of the
passengers and himself (who leave us at Colombo and go
straight on to England by the Chusan to-morrow) for all
the courtesy and kindness experienced at his hands during
the voyage. As for my part, I feel bound to thank the
P. & 0. Company for the great kindness experienced by me
at the hands of their representatives I have come in
contact with during the whole of my tour, particularly Mr.
Parker, of Bombay, who favoured me with a letter of intro-
duction. An open air concert was held on the quarter deck,
in which most of the ladies and gentlemen joined, giving
various songs. Some of them were not in the happiest style.
Tuesday, November 25.
We sighted, once more, the Oeylonian land (Adam’s
Peak) at 6 a.m. this morning. What a thrill of joy this
sent into the hearts of us all, as most of us, in pyjamas and
night-suits, stood on the deck, strained our eyes to see this
blessed sight. At 10-30, and we can plainly see the break-
water, the vessels in the harbour, the red-roofed houses on
the shore, backed by cocoanut trees, and rich hills further
on. About 11-30 a.m., the Parramatta anchored near the
Chusan, which takes away about half —the better half—of
our passengers direct to England.


{The following letters were not printed hi the Times of India, lut were
taken from the author's manuscript.')
Wednesday, November 26.
Early this morning (8 a.m.) we were aroused by a great
chattering noise on the deck. Went up and found our irre-
pressible friends the Cingalese hawkers, or pests ; but they
were soon driven out as we weighed anchor and steamed
away Bombaywards by 9 a.m. Not having- been able to
go up to Kandy, we were all glad to leave Colombo with its
heat, the cheeky people and town dirt. In the afternoon, as
we passed the Gulf of Manar, an exhilarating head wind set
in, and looked cheered up a bit. About 8 p.m., we sighted
the Cape Comorin light-house, and the sea looked smooth and
pretty under the fine moonlight. “What a lovely evening,
isn’t it ?” says Miss W . ‘‘ Yery nice, indeed,” say I.
Thursday, November 27.
Moving along very well in sight of the Western Coast
of India with the high hills of Nelgherries and other just
visible, and passing European ships, country crafts in full
sails, we are now on a regular track, a veritable thoroughfare.
The weather is of an indifferent character, muggy and
warm, and cool enough when breezy. Eun, 296 miles.
Friday, November 28.
Nothing particular doing on board. Since parting with
the flower of our passengers at Colombo, from which also
dates the advent of the enervating weather, a wonderful
change has come over the residue of our passengers on the
Parramatta. Every one looks sluggish and languid and
loth to undergo the slightest exertion. The weather this
morning was cool enough, but since the afternoon the
wind has disappeared, and muggyness reappeared. We are


steering pretty close to the Western Coast of India, clearly
recognising Pigeon Island, Oarwar, Goa, Yingorla and the
rugged hills backing them. The spectacle here is much
more pleasing than what one meets with on sighting the
Australian mainland. We made a run of 288 miles to-day,
which leads me to hope of getting to old Bombay by
11 a.m. to-morrow. This feeling of getting home is
very cheery to me, and almost makes me forget my
otherwise rather uncomfortable predicament brought
on by a series of two falls in the steamer’s engine-room
upon some rolling machinery on Monday last and over
the gloomy verandah of the Oriental Hotel at Colombo
on Tuesday. This is only by the bye and in the absence
of something better to write upon.
Saturday, November 29.
Since early this morning we are all pacing the deck
of the steamer and discussing the Bombay scenery as seen
on the outlying hills. I challenge the Australian passen-
gers on board that this at least beats the views they can
have before approaching Melbourne. Sydney, of course,
must not be touched in any discussions about natural
scenery, because in that respect she is above anything one
can imagine almost in any other part of the world. But
the dry hills visible right up to entering Port Phillip
Heads are very discouraging compared to the verdure
and foliage to be seen on the approaches to Bombay.
But to return to the subject matter of this journal. A
lady remarks I must be very glad in arriving so near to
Bombay. I reply that I view this phase of my travel
with mixed feelings. Glad —very glad —at the prospects of
getting home, and sorry to part with the nice company


of fellow-passengers on board the Parramatta. The
vessel herself is a floating palace, and the Commander as
well as her officers are a “ most gentlemanly lot of fellows,”
as one of us remarked on the occasion of Sir Napier
Broome’s birth-day recently celebrated during the voyage
between Albany and Colombo. The weather here at day-
dawn and for this time of the year appears too warm,
almost as disagreeable as we found it on reaching Colombo,
and the ladies before whom I have lately been praising
Bombay climate by December are now chafing me by
enquiring ironically if they are to put on warm clothing and
ulsters. It may be that coming from colder climates the heat
is felt more keenly than would be the case otherwise, but the
only excuse I can make is to suggest that this must be aa
exceptional day, the present weather is clearly not the right
sort of thing at the end of November, The temperature
must be nearly 90°, and I dare say we shall have a drop of 20°
by to-morrow morning. So saying, I divert the attention of
our passengers, as that gifted but rather too enthusiastic
writer Haeckel would say, to the deeply indented coast of
Bombay, growing gradually out of the filing mist of dawn
with the weirdly shaped outline of the Bhore Ghaut Hills.
The twilight eastern sky over the Indian shore was swiftly
dyed with the most delicate and tender hues, and then
suddenly our eternal friend the sun appeared in all his
Indian splendour, his Australian style being quite different
as I know to my pleasure. We could now distinguish the
details of the coast so familiar to me—first, the groves of
the palm trees, and then the vast harbour of Bombay. The
Colaba houses are also visible. Presently we saw the
noble buildings of the Fort in front, and in the background
the long green ridge of Malabar Hill. As we went on we


passed through the fleet of various steamers always lying
in the wide harbour. Then come the motly swarm of
boats and canoes, and our majestic ship is at anchor opposite
the Mody Bay, and off we go on shore. I consider myself
luckier than the rest of the passengers, because this landing
means for me a veritable return home ! What a sublime
sensation it is to get to a place where one is really welcome,
where he is rightly understood, where there is no formality
or ceremony, and all his wants are anticipated and sincerely
tended to ; the usual greetings—they are never too often—
and I drop once more into my domestic sphere, and the
inevitable business yoke.
Bombay, Sunday, November 30.
I am tempted to reappear for a moment to say that ray
forecast regarding our winter weather has turned out pretty
correct. The thermometer this morning in our Breach
Candy bungalow is 70°, and the minimum reported from
Oolaba is 67°. But the maximum yesterday on board
could not have been 90° as we once supposed : the drop
would be too great, perhaps. This is good enough, and I
lose no time in communicating to most of the fraternity of
which I am now only a late member. They, too, seem to
like Bombay already, and will go with me to Elephanta
and pass an evening at our house. What shall I provide
for their amusement ? A mutch , I declare ! It is stale
enough for us, but will be quite a novelty for them !
Besides, two of my particular friends, Mr. Thurston, O.M.Qv
(Colonial Secretary, Fiji), and Mr. Loftus (the son of the
Governor of Sydney, Lord Loftus), have expressed a desire to
view it too. We shall manage to have it over champagne,
and that must show it to the greatest advantage. Exit!


SOME FACTS ABOUT AUSTRALIA.
(Leisure Hour, July 1885.)
The recent despatch of Australian troops to the Soudan
marked the commencement of a new era in the history of
our southern colonies. While the question of confederation
is still under discussion a few facts illustrative of their
present condition will be interesting to our readers.
The mother nation does not even now realise to the full
extent the magnitude of its possessions in the south. Not
yet one hundred years old, Australia exports produce to
England more valuable than that exported by Germany,
and imports in manufactured articles more than France
itself ; while its total import and export trade is of an
annual value of more than £117,000,000, equal to that
of Denmark, Sweden, Spain, and Norway put together.
But then, figures only vaguely suggest the possibility of the
future.
The story of its discovery is well known. The exact
date of that event is doubtful, but old manuscript charts
are in existence, dated as far back as 1531, which have
marked on them a country called Java le Grande, situated
to the south of the Moluccas, and these markings being in
Portuguese, the claims of that nation to the honour of
discovery may fairly be admitted. The Dutch followed
closely, and made various explorations upon the continent
and the surrounding islands, many of which retain to the
present day the nomenclature bestowed upon them by these
enterprising mariners. The first Englishman who trod
upon Australian soil was Captain Dampier, of H. M. S.
Roebuck, and he visited and explored the north-west coast


of Western Australia in the year 1699. Captain Cook
visited New Zealand in 1770, and in April of that year he
sighted and named a southern point of the continent. The
first settlement in Australia was one for transported
criminals, founded at Botany Bay, in New South Wales, in
the year 1789, while in 1803 Tasmania, or, as it was
first called, Yan Diemen’s Land, was settled as a penal
colony. Other settlements, penal and _ emigrant, rapidly
followed one another up to the present time, while explora-
tions of the most important character have been continually
going on, revealing the unbounded natural wealth of this
great southern world. There is still room for discovery in
the eastern portion of Western Australia, the abutting
territory of 'South Australia, and its northern territory,
Cape York Peninsula, and many portions of New Zealand.
So far as the discoverers have gone through the country
adjoining the sea-coast they have found immense tracts of
land suitable either for agricultural plantation or pastoral
purposes, but there is nearly one-fifth of the vast territory
wanting in the essentials of habitation, though science has
come to the aid of the settler with its artesian wells.
The term Australasia literally means Austral or Southern
Asia, and comprises the island-continent of Australia, the
island of Tasmania, the three islands of New Zealand, and
the smaller islands contiguous to each colony. Australia
itself is the largest island on the face of the earthy its
greatest length from west to east being fully 2,400 miles,
and its greatest width from north to south 1,971 miles ; its
coast-line is 7,750 miles long, and its extent is computed at
1,884,561,920 acres, of which—up to the latest Govern-
ment return 5—95,715,135 acres of Crown lands have been
either sold or disposed of by land grants. A better


conception of this enormous territory may be gathered by
comparison. It is twenty-six times larger than Great Britain
and Ireland, fifteen times the size of France, about one-
sixth less than the United States of America, and only
about one-fifth smaller than the continent of Europe, while
as a matter of fact the Australasian group occupies nearly
two-fifths of the whole of the British dominions. The
proportion of the colonies to each other and to the whole
continent may be readily understood by the following
comparison : If the continent were divided into 100 equal
parts, Yictoria would comprise 3 ; New South Wales,
10 ; Queensland, 28 ; South Australia, SO ; and Western
Australia, S 4.
Their location may be described as follows Western
Australia, about eight times the size of the United King-
dom, with an area of 978,299 square miles, occupies the
whole of the western portion of the continent, and is
surrounded on the north, west, and south sides by the sea,
while South Australia and its northern territory form the
eastern boundary; Perth, pleasantly and picturesquely
situated, possessing a population of about 6,000 persons, is
the capital. To the east of this colony, and stretching from
ocean to ocean, occupying the whole of the central portion
of the continent, and containing 903,690 square miles, or
being more than fifteen times the size of England and Wales,
lies South Australia, the northern part of which is called
the Northern Territory. The capital of South Australia
is Adelaide, perhaps one of the prettiest towns on the
continent, situated at the foot of the Mount Lofty range of
hills, and containing a population of about 40,000 ; the
principal town of the northern territory is Palmerston. To
the north-east of Australia, and eastward of the northern


portion of South Australia, lies the colony of Queens-
land, which includes an area of 668,224 square miles, or
nearly twelve times the area of England and Wales;
Brisbane, its capital, is making rapid progress, and has a
population of about 40,000. New South Wales, containing
an area of 310,938 square miles, or nearly three times the
size of Great Britain and Ireland, lies south of Queensland
and east of South Australia, and is the great parent
colony of the group (having originally contained the
colonies of South Australia, Victoria, and Queensland),
with Sydney as the capital city, situatedj on a harbour
unsurpassed in the world; it contains a population of over
260,000.
At the most southerly part of the continent, south-west
of New South Wales and east of South Australia, is the
smallest colony on the mainland, Victoria, with an area of
87,884 square miles, or 1,800 square miles less in area than
Great Britain. Its capital, Melbourne, is a marvel of
industrial progress, and is termed the “ Queen City of the
South it contains a population of over 300,000. Tasmania
is an island 150 miles south of Victoria, surrounded by
the South Pacific Ocean; it includes an area of 24,330
square miles, or about one-sixth smaller than Ireland ;
Hobart, picturesquely situated at the foot of Mount
Wellington, is the capital, and has a population of 29,000.
New Zealand, comprising three islands, the North, Middle
or South, and Stewart’s Island, lies to the south-east
of Australia at a distance of about 1,200 miles. It is
nearly equal in size to the British Isles. The capital,
Wellington, has a population of 22,000.
The Fiji Islands, recently annexed, are in the Pacific
Ocean, due north of New Zealand about 1,000 miles, and


due east of Queensland; the whole group contains 8,034
square miles.
New Guinea, brought so prominently into notice by the
rival claims of Germany and the colonies, by the annexa-
tion action of Queensland and the vehement protests of
Victoria, lies to the north-east of Australia, at a distance of
about sixty miles. Port Moresby is the principal town,
and likely to become the capital as soon as settlement
begins.
The efforts of New Zealand to induce the Home
Government to sanction the annexation of Samoa to that
colony, and the willingness of the Government of Samoa
to be annexed, have brought this group of islands into a
prominence that warrants the introduction of a few facts
concerning them. Samoa is the native name of the group
of islands long known as the ‘■‘Navigators’ Islands.” They
consist of four larger and several smaller islands, with a
total area of 1,200 square miles. The islands are situated
about 8,000 miles from Sydney, and contain a population
of about 85,000 natives and a number of Europeans.
Samoa is said to be one of the loveliest, most agreeable,
and productive of all the South Sea group. The
Samoan Islands were discovered by the Dutch in 1722.
Little, however, was known of them till 1880, when a
mission was commenced by the agents of the London
Missionary Society. The independence of the Government
of Samoa was first recognised by his Majesty the King of the
Hawaiian Islands in 1876, The United States of America
were for many years desirous of recognising Samoa, and
upon the advice of Mr. Griffin, the American consul, his
Excellency M. K. Mamea was appointed envoy extraordi-
nary to the American Government, and sailed with his


suite for the United States. A treaty was signed and
concluded at Washington in January 1878, recognising
the independence of Samoa. The Samoan ambassador
was treated with great distinction in all the large cities of
America, and he returned home in an American man-of-
war specially set apart for him. On his arrival in Samoa
all the arrangements were perfected for the final approval
and proclamation of the treaty. The independence of
Samoa was afterwards recognised by Germany, and German
commercial interests are now largely represented there. It
was not till after Samoa had been recognised by the United
States and Germany that Great Britain succeeded in making
a treaty with it. The aggressiveness of the Germans
irritated the Samoans, and the Government recently passed
an Act annexing the island to New Zealand. The Bill was
to take effect from the date of King Malietoa’s signature and
seal. It was signed and sealed on the 9th February 1885.
The ratification of this is a matter of speculation. It will be
doubtless left to diplomacy to find a modus vivendi between
Germany, the United States, and England. It is hardly
probable that the claims of New Zealand in this respect
will be recognised.
The important foothold which the French have obtained
in the Western Pacific also arrests a passing glance. New
Caledonia is a penal settlement nearly equidistant from
Australia, New Zealand, and Fiji, about 1,216 miles from
Sydney, and has been regarded by the Australian people as
dangerously situated as a base of operations either for
military purposes or from which the recidivisms may escape
to harass society. The island is mountainous, 280 miles
long and 37 miles wide, and contains an area of 6,000
square miles. It was discovered in 1774 by Captain Cook,


and up to 1853 was considered a British possession. la
that year Sir George Grey’s commission as governor included
New Caledonia and the Isle of Pines, but on proceeding
to the former he discovered that the French flag had
been hoisted. Britain and France were allies at that
time, and France was left in undisturbed possession,
to the serious detriment of Australian interests. France
had determined to purge herself of her habitual criminals
by sending 60,000 of them, in annual batches of 5,000 to
New Caledonia, but the progress of the bill authorising this
was stopped by the vehement protests of the Australians.
It is generally thought that Australia is a comparatively
recent upheaval from the ocean, but geologists say there is
no evidence that such has been the case ; they assert, how-
ever, that the southern portion of the continent has been
upraised to a height of about six hundred feet since the
miocene period, subsequent to which there have been
volcanic disturbances with an extensive subsidence, but by
no means considerable in amount. This is confirmed by
the fringe of calcareous sandstones round the south
coast. There are many extraordinary phenomena which
tend to show a period of upheaval and subsidence, and,
despite the loud outcry that Australia is deficient in
water supply, its physical structure is indicative of great
stores of water in the interior, there being in the central
depression of the continent a line of groups of thermal
and cold springs covering several hundred square miles,
and which must have been derived from a central under-
ground reservoir whose sources are on the tableland slopes ;
these are capable of being utilised by artesian wells.
Each of the colonies enjoys responsible government with
the exception of "Western Australia, a Crown colony, which


will doubtless ere long be granted the advantages of con-
stitutional freedom that the others have, as enthusiastic
meeting's have been held, urging upon the home Govenment
the claims of the colony in this respect. The form of
government is based upon that of the British constitution ;
and, in fact, the rules and procedures of the British House
of Commons are frequently adopted and followed. The
governors are appointed by the Crown, and this act is the
most important link in the great colonial chain that binds
together in bonds of loyal union the mother country and the
Dominion of the South. The House of Lords is represented
by the Legislative Council, and the House of Commons
by the Legislative Assembly, and there are frequent
“ deadlocks ” caused by their antagonistic interests. The
franchise qualification is very low, manhood suffrage being
almost universal. The colonists are proud of their electoral
rights, and make a boast that they were the first to adopt
three of the most important principles of the famous charter
—vote by ballot, payment of members, and triennial parlia-
ments. The absence of hereditary legislators is a continual
theme of self-congratulation. There is little doubt that
the time is not far distant when these magnificent posses-
sions of the British Crown will be leagued in one great
federation, which would display in population and resources
the material of a nation—Population, over 3,000,000 ; rate
of annual increase, 120,000 ; annual revenue, over
£21,000,000 ; imports, over £54,000,000 ; exports, over
£51,000,000 ; sheep, not less than 85,000,000 ; cattle
8,000,000.
With regard to the population of Australia, it will be
worthy of note that in the year 1788 there were only 1,030
persons, who formed the penal settlement of Botany Bay,


New South Wales. At the end of 1882 the Government
returns estimated the population of Australia and New
Zealand at 2,936,409, of which number 1,593,729 were
males and 1,342,680 were females ; the last returns
(December, 1884), issued by Government Statist Hayter,
of Victoria, estimates the population to be 3,012,451,
distributed as follows—Victoria, 917,310 ; New South
Wales, 843,389 ; South Australia, 299,012 ; Queensland,
267,865 ; Western Australia, 31,233 ; Tasmania, 124,850 ;
and New Zealand, 529,292 —the males being greatly in
excess of the females. This is a wonderful advance in
ninety-seven years. The nationality of this population is
principally British.
The Chinese and Germans form a very predominant
feature in colonial life, the former being largely and indus-
triously engaged in mining and market gardening, while
the latter become estimable and stirring citizens, and are
perhaps most numerous in South Australia, Bearing in
mind the enormous territory of Australia it will be observed
that there is less than one person to the square mile, while
the average in the British Isles is about 287 to the square
mile. The mean death rate of Australia in 1882 was 14*99.
It may also be noted here that no less than 73,017 persons
emigrated from the United Kingdom to the Australian
colonies in the year 1883, while during the past forty-
three years the number added to Australia from the same
source amounted to 1,437,243. Assisted emigration to
Victoria has been discontinued since 1873, although thou-
sands of persons yearly make their way to this rich and
prosperous colony. Most of the other colonies have tempo-
rarily suspended immigration, from a desire to prevent
overpressure of the labour market, although there is always


a demand for skilled labour, but especially for agriculturists
and pastoralists, who may, by industry and perseverance,
in a few years secure a comfortable competency such as has
been obtained by many who arrived in the colonies with but
a few pounds wherewith to begin their new life. It is worse
than a mistake to send out clerks and men who have spent
the major portion of their lives in the routine of the multi-
tudinous divisions of factory labour. Agriculture is the
backbone of a country, especially young colonies, and, while
adding to the general prosperity, builds up the independence
and promotes the advancement of the individual.
The Government returns, published in March 1884, show
that there were in the colonies and Fiji 7,558,117 acres
under cultivation ; of these 3,697,324 were under wheat
and produced 45,541,529 bushels. In the matter of live
stock it has been estimated that there are in the colonies
more than 1,236,317 horses, 8,402,780 cattle, 77,254,170
sheep, and 874,232 pigs. The staple products of Australia
are gold, copper, tin, and other metals, wool and other
pastoral products, sugar, grain, and meat. It is estimated
that since gold was first found in New South Wales
in 1851, the mines of Australia and New Zealand have
produced 73,493,423 ounces, valued at £289,249,451, of
which Victoria has yielded nearly seven-tenths. Coal is
found in extensive fields in New South Wales, New Zealand,
and Queensland, copper in South Australia, and tin in
Tasmania and New South Wales. The trade in frozen meat,
wheat, wine, tallow, cotton, and sugar is assuming large pro-
portions. Wool, however, is the general and great staple of
Australasia, and forms its largest export. In a period of
fourteen years, from 1870 to 1883 inclusive, no less than
12,864,640 bales of colonial wool were imported into London.


The commerce of the colonies is greater than that of
Great Britain fifty years ago, when her imports were valued
at £45,952,551, and her exports at £39,667,347. The
value of Australasian imports in 1883 was £61,570,931,
and the exports £55,719.558. In company with this state-
ment may be placed another. The public revenue of
Australasia in the same year was £21,475,353, and the
expenditure £22,713,630, while the public debt, contracted
mainly for reproductive public works, amounted to
£109,122,395, or at a rate per head of the population of
£35 ss. llrf. To further illustrate, the number of vessels trad-
ing outwards and inwards was 16,779, with a tonnage of
11,221,139 tons; compare with which the tonnage of the
United Kingdom fifty years back—with population estimated
at 24,500,000 —when it registered 5,706,451 tons ; this
comparison becomes more impressive when it is considered
that Australasia is not yet one hundred years old.
At the end of 1883 (the date of the last official returns)
there were 6,670 miles of railway open, and 1,905 in course
of construction, while there were 31,836 miles of telegraph
line and 57,175 miles of wire open. The railway systems
are receiving special attention; no less than £12,000,000
are to be expended in New South Wales on new lines.
There are twenty-eight banks of issue, with numerous
branches, and on the 30th June 1884, their total assets
amounted to £112,385,872, their total liabilities to
£82,541,985. Savings Banks in connection with the Post-
offices, or under other Government auspices, are open in
nearly every town, where sums of money from one shilling
upwards may be deposited and withdrawn at very short
notice. In 1883 there were 365,828 depositors in all these
savings banks, the deposits in the General Savings Banks


amounting to £5,683,157 17s. 6d„ and in the Post-office
Savings Banks to £4,620,986 19s. lid. —a total of
£lO, 304,144 17s. 5 d,, showing an average amount to the
credit of each depositor of £2B 3s. or equal to about
£3 Bs. B d. per head of the entire population.
The question of defence has received considerable notice
of late years, but the recent rumours of war gave urgency
to it. Apart from the consideration of the continual
additions to land batteries and naval equipments, it may be
deserving of notice that the colonies could, if occasion
required, raise an army of nearly 500,000 men, from twenty
to forty—“ the soldier’s age ” —descendants mainly from
that old national stock that blotted out the Napoleonic
nightmare in 1815.
The press of the colonies is ably and fully represented,
there being over 800 publications. The support given to
the newspapers is illustrative in some measure of the interest
taken in all educational matters. Public libraries are in
every township, the free public library in Melbourne con-
taining nearly 200,000 volumes.
The education of the young receives special care and
attention, and the leading principles guiding the adminis-
tration of instruction may be thus briefly summarised :
education is in nearly every case free, attendance compulsory,
and the instruction secular, though not in all cases to the
exclusion of Bible reading, every convenience being offered
to ministers of religion and parents desiring religious
teaching for the children. During 1883 there were 6,122
schools in operation, on whose rolls were 621,561 children.
Higher and technical education is amply provided for, the
universities of Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, and New
Zealand having power to confer degrees.


Science has many able exponents, and nothing is spared
by the respective Governments to secure the best results, as
instanced in the observations of the transit of Venus some
years ago, when the Australian contributions to that impor-
tant subject were of a most valuable description. The
Melbourne Observatory possesses one of the largest teles-
copes in the world. On Mount Lofty, South Australia, Mr.
Clement Wragge has erected an observatory, and is making
important investigations. In botanical science Australia
possesses some of the highest authorities. Museums,
extensive and rich in all kinds of specimens, are
maintained.
As regards religion, there is no State Church, though
the Church of England dominates numerically. The
Sunday-school system has taken deep root, and is exercising
a widespread influence over Young Australia, i There are
also many important evangelical institutions.
The aborigines of Australia are very low in the social
scale, and are fast dying out (those of Tasmania being
extinct). By the last official census they only number
about 31,700. The Maories of New Zealand are a totally
different race, are very shrwed and intelligent, and are
intermarrying with Europeans. They numbered at the
last census about 44,097.
The climate of the colonies is healthful, the very hot
winds, so much condemned, being declared by scientists to
be beneficial. Tasmania is considered the most genial
climate. In the Middle Island of New Zealand a great
quantity of rain falls, and winter brings with it ice and
snow. The other colonies are subject to droughts, both
the extent and effect of which have been greatly exag-
gerated. The deficiency of water supply may yet be


surmounted by means of artesian wells, and by proper-
methods of storing.
In conclusion, let me quote the words of an Australian
writer, who says : “ In Australia the native population is
succeeding to the dominant influence hitherto exercised by
those who emigrated from the mother country. Their
successors, there is every reason to believe, are and will
continue to be animated by feelings of affectionate attach-
ment to the craddle of the race. They design that the
history of Australia shall be a continuation of that of Great
Britain, and that there shall be no rupture of the golden
chain which unites them with a glorious past. Inheritors
of the laws, the language, the literature of England, Anglo-
Australians desire also to participate in the inheritance of
of a thousand years of national renown.”
