

A LETTER
TO
Members of the Legislative Assembly
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES.
30th August, 1884..




The Honorable the Members of the Legislative Council.
GENTLEMEN
I beg leave respectfully to offer for your perusal
the accompanying copies of letters lately written by me in reference
to the bill for the amendment of our land laws now under your
consideration.
They may be called epitomes of others I some time ago
ventured to address to members of Parliament; and being shorter,
may perhaps be more fortunate in gaining effective attention than
it would appear their predecessors have been.
I may here state briefly what these letters are intended to
make manifest, viz.:—
(1) That the object aimed at in the bill in question, viz.,
to “ settle ” people on the land, or in other words to make or
induce people to become farmers or graziers, is not only one that
cannot be accomplished in the way set out in the bill, or by any
legislative enactment, but it is also one that the legislature ought
not to attempt to accomplish even were it accomplishable by such
means.
(2) That the means devised by the bill for the accomplish-
ment of this object, would, if tried, not only prove to be ineffectual,
but also injurious to this community in the highest degree.
For a confirmation of the accuracy of all I have said in these
letters on this subject, I appeal to the bitter experience we have
had during the last twenty years of the operation and results of
that disastrous method of disposing of the public land estate
called “ selling ” conditionally, which forms the foundation of
this bill.
I, as a part-owner of that estate, and on behalf of my co-
proprietors, the community at large, must beg leave to enter a
solemn protest against a continuance of a proceeding so inconsistent
with reason and common sense and justice as that of “ selling ” (or
rather, it should be called, “giving away ”), at a fixed uniform low
price, the choicest picked portions of thepublicestate,howevermuch
they may differ one from the other in quality of soil, in situation,
or in money value ; such price being also lower than that which
the most inferior of these portions would bring if sold in the open
market, or than that at which any of the land of the public, how-
ever inferior it may be, is ever sold.
As a member of the community owning the estate, I must
also beg leave to protest firmly against a continuance of the
practice of giving long credit for payment of the purchase-money
of land sold in conformity with this conditional sale system.
That practice has already brought into existence a large body of
debtors to the State, who, being also electors, band themselves
together, and threaten to exercise political influence very detri-
mental to the public interests, antagonistic to their own as
debtors. Were this body to become enlarged, there cannot be a


doubt that they would succeed in so packing the Legislative
Assembly as to obtain an act releasing themselves from their
pecuniary obligation to the rest of the community, and then we
weak-minded, credulous past-owners of the estate would find
ourselves denuded alike of our land and our money, and under
the necessity of finding a substitute for the lost money by
additional taxation.
This I am sure you will admit is a matter of very serious
import. The money already in jeopardy amounts to many
millions, and the bill now before you proposes to remit part of
this debt. If you once remit a part, and thus recognise a claim for
remission, you may regard the whole amount as lost; and that
only a question as to the time when remains to be settled.
No land laws based on a principle so foolish and absurd as
that of selling land of all kinds and qualities at one uniform price,
and that price lower than the market value of the land so sold,
ever can or ever will give satisfaction. The huge labyrinthic
mass of complicated legislative machinery now before you called
a bill for the amendment of our land laws, is founded on that
wrong and pernicious principle, and I as a member of this com-
munity respectfully make this petition to you that it may never
pass into law.
And your petitoner will ever pray, <tc.,
THOS. WALKER.
Yaralla, Concord, August 30, 1884.
Some of our Legislators who were inconsistent enough, or
subservient enough, or corrupt enough to vote in favour of the
bill now before you, whilst they, at the same time, expressed
their disapproval of it, gave two reasons for their tergiversation.
One was that this bill is not so bad a measure as the one it
is intended to supersede. The other that it is expedient that the
bill should pass to protect vested interests created by the present
law.
Both these reasons are evidently illusive fallacies—mere spe-
cious plausibilities.
The first is precisely similar to what might be said by a
highwayman reducing his claims on your purse—Be thankful I
formerly robbed you of £lOOO, I am now going to rob you of
only £9OO. The second has not the shadow of a foundation to
rest on, so far, at all events, as respects the system called “ sell-
ing conditionally,” for if that pernicious system were to be discon-
tinued to-morrow, not one vested interest would be affected
thereby ; no one would suffer, save those who have it still in
view to plunder the public in conformity with the provisions of
the present land law. But surely theirs cannot be called a vested
interest, though judging by the outcry they are making, these
would-be plunderers evidently regard it as such.


LETTERS
ON THE
LAND LAWS.
Addressed to " Sydney Morning Herald"
Sir, —I have read with due attention your recent leading
articles respecting the bill for the amendment of our land laws
now before the Legislative Assembly.
It seems to me that in these you have not distinctly or suf-
ficiently adverted to that important part of the bill which relates
to the alienation of the public estate by sales.
With your kind permission I will therefore, through the
medium of your widely-read colums, venture to offer for con-
sideration of my fellow-colonists some observations thereupon.
According to the tenor of the bill, no public lands (with few
exceptions) are to be sold otherwise than under the system called
the “ conditional.” That the present Ministry should have
invited the present Assembly to perpetuate this system does seem
to me to be something inexplicable, for it is essentially the same
as that which has been in operation during the last 20 years, and
for proposing to maintain which the preceding Ministry were
ousted, and to amend which a majority of the members of the
present Assembly are under engagement.
But what is this system 1 It is one which endows each
member of a particular section of our people with a right to select
from the whole area of the public estate open for sale, the choicest
morsel he can find (not being less than 40, nor more than 640
acres), and to acquire the same, be its quality ever so good, or its
situation ever so favourable, at a uniform fixed price, payable by
minute yearly instalments during a period of sixteen years ; such
price being lower and those terms of payment being more
favourable than that and those accorded to any other purchaser of
any portion of the public estate, be it ever so inferior in quality,
or ever so unfavourably situated. This privilege, so advantageous
to those to whom it is granted, is, however, conferred only on
those members of our community who, fortunately for themselves,
happen to be in a position which enables them to engage to reside
continuously, for a period of five years, on the land they acquire—
that being one of the conditions on which the privilege is granted,


and one therefore which necessarily excludes from the advantage
of the privilege the greater part of the owners of the land—the
community at large ; but which is just as senseless, ineffective,
and unproductive of benefit to the public as if it were that the
selector should once a week walk from Sydney to Parramatta.
This, I submit, is a manner of dealing with the public estate
that cannot be called “selling,” in the usual acceptation of the
word. It is neither more nor less than a mode of distributing it
most unfairly and unjustly, amongst a certain class of our people
exclusively, by a species of lottery in which there are no blanks
but only prizes, differing from each other in value, but all of them
of greater value than the price of the ticket.
Were any private owner to adopt a mode of dealing with his
property such as this he would simply be regarded and treated
as a lunatic ; and were any agent or trustee to do so he most cer-
tainly would be prosecuted at law, and held personally responsible,
criminally or otherwise.
Could it be conceived that our trustee, the Legislature, could
adopt, or rather continue to maintain, (for it is now in operation),
such a mode of so-called “selling” the public estate, the pecuniary
loss and other injuries and evils that would thereby be inflicted
on this community would be great beyond measure.
I will beg leave to bring under notice some of these losses
and injuries, and will begin with pecuniary ones.
When the owners of the public estate, that is the community
at large, determine to let pass into the hands of any individual
member of the body any portion of the common property, they
are justly entitled to require and obtain from the individual
acquiring it a full and fair equivalent. But in the conditional
mode of sale proposed by the Bill this is not obtained ; and the
just rights of the community at large, as owners of the land, are
entirely ignored, and their property is, as it is termed, “sacrificed,”
and a pecuniary loss of very large amount is inflicted on them.
That loss will arise in these ways.
In the first place, by permitting the choicest tit-bits
of the estate to be picked out and appropriated in the way
proposed, the remainder left on the hands of the owners
—the community at large—will be of an inferior quality,
and being now separated from the superior portions, will neces-
sarily be greatly diminished in market value. It may be difficult
to estimate precisely the amount of the loss that would in this
way be cast on the public, the owners of the estate, but it would
undoubtedly be very great.
Large, however, as the loss from this cause might be, it
would assuredly be infinitely less than the loss that the community
would sustain in having parted with the choicest picked portions
of their land at a fixed uniform price (having no relation to the


varying value of the portions respectively) altogether below the
value in the market of such portions, and infinitely below what
would be thair value were they to be retained in hand (let in the
interim) until a natural and legitimate demand for them, for use
and occupation, had, in the course of time and from increase of
population, arisen.
Even at the present time, we know from transactions daily
takiug place that such picked choice portions of land are saleable
at prices far above those at which, under the proposed conditional
sale system, they would be sold ; or rather, I should say, using
technical language, “ given away.” Some of them may not be
worth so much, but on on average to estimate them as being
worth less than £2 an acre would be to undervalue them. Some
of them are worth ( vide Chief Commissioner Moriarty’s report)
£lO ’an acre, others—clear alluvial land ready for the plough,
such *as in the Huuter River or Clarance River districts rents at
from £5 to £lO per annum, or sugar lands on the banks of the
Richmond or Tweed—are worth much more. Some lands on the
Blue Mountains, it is said, have been taken up under this
conditional sale system, and re-sold by the selectors at from £5O
to £lOO the acre. And yet these are the portions of the public
estate for which, under the conditional-sale system, the owners—
the community at large—receive only a paltry 20s. an acre, whilst
their value, above-mentioned, beyond this, passes into the pockets
of the fortunate arid favoured individuals who, by reason of the
absurd and senseless condition as to residence, are alone and
exclusively permitted to acquire them. I say advisedly “ passes
into their pockets,” for it is well known that a vast number,
probably one-half, of the whole of the portions of land purchased
conditionally are re-sold, whether lawfully or unlawfully.
Another very serious pecuniary loss entailed on the owners
of the land—the community at large —by this iniquitous mode of
selling their property at less than one-half its market value, is that
which arises from the necessity engendered by it of maintaining
at an immense cost a huge Lands Department staff, an army of
extra surveyors, land commissioners, land inspectors, land agents,
and clerks ; and, in addition to these, even new courts of justice.
Although it may not yet be a pecuniary loss, there is, in
connection with the price at which land is sold to conditional
purchasers, a matter of very grave import and a great loss
looming—that is, the long credit given to these purchasers for
payment of the purchase-money. This brings into existence a
great body of people possessed of political power having interests
in antagonism to those of the rest of the community.
The evil "effects of this will very soon become developed should
the number of this self-seeking body with pecuniary interests
adverse to those of the rest of the community be augmented.


As to the moral evils and injuries to which the community
is subjected by the system of selling land at a price below its
value in the market, conditionally—the so-called dummying, the
frauds and evasions, the lies and perjuries to which it gives birth
—I need not do more than allude to them thus briefly : They are
too well known, their existence has too well been demonstrated
by proceedings in courts of justice. The fact of these being
inherent in the system ought to be sufficient to condemn it as a
wicked one.
The condition as to personal residence annexed to this
“ giving away” of the public estate at a price so much below its
value I have not hesitated to stigmatise as absurd and senseless,
although I am aware that by some persons it is regarded as the
redeeming feature of the system, and as that which fully com-
pensates the community for all the losses and injuries it is sub-
jected to by its operation.
But surely these persons cannot have considered the matter
with sufficient care and thoughtfulness, or are wanting in capacity
to do so. They assume, I believe, that by requiring that buyers
of land at a price below its market value shall reside on it for a
period of five years, these buyers will be induced or compelled to
cultivate or otherwise use it in a way that will be so beneficial to
the public as to compensate it for all the losses and injuries it
may be subjected to by the operation of the scheme.
To me it appears clear that a greater delusion than this has
not possessed the mind of man since the epoch when that brilliant
idea, that by taking a horse to water you can make him drink,
was exploded—overthrown by experience, if not by reason. In
the present case both reason and experience can be invoked to
prove the fallacy of the idea that by placing a man under contract
to reside for five years on the land he buys, he will cultivate it.
If the cultivation of it appear to him to be an emyloyment of his
time, his abilities, and his capital, more profitable to himself than
any other open to him, he will no doubt cultivate it; but not
otherwise. He will not cultivate it because he is compelled to
reside on it. If he cannot cultivate profitably he will betake
himself to some other pursuit, and bide his time to sell out—
probably letting his land in the meanwhile. This view of the
case is pot founded on reason only, it is borne out by ample
experience. The conditional sale system—the practice of giving
away public lands at less than their value, on condition that the
recipients shall personally reside on them for a prescribed time—
has been in operation for more than twenty years, and thousands
of persons have taken advantage of it. And what is the result 1
Not one half of the donees have cultivated or otherwise used the
land. They have merely resided on it for the prescribed time, or
pretended to so, and then sold, pocketing the profit. They have


merely been successful speculators trading on the supreme folly
if not criminality, of the trustees representing the owners of
the lands —the community at large—who gratuitously, and at a
great cost to their cestui que trust, afforded them an opportunity
of becoming so.
If the rest of the donees have cultivated or otherwise used
the land they received, they have done so not because of the con-
dition as to residence, but because farming was their vocation,
and by following it they supplied a public want profitably to
themselves. These two considerations form the only sound or
safe basis for any industrious pursuit. And these men were no
more entitled to have land given to them to induce them to
become farmers, than they or other men would be entitled to have
chests of tools given to them to induce them to become carpenters.
They, of course, took advantage of the gift of land offered to
them, and “ small blame to them ” for that; but it was a wrong
done to the rest of the community to give it to them.
This brings me to another branch of this subject, about
which I must not omit to say a few words before closing these
remarks—l mean that which may be called the policy of our land
law. The policy that I should recommend, had I a voice in the
matter, would be that of not being in haste to sell our lands, but
at the same time of being willing and ready to afford to all per-
sons an opportunity of purchasing such portions as they might
legitimately have occasion for. I give the following by way of a
basis on which our land laws should be founded :
1. That to all persons alike there should be afforded facility
for acquiring land suitable for their respective purposes at such
full, fair, and reasonable prices adjusted according to the quality
of the land to be sold, as would be a guarantee that it would be
used for practical purposes only, and preclude it from being
bought by mere land-jobbers or speculators.
2. That to meet the requirements of minor agriculturists,
there shall always be ready for sale in all suitable localities an
ample supply of suitable land, measured in moderate-sized areas.
3. That, until required for other purposes, all land not
intended for immediate use, shall, for grazing purposes only, be
leased for fixed periods of time at full, fair, and reasonable rates
of rent.
4. The management of the land estate of the community to
be placed in the hands of two or three well-paid commissioners,
whose tenure of office should be similar to that of a Judge of the
Supreme Court, so as to place them outside the sphere of baneful
political influence.
If, instead of the complicated, perplexing, ill-founded and
pernicious system embodied in the bill now before the Assembly,
a law were enacted to accomplish these few plain and simple


objects, what an oppressive load would be removed from the shoul-
ders of this community, how much contention and litigation
would be averted, and how much time, labour, and money would
be saved !
No policy could, I think, be more erroneous and hurtful than
that which forms the foundation of the land laws which have
been in operation during the last 23 years. It is that of endea-
vouring to promote or induce the “ settlement," as it is ambigu-
ously called, of people on the land. The measures taken with a
view to give effect to this policy, are bribery on the one hand,
compulsion on the other—the bribes consisting of gifts of public
lands at a price far below their value, the compulsion being a
condition requiring that the person bribed shall, for a period of
three years, reside on the bribe given to him.
I shall not add to the length of this letter—already too long
—by attempting to set forth all the evil consequences and wrong-
fulness of this policy that I have done in other of my letters ;
but this, I think, 1 may safely say, that a policy more unstates-
man-like, more diametrically opposed to the dogmas and laws of
political economy could not be conceived. It is, in fact, the very
thing pointed at in the authoritative dictum Iquote below,* as an
emanation of “ folly and presumption.”
Fortunately for this country and for the persons operated
upon by it, it, as might have been expected, has signally failed to
accomplish the object aimed at. No excessive nor undue “ settle-
ment ” has taken place. No larger number of persons have
actually “ settled ” on the land than would naturally and in the
ordinary course of things have “settled,” irrespectively of all
the bribery and compulsion that has been resorted to. But,
on the other hand, as we all well know, this policy has been a
most injurious and disastrous one for the country, and it has been
universally condemned. Under these circumstances it surely is
scarcely conceivable that the present Legislative Assembly will
ever consent to a renewal of it. If we refuse to listen to, and
profit by, the teachings of experience, we must indeed be imbeciles,
or under the influence of selfish considerations; in other words,
rogues or fools.
It is, I think, most pitiable to see men in the position of
legislators engaged night after night, and week after week, in the
“presumptuous,” “foolish,” and futile task of endeavouring to
frame a law, the object of which is to direct and control men in
their choice of a business pursuit, and to instruct them how such
The statesman who should attempt to direct private people in what manner they
ougtt to employ their capital or industry, would not only load himself with most
unnece sary attention, but assume an authority which could be safely entrusted not only to
no single poison, but to no council or senate whatever, and which would nowhere be so
dangerous as in the hands of men who had folly and presumption enough to fancy them-
selves fit to exercise it. '• Wealth of Nations,” M'Culloch’s edition, p. 199.


business should be carried on; also, in exercising all their
ingenuity to devise ways by which they hope to be able to
counteract the desire which all men must naturally have to defeat
and treat with disregard and contempt, laws of a kind so
ignominious. Faugh ! The sight is sickening.
I am, &c.,
THOS. WALKER.
Yaralla, Concord, 26th June, 1884.
Sir, — My letter in your issue of the 30th ultimo has led to
my having been favoured with communications from several
members of Parliament on the subject of our land laws.
All these gentlemen tell me that the losses and injuries
referred to in my letter as resulting to the community from the
operation of the conditional systems of selling the lands of the
public, are thought very lightly of by those members of the Legis
lature who approve of that system —they alleging that the object,
with a view to the accomplishment of which that system is
devised—viz., that of settling people on the land—is of such
paramount importance as far to outweigh all such losses and
injuries, and to quite justify the State in making costly sacrifices
with a view to promote it.
These gentlemen further say that ideas of this kind have for
so long a time been continuously and strenuously promulgated,
urged and extolled by Sir John Robertson, the inventor of the
conditional system of selling public lands, and by other Ministers
for Lands coming after him, that they have become firmly fixed
like articles of religious belief in the feeble minds of certain
members of Parliament who either do not or cannot think for
themselves on such subjects, but are well content to adopt opinions
made for them by leaders of their party; and that this being the
case, these members are very likely to be found willing to accept
the measure now recommended to them by the present Ministry,
which is called an amendment of the existing land laws, but is, in
reality, intended to renew them in aggravated form, so far, at all
events, as respects the selling of land conditionally.


Be this, however, as it may, it is an unquestionable fact that
it is this craze in regard to “ settling people on the land ” that is
the originating cause of all those evils inflicted on this long-
suffering community by the operation of the present land law,
which have been so greatly deplored by members of Parliament,
the press, and by the whole community, excepting always those
members of it who surreptitiously profit thereby; and so long as
this craze shall continue to possess the minds of a majority of our
legislators, so long shall we be doomed to suffer from all these
evils.
Is there, then, no hope for us 1 Is there no possibility of
getting our legislators to emancipate themselves from the bondage
of this pernicious delusion 1 I think we may not be without hope,
and that there is yet a possibility of getting our legislators to rid
themselves of this hallucination. For Maana est veritas et
prcevalebit; and do we not know that many of the real religious
creeds of mankind have one after another been abandoned ; they
having yielded to the dictates of reason and been superseded by
wiser conceptions 1 The hallucination in the present case is so
utterly destitute of solid foundation that it should not be difficult
to dispel it from the mind of thoughtful, unbiassed men.
Let us, then, see what may be said about it. But in the first
place let us determine what is the precise meaning of this much-
used phrase —“ to settle people on the land ” —and ascertain what
are the means taken to accomplish this object, whatever it may be.
If the phrase has any meaning at all, it must mean “to make
people become farmers or graziers,” and the means resorted to to
carry this object into effect are none other than those described
in my letter in your issue of the 30th ultimo, which are by persons
favourable to the system euphemistically called “ selling ” land,
but which are, in reality, a system of granting to people for a
nominal consideration —erroneously termed price—a right to select
and appropriate to themselves portions, more or less large, of the
public land estate ; some of these portions being worth ten or more
times the amount received in exchange for them by the State,
none of them being worth less than double that amount. The con-
dition annexed to this right which is intended to, and is very
erroneously supposed will, compel the selector to become a farmer,
is that he shall, during a prescribed period, reside on the land he
selects and appropriates.
In other words, people are lo be induced and compelled to become
fanners on the one hand by bribes, most costly to the community,
and, on the other, by pains and penalties in the form of personal
restraint. And this is precisely what is proposed to be done by
the bill now before Parliament.
If members are to be found giving their countenance and sup-
port to a measure of this kind, they certainly must be under a


hallucination, or in a condition of mind still more deplorable.
The hallucination they seem to be under is that of imagining
that it is within the province and the power of the Legislature to
induce or compel people to be farmers; this being the same
calamitous one that gave rise to the pernicious land law of 18G1.
But surely only a small modicum of reflection should be
sufficient to enable a person of unbiassed mind to get rid of a
misconception such as this. For the merest tyro in politics or
political economy knows full 'well that it is neither within the
province nor power of a legislative body to promote or hinder,
encourage or discourage, direct or divert the industrial pursuits of
the community, and that when, unmindful of this fact, it
attempts to do any of these things, it is not only guilty of “ folly
and presumption,” but that nothing but disappointment and injury
can be the result. Of the accuracy of this knowledge we have
ample proof in our experiences of what have been the results of
the land law of 1861.
Referring more especially to the idea, said to be held by
members of Parliament, that to increase the number of farmers
is of so much importance to the public as to justify the State in
giving bounties to people to induce them to become farmers, I may
remark that, though farmers are undoubtedly most useful members
of society, and benefit the community in carrying on their diverse
businesses, yet they, in these respects, do not differ in any way
from those persons who are engaged in other industrial pursuits.
Is it not, therefore, wrong and unjust that farmers should be
singled out to receive gifts of portions of the public land estate,
whilst no such gifts, nor gifts of any kind, are given to other
industrial classes equal meritorious.
It was truly said by Mr. Baden-Powel, as lately quoted with
approbation in the Herald , that “ a bounty either encourages an
industry that needs no encouragement, or it encourages an
industry that should not be encouraged.” It is therefore clear
that no industry ought to be encouraged by a bounty. But of
all the industries carried on in this country, that of farming is
the one that least stands in need of encouragement of that kind.
Owing to the superabundance and comparatively low price of
fertile land, to the suitability of this climate, to the personal
freedom and independence of the life, and to other favourable
conditions, the proletariat classes of this country are naturally
prone to adopt farming as a pursuit, although it may not be so
pecuniarily profitable as other pursuits open to them ; and, in
fact, as is evidenced by the generally low price of agricultural
produce at the place of its growth, and by the too general
impoverished condition of small farmers, the tendency is
towards our having an excess of farmers. So long as people
take to farming spontaneously, led to do so by the demand for


agricultural produce, there is no probability of our having too
many farmers j but the case is otherwise when persons are
induced to become farmers by having bribes or bounties offered
to them. If under such circumstances as these the State gives
to people land as a bribe or bounty to induce them to become
farmers, it not only wrongs the whole community, but also those
members of it who accept the bribe—or, at all events, those
members who are tempted by the bribe to become farmers. But,
fortunately for themselves, only a limited number of those who
accept the bribe do become farmers ; the rest of them are saga-
cious enough not to become or remain farmers, but, sooner or
later, they sell at a profit more or less large the land given to
them. We know by past experience that this is what is generally
done. Because a man is or intends to become a farmer, and requires
requires land, is no reason why he should have land given to him.
A shoemaker requires leather, but none is given to him ; a
carpenter timber, but no gift of it is made to him. The fact is,
that this idea of giving land to people to induce them to become
farmers is altogether preposterous and fallacious, and ought to be
banished from all sane minds.
I have heard it said that what operates to keep alive this
noxious system of giving land to people to induce them to become
farmers, which goes under the name of selling land conditionally,
is the apprehension some members of Parliament are under that
they will lose their seats by giving offence to that class of electors
called free selectors were this system, by lack of their support, put
an end to. lam convinced that the present political power of this
body of people is overrated -is nothing more than a mere bugbear
which frightens politicians. But if it be really necessary to secure
the votes of this* class of people by bribery, would it not be much
better to let them have at once an order on the public Treasury
for a fixed amount, rather than to give them by a quasi-sale
portions of the public land varying in value, some being worth
£SO, others £SOO, more than the prices charged for them. With
reference to that wonderful mass of verbiage in the form of a
Bill now before the Assembly, I feel at a loss what to say. It is
a thing sickening to look upon. It is not possible that any
person not being one of those expert parasites adhering to our
land laws, called “ land agents,” can understand it or find his
way through its mazes. Were it to become law it would be
a mine of wealth for people in that line of business, of whom the
Minister of Lands, who has concocted it, is one. He, no doubt,
understands it well enough. It is called a bill for the amend-
ment of our land laws, but is certainly not entitled to have that
appellation. What it should properly be called is, “A Bill for
more speedily devastating, squandering, and distributing amongst
a certain class of people, having no right whatever thereto, the


lands belonging to this community at large, and for instructing
and directing people, by means of bribes and pains and penalties,
and by endless rules and regulations, how they should conduct
their business affairs in connection with land , ” for this is really
what is the nature of this bill. It affects to be a measure for
accomplishing what is one of the most commonplace'and every-
day businesses of life in this colony, viz., the selling and leasing
of land, but makes very small provision for effecting those objects.
It is a bill that cannot possibly be amended, for it is radically
and entirely bad, being based and built up upon erroneous and
wrong principles, utterly antagonistic to those approved axioms
of political economy and common sense which are recognised and
conformed to by all enlightened Legislatures, and form the basis
of our own public policy, as respects the industrial pursuits of the
people.
I venture to say that a more confusing, complicated, unintel-
ligible, unworkable, and pernicious piece of legislative mechanism
in connection with what is so simple an affair as the selling and
letting of land never was constructed. Asa measure of legislation
it is, I conceive, a disgrace to the age we live in.
If you can conveniently find room in an early Herald for
this letter, intended to be supplementary to mine in your issue of
the 30th ultimo, I shall feel obliged.
I am, &c.,
THOMAS WALKER.
Yaralla, Concord, 30th July, 1884.
Sir, —Impelled, wholly I hope, by a desire to be of service
to the community of which I have for so long a time been a
member, and from which I must so soon be severed by our un-
relenting foe, 1 have from time to time written in your columns
on the subject of our land laws, and have endeavoured plainly to
make manifest their defects, and the intolerable evils resulting
from them.
At the present crisis of their fate I will, with your permis-
sion, add a few words by way of a summing-up. Should these
have the aspect of being unsupported assertions, that may be
accounted for by the fact that in my previous writings I have
fully set forth the grounds on which they rest.


The distinguishing and most important feature of our
present land law is the one called “ selling conditionally.” This
is a more extraordinary and strange mode of disposing of a land
estate than ever before was resorted to or conceived. In my
letter in your issue of 30th June last I have fully described it,
so need not do so again. It has been the cause of all the losses,
injuries, and other evils which during the past twenty years have,
through the operation of the land laws, been inflicted on this
community, and which in 1881 led to the emphatic condemnation
by the country of the present land law, and to the substitution
of the present for the previous Ministry, and which also were so
forcibly expatiated on by Mr. Dailey when in his eloquent speech
he introduced into the Legislative Council the bill devised by the
present Ministry, said to be for the amendment of the existing
land law. Yet it is this very system—this evil-producing,
unjust, and unjustifiable system (I refer to my previous writings
on this subject in justification of all these epithets)—which is the
leading and fundamental feature of the bill now before the
Parliament.
It is to me a pitiable spectacle to see men so highly endowed
with intellect, and that still rarer gift called common sense, as
Messrs. Stuart, Dibbs, Dailey and others, lending themselves to
fasten on this community so evil-producing, and therefore so
wicked a system as this is. With two of these gentlemen I have
a sufficient personal acquaintance to enable me to say that I am
convinced they in their hearts and minds cannot approve of it.
Mr. Dailey, when eulogising in glowing terms the author of
this cruel system gave him credit for good intentions, and I am
quite willing to concur with him so far ; and I do not doubt that he
and his colleagues are also actuated by good intentions. But I
would beg leave to remind him that it is said a certain unmen-
tionable place for the punishment of evil-doers is paved with
“good intentions.” Assuming that to be the case, all I
would say is that few “ good intentions ” could be entitled to a
warmer berth in that locality than those now in question. For,
than these, few, in connection with legislation, can have been pro-
ductive of a greater amount of evil; and that is saying a good
deal, for the production of evil by well-intended legislation is
enormous.
I am aware that in the bill now before Parliament, an
attempt —a futile attempt—is made to obviate some of the lesser
evils resulting from this system, as it is found in the law of 1861.
But seeing, I presume, that it could not be otherwise than wholly
abortive, no attempt is made in it to shield the community from
the more flagrant and calamitous of those evils, and the cause of
them all is still retained without its efficacy for mischief being in
any way abated, but rather enhanced.


How, then, is it to be accounted for that this unprecedented
and disastrous manner of alienating the public estate is made the
foundation of this Ministerial project, said to be for the amend-
ment of our land law ? The answer to this of course is that it is
thus used under the supposition that it will “ cause people to
settle on the land.” An ambiguous phrase, which if it mean
anything, means in plain English, {< make people become farmers
or graziers,”
My comment on this is, first, that it does not lie within the
province of the Legislature to intermeddle in any way in matters
of that kind. That it is no business of theirs to make people
become farmers any more than it is their business to make people
become merchants, or lawyers, or tailors, or shoemakers, or any
kind of tradesmen. That attempts on the part of a legislature to
direct people how to employ their capital or industry invariably
produce effects the very reverse of those intended, and are only
indications of “ folly and presumption.” Secondly, that it simply
is not within the power of a legislature to make people become
farmers, let it do its best That people will not be, ncr cannot
be, made to become farmers by having gifts given to them, be
they money or lands ; or by being required to live on a piece of
land for a given length of time. People really intending to
become farmers, will, of course, be glad to take advantage of a
gift of land offered to them at a price less than its value in the
market, as they would be equally ready and willing to accept an
order on the Public Treasury for £lOO or £lOOO ; but what is
thus given is not the cause of their becoming farmers. People
are led to become farmers solely through the operation of certain
causes which I have heretofore specified, and by none others.
That any person of sane and unbiassed mind can entertain
so silly and absurd an idea as that by giving a man a portion of
land at a price one half or one-fifth or one-tenth of that which it
would bring if sold in the open market, and requiring that he
shall reside on the land for five years, he will be made to become
a farmer, I cannot understand. By giving a man land, or other
sufficient remuneration, you may certainly induce him to reside
on a place for a given number of years, but he will not, nor can-
not, cultivate it unless he believe that it will pay him to do it.
But there are thousands of men in the interior, whom it will suit
to accept a gift of land, and think it no hardship to be obliged to
reside for five years on the land he receives. I allude to all those
men who work for wages, and can find employment near to where
they live. At the end of the appointed time they can sell the
land and pocket the profit. But for the State to subsidise these
men would indeed be supreme folly. And is it not in the highest
degree wrong and unjust of the State to subsidise in this way any
one class of men exclusively 1 Can anyone give a good reason


why a man who selects farming as his calling should be subsidised
by the State —should have land belonging to the community
given to him at less than its market value—at a lower price than
other people can get it at, and would be willing to give for it—
whilst other men who select other equally useful pursuits as their
calling, have no subsidy of any kind given to them 1 If any good
reason can be given, I would like to know what it is. As I said
in one of my letters, a shoemaker has no leather given to him, a
carpenter no timber ; why, then, should a farmer have land given
to him by the State 1
In the bill now before Parliament this most unjust and most
foolish thing is proposed to be done. A farmer—not a farmer
but a person who it is foolishly supposed may become a farmer
because he is required to reside for five years on a piece of land, is
to be allowed to appropriate land of the State at less than one-half
the price that any other person can have it at. Can anything
more unjust and foolish be conceived 1 Supposing he were a full-
fledged farmer, why on earth should this advantage over all the
rest of his fellow-colonists be given him ?
Regarding this bill, I shall only further say that I fervently
hope the Legislative Council will save this community from the
disgrace and disaster of its becoming law. It is nothing but a
huge mass of intricate legislative machinery elaborately contrived
and constructed to do that which cannot he done. It is precisely
of the nature of a child’s ladder to reach the moon.
It aims at accomplishing that which cannot be accomplished
by any legislative enactment, and which no Legislature ought to
attempt to accomplish. Let that fact he kept steadily in view.
That it is a fact we know by dire experience gained during the
the past 20 years. An attempt precisely similar in its nature to
that of this bill—that is, an attempt to settle people on the lands
(or, in other words, make people become farmers) by legislative
enactment—was unfortunately and most foolishly initiated 23
years ago, and has been going on ever since ; and we know that
the result has been an utter failure, and we also know how much
we have suffered from this attempt having been made and persisted
in. Are we, then, to be insane enough to disregard all the bitter
teachings of experience ? I trust not. To attempt to amend a
bill of this kind would be a useless, senseless task. When a
structure has no proper foundation to rest on, it would be but a
foolish proceeding to attempt to patch or mend it.
I am, &c.
THOS. WALKER.
Yaralla, Concord, August 16, 1884.




