





A LETTERPRESS DESCRIPTION
OF THE
VIEWS OF SYDNEY
11ST 1810.
N the View of Sydney, from the east side of the Cove, No. 1, the house under the two
birds, as was the residence of the Governor-in-Chief, and was built of brick,
plastered over. It had very convenient stables and outhouses, and the grounds
extended to about four acres. The flagstaff near the garden house had the Union Jack
flying on holidays, and different signal colours were used then to form a communication
between the shore and the king’s vessels which were lying in the cove. The pine-
tree which grew in the garden was from Norfolk Island, and was the first tree of that description
ever planted in New South Wales The building under the three birds, as "~ r^ t extended some
distance right and left, forming a square, was the military barracks, and was built of brick,
the largest of which was erected by Lieutenant-Governor Foveaux. The white house and warehouse
which appear immediately under that building, but a considerable distance on this side, belonged
to Mr. Simeon Lord. They were built of stone, and the dwelling-house was by far the most magnificent
in the colony. The road leading through Barrack Square was the high road to Parramatta. The
house at the head of Government wharf showing four windows on the ground floor was a dry
storehouse belonging to the Crown, and was used for depositing articles for barter, &c., which
were sent out by the Government for that purpose. The small yellow house behind it belonged to
the Government, and was inhabited by Mr. John Gowen, one of his Majesty’s storekeepers at that
time. The yellow house on the right of the Barrack Square, and having nine windows in front of
each floor, was an extensive Government granary, built of brick and plastered over, under the
direction of his Excellency Governor Hunter. Attached to this building, on the right, was a very
useful military store, and on the left was a store for the issue of provisions. The red house, to the
right, was built of brick and had two wings. It was the Female Orphan House. The long building
above the Orphan House, of which only a part is seen, was built of brick, and belonged to Garnham
Blaxcell, Esq. The house a little to the right of the Orphan House, and appearing to have a wing,
was his dwelling, and attached to it are the warehouses of Mr. James Underwood, which were
built of brick. The building above was a church, as the tower denotes ; it was built of stone, and
had a peal of eight bells. On the right of the one road leading to the church, the buildings with
four windows and two doors in front, and the erection above it, were two Government Store Houses;
they were built of brick and plaster. The first was generally used for bonding of spirits in, for
naval stores, &c., and the other for the reception of salt provisions, when any arrived from England.


The wind-mill on the hill was a stone building and belonged to the Government. The building on
the right, which is continued on View No. 111., with a wall round it, was built of stone, and formed
part of the County Gaol. In the foreground are six of the natives belonging to the Sydney tribe,
who at that time were very numerous.
In View No. 111., taken from the east side of the Cove, the long building with a flight of
steps was the County Gaol, a part of which is seen in No. I. The white building to the right of
the prison, of which only three windows in front, and the warehouses around it, are distinguishable,
belonged to Mr. Henry Kable, who with Messrs. Lori and Underwood carried on an extensive oil
and sealskin trade. The two small houses, rather to the right, below the gaol, were built of brick
and used for the boats’ crews. The warehouses which hide part of these huts, and the house,
belonged to Mr. Isaac Nichols ; they were very extensive and commodious, and were built of stone.
The house still further to the right, with a door, four windows, and two side-lights, in front, and
kitchen detached, belonged to Mr. Thomas Moore. The wharf near this part was called the Hospital
Wharf, where all merchandize, &c., was landed. The road leading on the hill takes different
directions to the houses and streets on the rocks. The three long buildings on the right of the
road were the General Hospitals, and in front of them was the Government Dock-yard. Next to
the right of the Hospitals, the building with eight windows and two doors in front, and the other
with four windows and a door, with side lights in front, were the Barracks, occupied by the Medical
Staff. The large buildings to the right, at the water’s edge, were the house and extensive warehouses
of Robert Campbell, Esq. Where the yellow flag is seen flying on Dawes’ Point, there was a battery
and look-out house, which was used to communicate with the signals for ships in the offing at South
Head. On the hill was the Citadel, where the Union Jack was kept flying; the two windmills
belonged to the Government: one was built of wood, and the other of stone. The other buildings
belonged to individuals indiscriminately. The canoes, with fires in them, belonged to the natives.
In View No. 11., taken from the west side of the Cove, the lofty house, of which a part is
seen, and which was spoken of in Views Nos. I. and 11., belonged to Mr. Isaac Nicholls; and the
building on this side was the back of the General Hospital. The bridge —the only one at that
time which was built of stone in the colony—was a very bad structure ; the wall on each side of the
arch enclosed the grounds, which belonged to the Orphan House and Mr. Simeon Lord; the road
on the other side of the bridge was called Spring Row, and it led to several streets, and joined the
main road to Parramatta, &c ; below the palings were some very large tanks cut in the rocks, which
were used to supply the town and shipping with water. The rows commencing above the foot of
the bridge, on the east side, were called Chapel, Pitt, and Sergeant-Major Rows, the latter of
which, under two birds, as ran to the Brickfields, towards Parramatta. The houses on the
right, at this end of the longest street, seen in this View with three windows and a door visible,
belonged to Garnham Blaxcell, Esq., spoken of in View No. I.; the building, the eastern end of
which is partly covered by a tree, was the southern Military Barracks; the two lofty red houses at
the west foot of the bridge in the rise are side views of the Orphan House and Mr. James Under-
wood’s house, mentioned in View I ; the houses on the right, at a place which was named the
Rocks, belonged to different individuals, and some of them were very comfortable habitations.
In View No. IV., taken from the west side of the Cove, there was a carriage-road made
from Sydney to the extreme point, which is South Head. On the South Head was a flagstaff, a
look-out house, and an obelisk. The small island in the centre was, and is still, called Pinch-gut;


the other islands between these and the Heads were called, and are still named, Garden, Shark,
and Clark Islands. On the land to the right of Pinch-gut, which was called Be-ne-Long’s Point,
the Government built a hut for the native of that name, who was once in England; here was
also the remains of a battery. Under two birds, as ’Y*., were two houses on a point of land
leading from Farm Cove. Under a large flight of birds are three windmills and an extensive
bakehouse, two of which, and the bakehouse, belonged to John Palmer, Esq., and the other was
owned by Mr. Henry Kable. Beneath them was the Government House and part of the offices
and grounds. To the right of the Government Wharf are the l)ry Stores, spoken of in No. 1.,
from the east side; the building above that, built of brick, was the main Guard-house; the stone
house and offices to the right of the Dry Stores, with five windows on a floor, belonged to Mr.
Thomas Reiby, and the brick house nearly adjoining was owned by Mr. Andrew Thompson, and
the large stone house and warehouse belonged to Mr. Simeon Lord, mentioned in No. I. Yiew. In
the front of these buildings was the principal road leading to Government House ; here, also, were
the houses occupied by the Judge’s Advocate, Commissary, Clergyman, and Surveyor-General; but
they are mostly hidden by the trees and the large buildings before them. The stone building at
the stern of the sloop comprised the warehouse and part of the house which belonged to Mr. Isaac
Nicholls, spoken of in Yiew No. 111., the buildings concealed by part of the long shed near, but
on this side of Mr. Nichols’s, was the back part of the Assistant Surgeon’s Barracks; the house
behind the trees was the back of the Barracks of the Principal Surgeon. The house near the
natives, who are seen fighting, was not occupied by any persons of particular consequence; and the
one partly hidden by the rocks was occupied by Mr. Moore.


