

[Tom are requested to consider this entirely
Private and Confidential, it having as yet not
been submitted to the Public .]
COLONIZATION OF NORTHERN AUSTRALIA,
A LETTER, WRITTEN BY REQUEST.
London,
October 20, 1868.
Dear Sir,
Relative to the project of forming Settlements in Northern Australia, it may be advisable to give you and your English
friends, who are strangers to colonizing matters, an outline of the proper mode of proceeding, in order to insure the success of the
undertaking.
Commencing Operations.
1. The first thing to be done is the selection of -a safe harbor ; which must be capacious, land-locked, easy of access, and
possessed of deep water; of which plenty are to be found on the Northern coast.
The immediate success of the project will depend on the selection of a good Metropolitan harbor.
2. The next step is the selection of a proper site for the Capital; which, to save land carriage—so expensive and
so harassing to mind and body, and so destructive of time and prospects in the infancy of a Settlement —should be adjacent to
the harbor.
The capital of a maritime people should be placed, not inland, but on a maritime site. On the importance of this point,
in the arrangements of colonization, see my letter to Lord Palmerston.
3. When the site of the capital is determined, the surveyors will be instantly set to work to lay it out in quarter-acre
allotments, intersected by broad streets, sylvan squares, roomy quays, and park lands, for air and exercise—desirable everywhere,
but especially so as we near the Equator.
An attractive and healthy capital will form one of the elements of success. Its area will comprehend 5,000 acres, which
will be divided into 20,000 allotments.
4. When the capital is thus surveyed and laid out, the next move will be the erection of temporary buildings for residences,
offices, and warehouses. Good substantial huts and sheds will do for a time, until larger and more permanent structures become
indispensable; which, the forms and dimensions being specified and delineated, can be erected gradually, adding apartment to
apartment and wing to wing, as the growth and expansion of the settlements require.
Buildings in themselves make no returns. To sink large sums, therefore, in grand erections, as is sometimes done, before
the settlements yield their incomes, would be madness. Money may be expended in style and grandeur, but out of surplus revenue
only; and not until there be funds and means to repay the capitalists or the bondholders the interest of the money invested.
5. The next thing to be done will be to order the survey of the land around the capitals into blocks of 5, 10, 25, 50, 100,
250, 500, and 1,000 acres each, thus arranged to meet the requirements of all classes.
To prevent blunders, losses, wasteful expenditure, and vexatious disappointments, these are the first operations in wisely
and prudently forming new settlements.
Financial Matters.
Instead of selling the land out and out, as is usually done, to mere schemers and land jobbers, destroying the resources of
colonization and then squandering the proceeds, the allotments, in town and country, will be let at low rentals on long leases, with
purchasing clauses, to all applicants, without competition, on the principle of free selection and deferred payments.
This plan has, on my recommendation, been partially adopted by Parliamentary enactment in nearly all the Australias.
Town allotments will be eagerly rented, each at £5 per annum, rising on the termination of every fifth year £5, until the
twenty-fifth year, when the rent will remain stationary, with a right of purchase any time at the end of 50 years.
One year’s rental of one capital alone—the very first year, if all the allotments be let—will amount to £lOO,OOO per
annum. Under any circumstances the income will be large, and will not be long in reaching that amount.
The country lands will be leased in like manner for 50 years, at Is. per acre for the first year, 2s. the second, 3s. the third,
4s. the fourth, and ss. the fifth year ; after which at a rise of Is. an acre at the end of every fifth year until the thirtieth year,
when they may remain stationary, with, like town allotments, purchasing clauses at any time after the fiftieth year, at ten years’
purchase; not on the improved value of the land, but merely on the ground rental, which will amount even then to only £5
per acre.
When the intending settler is informed that no land is even now to be had in the vicinity of Adelaide, Melbourne, or
Sydney for less than £lO an acre, and none in the centre of these towns for less than £20,000 an acre, he will at once see how
moderate and advantageous are the terms on which the lands in these new settlements are offered to him.
The tenant thus allowed the use of the purchase-money for fifty years, and as long after as he may think proper to avail
himself of the accommodation, will be actually renting so much money, along with the land, without paying any interest for it;
which, on 100 acres will be tantamount to the use of £l,ooo, ,l tind on 1,000 acres to the use of £lO,OOO, for nothing; while the
land will be at the same time yielding a rising income of 5 per cent per annum for the first year ; 10 per cent the second ; 15
per cent the third ; 20 per cent the fourth ; 25 per cent the fifth ; 30 per cent the tenth ; 35 per cent the fifteenth ; 40 per cent
the twentieth; 45 per cent the twenty-fifth ; and 50 per cent per annum from' the thirtieth on to the fiftieth year ; when the
purchasing clauses will bring, in addition to all this, 500 per cent profit on the original investment for the freehold.
The tenant will thus be independent of the land-jobber and the moneylender—the two great curses of the present mode
of colonization —who often fleece him of all the fruits of his toil and industry, by selling him off at a week or a month’s notice to
satisfy their avaricious claims.
Immigration.
In existing colonies, the mode of conducting this department was borrowed from the Wakefield system ; which consists in
squandering immense sums of money in the most reckless and foolish manner. The plan acted upon is to raise hundreds of
thousands on the credit of the Colonial revenues, and to expend the whole in what is called “ free immigrationthat is, in giving
free passages to the laboring classes, and then abandoning them to their fate, as the ostrich does her eggs, in a strange land, without
houses or homes ; by which process the money is gone, and the immigrants, in nine cases out of ten, are pauperized, disappointed,
vagabondized, demoralized, and heart-broken. The cruel foolery is repeated, the borrowed funds are again squandered, the goose
that lays the golden eggs is again killed, and the Colonial debt again augmented, without any return of the money thus madly
thrown away.


Instead of a policy so insane, advancing the necessary moneys to the immigration fund on loan and at interest, the immigrants
will be indentured to the Government of the settlement before their embarkation, and assigned on their arrival to the settlers on
hire, until their passage-moneys be repaid. In this way they will have the pride and pleasure of paying their own passages ;
they will be provided with, homes on their arrival; they will be saved from heart-breaking disappointment, and from the
degradation of pauperizing and vagabondizing habits ; they will acquire experience for colonizing before they start for them-
selves ; the Settlement will have the benefit of their services and labor without incurring one farthing of expense ; and the
money thus repaid will, with its accumulating interest, be again available in the immigration fund for a similar purpose, and
mil thereby forrri a continuous stream of labor, to enrich and augment the prosperity of the community and that of the
immigrants themselves without loading the Settlement with debt.
Had the existing colonies acted upon this principle—the principle of making the immigration fund self-supporting—each
of them might have had £1,000,000 thus to expend annually for their own benefit and that of the parent state, instead of meanly
applying to relief committees for charity donations to supply their immigration wants.
One hundred thousand pounds of the capital thus lent to the immigration fund at interest, say at 10 per cent., instead of
being foolishly thrown away, will become, not a burden, but a source of enrichment to the Settlement.
The last but the most important of all the monetary affairs of the new settlements, will be the supply cf a circulating medium.
Banking.
The formation of a Colonial Bank, to provide the Settlements with a safe and reliable circulating medium, and also to
furnish them with capital for their requirements, not at the enormous charge of 30, 40, or 60 per cent, which is often paid for it in
other Settlements, but at a moderate rate of interest, will be a new feature in colonization. Ho settlement ought to be formed
without the convenience of Banking accommodation ; yet, strange to say, no statesman, no founder of a Settlement, seems ever to
have thought of giving such an enterprise Banking aid. A circulating medium is essential to the well-being of every civilized
community.
This, prudently conducted, will be the soul of the project, the life of the Settlements, and one of the greatest sources of
wealth to the community.
But, to insure these results, it will be necessary, even in the common discount department, to allow no transactions in the
usual hazardous way, on the mere credit of good names—names which may be good for thousands to-day, and good for nothing
to-morrow. In every case the applicant will be required to lodge the security on and for which he wants the discount.
In making advances on land for long or short periods, the applicant will also be required to lodge his title-deeds, with a
mortgage assignment, accompanied by a certificate of value signed by the Bank Surveyor, and endorsed by the Bank Inspector;
and in no case will advances be made to more than two-thirds of the estimated value. Ho issue will be made, no proposal
entertained, without tangible security.
In this way a large, safe, and profitable business may be done without risk or the possibility of loss.
The Staff.
This, when full, will necessarily consist of a Colonial Manager, a Colonial Secretary, a Colonial Treasurer, a Surveyor-
General, an Auditor-General, a Collector of Customs, a Harbor Master, a Commissioner of Lands, a Superintendent of Public
Works, a Bank Manager, and a Colonial Chaplain.
To these will have to be added a Superintendent of Police, a Magistrate, an Attorney-General, a Judge, and a Sheriff, to
enforce law and order. For which purpose it will be desirable to have the five last appointments confirmed by the Crown.
Expense.
To each of these fifteen heads of departments—leaving the salary of the Colonial Manager to be determined hereafter —
a salary of £l,OOO per annum will be granted; out of which they will have each for a time to pay the assistants and clerks
of their several establishments —but oidy for a time, until the settlements get into full working order; after which the expense of
the sub-employees will be borne by the Colonial treasury.
The supreme, civil, military, and naval authority will, as a matter of course, vest in the Colonial Manager, subject to the
authority of Her Majesty the Queen, during the formation of the Colonies; which will save to the Colonial Treasury the expense
of these departments, during the infancy of the Settlements.
The annual cost of the whole of the staff of each Settlement, when filled up—omitting that of the Colonial Manager—
will, therefore, amount to about £15,000
To this add, for—
Volunteers ............... 5,000
Missions to the Aborigines 5,000
Contingencies . . ........... 5,000
Total estimated cost of the Staff of each Settlement ....... £30,000
The police expenses will be defrayed entirely by municipal councils, whose interest and whose business it will be to prevent
and detect the commission of crime, and for which both town and country will be divided into municipal districts. Why should the
Executive be harassed and the Colonial treasury burdened with a centralization of affairs and business—especially criminal
business —which concern the people themselves only in their respective localities ?
The construction of roads and bridges will also eventually have to be borne by the municipal councils, for whose require-
ments certain lands and local dues will be set apart. The cost of the main lines will be ultimately saved by the formation of
tram and railways; which, economically constructed, will pay their own expenses, and become a source of revenue.
The framing of regulations, the enactment of laws, and the publication of ordinances, in the name and on behalf of Her
Majesty—to whom the whole of the staff must swear allegiance, and obedience to the Colonial Head of the Company as her
representative, so long as he may have to act in that capacity—must vest in the Colonial Manager who will have authority to
call upon the heads of departments to assist him in and out of council, to maintain order, and promote the peace, well being, and
progress of the Settlements.
The cost of the staff for colonizing Horthern Australia —the only annual cost which will have to be incurred— may
therefore be set down, for a time, at £30,000 per annum; and for ever at a figure that will not exceed £50,000 per annum for
each settlement. In all, £150,000 —a sum not worth naming out of the vast revenues which the colonization of this magni-
ficent region will ultimately produce.


Land Revenues.
Rental of three capitals—£100,000 each
Rental of the suburban and the country lands of the three settlements—the latter, say that
of only 5,000,000 acres at from Is. the first to 5s. per acre the fifth year
£300,000
1,250,000
Custom-House Revenues.
Say, £150,000 from each of the three settlements
Inn-keeping , squatting licences , and royalties from mineral lands —say
450.000
150.000
Banking.
Discount, advances on mortgage, and premiums on bills of exchange
100,000
Total
£2,250,000
From which deduct —
For management . .......... £150,000
For extras and contingencies 1,100,000
1,250,000
Total, net annual income .......
£1,000,000
But, to effect this, £300,000 will be at once required for the purchase of a steam ship, the erection of custom-houses,
and the building of sheds and warehouses, in each of the settlements, for the reception of the cotton, silk, wool, sugar, corn, oil,
tallow, gold, silver, galena, and copper, which will he deposited with the Colonial Manager, by the tenants and others, for
consignment to England ; and also for the reception of consignments for shipment to and from the adjacent Colonies.
The remaining £700,000 will be at once placed in consols or lodged in the Banking department to push the project into
action.
To meet this expenditure, let us see what may be expected in the shape of
Returns.
To name the amount of returns which are certain from capital prudently invested in the undertaking, would he highly
improper; because it might be misconstrued into a wish to hold out delusive inducements to investments in the concern ; so
incredible would the announcement of the amount appear. Still, to such inquiries a reply must be given, the capitalist having a
right to demand some definite and satisfactory answer on this pointj- before venturing his money in the project.
Let the following therefore suffice.
Having by long experience acquired a knowledge of imperial and colonizing matters sufficient to justify confidence, I have
no hesitation in assuring capitalists of returns to the amount of 50 per cent above that of their investments in the French
and 100 per cent above that of their investments in the British funds ; and I am prepared to guarantee to them such returns
by securities to five times the amount of the capital required.
Extraordinary as the offer may appear, my confidence in the undertaking is justified by a reference to the estimated value
of the fixed and moveable property in Victoria —a colony only just emerging from her teens —which already amounts, as may be seen
in the Melbourne Herald of, I think, 1860, to £200,000,000 —a colony whose revenues amount to £3,000,000 per annum, and
which has just expended £10,000,000 in the construction of railways for the accommodation of her internal traffic alone—and
all this by a popxdation of only 500,000.
Looking therefore at this and other instances of the great and rapid accumulations of wealth in the Australias, the follow-
ing estimate of the income from the intended settlements will be seen to be extremely moderate.
which, on £1,000,000 of invested capital, will be a return of cent per cent annually at the very commencement.
It is important to remark, that 3,000 miles of a cotton-growing territory, abounding with rivers, harbors, and a healthy
climate, with plenty of cheap labor in the immediate vicinity, will be able to supply Europe with cotton —an article for which
Britain paid America, and is now paying, chiefly to foreign countries, £50,000,000.
But what will be more interesting to moneyed and mercantile men is the circumstance that the settlement I contemplate
on the North-West of the continent, will be one of the finest mercantile positions in the world. Connected as it quickly will be
with the Southern, Western, and Eastern settlements by railways as well as by shipping, it will become the grand emporium of
the whole of the Australian group, and their £100,000,000 of commerce, with India, China, and Europe. It is 5,000 miles nearer
to India than the other settlements; fifty degrees of latitude nearer to England than India is by,sea ; and 5,000 miles nearer to
England than the other settlements by the overland route.
This settlement will bring Australia by the electric wire within ten days’ hail of the British Isles.
Its tine naval and military position, too, will give it the command of the Indian Archipelago for commerce, Christianising
missions, and dominion.
Such is the programme for the colonization of Northern Australia; the result of upwards of thirty years’ experience—the
experience of one who, for that long period has noted the egregious blunders of our present mode of colonizing, and herein
recommends safe and sure remedies for all its ills.
In order to the attainment of immediate success, the Colonial Manager, accompanied by two or three officials, should
at once proceed direct to the Colonies —where the best pioneers of colonization are to be found —to complete the Staff, charter
a vessel, and thence start for the selection of a harbor and the site of a township for the first settlement in the North-West.
And this should be done as quickly as possible. The loss of time is the loss of returns and the loss of fortune—which, like time
and tide, wait for no man.
Believe me,
Dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
R. L. MILNE.


. i > i j 7. 0 V IV. » . * ■ ■ , - - v> i
, *
■ •
'
? o ■ i|
0 a
■s o *
Ip I
Cb (► <g
*ti (** CD H
«• h a Zj
9 t> OD • bd . - S.
M Lj . • L - 1
f « s W 5 2 H J.
1 . " >- CS3 H
:» . . 5 . . . : ; e. '■ -. «
« S ?" h-3 Sd
| ■ • .“
tel <^>
P ( .... j_ ; • ; ■ •,
R$, Wmm
.
% 1 V . ;
ftrt 1 ' ;
