

A LETTER
— S> . . . TO .. . P
The Australian Imperial Forces
The Transcontinental Line, Australia,
September, 1918.
Dear Boys,—
Last year I sent you my greetings from Victoria, beautiful
in its early Springtide, fragrant with the wattle's gold, lovely
with the yellow of primroses and daffodils. How different is
the scene as I begin another Christmas letter, here in the midst
of the Australian desert, with its dreary leagues of saltbush and
of bluebush around me ! Yet I write from the only place repre-
senting you all—the Transcontinental Railway—its magic
girdle of steel links up east with west, north with south! lam
thinking, as I write, of fair Perth water, and the glory of the
wild flowers of W.A. as I passed them by in the train, of the
fresh, strong life pulsating through the goldfields, of the forests
of kurrajong and sandalwood left behind me, as I entered this
desert with its great open spaces, so typical of our big free
people. Now I will travel through sandhill and field and village
till I pass the deep green gullies of the Mt. Lofty ranges, and
come to my own Victoria. But the rails sweep on, linking up
New South Wales our Mother State and Queensland, home of
mighty fighting men, fusing all the peoples into an Australian
Commonwealth.
As I write, I think of a magic chain, more wonderful than
the steel that links the States —a chain forged in war's grim
workshop, tempered by hardships manifold, riveted by death's
cold hand —the chain of patriotism that made you, with your
New Zealand brothers, comrades all, one family of Britain's
loyal sons beyond the seas!
Dear boys of Australia on every front, I send you my greet-
ings now for the last Christmas, we firmly believe, that you will
spend on foreign soil. The next will be in the homeland, amongst
your dear ones!


This has been an eventful year, boys. Dark days shadowed
its earlier months, days that witnessed the treachery or defec-
tion of former allies, and saw reverses and disappointments;
days when our hearts sank as the gray waves of the enemy
divisions swept over the British lines, and the places won at
such bitter cost— Bapaume, Pozieres, Messines—fell into the
foemen's hands! Oh, boys, how grandly then in those dark
days did you respond, when you, our sons, our brothers, were
called to stem the rush of the oncoming foe! How we exulted
at the honor you conferred on your own Australia, as you nobly
justified the hope that summoned you forth, when you stopped
the gap in the Allies' lines; when, transferred from north to
south, you saved Amiens, and at Villiers-Bretonneux put up a
record for the April of 1918 which paled your deeds on the event-
ful morn of April, 1915, that made the first grand chapter of
our history!
Yes, you boys of our southern lands saved the Motherland
then, when hearts were sinking, and faces blanching at tne
prospect of what would happen if the Channel Ports were
gained. You held the line from the Ancre to the Somme
"like a steel cable." Splendidly you continued your spirited
fight, disdaining immobile tactics, always attacking and harass-
ing the Hun! We honor our heroes of Hamel and Bray, of
Peronne Ridge, Mont St. Quentin, Cologne Farm, and Villeret,
and the New Zealand men who regained Bapaume. With the
name of Villeret I must stop, but you will not! When you read
this, you, who are now standing on the outposts of the Hinden-
burg line, will, we have faith to believe, have advanced onward
and eastward ! God make your deeds as fruitful of final victory
and permanent peace as they are immortal in our memories!
I must not forget the dauntless men who in Palestine have been
enduring cruel straits, and fighting against German and Turk
in the bitter cold of the Judean hills, or the infernal heat of the
Jordan valley.
Crusaders all, you boys of the Light Horse, and the now
disbanded Camel Corps, who have aided the British Expedi-
tionary Forces to win back the Holy Land, and thus usher in a
new era of order and justice, and ensure times of prosperity for
those who dwell in that ancient land, famous for its warriors and
its prophets, holy as the home of the Saviour of mankind. As
I write, you are sweeping across Sharon's valley, irresistible and
triumphant; and Nazareth now is wrested from the hand of the
unholy Turk.
Dear Australians in Mesopotamia, yours has been a hard and
lonely exile for another year. You have had your successes and
reverses, but you have resolutely carried on, witnessing the order
and good government that follow Britain's rule wherever her
flag is flown.


Dear boys oil every battle front, I greet you in the name of
Australian womanhood, as I have often done before. We glory
in your bravery, your cheerful endurance of hardship and suf-
fering, or the prostrating weakness of sickness. We bless the
devotion of the surgeons and nurses, who care for those broken
bodies of yours; the ministry of the padres, who counsel and
advise you of the Heavenly Friend when earthly friends cannot
avail. We honor Britain and all her Allies, but our hearts go
out to you, our own Aussie boys, bone of our bone, and flesh
of our flesh, sons of the soil and bushland, sons of the sea-girt
city and the mining camp, sons of the hillside and the inland
plains. We honor you for your glorious courage in attack, for
your quiet endurance of horrors unimaginable, for your contempt
of danger and death when duty was to be done, the foe to be
met, victory to be grasped! "Bravo," we cry, as again and
again you prove your mettle, stemming the foe's advance, com-
pelling his retreat, ever victorious and steadfast. Soldier friends,
we grieve for your fast-thinning line, and trust that, though few
in number, you may still do valiantly and make yours
"The larger manhood saved for those
Who walk unblenching through the altar fires."
We send our sympathy to our lonely prisoners so bravely bearing
their exile this Christmas tide, and pray for their glad home-
coming.
We sorrow with you over your fallen comrades—we, who have
bitter mourning too! My last word is, "Be God's good man, as
well as your King's brave soldier." Put yourselves for life
and service, disablement or death, in His keeping. He will
hold you by the mercy of His Son in the hollow of His hand-
here or there—what matters, so long as you are His? The Lord
is mindful of His own, and will defend you, and your cause.
Let me repeat the words written to some of you after the
Landing: "God can never bless infamy. Right shall prevail,
and we shall live to see it," May God bless and strengthen you
as you strive for a little longer till the foe is driven out of the
bleeding land of France. Then, when victory has crowned your
final efforts, and the glad day of Peace has dawned, you will
return to the homeland you have fought to keep free, and then
it will be for you a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year.
"Now bear you well, and bear you high,
Who fights for God to God draws nigh,
And wins him immortality;
Carry on, Brave Hearts! Carry on!"
JEANIE JOBSON.
P.S.—I will be glad to answer any boy who cares to write
to me.


