

A LECTURE
ON THE
EASTERN QUESTION,
DELLVERED BY THE
REV. J. S. WHITE, M.A., LL.D.,
Mechanics’ Institute, Singleton,
MAY 10th, 1877.
Singleton:
THOMAS B. BOYCE, MACHINE PRINTER, SINGLETON & MURRURUNDI.
1877.




LECTURE.
THE EASTERN" QUESTION.
r n What is it ? In order to a definite,
an intelligent, and a satisfactory answer,
we must consider the circumstances of the
case In 1389. or nearly 500 years ago, a
tribe of the variety of the human family
known as Mongols, to the number o aUm
7 000 000 occupied an area of the central
region of Asia of 900,000 square miles in
is. m
JMimg* «>”the east; and from Siberia and
Dzungaria on the north. to Per ® ia ’ ' g U or
tan and Tibet on the south. As nomads, or
wanderers, they subsisted on the spoil * of
the chase, the produce of the more seq
ous animals, and on the fruits of a rude and
fitful cultivation of the earth. Fin g
place too strait for them they were smrtten
with the desire of migrating beyond the
comparatively narrow limits of their te
tory The world beyond was to them a
terra incognita. They knew little or nothing
of its extent, its natural character, its
habitants, or its products. But the
SPIRIT OF MIGRATION
was upon them strong and irresistible, and
with it the spirit of conquest, always twin
born with it. and its necessary complement.
Instead of being hindered by the mystery
which hung over their undertaking, by ex-
tenuating or concealing altogether the diffi-
culties and dangers which lay before them,
and giving full scope for the imagination
—mystery’s instrument and faith’s ma-
terial —to magnify and irradiate, with all
the splendours of fancy, the advantages and
benefits to result —it stimulated them to
action. The great natural will never
lacks an opportunity, or an exponent, to
make it available, but begets both, which
become at once the nation’s son and the na-
tion’s lord. In the case of the tribe in ques-
tion, the time came and the man. When the
time came the man appeared in the person
of
TIMUR, OR TAMERLANE,
as he is sometimes erroneously called. Under
his leadership the people went forth, not
knowing whither they went. Their exodus
was one of those great acts of national faith
and hope which the Father of Spirits and
Great Disposer of all events, who holds the
hearts of men as the rivers of water, and
turneth them whithersoever he listeth- who
does as he will in the armies of heaven, and
whose hand none on earth can stay from
working—constrains for the purging of the
accumulated intellectual and moral dens and
corruption of effete peoples, for the regene-
ration of mankind, the good of the world,
and his glory. They went forth conquering
and to conquer. As if in mockery of al
human instrumentality in this mighty move-
ment. big with the interests and destinies o
the world, Timur, the leader and master-
spirit of the movement, was in person the
very antithesis of the ideal of a conqueror.
He was small in stature, lame in his feet,
and otherwise deformed. But though
diminutive in body he was great in soul.
Though he halted on his thigh he never
halted between two opinions. Though his
; gait was awkward, his intellect moved itself
aright, and gave its colour in the cup of the
DESTINY of nations.
I Though slow in pace he was swift in oper-
ation'' His feet were like hinds feet.
Though feeble in body he was strong in-
vincible, irresistible m action At the head
of his rugged savage horde he swept over
the face of the earth like the besom of de-
struction. Every battle ended in victory,
and uninterrupted victory ended in the es-
tablishment of an empire embracing part of


Asia, part of Europe, and part of Africa, and
the representatives of all the families of
mankind. The Dneister marked its limits
on the west, Moscow on the north, the
Ganges on the south, and China on the
east” Mongolians, Slavs, Caucasians, Malays,
Negroes ali owned his sway. This Timur and
his cunquering
FOLLOWERS WERE TURKS,
the people whose interests the Eastern ques-
tion more directly concerns. Among other
conquests in Europe, the Turks subdued, in
1392, Bulgaria, with an area of 30,000 square
miles and a population of 3.000.000 ; in
1466, Servia. with an area of 20,000 square
miles ; Herzegovina and Bosnia, with an
area of about 50,000 square miles, and a
population of 200,000; Albania, with an
area of about 30,000 square miles, and a
population of nearly 2,000,000 ; and in 1714,
Montenegro, with an area of 18,000 square
miles, and a population of 130,000. These
countries became provinces of the realm of
Turkey, and their inhabitants subjects of its
government. These countries and their in-
habitants belong to Lurkeyby the right of
conquest, which is regarded in the code of
national morals as the right of the better
over the worse, the right of knowledge and
virtue over ignorance and sin. This right
has, in the moral code of nations in all ages,
been deemed paramount. The ancient
Greeks and Romans, the most civilized of
the nations of antiquity, regarded the right
of conquest in the conquerors as paramount
to the right to have, to act, to live,, in. the
conquered. They held themselves justified
in putting to death those whom they con-
quered in battle ; and although they did not
always exercise that right, they perpetuated
their claim to its exercise in the designation
of their captives, who by the Romans were
styled servi, or spared. It is
NOT YET A CENTURY
since the Christian nations of modern Europe
agreed to forego this right. Only a few
years ago the people of the United btates of
North America acted upon it in their deal-
ings with the Africans. But by no inde-
pendent country in Europe, or . in the world,
is the right of conquest universally and
absolutely surrendered. By every inde-
pendent country in Europe and the world,
the right is still held in theory and enforced
in practice. It is by no other or better
right than that of conquest that the Anglo-
Saxons compel the Celts to receive and con-
form to their laws. It is by no other right
tha': the Anglo-Saxons and Celts have in
their turn compelled the population of India
to receive and conform to their laws. It is
by no other right that the Slavs of Russia
compel the Fins and Circassians to receive
and conform to their laws. It is by no other
right that the Celts of France compel the
Moors of Algeria to receive and conform to
their laws. The provinces held by the Turks
by this right—the right of conquest—re-
belled. and in their uprising are said to have
perpetrated
FEARFUL ATROCITIES
upon the Turks. The Turks sent an army
to crush the rebellion, and in crushing it
they are said to have perpetrated most fear-
ful atrocities upon the insurgents. At the
same time, it must be borne in mind that
the atrocities on either side
WERE GREATLY EXAGGERATED
ill the first report, and some of them were
wholly disproved. In 1856, after the close
of the Crimean War, in which “someone had
blundered,” and which was altogether a huge
blunder, England, France, Russia, and
Turkey made a treaty, providing, amongst
other things, that the rights of the Christian
inhabitants of the provinces recently in
revolt should be respected, and that a con-
stitution should be given to them by Turkey.
We do not know whether these rights were
respected by Turkey or not. The people of
the provinces in question say, no ; the Turks
say, yes. We do know that during a con-
ference of the Powers abovenamed, held in
Constantinople a short time ago
A CONSTITUTION WAS GRANTED
Now the question is, whether the severity or
cruelty of the i urks towards the Provinces,
and their failure to granr a constitution,
warranted any one of the Powers to the
treaty of 1856, or the whole of them com-
bined, in making war upon Turkey or inter-
fering with her action upon her own subjects
—whether, in the language of Mr. Glad-
stone, England, or France, or Russia, or the
three together, should drive the Turks, bag
and baggage, out of Europe. The point to
be ascertained is, is such a course of action
justifiable 1 Is it justifiable in the case of
Russia especially ? Should England, assum-
ing the position of a passive spectator of
Russia’s invasion of Turkey, allow matters


to take their course, and eventuate according
to what is termed the chances of war ? This
question is of vast importance—the most im-
portant, beyond all controversy, that can
occupy the attention of Europe and the
world . It is a question of justice, a question
°f policy, a question of empire, a question of
civilization, a question of religion, a ques-
tion that most intimately concerns the
material, intellectual, political, social, moral,
religious interests of mankind. On this ques-
tion, so far as facts are concerned,
WE AT THE ANTIPODES
of the immediate scene of action are as well
qualified to judge as the people of Europe,
for we have full and reliable information
with respect to the facts and issues it
involves, and the commentaries of some of
the wisest and best of men. So far as the
spirit of inquiry is concerned, we are better
qualified than even the people of Europe to
investigate it, to weigh evidence, and to
decide, and form an intelligent and impar-
tial judgment upon it. We are far distant
from the immediate scene of events, and
therefore free from excitement and its con-
sequent prejudice, which personal converse
with them necessarily involves ; and we
have as great an interest in its satisfactory
solution as they—nay, even a greater interest
than they, for we are equally amenable to
results and less able to influence them. To
proceed with the subject. Are hostilities
against Turkey justified by her alleged atro-
cities in the revolted provinces, or by a
breach of the treaty of 1856 ? Suppose her
to have been guilty of the atrocities with
which she is charged, her guilt would not
justify hostilities. Turkey is a sovereign,
independent State. She has always been
such. She has always been acknowledged
to be such. She is expressly and distinctly
recognised as such in the treaty of 1856 by
England, France, and Russia. Now the
sovereignty and independence of a State
necessarily implies freedom to govern within
her own territory as she pleases. It is of
the very essence of sovereignty and inde-
pendence in a State that she have within
her own territory
NO SUPERIOR
but God and the law, that is, her own law.
The moment that this right is questioned by
a foreign State that moment is the sove-
reignty and independence of the State
questioned. The moment that this right is
taken away the sovereignty and independ-
ence of a State perishes. The axe is most
effectually laid to the root of the tree of
sovereignty and independence, and the same
blow that destroys her right to govern within
her own territory as she will, overthrows
utterly her sovereignty and independence.
The Powers to the treaty of 1856, recognis-
ing as they did, expressly and distinctly,
the sovereignty and independence of Turkey,
had no right to impose conditions upon her
in reference to the government of her sub-
jects within her own territory. In imposing
these conditions they perpetrated an incon-
sistency, and in seeking to enforce them they
seek to enforce an impossibility. The recog-
nition of the powers to the treaty of Turkey’s
sovereignty and independence necessarily
excluded the imposition by them of condi-
tions upon her. They recognise the sove-
reignty and independence of Turkey, and
then in the same breath treat her as
A VASSAL STATE.
True. Turkey agreed to the conditions, but
Turkey as a sovereign and independent
State had no right, no power, to agree to
them. In agreeing to them she perpetrated
an inconsistency, and undertook to perform
an impossibility—she undertook to do what
she could not do but as a vassal State, and
she never parted, was never supposed to
have parted, with her sovereignty and inde-
pendence, or any part of it The whole
transaction on the part of all the Powers
concerned
WAS A BLUNDER,
and involved an impossibility. On the
principle that ad impossibilia non coget lex,
the treaty, so far as this provision is con-
cerned, is null and void. The other Powers
might have recognised the sovereignty and
independence of Turkey, and bound her to
surrender a portion of her territory, but they
could not recognise her sovereignty and
independence and interfere with her treat-
ment of her own subjects. (2). The treaty
provided that Turkey should respect the
rights of her Christian subjects, and grant
them a constitution. Now suppose the
Turkish Government failed to do so, her
failure would not, in terms of the treaty,
justify hostilities, even supposing the treaty
jto be valid and binding. The Turkish
Government could be bound to respect the
rights of only peaceable and loyal subjects—
to such subjects only could she be bound to


crive a constitution. But the subjects in
question were not peaceable and loyal, but
TURBULENT AND REBELLIOUS.
They were in armed insurrection against
their lawful Sovereign, and committed atro-
cities against their fellow-subjects, what
ri edits had such subjects ? What right to a
constitution ? They had forfeited all rights
as subjects of Turkey, and exposed them-
selves to the punishment of rebels. Could
England, France, or Russia, when_ agreeing |
to the treaty, have contemplated rights and j
a constitution for rebels bloodthirsty
rebels ? Did they, could they, expect that
to her subjects in open rebellion Turkey was j
to be not only tolerant and indulgent, but to .
wrant a constitution ? This would have been j
to contemplate the abetting of insurrection,
and the encouragement of rebelion, anarchy,
and confusion. When the Algerines
revolted against French rule, did Trance
treat them tenderly ? Did she offer them a
constitution ? No ! She visited them with
fire and sword. Marshal Bugeaud drove 700
of them into a cave and stifled them men,
women, and children - with the smoke of a
large fire kindled at its mouth. When the
Celts revolted against the government of
England, did she treat the rebels tenderly !
No ! She visited them with fire and sword.
They were massacred in Glencoe, and
butchered at Culloden. When the Sepoys
revolted she blew them from the mouths of
cannon. When the Poles and Turks revolted
against Russia, did she treat the rebels ten-
derly ? No! She pursued them with fire
and sword. The world’s history records
NO GREATER ATROCITIES
than those perpetrated by Suvaroff upon the
Christian inhabitants of Poland and the
Mahommedan inhabitants of Ismail. Re-
bellion against the Powers that be, whethei
by aliens or the home born, has always been
regarded as a crime of the first magnitude,
and punished accordingly. To put down
and punish rebels has always been looked
upon as a “merciful policy, and as a politic
mercv.” The degree of severity employed
must/ever depend upon the character of the
government and circumstances. It has ever
been thought a matter of subordinate im-
portance. (3.) But even if the treaty ot
1856 was valid and binding, even if Turkey
had violated it, and if, because of its viola-
tion, she became amenable to England,
France, and Russia, with what show of con-
sistency, propriety, or decency can Eussia
assume the character of a vindicator of out-
raged humanity and violated treaties, and
apply the rod of chastisement to Turkey l
WHAT ARB THE RUSSIANS ?
They do not stand high in the scale of civil-
ization. It is not long since they were
recognized by the civilized countries ot
Europe. The great body of them are serfs,
bought and sold like cattle. In things
secular and sacred they know no other law
than the will of the Czar. 1 heir punish-
ments are most brutal and revolting—the
beating with the knout, mutilation of the
person, cutting out of the tongue. To
these punishments even women are liable.
Upon women these punishments have been,
and such punishments still are, inflicted.
Russia has a traditional policy of aggresion
selfishness, aggrandisement, duplicity, and
blood. As early as the days of Peter the
(j rea t —as soon as she was capable of con-
templating such a policy—it became the
idea of the national mind, and as soon as she
was capable of realizing it she put it in
practice. It was embodied by Peter the
Great in his will and left as a legacy to his
subjects.
HIS WILL IS AS FOLLOWS :
‘<(1) Let the Russian nation be kept in a
continual state of war, so that her soldiers
may be hardy and always ready for fighting.
Let there be no repose excepting when it is
necessary for the repair of the finances of
the Empire, or for the re-organization of our
armies, or for waiting for the most oppor-
tune moments of attack. Let times of peace
be thus made useful for the support of war,
and war be conducted so as to give advan-
tages in peace, always keeping in view the
aggrandisement and the increase of the
prosperity of Russia. (2) Attract by every
possible means, from the most cultivated
nations of Europe, able captains in times of
war, and the best scholars in times of peace,
so that the Russian nation may profit by
such advantages as may be obtainable _in
other countries without any risk of losing
those of which she is herself possessed.
(3) Take a part on all occasions in the
troubles and disputes of Europe, particu-
larly in those of Germany, which, being
nearest to Russia, have most direct interest
for her. (1) Keep up divisions in Poland,
and encourage continual jealousies and agi-
I tations ; purchase with gold the support of


the nobles, corrupt her Diets so as to have
the power of influencing the elections of her
kings ; gain partizans of our own ; give
them protection by moving Russian troops
into the country, and then keep them there ,
till the proper time shall arrive to take pos-
session. If the neighbouring Powers object,
they should be ' momentarily appeased by
sharing the country with them until it is
possible to retake what has been so ceded.
(5) Take from Sweden as much as possible,
and manage so that she may attack us,
which will give a pretext for her subjuga-
gation. With this view isolate her from
Denmark, by carcfu’ly encouraging rivalries
between these two countries.
(6) ALWAYS CHOOSE WIVES
for the Russian Princes in the German
States, and by such alliances unite their
interests with ours, and obtain their support
for our views. (7) Encourage a commercial
alliance with England, she being the Power
which has most need of us for the main-
tenance of her navy, and which can be most
useful to us for the development of our own.
Exchange our timber and oiher productions
for her gold, and establish constant friendly
relations between her merchants and sailors
and ours, by which our people will be im-
proved in seamanship and in the arts of
commerce. (8) Extend the frontiers of the
Empire unceasingly, towards the north along
the Baltic Sea, and towards the south along
the shores of the Black Sea. (9) Approach
as near as possible to Constantinople, and
towards the Indies. He who reigns at Con-
stantinople will be
THE REAL SOVEREIGN OF THE WORLD,
and, with that object in view, provoke con-
tinual wars with Turkey, and with Persia ;
establish dockyards in the Black Sea ; get
possession of the shores of that sea, as well
as those of the Baltic —these two things
being necessary for the ultimate success of
our project; hasten the decadency of Per-
sia ; penetrate as far as the Persian gulf ;
re-establish the former trade of the Levant
by appropriating Syria, and, if possible,
extend the power of Russia to the Indies,
which are
THE EMPORIUM OF THE WORLD.
Once there we can do without the gold of
England. (10) Carefully seek and maintain
alliance with Austria, appear to support her
ideas of future sovereignty over all Germany,
and covertly excite against her the jealousy
of the German Princes. Endeavour to
induce either one side or the other to solicit
the assistance of Russia, and then take the
country, as it were, under our protection, by
which means we shall be enabled to prepare
it for eventual domination. (11) Interest
Austria with us in the expulsion of the
Turk from Europe, and, when we have con-
quered Constantinople, neutralize the effects
of her jealousy, either by stirring up a war
between her and the other European States,
or by giving up to her a portion of our con-
quest, which we can retake from her after-
wards. (12) Attach an-I unite to us all the
dissatisfied Greeks and other schismatics in
Hungary. Turkey, and the south of Poland,
making Russia their centre and support, and
establish a universal ascendancy over them,
by a kind of sacerdotal supremacy ; this will
secure us serviceable friends in the enemy s
country. (13) When Sweden has been dis-
membered. Persia vanquished. Poland sub-
jugated, and Turkey conquered, our armies
united, and the Black Hea and the Baltic in
possession of our fleet, a proposal must be
submitted
SEPARATELY AND VERY SECRETLY,
first to the court of Versailles._ and then to
that of Vienna, to divide with them the
Empire of the World. If either of the two
accepts, which is not to be doubted, as their
ambition and their self-love will be flattered
with the suggestion, make use of that power
to crush the other, and afterwards in its
turn we must crush the first, which will not
be difficult, as by that time Russia will be in
possession of the whole of the East, and of a
great part of Europe. (14) If the improb-
able case should arise of a refusal by both
Powers, it will be necessary to bring about a
state of war between the two which will
exhaust them both, and then choosing the
decisive moment for action, Russia would
fall upon Germany with her armies at the
same time that the powerful fleets would
issue from the sea of Azov, and from the
port of Aichangel, filled with hordes of
Asiatics, and, uniting themselves to other
fleets in the Black Sea and in the Baltic,
they would advance by the Mediterranean
and the Atlantic Ocean, and land them on
the shores of France, which will speedily be
overrun, whilst our land forces do the same
in Germany. Once these two countries van-
quished, the rest of Europe will soon pass


under our sceptre. It is bj these means that
Europe can and must be conquered.”
WE NEED OCCUPY
neither time nor labor in proving either the
genuineness or the authenticity of this docu-
ment. Its policy is so closely, so particu-
larly, and so fully illustrated i t the subse-
quent history of Russia, that, read in the
light of subsequent action and events, it
seems to be rather a record of a policy
perfected than of a policy prescribed.
Russia has ever been false and double-
dealing. She has ever been a systematic
and flagrant truce breaker. Never did she
allow herself to be bound by any treaty,
however explicit in its terms, or solemn in
its sanctions, a moment longer than self-
interest dictated. Russia was the first vio-
lator of the treaty of 1856, After that
treaty she continued to hold Adassi, an
island at the mquth of the Danube on the
Blacky Sea. In spite of that treaty she con-
tinued to hold it. In the face of remon-
strance. backed by the presence of a British
fleet in that Sea. she persists in holding
it. No doubt she will continue to hold it in
illustration of her fidelity to treaties, so long
as their observance suits her convenience.
But not only is Russia a flagrant, presump-
tuous, and persistent violator of the treaty
of 1856 herself; she stirred up and abetted
the rebels whose punishment has unde-
servedly drawn down upon Turkey the
odium of England, prejudiced the public
mind of Europe against her. and disposed it
to regard her in any light which could
afford a shadow of justification for her chas-
tisement, whether as a violator of treaties or
an enemy to humanity. So early as 1828
RUSSIA EXCITED AND FOSTERED REBELLION
in Bulgaria, but the Turkish Government
effectually suppressed it— do doubt by the
exercise of severity. But the English people
were not so sensitive in those days to the
rights of rebels and their claim to a consti-
tution as they seem to be now. Turkey
was allowed, very properly, to manage her
own affairs, and Russia was disappointed
It cannot be denied that Russia was the
prime mover of the late rebellion, and that
she aided the rebels. It is a well-known
fact that after the insurgents in Servia at
the least were disposed to lay down their
arms and resume their allegiance,
RUSSIAN SOLDIERS COMPELLED THEM
at the point of the bayonet to continue the
contest . It is stated on good authority that
some of the most revolting of the atrocities
perpetrated were perpetrated by Russian
soldiers. _ While matters were yet in suspen-
sion, while the Gonference was yet sitting
and debating on what course to pursue,
Russia was pouring soldiers into the revolted
provinces under the name of volunteers.
Before the Conference ended these provinces
were filled with her troops. Had England
and France, or either Power, interfered and
settled the question in dispute amicably, no
no doubt these volunteers would have been
disowned by the Russian Government. Now
that Russia has gained her point and been
allowed to make war upon Turkey, these
volunteers are recognised and employed as
soldiers. In fact the conduct of Russia in
respect of the treaty of 1856, and all the
matters that have arisen out of its alleged
violation by Turkey, has been characterised
by
FAITHLESSNESS, PRESUMPTION, INTRIGUE,
AND WRONG.
Neither England nor France could with very
good grace make war upon a sovereign inde-
pendent State for putting down rebellion
within its own territory, or on account of
the mode of its suppression, but surely
Russia, of all the nations of the earth, is
debarred from interfering by every consider-
ation of consistency and decency. Of all
the nations which surround Turkey ready to
execute vengeance upon her, Russia, as the
oldest, most hardened, and most heinous
offender, smitten by the convictions of
national conscience, should be not only not
the first to cast a stone at her but the
first to retire from the circle of avengers.
England and France, who have always in
treaties manifested more or less of the influ-
ence of a national conscience, and have
always shown themselves sensitive to the
dictates of national honor, might, with some
show of propriety, have taken upon them-
selves the vindication of violated treaties;
but with what show of consistency or
common decency can Russia assume such a
function ?
what is Russia’s real motive
in making war upon Turkey ? Antecedent
probabilities and historical facts have irre-
sistibly led us to the conclusion that Rus-


sia’s real motive in making war upon Turkey
is one neither of justice nor philanthropy.
Russia presents herself on the pedestal of
events as the friend of neither. She stands
forth pilloried before Europe and the world
as a nation which, in adhering to her tradi-
tional policy has made void all law, human and
divine. We must seek then for some
other motive than justice and philanthropy.
Her selfishness and ambition must guide us
in our enquiry. Russia already possesses
in Europe, Asia, and America, a terri-
tory of about 9,000,000 of square miles with a
population of about 75,000,000, or about one-
seventeenth of the whole surface of the
earth and about one-thirteenth of its popu-
lation. But this enormous extent of terri-
tory, so utterly disproportioned to that of
ally other country iu the world is altogether
inadequate to satisfy the morbid cravings of
Russian ambition. Nothing less than uni-
versal empire will satisfy her. The world
in her estimation will no more admit of two
sovereigns than of two suns. The Czar
MUST BE MONARCH OF THE GLOBE.
But to the gratifying of this insatiate am-
bitton nature has wisely hitherto interposed
difficulties great if not insuperable. On the
north of her possessions in Europe, Asia, and
America, she has a seabord of thousands
of miles in extent, but during nine months
of the year not available because of the
accumulations of thick, ribbed ice. She
possesses the whole of the Northern. Eastern,
and Western shores of the Caspian Sea’
upwards of 1000 miles, which is always
navigable, but having no outlet the navigation
of it respects only the surrounding country
bhe possesses the seabord of the Baltic on the
eastern side, which, together with the sea-
bord of the gulfs of Riga, Finland, and
-Bothnia, gives a seabord of about 1300
miles m extent. While parts of the Baltic
aie navigable during the whole year the
greater portion is frozen up during five
months of the year. Her seabord is to
some extent increased by the shores of the
sea °t Azov, which is always practicable.
AsAo the outlet from the Baltic and its gulf
extensions, that could be easily blockaded
by Crermany and Denmark. Germany and
Denmark could most effectually prevent her
intercourse by sea with the rest of the world
during nine months of the year. Russia
then as at present situated could never be-
come a great naval Power, and until she be-
come a great naval Power she can never
effectually carry out her scheme of universal
empire.
THE GREAT POWERS OF EUROPE,
and especially England, aware of the
fact, and no doubt dreading the results of
her naval superiority, have always in all her
treaties sought to restrict her to the sea-
bord she already possesses. England espe-
cially has sought to exclude her from the
navigation of the Mediterranean and Black
Seas. Should she conquer Turkey and con-
fine herself to the possession of the revolted
provinces, Russia will gain not only a vast
accession of most valuable territory to the
extent of about 130,000 square miles, with a
population of about 6,500,000, but a seabord
of upwards of 300 miles in length on the
Adriatic and lonian Seas, and about 200
miles on the western shore of the Black
Sea. She will command the nassage of the
Bosphorus, the navigation of the sea of
Marmora, and the passage of the Darde-
nelles, and the whole coast of Asia Minor
from the Dardenalles to the Isthmus of
Suez, the Suez Canal, and the Red Sea. By
land she will be able by the construction of
a railway along the valley of the Euphrates
to reach the Persian Gulf. Thus by land
and sea she will be enabled to attack our
Indian possessions which have ever been the
object of her intense desire. The Czar of
Russia would have Constantinople, and
having Constantinople he would have every
facility for becoming sovereign of the
world. Russia would be more than Russia
not to take advantage of them.
(6j HOW WOULD RUSSIA USE
her vast accession of power to be attained
by her conquest of Turkey ? Once possessed
of the means of acquiring universal empire
what would become of the freedom and in-
dependence of Europe and the World ?
What rights would she respect? What
wrongs would she forbear ? What treaties
would she acknowledge ? She would exact
from subjugated nations the last farthing of
i tribute of forbearance, and. as in weigh-
ing the gold for the price of their ransom
| they sought to adjust the balance, according
to the principles of justice and mercy, she
would kick the beam as Brennus did in the
Roman forum, and reply to their remon-
strances as he did, “ the right of valiant men
lies in their swords, the only portion of the
vanquished is to suffer.” Would her con-


quests promote the cause of civilization ? She
herself is less civilized than many of the
European nations. She would need to be
civilized by the conquered. The task of
civilising conquerers is certainly not an easy
or an enviable one.
A WORD OF TRUTH RESPECTING THE TURKS.
"We have been so long accustomed to hear
the Turks stigmatised as the most effeminate
and debased of men, and Turkey sneered at
as “the sick man,” that in order to investi-
gate the subject impartially, and therefore
rightly, long cherished and deeply rooted
prejudices have to be overcome. They were
originally Asiatics, it is true. But are we
not all originally from Asia ? Is not Asia
the great mother of us all. We are but
Asiatics, modified physically, mentally, and
morally by time, place, and circumstance.
Have the Turks alone of all nations resisted
the influence of time, place, and circum-
stance 1 Assuredly not? The Turks have
been improved by their contact with Western
nations. According to the highest authori-
ties the Turks are physically a fine race.
“ The Turkish skull is symmetrical, elegant,
and harmonious, and a very fine work of
nature.” One of the best proofs of a race’s
stamina is its power of reproduction. This
power the Turks have shown themselves to
possess in an eminent degree. At the begin-
ning of the present century the population
of Turkey was 17,500,000. In 1844 it was
39,000,000. The revenue which was then
£7,000,000 is now £15.000,000. The Turks
are
MAHOMMEDANS, NOT IDOLATORS.
They are a strictly sober people—in fact,
total abstainers. From the fourth to the
ninth centuries, they were the enlightened
teachers of the world. Schools have been
established throughout the Empire, and
there are now 20 newspapers, and between
30,000 and 40,000 copies of the scriptures
have been circulated during the year. Since
1851 toleration has been granted to all reli-
gionists, and it is now no longer penal for a
Musselman to change his creed. They have
more than once beaten the Russians, and
they have frequently and shamefully de-
feated the Austrians. The Turkish Govern-
ment has shown itself equal to the exigen-
cies of its position in respect of its own
subjects. It put down the insurrection of
the Bulgarians in 1828, and the insurrection
of the last few months, in spite of Russia’s
intrigues and Russia’s aid. Turkey has an
army of 340,000 infantry, 40,000 cavalry,
upwards of 1000 pieces of cannon, and
a large fleet. The Turks, then, are
NOT THE DEBASED, EFFEMINATE RACE,
nor Turkey the “ sick man” she. is repre-
sented. The Turks are not a whit behind
the average of European nations in physical
stamina, in intellectual capacity, or moral
improveability. (8). The people for whom
Turkey is invaded. As a race they are
chiefly Slavs, or Slavonians —
THE SARMATIANS AND SCYTHIANS
of antiquity. They are not distinguished in
history for their civilization. They seem
to be deficient in the first element
of national existence, capacity for
self-government. Hence we find them,
on the breaking up of the Roman
Empire, no sooner forming themselves into
separate States, than they resolved them-
selves into two classes —masters and slaves.
Hence also, we find Bohemia. Bulgaria,
Moravia, and Poland —originally Slavic
states —incapable of maintaining a separate
and an independent existence, and absorbed
by and incorporated with other races, chiefly
Teutons. Indeed, they seem destined to
exist on’y under tutors and governors, and
to contribute only a subordinate and latent
element to the great mass of human society.
As to religion, they are of the Greek church,
■which differs from all other churches,
denies the Trinity, accepts as its rule of
faith and practice the scriptures and tradi-
tions of the church, recognizes seven sacra-
ments, —transubstantiation, adoration of the
host, auricular confession, priestly absolu-
tion, extreme unction, penitential works,
picture-worship, celibacy of Bishops and of
the clergy after ordination, intercession of
the saints (especially of the Virgin), a state
of purgation after death, prayers for the
dead, merit of good works, and fasting. The
Greek church recognises as her heads, the
Patriarch of Cl>nstantinople in the East,
and the Czar of Russia in the West. As to
national character, the inhabitants of the
revolted provinces are represented as rude
to some extent, industrious and social at
home, but as
ROBBERS AND PIRATES ABROAD.
Such are the people for whom Turkey is
abandoned to the tender mercies of Russia !
What has Russia to communicate to them ?
What can she do for them ? If the Rus-


naA in taking them out of the
S an d of U Turkey it will not be to introduce a
hand of turkey. ’ , Knt . add Slav
new and superior element, but * j j e rior ele-
‘° T’ HJffto to supersede supersld-
S£* i r **" hi S 5£ £
add slavery to slavery tt £ arbaris m to
civilization to bar ... ’ to superstition,
barbarism, supeis . those people for
Russia can communicate» ten .
whose inteiests s P ,- b they have
de rly solicitous-f n | rdo nothing
invasion end inco q and Moham-
Turks are Mongols y the whole
medans by rdi|U . J 00) are Mon-
population o A, are Moham-
g Lnf The Mohammedan Mongols of
are likely to sympathise with the
and co-religionists. throughout its
S"! significant. Napoleon the First con-
templated the possible
stirring of the eastern hives,
ri (Wlared that it would be a bad day foi
and deciaieci j The invasion
times un^ er h^?Tp™ e co urae of God,” and as
surnamed the i . vv r o is com-
Tartars under Geng i Kl . the
puted to have destroy Jfc be
d nhe find herself in straits,
that lurKey, ii European nations,
deS v rt appeal to the Mohammedan Mongols of
Tla It is not unlikely that her appea
Asa. rr lb , •. As in the case ot
c,m ‘;i ?Vf'f m erelj to succour their brethren
nised bodies, mere y ess 0 f time, lured
Europe. This is a possibslity ought
tn hp taken into account. It is a con-ug
ency which should be provided against.
SHOULD ENGLAND INTERFERE
on behalf of Turkey ? England is bound by
every consideration to interfere. It may oe
1.1../ Turkey may not need assistance. I
Say to hat she will be able single-handed
to defeat and drive out the orlt “S
SSTof SSS%*iSS. « probability, or
certainty, England U S, ar ily
sideration to assist iuikcj
tn mike war on her account, but to say
: ' in that, voice that is never beard
“SetEussla jB
one of the most powerful nations of Europe
If England stand aloof m H »
trouble" she will have one friend
among European nations, and one enemy
rnore—a condition by no means to be
desired. England's course of acbon
LMHss^X
draw her into the quarrel, and be a paitic
pator in her action,
ENGLAND REFUSED.
n blip vprv fact of her refusal shew
that* she did not believe in Turkey’s alleged
tuilt either as to the treaty or the atroci-
ties By so doing she tacitly but con-
t].es.' w ppriified her belief in Turkey s
S£r- ttst; "s
p rp gi«f||
annear unprincipled and unprovoked With
such views what can be England s duty but
to assist Turkey ? With such a conviction
what must England feel herself consmenti-
ously and in the interests of humanity
impelled to do, but to succour iurkey .


Turkey is one of the oldest, most faithful,
and most useful allies of England. She has
stood between India and invasion. She has
fought side by side with England in
England’s quarrel with Russia. He has in
the opinion of England done nothing to
forfeit her claim to confidence ; nothing to
sever or relax the bonds of national con-
fidence. She is in need of aid and there-
fore
ENGLAND SHOULD AID HER.
For England to abandon her without the
pretext of a fault is for England to be guilty
of a baseness unworthy of any people. Non
talibus artibus Roma crescit. It is not by
such a policy that England has obtained her
present greatness and preeminence among
nations, and it is not by such a policy that
she is to maintain it. England is bound to
assist Turkey by considerations of self
interest. The probable results of the subju-
gation of Turkey by Russia have been briefly
indicated. In these results England is more
largely interested than any other nation of
Europe. All her foreign possessions,
especially those of India, are at stake.
THE CROWN OF THE EMPRESS OF INDIA
Is involved in the issue. Turkey has for
generations been regarded by England’s
wisest, most patriotic, and greatest of states-
men as the great and effectual barrier
against the invasion of her Indian territory'.
We cannot consult the map of the world
without surmising that she is so. We can-
not interrogate the history of the last hun-
dred years without being convinced that it
is so. True, Mr. Bright laughs at the idea,
and regards Russia’s exclusion from the Black
Sea and the Mediterranean as unjust and
foolish, and insinuates that in seeking to use
these seas, even in the face of treaties,
she is doing only what everyone else in like
circumstances would do, and plainly says
that the Black Sea and the Mediterranean
must of necessity ere long be thrown open to
her fleets. Mr. Bright therefore would let
events take their course between Russia and
lurkey. Is this argument ? Is this morality ?
Is this patriotism ? If it is unjust and foolish
to seek to exclude Russia from the Black
Sea and Mediterranean, if Russia must and
will ultimately navigate these seas, is that
any reason
WHY TURKEY SHOULD BE VICTIMIZED
If England has seen it to be to her interest
to maintain friendly relations with Turkey.
to exclude Russia from the seas in question,
and if Turkey, has served the purpose of ex-
cluding her therefrom, and if England now
sees that she was in error in respect of such
exclusions, is that any reason why Turkey
should be handed over to Russia, against
whom she was supposed to have protected
our interests ? If it is a venial sin for Russia
to violate treaties, is this any reason whv
Turkey should be sacrificed for maintaining-
treaties, and that for the interest of others ?
If Russia must and will obtain the naviga-
tion of the Black Sea and the Mediterranean,
is that any reason why Turkey should be
deserted by England for having assisted her
to avert such an issue ? If it concerns the
interests of England to maintain the sover-
eignity and independence of Turkey—and all
our wisest, most patriotic, and greatest
STATESMEN HAVE BEEN UNANIMOUS
on this point—is it patriotic to ignore that
sovereignty and independence, and sneer at
our safeguards ? The hon. W. E. Gladstone
holds that Turkey has violated the treaty of
1856 as to the government of her own sub-
jects, has been guilty of the most horrible
atrocities, is a standing illustration of govern-
ment by mere brute force, and is incapable
of improvement, and ought therefore to be
first scourged with war and then
DRIVEN BAG AND BAGGAGE
out of Europe. I think it has been shewn
that Turkey not only did not, but could not
violate the treaty of 1856 in respect of the
government of her own subjects. With res-
pect to the alleged atrocities committed by
her, all reliable information has shews that,
so far as the Turks were concerned, they
were either not committed at all or that the
account of those committed wss greatly
exaggerated, that the Russians, and not the
Turks, were the perpetrators of most of them,
and that supposing they were such as they
are now known to have been, they were not
greater than those by which rebellions in
every age and every country have been
punished by a government sufficiently st#ong
to suppress them. With respect to govern-
ment by mere brute force, Turkey dose not
afford an illustration of it. No country
could have been governed by mere brute
force for upwards of
FOUR HUNDRED YEARS
or the quarter of the time. It is contrary to
nature, and contradicted by all history.
This, Mr. Gladstone must know. Turkey is


governed by the Koran which propounds a
system of government on the whole wise and
benevolent. This Mr. Gladstone also knows.
He knows that if a ruler disregard the re-
quirements of the Koran he becomes, by the
very fact, an infidel in the estimation of his
subjects, and forfeits all right to the allegi-
ance of the faithful. As to brute force, no
doubt force is employed to secure obedience
to the law in Turkey. I know of no healthy
state in the world in which this is not the
case. Even in England the baton of the
constable, the bayonet and bullet of the
soldier, the prison, the gallows, or the block,
are the ultimate resort in the case of
criminals. All this Mr. Gladstone knows.
That the Turks are incapable of improvement
all history disproves. Nay, their capability
of improvement —the fact of their improve-
ment —is recorded in their beads, for instead
of being now Mongolian in shape, they are,
as observed before, symmetrical, elegant, and
harmonious, and
A TRIUMPH OF NATURE’S HANDIWORK.
They have improved in the arts of war and
peace, and they are still improving. They
are learning to value literature, and they
have availed themselves of the Press. They
have learned to value education, and they
have established schools. They admit
amongst them the Scriptures, and the proper
authorities tell us that they are not in all
cases a dead letter. They avail themselves
of the schools of England and France for
the education of the youth of the higher
classes. All this, and much more, Mr. Glad-
stone knows ; showing that the Turks are
not only capable of improving, but they have
improved, and are improving—that, in fact
the “ bag and baggage” policy is not the right
one. Mr. Gladstone’s opinion on the matter
concerning the national honour and the
national interests is not. I think, entitled to
implicit reception. Mr. Gladstone allowed our
flag to be grossly insulted by the Americans
when Commodore Wilks boarded the mail
steamer and removed by main force Sidell and
Mason. Mr. Gladstone allowed our honour
to be impunged when England was treated
contemptuously and all but ignored in the
European Conference, Mr. Gladstone sacri-
ficed at once our honour and our interest
when he urged the payment of the Alabama
claims. Of the amount granted for such
payment, at this moment
£2.000.000 REMAIN
over and above every shadow of a claim
which has been satisfied. In a matter of
national policy involving our national
honour and our national interest, I would
not be disposed to commit either the one or
the other to either Mr. Bright or Mr.
Gladstone. In the matter under considera-
tion we can be guided by facts, and we
trust that these facts will furnish a founda-
tion for a policy in respect of Turkey worthy
of England’s great, noble, sensitive, and
generous heart, and I feel persuaded that
that policy will be one involving the main-
tenance of the sovereignty and indepen-
dence of Turkey, the peace of the world,
and the best interests of mankind.
T. B. Bvjjce, Machine Printer, Singleton and Murrnrundi.


