

LETTER TO MR. H. RUSSET,
IN ANSWER TO HIS
djjflttatitutum for all (putnfe
THE RIGHT REV.
THE LORD BISHOP OP ADELAIDE.
ADELAIDE:
PUBLISHED BY T. MURPHY, BUNDLE STREET EAST;
SOLD ALSO BY
E. S. WIGG, BUNDLE STREET.
Price Threepence.




PUBLISHED BY T. MUKPHY, BUNDLE STKEET EAST;
SOLD ALSO BY
E. S. WTGG, BUNDLE STBEET.
Price Threepence.




A LETTER.
/W 33-55“ )ris&l?%
1 -7-Vl
Bishop’s Court,
October 4, 1855.
Peak Sir,
I have read your “ Constitution for all
Churches,” and while the gentleness of spirit in which
it is written is commendable, I cannot altogether acquit
it of self-sufficiency. As I ran it over the following
remarks occurred to me :
The Constitution of your Church, p. 15, pointedly
contradicts St. Paul’s arrangement for Crete, p. 9. (Titus
i. 9.) Titus, like Timothy (though not of the Twelve),
received authority to ordain elders, over whom they had
the oversight. (1 Tim. v. 19.) They were overseers of
elders and churches , while a college of Presbyters had
the oversight of the flock or different congregations in
any large city, as at Ephesus. (Acts xx. 17—28.)


Your “third and most important office” of Evangelist
(which, according to p, 8, was not a permanent office)
you gratuitously assume to be a “ travelling missionary.”
What becomes of the inspired writers of the New Testa-
ment, the proper “ Evangelists ?” Was not an inspired
writer of the Christian Records (which was not a per-
manent office in the Church) as necessary as “ travelling
missionary teachers ?” But you lose sight of that
appointment of God in your explanation of the word and
work of the “ Evangelist.”
Your statement of the Baptismal Creeds, p. 11, over-
looks that of our blessed Lord himself. Compare
Matthew xxviii. 19, and Mark xvi. 15. Was not belief
in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, in whose name
adult converts were baptized, necessary and actually
required ?”
But having seemingly omitted the Holy Spirit from
your statement of the scriptural creed for baptism, I am
less surprised at the defective statement of the work of
the Comforter, given at p. 15. You say, “No one is
taught to expect the reception of the Holy Monitor and
Comforter as resident in his heart till he obeys the
Gospel.” Is there no “ preventing ,” as well as co-opera-
tive grace ? “ They” (that is the Christian Disciples),
you say, “ teach sinners that God commands all men—


to turn to him; that the Holy Spirit strives with them so
to do by the writings of the Apostles and Prophets What
then becomes of St. Paul’s—“ God worketh in you both
to will and to do of His good pleasure.” Surely the Holy
Ghost strives with the sinner’s heart in other ways than
by merely speaking to him by the inspired Scriptures.
A Pelagian would allow that. With regard to the dif-
ference between faith and opinion, p. T 4, you surely
know that the Church of England teaches the child thus
in the Catechism:—
“What dost tliou chiefly learn in these Articles of thy
Belief?—First, I learn to "believe in God the Father,
who hath made me and all the world. Secondly, in God
the Son, who hath redeemed me and all mankind.
Thirdly, in God the Idoly Ghost, who sanctifieth me and
all the elect people of God.” And in the Visitation for
the Sick, on the dying bed, the penitent sinner is exhorted
to examine himself by the articles of the Apostles’ Creed,
of which the chief are pointed out to every child, that he
may know whether he believes as a Christian man should
or no. I doubt whether any Church proves the sound-
ness of its members in the faith by a more scriptural and
simple creed than the Church of England; and that, too,
in the hour of death. We do, therefore, make as wide a
difference between faith and opinion—between the testi-


mony of God and the reasonings of men—the words of the
Spirit and human inferences (only more correctly) —as,
from your statements, the Christian Disciples appear to
do. We do not, however, think it wise, or consistent
with Christian humility of mind, to reject the “ reasonings
of good men of all ages in the Church as to what is the
testimony of God, in order to set up our own individual
and personal dogmatism.”
As you have invited remarks from the members of the
Church of England, I have set down such as in a cursory
reading of your Tract occurred to me.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
AUGUSTUS ADELAIDE.
Mr. H. Hdssey




7mf
’ ii&uo
Pis'U £>
