

LETTER
TO THE
Rt. HON. ROBERT PEEL,
HIS MAJESTY'S SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE
HOME DEPARTMENT,
UPON THE DETENTION OF
i&eto 93etf)Um 3£o3p)taK,
ST. GEORGE’S FIELDS.
“ Justice, Justice, Justice, most Noble Duke.”
Measure for Measure.
SOUTHWARK;
Printed and published by Frances Mackenrot,
22, Elliott’s Row, Prospect Place, near the Elephant
and Castle, St. George’s Fields.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.




LETTERS, &c.
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE ROBERT PEEL, M.P. HIS
MAJESTY’S SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE
HOME DEPARTMENT.
Sir, — August 12, 1824.
I long paused and hesitated before I would presume to
venture on so hazardous a step as to address a Statesman of
your exalted station, but to render justice to myself and fa-
mily, I overleap the barriers which separate my path of life
from yours, and despairing of gaining your notice through a
private channel (which, if practicable, I gladly would have
embraced), am compelled, although repugnant to ray feel-
ings, and ideas of propriety as a female, to call upon you
thus publicly for Justice, strict and impartial justice, with-
out which my husband will continue to linger out a miserable
existence in the horrible confinement of a madhouse. I still
must struggle without his protection and support, and our
children, four in number, reared in poverty and ignorance.
Being an Englishwoman, of which 1 am not a little proud,
I have imbibed, withthe air of my nativecountry, that sense of
liberty and independence, which teaches respect to myself
without forgetting what is due to my superiors; it is,’there-
fore,, with the utmost deference to your rank, and firm reli-
ance upon your principles of justice, truth, and strength of
judgment, that I now appeal openly for its administration :
but it cannot be atchieved until you are throughly acquainted
with the double dealing and nefarious practices of certain men
in office, who, for their own interest, and to conceal their
misconduct from the public, have raised a mist before your
eyes, which it is my bounden duty to dispel, at least, endea-
vour so to do, ’Ere so desirable an event can possibly take
place, I must be more prolix than I could wish, and likewise
declare that I am not actuated by motives of malice or ill will
towards the individuals whose names will hereafter appear,
yet will not so far play the hypocrite by adding, that I main-
tain philanthropy and goodwill for them—it would be false.
I hate them most cordially ; they have heaped bitterness and
sorrow upon myself and children, which naturally creates
detestation. Still, as a Christian and fellow creature, I
would rather serve than afflict them, and have left them to
their conscience, if they would have permitted me.


On the 2c] of March, Mr. Hume brought forward, in the
"House of Commons, the case of Anthony Mackenrot, press-
ing his liberation from the Criminal Wing’ of Bethlem Hos-
pital, upon which you candidly acknowledged, “ that Beth-
lem Hospital was a place for the insane, not the sane, and
■“that when Governmentwas convinced there was no danger of
“ a relapse, when there should be proof that he waaa proper
“object, there wouldbe no hesitation in giving him his liberty.”
The above reply naturally created the most sanguine hopes
in the bosom of my husband and self, knowing that Dr,
Munro, one of the visiting physicians, had, for years past,
■reported him sane, and upon the prospect and expectation of
his release from an imprisonment of near nine years, we were
simple enough to build ideal structures of anticipated happi-
ness; alas! as it has since appeared, never to be realised.
It is here imposed upon me to enter into the private affairs of
Bethlem, to prove why the persons 1 accuse of conspiring to
keep Mackenrot in confinement, are thus interested. As it
will,' no doubt, seem almost incredible that a gentleman of
Mr. Capper’s respectability, should have rendered such petty
though cruel chicanery necessary to support his good name;
Yet soil is, and 1 shall advance nothing save what I can
substantiate and fully prove. On the 6th of May last, two
keepers of the Criminal Wing, named William Webster and
John Howard, and a female keeper, Mary Barnes, were dis-
charged from their stations, for bringing charges, on the 7th
of April, against the resident Physician of the Hospital, Dr.
Edward Wright, and Mrs. Elizabeth Forbes, the Matron;
that the above mentioned keepers were apprehensive of
committing an irretrievable error, by administering medi-
cine which, from its being generally compounded by a person
who was totally ignorant of the profession altogether, ren-
dered it quite a matter of chance as to the effects produced.
These charges were laid before one of the Governors, a gen-
tleman of strict probity and honour, who, possessing likewise
sentiments of feeling and humanity, remonstrated with the
Matron (prior to laying them before the Committee) upon the
impropriety of her conduct. She, as a matter of course,
denied the whole affair, and when called before the Com-
mittee, was prepared with a refutation, in the shape of a note
from one Mary Baxter, who had lived servant with her, Mrs.
Forbes, at No. 9, Pleasant Place,. Lambeth—be it understood
that this No. 9 was a house which the Matron rented, against
the rules and orders, for the nominal accommodation of a gen-
tlewoman who, from motives of delicacy shall not be named.
Suffice it to say, that she was a woman of high respectability
and of unsound mind. When Webster and Howard were"


examined by a slender Committee of the Hospital, upon the
truth of their complaints, they were foiled in their attempts
as to the Matron, in consequence of Mary Baxter’s note,
already mentioned, and will shew itself in the affidavit (p, 11)
annexed, with a petition presented by them to the general
Court of Bridewell and Bethlem. All this will appear a very
inconsistent and a wide digression from the subject of my
husband’s liberation : nevertheless, however incomprehensi-
ble it.may seem to you, and persons in general, it is the main
cause of Mackenrot’s cruelincareeration, which I shall clearly
prove by what follows. The moment I was informed by ray
husband of the actions of Webster and Howard, lexclaimed,
give up all hopes of freedom ; Wright and Capper will take
especial care that you shall never see the outside of this hor-
rible abode, as I knew perfectly well that both these Gentle-
men had taken it into their wise heads the idea (simply, be-
cause conscious they merited it) that Mackenrot, when
emancipated, would publish their conduct to.the world, and
so alarmed have they ever been that not a single line is suf-
fered to pass from his hands to mine, even upon the most
private domestic occurrences, without the inspection of Dr.
Wright, and often from him it passes to the Secretary of
State’s office, for the perusal of the inspector of the Criminal
Wing, John Henry Capper, Esq. Permit me here to ac-
knowledge, without deviating, in any degree, from that re-
spect which is your due, that in justice to my sex’s ingenuity
I have, by' stratagem, often received letters from him un-
known to either officers or keepers. Do not blame me for
acting thus, as we are divided by two rows Of iron bars*
thirteen feet asunder, always one keeper to catch the words,
as they drop from our lips, and oftener than not three men.
are gaping at us the whole of the visit, besides the misery of.
seeing and hearing maniacs of the worst description, pressing,
their faces to the iron, and soliciting commiseration and re-
dress from their sorrows. I must now return to the grand
object of this appeal, and shew why you have been imposed
upon as to the actual state of Mackenrot’s mental health, John.
Henry Capper, that pink of courtesy, and cream of inspectors,
has been, for years past, in habits of strict intimacy with the
Matron, Mrs. Forbes; indeed, many have been unnatural
enough to say that he is a. favourite lover. Upon that sub-
ject they must alone answer, nor would it concern me if it
did not produce many evils to the Hospital, which, were
Capper less partial, might be remedied. However, these
lovers or friends used to meet at No. 9, Pleasant Place, about
thrice a week, and I had the happiness of seeing them from.


toy residence, then' No. 16. I believe we all know, by expe-
rience, that love goes but a very little way towards support-
ing the substantial part of-the human frame; that' even in
Arcadia, the Shepherds and Shepherdesses were vulgar enough
to eat; (and so did J. H. Capper, /Esq. and his beloved Eliza-
beth,) and if the affidavit of Mary Baxter is true, it was
the properly of Bethlem Hospital-that supplied the house
for them both. Notwithstanding these frequent meetings in
Pleasant Place, Mr. C. had free access to the Hospital, and
pretty liberally he availed himself of the welcome he found in
the main part of that building. It seems the magnet of friendr
ship or love drew him from his duty, which lay in the Criminal
Wing alone. Whether he feared contamination, or his feel-
ings were 100 sensitive to behold the acute misery experienced
by some of the unhappy inmates, arising from their state of
mind, is not for me to determine; but so it was, he has suf-
fered, nine months, to pass without the honour of a call in the
Criminal Wing. In consequence of such gross misconduct, it
cannot surprise you that he should dread a disclosure, espe-
cially having winked at the neglects of Dr. Wright, with
whom he was upon excellent terms to all appearances, and
they used to meet at the Matron’s to grand dinners, given
by her to the good Doctor and his lady, the Steward &c.,
where wit, wine, and sentiment, no doubt flowed abundantly;
therefore, when Webster and Howard were discharged, to
find if Mackenrot had ought to do with the charges made by
them, they locked him out of his room during an occasional
absence, and seized all his books, extracts, private papers,
and a Journal or diary,' which he had kept from the first hour
of his captivity (I believe not an uncustomary thing incases
of tedious and almost solitary confinement). Upon my hear-
ing of this hardship, I may more justly say robbery, I called
on Mr. Capper, requesting to know the motive, and demand-
ing his protection from the cruelty of Dr. Wright.' He
replied, u If was customary with Government prior to a
man’s discharge; (that Wright knew not'of this circum-
stance;) that he (Mackenrot; had written a violent letter
to Mr. Hume, the Member, and was, as he had heard,
in a very irritable state of mind; that he should lay his
papers' before Bethlem’s Committee; that Mackenrot was
an excellent penman, and wrote nothing but truths; that
he (Capper) desired nothing better than to peruse his papers,
as theymust be very entertaining.” This shew off and at-
tempt at wit, was spoken in a bitter tone of irony to me, the
wife of-this unfortunate and-ill-treated man. I declared, in
the early part of this letter, that I was not guided by malice


or ill will: I could almost recal my words when I take a-
retrospective glance, and call to mind hist countenance .and
manner on that day:—were my pen of wormwood and ink, of
gall, justice could not be done to his bitterness of expression
and my insulted and indignant feelings. I once was told, by
a man .of great talent, that I should find Capper a silver
itongued-serpent, and not to put faith in his words,: How truly
•was he delineated, as none but the most unfeeling couldhave
seen a woman pass the prime of her day’s in the desolate state
J have done, without commisseralion. He has beheld my
children grow from ray arms to their present stature, unedu-
cated and without a father’s protection or support. One
only Son,, the eldest of my family, he first knew in frocks,
now twelve years of age, and often, inhumane language,
remarked upon his rapid: growth and dreary prospects; but
it seems he felt not his own words. Yet if he is not a father,
he is a:husbandv and I should think, without presuming too
■far, he xould have: some slight ideaof.a husband’s acute
feelings.. As I found no redress could be obtained from him,
I measured back my steps to the Hospital, and, asked Dr.
•W.,how Mackenrot .did, at the same time observed, that I
■had heard he was in an irritable state, at which I sadly re-
gretted.- > Thrown off his guard, the Doctor exclaimed “ ir-
ritable! no; who told you so? he is the same as ever, quite
well.” Upon demanding why his papers were forcibly taken
from him, Dr. W. assured me no harm was intended, that
Mr. Capper knew not of their seizure. Upon this gross and
double falsehood, I spoke my thoughts pretty freely. About
this time, the Right Honourable Lord R. Seymour arrived in
town, one of the Governors of the Hospital, a Nobleman
who has befriended me, for some years past, with the most
substantial proofs of his humanity. ■ This gentleman had no
.sooner come to London, than he called on you to learn when
,my husband might expect to be liberated. What: passed
between you and his Lordship (he since told me) was favour-
able to my wishes, and from that conversation Lord R. S.
fully anticipated a happy termination to M.’s imprisonment.
■But upon a second. interview, his Lordship heard from you
that the visiting Physician had sent private intelligence,
through Mr; Capper, that Mackenrot had written irritating
letters, wherein he had threatened assassination to an. indi-
vidual, and that you; could not, in justice to .your fellow
creatures, grant his discharge; end his Lordship, for the same
reasons, could not recommend it. Under the belief that my
■husband was a dangerous character, it could not be ex-
pected you would free him, but it was your duty to know


upon vrhat grounds it was deemed necessary to keep him in
confinement, after the strong quarterly reports which have,
for years past, been signed in his favour by Dr. Munro ; and
if I aver that it was the first instance, since the building of the
Hospital, that a private report was required or admitted, I
do not think I speak wrong. The violent letter to Mr. Hume
I subjoin, with one to the Committee. That to Mr. Hume
•was detained by Capper, according to the fashionable Beth-
lem phrase, “ because it was inflammatory.” That to the
Committee being judged still more dangerous, Mr. Hume’s
gave way to it, and was r.o more heard of. Lord-R, Sey-
mour acknowledged to me that he had heard of this dreadful
letter, but could never get sight of it. However, Mackenrot
supplied his Lordship with a true copy, which that gentleman
pronounced to be far from violent or threatening. That to Mr.
Hume relates (as will be seen) to a request from Mr. Capper to
Mackenrot, to furnish him (Capper) with a true statement of
his claims on H. M.Treasury. That he has claims, I believe
is beyond a doubt. That his wife.and children are.reduced
to poverty, and to whom the liquidation of those claims
would be acceptable, is likewise beyond a doubt. Yet here
to particulize them would be foreign to the subject, (save
the desire Mr. Capper had to possess himself of them,)
he .having repeatedly inquired of me if I thought Macken-
rot would become troublesome to Government if liberated.
It is how high time that a strict investigation should lake
place, for the benefit of society in general, independent of
my own private wishes. The question now is, for what cause
is my husband kept in Bethlem, with whom I have not shaken
hands for near five years? It is not that he is deranged.—
Dr. Munro has reported otherwise, and ought to be put on
his oath, when he must acknowledge that he has acted by
the persuasions of Wright to send a private report toyou,
which arose from the perusal of his papers and observations.
What they are that can so injure him I know not, —thus far 1
declare, that if he is confined for his thoughts or extracts,
written on bracks of letters, or margins of books, he is the
first British subject everso treated, and sincerely hope will be
■ the last. It cannot be that Government never granted a crimi-
nal lunatic liberty. See the case of Isaac Foy, who obtained
•his freedom in less than a year’s confinement in the Hospital,
although convicted of Murder. It cannot be for want of
' exertion on the part of his friends, at least, those who wish
’to serve him, as both Lord.R. Seymour and Mr. Hume have
■strongly urged his. liberation.: It is because Mr. Capper is
conscious of the gross impropriety of his.'Conduct, and bow


richly he deserve* an exposure. He knows what a treble gamd
he, Dr. Wright, and Mrs. Forbes, have played: the Doctor ne-
glecting his patients, the Matron defrauding the stores, and
the Inspector conniving at, and partaking thereof. Thus, to
save themselves from Mackenrot’s pen, (forgetting he has a
wife, although not so learned, can speak the truth without
being reported insane for so doing,) they have told Dr.
Munro'that he was irritable during his absence; and the
Doctor (Munro) really, to my belief, being a good, upright,
and humane man, would rather, judging by himself, credit
Mackenrot’s head to be in fault, than Wright’s heart, still
he should have a greater respect for his own abilities, than
to listen to such sycophants. Were my husband really de-
ranged, I could not wish for his return home ; were it against
the laws of my country to free him, I dare not address you
thus ; but under existing circumstances, it is a duty incum-
bent on me to solicit his freedom; it is my duty, as his wife;
as a motherto his children, and injustice to myself. Deprived
of his support, I have nothing but what I-derive from my
father, a man turned of seventy; and, besides depriving him
and his family of many comforts he ought to enjoy, I am
aware of the natural, though melancholy truth, that he can-
not be spared to me many years longer, when I shall be
thrown on the mercy of the world, in a still more unprotected
state than the present. And is a whole family to suffer merely
to screen such characters as Dr. W. and Mr. Capper, who
would not hesitate at any falsehoods to answer their own
ends, who pervert good to evil ? Look at the fate of Web-
ster and Howard ; the first has a wife and two children, the
latter a son, neither have been employed since the 6th of
May last: what for? simply because they refused to risk the
lives of patients under their care, by administering medicine
which might deprive them of life, in lieu of restoring health;
They likewise acted up to the book of rules and orders each
servant has given him upon his entrance to the Hospital.—
Therefore the keepers have now tacit permission to act as
they please, and cheat with impunity. At the same time, I
think it necessary (as the public will, if they please to take
the trouble, see this letter,) to add, that I have always found
the keepers civil and humane men. That the dreadful pro-
ceedings often suspected to exist in Bethlem is altogether un-
known. The cruelty of Dr. Wright is not of that kind to
inflict corporeal punishment, or privations of food; ail is
cleanly and wholesome. That Dr. Munro, had he been suf-
fered to follow his own free wijl, I should not be necessitated
to act as I have done. He, perhaps, knew not, that upon the


privation of his room and books, Mackenrot was even denied
half a sheet of paper, and the keepers were told; if'they ini
dulged him with any, they should be discharged. That
his upon procuring a sheet from one of the patients, who'sold
it, his little store was taken from him, thus irritating the un*
happy men under their care, and until your humanity granted
him a quire per month, upon the application of Lord R. Sey-
mour, he was without any source of; amusement whatever;
and I am inclined to think, if you were acquainted with every
particular, you would have no hesitation in granting his dis-
charge. Lord R. Seymour desired Mackenrot,’before he left
town, about three weeks since, in the presence i,of' Dr-
Wright, to write to.him every week, and being a Governor, hi*
letters would pass without inspections Lord R. S. requested
this from the very best motive, that he might form his own opi-
nion to his sanity. This did not suit Wright, although he made
no objection at the time. He refused to forward the first letter
without the usual overhaul. ■ I refer to your own judgment,
that if Mackenrot wiites false, he (Wright) can refute it; if
truth, he ought not to fear him. It is, certainly, an arduous
task for me.to court the public eye by this bold step, yet
having no alternative, that alone must extenuate. Will not
every man, upon referring to his own heart, acknowledge he
would wish his wife to do the same ? then let no person say the
affairs of madmen are not his. It is every man’s concern!
(here is not an individual who can boast that he shall be ex-
empt from that dreadful calamity. How long we can pride
ourselves on strength of intellect God alone knows. If
respectable birth, an education upon the most liberal scale,
and abilities of the highest order, could ensure unshaken
sanity, then had my husband not spent his best days in a
madhouse. But after years of misery, to be reported fit for
society, without qualification ; to be upon the eve of are-union
with his family; to be detained upon God knows what; if
tantalizing his best feelings can be borne without a relapse,
what can there be to dread ? There is not a man in the
Hospital, keeper or not, save Dr. W. who will not say that
he always acted in a mild and gentlemanly manner : but lie
writes what displeases the Doctor, and for that confined.—
Mr. Owen Daly has promised, should it be necessary, to
make oath to his sanity, as far as he saw. This Mr. Daly
was his keeper for three years, until three weeks ago, and had
an opportunity of seeing him at all times and in all humours.
Having now done justice to the honest and dishonest, I quietly
anticipate a prosecution for libel, from Mr. Capper, Dr.
Wright, and Mrs. Forbes. “ The greater the truth, the


greater the libel.”' Yet, as it can make but little difference to
me, if I inhabit one of His Majesty’s prison’s or aparish poor-
house, lam perfectly indifferent to the result. All I aim at
is my husband’s restoration to the free air of Heaven, to
protect me and his children. I regret it has not been in my
power to refrain from attacking one of my own sex, especially
one who has behaved towards me with politeness} but it was
not possible to shew Mr. Capper in his true colours without.
I shall now conclude, with the most earnest solicitation for
redress, and an impartial inquiry into the facts of my hus»
band’s detention, and into the truths of this foul and most
inhuman conspiracy, and that you will be pleasedto reflect,
that a man has an undoubted right to commit his thoughts to
paper without being answerable to any human being, ranch
less be confined thereupon. It is an unheard of crime. Apd
that you will condescend to peruse the letters hereto annexed,
and decide if they savour of madness, at the same time re-
collect they were forced from him as cries are from the
wounded wretch under military discipline. He suffered, and
made his sufferings known. 1 suffer .threefold, for my hus-
band, for ray children, for myself. Therefore, let me again
beseech you to grant me justice, and should my feeble pen
bring conviction to your mind ; consequently, happiness to
my family, I shall ever rejoice at the temerity which urged
me forward against my general habits and ideas.
With every sentiment of respect,
Sir, I have the honour to be,
Your most obedient and humble Servant,
Frances Mackenrot.
22, Elliott’s Row, Prospect Place, Newington.
AFFIDAVIT OF MRS. MARY BAXTER.
London (to wit).
■ Mary Baxter, of Whitmore House, Hoxton, in the county
of Middlesex, Nurse, rnaketh oath and saith, that from the
month of July, 1821, till the month of July, 1822, she re-
sided at No. 9, Pleasant Place, Lambeth, in- the county of
Surrey, as servant to Mrs. Elizabeth Forbes, who is, and
was then, Matron of Bethlem Hospital; and during which
time this deponent received, from the said Elizabeth Forbes, a
great variety of articles, and particularly the following :
bread, butter, cheese, meat, soap, candles, sheets, blankets,
and brushes, all which this deponent believes to have been


Ihe property of, and belonging to the, Governors of Bethlem
Hospital. And this deponent further saith, that all the said
articles were used and applied by this deponent, brand about
the business, and or the use of the said Elizabeth Forbes.
And this deponent further saith, that she addressed 1 a note
to the said Elizabeth Forbes, on the twentieth day of April
last, and which said note, this deponent swears, was copied
by her from a paper written by Mrs. Eucrest, sister to the said
Elizabeth Forbes,
Sworn before me, this 26th? (Signed! Mary Baxter.
day of May, 1824. *
(Signed! R. Waithman, Mayor.
PETITION OF MARY BARNES, WILLIAM WEBSTER,
AND JOHN HOWARD,
TO THE WORSHIPFUL, THE PRESIDENT, TREASURER,
AND GOVERNORS, OF THE RORAL HOSPITAL OP
BRIDEWELL AND BETHLEM.
The humble Petition of Mary Barns, William Webster, and
John Howard,
Sheweth,
That your Petitioners were all three discharged from their
places, in Bethlem Hospital, upon the 6th day of May last,
at an hour’s police, without any imputation against them of
fault or offence.
That your Petitioners, in the late charges made against
their superiors in Bethlem Hospital, were instigated by no
motives of malice or ill-will, but considered that they were
acting upon their standing rules and orders, viz.
“ It is the duty of every officer and servant belonging to
“both Hospitals, generally to promote the true interest of
“ the charities, as well by his or her own diligence or exam-
“ pie in the department wherein he or she may be employed,
“ as by recommending to others a strict observance of the
“ rules and orders ; upon no account conniving at, or con-
“ cealing any, infringement on them by others.” .
That your Petitioners now firmly believe that they can sub-
stantiate, upon the most unquestionable testimony, every al-
legation or charge that they have made upon this occasion,
and now humbly submit to the consideration of the Gover-
nors, the affidavit of Mary Baxter, upon the matter of those
charges against the Matron, Elizabeth Forbes.


That your Petitioners cannot but feel themselves exceed-
ingly aggrieved by 'the undeserved chastisement they have
received, and now humbly crave that redress which the Ge-
neral Court, in its justice and wisdom, may consider their due.
And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
Mary Barkes, William Webster, John Howard,
LETTER FROM A. MACKENROT,
TO J. HUME, ESQ., M.P.
Sir, Bethlem Hospital, 13th May, 1824.
I am forced to entreat you, once more, to honour me with
your presence in this Hospital, as soon as you can make it
convenient, to enable me to submit (o you circumstances of
such a nature that you will deem it expedient to lay them’
before Mr. Peel himself—and eventually before Parliament,
’ere the advancing state of the Session precludes or frustrates
the efficacy of such a measure.
Mr. Capper, inspecting the Criminal Wing for the first
time since last August, on Tuesday, the 11th instant, in lieu
of any information respecting my discharge, merely desired
me to furnish him with an account of my claims on His Majes-
ty’s Treasury, which I cannot comply with, as the officers of this
Hospital have thought proper to take all my papers and books
away from me; and as I have met with sO many delays and
disappointments in that quarter already, (the manly and can->
did speech of Mr. Peel alone excepted,) I am naturally anx- r
ious to avoid giving a pretex to new ones, as my having-
claims on Government or not, should make no difference in
my discharge from a madhouse; especially as H. M. Treasury,
is no more bound or likely to abide by Mr. C/s opinion, than
your humble servant. Besides, if the Home Department
intends to confine me till my claims for captures, erroneously
condemned as Droits de June Corono, are leisurely dis-
cussed and litigated, such long winded proceedings would
even exceed the Chancery delays respecting the scite and
reliques of a late Chichester windmill, and neither myself or
the present generation, or the possible remains of either, would
endure to so remote a period, of such snail paced progress
of the law and Government clemency. The captors of the
Manilla and St. Eustachius have had a pretty good specimen,
most of whom perished in the Hospitals of the East and West
Indies unpaid. However, I shall be guided in this, as in all
other public matters, solely by your advice.
Having the honour to be, &c. &c. &c.,,
A, Mackenrot,


COPY OF A LETTER FROM A. MACKENROT,
TO THE COMMITTEE OF BETIILEM-
My Lords and Gentlemen,— 13th May, 18J4.
• Painful necessity, nay, absolute compulsion, and by no
means that stale joke, the Cacoilhes Scribendi, (the itch for
sqribling,) on former occasions imputed to me, causes my
present application to your Committee. If you
possess the spirit of men—the feelings of Gentlemen—the
charity of Christians, and the sense of dignity and decorum
belonging to your station in life—you will not hesitate a mo-
ment' to order the instant restoration of my private papers,
seized by the resident officers since Monday—an atrocity
unprecedented, thank God, in Newgate, or in any prison in
England, as they possibly contain my conjectures and
thoughts on domestic occurrences, which no man in the
universe has a right to pry into ; and is such an outrage to
be endured in an asylum, in a charity, professing to sooth
the mind and restore hurled intellects ? Will you be so far
forgetful of your.sacred and bounden duty, to suffer a pa-
tient, acknowledged to be perfectly sane, and now upon the
point of being at last discharged, will you suffer a man so
situated, to be thus brutally annoyed, irritated, and perhaps
eventually driven into the horrors of despair, and of the
dreadful malady of which he is novv admitted exempt?—
Would you sanction such a barbarity—such a tremendous
risk—just for the sake of bolstering up the rotten cause—
and the continuation in place of an Apothecary, who, to say
the very least of him, does his duty by proxy; (barring that
of receiving his salary, which he does in person,) and by
what proxy ? by deputizing an ignorant porter, unable to
read the very labels on the boxes and bottles of his shop, or
to decypher the prescriptions of physicians ? and of a
Steward, who robs the patients of part of their pittance of
animal food, and very wisely sells his own ample allowance of
meat for ready money, and hath put the proceeds thereof, for
years,'undisturbed, into his own pockets, and that, too, with
the permission,, privity, or connivance, of your vigilent and
upright Superintendent! What a pity that Monsieur Le-
sage, the author of that inimitable novel, Gil Bias, was un-
acquainted with this refinement in hospital economy; merely
introducing a Steward at Oviedo or Valladolid, who gets
rich by managing the concerns of the poor; and that
still superior wit, Cervantes, so humourously describing an
imaginary madhouse scene at not practically


learned in Bethlem, why emptiness of the stomach and wind*
produce madness in the brains of patients, in the exact pro-
portion and the ratio of the cash it throws into the filling
pockets of a predatory Steward. ■ And is it possible, that for
screening such official criminals, your-Committee sanctions
the worrying of your patients’ minds, and the wanton lacera-
tion of. their best and tenderest feelings, and most acute
sensibility, and that, too,' after the lamentable experience in
the case of Francis VVylkes, a young man in this building,'
driven mad by being wantonly locked up from the yard for
merely throwing over the walls a love-letter to a servant girl.
Though Wylkes was previously quite well for years, and,
barring his offence, entitled to his discharge, but in conse-
quence of such improper irritation, he was driven into re-
peated fits of confirmed lunacy and mania, nay, even brought
to death’s door. Thus far your Committee will permit me to
tell you, that you incur an awful responsibility, if not
promptly redressing so abominable a grievance. How
would you put up with such unprofessional and disgraceful
treatment of a brother or sister of yours, by any apothecary
out of doors ? How unceremoniously would such Knights
of the Pestle be dismissed from your premises, amidst the
sneers, and, peradventure, the kicks and cuffs of your foot-
men? And unless you manifest the same, or similar sym-
pathy, for “ your poor brethren,” as Bishop Atterbury called
the inmates of Bethlem Hospital, your vaunted professions
of charity and humanity, will pass, in the eye of a discern-
ing public, for rank hypocrisy; “for dowlas!—filthy dow-
las!” The sanity of patients being the first and paramount
object of an hospital, whilst the employment of such worse
than questionable characters, can never be a legitimate one.
Do not allow your better judgments to be run away with by
an account of a pretended search for penknives, for no such
thing was contemplated at the time, and only afterwards
trumped up; besides, sharp and edged tools would be safer
in my hands, than in the miserably nervous grasp of Dr.
Wright, to whose unsteady lancet you are so ill-advised, as
to entrust the veins and hearts blood of the unhappy patients
under your delusive protection. His life I have twice saved
by effectually dissuading one patient from piercing his breast,
and another from splitting his skull, with instruments per-
fectly adequate to the purpose, under the guidance of un-
erring hands, tried and experienced in deeds of blood, of
which there is a score here, and no man more universally de-
tested than he is. .But such are my thanks for all these
courtesies, as likewise for my forbearance to furnish the pa-


lientswiih extracts of their cases, from the celebrated " Ex»
tracts in Bethlem," which-I had, andean again obtain, and
which would have raised a mutiny in the house; besides’
my being able to prove him, by the most irrefragable chain,
intrinsic and extrinsic, direct and indirect evidence, to the
satisfaction of any Jury in England (some infatuated old
gentlemen in your Committee-room alone excepted), to have
been the author of, and for the printing and enlarging a se-
cond edition, of which false and scandalous production he
may possibly destine some garbled extracts from my seized
papers. However, in case of his being hereafter killed here,
as patients were before, which God avert, you would have to
pension his widow and children the same as if he was a good
and efficient Doctor, Apothecary, and Surgeon, though, by
these treble callings, He never in his life earned £lO out of
Bethlem before (as he acknowledged to me), and perhaps
never will hereafter. lam desired, by Mr. Capper, to fur-
nish him an account of my claims on Government, but being
excluded from my room, books, and papers, cannot do so
with arithmetical precision. Though I draw the inference of
Government, even if they really meant it well, such are their
proverbial delays, as I have experienced, to my sorrow, on
former .payments, as to dread, at present, a postponement of
my liberation under this pretence. I trust your Committee
will spare me the necessity of an appeal to a higher quarter,
to yourselves displeasure, and to your Hospital discredit, in-
separable from such a step. Having the honour to be,
My Lords and Gentlemen,
Your most humble Servant,
A. Mackenrot.
Printed by Frances Mackenrot, No. 22, Elliott’s Row,
St. George’s Fields.
