

A
LETTER,
IN
VINDICATION OF THE PRINCIPLES
OF THE
REFORMATION,
ADDRESSED TO
ROGER THERRY, ESQ.,
Commissioner of the Courts of Requests in New South Wales,
IN CONSEQUENCE OF A
SPEECH DELIVERED BY HIM,
IN THE ROMAN CATHOLIC CHAPEL, AT SYDNEY,
ON SUNDAY, JULY 29, 1832,
BY THE
REV. WM. GRANT BROUGHTON, M.A.
Arhdeacon of New South Wales and its Dependencies,
SECOND EDITION.
Sydney:
PRINTED BY STEPHENS & STOKES, 5, KING-STREET.
1832.




A LETTER,
&C. &C.
Sydney, August 27, 1832.
Sir, — You will require, I am persuaded, no other ex-
planation of my reasons for thus addressing you, than that
which I have already put you in possession of; namely, that
as you, in commenting upon a private letter, had taken oc-
casion publicly to controvert the main principle of the
Reformation, it was proper that some notice should as
publicly be taken of jour arguments. In a controversy of
this description, turning wholly upon a question in theology,
it may be asked why are the opinions of a layman se-
lected as the object of special remark ? I reply, because
at the late Meeting in the Roman Catholic Cghapel you
came forward as the most prominent defender of the Ro-
man Catholic system, and of the practice which has pre-
vailed of its receiving support and encouragement from
Protestants. I question the propriety of bringing such
subjects into discussion before an auditory thus assembled ;
and am still less satisfied that Religion will derive benefit
from the publication of your observations in the columns
of a Newspaper. But as you, Sir, have thought yourself
authorised to employ that mode of expressing and circu-
lating your opinions, you must not be offended by the no-
tice of them, which anxiety for their own pure scriptural
faith may draw from Protestants.
It may be said that the tenor of the letter which
you were commenting upon, proved the wish and


intention of the writer to provoke discussion. Allow me
to remind you that the provocation was given, and
the discussion entered upon, by yourself. The letter
of Sir Edward Parry was written in reply to an appli-
cation from you to give his active support to mea-
sures which had for their object the extension and perpe-
tuation of the Roman Catholic Religion. Such an appli-
cation, addressed to a Protestant, carries a most offensive
imputation. It implies that the person addressed has no
conviction at heart of the truth of his own profession ; but
that while he outwardly appeals to the Scriptures as his
only guide, and supplicates the mercy of God through the
merits of his Saviour alone, he is yet so little in earnest
upon these points as to be ready to lend his aid to the ad-
vancement of a system which lays down a directly oppo-
site rule of faith, and pleads the merits and intercession of
created and sinful beings unitedly with those of the eter-
nal Son of God. By asking a Protestant to aid you in
such a cause, you virtually tell him that he has no heart
and no sincerity ; but that you believe him to be a person
prepared to sanction contradictions. Sir Edward Parry, I
am well assured, is able to defend himself ; and therefore
shall offer no other observation than that he has my cor-
dial respect and my thanks (if these are of any value in his
estimation) for the manliness and intrepidity with
which, when thus attacked, he has expressed his senti-
ments. Such feelings as he has manifested, will, lam
quite aware, receive very little encouragement under the
prevailing system of phlegmatic and listless unconcern
respecting matters of faith and principle. It is, I know,
accounted a proof of a contracted and illiberal disposition to
manifest any degree of earnestness upon that subject, which
ought to take the lead of all other subjects in our contem-
plations and affections. It must be obvious to every ob-
server, that the system of the Romish Church at the pre


sent moment, is to lull the jealousy of Protestants ; and,
not content with reducing them to indifference and inac-
tion, to induce the luke-warm and unsuspecting to lend their
active aid to a cause, which, if they knew their own prin-
ciples, they must think it worse than sacrilege in any
degree to espouse. You could scarcely expect, Sir, that
we (for I speak in the name of all reflecting Protestants)
should be content without notice or remonstrance to wit-
ness a consolidation of this system, which has been already
carried on too long. It has become our duty to speak out.
The opposition which you have already encountered from
one individual will have the effect, I trust, of inducing
others to pause, and reflect upon their own responsibility
here and hereafter, before they lend their aid, upon any
consideration whatever, to that which they are not religi-
ously persuaded is agreeable to the truth.
That which misleads the generality of Protestants, and de-
livers them over bound hand and foot into the power of their
adversaries, to work for their interest and according to
their pleasure, is forgetfulness or inconsideration of their
own principles. Why are they Protestants ? What
caused their ancestors to become Protestants ? It was the
conviction they entertained that the truth of God and the
purity of the Gospel could not be maintained under the
system which the Church of Rome sought to force upon
them. Ido not charge all Protestants who act differently
from Sir Edward Parry, with deliberately intending to
promote error in religion ; but I cannot acquit them of in-
difference which has all the ill-effects of such an inten-
tion, and is, therefore, but in a limited degree less cul-
pable.
The tendency of late proceedings, and especially of the
speech delivered by you in the Roman Catholic Chapel,
is to encourage still more in the Protestant mind this


latitude of thinking- with respect to the standard of Faith.
This gives you two advantages ; ths one immediate, the
other in prospect. First, you prevail on them, under pre-
text of liberality, to help you forward in your religious
views; and in the next place you may hope that, having
cast away all concern for their own faith, they may in due
season become more ready recipients of another. I say
this under a persuasion, the fruit of long- enquiry and re-
flection, that the Churches of England and Rome, having
adopted first principles so different, must ever remain dis-
tinct and adverse Neither can gain a religious advantage
but at the other’s expense. Believe me, Sir, it is not any
want of charity, but it is love of truth which leads me
to make this assertion. God forbid that we as individuals
should not live together in harmony and peace. But I can-
not be silent when I find you engaged in an attempt to shake
the fidelity of Protestants to their own communion, and to
obtain from them a positive effort in favour of yours. I
have no disposition to question your right to set off your
religion to the best advantage by any exertions of your
own and of those who think with you ; but I do and must
ever object to the enlistment of professed Protestants on
your side.
If indeed a man have not made up his mind upon this
most momentous controversy, he is not worthy to be called
a religious man. He may take part with you or against
you as the whim may incline him ; but his support or his
opposition do not deserve to be attributed to any feeling
more respectable than that which I have assigned. But if
he, after seriously asking himself the question, ‘‘What is
truth,’ shall have decided within himself that truth is to
be sought for upon Protestant principles, or from the
Scriptures alone, that man, I do say, shews little reverence
for the appointments of God, when he takes an active


part in support of a system which according- to his own
acknowledgment is founded upon error.
To secure myself from the charg-e of misrepresenting-
the principles of either Church, I will place them here in
contrast with each other ; premising- only, that if I were
acquainted with any more authentic exposition of the
principles of the Church of Rome than is contained in the
Decrees of the Council of Trent, 1 would most readily
apply to it for information. At the fourth Session of that
Assembly, and by its supposed infallible authority, the rule
of Faith among- Roman Catholics was thus fixed and
declared. “ This sacred oecumenical and general Council
of Trent, lawfully assembled in the Holy Spirit, and
presided over by three Leg-ates of the Apostolic See,
having- this object in view that, errors being removed, the
real purity of the Gospel may be preserved in the Church ;
(which, promised aforetime by the prophets in the Holy
Scriptures, our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, first
promulg-ated by his own mouth, and afterwards ordained
to be preached to every creature by the Apostles as being
the fountain of all saving truth and discipline of morals ;
knowing-, also, that this truth and discipline is contained
in the written books, and in the unwritten traditions which
having- been received by the Apostles from the mouth of
Christ himself, or from the dictates of the Holy Spirit,
were handed down and transmitted even to us ;) following-
the examples of the orthodox Fathers, receives and
venerates with equal sentiments of piety and reverence all
the books, as well of the Old as of the New Testament,
since one God was the author of them both, and also the
Traditions relating- as well to Faith as to Morals, inasmuch
as preceding- from the mouth of Christ, or dictated by
the Holy Spirit, they have been preserved in an uninter-
rupted succession in the Catholic Church.”


The corresponding' declaration of the fundamental prin-
ciple of the Church of England, in which indeed all the
Reformed Churches acquiesce, is set forth in her Sixth
Article. “ Holy Scripture containeth all thing's necessary
to salvation, so that whatsoever is not read therein, nor
be proved thereby, is not to be required of any man that it
should be believed as an article of faith, or be thought
requisite or necessary to salvation.”
I have placed these contradictory declarations thus
directly in contrast, in order that the inconsistency may
be made manifest, of a Protestant lending his aid to
uphold the Roman Catholic Faith. He is giving his
assent at once to adverse propositions. He is affirming
with the same breath that Holy Scripture contains all
things necessary to salvation ; and yet, that some truths
necessary to salvation are not contained in Scripture,
but are handed down by Tradition only. He acknow-
ledges that nothing is to be required of any man as an
article of faith, or to be thought necessary to salvation,
unless it be contained in, or may be proved by, Scripture ;
and yet he comes forward as the advocate of those who
exclude from salvation, and pronounce an anathema upon,
himself and all others who will not believe very many
things which are confessedly not in the Scriptures, and, we
maintain, cannot be proved thereby. How any person
can lend his sanction, encouragement, and assistance to
obtain the means of propagating what he acknowledges to
be a religious error, and yet escape the guilt of prevarica-
tion, I confess my own inability to discover. If he be
persuaded that the Scriptures are the word of
Truth, and that the Truths which they contain, are
the most glorious inheritance of mankind, it must be
a miserable sophistry which prevails upon him, for
any consideration, to further the views of those who
set up a different rule contradictory to the Bible.—


It is, no doubt, very consistent with your principles to say,
as you are reported to have done, that you “ connect your
belief of the Scriptures with a faith on the authority of
which they restbut what proof do you give, that be-
cause the authenticity of the Scriptures is proved by tes-
timony, or, if you please, by tradition—tradition is, there-
fore, of equal authority with the Scriptures, and binds our
assent to many points of faith and practice concerning
which the Scripture is silent? You adduce the well-
known saying of St. Augustine, that “he would not be-
lieve the Gospel unless he were compelled by the autho-
rity of the Church.” This is one of those pointed sen-
tences into which men of ardent tempers are occasionally
betrayed. They dart forth a sentiment which, though
true in a certain limited sense, is not true without that
limitation. The consequence is, that even with the best
intentions, they do much mischief; because the world at
large is apt to understand them literally, and nine persons
take the maxim in a wrong sense, for one who takes it in
the right one. W ith submission to St. Augustine, I main-
tain, God has not so left himself without witness,
but that an individual possessing the Gospels, might
be so impressed with their internal evidence as to
embrace and be persuaded of the reality of the things
which they testify as pertaining to salvation, even
though he had never heard of the Church, or of an
assemblage of believers agreeing in the reception of the
Gospel from the earliest age. Still, such an individual must
be anxious to know what was the origin of such remark-
able books; when, or by whom, or unto whom, they were
first promulgated ; how received, how preserved. Not
knowing anything of the history of the Church, he could
have no assurance upon these points; and consequently
his faith, however sincere, would be imperfect or encum-
bered with difficulties. For the prevention or removal of
B


eueh difficulties, St. Augustine declares recourse must be
Lad to the Church, to its testimony or authority. Un-
doubtedly he does. But then, Sir, I must ask you, What
Church? I know the inveteracy with which those of
your persuasion are accustomed, whenever they hear or
read of “ The Church/' to apply it to the Church of
Rome ; as if that were the Church or the Catholic Church
of Christ. But, indeed, let me assure you, this is a very
great error, and the source probably of almost all the
other errors into which you have fallen. St. Augustine
does not speak of the authority of the Church of Rome,
as leading him to put faith in the Gospel; but he refers to
the Church in its proper and universal sense, and to its
tradition or testimony as the concurrent opinion of all be-
lievers every where. And certainly in this sense, the unani-
mous testimony of the Church does confer upon the Gos-
pels a moral and reasonable assurance of authenticity ; such
as must determine every candid enquirer to receive them as
of divine origin and authority. Such an assurance, may I
without offence observe, they never could possess, if the
Church by which they are attested were no other than the
single Church of Rome. Can you fail besides to perceive what
force this very declaration of St. Augustine has, or ought
to have, against the reception of tradition? He declares
that he could not receive the Gospel except upon the au-
thority of the Church, or of unbroken and universal tes-
timony. Sir, this is the very reason why we Protestants
reject tradition ; because you have never been able to prove
with respect to any one tradition, concerning either faith
or morals, that there exists on its behalf any such unbroken
and universal acknowledgement, by means of which it
could be traced down from the days of the Apostles, to the
present age. If you can produce any doctrine so attested
I will pledge myself to show that it is either contained in
the Scripture, or may be deduced from it; and that it is


also contained among the acknowledged doctrines of the
Church of England.
From Augustine let us pass to St. Paul, whom you quote
as another authority in favour of tradition. “ Continue,”
he says to Timothy,* “in the things which thou hast
learned and hast been assured of, knowing of whom thou
hast learned them.’' The Apostle in other passages salutes
Timothy as his “ dearly beloved,” as his “ own son in
the faith and lam therefore little inclined to dispute
that St. Paul is here referring to himself as the spiritual
father and instructor of the son of Eunice; and that on
the assurance of his authority, Timothy was exhorted and
required to “continue in the things which he had learned.”
But before you require us to receive and apply this as the
rule of our own faith, let me request you will attentively
consider the difference of circumstances. Who was Saint
Paul ? an Apostle who had seen the Lord Jesus Christ;
and had been instructed by him in all the essential facts
and doctrines of the Gospel. Even though the same word
“ tradition” may be used to describe the oral communica-
tions of St. Paul to Timothy, as well as the unwritten
deposit of which your Church professes to be the guar-
dian, I must ever most earnestly contend that in the reality
of the things spoken of there is no sameness, and scarcely
any resemblance. It is a most inconsequent mode of rea-
soning to infer that because an inspired Apostle, who had
received instruction from the Lord himself, was able by
word of mouth to transmit the same without error or
abatement to his own immediate disciple, therefore the
same may with equal certainty be handed down in the same
manner through so many ages ; and that we, who cannot
possibly trace out the first origin of certain tenets or follow
them downward in a connected stream, must nevertheless
•II Tim. 111. 14.


receive them with a submission as implicit as that with
which Timothy received the words of the Lord spoken by
Paul. Sir, I must shew myself a Protestant here. On be-
half of all my brethren I must protest against such a tyran-
nical assumption. Before we acquiesce in the traditions
which your Church seeks to impose upon us, and by means
of which she may impose any doctrines that she pleases, we
must in all reason require you to prove that we have as per-
fect means as timothy possessed, of “ knowing from whom
we learned them." And let me remark with what sur-
prise I observe that in your quotation of this authority you
should have stopped exactly where you did. Why not
proceed with those words of the Apostle which immedi-
ately follow ? “ And that from a child thou hast known
the Holy Scriptures which are able to make thee wise
unto Salvation through faith, which is in Christ Jesus. All
Scripture is given by inspiration of God ; and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect,
throughly furnished unto all good woi'ks” According to
my plain understanding the man of God cannot be more
than “ perfecthe cannot come behind in any spiritual
gift if he be “ throughly furnished unto all good works."
And these things, we have assurance, the Scriptures are
competent to effect for him. Our Saviour also points out
these, not obscurely, as the word of God, and as the sole
foundation of belief in him. “Ye have not his word,”
he says “ abiding in you ; for whom he hath sent, him ye
believe not."* What course then does he enjoin them to
pursue for remedy of these mortal deflciences ?or in order
that they might have the word of God in them, and be led
to a belief in his Son. He does not recommend their hav-
ing recourse to tradition. No ; but he emphatically gives
them this direction; “ Search the Scriptures ; for in them
John V. 88.


ye think ye have eternal life ; arid they are they which
testify of me.’’* All our desire is that with respect to the
Scriptures of the New Testament you would allow us to
come to the same conclusion which our Saviour held con-
cerning* the old. The argument employed by those on your
side in favour of tradition, is briefly this ; that several years
elapsed after the Ascension of our Lord before any single
book of the New Testament was written, and many more
before they became universally known, and were collected,
and received as divine ; that during- this interval, the sole
vehicle of instruction was oral tradition, and therefore that
when at leng-th the written word was added to the un-
written, the latter would not on that account forfeit the
authority which it had previously enjoyed. But what au-
thority have you for this opinion ? not the decisions of
Christ with respect to the Old Testament, nor those of his
Apostles relative to the new. The conclusion to which
they lead us is, that the written word was given, not to
serve as a rule of faith conjointly with tradition, but with
the express desig-n of superseding: the authority and use of
tradition altogether. The appointments of God are uni-
form, and his dealing's run’ parallel under both dispensa-
tions. The relig-ion of the patriarchs was preserved by
tradition during- 430 years ; as that of Christ was for about
30. Then, in the former case, when it is to be presumed
that tradition was no long-er safely to be trusted, the Books
of Moses were written ; and afterwards those of the Psalms
and Prophets. The Old Testament therefore, it may with
as much justice be said, was added to the previously exist-
ing- traditions ; many of which were accumulated and pre-
served by the Jews as supplementary to and explanatory
of, the written word. The Jews too had apparently very
strong: grounds to justify their appeal to tradition; among
which were to be reckoned the great length of time during-
* John V. v. 39.


which the knowledge of God had been preserved by it
alone; and the injunction delivered to them by Moses be-
fore his decease. “ Remember the days of old ; consider
the years of many generations ; ask thy father and he will
shew thee; thy elders and they will tell thee.”* Has the
Church of Rome any text to produce, in favour of her
traditions, equally pertinent with the above ? By no means.
If then our Lord directed the Jews, who had such an ar-
gument on their side, to “ Search the Scriptures,” and
charged them with having “made the word of God of
none effect by their traditions,” how much more forcibly
would he have urged this against you ?
We may thus reason very strongly from analogy
against the authority of tradition; because no expla-
nation can be given why the same principle upon
which it was condemned under the Jewish dispensation
ought not to be extended to it under the Christian. In
fact, if we examine the declarations of the authors of the
New Testament, we shall find that their very purpose
in becoming writers, was to furnish security against the
errors which even in that early age, a reliance on tradition
was beginning to introduce. St. John assures us that if
the things which Jesus did should be written every one, the
world itself would scarcely contain the records, t Here
assuredly was an ample and edifying field for the exercise
of traditional fidelity. And yet what has it done ? and
why has it done no more ? Of all the sayings of Jesus
unrecorded by the Evangelists, but one has been preserved;
and that one has been preserved in consequence of having
found a place in the writings of St. Paul. Speaking of
himself, St. John most significantly says—“ This is the
disciple that testifieth of these things, and WTote these
things;” and again “these are written, that ye might
• Deuteronomy xxxii, 7, f John xxi, 25.


believe that Jesus is the Christ, the son of God, and that
believing" ye might have life through his name.”* It is
very true that in an earlier stage of the faith, St. Paul com-
mended certain traditions to Timothy upon the ground ot
his knowing from whom he learned them; and I have
stated reasons why this, as a temporary resource, was suf-
ficient, so long as the Apostles were in existence, to main-
tain, and give assurance of, the conformity of such tradi-
tions with the doctrine delivered by Christ. But at a later
period, when this assurance must be greatly weakened or
altogether fail, as the last of the Apostolic body was on
the point of departure from the world, the resource of
tradition was to be superseded by another authority less
liable to uncertainty and exception. This the expression
of St. John plainly intimates, as he says explicitly that he
wrote these things in order that they might be believed.—
And let it be remarked what this belief was to include.
Even the cardinal doctrine “ that Jesus is the Christ, the
Son of God that doctrine on which our Lord declares
that he would “ build his Church,’’t It is not my inten-
tion to enter into the whole question of tradition, which
has filled so many volumes. I would rather direct atten-
tion to a few points only, and such as have not been gene-
rally dwelt upon in connexion with this argument. Look
therefore at the proem of St. Luke’s Gospel, in composing
which he was encouraged, perhaps assisted, by St. Paul.
His design in writing, he most convincingly explains, was
to counteract the inaccurate representations which had even
then arisen from incautious reliance on tradition. These
are his words —“ For as much as many have taken in hand
to set forth in order a declaration of those things which
are most surely believed among us, even as they delivered
them unto us, which from the beginning were eye witnesses
and ministers of the word, it seemed good to me also, having
* John xx, 81 and xxi, 24 f Matt, xvi, 18.


had perfect understanding of all things from the very fir*t,
to write unto thee in order, most excellent Theophilus’
that thou mightest know the certainty of those things
wherein thou hast been instructed.”* In this passage
there is a plain reference to tradition ; to a statement set
forth ‘‘ as they delivered, who were, from the beginning,
eye-witnesses and ministers of the word.” It ”is very
plain also that errors had crept into the “declaration” or
dig-est so set forth; otherwise the circumstance of its
having- been given to the world, could not reasonably
have caused St. Luke to think it incumbent on him also
to write. You will say probably that he still does not
object to the oral account itself, as delivered by the eye-
witnesses from the beg-inning ; but only to those written
accounts which, professing to be derived from them,
conveyed an erroneous representation. It is true. Never-
theless the inference is unavoidable—that St. Luke thought
the -fidelity and certainty of the oral accounts might °be
impaired by the emission of such inaccurate written
accounts ; and that to restrain the consequent growth of
uncertainties, it was necesssary for him to investigate all
things from the beginning, and commit them to writing
If then, during the life time of the Apostles, a danger' of
this kind is proved to have existed, and could thus only be
guarded against, what assurance or safety can we have in
building our faith upon traditions which remained for an
indefinite period unwritten, and until long after all oppor-
tunity and possibility of tracing them to their origin had
passed away ? It i s worthy of observation, that very
many of the Books of the New Testament were written
for the express purpose of determining and protecting the
purity of particular doctrines, as they came to be succes-
sive y controverted. Ihe Gospel of St. John was designed to
assert the Divinity of Christ against the errors of Cerinthus;
Luke I, 1.


the epistles to the Romans and Galatians were meant to
settle the controversies concerning: the abolition of the
Mosaic Law, and the doctrine of justification ; the epistle
to the Hebrews is a formal vindication of the atonement ;
and in like manner St. Luke’s intention was to set down
such an account of the words and actions of Christ, as
should be sufficient to clear away the misrepresentations to
which they had been exposed. Now, if it be true that
all those doctrines, which you maintain upon the credit of
tradition, were received by the Apostles from the mouth of
Christ, how is it to be accounted for that his declarations
relating: to these doctrines were not perverted in common
with his other discourses, as from the absence of all
recorded attempts to vindicate and explain them, we must
conclude they were not ? If he communicated to his
Apostles, and they taught their converts, the doctrines of
transubstantiation and purgatory for example, it is very
singular, assuredly, that these should not have given rise
to difference of opinion, so as in some part or other
of the writings of the Apostles to be brought into dis-
cussion, as well as the atonement and justification. It is
highly remarkable, that when St. Luke found it necessary
to write a corrected statement of those discourses of
Christ, which might confirm Theophilus in the things
which he had learned, there should not be contained in
any one of the discourses which he records a single
allusion to any of the peculiar or traditionary dogmas of
you*' Church. The only way in which this can be
accounted for, is by admitting the Protestant conclusion,
that no such doctrines were taught by Christ, or knoum to
his Apostles. And moreover if the authority of the
Church be sufficient, as you maintain, to define infallibly
what traditions are divine and genuine, would it not have
been incumbent on Theophilus to admit on the sole autho


rity of his instructors the certainty of the things in which
he had been instructed ? and how then, for the purpose of
confirming him in them; could it have been necessary for
St. Luke to investigate ? It is evident that those instruc-
tors, whoever they may have been, dealt with him as with
a person having the right of private judgment. They did
not say to him, “the traditions which we deliver to you are
such as we have received ; you cannot, it is true, trace them
with certainty to their first derivation ; but nevertheless
be contented to admit them on our authority." Instead
of this St. Luke undertakes for his satisfaction to trace
back every thing to the original witnesses. And yet
we find your principal champion maintaining against
the Protestants, that the most unquestionable token by
which any doctrine can be proved to have proceeded
from the Apostles is that “ it is not in the power of any
one to shew where it had a beginning."* There is an
evident fallacy in his attempt to limit this remark to such
doctrines as are embraced by all Christian Churches; be-
cause there are in fact no such doctrines. If there be any
tenet received b y all Churches, that is as universally as the
Scriptures*themselves, it is undertaking little to affirm that
plain and satisfactory evidence of it will be found in the
Scriptures ; and then all men can shew where it had a
beginning. In reality the only doctrines which advance
a claim to be received without that description of proof
which St. Luke afforded to Theophilus, are the doctrines
which the Roman Catholics build upon tradition. These
extra-scriptural opinions the Protestant is satisfied, rest upon
an insecure and inadmissible foundation; because although
they are said to have a particular origin it is impossible to
trace them to it. Both the dispensations of God began
with the employment of tradition ; but we have the au-
* Bassuet. Expos, of the Cath. Faith, chap. xvii.


thority of our Lord for asserting- that the patriarchal tra-
ditions, which all had reference to him, were rendered
unnecessary by the written word into which they were
incorporated. He condemns all appeal to tradition, by the
possessors of that word, because it made the word of none
effect: and therefore when he would fully instruct his own
disciples, ‘‘ he beg-an at Moses and all the prophets,
and expounded to them in all the Scriptures the thing’s
concerning himself.’’* The more attentively indeed we
examine this matter of tradition, the firmer is our persua-
sion, that whether under the old or the new covenant, it
was a temporary expedient; designed from the outset to be
superseded by the introduction of Scripture ; the only in-
fallible rule ; the only unchangeable witness. We know
it is the practice of artists in the first instance to prepare a
mould, upon which all the lines and lineaments of their
design are accurately laid down. But this is a mere arche-
type of the intended work, It is in the cast, which is ob-
tained from that mould, that the features are exhibited in
permanency and perfection. The mould itself having
accomplished its purpose, is thrown aside and no longer
thought of.
Earnestly do I hope that such Roman Catholics as may
peruse these arguments will have the candour to consider
whether they are just; and if so whether the Sixth Article
of the Church of England must not be a safer foundation
for a Christian to rest upon, than the Decree of the Council
of Trent. The Jews were warned and exhorted to “ Search
the Scripturesand when they refused to do this, pre-
ferring to follow guides of their own, they were aban-
doned to crucify their King. Thus be assured, Sir, it will
ever prove. Wherever tradition is set, as it was by the
Jews, upon an equality with the Scripture, there is reason
* Luke xxiv, 27.


to dread a manifestation of the spirit of Antichrist; which,
either directly or indirectly, “denieth the Father and the
Son.” Ag-ainst what other spirit indeed is that terrible
anathema directed, which causes us to tremble while it
“ testifieth unto every man that heareth the words of the
prophecy of this Book, if any man add unto these thing’s,
God shall add unto him the plagues that are written in
this Book/’*
You make, I observe, an attempt to derive support to
your cause from the sentiments of some among’ our own
hierarchy. “ The Protestant Bishop of Elphin,” you are
reported to have said, “ writes thus—By far the greatest
part of the population of my. Diocese consists of (Roman)
Catholics. I cannot make them good Protestants; I there-
fore wish to make good (Roman) Catholics of them ; and
with this intention I put into their hands the works of
Gother. It is not that I have any such objections to urge
against the (practical not controversal) works of Gother
as to desire that they should not be read. But if these
works, which it is presumed have the effect of
making them “good Roman Catholics,” were to be put into
the hands of any persons for this sole reason, that such per-
sons would not receive an unadulterated representation of
the truth, I dissent from and abhor the suggestion from the
bottom of my heart. According to this principle the
Apostles might have said both to Jews and Greeks, Since
you will not receive our preaching according to the import
of God's word, and we cannot make you good Christians,
we will preach to you such doctrines as are more agreeable
to you, and will fix you more strongly in your present
persuasions. 1 know not, Sir, from what source you de-
rive the above sentiment, nor upon what authority you
attribute it to the Bishop of Elphin ; nor whether the
• Rev. xxii. 16.


present possessor of that See be meant. In that case I
should have strong reasons for thinking that the inference
which you intend us to draw is altogether groundless ; for
at a meeting' of the friends of Scriptural Education, in
Ireland, held at Dublin on the 11th of January last, the
following letter was read by the Secretary, the Reverend
Thomas Kingston:—
“ Elphin, January 9, 1832.
“ Sib,—l am obliged to inform you that it will be totally out of my
power to attend the Meeting of the Friends of Scriptural Education,
which is to be held at the Rotunda to-morrow. It is with much regret
that I feel myself unable to do so; as the object of it is one which I view
with intense interest.
“ 1 remain, Sir, your obedient humble servant,
(Signed) “J. ELPHIN."
Again, in the expressed opinions of the present Bishop
of London, lean discover nothing which, being allowed,
would shew that Protestants may blamelessly and even
laudably assist in giving facilities for the diffusion of Roman
Catholic principles. His Lordship, according to your
quotation of his words, remarks that service is to be ren-
dered to religion “ not by retaliating mistatements, invec-
tives, and calumnies, or crudely asserting an unqualified
right of private judgment, but by referring to primitive
antiquity.” Few, be asssured Sir, if any, in the Church of
England, whose opinions are worthy of attention, will
refuse to unite in sentiment with the Bishop of London.—
Where, let me ask, have any of that description asserted
the “ unqualified right of private judgment ?!” The right
of judging for ourselves is, like the right of acting
for ourselves, an endowment bestowed upon us by the
Author of all good ; and although the one right be
cognizable by human laws, the other not, yet if we use
either of them in an “ unqualified” manner, that is with


out due regard to the lights of reason and revelation, or to
the known will of God, and to the circumstances in which
He has placed us, I do not believe that any sound divine of
our communion will, any more than the Bishop of London,
contend that we exercise them without guilt. There is
always a mean, if we are willing to trace it out, between
slavery and licentiousness. There is a great difference,
you must admit, between referring to the opinions of those
holy men who had immediate, or next to immediate, com-
munication with the Apostles, that they may serve as guides
to us in fixing the true sense of Scripture, and referring, as
you do, to the traditions of a less carefully discriminated
antiquity with a view to set them up as rivals of the
Scripture. The former of these is a resource which no
judicious and humble Protestant will decline, when he is
enquiring what doctrines are contained in Holy Writ, or
may be proved thereby. If you still doubt whether the
Church of England does make that acknowledgement of
the principle that primitive antiquity ought to be con-
sulted, let me refer you to the creeds which she has
adopted as summaries and expositors oT Scripture. Do
not these represent the sentiments of a truly primitive an-
tiquity ? and does she not daily refer to them as a test of
her principles ? And I must be permitted to observe,
since you challenge the comparison, that in her exclusive
adherence to the earliest models, the Church of England
may read a lesson to your’s upon the intermixture of com-
paratively modern forms which the latter has adopted.—
brom the ancient Creed of Nice, which we
have followed, and for every article of which the Scripture
affords a warrant, you make us to pass, by a violent revulsion
to those newly imagined tenets which in the Creed of Pope
Pius 4th are, after a most inartificial and unsatisfactory man-
ner, added to the ancient profession. Many times have
I sought earnestly, but in vain, to discover a tolerable rea-


son why those Holy Fathers who assembled to fix a sum-
mary of the Christian fath should have omitted from it all
those articles which you now make to rest wholly or par-
tially upon tradition, if they believed, as you do, that
tradition and the Scriptures stood upon the same footing of
authority. Why, when they had professed that Jesus
Christ “ was incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the Virgin
Mary,” should they have neglected to add that the Virgin
Mary is to be worshipped ? When they introduced “ one
Catholic and Apostolic Church,” why did they not point
out one Church distinctly as “ the mother and mistress of
all Churches or wherefore with the “ remission of sins"
did they not unite some mention of indulgences for them ?
I assure you, Sir, that 1 ask these questions not with any
design of catechising- you. I would not be guilty of such
incivility. But I write thus in the hope that you, as a sin-
cere enquirer after the truth, may be induced to give a
fair hearing to what the Protestant has to object, and to
consider these questions, not with an unqualified, but still,
with a freer use of your own understanding than you may
have hitherto exerted. “ Call no man your master upon
earth.” “ Prove all things : hold fast that which is good.’’
Having detained you already perhaps too long, I will
only observe that my intention was to point out the real
difference, that which lies at the bottom of every other
difference, between our respective Churches. Such differ-
ences may be deemed very unimportant, nay sometimes
highly ridiculous even, by men who pride themselves upon
their enlightened and liberal views. Upon these I can have
little hope of producing any effect. But they who think
seriously of their obligation to obey God rather than man,
will not fail to remember that all the corruptions (as we
esteem them) of the pure doctrines of God have arisen
from a desertion of his word. To the equalization of tra


dition with the Scriptures, we trace the rise, and attribute
the maintenance, of those opinions which Protestants ad-
jure:—the infallibility of your single Church: the sup-
pression of the right of private judgment; the reception
of seven Sacraments; the tenet of transubstantiation ; the
denial of the cup to the laity; the propitiatory sacrifice
of the Mass ; purgatory.; prayers for the dead ; the invo-
cation of saints ; the veneration of relics and images ; the
power of indulgences; the supremacy of the Pope as
Universal Bishop; prayer in an unknown tongue; re-
strictions upon reading the Scriptures ; and the denial of
our justification by faith alone. Jt is easy to maintain, so
long as general terms are used, that the difference between
us and you is unimportant; but when the consequences
of that difference come to be thus stated in detail, it evi-
dently appears to be vital , and, so long as you continue to
insist upon your present rule, must he incurable. My
opinions upon this subject 1 should have been satisfied, as
heretofore, with maintaining in private, had I not been
informed of your public attack upon the principle of the
Reformation, and of your application to the Protestant
inhabitants of the Colony to favor the religious interests of
the Roman Catholics. It became then my duty as a Pro-
testant Minister to tell them plainly that they could not do
this without guilt. Ido not repeat your not very reverent
or becoming parody upon Scriptural language; but in
effect you say there is no prohibition against a Protestant
subscribing to build a Roman Catholic Chapel. I must
differ from you upon this point, and maintain that the
whole tenor of the Gospel is opposed to such a proceeding;
in-that it requires us to have in all our doings, a single eye
to the advancement of truth. It is a characteristic of genuine
charity that it “ rejoiceth in the truth :” in the discovery,
and exclusive support and encouragement of it. Carry


then as far as you will the maxim that all men
should be permitted without molestation to worship God
agreeably to their own consciences, it can never lead to
the conclusion for which you are contending; nor justify
Protestants in lending active aid to strengthen and extend
a system which, if their principles have any meaning, they
must regard as the parent of error and opposed to the
truth of God, “ Let every man,’’ your Scriptures say,
“ abound in his own sense let him follow his own way
of thinking. But before we allege this maxim to justify
our connivance at those sentiments in others from which we
ourselves dissent, let us be at least well satisfied that our
differences turn upon such harmless scruples alone as the
Apostle was referring to. It is a different thing when the
dispute goes to affect the foundations of piety itself. Then
undoubtedly we should take no step without due consi-
deration of the account which we all must render of our
employment of our several talents; when the sole en-
quiry will be “ Hast thou occupied them for my service V’
My design in writing thus is, I repeat, to warn my Pro-
testant brethren against submission to the insidious para-
lyzing influence which has been exerted to persuade them
that they are justified in encouraging the Roman Catholic
religion, as being but another equally acceptable mode of
worshipping the same God. I wish to excite them to re-
flect whether they have a real, and not merely a nominal,
belief; whether the Reformation proceeded upon any dis-
tinguishing fundamental principle; and if so, whether it is
worth contending for. Why did the Reformers at the cost
of their lives refuse to do any act which might be thought
to express the slightest acknowledgement or approval ot
the Church of Rome, but that they were persuaded it had
adopted a false Rule of Faith, and believed that in its
T)
• Rom. nr. 5.


consequences it endangered the faith itself, and was
mimical to the righteousness of God? How can we
then, as their professed followers, give you the support
you ask without belying our convictions and proving our-
selves traitors to our own principles ? These sentiments,
Sir, lam more than fearful will not be acceptable to you.
But I have felt myself called thus publicly to express
them from finding you engaged in an extensive and appa-
rently not unsuccessful attempt to attach to your cause
those for whose souls I am to watch as one that must give
an account. Neither is it on the exclusive behalf of the
Protestant Faith that I write; but under a sense of anxiety
for the general interests of religion. So long as men are
earnest and sincere, even in erroneous views with respect
to Christ, there may be in them a feeling of real piety ;
and those efforts will at least be honest which they make
for the extension of their own opinions. But we have
now to speak of the system of giving countenance and
support to religious opinions which are diametrically op-
posed to our own. Its adoption here.may for a time pro-
mote the apparent interests of your Church ; but I warn
you of the injury which religion must sustain from the ex-
ample of such an alliance. You will do no good, even
according to your own understanding of the term, to those
with whom you are united; and they will do you much
harm. You will not bring them over to your Church ; but
what if they should carry into its bosom the spirit of their
own indifference! In availing yourself of their assistance,
you recognize a principle which, carried to its full extent,
would authorise all men to encourage all sorts of opinions,
without consideration of their truth or falsehood. Ido not
perceive where the limit is to be fixed; for if any of us
may in one instance support that which we do not believe,
why not in all ? It is a very different case from that of
forsaking one form of Christianity for the purpose of em-


bracing another under a conviction of its superior truth and
sanctity. There is at least consistency in such a proceed-
ing; but we are required to abandon consistency, and to
admit that all zeal and earnestness are out of place with
reg-ard to questions which involve the essentials of religious
truth. Whenever we are brought to a general persuasion
that so much laxity upon the subject of religious engage-
ments is admissible, we cannot be far from thinking that
religion itself is an affair of very little moment. For let
your judgment of men in this behalf be formed upon obser-
vation of their conduct in other instances. If in the com-
mon affairs of life they ever display such unconcern about
their own way of thinking, and such readiness to exert
themselves in favour of an opposite persuasion, you con-
clude at once that they have no strong feeling of the im-
portance of the subject either to themselves or others.
You, Sir, I am painfully sensible, are sanctioning an awful
precedent in favour of religious indifference under the
pretext of toleration. The enemies of religion itself, under
each and all of its forms, will quickly make you perceive
its force when applied to their own purposes. You may
accomplish what appears to you a great object for your
Church, but you will discover, when it is too late, that the
effect of that very success has been to eat out the entire
heart of religion, and to leave nothing remaining but its
outward form. Ido not expect to be immediately or gene-
rally believed, but time will prove that I am right. To
its decision 1 appeal; and earnestly desiring that all men
may know and embrace the truth.
I remain, Sir,
Your very obedient humble servant,
w. G. BROUGHTON.
STEPHENS AND STOKES, PRINTERS, SYDNEY.


