

A LETTER
ON AN ARTICLE IN THE “TIMES” OF i 3 th MARCH, 1886.)
Not sent for insertion in the “ Times,” but printed as a pamphlet.
THE LAW OF LIBEL.
Bv G. W, RUSDEN,
Author of History of New Zealand;
History of Australia ;
Aureretanga ; Moyarra,
<•>
LONDON:
WILLIAM RIDGWAY, 169 PICCADILLY.
Price Sixpence.


•


THE EDITOR OF THE “TIMES.”
Sm,
Some time ago it pleased you to launch through a leading
article, some thunders at my head.
As I presume that the maxim nullum tempus occurnt regi
applies also tonanti you would not deny me the right of appeal
perhaps —if I were inclined to ask for space in your own columns to
reply to your remarks. But when your article appeared I had
placed my case implicitly in the hands of others and could not use
my own hand ; and the time that has since elapsed has probably
driven the matter out of all recollection in days when nine minutes
cannot be spared for small occurrences.
For my own part I do not deem the subject worth notice as a
personal one ; and my main object is the general consideration of
the law of libel.
Against the spirit of your article, indeed, I should be ungrate-
ful if I were to protest, for you were good enough to say that
“ Inspired by the best intentions Mr. Rusden has been unfortunate,
and that I had written “ a clever book in three volumes,” &c.
You added that “some living English statesmen must be very
familiar with epithets such as Mr. resents,” but that it was “ im-
probable that any court will carry the doctrine of privilege to the
length of protecting any charge made in good faith against a public
man.”
The word any is so elastic that if it be taken in the widest sense
of eccentricity, your doctrine of probabilities would be accepted by
all. But if the word be construed reasonably, I the
principle of protection to which you refer is reasonable and just,
and that, in practice, it has frequently been recognized.
On the matter personal to myself, as touched upon by you, I
shall only remind you that the peccant paragraphs were founded on
information furnished by a Bishop of scholarly Oxford reputation ;
and that, unwilling to rely upon a single statement, 1 sought
farther particulars ; and obtained them, in writing, under the hand
of the same apparently high authority.
I do not desire to contend, now, that it was sufficiently high
authority, or that I construed it correctly ; but putting my own case
on one side, I would point out that there has been (since the date


of your article) an instance in which an eminent Judge, Sir Henry
Hawkins, instructed a jury that the reputable character of an in-
formant may, and ought to, excuse a public writer, who, misled
himself, writes something which may mislead others.
An action for libel was heard at Manchester in 1886 before
Mr. Justice Grantham. A verdict having been given for the
defendant, a new trial was moved for in a Divisional Court, before
Baron Huddleston and Mr. Justice Manisty, on the ground
of misdirection, &c. They directed that there should be a new
trial.
The new trial was held before Mr. Justice Hawkins at Man-
chester in January 1887.
In his summing-up Sir Henry Hawkins said (Manchester
Courier , 26 January 1887) —
“What was the position of the defendant in this matter? (The defendant, an
editor, had printed a speech made in public.) Nobody questioned at all that Mr.
Thompson who made the speech was a gentleman of position and standing, and a
gentleman whose word was entitled to be treated with respect. It was not as though
a mere unknown adventurer had come forward and made a statement derogatory to
the character of any one. In that case one might very well have looked with
suspicion upon his statement.
“ But in this case a reporter heard an influential gentleman make this statement in
terms which certainly indicated that there was no hesitation and no doubt at all
about the matter . . . He could see no reason why he should not implicitly rely
upon the statement; not that that would justify his putting it in the paper, unless
they also came to the conclusion that it was for the public good that it should be
published . . . He did not think they ought to go into the question of whether or
not the story was true or false. If it was believed by Mr. Sowler, the editor of the
paper, to be true, the mere fact of its being true or untrue did not, in his mind,
affect the question whether it was for the public good that it should be published . .
If they believed that it was for the public good that the matter should be inserted,
then their verdict would be for the defendant; but if they came to the conclusion
that there was malice, or a sinister motive, or that it was not for the public good
that the publication should be made, they would find for the plaintiff .... It was a
grave misfortune that Mr. should have made the statement, untrue as it was. But
still though an untrue statement Mr. Sowler was in no respect responsible. He
knew nothing at all about it. He had before him a gentleman of position, of
intelligence, and of supposed integrity, and a gentleman who occupied a position in
the corporation which certainly would have disarmed him of even suspecting that
he would have been guilty of inaccuracy. l He thought they must all regret that
this imputation should have been made against Dr. Pankhurst ; and at the same
time one could not help sympathizing with Mr. Sowler for that he should have
been induced to insert a statement which turned out to have been so utterly
unfounded.”
I submit to you, with confidence, that these deliverances
greatly enlarge the scope of probabilities which—before Sir H.
Hawkins thus spoke—you seemed to apply to the claims and
risks of a public writer.
Desiring to discuss the subject in its public relations, and, as
much as may be, to avoid personal allusions, I say no more on
1 It is hardly necessary to remind you that the position of a Bishop, an Oxford scholar, is not
inferior to that described by Mr. Justice Hawkins. My object in citing the case, however, is not
to draw a comparison between my case and that of Mr. Sowler, but to invite your attention to an
apparent discrepancy between some of your remarks and the dicta of Mr. Justice Hawkins.


this topic than that the position of a public writer would be
intolerable, and the performance of his duty would be rendered
impossible, if no such distinctions as those laid down by Mr.
Justice Hawkins were sanctioned.
In your own article, indeed, I trace some sympathy with that
learned Judge’s utterances, for you wrote :
“ Mr, Rusden may think, and his counsel gave expression to the thought, that it
is very hard that he, a painstaking historian, should be made answerable for his
statements. He may with some reason, say ‘How few chroniclers would prose
unimpeachably accurate if their statements were sifted carefully in a court of law !’
Such, however, is the penalty attached to writing contemporary history, though
rarely has it been so heavily paid as yesterday.”
Sir Walter Raleigh’s reflections upon the contradictory state-
ments of eye-witnesses —fresh from seeing—-would have amply
sufficed to warn me of the difficulty of insuring accuracy in any
narrative.
Moreover in addition to the fallibility of all men —whether
historians or others —there would always confront an author the
hard fact that, even if his narrative were really accurate, and no
informant had misled him, it might be difficult or impossible to
establish his accuracy to the satisfaction of a court of law.
This hard fact it is that makes me hail with gratitude, and press
upon your attention, the utterances of Mr. Justice Hawkins which
I have quoted.
You will not fail to remember that the taint of fallibility is not
absent even from the courts of law themselves. No ordinary
person would presume to make such an assertion on his own
authority: but when three Judges are found overruling the dicta
of one or two other Judges, it is impossible to deny that somebody
is wrong, without at all subscribing to the saying which Shakspeare
puts into the mouth of distraction, that a pigmy’s straw may
prevail in one case, though the strong lance of justice may fail in
another.
It is the sum of many cases, and not any individual one, to
which I desire to call your attention.
Nevertheless, in passing, I wish to thank you for one con-
clusion contained in your article, which was the more gratifying to
me because a few persons, who had not watched the case so
closely as you had, failed to discern the fact that the jury in my
case gave no opinion, and were not asked to express any opinion,
as to the conduct of the New Zealand Government, or of their
officers, at Parihaka or elsew'here.
To emphasize your accuracy on this point, I will cite a few
brief sentences from the published short-hand report of Baron
Huddleston’s summing-up in my case, in 1886, merely premising
that I had nothing to do with the publication.
“Something occurs” (the learned Judge said) “which ends, not in fighting, but
ends in what I should say would be a massacre at Handley’s Woolshed. ... You


have the fact that two boys undoubtedly were killed. . . . This seems also to be
perfectly clear, that the troopers had not a clear view of them when the order was
given to charge, and when they rode upon them ; and whether they committed
violence upon children or not, I do not know. Ido not know whether that will
rest much in your consideration. . . . With reference to that (Parihaka affair) I
think it would be advisable as far as we can to keep clear of all that discussion. . . .
No doubt some of those men w'ere taken into custody, and that may have been a
very arbitrary act, I think Sir Henry James was quite justified in saying— * I will
not go into that question.’”.
I merely quote these sentences to show how correct you were
in your statement that the jury pronounced no opinion on the
treatment of the Maoris by the local government or by its
officers.
But I imagine that you would be among the first to admit
that though the plaintiffs counsel declined, and the jury were not
asked, to “go into that question,” it was a question with which a
historian was bound to deal.
You cannot be ignorant that, whether wisely or unwisely,
writers and speakers in England parade their views about alleged
atrocities, in Bulgaria or in these islands, with apparently little
care to be accurate, whether arraigning a turbaned Turk, or a
distinguished fellow-countryman.
I Lie crucem sceleris pretium tulit , hie diadema. One man
may steal a horse when another may not look over a hedge.
I wonder how many Judges would be required in the High
Court if actions were founded on all stinging political speeches. 1
Reverting, however, to the promulgation of erroneous informa-
tion derived from apparently credible authority, I must guard
against a supposition that my remarks would apply to any case
in which any mean or malicious motive exists. Any such case is
unworthy of discussion. In my own case you may perhaps
remember that there was not even any personal knowledge, and
that the plaintiff had declared, publicly, in the New Zealand
Parliament, in 1883 :
“The truth is this book has to some extent been misapprehended. The attack
is not per se upon me. What does Mr. Rusden care about me individually? He
cares nothing about me. . . . What he says on that matter is not, I suppose, from
malice against me at all. He cannot have malice against me.”
Never, I should imagine, can there have been a case in which,
so far as the above words go, a plaintiff and defendant have been
more thoroughly of one mind.
But, discarding all consideration of cases in which personal
malice exists, the question may fairly be asked whether a historian,
or public writer, ought on public grounds to be shielded from
1 The Times oi I2th February, 1890, reports Sir John Gorst assayingin the House (nth February),
“ If you are going to have the proprietors of United Ireland brought to the bar of the House every
time they bring a criminal charge of murder or falsehood against my right hon. friend, the House
will have little else to do but to mete out punishment to delinquents at the bar. Even members of
the (Gladstone) government to which the right hon. gentleman (Harcourt) opposite belonged were
made the object of the foulest and quite unnameable charges.”


harm if he can show that he exercised reasonable diligence 1 to
insure accuracy.
A public writer must be entitled to some protection in the
discharge of his duty.
The question is—how much ?
Lord Chief Justice Cockburn partly answered the question
twenty years ago, in the case of Wason v. Walter (Mills and
Holroyd , Q. 8., vol 4).
“ The full liberty of public writers to comment on the conduct and motives of
public men has only in very recent times been recognized. Comments on govern-
ment, on ministers and officers of state, on members of both Houses of Parliament,
on judges and other functionaries, are now made every day, which half a century
ago would have been the subject of actions, or ex-officio informations, and would
have brought down fine and imprisonment on publishers and authors. Yet who can
doubt that the public are gainers by the change, and that though injustice may often
be done, and though public men may often have to smart under the keen sense of
wrong inflicted by hostile criticism, the nation profits by public opinion being thus
freely brought to bear on the discharge of public duties ? ”
Long before he thus spoke Lord Chief Justice Cockburn had
(in Hunter v. Sharpe , Q. 8., Foster and Finlayson , vol. 4) drawn
a broad distinction between a case containing malice, and one
exhibiting: vehemence, when he said :
o
“ And if the writer of the article was satisfied in his own mind—as you cannot
doubt he was —that the plaintiff’s system was delusive, and that he himself was a
pretender and a quack, then we cannot wonder that in his honest indignation he
should have put gall into the ink when he wrote to expose the conduct which he
denounced. It was not the case of a man sitting down to gratify personal spite or
professional malice, but a man writing honestly to denounce what he honestly
believed to be a system of quackery and imposture, and to vindicate the honour
and the character of the profession of which he was a member, and to do his duty
to the public in whose interest he was writing. .”
Another Lord Chief Justice (Erle) had said in 1861 (Turnbull
v. Bird , Foster and Finlayson , vol. 2) :
“ The law is that a man may publish defamatory matter of another holding any
public employment, if it is a matter in which the public have any interest. . . .
The rule in these cases is that the comments are justified provided the defendant
honestly believed that they were fair and just. With that limitation the law allows the
publication.”
In 1872 in Laughton v. Bishop of Sodor and Man (L.R. Privy
Council Appeal cases) the Privy Council decided that a statement
which is by nature privileged, in which the person making it has,
or honestly believes he has, a duty, “ is privileged although it con-
tains criminatory matter which without privilege would be defama-
tory and actionable.”
In this case the Judges referred to a previous case (Spill v.
Maule , 1869, L.R. Exchequer cases) heard before Lord Chief
Justice Cockburn and the learned Judges Keating, Lush,
1 I cannot use the words “due diligence” after their sinister perversion in and under Mr,
Gladstone’s and Lord Ripon’s Treaty of Washington in 1871.


Hannen, Hayes, and Brett. Lord Chief Justice Cockburn in
delivering the judgment, said :
“ Now, the communication being privileged, the presumption is in favour of the
absence of malice in the defendant, and in order to rebut this presumption, the
plaititiff must show actual malice , and he may no doubt show this by a reference to
the terms of die libel as being utterly beyond and disproportionate to the facts. We
must then look to see whether the circumstances are such as to rebut on the part of
the plaintiff the presumption of the absence of malice in the defendant. . . . Now,
the presumption of law being in favour of the absence of malice in the defendant,
and the only evidence of malice being his description of acts done by the plaintiff
which were capable of a two-fold construction, that presumption of innocence which
attaches to the writer must also, where his act is capab’e of a double aspect, still
attend him. Starting with the presumption of innocence in his favour, we must
assume that the defendant did entertain that view of the plaintiff’s acts which
induced him to believe, and honestly to believe, and say, that the plaintiff’s conduct
was dishonest and disgraceful.
“ We have not to deal with the question whether the plaintiff did or did not act
dishonestly or disgracefully; all we have to examine is whether the defendant stated
no more than what he believed, and might reasonably believe: if he stated no more
than this he is not liable, and unless proof to the contrary is produced we must
take it that he did state no more.”
[Held that implied malice being negatived by the privilege,
there was no evidence of actual malice, and that a verdict for the
defendant was properly directed by the Judge (Baron Martin) at
the trial,]
Before touching upon a case ( Clark v. Molyneux) in which, on
appeal, the proper construction of the words “honest belief” was
laid down, it is well, perhaps, to cite in chronological order a few
other cases, which seem to show that malice may not be inferred
or imputed, but must be expressly proved before a public writer
can be milcted.
In Sontervill v. Hawkins (L.J. 1851, vol, 20) Lord Chief
Justice Wilde had decided that a communication was privileged
and there was no evidence of malice. A new trial was sought on
the ground of misdirection. Mr. Justice Maule, in delivering the
judgment of the court, said :
“ The class of privileged communications is not so restricted as it was contended
on the part of the plaintiff.
“ It comprehends all cases of communications made bona fide in performance of a
duty, or with a fair and reasonable purpose of protecting the interest of the party
using the words, . . .
We thirk therefore the communication in question was privileged, i.e. it was
made under circumstances which rebut the presumption of malice which would
otherwise arise from the nature of the words used. That presumption being re-
butted, it was for the plaintiff to show affirmatively that the words were spoken
maliciously; for the question being one the affirmation of which lies on the plaintiff,
must in the absence of evidence be determined in favour of the defendant.
“On considering the evidence in this case we cannot see that the jury would have
been justified in finding that the defendant had acted maliciously. It is true that
the facts proved are consistent with the presence of malice as well as with its absence.
“ But this is not sufficient to entitle the plaintiff to have the question of malice left
to the jury ; for the existence of malice is consistent with the evidence in all cases
except those in which something inconsistent with malice is shown in evidence ; so
that to say that in all cases where the evidence was consistent with malice it ought


to be left to the jury, would be in effect to say that the jury might find malice in
any case in which it was not disproved, which would be inconsistent with the admitted
rule , that in cases of privileged communications malice must be proved, and therefore
its absence presumed till such proof is given.”
In 1851 in Taylor v. Hawkins (Q B Adolphus and Ellis , vol.
16) a new trial was asked for on the ground inter aha that the
presiding judge (Erle) ought to have told the jury that there was
no evidence of malice.
The case is a pleasing instance of the modesty with which Mr.
Justice Erle admitted that he had been wrong. He with Lord
Chief Justice Campbell, and Judges Patteson and Coleridge
heard the application for a new trial.
The Lord Chief Justice said (Patteson and Coleridge
concurring),
“ 7 he rule is that if the occasion be such as repels the presumption of malice, the
communication is privileged, and the plaintiff must then if he can give evidence of
malice ; if he gives no such evidence it is the office of the Judge to say that there is no
question for the jury , and to direct a nonsuit or verdict for the defendant."
Mr, Justice Erle said :
“ I thought at the trial that the extent of the statement afforded some evidence of
malice for the consideration of the jury, but my opinion is now altered by Somervill
v. Hawkins.
“ There must be a new trial on the ground that the jury ought to have been told
that there was no evidence of malice for their consideration.”
Of course it may be argued that the modest Judge deserved no
praise for having yielded to the law as laid down by Judge Maule
in Somervill v. Hawkins. But to me it seems that the man who
rises superior to any evil tendency in our nature, commands the
utmost respect. Philosophy should know no passion : law ought
to be without prejudice. Yet there have been ill-tempered philo-
sophers and unjust Judges.
Seymour v. Butterworth {Foster and Finlay son, vol. 3) was tried
in 1862 before Lord Chief Justice Cockburn, who told the jury :
“ It was not disputed that the public conduct of a public man might be discussed
with the fullest freedom. It might be made the subject of hostile criticism, and of
hostile animadversion, provided the language of the writer was kept within the
limits of an honest intention to discharge a public duty, and was not made a means
of promulgating slanderous and malicious accusations.
‘‘ It would often happen that observations would be made upon public men which
they knew from the bottom of their hearts were undeserved and unjust. Yet they
must bear with them, and submit to be misunderstood for a time, because all knew
that the criticism of the press was the best security for the proper discharge of public
duties. It would be for the jury to say whether the writer of this article only
denounced a vicious system, or whether he intended to impute. . . .
“ If the jury thought that instead of a fair, reasonable, honest comment upon the
circumstances this was made an opportunity of gratifying personal vindictiveness and
hostility, they would have to assess the damages which the plaintiff was entitled to
recover.”
It may be gratifying to one occupying so onerous and respon-
sible a position as that of the editor of the Times , to reflect that
the jury in the case of Seymour v. Butterworth , though they gave


a verdict for the plaintiff, and though he was a Q.C. gave it for the
modest sum of forty shillings.
In 1868 in the Law Reports, vol. 18, will be found the case of
Caulfield v. Whitworth , tried originally before Mr. Justice
Keating. The synthesis at its head is :
“ Held that no words are actionable if spoken on a privileged occasion, unless
express malice is proved, and that it is the duty of the Judge to withdraw such
a case from the jury unless an active motive for spite on the defendant’s part is
clearly shown. Proof that the words are false, without evidence that they are false
to the defendant’s knowledge, will not entitle the plaintiff to have the question of
malice left to the jury.”
Lord Chief Justice Bovill, and Judges Willes and Byles
heard the application for a new trial.
Lord Chief Justice Bovill said—
“The Judge (Keating) thought that the occasion upon which the words were
spoken was privileged and that there was no evidence of malice. It would therefore
here be necessary for the plaintiff to prove malice in fact, but it did not appear that
the defendant knew his words were false. . . ”
Mr. Justice Willes said —
“ Clearly the occasion and the character of the words spoken were within the
protection cast by the law around privileged communications ; and if they were
spoken bond fide they would afford no ground for action. That rule would be quite
illusory if the judge left to the jury every slight circumstance suggested by the
ingenuity of counsel as a reason for inferring that malice existed.
“ Unless an active motive for spite be shown , it is the duty of the Judge to withdraw
the case from the jury. It is not sufficient to show that what was said was untrue ,
but in order to complete the evidence of malice it must be shown that it was untrue to the
knowledge of the defendant d . . . The malice (L.C.j. Jervis had said in one case)
must be such as to induce the Court, or any reasonable person, to conclude that this
occasion has been taken advantage of to give utterance to an unfounded charge.
So in the present case the Judge would have been wrong if, without any direct
evidence of malice, he had left the case for the jury to infer it.”
Mr. Justice Byles said—
“ I am of the same opinion, and I entirely agree with all that has been said.”
[After referring to the cases of Somervill v. Hawkins , and
Taylor v Hawkins , above cited, the J udge added] —
“ In addition therefore to the general effect of the authorities , we have in these
two cases the unanimous decisions of the Courts of Queen’s Bench and Common
Pleas, delivered about the same time, authorizing the course which was adopted by
my brother Keating in holding that there was no evidence of malice for the jury.
Almost contemporaneous with the case of Caulfield v. Whit-
worth, was that of Wason v. Walter which I have already cited.
In 1871-2 occurred the case of Henwood v. Harrison , in which
the reporter remarks that the fair and honest discussion of, or
comment upon a matter of public interest is, in point of law,
privileged, and is not the subject of an action unless the plaintiff
1 These words are italicized as specially fitted to provide an answer to your suggestion that it
was “improbable that any court will carry the doctrine >»f privilege to the length of protecting any
charge made in good faith against a public man.” .
1 do not suppose that any author would wish for more safeguards than those recognized in the
case of Caulfield v. Whitworth,


can establish malice. The Judge who tried the case —assuming a
letter to be primd facie libellous, and it being conceded that the
publication was without malice —nonsuited the plaintiff on the
ground that it was a fair criticism upon a public matter of public
and national importance, and therefore privileged.
The counsel who showed cause was Mr. Huddleston , who
argued that malice was not to be inferred unless some evidence
were given. The learned Judges who decided the case were
Grove, Willes, Byles, and Brett. Mr. Justice Willes said,
that the Judge had nonsuited the plaintiff —
“ upon the principle that every man has a right to discuss freely, so long as he does
it honestly and without malice, any subject in which the public are generally in-
terested ; to state his own views and to advance those of others for the considera-
tion of all or any of those who have a common interest in the subject, and that
whilst he does so he has a privilege attaching to such free discussion, of the same
character which has been held to attach in numerous instances, in which liberty of
speech has been allowed on grounds of public and social convenience, where the
speaker or writer, and the person or persons addressed, have had a duty or interest
in common, the existence of which is held to rebut the inference of malice
The principle upon which these cases are founded is a universal one , that the public
convenience is to be preferred to private interests , and that communications which the
interests of society require to be unfettered, may be freely used by persons acting
honestly, without actual malice , notwithstanding that they involve relevant comments
condemnatory of individuals.” [Referring to iVasonv. Walter, .Judge Willes said]
“ That decision necessarily involves the conclusion that the fair and honest discus-
sion of, or comments upon a matter of public interest, is in point of law privileged,
and that it is not the subject of an action unless the plaintiff can establish malice.
Where privilege exists the burden of proof of actual malice is upon the person who
complains. If there is no evidence of such malice it is the duty of the Judge to direct
a nonsuit or a verdict for the defendant. As Lord Wensleydale said {Farmiter v.
Coupland ), ‘ Every subject has a right to comment on the acts of public men, which
concern him as a subject of the realm, if he does not make his commentary a cloak
for malice or slander.’ It would be abolishing the law of privileged discussion , and
deserting the duty of the court to decide upon this as upon any other question of law,
if we were to hand over the decision of privilege or no privilege to thejury. . . The
whole argument to prove that the case ought to have been left to the jury was based
upon the primh facie case of words printed, which a jury might find to be disparag-
ing to the plaintiff, in stating that his plans were worthless. The answer is that the
privileged occasion shifts the burden, and that in respect of relevant words, though
defamatory, the plaintiff cannot recover without proving malice, which he has failed
to do.”
The learned Judges Byles and Brett concurred.
In 1873 it was moved to set aside the verdict in the case of
Odger v. Mortimer , in which, though the use of strong language
had been proved, the jury found for the defendant.
Lord Chief Justice Bovill, and Judges Grove, Denman, and
Honyman heard the application.
The Lord Chief Justice said —
“ Mr. Odger is essentially a public man. This being so, editors of public news-
pipers may comment in the strongest possible way upon what he says and does in
that character. As for the ridicule complained of, that is often the strongest weapon
in" the hands of a public writer, and if it be used fairly the presumption of malice
which would otherwise arise is rebutted, and it becomes necessary to give proof of
actual malice, or of some indirect motive, or of a wish to gratify private spite.”


Justices Grove, Honyman, and Denman were of the same
opinion, the latter saying—
. . The plaintiff here is emphatically a public man, and as such is prima facie
the proper subject of public comment.”
In 1876-8 the case of Clark v. Molyneux (Q.B. vol. 3,
1877-8), was tried, and it was ordered on appeal, that there
should be a new trial ; one of the grounds being that Baron
Huddleston, who tried the case, had misdirected the jury as to
the construction of the words “ honest belief.”
“ Do you think” (Baron Huddleston had said to the jury) “that the defend-
ant made these statements and wrote this letter bond fide and in the honest belief
that they were true, not merely that he believed them himself, but honestly believed
them—which means that he had good grounds for believing them to be true? I
mean to say that if he pertinaciously and obstinately perhaps persuaded himself of
a matter for which perhaps he had no reasonable ground, and with respect to which
persuasion you twelve gentlemen 1 would say that he was perfectly unjustified, . . .
then your verdict will be for the plaintiff.”
The jury gave a verdict for the plaintiff for 200/.
In November, 1876, the defendant obtained an order for a new
trial, alleging that the verdict was against the “ weight of evidence,
and on the ground of misdirection of the learned Judge, in that he
misdirected the jury on the question of bona Jides and malice, in
telling them that if they thought the defendant published the
defamatory matter complained of carelessly and recklessly, or with
a disregard for the feelings of others, and in such a way as they
being men of the world would not have acted, they should find
that the matter was not published bond Jidefi
In the spring of 1877 the order for a new trial was discharged
by Lord Chief Justice Cockburn and Mr. Justice Mellor, but the
resilient defendant appealed.
In December, 1877, his appeal was heard by the learned
Judges Bramwell, Brett, and Cotton.
After the arguments, Lord Justice Bramwell said—■
. . . “ I cannot help coming to the conclusion that the question left by the Judge
to the jury was put in an inaccurate shape : . . . the proper direction to the jury
would have been as follows : —These occasions are privileged, and unless you are
satisfied that the defendant availed himself of them to make the statement com-
plained of maliciously (with an explanation of what is legally comprehended in that
word) then you ought to find a verdict for the defendant. By the language which
the Judge used, he led the jury to the conclusion that the burden of proof is on the
defendant.
“I also think that the form of the question is objectionable in this, that it may
have induced the jury to suppose that they were to find affirmatively either that the
alleged libel was written bond fide , or that the defendant in publishing it was actuated
by feelings of malice, and that if they did not find the former they must find the
latter. . . . The Judge asked the jury whether the defendant did what is complained
of in the honest belief that what he wrote and said with reference to the plaintiff was
1 Cf 'Baron Huddleston’s summing-up in my case in 1886, “It is not what Mr. Rusden
himself might have thought as to the meaning of the words he used. ... It is not what Mr.
Rusden understood his words to mean. It is what you and I, humble individuals, possessing
common knowledge, would understand the thing to mean, &c. &c.”


true. At a later period of the summing up the Judge explains what he means by
honest belief, and the effect of his language is that the jury must have been led to
think that hottest belief means not the actual belief in the defendant’s mind, but belief
founded on reasonable grounds. Apart, therefore, from the question upon whom
the burden of proof lay, I think there was a misdirection as to the meaning of the
term honest belief, and that the verdict against the defendant cannot stand.
Lord Justice Brett said—
... “I am of opinion that there was a misdirection by the learned Judge to
the jury, that the verdict was against the weight of the evidence, and that there was
no evidence of malice which ought to have been left to the jury. . . .
“ If the occasion is privileged, it is so for some reason, and the defendant is only
entitled to the protection of the privilege if he uses the occasion for that reason.
He is not entitled to the protection if he uses the occasion for some indirect or
wrong motive.
“ If he uses the occasion to gratify his anger or his malice, he uses the occasion
not for the reason which makes the occasion privileged, but for an indirect and
wrong motive.
“ If the indirect and wrong motive suggested to take the defamatory matter out
of the piivilege is malice, then there are certain tests of malice. Malice does not
mean malice in law —a term in pleading—but actual malice —that which is popularly
called malice. ... I think I have laid down the correct rule on which to ground
the direction to the jury, and I think the learned Judge did not follow that rule, but
he so expressed himself that the jury would be led into following other rules.
“I think the jury were misled into believing that the burden of proof that the
defendant was not actuated by malice in the statements he had made lay upon the
defendant rather than on the plaintiff. I apprehend the moment the Judge rules
that the occasion is privileged, the burden of showing that the defendant did not
act in respect of the reason of the privilege, but for some other and indirect reason,
is thrown upon the plaintiff.
“ I also think that the learned Judge was mistaken in the definition of malice
he gave to the jury, and the jury might have been misled by his leading them
to app'y that definition to the question of what was malice in fact. ... It has been
decided that if the word ‘ maliciously ’ is omitted in a declaration for libel, and the
words ‘wrongfully’ or ‘falsely’ substituted, it is sufficient; the reason being that
the word ‘ maliciously’ as used in a pleading has only a technical 1 meaning; but
here we are dealing with malice in fact, and then malice means a wrong feeling in a
man’s mind.
“I am further of opinion that the direction to the jury—that assuming that the
occasions were privileged, if they thought that the defendant wrote the letter, and
made the statements bond fide, and in the honest belief that they were true, not
merely believed them himself, but honestly believed them, which means that he had
good grounds for believing them to be true —left the jury to suppose that although
the defendant did believe them in fact, yet that did not protect him unless his
belief was reasonable, whereas the only question was whether the defendant did in
fact believe what he said, and not whether a reasonable man would have
believed it.
“The question of wilful blindness, or of an obstinate adherence to an opinion
may be tests by which a jury may be led to consider whether the defendant did or
did not believe the statements he made, whereas the learned Judge, by the way in
which he directed the jury, left them to understand, as I think, that although the
defendant did believe the statements, yet, if his belief was founded on a wrong
reasoning, that he was not within the protection of privilege.
“In that respect, with great deference, I think the learned Judge’s direction to
the jury was erroneous.
“Assuming that the right question had been left to the jury, is there any evidence
in support of the finding of malice? Now, the occasion being privileged, the burden
1 This, if widely known, must be some comfort to friends who arc indignant when one whom
they respect is the subject of a verdict for which they have no respect.


of proof to show that the defendant was not within the protection of the privilege
being on the plaintiff, and it being an admitted fact that the defendant did not
know the plaintiff, had never even seen him, and that he had no relations with him
whatever, and no motive can be suggested why the defendant should have a
vindictive feeling against the plaintiff, I think that the discrepancies which were
relied upon, and the want of care in instituting inquiries, are too slight to justify a
Judge in asking the jury whether the defendant was actuated by indirect motives in
making the statements. 1 He certainly did not make them from a want of belief in
them, nor was he influenced by anger in making them, not caring whether they were
true or false.”
Lord Justice Cotton said :
. . . “When once the learned Judge had laid down that the occasion was
privileged, the only question for the jury to consider was whether the defendant
acted from a sense of duty, or was actuated by some improper motive, and the onus
of proving that the defendant was influenced by some improper motive —that is,
that he acted maliciously, was on the plaintiff.
“ In order to show that the defendant was acting with malice, it is not enough
to show a want of reasoning power, or stupidity, for those things of themselves do
not constitute malice. A man may be wanting in reasoning power, or he may be very
stupid, still he may be acting bona fide , honestly intending to discharge a duty.
“ The question is not whether the defendant has done that which other men, as men
of the world , would not have done, or whether the defendant acted in the belief that
the statements he made were true, but whether he acted as he did from a desire to
discharge his duty. , . .
“ There is also another point in the summing-up in which I think there was a
misdirection to the jury.
“ The burden of proof lay upon the plaintiff to show that the defendant was
actuated by malice; but the learned Judge told the jury that the defendant might
defend himself by the fact that these communications were privileged, but that the
defendant must satisfy the jury that what he did, he did bond fide, and in the honest
belief that he was making statements which were true.
“ It was clear that it was not for the defendant to prove that he was acting from
a sense of duty, but for the plaintiff to satisfy the jury that the defendant was acting
from some other motive than a sense of duty. . . .
“ On the only other point in the case I think that there was no evidence of
malice to be left to the jury. lam of opinion that in this case the evidence does not
raise any presumption of malice on the part of the defendant, according to the
law as laid down in Somervill v. Hawkins."
(Judgment reversed and new trial ordered.)
It is almost needless to say that the plaintiff ventured upon no
new trial, in defiance of a deliverance by the Court of Appeal,
which must have acted as a check upon all speculative actions
embarked upon with the hope of filling a pocket rather than
redeeming or obtaining reputation.
1 If any friend of mine should read the above sentence and feel inclined to ask why I did not,
when applying for a new trial, cite this case, so analogous in details to my own, my answer is that
I endeavoured to do so, but was told by the court that the terms of the rule obtained precluded my
deriving any benefit from the case. “ The order of the court,” I was told, “is clear that it is only
open to you to advert to any question for the purpose, if you can, of showing that that particular
thing tends to show that the damages are excessive.” .... The shorthand report of my
application is—
“ The Defendant. —But surely, my Lordj it cannot be contended that a published work on a
public subject is in its nature not privileged. One may go beyond a privilege
“ Mr. Justice Fjei.d. —That we are not going to try. That has been tried and disposed of
against ,you.
“ The Defendant. —But that is one of the points in the Notice of Motion.
“ Mr. Justice Fielv. —That is disposed of against you by the arrangement your counsel came to.
. . . We must take the rule ... We are bound by that, and we sliall not go out of it.”


Thus far the cases I have cited have been selected from what
some modern politicians call ancient history.
I am not sure that truth is contemptible because it is ancient,
or that modern folly is respectable when it reviles old wisdom.
There are, however, some recent cases which confirm the general
principles which I have put before you.
I do not pretend to say that my observation has grasped all the
libel cases which have occurred. Perhaps another observer might
be able to adduce cases somewhat conflicting with those I have
quoted. If so, he would only strengthen the common reproach of
uncertainty in that which ought to be sure and unswerving.
One character complains of undue restraint by the “ rusty curb
of old father antic the law;” —another, created by the same master
hand, reminds us of “the majesty and power of law and justice.”
With becoming reverence I may refer to recent instances of the
latter order.
I was a bystander at Manchester during a portion of the case of
O’Brien v. Lord Salisbury.
It loomed so largely among topics of the day that it is needless
to dwell upon particulars,
But I wish to remind you of your own comment (23rd December
1889) with which I heartily agree: —“Lord Salisbury was, in fact,
availing himself of the right, which all his countrymen enjoy, to
comment upon matters of public interest and notoriety.”
Woe will be to the country in which those best fitted to form
opinions may not express them.
What a miserable inversion would then exist of the saying—
“ That in the captain’s but a choleric word
Which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.”
Imagine a wise, dauntless, and patriotic minister, condemned to
be the mark of wanton calumny himself, and—infinitely worse—to
see the land disgraced by abetted crimes ; and forbidden to utter
warnings or suggest consequences in order to awake the con-
sciences, and the common sense, of his countrymen !
A public critic, though honourable, is fallible; but, if he be
honourable, to inflict penalties upon him may be not only'tmjust to
him, but injurious to the country.
Another recent case reported in your columns seems to
present a decision at variance with the dictum that it is
“ improbable that any court will carry the doctrine of privilege to
the length of protecting any charge made in good faith against
a public man,”
The Law Report in the Times (15th and 16th November
1889), in the case of Besant v. Hoskyns , ascribes the following
ruling to Baron Huddleston.
o
“ But the question was . . . what the defendant's honest belief was. . . For if
the reading of her writings had created in the defendant’s mind a reasonable and


honest belief that she did, and he published it upon a privileged occasion, he had a
complete answer to this action . . . The learned Baron finally left these questions to
the jury :
“(i) Did the defendant publish the alleged libel?
“ (2) Was the matter complained of a libel ?
“(3) Was it true in substance and fact?
“ (3a) If untrue, then did the defendant when he published it, honestly and
reasonably believe it to be true, and his duty to publish it, and did he do so without
malice ?
“The first question, the learned Baron observed, was practically admitted, the
second they would doubtless answer in the affirmative.
“ If the libel was true there would be a verdict for the defendant; if not, then
they would have to say whether or not the defendant had been guilty of mala fides
in the sense he had explained. If they answered this in the negative, as he had
held the occasion to be privileged, it would be a verdict for the defendant.”
Nor is this the only recent occasion on which your obiter dictum
as to curial probabilities has been traversed.
Another case tried before Baron Huddleston (. Partridge v.
the General Council of Medical Education and Reg istration of the
United Kingdom) was reported by you on the 21st December
1889, and seems strongly to confirm the view I am pressing upon
your consideration.
“ Mr. Waddy (you reported) for the plaintiff argued that the defendants had
gone entirely beyond the powers given them by the legislature, and were therefore
liable in damages, there being in fact legal or cofistructive malice 4
“ Mr. Baron Huddleston said he might say at once that he was prepared to decide
that this action would not lie unless malice were proved, and he would therefore
suggest that the jury should be discharged, and it be left for his decision, in which
event either party could go direct to the Court of Appeal.
“ Mr. Waddy said his client wished the matter to go to the jury.
“ Mr. Baron Huddleston. But I will not permit it. I have told you I am
going to decide the matter at once.
“ Mr. Waddy. Then I can say no more, my Lord.
“Mr. Baron Huddleston then gave judgment for the defendants, holding that
there was 710 evidence of )7ialice on the part of the defendants and that, therefore the
actio7i did not lie. . . .
“He did not think it required authority to establish that where persons in a
quasi-judicial capacity exercised their discretioti wrongly no actio7i coiild be mai7itai?ied
against them for such a decision unless it could be shown that they had arrived at
their derision maliciously.
“ Here there was no evidence at all of malice, and the plaintiff must therefore be
nonsuited, and judgment entered for the defendants.”
As I disclaim what seems to me a forced interpretation of my
own language, so I shrink from authoritatively interpreting the
words of another.
Yet I imagine that it may occur to you that a historian, or
public writer, who is not unworthy of his calling, fills a quasi-
1 I do not aim any of my arguments at such kinds of malice. It has been boasted that law is
the perfection of common sense. The kind of law which constructs malice where there is no real
malice is transcendental, and requires, I hope, a very uncommon sense to understand it.
What a man says he says with his own meaning, and not with another man’s. If one man’s
words are to be interpreted by the fancies of another—and that other a mere causidicus, who if he
had been engaged on the other side would as glibly have said the contrary —of course anything,
however ridiculous or false, may be constructed. No writer’s mind is inhabited, while he writes, by
the dark spirits of construction which may afterwards rush in to take possession of his words and
wrest them to meanings of which he was not the author.


judicial position, and that in his case, at all events, the time may-
come when it will be “ improbable that any court will (refuse to)
carry the doctrine of privilege to the length of protecting any
charge made in good faith against a public man.”
Then will the weighty words of Lord Chief Justice Cockburn
bear their full fruit:—
“ The full liberty of public writers to comment on the conduct and motives of
public men has only in very recent times been recognized. Comments on govern-
ment, on ministers, and officers of State, on members of both Houses of Parliament,
on Judges and other functionaries are now made every day, which half a century
ago would have been the subject of actions, or ex officio informations, and would
have brought down fine and imprisonment on publishers and authors.
“Yet who can doubt that the public are gainers by the change, and that though
injustice may often be done, and though public men may often have to smart under
the keen sense of wrong inflicted by hostile criticism, the nation profits by public
opinion being thus freely brought to bear on the discharge of public duties.”
It may be said that in the consciousness that, if his work be
worthy, it will survive an ephemeral condemnation —that “ socor-
diam eorum irridere libet qui praesenti potentia credunt extingui
posse etiam sequentis aevi memoriam ” —the author has compensa-
tion for all troubles of the hour. It may be so ; but it does not
follow that it would not have been better for the public of his
own time, as well as for himself, if no vindictive penalty could
have been exacted from a writer actuated by good faith, and
breathing no malice.
You will, I trust, consider that what I have written, I have
written calmly ; and that though compelled, in answering your
courteous criticism, to refer to my own case, I have alluded to it
with no more feeling than the coldest commentator would have
displayed.
One characteristic of libel cases —the eccentric differences in
the amount of damages awarded—l have not dwelt upon. While
the minds of men differ, such eccentricities are unavoidable.
Nevertheless some of them are droll.
England’s greatest Prime Minister, Pitt (respected by all in
his own time, when no one could foresee that, in a time to come,
a man who had lauded him for half a century would in old age
denounce the dead man as a “ blackguard ”) was verdict
awarded no more damages than But Pitt of course was
neither sordid, nor a money-seeker.
It may seem strange that a Queen’s Counsel, attacked with
“ most bitter language ” obtained a verdict for no more than forty
shillings.
Again, a medical man (In one of the cases which, like the last,
I have cited) obtained a verdict for One Farthing, in a case in
which Lord Chief Justice Cockburn told the jury that the
defendant had written with “ extreme bitterness and severity ” but
that he was writing “ honestly to denounce what he honestly
believed ” to be wrong.


In the case of Bar dell v. Pickwick my old friend Charles
Dickens represented the plaintiff as obtaining a verdict (but not
the money) for ten shillings in the pound of the amount sued for.
I have seen a report of a recent historical case in which the
plaintiff’s legal advisers were content with a shilling in the pound.
It would bewilder a plain mind to endeavour to find any
reasonable common measure to apply to such eccentricities.
As I write these pages a cognate branch of the subject comes
before me in the press. I deal only with its principle, and express
no opinion on its particulars.
I hazard no statement as to what the law is, but common sense
indicates what it ought to be.
An elected representative on the London School Board in the
performance of his public duty, writes or says something which
gives offence ; an action is brought against him, and damages are
obtained.
Let us assume that he was actuated by no malice or mean
motive. Let us also assume that in the present state of the law
the damages were properly obtained.
Then the law ought to be altered.
It is monstrous that the conscientious discharge of public duty
should entail private loss.
Members of Parliament are hedged round with privilege not
for their own sake, but that they may be untrammelled in doing
their duty.
A member of the School Board is surely entitled in justice, if
not in law, to the same safeguards.
As the School Board member is the chosen champion of
thousands of ratepayers, they will probably defend him in the
performance of his duty.
But the solitary historian, though he serves the public of the
present and the future, has no immediate clients, and courts no
special patron.
In the language of the great Judge whom I have quoted —he
writes “ honestly to denounce” what he honestly believes to be
wrong, and it is not to be wondered at if indignation sometimes
makes him vehement in vindicating the honour of his country
while doing his duty to the public, in whose interest he writes.
P'or him, too, with the limitations above alluded to, the law, if
it require alteration, should be amended, lest the saying of smooth
rather than true things become the desire of a wielder of the pen,
and the page of history be made a field of flattery or falsehood.
If the nobler hope of fame desert the mind, base or servile
passions may enter in, and convert into a ghastly mockery that
which ought to be a living picture of the times.
G. W. Rusden.
14th February 1890.
RICHARD CLAY AND SONS, LIMITED, LONDON AND BUNGAY.


V■ :->\ l •' 4.
- ' /'■ •' r'‘'lX' ,; /■ ■:&{ I- '■' ; . ■ .v’ ’ -


.
■
. ’ v , >
..V - - , . , - '• • •
■y..yy ;■■■ - ' ' - .fev ; ■ & y'yy V" h: l '-rz ■;■ ' ■ y-V., ■$ \
-
■-?: y : g-y? -y- - ,.,- v >>■ ' ■ ' ■■X v - ;■
. *■ 1 .. . v , ■, v VV
.
. > yy - > y;J : . . -■> * - :|Jy;y , - >' Cfte'
’■ ~ h -'■'■'-v' /■•*•'■ r : r%0: ' : 'V
I-;/- £>" /<
.. ' y *
• ■
■■ ’z ’■.•■•' ■ 'v ‘ , -v ■ s ■ ■•■';■■ *. . . ■ - ■' '■ • , k - ■ - -1. 'y*;V
i
.. " ’ ' ; - ■ ' ■ ; ' ■ ■ ; ■ '
' - ‘ - y V-' y ' ' - ' - , • . . ■ .
■ ' y y ■ ■■ ■?: $. v.,.* ■. ■ • 1 <- - 1 k .-
T< ' ' , J\T
'' ■ ' ; ■ ■ ■ ' • ... ' ■ •
" ' ‘ ' ' .
■' ;■■■' . - . ■■■■■ ... ■ .: . - ■■ ; ■■ . .?,» •‘r-^
■. .-■■■■■ - 1 ■ ■
-
'V.-, v ; v -**yy
.
■ /. ?
.v- ■. < y : ,. , ■-.J - J ■ , -• . ■; ;■ ,, ,
f . ' •/. ’' >.: " ■
■ . ' ■ - ‘ . .
' .,' v.:. - . / - y . . • , ■ ;. '-> v ' ?""•••■ '* '
'
-
■
r
Y .-sy:. > . ' ■ • . , ■. ’ V j ■ .-,r 'CvV-.'-v . ■ ... . y • .V,, ■ ’■ /; <
'
■
■ -
■' ■■ ; . ... .» - '
■
t'x z yy rt ■ . y. ; ''yy ■■■•:"■’ y ; i'> ■-'-■■ •*.< yi
' . . ■ r . . ” ' - ■ . -■
m ? y • • 4 r ; ■ y .y. : v,: : ■?' A, V yr’' :: yC..,. ‘fe¥|
■ ■■' t- ->J . v.;. y. %■ - ■ 'y y.- - , .«
,
■
