

A Letter to Roman
Catholic Priests
BY EMMETT McLOUGHLIN
(Author of People’s Padre, American Culture and Catholic
Schools, and Crime and Immorality in the Catholic Church .)
NATIONAL SECULAR SOCIETY
103 BOROUGH GIHT STREET, LONDON, S.E.1
Telephone: HOP 2717


Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce


REVEREND AND DEAT FATHER:
You are what I once was —a priest of the Roman
Catholic Church. I am what perhaps you, and certainly
what thousands of your fellow priests, would like to be
~a normal, free American citizen, earning his living in
a normal way, and spending his days and years in a
normal, happy and satisfying marriage. It is now twelve
years since I broke with the Franciscan Order in Phoenix,
Arizona, after fifteen years in the priesthood. I still live
in Phoenix and still am superintendent of Memorial Hospi-
tal. known during my clerical days as St. Monica’s
Hospital. If you are still contented with life in the priest-
hood, you will resent my words. If you are disturbed,
disillusioned and discontented, these few pages may be
welcome and may even help you.
The detailed story of why I made the “great step” and
what followed is told in my first book People’s Padre. My
analysis of my education (and yours) is told in my second
book American Culture and Catholic Schools. Of course,
they have both been strongly condemned and forbidden.
If n °t, I would have been a liar because I wrote exten-
sively in them of the Hierarchy’s un-American attempts to
suppress freedom of thought and freedom of writing.
To Help Priests To Leave
I am writing this booklet to help sincere priests get out
of the priesthood successfully, without fear and with
dignity. It is wrong that they should slink or sneak out —
as so very many are forced to do. Probably because my
own break was so open and so successful, or because I
have remained in the same city where I had served as
a priest and can easily be reached, I have been contacted
by hundreds of ex-priests and discouraged priests. Many
have been helped and are now happily adjusted. Many
have gone through hell in their strike for freedom. Some
have failed because they could not or would not help
themselves. This is an attempt to point out the “symp-
toms” of the desire to change, the discouraging hurdles an
ex-priest must face and the encouraging future that
beckons any priest who is a genuinely religious man and
a determined American.


There are many reasons for discontentment in the priest-
hood. In the first place, and let’s be honest, we were all
sucked in before we were old enough to know what it was
all about. We really did not know enough of the Church
to donate our lives, our futures, our possibilities in this
world, our chances in the next on a toss of the dice—the
mere word of a priest counsellor that we “had a vocation”.
We knew practically nothing of the history of its dogma,
its politics, its alleged ideal and practice of celibacy—
certainly not nearly enough to gamble our lives and our'
eternities on it. Be honest now. Examine yourself as ruth-
lessly as you are supposed to do in your normal retreat.
As the years since ordination have slipped by, perhaps
you have developed honest intellectual misgivings about
doctrine and history. Don’t stupidly chase these thoughts
away, like fanning a fly, as temptations of the devil. Study
them. Analyse them. A system that cannot stand the
spotlight of intense intellectual investigation isn’t worthy
of your acceptance and sacrifice. Get books by Protest-
tants and alleged agnostics—if they are reliable. Read
the true history of your religion, your Church (they are dif-
ferent), and your Papacy. You can get the books. Read
John McKnight’s The Papacy~a New Appraisal, Henry
Charles Lea’s History of the Inquisition, Lowell Thomas’s.
On Top of This World and a host of others. Study Pro-
testant theology. All of its leaders were not ignorant
fools or sex-hungry maniacs, even though we were taught
that most of them were. Study the various sincere inter-
pretations of the “rock” and realize that the word does not
necessarily mean St. Peter.
Read, Read, Read
Study the true shameful history of the Council of Trent.
Read the former Paulist William Sullivan’s account of the
Vatican Council in Under Orders and realize that even
your forebears in the American Hierarchy couldn’t stomach
the unhistorical and unscriptural arrogance of Pius IX in
ramming Papal infallibility down the bishops’ throats.
Read. Read. Read.
Perhaps you have surreptitiously read enough already so
that you are convinced that the Papacy was a gradual
opportunistic historical growth rather than a divine in-
stitution. Perhaps you have tried in vain to find a clear
scriptural basis for auricular confession. Perhaps as you
have heard thousands of good sincere struggling Catholics
confess the practice of birth control you have searched
your own soul and the Scripture for a basis for its sinful-
ness. You have long since realized that dragging poor


old Onan out of the depths of Genesis and hanging the
guilt on him is ludicrous.
Celibacy!! You know you were tricked into it. You
know now that all the pious proliferations as to your
freedom in taking that vow sound more hollow as the
years go by. You were about as mentally free after all
those years of conditioning, lectures, spiritual readings,
retreats and other indoctrinations as a trained Nazi or
a Communist echoing the “party line”. You have struggled
against nature’s second strongest urge. You have seen
the behaviour of other priests. You have heard their
confessions —perhaps those of bishops, too, as I had.
Perhaps you have found something your superiors or
bishops would not want you to have —a true history of
celibacy. If so, you have learned that throughout Catholic
history it has been only sporadically enforced and never
adequately observed. You have learned that the basis for
celibacy and chastity is not the example of Jesus and the
apostles or its spiritual preference by God at all. I came
to my senses with a jolt when it dawned on me that eleven
of the twelve apostles were married. I was also shocked
to learn that prior to the Council of Trent the marriage of
the clergy was generally accepted as valid even though by
some illicit.
Henry C. Lea’s authentic work The History of Sacer-
dotal Celibacy in the Christian Church has been repub-
lished by Russell & Russell, 80 E. 11th St., New York 3,
N.Y. Get it, it will astound you. The only reason for
celibacy is money. The Hierarchy did not want married
priests bequeathing Church property to legitimate children.
It really did not and does not care how many illegitimate
children they have because bastards cannot legally inherit
the Church’s property. Perhaps you have fallen in love
with some charming woman and the struggle between
nature and the fear of the smiting arm of the Church is
tearing your heart out ...
Perhaps you don’t believe that Catholicism is more im-
portant than Americanism. Perhaps you are old enough
and experienced enough to believe in freedom of thought,
freedom of reading, freedom of worship—the principles
that have made your nation the greatest in the world and
the denial of which by your Church has kept other nations
dragging their feet for centuries. Maybe you have observed
your bishops or your pastors institute boycotts against
bookstores, drugstores, theatres and magazines and
watched them herd the Catholic laity into line like “dumb
driven cattle”, instead of thinking, self-reliant, free


Americans. Perhaps you feel a shiver of nauseating dis-
gust at the bishops’ un-Americanism because you, too.
were an American before you became a Catholic priest.
So, what are you going to do about it? Are you going
to swallow all these insults to your intelligence, all these
wrenchings of your legitimate emotions, all these mental
and financial exploitations of the sincere people who look
to you as their leader and father? Are you going to go
on stifling your intellect, sneaking the occasional hidden
fruits of your clandestine desires, failing your devoted
people and ending your life with a solemn requiem mass
and the hypocritical burial eulogy, “Well done, thou good
and faithful servant. Enter into the joy of thy Lord”?
Or are you going to be a man and an American and
face the issue? If you want to get out of the priesthood
and atone for your sins of ignorance and hypocrisy and
be happy, this booklet is intended to help you . . ,
In the first place, our background has trained us for
nothing useful. You know that all the laity’s talk about
priests’ “marvellous education” is a carefully nurtured
myth. Education for what? Take a prospectus of any
reputable college or university and check for yourself the
fields for which you are adequately prepared. And what
skills have you been taught?
The only subject you know well is language. But Holy
Mother Church has foreseen the possibility of your
“taking your hand from the plough”. In most cases here
in the United States and around the world, lest you be
tempted, seminaries do not issue the document proving
you have earned a degree. Normally you can’t get a job
teaching even in a grammar school without at least a
bachelor’s degree. Frequently, too, if a seminary does
issue a degree it is useless, I tried to help one ex-priest
from Boston. He had a degree from St. John’s Seminary,
the pride and joy of Cardinal Cushing. The degree was
worthless.
If you quit you will be persecuted by the Church. How
this can be reconciled with the Hierarchy’s boasted belief
in freedom of worship in the United States, I have never
been able to understand. I have been out of the priest-
hood now for twelve years and they have not yet “called
off the dogs”. The clergy will do its best to ruin you.
They will try to keep you from getting a job. If you get
one anyway, they will try to get you fired. All too often
they will succeed. They will malign you with the vilest of
accusations. They will tell the laity, and sometimes put it
in print, that you are a turncoat, an apostate, a traitor, a


thief, a drunkard, a lecher, an adulterer, possibly a homo-
sexual, but certainly physically diseased and mentally
insane. They will hound you from job to job, and if
they are able, they will boycott and try to ruin the firm
that will employ you. This they have done to me in try-
ing to ruin our hospital.
The blind devotees among the Catholic laity, whom I
call the “Shock troopers”, will trail along like the dumb
sheep that they are. If they know where you are. they
will deluge you with anonymous mail. Some will send
wastebaskets full of medals, rosaries, scapulars and other
superstitious trinkets. Others will damn you with the
vilest execrations. If you should marry, they will pour
such obscenity upon you as to make a pornographic news-
stand look like a church vestibule’s pamphlet rack. They
will gossip viciously in spreading rumors about you and
will aid the Hierarchy in trying to starve you to death or
force you back to femes Springs or one of the other
ecclesiastical “penitentiaries” to do penance for your
scandal to God’s chosen ones. If you have a phone, they
will plague you day and night (especially when they are
drunk) with insulting calls. “Yea, the time cometh that
whosoever killeth you will think that he doeth God a
service.” I know. They have tried it on me.
One of the serious obstacles you will have to cope with
is your own laziness. Life in the priesthood is a parasitic
existence at the expense of the laity. They have wined
you and dined you and supported you like a drone in a
beehive until you are physically and intellectually atro-
phied. You are on a pedestal. After all, aren’t you an
“alter Christus”? When you leave the priesthood, you
are going to find it hard to adjust to a steady diet of
working eight hours a day, or if you attain an executive
position or take on two jobs maybe sixteen hours a day.
In spite of the seemingly unconquerable obstacles of
theology (not the Scriptures), emotion, persecution and
lack of educational equipment, thousands of American
Roman Catholic priests have left the priesthood success-
fully and are living with satisfaction as free Americans.
You can do it, too. In the first place, it is not true, as
I was taught and presumably you were, that Protestants
will be wary of you as one who has broken his vows and
therefore cannot be trusted in business or in social inter-
course. They will do their best to help you —not because
they are vindictive against the Catholic Church but because
they see you as an individual Christian who needs help.
They wonder how you could ever have been so mentally


indoctrinated and stupid as to have taken such silly vows
at all. You will have unseen millions wishing you well. . .
If at all possible fortify yourself with your college degree.
You have earned it through years of study and are en-
titled to it, regardless of your ruse to get it. If there was
ever an instance of justifiable “occult compensation”, this
is it. If you can’t get your degree, at least try to get a
transcript of your credits. I did by hiring two firms of
lawyers in two states and threatening to sue the Fran-
ciscan Order. If you have trouble getting your credentials
we and our attorneys can help you.
A group of people, led by ex-priests, interested in help-
ing Catholic priests back to normalcy is now working
with certain colleges across the country for the evaluation
of seminary credits and the issuance of degrees for ex-
priests who wish to teach.
Teaching is by no means the only field open to those
who leave the priesthood. But you must be willing to
work—with your hands, if necessary, to get a start. Some
“alteri Christi” think they are too good or too educated
to start at the bottom. If you are one of these parasites
on the unsuspecting Catholic laity you should stay in your
monastery or rectory. You will be of no use to yourself
or humanity in the modern world.
Many an ex-priest who is now successful has started
working in a laundry, a service station, a factory or any
other work that is honourable and decent. I know ex-
priests who own service stations and automobile agencies.
Others are in real estate, in agencies of the Government,
in the construction industry, in personnel work, in tutoring,
or like myself in the field of hospitals. The world of
insurance, life and otherwise, is clamouring for good sales-
men as are other sales fields. Priests are made to order
for this work. After all, besides languages and a bit of
distorted history, what else have we been trained in but
the high-powered peddling of spiritual snake oil to ouf
gullible parishioners?
But remember—if you are going to have any regrets
don’t leave the Church. You can never be free until you
are free from your own fears.
If I can help you in any way, by advice or by placing
you in contact with others who are anxious to help, please
contact me. —Still, Your Brother, Emmett McLoughlin,
Memorial Hospital, Phoenix 3, Arizona, USA.
Printed by G. T. Wray Ltd. (T.U.), 332 Goswcll Road, London, E.C. 1.
Published by the National Secular Society, 103 Borough High Street, S.H.I.
