

A LETTER
THE KEY. WILLIAM LAW,
LAUNCESTON, V.D.L.
ON THE SUBJECT OF HIS ADDRESS DELIVERED
AT THE ASSEMBLY OF THE VAN DIEMEN’S
LAND CONGREGATIONAL UNION, HELD IN
HOBART TOWN, DURING THE MONTH
OF DECEMBER, 1854,
ON THE
NEW TESTAMENT DOCTRINE
CHURCH SUPPORT.
THE KEY. T. 0. EWING,
Pitt Town, New South Wales.
PRINTED BY JOSEPH COOK & CO.,
219, GEORGE STREET.




Reverend Sir,
In your address “on the New Testament Doctrine of Church
Support,” after having, as is usual with men of your Sect, abused the
Church of England, and sneered at all who “ accept the decisions of
Synods or Assemblies of Divines,” you express your opinion on the
Voluntary System; and then, in a spirit of extreme self sufficiency,
declare that it is not now an open question as to what the New
Testament teaches respecting Civil Establishments of Religion; for
your “ Address has settled the point.” “Itis a closed question, and
the verdict is against Church Establishments, as being unchristian,
useless, and earthly.” ( p. 26. )
But, despite this dogmatism, the question of Church Establishments
is still an open one. Men in England and the Colonies are discussing
it warmly : nor will they respect your veto on its further discussion.
We are able, and have as good a right to decide for ourselves as to
the nature and utility of Religious Establishments as you have. We
arc not under any kind of Ecclesiastical Lynch Law. Our press is
not “ fettered ;” nor are our “ Pulpits reduced to vassalage ” as they
are in South America, through the influence of slaveholders, who so
ardently admire the Voluntary System, in matters pertaining to
Religion.*
“ The Address proves it”! We shall see. Having blown away the
chaff and dust you raised about the question touching Civil Establish-
ments of Religion, I find you declaiming against their lawfulness —
from the nature of Christ’s kingdom —the example of Christ, His
Apostles, and the early Christians, and from the admitted injustice of
all taxation to uphold religion, (p. 12.)
* See “ The Voluntary System Exposed, and Civil Establishments of
Religion Justified.”


You say the kingdom of Christ “ is essentially distinct from, and in
some cases directly opposed to earthly kingdoms. His kingdom is in
the world: but how unlike it is to earthly kingdoms, a few sentences
wdl show. The kingdom of Christ is essentially spiritual in its nature
* Earthly kingdoms relate to and govern the outer
man, the domain of Christ is the inner man —the soul. Earthly kingdoms
are obtained by conquest, compact, and delegation, their state is
outward and visible, they admit ot and require assistance, subordinate
rulers, tried counsellors. But the kingdom of Christ is invisible.
Christ rules alone.” (pp. 8 and 9.)
The kingdom of Christ is not invisible : nor can I reconcile what
you say here with your subsequent description of the Church, (pp. 28,
29.) “ The New Testament idea of a Church is simple and beautiful
an assembly of faithful men, who, believing upon Christ, associate
together for the purposes of Christian fellowship, purposes of mutual
edification, and the diffusion of divine truth, with Deacons to attend to
tables and temporalities. A Minister, or Ministers of their choice to
expound the written word—ordinances duly dispensed * * *
Brethren, we belong to such Churches.” You teach (by implication)
(p. 9.) that the Church admits of “no subordinate rulers:” here, you
speak of her Deacons and Ministers ! there, you say the Church of
Christ is invisible, here, you endow her with tables and temporalities //”
At no time, however, was the Church of Christ invisible. Before the
Flood, it had a visible existence in Abel, Seth, Enoch, in all who, in
those days, “ called on the name of the Lord.”* Noah, amid the ruins
of the Deluge, represented the Church visible. The Patriarchs, in
their several generations, were members of the visible Church, which
had its altars and its sacrifices. The Church of God was visible, even
in Egypt, for four hundred years:—it marched through the wilderness
under Moses and Aaron ; Joshua led it into Canaan; and there it was
visible till the Baptist proclaimed His approach whom the nations
desired. Christ came. He laid, in Judea, the foundation of the
Christian Church, which He commanded His disciples to hear and obey.
This Church, the Apostles built up so, that it became visible in Piome,
in Corinth, in Ephesus, &c. Nor has it ever since been invisible. This
Gen. iv, 26.


Star of Hope lias shone through the blackest clouds. The darkest
period of the Church’s history presents us with Confessors and
Martyrs for the truth: and at the “Glorious Reformation,” the
spouse of Christ was seen in her bridal attire “ waiting for her Lord.”
Yea, the visibility of the Church is secured by the promise of Our
Gracious God. “ The gates of hell (f/Sov) shall not prevail against
her.” *
Your assertions (by implication,) that the Church of Christ is invisible
and requires “ no assistance,” harmonizes strangely with your eager-
ness to prove (pp. 12-14.) the right of a Christian minister to a maintenance
from his people : and with those pressing exhortations to Independents
to afford their Pastors an adequate support. As they are not “ exem-
plary ” in this respect, they may improve as you have told them that,
“ the command (to contribute) is positive, the ordinance of universal,
perpetual obligation upon all who, associated in bonds of Christian
fellowship, have one over them as Pastor and Watchman. They
cannot escape from this duty by any species of delegation: theirs
is the duty • * To suppose that it is voluntary, in the
sense of a Christian man being at liberty to contribute or not just
as he pleases is wrong * * is not what the scriptures
teach” (p. 25.) Will “the rich man” now “bring his offerings of
gold and silver ; the poor man his pence, the widow her mites,” &c. ?
(pp. 29,30.) If they do this, you will be able “ to build chapels for the
colonies and obtain ministers —to send Bibles to Cliina—Missionaries to
India—and Native Teachers to the Islands of Western Polynesia to
meet every claim, and be ready for any emergency.” (pp. 30 and 31.)
They 'have not done this yet —nor would we confide the keeping of
Religion to a system which has so signally failed in connexion with
your own denomination.
“ The Church of Christ was not obtained by conquest, compact, or
delegation.”! Pray, how was it obtained ? For what purpose did
Christ triumph over Principalities and Powers ? Why were “ His
garments rolled in blood ” ? Did not He come to conquer ?to obtain “by
conquest ” His rightful inheritance ? to lead “ captive captivity,” and
• “ The full meaning of our Lord’s promise, in the latter part of Matt, xvi, 18,
—seems to be that His church oh earth, however persecuted and distressed, should
never fail, ’ ’ (Parkhurst.)


receive gifts for men ? In “ the Council of Peace,” a “ compact ”
was entered into between God the Father, and His Eternal Son. God
“ made a covenant with His chosen,” promised Him the heathen
for His inheritance, when, by the shedding of His own most precious
blood, He had made an atonement for the guilty: and Christ will
yet “ deliver up the kingdom to the Father, that God may be all
in all.” This kingdom is the ChristianXhurch. It is visible. Like a
city on a hill, all men may see it. It is governed by the laws of
Christ, has a form of admission, a badge of membership —it has
peculiar duties and privileges, and duly appointed officers. Yet, in
this kingdom are many unworthy subjects. Our Blessed Lord has
compared it to a net cast into the sea, which caught fishes of every
kind —to a field in which tares, as well as wheat, grow. It is not
the ethereal body which you first say it is; but a tangible visible
corporation such as, at last, you admit it to be. The Church takes
cognizance of men’s external conduct, invites them “to crucify the
flesh with the affections and lusts.” For, the bodies of believers “ are
Temples of the Holy Ghost.” Her members must practise holiness,
which is profitable for this life and the next. She will not prostitute
her ordinances to the use of the unworthy. The Corinthian Church
cut off its impure members: nor has the Christian Church in our own
times renounced its jurisdiction over “ the outer man .” You ridicule
“the power of the keys (p. 11.) But, the power to bind and loose—
to retain and to remit sins committed against her, is the Church’s
great privilege, without it she would not only soon become corrupt,
but invisible—extinct.
All you say concerning the kingdom of Christ, and the king-
doms of this world, (pp. 8,9, 10) is grounded on the assumptions
that bodies distinct, cannot unite without the independence of the
weaker being imperilled: and that Church and State are so
“essentially distinct and opposed” to each other, that an alliance
between them can only be productive of disastrous consequences.
These propositions are untenable. The kingdom of Christ, by your
own admission, is in the world, and it exercises independent spiritual
jurisdiction over its members. It is composed of men engaged in
worldly business. They may be good Christians, and loyal subjects,
“ rendering to Caesar the things which are Caesar’s,” and to God the


things which are God’s. They are members of Church and State.
Now, here is an alliance which, if you are true to your own avowed
principles, you must condemn. But, it is a holy alliance. Our duties
to the State do not interfere with our obligations to the Church. We
serve both, without being in bondage to either. We love God and
honour the king. There may be a profitable alliance between distinct
bodies, each retaining its perfect independence. The connexion which
at present happily exists between England and France illustrates this.
They war against the enemy of liberty. They mutually co-operate to
repel his aggressions. Each has an army directed by its own generals,
led by its own officers, and subject to its own military laws. 1 hough
allied, each army is independent; And for the overthrow of the Great
Apollyon, such an alliance as this may, and should exist between
Church and State. The State may assist the Church, without in the
least trenching on the Church’s inalienable spiritual prerogatives. In
the middle ages, the Church enslaved the State. The confessors of
Augsburgh protested against tliis: and if, unhappily, the State should
ever exert an undue influence over the Church in her spiritual juris-
diction, we would rejoice to see the disorder remedied. We object to
the confusion of the two Societies; we q,sk the independence of each,
not their separation! * The reformed Church of Scotland, from the
beginning, was constituted on the right of self government. Nor did
she renounce this principle when she became connected with the State "j*
The Reformed Church of England “guards with jealous care the
Crown Rights of the Redeemer.” % Christ is Head of the Church and
State. By Him kings reign and princes decree justice.§ He gave
some Apostles and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. || Nor shall
we doubt that States will honour and assist the Church: for Christ, its
Great Head, has said, “ Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and their
Queens thy nursing Mothers: they shall bow down to thee with their
face toward the earth and lick up the dust of thy feet.”* “ Thou
• Buchanan’s Ten Years’ Conflict, vol. 1, p. 28.
f Ditto ditto ditto, p. 63.
♦ XXXVII Article. § Proverbs, viii., 15. |[ Ephesians, iv., 11, 12.
+ “ * Isaiah, xlix., 23.


shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles, and shalt suck the breast of
kings, and thou shalt know that I the Lord am thy Saviour, and thy
Redeemer the Mighty One of Jacob.*
The Church acts on man’s conscience—the State takes cognizance
of him as a social being: the former does not make magistrates; the
latter does not ordain ministers. Each may work harmoniously
with the other —each may recognize the others entire independence,
and thus secure a righteous, enlightened and lasting peace, f This
was the case under the Law. The State had its duties. So had
the Church. Their respective offices were clearly defined and attended
to, so that under the Ceremonial Dispensation, the union of Church
and State was a blessing to the nation.
Nor are Church and State “ essentially distinct,” and necessarily
“ opposed to ” each other. Between the things of time and eternity
there is a deep relationship. The period will yet come when the
kingdoms of this world will become the kingdoms of Our Lord and of
His Christ. J Will this be an “ unholy alliance ” ? Would you,
then, insist on an entire separation between Church and State ? Or,
will you even now insist on their complete separation ? Could the
rights of the Church be secured, were the State prevented from inter-
fering in any way with Church affairs? Church property must be
held and administered in accordance with the laws of the State where
it is situated, so that, it must always constitute the subject of civil
jurisdiction. Should the State be deprived of the power to compel
men to pay external respect to the Sabbath ? or, by the infliction of
temporal pains and penalties, to regard the sacredness of an oath ?
“ The nation and kingdom that will not serve God shall perish, yea,
those nations shall be utterly wasted,” §
Your argument from the New Testament in defence of the Voluntary
System is tins —-CimisT and His Apostles, and the early Christian
Ministers were supported voluntarily by those to whom they ministered
in holy things, (pp. 7,8, 20, 21, 23.) No one denies this. Nor does
this admission involve the conclusion that the principle of a National
Establishment of Religion is wrong. We, individually, are bound to
* Isaiah, lx., 16. f Ten Years’ Conflict, vol. 1, p. 22,
J Revelations, xi., 15. § Isaiah, lx., 12.


propagate the faith: Is the State exempt from this important duty ?
Our Saviour and His Apostles lived in troublous times, were the
victims of persecution; and, on that account, they sometimes assembled
in “ desert places,” and “ in the dens and caves of the earth ” to worship
God. The causes which operated to defraud them of their civil rights,
deprived them of the advantages of a National Establishment. Suppose
the case of a Minister, —holding most firmly the principle of Civil
Religious Establishments,—placed in the midst of the enemies of his
faith, or in a heathen land. He would act precisely as Christ and His
Apostles did. He would declare to them the whole counsel of God,
direct them to the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the
world. Numbers of them repent and believe. A Church is formed.
Now, they are instructed in their duties towards their Minister. They
are reminded of the Apostle’s command, “ Let him that is taught in
the word communicate to him that teacheth in all good things.”* And,
if there be one among them who, like a certain Independent Deacon,
thinks he has a right “to quarter his horse on the poor Minister’s
hay,” whilst it is optional with him whether he coutributes towards
the Minister’s support or no: or believes that, if the people do not
come forward voluntarily with a sufficient maintenance “for their
Pastor,” the Minister is bound “ to work with his hands as St. Paul
didf’—he is reminded of the Apostle’s words, “Have we not
power (the right) to eat and to drink ? Have we not power to lead
about a sister, a wife, as well as other Apostles, and as the Brethren of
the Lord and Cephas? * * have we not power to forbear
working ? Who goeth a warfare any time at his own charges ? Who
planteth a vineyard and eateth not of the fruit thereof? or who feedeth
a flock and eateth not of the milk of the flock ? * * * For our
sakes, no doubt, it is written, “he that ploweth should plow in
hope,” and “he that tliresheth in hope should be partaker of his
hope.” “If we have sown unto you spiritual things, is it a great thing
that we shall reap your carnal things ?” The minister says all this,
whilst he firmly believes that Civil Establishments of Religion are scrip-
tural and advantageous to the cause of Christ. If a Gentile Nation
* Galatians, vi., 6.
t The Rev. Dr. Lillie, of Hobart Town, has instanoed such a case in
connexion with the Independents of Tasmania.


were, by bis instrumentality, converted to the Christian faith, he would
say to the Rulers that they were bound to nourish and cherish the Church
of God. Following the example of the Apostle Paul, he would tell
them, that under the Law of Moses the State and Church were allied —
that the State provided for their maintenance who ministered in holy
tilings ; and that in conformity with this most equitable principle, Chris-
tian States should attend to their temporal wants who preach the gospel.
Adopting your words, he might use them to enforce the truth, that
there is a plain analogy between the Jewish and Christian Churches,
and that the union of Church and State “ is venerable for its antiquity.”*
Your comment on the words, “ Thou shalt not muzzle the mouth of
the ox that treadeth out the corn,” is admirably adapted for this purpose.
This was not said, says the Apostle, for oxen merely, but to enunciate
a principle that those who labour in any department of human effort,
have a right to share a part of the produce, to live by their labours.
The illustration is however adduced specially ‘ for our sakes,’ that he
who ploweth or thresheth in the spiritual husbandry should have given
to him all that is necessary for the supply of his wants. The Apostle
then shows that those who ministered in holy things under the Old
dispensation lived of the things of the temple: and those who waited
upon the service of the altar were partakers with the altar. In nearly
all the sacrifices offered under the Mosaic dispensation, one part was,
by the express command of God, reserved for the officiating Priest, and
the servants connected with the temple. The Priests and Levites
claimed and received all needful support. There has been, it is
true, a charige of dispensation, but the principle of just recompense
for services rendered remains the same. For even so, hath the Lord
ordained that they which preach the gospel should live of the gospel
• * * Let those who quarrel with the ordinance carry their quarrel
to him who made it, and he is well qualified to sustain and enforce his
own commands, “(pp. 16 and 17.)” After this, who will despair of
your embracing <( the principle ” of National Establishments of
Religion? “There has been a change of dispensation,” yet,
“ the principle” of that dispensation “remains the same !” This is
exactly my position when arguing for Church Establishments from
Barrow.


God’s word. “ The principle ” of Civil Establishments of Religion
pervades the legal and Christian economies. You have committed
yourself to “ this principle ,” you have defended it in the very
words of St. Paul!!
Christ and His Apostles could not expect “ State aid.” In
their days, no Joseph was at the helm of civil alfairs —then, there
was no Pharoah to endow the Church with a Goshen. But the
Hebrews, whether under the iron rule of power in Egypt, or in
captivity in Babylon, held, though it was not always expedient for
them to assert the principle of National Religious Establishments.
How were Christ and His Apostles supported on the Voluntary
System ? He had nowhere to lay His head—they had “no certain
dwelling-place” and suffered hunger and nakedness.* Has either
Christ or His Apostles said one word against National Establishments
of Religion? Have they anywhere commended the Voluntary System
under which they suffered so many things ? No! But both He and
they countenanced Church Establishments —they preached in “ State
supported” Synagogues and Temples—they contributed towards a
National Establishment of Religion, j- Christ commended others for
doing the same thing. J Still, you allege that there is not one allusion
in favor of National Establishments in the New Testament! (p. 22.)
When the Apostles refer to Voluntaryism, it is even as a thing of
expediency, leaving the conclusion that, if it were expedient , they had
power to accept support from the State. They never imagined that
the duty enjoined on the people, freed the State from its obligations to
the Church of God, and involved a separation of the people, in the
capacity addressed, from the Christian State. They never touch the
question of a separation, but assert the spiritual character and moral
power of the Church. It was expedient, for a time, to lay aside the
practice of circumcision. Was it unlawful afterwards to restore it ?
In the days of Constantine, Christians believed the Church was entitled
to support from the State, This is declared by one whose hostility to
• 1 Corinthians, iv., 11, 13. 2 Corinthians, xi., 23, 27.
f Matthew, xvii., 27. See Mant and Whitby on these passages; also
Prideaux’s Connexion, vol. 1, p. 132.
+ Mark xii., 41, 44. See Horne’s Comp. Introduction to the study of the
Bible, Ninth Edition, p. 274.


National Establishments was as bitter as your own. Gibbon writes,
“When Constantine embraced the Christian faith, he seemed to
contract a perpetual alliance with a distinct and independent Society:
and the privileges granted or conferred by that Emperor, or by his
successors, were accepted, not as the precarious favours of the Court,
hut as the just and inalienable rights of the Ecclesiastical OrderT *
Nor did Voluntaryism secure the purity of the Christian Church: for,
to the Apostles’ days we can trace the germs of Arianism and Popery,
which afterwards were fully developed in the Church. It was not,
however, till Cromwell and his Independents overthrew both Church
and State, that the box was opened, whence issued heresies which
never before had appeared among men.
Your ideas of an ecclesiastical establishment seem inseparably
connected with “taxation” (p. 12.) “robbery,” “handcuffs,” and
“ imprisonment.” (pp. 10 and 11.) But these have no necessary
connexion with a National Establishment of Religion. Were the
Church endowed with tithes or lands, she wonld be supported in
honour and independence. Of tithes, and all “ State endowments,” you
say “Away with them.” Oliver Cromwell, “ The Great Man” among
Independents, was of a better mind when his eyes were opened to see
the havoc he had made among sacred things. He would have
restored in all essentials that ancient constitution which the majority of
the people had always loved, f When it was too late, he saw and
understood the beauty and utility of those establishments, civil and
ecclesiastical, over the ruins of which he had made his way to power:
and gladly would he have restored the monarchy and the Episcopal
Church ? J Nor did he wish, until a better plan could be devised for
maintaining the Clergy, to abolish tithes. He countenanced “ a just
maintenance ”to the Church “by tithes or otherwise.” “ For my part
I would think it very treacherous,” said Cromwell, “if I took away
tithes till I see the Legislative power settle maintenance to ministers
another way. But whoever they be that shall contend to destroy
tithes, it doth as surely cut their, the Ministers’ throats, as is a drift to
take tithes away, before another mode of maintenance, or way of
* “Decline and Fall,” vol. 1, p. 305. f Macaulay’s History of
England, voL 1, p. 132. \ Southey’s Book of the Church, p. 481.


preparation, towards such, be had. Truly, I think all such practices
and proceedings should he discontinued. I have heard it from as
gracious a minister as any in England, —I have heard it professed, that
it would be a far greater satisfaction to them to have maintenance
another way, if the state will provide it. Therefore, I think, for
the keeping of the Church and people of God, and professors in their
several forms; in their liberty, I think as it, this of tithes or some
other maintenance, hath been a thing that is the root of visible
profession * * * * you will find a blessing in it
Independents admire the Usurper’s principles in the first stages of
his career. Will they endorse those he enunciated when his under-
standing was enlarged, and his judgment ripened.
You have dragged into this discussion the question of Church Rates.
To soil the fair reputation of the Church of England, you tell that two
persons had been imprisoned in England, because they were unable to
pay the Church Rates, (p. 11.) Admitting your version of the story to he
true, it proves only, that the law concerning Church Rates requires
immediate amendment. “ There are signs,” you say, “of improvement
in the administering of the law relative to Church Rates,” and that they
are likely soon to be “ put on a different footing .” This word “footing,”
you eagerly lay hold of for the purpose of descanting on “ chemical
affinity,” and the materials which composed the feet of Nebuchad-
nezzar’s image. You are not the first Independent Preacher who
has proclained his folly to the world when approaching even the feet of
the Symbol of Prophecy. Had you not assailed the Church of England,
I would have left undisturbed the dark doings of the Independents.
Now, however, I shall break your Dagon’s head and hands on the
threshold of this argument. You have resorted to the boyish practise
of throwing stones; I purpose, therefore, to demolish the glass house
in which you have ensconced yourself. You have put your foot into the
heart of Independency.
I will not speak of the Independents, during the “ Great Rebellion,”
demolishing “ the carved work of God’s house with axes and hammers”
—dragging the body of an Archbishop, of the Anglican Church,
* Cromwell’s Letters and Speeches, by Thomas Carlyle, Speech sth, vol. 4,
p. 125-6.


from its grave, to bury ft in a dunghill. * Independency iu power is
my subject. It ejected seven thousand Clergymen of the English
Church from their Benefices f which were nearly all bestowed on
Independent Preachers.% These intruders, whom, doubtless, you
reckon among “the Sacramental Host of God's Elect” (p. 15.)
declaimed against pluralities when they could not get them; but being
within their reach they had no scruples of conscience in holding “ two
or three livings.” From 1641 to 1647, no fewer than one hundred
and fifteen clergymen were turned out of their livings within the
Bills of Mortality—they were plundered, and their children set in the
streets. § Did not Waller, the Independent General, treat Chilling-
worth, the champion of Protestantism, with so great barbarity that he
died ? Did not Cheynel, the Independent Chaplain, pronounce an
infamous oration over the grave of this immortal man, and throw into
it to rot, as he said, with its author, that book which is dear to every
lover of evangelical truth ?|| The Independents tolerated the pro-
pagators of all heresies, but placed their ban on the members of the
English Church. In those days there were Sectaries, called by the
Presbyterians, “ Strange monsters, having their heads of Enthusiasm,
their bodies of Antinomianism, their thighs of Familism, their legs and
feet of Anabaptism, their hands of Arminianism ; and Libertinism, the
great vein running through the whole.* All these enjoyed a full and
unbounded liberty of professing publicly their respective doctrines.
The Episcopalians alone were excepted from this toleration and received
the most severe and iniquitous treatment And they who were loudest
in their professions of Independency, imbrued their hands most deeply in
the blood of their king, who was martyred for the liberties of the
Church and State.J
Referring to the Independents of Massachusetts, in America, I say
nothing of the Frauds they practised to obtain and retain the Royal
Charter § —of their Ingratitude \\ —their Republican predilections*—
• Southey’s Book of the Church, pp. 446, 447.
•j- Southey’s Book of the Church, p. 448. Macaulay’s History of England,
vol. 1, pp. 158, 160. % Collier, 11., 828. § Ibid.
|| Southey’s Book of the Church, p. 448. * Ibid., 477-8.
| Mosheim, p. 445, vol. 2. J Macaulay’s History of England, p. 128,
vol. 1. § See Judge Halyburton’s Buie and Misrule of the English in
America, pp. 40, 76, 84, 90, 93, vol. 1. || Rule and Misrule, p. 126,
vol. 1. • Ibid., 43, 46, 126, 294.


their Defiance of Royal Authority * and their Duplicity f They
professed to leave England to be free from ecclesiastical control, J and
established their own Independent Church, on the basis of intolerance
and They passed an Act for the building of houses, from
State funds, for the Independent Clergy. || All who were not Members
of this Independent State Church, were deprived of their Civil Rights,*
and ‘ taxed ’ to support the Independent Preachers, f
New England, writes “ Cotton Mather,” being a country where
interests are remarkably enwrapped in ecclesiastical circumstances,
Ministers ought to concern themselves in politics ” —You say, “ Our
churches are not in any sense political institutions.” (p. 22.) So,
there is a great difference between you and “ Brother Mather,” as to
the Constitution of Independent Churches. lam not surprised at this:
for sometimes you speak of them as having no constitution, no visible
existence, and then you enrich them with Tables and Temporalities,
with Deacons and Ministers ”/
Nor did the Independents of Massachusetts merely “ tax ” men for
the support of their Religion: they persecuted all who would not
conform to Independency. Two gentlemen named Brown were
transported because they were Quakers were fined,
whipped, had their tongues bored through with a red hot iron, and
hanged !§ These Independents had as “rooted” an aversion to
witches, as you have to the Fathers of the Christian Church, whose
names will be held in everlasting remembrance, but to whom you have
applied the words of the Prophet—“ Seek unto them that have familiar
spirits, and unto wizards that peep and mutter,” (p. 6.) If, however, the
so-called witches and wizards of Massachusetts were of the same
character and principles as the doctors of the Ancient Church, we shall
esteem them as martyrs for Civil and Religious Liberty. The Inde-
pendents filled their prisons with supposed witches. In June, 1692, one
was executed. In July, five old women suffered death. In September,
two men and six women were burned by independents for witchcraft;
and for the same alleged crime, the Rev, Mr, Burrows, of Salem,
* Ibid, 24. f Rule and Misrule, 28, 30, 32, 343,346, vol. 1, p. 357, vol. 2.
X Ibid, 28, vol 1.
§ Rule and Misrule, p. 58, vol. 1. |) Ibid, p. 66. * Ibid.
f Ibid, p. 239. + Ibid, p, 35. § Ibid, 161, 164.


was put to death * From these facts the public will perceive, that
there is something very “ unchristian, earthly, unsociable, and
violent ” in connexion with the History of Independency —that, at one
time, “it was unfriendly to the growth of religious knowledge,
primitive morality a chaste faith, and universal love.” (p. 11.)
Indeed, when calmly considering the conduct of Independent Ministers
under Cromwell, and in Massachusetts, “ I hesitate not to say, that the
insatiable selfishness and grasping rapacity of these men * * *
have done more to obstruct the progress of true Christianity than the
open efforts of avowed unbelievers” “The worldly spirit of”
Independent Preachers, “ who hunted after rich livings, has damaged
religion to an extent which, only the disclosures of the judgment day,
will fully make known.” (pp. 27 and 28.)
The Church of England compelled the Independents of Massachusetts
to he tolerant, f Men of almost every class, admit the moderation of
the English Establishment—that there is no section of the Church
Universal that would have used power with such moderation as the
ministers of the Church of England. “ The day which shall transfer
their power to any Christian sect, with its present prejudices and
prepossessions, the nation will hang deplore. J You say the Chinch
of England is “ unscriptural in its frame.” (p. 11.) A greater man
than you are, —who was not one of this Church’s ministers, —declared
that “ She has stood the foremost and wielded the mightiest polemic
arm in the battles of the faith.” § You insinuate that her ministers are
“ Men who cannot teach and will not learn. (p. 28.) He says—
“ She is signalized by the prowess of her sons in the high walks of
Christian scholarship,” and eulogises her Clarkes, Butlers, Warburtons,
Hurds, Horseleys, and Paleys.jl The Church of England “un-
scriptural ! ” Robert Hall, the most eloquent of all Independent
preachers, said, —“ Her Liturgy is by far the greatest uninspired work
extant.” * That eminent Wesleyan, Dr. Adam Clarke, says —‘ 4 It has no
equal in any part of the Universal Church of God—it is founded on
* “ The Independents who burned some hundreds for Witchcraft, and hanged
Quakers, proposed more massacres than they executed.” D'lsraeli's Charles /.,
Ul f’ Rule'and Misrule, p. 279. J The Rev. Samuel Drew, (Wesleyan.)
§ Dr. Chalmers’ Sermon on Antiquity, p. 31. || Ibid 31.
* Quoted in Rule and Misrule, p. 336, vol. 1.


those doctrines which contain the sum and substance of Christianity,
and of the most refined devotional feeling. Next to the Bible it is the
book of my understanding and of my heart * Dr. McAIl, a gifted
Independent minister, said,—“ I believe the great and leading doctrines
of the National Church to be those of the New Testament, and shall
defend and enforce them in my public addresses and my private life.” f
You object to the Church of England as “a system.” (p. 11.)
Mosheim informs us that the English Church approaches near to the
rites and discipline of former times; and that, in the most important
points, it is entirely opposite to the principles of the Homan hierarchy. +
The Synod of Dort, “ had the Church of England in great honour, and
wished they could establish themselves on the same model. For, the
Bishops of the English Church, in removing the rubbish which had
accumulated in her from the usurpation of Rome, kept steadily in view
the practise and institutions of the primitive ages. § The learned
Grotius, writing to Johannes Corvinus, said, —“ You see how great a
progress the Bishops of the English Church have made in England, in
purging out pernicious doctrines, chiefly for this reason, because they
who undertook that holy work admitted of nothing new, nothing of their
own, but had their eyes wholly fixed on another world.” Her principles
are evangelical —she has an historic constitution an existence sig-
nificant of universality.
Having maligned the Church of England, you laud Independency,
as being “ the primitive form of Church Government ” (p. 31.) From
Ecclesiastical History we learn, that Independency took its rise in
Holland, during 1610, and that the first Independent congregation,
“ was set up in England ”in 1616. || Connected with your “ primitive
form of Church Government” you teach the doctrine of Apostolical
Succession. “ We” (the Independent Preachers) “ are the true suc-
cessors of the Apostles”! (p. 31.) You repudiate Episcopacy, whilst
claiming antiquity!! Robert Hall admitted that the Church was
governed by Bishops in the latter part of St. John s life.* In your
hatred of Episcopacy, you libel the Bishops of the Anglican Church—
* Srb his Letter to a Wesleyan Preacher ; also his General Preface to his
Commentary on the Bible, p. 20. f His life by Wardlaw, p. 7 4.
+ Ecclesiastical History, vol. 2, p. 61. § Ibid, P-181. H Ibid, 443
• Bishop Wilson’s Sermon on “ Apostolical Communion.


‘‘Consecration by a Bishop savours of impiety ” (p. 26.) They
merely set apart the buildings to the special service of God “by
prayer.” At such “consecration” the word of God is read, and the
Sacrament of the Lord’s Supper duly administered. But when Bishops
do this, you say, they act impiously! Alas, for that primitive spirit of
Christianity of which you boast (p. 31.) The primitive Christians loved
each other —esteemed their Bishops very highly for their office sake,
but you are the malignant traducer of the Episcopal order. *
In your compassion for “ the hard working ministers of the Episcopal
Church,” you inform the public that, “they are very poor”—wear
“ seedy coats,” and are often dependent upon casual charity for a
“ new ”or cast-a-way coat,” (pp. 26, 27.) In return for your exertions
to improve the temporal condition of the Clergy of “ State paid Churches,”
I would remind you that preachers, under the Voluntary System, are
not generally in circumstances so independent as to justify you in
instituting a comparison to our disadvantage, between them and us.
Is it not true that Independent preachers, in Launceston, for the
purpose of supplying their hearers’ lack of service towards them, have
become hirelings of the press and keepers of petty day schools ? Is it
not true, that an Independent' preacher of mature age—not one
hundred miles from Hobart Town, whose family is large and whose
salary is small, fell into debt? Were his private and domestic
arrangements not all laid before a “ Church Meeting,” and did not
that meeting endeavour to ascertain on how much this Independent
minister was able to exist ? Has this good man, who is growing old
in the service of Independents, not been compelled, through sheer
necessity, to accept the cast off clothes of others for the use of his
family ? And did his amiable wife and excellent daughter not conduct
a seminary for young ladies, to keep starvation from the door?
Probably the voluntaries whom this Independent minister serves, are,
in your estimation, “ men who wish to take a calm and dispassionate
view of things—men in love with truth—acting under the influence of
Christian principle —capable of exercising a cool and impartial judgment
♦ Independents, and almost every other body of Christians, have religious
services at the opening of their places of Worship, which stand them instead of
Consecration ; and at those Services many absurdities and errors are proclaimed
by enthusiasts and canters.


upon the various matters brought before them as an associate body of
Christian men, and ready on all occasions to obey the commands of
Christ!” (p. 22.) . . ,
Your test of Church Membership is “ character ” and spiritual
fitness.” There are few men who have not a “character” of
some kind. Are Independents prepared to admit all men into their
communion? Hugh Peters, “when expelled from all respectable
society” found an asylum among the Independents* Until you
published that “character” and “spiritual fitness” are the solo
qualifications requisite to entitle a man to communion with Indepen-
dents, I did think that their admission of members now was stricter
than ’during the Great Rebellion. You throw to the winds all
“ Creeds ” and “ Confessions of Faith.” So, among Independents every
man is a creed to himself. Quakers, Baptists, Methodists, &c
appeal “to the Law and to the Testimony”—all “take their stand
on “ last principles” (p. 31.)— all abuse the Church of England all
have “character” and “spiritual fitness : ’’-all, therefore may, if
they please, rank with Independents! The Church of Eiiglam
is much different from Independency. Taking the Word of God she
has embodied the substance of it in the Creeds, Articles &c. These
are to her what rules and regulations are to other societies.
Among Independents, however, unity of faith, discipline or conduc ,
cannot be secured. One class of Independent preachers, “ proffers the
right hand of fellowship to ministers of all denominations. Another
class refuses to hold spiritual connexion with “ State paid ministers.
Some of them “ rejoice in the spread of the gospel, whoever preaches
it.” Others “cannot convert souls, if not as Cougregationahsts. j
Some build churches, ostensibly, “ for the love of Gon.” Others erect
them, avowedly, to make proselytes to Independency ! J
• Rule and Misrule, p. 123, vol. 1. See Macaulay’s History of England,
i nn 597-8 for another case of a similar kind.
+ o, “ i ere ' u i
*•— ,to
U”Te’u!^t°|-fcMe , c B.?nghdJ 8 .?nghdJ in the Congregational Chapel, Pitt Street,
when the Independent Church Building Society was established in Sydney. G. A.
Lloyd’s Speech: Sydney Morning Herald, 7th June,


Independents are loud in their denunciations of “the exclusiveness of
the Episcopal Clergy” and “the tyrany of Bishops.” A respected
minister, not connected with any ecclesiastical establishment, writes,
“ The Congregational Board, as respects authority, will soon be on a
footing with the Roman Papacy !! ”
You say the Church of England owes its existence to Acts of
Parliament, (p. 23.) As you seem fond of quoting from “ the whimsical
author of Sam Slick” (p. 20.) I will treat you to a few facts from
Judge Halyburton* He says the Church of England was founded by
one of the Apostles of Christ, —is co-eval, if not anterior to the Romish
Communion—that nearly 600 years before Augustine’s mission to
England, the Anglican Church had her Bishops, Priests, and Deacons.f
Her Bishops, for a time, resisted the encroachments of Rome,;}; but
were at length overwhelmed by Romish domination. At the Reform-
ation, the English Church was restored to her primitive independence,
and exercised her peculiar privileges. Romanists themselves, when
permitted to exercise an independent judgment, admitted the unex-
ceptionable character, and great beauty of the English Church, and
joined in her services for twelve years. Two Popes, Paul and Pius IV.
would have acknowledged her claims, had Queen Elizabeth confessed
the supremacy of the Roman Pontiff. These are truths which an
intelligent, educated layman of the English Church has gleaned from
history, and published to the world. You are referred to him, rather
than to divines of the English Establishment, for you might regard
their testimony as interested.
You attack Civil Establishments of Religion on the ground of their
inefficiency; and assert that the Voluntary System “supports more
ministers, builds more places of worship, and teaches more children,”
than Churches connected with the State, (p. 24.) Are Religious
Establishments really or necessarily inefficient ? In Scotland from
1638 to 1660, when the Church had reached the ideal of her
relations with the State, every parish had a minister, every village a
* Rule and Misrule, pp. 334, 337, vol. 1.
oil a of o? 7 e Br i tis f h ? hurch were P resent at the Council of Arles, A.D.
chriln 8 h L" ; f 3 A 9 r mum ’ s “ BingWs »<
X Bingham, vol. 1, pp. 75, 349.


school, every family a Bible, —all children of age could read ; the Holy
Scriptures and the name of God were respected * The Established
Church of Scotland’s mission to the Jews is a noble undertaking f
Her revenue for ecclesiastical purposes in 1838 —39 was <£69,412.J
During five years 200 Churches were added to the Establishment,
whilst none were built by the Dissenting bodies.§ The Chapels
of Ease were supported from pew rents and voluntary contributions,
but “ they were inefficient. Men have no natural appetite for spiritual
things—will not resort to God’s house as they do to the market
place, under the spontaneous impulse of desires which they are
eager to indulge. Voluntaryism would drag the great mass of the
population “ into the depths of an irreligion and vice, from winch, with
but the means and forces of a Voluntary Church, we never could recall
them.”* Historians and Statesmen, of the first class, have given
expression to their abhorrence of the Voluntary System, and have
defended National Establishments of Religion.f
Churches holding the Voluntary principle “ support more ministers,
build more places of worship, teach more children than Churches
connected with the State !!” Where ? In Ireland ? The Roman
Catholic Church does not hold the Voluntary Principle : and iu Ireland,
Independents are nearly as rare as true Christians are in those Tartar
hordes, among whom an Independent preacher in Sydney, professes to
have introduced Voluntaryism. In Scotland ? The Free Church does
not hold the Voluntary principle. Her standards are those of the
Established Church; and these defend National Establishments of
Religion. The Scotch never relished Independency + In England ?
The Bishop of London has recently shewn (the basis of his argument
is the Census of 1851) that the Church of England is the great
Instructress of the people. To this Census Dissenters appeal to show
• Kirkton’s History of the Church of Scotland, pp. 63, 64.
f Ten Years’ Conflict, vol. 1. p. 326. J Ibid, p. 330.
S Ibid, 331. 11 Ibid, 309.
i Dr. Chalmers, quoted in Ten Years’ Conflict, p. 446. See his Plea for
Endowments.” _ , . _ . , , ~,
+ See Alison’s Europe, vol. 2, pp. 194-5. Burke s Works, vol. 1. pp. 410,
416, 419, 420, 436, 437, vol. 2, pp. 498 and 499. “ The Voluntary
liberality of individuals, even in times of the greatest excitement, is a poor
financial resource.” Macaulay’s History of England, vol. 1,113.
j Macaulay’s History #f England, vol. 1, pp. 122 and 129.


that dissent is on the increase, and that they are rapidly multiplying
their Churches. This Census proves “ that the State has devoted
time and funds to increase the facilities of worship and make men
moral by the influence of religion.” The Census “ Returns” as to the
“ progress of Church Building ” were “ got up ” on the Voluntary
principle. “ They are not complete,” Voluntaryism, take it as you
will, is a most incomplete thing. Yet, incomplete as the Census is
admitted to be, it shows that more than one-half of the sittings in
England and Wales, are provided by the Establishment. Her places
of worship are substantial ecclesiastical edifices. They are separate
buildings. The Census assures us “ that all the places of worship are
not enumerated,” and that “ more than one-tenth of those returned are
not separate buildings !” The Dissenters have returned all the hovels
in which they not unfrequently perform their worship, and they compare
these with the noble edifices of the venerable Establishment. The
Voluntary system is deceptive throughout, and will be as evanescent
as those dilapidated frail, mercantile looking structures, which some-
times represent it in England, New South Wales, and Tasmania.
Nor is the English Establishment in this Colony inefficient. You treat
your readers to assertions. I will give them proofs. For, in these
times of practical issues, nothing less will satisfy the public. Here,
the Church of England has above one hundred ministers and about sixty
substantial Churches in which large congregations assemble. The
Independents have ten preachers and two or three Churches. The
Balmain congregation “ consists of twenty-two members.” The
Church of Maitland of “ Twenty-four members! * lam told that the
day schools connected with the Independents in New South Wales do
not number five hundred children. In the schools belonging to the
Church of England during 1853, six thousand eight hundred and
eighty-seven children received a sound religious and secular education.-j-
In 1853, the Independents raised £2,164. J The “ State paid Church
of England” in the Diocese of Sydney raised, during 1853, nearly
£lB,OOO, and in 1854, the sum of .£29,312 for ecclesiastical purposes.§
* Report of the Congregational Home Missionary Society for New South
Wales — “Empire,” 13th October, 1854.
f Annual Report of the Denominational School Board, 1853.
+ Congregational Report, supra.
§ Reports of the Diocesan Committee, 1853 and 1854.


Now, with all these facts staring you in the face, will you say that the
Voluntary System “supports more ministers, builds more places of
worship, and teaches more children” than Churches connected with
the State?
Nor has the Voluntary System succeeded in Scotland * America is
the only country where Voluntaryism has been tried on a large scale.
And how does it work there ? Morality declines in America, f The
spiritual destitution of that country is deplorable. Whole masses of the
population are without the means of grace, j “ A vast population exists
in the United States for whom no means of grace whatever are
provided. The most accurate examination would fix the number at
not less than Five Millions. * * * The whole nominal professors
of religion in the land does not much exceed Two Millions, while the
population numbers Eighteen Millions .§ Instead of improving, Church
affairs are growing worse in America. In 1850 Nine Millions of souls
were altogether unprovided with the means of grace. || There are
districts in America consisting of from fifteen to twenty thousand souls
entirely destitute of any religious ministry* The Baptist sect alone
proclaims a want of above three thousand ministers to supply the
existing Churches.f The number of Churches in America in 1853
was 15,477, but there were only 12,130 ministers.^
There are “ seedy coats” to be seen among the American Clergy.
“They have a poor time of it” under the Voluntary System, The
highest salary a minister can expect in America, in any communion, is
2,500 dollars. “ This is but a mere subsistence, and will hardly
enable a city minister to maintain and educate his family. § Hence,
many American ministers have deserted their churches, and sought
for a more profitable sphere of labour.”U
Education, in America, is not in a more prosperous state than
* Home and Foreign News, (a Free Church publication,) August and
September, 1854.
f Marryatt’s America, vol. 1, p. 220. X Ibid, P-219-
§ Report of the American Board of Education, March Bth, 1844.
i| Blackwood’s Magazine.
* The Rev. J. S. Mills, an American Clergyman, quoted by Dr, Chalmers,
in his “ Plea for Endowments.”
•J- Martineau 111., 272, 273. J Ibid.
§ Religion and Education in America, p. 196.
1| The Rev. Dr. Fullerton.


Religion. In Georgia 41,000 white citizens were unable to read
In Virginia 80,000 were in the same predicament. The evil is
conceded to be a growing one. In Virginia and Georgia, in 1840, the
number of uneducated whites was increasing. This is true to a greater
or less degree of every Republic below Mason and Dixon’s Line.
South Carolina, Alabama, and Mississippi, if not North Carolina, are
far worse off, because the several Governments act on the Voluntary
System. They will not educate the people.*
The utter neglect of the poor, as respects Religion and Education, is
a “ distinguishing principle ” of Voluntaryism. Under the American
Church System there is no provision for the poor. Those only who
can afford religion may obtain it.-j- They who cannot pay pew rents
are in charge of none.J But the neglect of the poor is not the
“distinguishing principle ” of National Churches. “The Christian
Statesman provides for the multitude. It is the first object in the
ecclesiastical institution. Nor can we think that men really
believe the gospel who do not take care that it should be preached to
the poor.”§
In America, the people elect their own ministers. This is not a
“ primitive ” practice, though classed with those “ last principles ” on
which Independents “take their stand”—Such a “custom” was un-
known in the Apostolic Church —in any branch of the Christian Church,
till the date of Independency. Then only, did laymen begin to elect
and ordain their own ministers. In America, the pew holders
not only elect the minister, they also pay him.jl He is their
hired servant. He must suit his preaching to their taste, —he is in
dread of his congregation. If he displease a man of importance
or a busy woman, there is an end of his peace. Popularity is the
measure of his comfort. At first he is most popular. By and bye
his support begins to flag, then his maintenance is reduced and
he is forced to emigrate.* This system of popular (Section is ruinous.
It makes religion descend from its function of correcting national and
* Philadelphia Leader. f Marryatt’s America, 219.
+ Wilberforce’s History of the American Church, p. 439, 440.
§ Burke’s Works, vol. 1, p. 419.
II Wilberforce’s History of the American Church, p. 439, 440.
* A Voice from America, 194, 199.


personal vices, and boldly denouncing the national sins in the ruling power.
In these circumstances Religion becomes little more than the re-echo
of public opinion* The people of America rule with a high hand in
the Church. They elect, hire, and dismiss the minister, just as they
please. The Rev. Jonathan Edwards, was minister of the Church at
Northampton, Massachusetts, for twenty years. His Church roll having
become rather corrupt, he resolved to purge it. But the sovereign people
hearing this, met and voted him out of the Church ! Writing to his
friend, professor Hodge, he said —“ I have been long out of conceit of our
unsettled, independent way of Church government.”-}- Sometimes how-
ever, they do not vote the minister out, but merely “ stop the supplies,”
This answers the same purpose; they get rid of him :so that “if no other
argument against a ” Voluntary “ paid ministry could be found, the
manifest evils which it inflicts upon the ministers so sustained, would lead
us to regard the system as being at once dangerous, and unwise,” (p. 28.)
One (not the minister of an Established Church) whose experience
of Voluntaryism has been great, writes: —“ It tends to promote division
and tyranny, arising from irresponsible persons having authority over
the ministers whom they set up and puff up, or put down and destroy ,
just as those who hold the purse strings choose.”
Some American Voluntaries make a speculation of God’s house. It
pays them; though they keep their ministers in poverty. They club
together,—build a church, and let out the sittings to some popular
preacher, who, so long as he can draw a congregation together is
allowed to retain his place, but when he fails to do this, he is obliged
to give way to some one else. This is a common practise; and Dr.
Campbell, of London, has written several articles in his “ Banner ”
exposing it. J
The American clergy are, no doubt, men of “ popular talents’ ’ —
able to speak as profanely as you do concerning the salvation of men's
pockets, (p. 10.) £ and as wildly about “ offering a ransomed world at
the foot of the cross,” though the agency of Independent preachers and
Voluntary contributions (p. 31.) —they may possess great “ tact" in
“taking up" the offerings of the Church, and their knowledge of
• Alison’s Europe, voL 19, pp. 47-48.
f Religion and Education in America, pp. 64-65.
X Rev. Dr. Fullerton.


“ Globes” (p. 11.) may be as profound as your own—they may be as
able as you are, to perceive the difference between “ dedication ” and
“ consecration ” when applied to the setting apart of Churches to God’s
service, (p. 26.) But there are few who will say that either you or
they, have “ the position,” social, political, or ecclesiastical, which the
ministers of the established Churches of England and Scotland possess.
Nay, you even admit the “exemplary” diligence of “State paid
ministers ” in visiting their people, whilst you say that preachers on the
Voluntary System are negligent in the discharge of this important branch
of clerical duty. (p. 22.) Miss Martineau, herself a Voluntary, declares
that the American Clergy are the most backward and timid class in the
society in which they live. They are self-exiled from the great moral
questions of the time, the least informed with true knowledge, and the
Great Supporters of the Slave System. For their living depends
on the opinion of those whom they serve* Such are the fruits of the
Voluntary System in America. Nor could we expect better results
from a “Church system” introduced by President Jefferson, an
avowed infidel. This Apostate of the West, hoped to do, by means of
Voluntaryism, what his great antitype could not, by artifice and open
hostility accomplish in the Roman dominions.
Your assertion that the sum of Church History is against the
principle of National Establishments of Religion, receives little support
from Baptist Noel’s statement that the union of Church and State
“is condemned by history,”(p. 26.) He would tell you that Infant Bap-
tism “is condemned by history.” You would not believe him. D’Aubigne
is merely the historian of the reformation. Your reference to Mosheim
is unhappy—For he reckons princes and magistrates among the
Church’s benefactors. Nor does he say a single word —so far as I can
remember, in favor of the Voluntary System, All the Standard Writers
of Church history since the days of Christ, held the principle of
national establishments. Are you ignorant of the %ct, that Milner,
whom churchmen and dissenters generally admire, has, in his eccle-
siastical history, defended with great ability, civil establishments of
religion ?
Because the state sometimes supports “ truth and error,” you argue
Martineau 111. 278, 283. Alison’s Europe, vol. 19, p. 49.


that the principle of national establishments is pernicious (p. 24.) Is
such support inseparably connected with the principle of national
establishments ? Better that the State should support every form of
Christianity, than that it should support none. Should churchmen in
Tasmania, renounce state aid, because Independent Churches there
applied for and obtained it ? They are not responsible for the conduct
of the State. Shall we, because God sends His rain on the grounds of
inconsistent, turbulent, malicious people, cover in our own to prevent
heaven’s blessings from reaching them? Shall we spurn the kings
bounties, because rebels have experienced them ? When bread
is offered us, shall we refuse it, because some who received
bread applied it to a use which we think is highly improper ?
Strange as it may seem that you and I should agree on any point,
I admit your statement that those who profit from a minister’s labours
should attend to his temporal wants (pp. 20, 24.) From your con-
cession I educe an argument in favor of national establishments of
religion. For, as by the labours of Christian ministers, the State is
benefitted—they transform the drunkard into a sober—the thief into
an honest, and the miser into a liberally minded man —it is bound, on
your own showing, to maintain the Christian ministry in honour and
independence. But for this ministry, gaols and gibbets would be more
numerous than they are. Its teaching has, by God's grace accompanying
it, turned many subjects and rulers from sin to holiness. It benefits
the State —has claims on the Government, not merely for protection,
but support. Unless this be afforded in New South Wales, the most
fearful spiritual destitution will ensue. The people are too com-
monly like your model magistrate Gallic, (p. 21.) Their eyes are blinded
by Mammon: And unless the awful realities of eternity are pressed on
their attention, they will never care for any of those things which
concern their souls.*
• Report of the Select Committee of the Legislative Council of New South
Wales, on Clergymen’s Stipends, October, 1854,
Even as respects worldly business the Voluntary System does not suit here.
At a meeting of the Sydney Chamber of Commerce, held on 14th June, 1855,
“ to consider the best means of assisting in the establishment of a nautical school
in Sydney ” —a proposition was made that the public would contribute one-half of
the current expenses, if an annual grant from the general revenue to the same amount
were guaranteed by the Government on that condition — Mr. Murnin “ thought
it extremely doubtful if the City would subscribe largely. Indeed, whatever
it might do at first, people would soon fall off when they were asked year after year."


Certain Churches which had received State support in Van
Diemen’s Land and Victoria, having hoisted the flag of Voluntaryism,
I took occasion in my pamphlet entitled “ The Voluntary System
Exposed, and Civil Establishments of Religion Justified” to refer
to their inconsistency. You have essayed a reply. It is this: “ The
Book will soon sink in the gulf of oblivion, with its leaden weight of
falsities and misrepresentations.” (p. 22.) It may, indeed, soon be
forgotten ; but the truths which it enunciates are eternal. Had you
instanced these “ falsities and misrepresentations,” I would now be
in a better position than lam to defend myself. You have not done
this ; yet, you accuse me of falshood and a perversion of the truth !
Is this manly ? Is it conduct worthy of a gentleman ? A liar is
justly held in universal detestation, he is a moral pestilence and
friendship withers at his touch. But you, who profess to be a minister
of the meek and lowly Jesus, have attempted publicly to fasten on
me, a minister of Christ, the brand of falsehood and misrepresentation,
without offering any evidence in proof of your accusation. Worldly
men will call your conduct dishonorable, and godly men will
denounce it as sinful.
In my first publication I was as particular as I have been in this,
to give the authorities whence I derived my information. The works
from which I quoted are accessible to the public. The quotations are
honestly made: nor have I charged any religious body professing
Voluntaryism, with acts they never committed. If, however, you
had any doubt of the truth of my statements; it was your duty,
before accusing me of falsehood and misrepresentation, to make
a searching inquiry into the whole matter. Obviously, you have
left this undone. With an unqualified and sinful recklessness you
Mr. Hirst said “ that in Sydney, unfortunately, wherever the Voluntary
System has been introduced it had always fallen upon the zealous few. (Hear
hear.) Why, not more than 150 were to be found, who, conscientiously and
steadily did what was to be done in matters of benevolence ; whilst every person,
not only in the City, but throughout the Colony, were one and all equally
concerned in staying the effects of crime, pauperism, and disease. Look at the
Benevolent Asylum, at the Sydney Infirmary; look at their yearly meetings
and their yearly subscriptions. Why, year after year the same few alone attended
and alone subscribed. And with the truly honorable exception of the Patriotic
Fund, the most culpable selfishness was displayed by the citizens, when asked to
subscribe to benevolent objects” Sydney Morning Herald, 15th June, 1855.


have, in your haste, circulated “an evil report against your
neighbour.” Your example is pernicious: you have spoken without
reflection —asserted without proof, and slandered without compunction.
Your mode of disposing of facts and arguments unpalatable to
you, will content those persons only to whom truth is nothing,
except in so far as it suits their whims, and to whom Sectarianism
and detraction are all things. It will not satisfy the enquiring,
the honest and good. I charge you, on the strength of the evidence
I have already published, and your mode of reply, with a wilful
defamation of one who has written the truth, because he did so:
and with a sinful denial of the truth itself, because it strikes at the
root of your Sectarianism and prejudices. I challenge you by any
kind of legitimate evidence, to invalidate one fact I have adduced.
Declamation and bare assertion may suit those who are unable,
or unwilling to test theory by fact; but all whose opinions are
worth having, will not fail to estimate aright your mode of attack
and defence.
The worthlessness of your statements and the wickedness of
your accusation become more apparent and appaling to all lovers
of truth, when they are looked at in connexion with what has
taken place in the Colonial Independent Church. That the public
may have a correct and condensed view of the case, wherein you,
an Independent preacher, have committed yourself to the charge of
defamation, and solemnly accused me of having published lies and
misrepresented truth, I shall place my printed statements and youis
side by side, and submit my evidence. No one will then have any
difficulty in arriving at a correct verdict, —giving a true deliverance
between us:—
FIRST
My Sta'
“ Mr. Dowling, Baptist min-
ister in Launceston, till very
recently received .£l5O from
the Government as his salary
as Chaplain
Your Reply—
It “ will soon sink in the gulf
of oblivion, with its leaden
weight of falsities and misre-
presentations.’’
Evidence. —For many years past Mr. Dowling appeal’s on the


Public Estimates ” of Van Piemen’s Land, as receiving a salary
in the same way as the other endowed ministers of the colony: And, in
the “ Launceston Examiner ” of 22nd March, 1853, Mr. Dowling
says “The Government” gave him “forage” for a horse; and
that he obtained from the Government, “ for our Chapel the grant
on which to build it: and but for the Church Act, I should have
received £5OO as promised by the Lieutenant-Governor Arthur.” —
Verily Sir, this witness may be heard: he proclaims aloud the
evidence of his own
inconsistency,
and does more than fully
substantiate my statement —-
SECOND: —
My Statement —
“Mr. Price, an Independent
preacher in the same town, got
land from the Government worth
about <£3ooo, and £5OO in cash,
for the purpose of Building his
Church. He has a life interest
in the property.”
Your Reply—
It “ will soon sink in the gulf
of oblivion, with its leaden
weight of falsities and mis-
representations.”
Evidence. —In the “Launceston Examiner” of 22nd March, 1853,
Mr. Dowling writes, that Mr. Price’s Chapel is built on land granted
to the Independents of Launceston, by the Government; and that Mr.
Price has a life interest in the property.
Evidence extracted from the Government Records of an
Diemen’s Land; —
On 19th December, 1832, Messrs. Gilles, Williams, Jennings,
Corbett, Reed, Dowling, Sherwin, and Friend, applied “ on behalf of
the Congregation” attending the Rev. Charles Price, the Independent
minister of Launceston, to solicit the Governor’s “ patronage and
assistance”; and also the grant “of a piece of land,” and “such
further assistance as may be in his power.” The sum of £5OO was
given to Mr. Price’s congregation.
Mr. Charles Price, on 2nd February, 1837, represented to the Lieu-
tenant-Governor’s Private Secretary, that the inhabitants of Launceston,
having subscribed £SOO, the Governor had added £SOO, but that the
£IOOO was insufficient for the erection of the Chapel; and that they


had resolved to subscribe £4OO, “to erect such a building as is
required by the rising Independent interest in the town.” He stated
that they had contracted for the building for £1375, exclusive of pews,
&c.; and that it would take £4OO more for the fittings. He asked the
Government to contribute £375 more, and urged this on the ground
that there was “ no Society to which he could apply for assistance ”
towards the erection of the Chapel: and that they “ belonged to a
denomination of Christians which support their own ministers, and
only ask the Government to assist them in the erection of
their Chapels, when they are not able to build one for themselves.”
Now, of this Chapel built on ground obtained from the Government,
and on which £5OO of Government money have been expended,
Mr. Charles Price, has, with great “ tact ” become “ the Trustee for
life.” “He has a life interest in it.” His congregation cannot vote
him out of the building, he can hold it in defiance of them all.— he
will live in it— he will teach in it, and he will preach in it, whatever
they or others may think, or say, of him using public property for
his own private advantage: And Charles Price is a Voluntary!
“ State support is a cursed thing, is the wedge of gold, and the
Babylonish garment, which brings wrath down on God’s heritage! ’
Yet, Charles Price applied for it— received it, sticks to it; and
withal advocates Voluntaryism!! If Mr. Price is the faithful
expositor of Independency, it teaches that truth is dependent on
circumstances. “ State aid ”is good and lawful, when Independents
require it. But, when they can do without, it becomes “ the leaven
of iniquity !!! ” Are you prepared to disprove these facts ?
THIRD :
My Statement —
“ Mr. Miller, an Independent
minister in Hobart Town, re-
ceived £5OO from the Govern-
ment to build his Chapel. He
has since refused £2OO a year
salary from Government.
Your Reply—
It “ will soon sink in the gulf
of oblivion, with its leaden
weight of falsities and misrep-
resentations.”
Evidence —“ West’s Tasmania,” vol 1. p. 200, shows that the
Government of Van Diemen’s Land gave £5OO towards the building
of Mr. Miller’s Chapel.


From the Government Records of Van Diemen’s Land, I have
ascertained that Mr. Miller’s congregation, represented by Messrs.
Warham, Jennings, Hopkins, Morrison, and Hodgson, waited on his
Excellency Sir George Arthur, and stated that the Chapel was in
debt to the amount of <£4oo, —that they were anxious to build a
minister’s house, and had in view other ecclesiastical purposes which
they wished to carry out. They therefore asked the Government to
yive them <£looo. They received £5OO.
Mr. Miller may say, as he has already said in a letter to a gentle-
man in Sydney, “ I did not get the money, the Trustees did.” But
he is the minister of the Church for which the money was obtained.
He knew where the money came from and how it was appropriated.
He never told the public that the Trustees had done wrong in
soliciting and accepting Government aid. He cannot dissociate himself
from the proceedings of his congregation, acting as such. As a
member of the Independent Chapel he received the £5OO. And as its
minister, he, inconsistently enough, refused the annual salary of £2OO
from the Government. His congregation would not, perhaps, permit him
to accept it. The Independents will receive aid from the State, “ for
ecclesiastical purposes ,” but, the minister must be dependent on
them. They will be his master,
quently prove themselves to be.
and hard masters they not unfre
FOURTH
Mv Statement —
Your Reply—
“ Mr. Morrison, of Victoria,
(Independent) got land from the
Government, on which his con.
gregation built a Chapel, a house,
and a school-room. The remain-
ing portion of the land (worth in
the market, at present, more than
£20,000) is leased for some
£4OO per annum.”
It “ will soon sink in the gulf
of oblivion, with its leaden
weight of falsities and misrep-
resentations.”
Evidence. — The public prints
of Victoria lately announced, that
Mr. Morrison had applied to the Government for “additional sites
for Chapels .” An angry correspondence took place between Mr.
Morrison and a Mr. Odell, another Independent preacher, who accused


Mr. Morrison of betraying Independency, Yet, the Rev. A. Morrison
identified himself with the proceedings of the “ Conference of Congrega-
tional Independents,” held in Melbourne, in February last, where certain
bunkum resolutions were passed respecting Independent “ Collegiate
Institutions ” and “ Statistics .” In this “ Conference,” much bitterness
of feeling was expressed against national establishments of religion; and
the practice of receiving “ occasional grants of money , or gifts of land,”
from the State, was denounced as “ contrary to sound policy, repugnant
to the New Testament, and injurious to that cause it professes to aid ” !!
Now, sir, I have given you the evidence of my statements. If you
cannot disprove it, you will surely apologize for the foul calumny you
have published respecting me. The public expects this —I expect it.
Nor is it more than I am entitled to —you have administered the
poison, now apply the antidote —silence on your part now will be the
evidence of your guilt—that you have maliciously traduced the character
of a Christian minister.
It is pitiable to see a man in your position so degrading himself by
his predilection for slander, as to become the scorn and reproach, even
of the impious and profane. You may yet repent and amend —may
atone for your fault by a plain and public avowal of your grief for the
injury you have striven to inflict upon me. May the God of Truth
forgive you! In sorrow, not in anger, I have written of your conduct;
and in the spirit of love, I would call you to repentance.
Of you personally I know nothing. But, judging from your pam-
phlet, you seem to be a man hunting after popularity, and dealing
largely in cant and clap-trap declamation. Your theology is as defec-
tive as your historical knowledge is limited and shallow. It is a
public calamity when men, such as you are, have charge of Christian
congregations. For your own improvement, and the welfare of your
people, I earnestly recommend to you a severe and well sustained
course of theological, philosophic and historical reading. You will find
“Todd’s Student’s Manuel,” and “Abercromby on the Intellectual
Powers,” useful books, if inclined to act on a suggestion disinterested
and well intended.
I am, Reverend Sir,
Your obedient Servant.
Pitt Town, Parsonage, X. C. EWING.
18#& June,-1855.


