

iA
:
■ Vk
. "




OF THE
THE SPEAKER
LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL,
ON THE FORMATION OF
A SECOND CHAMBER
IN THE
LEGISLATURE OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
JOHN NODES DICKINSON, ESQ.,
ONE OF THE JUDGES OF THE SUPREME COURT.
SYDNEY:
PUBLISHED BY W. R. PIDDINGTON.
1852.
Price One Shilling.




TO THE HONORABLE
THE SPEAKER OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL. *
Sydney, Ist January, 1852.
Sir, —
* The Imperial Parliament having left to our local
Legislature the determination of the important question
respecting the existence of a second Chamber in the Colonial
Council, and as the agitation of that question by the
distinguished body over which you so worthily preside, may,
ere long, be pending, a well wisher to the future prosperity
of this important portion of her Majesty’s dominions, and to
its permanent connexion with the other territories of the
British Empire, embraces this happy season of calm repose
from all political disquietudes, as a fortuqate opportunity,
before any differences of opinion have arisen, or passions been
excited, on the momentous question, to suggest a few remarks
upon the formation of a second House, in the earnest hope
that the proposal of a scheme embracing to some extent the
peculiar feature of British legislation, may (even if it should
be impracticable,) induce the public to consider, whether the
future Colonial may not be more closely assimilated to the
Imperial Legislature, than merely by transferring the non-
elective members to a second Chamber.
In the first place it is to be remarked, that a Legislature is
to be framed, not for an independent nation, but for a British
Colony. But it is to be hoped that the Legislature will be so
framed, that, as the Colony advances in wealth, in science,
and in population, it will not become a mere inferior depen-
dency, but be federated with England on the terms of the
strictest equality.
-A. _^v-v
M33fps) Fq (L ?


May I, Sir, be permitted, at the outset, to intrude upon
your notice the expression of my sincere belief, that Her
Most Sacred Majesty Queen "V ictoria has in no portion of
Her dominions a body of subjects more affectionately attached
to her family and person, more steadily loyal to her throne,
or prouder of their membership of the Great Britannic
Empire, than are the inhabitants of New South Wales.
The pride which the Colonists feel in being members of the
greatest body politic which this world has ever seen, is
enhanced by the fact, that though circumstances have not
hitherto permitted their enjoying the inestimable glories and
advantages of the British Constitution to their full extent,
it has, nevertheless, been announced on the highest authority,
that a Colony is to be considered as an English county, and
that Colonists are not the inferiors, but the equals, of their
fellow-subjects in the British Isles.
Great, therefore, has been the satisfaction excited in this
Colony, by the British Parliament having decided that the
inhabitants of New South Wales shall themselves conduct
the management of their internal affairs by a constitution
modelled upon that of England, and that the connexion of
this Colony with the Empire is to be inviolably maintained.
The Colonists are gratified at once by Mr. Peel’s expressed
opinion in favour of “ stamping the impress of the British
Constitution on their institutions,” and by the declaration of
the first Minister of the Crown, “ that it is the bounden duty
of Parliament to maintain the Colonies which have been
placed under the charge of the British Government, and
that the latter body cannot get rid of the obligation to
govern them for their own benefit.”
A popular author* has lately written : “ When the day shall
“ come (as to all healthful Colonies it must come, sooner or
“ later) in which the settlement has grown an independent
“ state, we may thereby have laid the seeds of a constitution
“ and a civilization similar to our own, with self-developed
* Sir Edward Bulwer Lytton.


“ forms of monarchy and aristocracy, though of a simpler
“ growth than old societies accept, and not left a strange motley
“ chaos of struggling democracy —an uncouth livid giant, at
“ which the Frankenstein may well tremble —not because it is
“ a giant, but because it is a giant half completed. Depend
“ on it, the New World will be friendly or hostile to the Old,
“ not in proportion to the kinship of race, hut in proportion to
“ the similarity of manners and institutions —a mighty truth,
“ to which Colonists have been blind.”
Whether this author be accurate in his prophecy, that this
Settlement will one day become an independent State., is a
question which I have no inclination to discuss. Suffice it
for the present to observe, that I agree in opinion with (as 1
believe) the vast majority of the inhabitants of the Colony, in
anticipating that New South Wales will for centuries enjoy a
grander position among the Nations as a distinguished mem-
ber of the great Britannic Confederation, than as an isolated,
even if independent, territory. But I cordially agree, that
whether connected or independent, the Colony will be
friendly to its Parent State, not in proportion to the kinship
of race, but to the similarity of manners and institutions.
The question, therefore, seems to be, how the Colonial
Legislature shall be so constituted as to induce the required
similarity of manners and institutions.
On perusal of the debates upon the Australian Constitution
Bill in either House of the Imperial Parliament, it may be
observed, that almost every one considered as indispensable
the existence of a second Chamber in our Legislature, which
should put upon hasty legislation the salutary check which is
exercised in England by the House of Lords. From these
debates we may clearly perceive, that though it was felt that
so august a body as that of the House of Peers could not be
instituted in a youthful colony, it was nevertheless desired
that the honors which are incidental to a monarchic state,
should be bestowed by the British Crown among its Colonial
subjects ; and that the Legislatures of this Colony, and of
others similarly circumstanced, should respectively contain a


body of individuals in a second Chamber, more independent
of the popular constituencies than the members of a lower
Chamber ought to be. That though a House of Lords like
that of England, could not possibly be introduced into a
Colony, there should be, notwithstanding, in every depen-
dency of the empire, a chamber conferring on its legislation
the same advantages as are afforded to that of England by its
House of Peers.
And here. Sir, I trust you will excuse me for inviting your
attention to a few extracts from Hansard’s Reports of the
Debates to which I have alluded, I quote at full length, as
applicable to the question under discussion, some observations
of Mr. Roebuck, Lord Monteagle, Earl Grey, Mr. Glad-
stone, and Mr. A. B. Hope.
Mr. Roebuck. —It was all very well to say our Colonies should be
governed by British institutions. The Colonists could not rely on us ; and
they had no materials for an aristocracy. If, then, we could not make an
aristocracy, we were bound to put a check on hasty legislation, by the
arrangement of a second Chamber, under circumstances different from the
democratic body, and calculated to insure greater stability.
Lord Monteagle. —Our Colonies did not all of them, it was true, com-
mence with two Chambers ; but all our British Colonies, properly so called,
had adopted two Chambers, as soon as they found that form of government
practicable ; and they had found it practicable, when their social condition
was much less advanced than that of the Australian Colonies at present.
Our Colonies, indeed, had universally held to one general principle, to
which they had adhered from the outset to the present time, and that was a
love for the institutions of their Mother Country , and a desire to adapt those
institutions to their condition.
To which Earl Grey replied The noble Lord had said “ Introduce
into these Colonies our own institutions.” That was very fine, but unhap-
pily it was impossible to do so. A House of Lords existed in this Kingdom,
but it existed no where else on the face of the earth. It had grown up
from the time of the Conquest; but it was an institution they could
no more create than they could create one of the magnificent oak trees
which had been planted at the Conquest, and which were now crumbling
into dust.
Mr. Gladstone. —The first object to be gained was a double Chamber,
because it was certain to right itself as to details, if not right at the outset.
The second object was, that both Chambers should be based on the elective
principle. Ihe third object with him was, that Her Majesty should be
empowered to retain the right of conferring honors and rewards on the most
distinguished Colonists.


Mb. A. B. Hope would support the motion of his honorable and learned
friend, the Member for Midhurst, because it carried out a principle which
had long been deeply implanted on his mind-he meant the necessity of
giving to our Colonies English habits, English feelings, English manners,
English government, and above all, he would say, though it was in the face
of the prevailing feeling of the day, English Monarchy. Of course, in ad-
vocating a Colonial Peerage, he was not foolish enough to suppose that
there was yet in Australia, or in any other of our Colonies, the materials to
form such a Peerage as would be anything but suggestive of ridicule. He
knew that the prestige of wealth and hereditary descent was the very last
thing that Could grow up in any new colony whatever ; but while he felt the
importance of avoiding any immature and hasty plan for establishing a
Monarchical system in our Colonies, he was yet of opinion that toe ought to
lay the foundation for it in all of them . He was aware that climate had a
great effect on character —he knew the hardening and roughening effect of
a northern, and the enervating effect of a tropical climate ; but in Australia
and New Zealand, where the climate was as temperate and the habits of
life the same as our own, he knew no reason why our Anglo-Saxon institu-
tions should not thrive as well there as in the old country. It was clear,
then, that the question was reduced to this dilemma—either that the old
English Constitution was a fallacy—which he did not admit —or that in a
Colony like Australia, founded by Englishmen, and with an English climate
to dwell in, it must be the fault of our Legislature if they did not enjoy
English institutions. In what shape these institutions should be intro-
duced - whether, for instance, there ought to be titles of honor given—he
did not mean the highest titles of nobility, hut whether there should not be
Baronetcies, with the right of sitting in the Upper Chamber, —he would not
then stop to enquire ; but he thought it was as clear as daylight, that if we
were to retain the Monarchical system ourselves, and at the same time pre-
serve our Colonies, we must give them far more of Monarchical prestige
than we had hitherto given them—that we must let them taste of its sweets
as well as its bitters.
Each of those Statesmen (Earl Grey excepted) appears
distinctly to have advocated an Upper Chamber. Though
every reasonable person will agree with Lord Grey in his
remark, that such an Upper Chamber as the House of Peers
cannot be introduced into a Colony; and though his Lord-
ship cannot be gainsayed, when he asserts that a House of
Lords exists nowhere but in England; we may be,
theless, permitted to imagine, that had the Kingdoms
of the European Continent possessed an Upper Chamber
like the House of Lords, they might have escaped the fear-
ful revolutions by which, in these latter times, so many of


them have been convulsed, and by which the United Kingdom
with its Legislative Peerage has hitherto been unscathed. It
may, therefore, not be unimportant for the Colonial Parliament
deliberately to consider, whether there may not be some
quality in the House of Lords susceptible of introduction
into our legislation, thereby rendering the social and political
condition of the Colony less exposed to those popular con-
vulsions, by which the countries wherein no such Chamber
as our House of Lords exists, have been so often agitated.
Let us enquire, then, what element exists in the British
House of Lords that is, at the same time, a valuable ingre-
dient in legislation, and is, moreover, independent of the form
of the institution and of the feudality of its origin.
That element I humbly consider to be foresight. By
foresight I mean not an unreasoning conservatism, which
would remain at anchor in a dangerous offing, but a cautious
’watchfulness which would, before changing position, care-
fully study the best charts which the world’s experience has
compiled. Such quality is exercised by the House of Lords,
because each Peer is naturally anxious for the preservation
of his name in the land, and of his title to posterity. He,
therefore, anxiously deliberates how a proposal, if enacted,
may affect the fortunes of his posterity. His interest in the
continuance of his title, and of the existing state of affairs,
renders him cautious against precipitate legislation, while the
independence of his Parliamentary position emboldens him to
say for the benefit of his country and posterity, “ this measure
must undergo further deliberation.” The great advantage
conferred upon the British people by the House of Lords, is
a confidence of stability in their political arrangements. The
inheritor of possessions, the acquirer of property, and the
steady pursuer of a business or a profession, enjoys the feeling
that things, in the main, will proceed next year as during the
present period. Though living in a country where the
democratic element has fair play, and is working vigorously
and even rapidly , yet no one in England ever fears that his
fortune may be snatched from him, or his position debased.


by any sudden convulsion of popular excitement. The
cautious deliberation evinced by the Lords, and their natural
distrust of innovations, induce them to pause before consenting
to any measure that has not been thoroughly sifted and dis-
cussed. It by no means follows that a measure will certainly
be passed through the Upper House, because on its first pro-
mulgation it may have found favour with the House of
Commons, or excited popular fervour without the Parliament.
Experience has shown, that every really good measure
introduced into the British Parliament has been finally
enacted, but hardly ever until by discussion and deliberation
the Lords have been satisfied that the whole country was
convinced that it ought to become the law. The Lords
are enabled to prevent intemperate and hasty legislation,
to secure deliberation, and effect amendments, simply
because they are not immediately amenable to constituencies,
■who may eject them from their position as senators. Though
the British people are aware, that by the House of Commons
representing the democratic and progressive spirit of the
nation, every good proposition will certainly become a law,
they as certainly are conscious that by means of the House of
Lords, every proposition will be most cautiously considered
so that its goodness may be tested.
To ensure foresight, it appears, in the first place, desirable
that the Upper Chamber of a Colonial Legislature should
contain the hereditary principle. But at the same time I
would protest against what, for distinction sake, 1 would call
the hereditary system. By the hereditary system I desire to
be understood as meaning the necessary succession of the son
to the legislative functions exercised by the father. Time and
consent, together with the transmission of large estates, have
settled that system in England to the honor of the Peers, and
the great advantage of the people. But even there, with
respect to the newer portions of the Upper House, viz., the
Scotch and Irish Peers, another system has been introduced
of a selection of a few, by the general body, as their repre-
sentatives.


The nomination by the crown of the members of an Upper
House, although appointed for life, will hardly be regarded
as a final settlement of the question. A House so constituted
would resemble no British Institution. Unconnected with
the people, and owing nothing to their suffrage, the inde-
pendence of its members would, however unjustly, always be
liable to suspicion. A greater sympathy with the Sovereign
than with the subject, would ever be attributed to them by the
ignorant and disaffected. The members of such a house,
having no relation with the times of their posterity, might be
as liable as a democratic body, in seasons of political excite-
ment, to prejudice the interests of the future, by too fondly
gratifying the exigencies of the present crisis. In every con-
flict between the two Chambers, the public, however errone-
ously, would naturally adhere to that of their elected repre-
sentatives.
The election by the people of the members of an Upper
in the same manner as those of a Lower House are chosen,
would, most certainly, not “ stamp the impress of the British
Constitution on the Colonial Institutions,” nor would the Bri-
tish Parliament find it an easy matter “ to maintain the Colo-
nies under the charge of the English Goverment, to be
governed by it for their own benefit.”
But, as the principle of election rather than of nomination
is likely ultimately to prevail, I would suggest, therefore, the
institution in this Colony of an hereditary order, of which the
Nova Scotia Baronetage may be cited as a precedent, and
that from such order an Upper Chamber should be elected.
The hereditary dignity would afford great assurance that the
foresight of the British House of Lords would be exercised
by every member, so interested in the continuance of superior
station. The precedent of the election of Scotch Peers by
their brethren in each Parliament, would indicate that the
election of Members of an Upper Colonial House should be
not only from, but by, the members of the hereditary order.
Without pursuing that subject further, it may be worthy of
consideration, whether an Upper House should not be so


elected at each successive Parliament. But should that plan
be considered too exclusively aristocratic for a new country
at this advanced period of the world’s existence, and that an
Upper as well as a Lower House should be the creature, not
of a class, but of the whole community ; then it were better
that the election should be by the same electors as those who
choose the Members of the Lower House. To enable an
Upper House, however, though so elected as last mentioned,
to exercise the foresight which seems the desirable property
of such a Chamber, its Members should be elected for a
longer period than those of the Lower House. For it is not
altogether vain to imagine that a resistance by an Upper
Chamber to popular fervour, which might be visited with
indignation at the close of one Parliament, might obtain the
approbation of the people at the termination of a second.
It is evident that a Senator would act with more fearlessness
and independence, if called upon to account at the end of six,
rather than of three years. It would seem expedient, more-
over, that Members of an Upper House should not be
exposed to the ordinary tumults and expense of a popular
election, nor resort to the manoeuvres of canvass and solici-
tation.
Such an Upper House, as proposed, implies the prior
existence in the Colony of an hereditary order.
Accustomed as the Colonists have always been to persons
having the dignity of Knighthood, as residents in this
territory, and following the Nova Scotia precedent, I would
pi'opose the creation of a New South Wales Baronetage.
The attainment of such a distinction would, as I conceive, be
an honourable object of ambition to the Colonists ; and, if
liberally bestowed by the Crown, a great inducement to all
to the exercise of private and public virtue, and a great
attraction to wealthy capitalists from England to fix them-
selves, their families, and their fortunes in this quarter of
the world.
The creation of such an order, in addition to completing
the British institutions within the Colony, would tend to the


introduction, throughout all classes of society, of the same
tone of manners to which Englishmen have ever been
accustomed. For by the introduction of the clear distinction
of ranks which exists in England, the same refinement would
probably be exhibited throughout all orders of Colonial as
well as British society. There would be the same endeavour
to preserve property in a family, and to distribute it among
tenants, in this Colony as in England. Moreover, persons of
senatorial order and independent property would be induced
towards, and have leisure for, the cultivation of those states-
man-like studies of modern history and languages, inter-
national law, and political economy, to which persons engaged
for their subsistence in the toils of professional and com-
mercial competition, can hardly be expected to direct their
energies and time.
Nor would the establishment of hereditary honors in this
Colony be invidious. The existence of social distinctions and
the transmission of hereditary honors are congenial to the
inclinations of Englishmen, who do not change their disposi-
tions by emigrating to Australia. The natural disparity of
mankind in mental capacity, in bodily strength, and in con-
tinuous perseverance, must everywhere produce inequality in
social condition, and they who possess superior social advan-
tages will in the long run acquire political superiority; and
so the spirit of aristocracy will ever exist in society, and
influence the action of government. It has been said, that
there are four natural aristocracies, namely, those of wealth,
talent, manners, and birth. The aristocracies of wealth and
talent are speedily apparent in every society; that of manners
may be expected to follow; and surely it is desirable that the
one of birth, which is less invidious than the others, and which
would exercise over them an influence beneficially counter-
acting, would be treated by a British community as not only
in itself a valuable social ingredient, but as peculiarly grateful
to their feelings, by reviving and perpetuating in a distant
country, the same form of society in which they rejoiced at
home. These natural aristocracies, it has been said, should


be blended into one constitutional aristocracy, so that each
might influence and check the others. Let an hereditary order
be constituted, and that order a senatorial qualification, and
in a few generations the natural aristocracies will be fused
into one legal power. Such a distinction should, however,
be attainable by every deserving individual, as are now the
offices of the law, and the dignities in the Church of England.
But it may be said, that the creation of such an order is the
virtual introduction of an aristrocracy into the social and
political condition of this Colony; that aristocracy is an
element in legislation repugnant to the spirit of the age, and
to the circumstances of a Colony ; that the will of a whole
people should not be overpowered by the scruples of a favored
portion of it; that democratic fervour should not he impeded
by aristocratic caution. As to this, an authority of no small
weight, Sismondi, has said.
It is in the nature of the human mind to advance to its object through
continual oscillations. Publicists have never yielded more to these contrary
oscillations, than when endeavouring by the institutions of Government to
secure the greatest good of all, they have wished to appreciate the ability and
importance of an aristocracy. Among the political instructors of free nations
Lycurgus and Solon, Xenophon, Thucydides, Plato, Aristotle, Livy, Tacitus,
Machiavel, and Calvin, have manifested a decided leaning to aristocracy.
In our time, on the contrary, it is attacked with such bitter violence, that
by this name is designated all that is esteemed most odious in governments,
and what it seems determined shall be extirpated everywhere. This fury is
not yet appeased, and perhaps the remains of European aristocracy may yet
be exposed to violent attacks. The victories of the aristocratic and democratic
systems have alternated since the commencement of human communities,
and other changes will yet follow. Thought , however, advances, and now
begins to be convinced, that both aristocracy and democracy are two necessary
elements in all good government: each pernicious when it is exclusive, or
even when it governs : both essential to the happiness of nations, when they
are skilfully combined, so as to work together.
It is obvious that there is nothing repugnant to rational
liberty in the existence of such an order in a State as that pro-
posed ;as I believe most people are agreed that individual
liberty is likely to be less assailed by the aristocracy of
monarchical England, than by the multitude in republican
America. Professor Christian, in a note to page 407 of the


Ist volume of Blackstone’s Commentaries, has said, “ Subor-
“ dination in every society is the bond of its existence ; the
“ highest and the lowest individuals derive their strength
“ and security from their mutual assistance and dependence ;
“ as in the natural body the eye cannot say to the hand, I have
“ no need of thee ; nor, again, the head to the feet, I have no
“ need of you. Milton, though a favourer of a republic, was
“ so convinced of the necessity of subordination and degrees,
“ that he makes Satan, even when warring against Heaven’s
“ King, address his legions thus :
If not equal all, yet free,
Equally free: for orders and degrees
Jar not with liberty, but well consist.
“ True liberty results from making every higher degree
“ accessible tc those who are in a lower, if virtue and talents
“ are there found to deserve advancement.”
In addition to the passage from Milton, the learned
Professor might have cited the observation of Ulysses in
Shakspeare—
How could communities,
Degrees in schools, and brotherhoods in cities,
Peaceful commerce, from dividable shores
The primogeniture and due of birth,
Prerogative of age, crowns, sceptres, laurels,
But by degree stand in authentic place ?
Take but degree away, untune that string,
And hark, what discord follows ! Each thing meets
In mere oppugnancy ; the bounded waters
Should lift their bosoms higher than the shores,
And make a sop of all this solid globe ;
Strength should be lord of imbecility,
And the rude son should strike his father dead;
Force should be right; or rather right and wrong
(Between whose endless jars justice resides,)
Should lose their names, and so should justice too.
But as the acquisition of such a dignity as that of Baronet
would place the possessor of it in a position superior to that of
his fellow-subjects, it should only be conferred as a reward for


eminent public services, and the institution of the Order
should be immediately connected with the advancement of
Colonial interests.
The wants of the Colony seem obviously reduceable to two
heads. First, —Laborers, to develope its resources; and,
secondly. Money, to set those laborers in motion.
From all that I have ever heard or read, the internal
resources of this Colony appear to be prodigious. Instead of
being a land doomed to eternal sterility, as we were once
assured, this territory, as it seems, contains the natural
elements of wealth in such abundance, as nearly to over-
whelm the most imaginative conception. During the early
period of last year, a bright and even glowing view might
have been taken of the perhaps then distant prospects of
New South Wales, by reference to the amazing tracts of land
which are asserted to be adapted, in a remarkable degree,
throughout many latitudes, for the production of wdieat and
other corn; for the cultivation of the olive and the vine ; for
the growth of cotton and of sugar. During that period the
same fond expectation might reasonably have been strength-
ened by the ascertained existence of extensive mines of coal,
of iron, and of copper; and by the further consideration
that much of that portion of the soil, which is unfit for agri-
cultural purposes, affords some of the finest pasturage in the
world, and which, having hitherto been the principal source
of the commercial prosperity of the Colony, might be
expected to retain thereafter the same function, and even the
more important one of rearing food for the consumption of
the people. Such laudatory anticipations, though they might
reasonably have been entertained at that time, must have
been enjoyed as the prospect of blessings not speedily to be
attained. At that time the most sanguine Colonist must have
strained his vision throughout a vista of years to behold
the accomplishment of his hopes. But, since the astounding
discovery in May last of the gold mines, we seem to be
“ transported beyond the ignorant present, and to feel now
the future in the instant.” They, even, “ whose conversation


was of bullocks,” now speak, like Pistol, “of Africa and
golden joys ; ” and this infant Colony, (to borrow a most
felicitous expression,) “ is about to be precipitated into a
nation.” By the intrinsic value of the gold, and its
influence on the development and diffusion of its other
resources, this Colony may ere long take position
amongst the richest territories of the earth. With
its unrivalled harbour, this town of Sydney may,
hereafter, not improbably, have a rank among the nu-
merous cities of the British empire, inferior alone to that
of London. From the development of the natural resources
of the Colony, with the consequent extension of its inland
trade and foreign commerce, and its resulting advancement
in refinement and education, in the liberal arts and learned
sciences, we may be permitted, without indulging in
romantic speculations, to anticipate a future when a verdant
and teeming country, a prosperous gentry and thriving culti-
vators, may greet the eyes of travellers in every direction ;
when picturesque villages and substantial towns may arise in
every quarter, and Sydney shine before the world, not as a
mere collection of shops and warehouses, but as exhibiting
along with those most solid indications of prosperity, public
and private edifices of elegance and comfort, of grandeur
and of taste; the Pacific Ocean may have its City of palaces,
and on the shores of Port Jackson may spring up a City
with its suburbs, not only displaying the trading conveniences
of a Bristol, but unfolding also the scenic grandeur of a
Genoa; perchance combining the commercial capabilities
of a Liverpool, with the palatial splendour of a Venice.
As the resources of the Colony become developed, its
opportunities of rendering them available appear to be un-
paralleled. The Colony has, for the protection of its exports,
the British Navy, without incurring expense towards its
support. It has the advantage of those ships which are
constructed at the cost of about one thousand pounds a gun,
without contributing to the outlay for their fabrication, or to
the millions which are annually expended in the maintenance


of seamen, and for the necessary munitions. The Colony has
the British power ever ready to clear the seas of pirates, and to
prevent the aggressions of Foreign nations. It is assured
against the jealousy of its rival gold country, and of that
Nation which has so kindly assumed a Protectorate over an
island of the Pacific. The British cruisers, will assuredly
prevent the visitations of Chinese or Malacca pirates, whose
cupidity would be sorely attracted towards vessels transport-
ing Australian ingots. Under the protection of the British
Flag, the commerce of the Colony may be expected to em-
brace, not only its present relations with the United King-
dom, hut speedily to form new associations with India and
China, with Western America and the South Sea Islands.
With such exportable commodities as the Colony will one
day possess, and with the populous and wealthy countries in
its neighbourhood, the commerce of New South Wales must,
before the close of this century, flourish to a degree beyond
the power of anticipation to conceive.
As, with reference to other commercial States, and more
particularly to the French and American Republics, it is not
wholly Quixotic to imagine that, for the mercantile interests
of the Empire, the British Government will hereafter be
desirous to acquire a permanent influence in the Polynesian
Islands, it may be anticipated that when the English Parlia-
ment can safely devolve upon these Colonies the duty of
managing entirely their internal affairs, the Governor-General
of the Australasian Colonies will be employed as the British
Minister for managing the foreign relations of the Empire
with the South Sea Islands, and with the States of West America.
Under such management, as civilization advances within the
islands, they will not improbably become new Colonies of
England, with their affairs administered by Lieutenant Go-
vernors, Executive and Legal functionaries, selected not only
from men of capacity in England, but also from deserving-
inhabitants of New South Wales, and the other Australian
Colonies. A wide sphere of public service would thus be
opened to the talents and ambition of the Queen’s subjects in


these territories; and the Australian Colonies* by thus sharing
in the Government of the Empire, would form, with the
newer Dependencies, the Parent Kingdom, and her older
Settlements, such a confederation as has never yet existed.
That the Colonists may, at no very distant period, be con-
sidered capable of relieving England from the burthen of
managing their local affairs, may be expected from what has
occurred in other quarters. The boon that has been con-
ferred on rebellious and discontented Canada, is not likely to
be withheld from this prosperous and loyal Colony, whenever
the British Government is satisfied that the privilege will be
exercised with calmness and moderation. That the Imperial
Government will ere long be satisfied on that point, there
seem reasons to entertain a hopeful expectation. This Colony
is remarkably distinguished by the paucity of violent crimes
committed in it, and by the integrity and intelligence with
which the verdicts of juries are arrived at. No Vigilance
Committees here supersede the judges and the hangman in
their respective functions; the community regards the action
of its legislature for the redress of its grievances and the
advancements of its interest; and the demagogue’s occupation
is therefore gone. Within the last twelve months, how grace-
ful was the submission of the Citizens of Sydney to the judi-
cial eviction from his office of the Mayor of their selection,
upon a legal proposition of the strictest technicality, considered
valid by a majority only of the Supreme Court. Where a
people, even at a season of excitement, surrender their judg-
ment to the decision of their Court, and perform so faithfully
their own judicial duties as jurymen; while they act person
ally in politics only by recording their suffrages at the hustings,
and afterwards rely on the representatives they have elected,
it cannot be doubted that they are tending swiftly towards
the attainment of a proper influence on the executive power
of their community.
But it is evident that self-government cannot be exercised
according to the principles of the British Constitution, with-
out that check of foresight, which could only be induced by


the introduction of the hereditary principle in a second
Chamber of the Colonial Legislature.
For the introduction of that principle maybe suggested the
creation of a Colonial Baronetage, as advised by Mr. Hope;
and that its creation should be connected with the extension
of colonisation from Great Britain, for the principle of which
there is a precedent in the Nova Scotia Baronetage.
As the Privy Council has recommended that money
derived from the sale of the Waste Lands shall be devoted,
in equal moieties, to the introduction of emigrants from Great
Britain into the Colony, and to the execution of public works
therein, and as according to that recommendation the
adyancement of the Colony will be in proportion to the land
sold, I would propose (for the more speedy settlement of this
territory) that the dignity of a Baronet of New South Wales
shall be from time to time conferred on every jit and proper
person who shall purchase a quantity of the Waste Lands in
the Colony.
But as no one can be expected to buy land for more than
its probable value, so that each purchaser for his money
would obtain its equivalent in land, he should for his
Baronetcy, in addition to his purchase, directly benefit the
Colony, by settling on his purchase a certain number of
married couples as tenant farmers, and also make a contri-
bution to the Public Treasury towards the expenses of
Religious and Educational establishments. Or, if he should
purchase land for the value of its minerals, that he should
moreover lay out gardens, and build cottages in which the
miners might be lodged; and so, in each case, the village
system of England might be fully established. By such a
plan (if practicable) roads, dams, bridges, tanks, and other
useful public works, might be from time to time constructed
throughout the Colony, by means of half the money paid
upon the purchases of the Waste Lands. Laborers would
be introduced by the other half; and so, a body of yeomanry
would be settled throughout the country, and secular and
religious education would be provided for the children. The


arable land would be fully cultivated, the mines worked, and
thus the resources of the Colony would become fully de-
veloped.
The next question for consideration, therefore, is, where
are the persons to be found who would expend large sums of
money for the acquisition of Colonial Baronetcies ?
It cannot be doubted that there are many within the
Colony, both natives and emigrant settlers, merchants and
wealthy tradesmen, who could afford the purchase, if the
dignity were created. There can be little doubt, moreover,
that many persons in England would be glad to purchase
an hereditary distinction upon the terms proposed. For
we have seen that sons of Dukes and Barons have emigrated
to New Zealand, in order to improve their pecuniary pros-
pects. Such gentlemen would not be the less likely to come
to this Colony, if they could attain, in addition, an hereditary
position in the Colony, analogous to that which their elder
brothers enjoy at Horae. But it is not from that elevated
position of English society, that I should anticipate the candi-
dates for Colonial dignities, but from moderately wealthy
individuals of the middle order. There are in England, I
confidently believe, numerous possessors of capital, which,
at the low rate of interest there attainable, will scarcely pro-
duce an income sufficient to relieve the owners from the toils
and anxieties of commercial and professional pursuits. The
possessors of such capital have already a strong inducement
to emigrate hither, in order that they may enhance their in-
comes by the higher rate of interest in the Colony than in
England.
It is obvions, however, that a stronger inducement than a
higher rate of interest must be held forth to allure persons of
large capital from their homes in England, to settle them-
selves and their descendants in this or in any other Colony,
io allure capitalists from the old world, where almost every
enjoyment can be certainly procured which money can
achieve, to countries which afford, even to the wealthy, little
more than the decent, comforts of existence, some great


advantage must be offejed which is not attainable by wealth
at home. Much as most men of wealth may desire such
distinction, hereditary rank is with difficulty obtained in
England, and is the only advantage which wealth cannot
ensure. To be the founder of a family, and to be remem-
bered in the land, is so great and laudable a desire among
Englishmen, that the passion, if it may be so called, may be
made a powerful instrument in the settlement of this Colony,
and in the cementing of its connexion with the British
islands.
The influx into the colony of a number of gentlemen of
pecuniary independence, of education and character, emigra-
ting from England, for the purpose of acquiring hereditary
station and landed possessions in this Colony, would indi-
rectly improve the social condition of this territory by
inducing the simultaneous division of society into orders,
each almost blended with its immediate superior and inferior,
as in the British Islands, and so we might expect to see
reproduced in this Colony another England in its social
aspect.
But though I, Sir, would advocate the institution of an aristo-
cracy independent of, though influenced by, the people, acquir-
able by purchase (as in the original institution of the British
Baronetage,) I consider it, nevertheless, desirable that the
Crown should have an interest in the institution. For,
according to my view of the British Constitution, the Crown,
the Aristocracy, and the people should respectively influence
the working of every institution. Moreover, without the
direct influence of the Crown, pre-eminence in talent, in pri-
vate and in public worth, might frequently be baffled in the
endeavor to obtain the distinction that has been herein sug-
gested ; and, therefore, the Crown should have power, from
time to time, to grant the dignity of a Baronet to any fit
and proper person, irrespective of pecuniary qualification or
landed purchase.
In this age of the world and in this new region, possessors
of titles might benefit the Colony, and increase their estates,


under more advantageous circumstances than the Peerage of
England can enjoy. No traditions and no prejudices can
arise to restrain the members of the Australian order from
engaging in commerce and in trade. Should a Baronet, for
the purpose of preserving his property to his order, think
proper to leave all landed property to his eldest son,
the younger ones will have free scope to engage in
business, and achieve Baronetcies for themselves. If
the acquisition of wealth by the Colonists should be the
direct road to political influence and social pre-eminence, then
would not only commerce, but trade, the profession of the
the merchant, and the occupation of the retail tradesman,
be alike profitable and honored. With the political dignity
of a senator, and the social position of a Baronet, held out to
an Australian youth, as the probable reward of successful in-
dustry in trading pursuits, the occupation of the shopkeeper
would no longer be regarded as affording no path to distinction,
no exercise for intellect, and no elevation in society. Young
men would feel that by following business, they would be
more likely, than by embarking in the learned professions of
Law, Divinity, or Medicine, to acquire those fortunes by
which the posts of ambition would be secured to them. As-
piring young men might be expected to engage cheerfully
in commercial avocations, in preference to encountering the
chance of moderate incomes in the learned professions; and
so, perhaps, instead of finding in every town and village, hosts
of needy lawyers and physicians, the community would
have numbers of opulent merchants, wealthy tradesmen*
ingenious mechanics, and thriving labourers, each, while
intent on procuring his own advancement, developing the
resources of the Colony, and improving its position in the
great Commercial World. Men of intellect would neither
despise trade, nor consider their children thrown away
by engaging in mercantile pursuits, if, by following
them, they perceived the road to distinction clearly open
to their ambition. Not only trade and commerce, but
tradesmen and merchants, flourish by the competition of


numbers. Not only has England, the “nation of shop-
keepers,” flourished by the numbers engaged in com-
merce, but also the vast numbers engaged in competition
with each other. The merchants and traders of London,
Liverpool, and Manchester, are more flourishing than those
of Sunderland and the other smaller commercial communities.
But, with respect to the professions, it is a trite observation
that lawyers and doctors eat up each other. The prosperity
of the merchant, the tradesman, and the farmer, as also that of
the mechanic and rustic laborer, depends on the natural and
healthy condition of things ; those of the lawyer and doctor
on the disturbed and extraordinary position of affairs. Hence
independence may be more easily secured by trading than by
professional pursuits. The latter, however, will, in the
existing nature of affairs, be always preferred, because, de-
manding more learning and exacting more study, they are
held in higher estimation than the former; and to counteract
this prejudice, I would have the road to distinction more
certainly attainable by trade than by the professions. For
all men like to rise, and they whose position precludes their
own elevation, may be tempted to pull down those more
fortunate than themselves.
The professions of the Law and the Church are much
esteemed in England, because every member of the commu-
nity may be (however unlikely) a Chancellor or a Bishop.
Those dignities are regarded without envy, because they are
open to all. In a country where the son of a coal-fitter has
lately been a Chancellor, and that of a hair-dresser the Chief
Justice of the King’s Bench, and both of them Peers of
England besides, it is not strange that legal dignitaries are
not assailed by democratic envy —no wonder that their occu-
pation is so much looked up to. Connect, in this Colony, the
occupation of the tradesman with even the possibility of
social and political advancement, and immediately would his
position be raised—immediately would objections to the
pursuit of trade be removed. The tradesman, with an honor-
able object of ambition before his mind, would pursue trade


on scientific commercial principles, and school his tastes and
his acquirements to qualify him for the elevation he might
attain. If the young men of active minds and cultivated
talents perceive that eminence may be attained by commer-
cial and trading pursuits, the professions then will not be
overstocked : —as to which, I cannot conceive a greater social
and political evil in any youthful community, than a number
of unemployed lawyers and doctors in every town and
village, for poverty and intellect combined produce “ men
“ who are habitually meddling, daring, active, subtle; of fro-
“ ward dispositions and unquiet minds, ready to join in any
“ project which may procure them a litigious constitution in
“ political affairs.” Much more prosperous will the Colony
be, should its young men hereafter have inducements to
engage steadily in the pursuits of agriculture, of trade and
commerce, than that multitudes of them should be endea-
vouring to attain pre-eminence by engaging in precarious
professions.
I will now proceed to consider some of the objections to
which my scheme is obviously liable. The origin of such
an aristocracy may be designated mean. It cannot be carried
on as suggested after the country is settled. Its members will
possess no traditional glory. They will have no dignity of
long descent, and even, if successful, the order must ever be
constantly fluctuating.
As to the meanness of its origin. —The creation will origi-
nate, like the English Baronetage, by purchase. It will arise,
if at all, not for the glory of individuals, but for the benefit
of the public. It is to be framed, not for connecting the
present with the past, but for connecting it with the future.
As to its want of ancestral glory. —As to that it will not be
much more modern than the Colony itself. Its promise
of benefit to posterity will more than compensate for its want
of connexion with the past. The grandchildren of the first
Baronets will, moreover, have an ancestry as defined as many
Peers of England now have.
As to the impossibility of carrying on the Institution after


the Colony is completely settled. —As to this, I think that at all
times, after the Colony is settled, whoever acquires a certain
large amount of landed or other property, should become
entitled to the dignity of the Baronetage, even though he
should purchase from another person of the same order.
As to its fluctuation. —From what I have said in the last
paragraph, it is clear that it would be so : but such has been
the case with the Peerage of Great Britain. The members of
that body, notwithstanding the Statutes of Entails, have
never been able by force of law to keep their possession in
the hands of their eldest sons. The contrivances of
lines and recoveries have rendered abortive those statutes,
and enabled the necessitous possessors of landed properties
to dispose of them, like any other marketable articles, for
the advantage of the public and themselves, although
to the disinheriting of their natural heirs. The most cur-
sory perusal of Burke’s Peerage will show how many
aristocratic families in England have from time to time
become extinct; and how continually the aristocratic order
has been re-inforced by direct and modern creations from the
body of the people. More than one-third of the existing
Peerage has arisen from the profession of the law; and it would
be difficult to find, amidst the numerous Peers of England,many
who can trace from the time of the Plantagenets. Though
the individuals of an aristocratic body may continually alter,
the order, nevertheless, exists at all times in close identity,
as a river has been said to be still the same throughout all
times, though the globules which compose it are continually
shifting.
If the nomination of Baronets to seats in an Upper Chamber
should be by popular election, electors (without putting the
candidates to proclaim their own merits upon the hustings,)
will be enabled to judge of the competency of individuals by
considering the manner in which they may respectively have
managed their private affairs, by their respective careers in the
Sydney University, or by any writings they may have com-
posed on political subjects.


As from the working of the House of Lords in England, it
is obvious how beneficial it has been to that body that certain
of its members have been previously members of the House
of Commons, and as men of title, (such as that great minister.
Lord Palmerston, and other Irish Peers,) have been advan_
tageously placed in the House of Commons, it would seem
desirable that Baronets of New South Wales should be
eligible as members of the Lower House.
Belonging to no political party, either in England or in this
Colony, and neither expressing nor entertaining any judgment
upon any of the questions which have been agitated in
this society, I hope that in bringing forward the above
suggestions I am not inconsistent with myself, nor an
intruder on public notice. An open question is now before
the Australian public; on its solution the welfare of the
Colony and the prosperity of the Colonists depend. This is
not only a British Colony, but a territory to which the
people from the British isles are continually emigrating.
Such emigrants are more likely to prefer a territory which
resembles their own country in its political organization and
social aspect, than one in which no such resemblances exist.
Almost all existing Colonists appear anxious that the Colony
should continue to be a portion of the British Empire, and to
possess the British institutions. And of the few who express
violent democratic opinions, and express their admiration of
the political sytem of the United States of America, their
sentiments, I would fain believe, are, in substance, merely a
strong desire that the democratic element of the British Con-
stitution should have its fair weight in the political insti-
tutions of this Colony. The democratic vigour of England is
most securely planted in Australia. How then can be intro-
duced the aristocratic check, without which the monarchic
principle cannot for a century be maintained ? Believing, then,
that the Colonists in demanding British institutions seek a
Legislature composed not purely of the democratic, but of
that combined with the monarchic and aristocratic elements,
I have ventured, not so much personally to advocate, as to


propose for the consideration of the Legislature and the
Colony, the foregoing observations. Should the topic be
ever fairly discussed, and should it be deliberately decided
after full consideration, that the hereditary principle can
never be properly introduced into the political or social rela-
tions of this Colony, then many minds will be settled on the
point, which otherwise will still cling to the idea of the practi-
cability and desirableness of its introduction. Before reject-
ing the admission of the principle, it may be well to consider
whether the spirit of aristocracy can ever be banished from
human society ? Whether its introduction may not tend to
the advancement of the moral, social, and political welfare of
this community? Whether Australia shall be a reflection
of the United States of America, or of the United Kingdom
of Great Britain and Ireland ?
As a conclusion to the foregoing remarks, I propose for
consideration:—
1. That a Baronetage be created for New South Wales.
2. That the Crown shall confer that honor on fit and pro-
per persons at its discretion.
3. That for the settlement of the Colony, and until its com-
plete settlement, the Crown shall confer a Baronetcy on
every fit and proper person who shall have
a purchased (x) acres of the Crown Lands of the
Colony,
b settled thereon as tenant farmers (y) married
couples from Great Britain or Ireland.
c made a contribution for the religious instruction
of the residents in the district where his pro-
perty is situated.
4. That when seventy-five Baronets by purchase shall
have been created, the Crown shall create (without reference
merely to landed qualification) twenty--five Baronets; and
that then the whole order shall elect from their body, thirty
Baronets as Members of an Upper House to serve in one
Parliament; or, that the electors of Members of the Lower
House, shall, at every third Parliament (the same to be of


four years’ duration) elect thirty from the Baronets to form an
Upper House. So that in the last mentioned case of popular
election the Members of the Upper House shall sit thrice
as long as those of the Lower Chamber.
5. That Baronets shall be eligible to be Members of the
Lower House.
6. That if an Upper House shall be constituted by popular
election from the Baronets, (in order to prevent Baronets
being ruined by election expenses, and to restrain canvassing)
the election shall be in this manner, viz. :—every voter at an
election of a Member for the Lower House, shall, when he
tenders his vote at the polling booth of his district, hand in,
also, a list of the thirty Baronets whom he chooses to be
Members of the Upper House.
In venturing to submit such a speculation as I have above
proposed, to the notice of the Australian Public, I have
gladly availed myself of the opportunity to address it to you.
Sir, the honored President of the distinguished body to whom
the great task of completing within this Colony the British
institutions, has been confided by the Imperial Parliament.
To abler hands than to the Members of that body, presided
over by one so universally esteemed and respected as yourself,
the great duty could not have been entrusted. For the details
of the plan I have no bigoted affection ; I have specified
them only as one mode of introducing the hereditary princi-
ple into the legislative and social systems of the Colony.
Believing, with the great moralist. Dr. Johnson, that there are
few ways in which a man can be more innocently occupied
than in making money honestly; sincerely thinking that
wealth is acquired by very few without the exercise of talent,
foresight, and integrity; deeming that the future position of
this Colony will be that of a great commercial country, it has
appeared to me that the foundation of a Colonial Aristocracy
should be based on wealth employed upon the development
of the capabilities of the territory for the production of export-
able commodities.
Beseeching your indulgent consideration for the imperfect


manner in which I have introduced my proposal, and respect-
fully begging your attention to the extracts from Sismondi,
hereto appended,
I have the honor to be,
Your most obedient Servant,
J. N. DICKINSON.


APPENDIX.
Extracts from a Translation of an Essay by Sismondi on the Aristocratic
Element in Eree Countries.
The distinctions which the legislator may recognise as pre-existing in
society, and which he may regard as so many natural aristocracies, already
full of life before a constitution had assigned to them a rank in the social
body, are the aristocracy of birth, that of manners, that of talents, and
and that of wealth.
Among all nations, and in all times, the antiquity of race has been con-
sidered as a distinction. There is in all the enjoyments which man can
obtain on earth something so fugitive, his life passes away so fast, his name
is so soon forgotten, that he seems to be for ever struggling against the
devouring power of time. All which can prolong his existence and the
remembrance of him appears to him a victory. He seizes with eagerness
every means of connecting himself with past or future ages; he says with
pride we when speaking of his associates, he says it with more still when
speaking of his race. It is a successive and not simultaneous body, com-
posed of all those whom he has succeeded, of all those united by the same
blood, the same name, in whom the same bond of honour creates mutual
responsibility; who living in different ages have never seen one another, bo
that he who is among the living is, as it were, in his turn alone entrusted
with the defence of all those who have preceded him. Perhaps the most
just definition of heroism would be, the greatest development of the energy
of one for a common interest, and such is precisely the appeal which the
aristocracy of birth makes in every generation to him who has in charge the
honour of his race.
The second source of distinction in society is elegance of manners, the
knowledge and observance of all conventional forms. It supposes in men
who feel themselves associated by this relation in their minds, delicacy of
observation, tact, good taste, a sentiment of respect for others in proportion
to what they exact for themselves. But the aristocracy of manners gene-
rally recognises its members by more frivolous signs. Not only does it
require purity of language, it also often prescribes an affectation of a
fashionable style of speaking; to elegance in modes of life, it also joins a
knowledge of dress ; for the politeness which shews respect to all, it some-
times substitutes an impertinence so much the more offensive, because it is
covered by outside ceremony. The aristocracy of manners is found, with
the most exclusive pretensions, among those nations where the law does not
admit any distinction of birth, and it is there that whatever offence it has
given has been the least pardoned.


The third source of distinction in society is that of talent and education.
It is even education only which forms the bond among those who pretend to
make part of the aristocracy of talent. No circumstance can place a greater
difference between the relative power of two men, than that one has exer-
cised his intellectual faculties, the other his physical strength ; intelligence
alone elevates us above the brutes, corporeal labour assimilates us to them.
The inequality of the faculties which we bring into the world at our birth,
the inequality of our aptitude in learning or reflecting, the inequality of the
influences of education and example, are mysteries to us. But it is a fact
that thought is the great human power; it is a fact that education and
study enable us to join to our own experience and reflection the experience
and reflection of all the human race. A man remaining uncultivated,
and knowing only what he has thought, what he has observed him-
self, opposed to him who is enriched by the thoughts and experience of
ages, is like a poor individual who would contend with his own weak arm,
against the combined power of a multitude. The man, also, who by the
obligation of manual labour must have condemned his faculties to almost
constant idleness, opposed to him who, by constant exercise, has given to
his mind rapidity, certainty, and precision, has not the same means of
making the most of his individual power of thought; whilst his adversary
knows how to employ for his greatest advantage the treasures of thought of
all those who have lived before him.
The last of social distinctions is wealth. Most frequently the aristocracy
of wealth is found united with the three preceding ones. Thus, nobility is
often only wealth transmitted from generation to generation. In England
the proprietor of estates is seen to leave his widow and daughters in a state
of deprivation in order to transmit his estate and his wealth to a relation of
the same name as himself, sometimes to a relation he does not like; his
house, his estate, are to him only the means of perpetuating his name and
his memory, of striking posterity with the image of a long succession of
ancestors. Wealth also unites more easily than poverty with the distinction
of manners ; it facilitates exterior elegance; and if a rich man is ever so
little endued with tact, he acquires very soon the polish of mind of those
with whom he lives, when it is superficial. The constant mockery which
crushes upstarts really reaches only some singular persons whom a particular
incapacity has rendered rebellious to the teachings of the world. The dis-
tinction of Education has almost always, after the second generation, been
attainable by the rich ; it requires only leisure and fortune, and in our times
it is seldom that it is completely wanting, even in those who have become
most rapidly rich.
Such are the aristocracies, such are the distinctions which are found through-
out society. The jealousy against the exclusives, felt by those who are
excluded from the distinguished classes, may be violent, may be passionate;
the multitude may be led to alarming excesses against the few ; the name of
aristocracy and of aristocrat may be a deathcry to those whom it designates ;
still the same pride which shocks us in another rank, will make us eager to
have our own held in respect, as soon as we can pretend to have one. The


aristocracy of birth, which is beyond the chances of fortune, which neither
the prince nor the people can give or take away, will subsist in spite of the
legal abolition of nobility; it will subsist not only in the hearts of those
who claim the distinction of an ancient family, but in the imagination of all
those who are attached to the historical recollections of their country. The
aristocracy of manners will be so much the more strongly delineated when
political institutions have repudiated all others ; only it will be so much the
more futile as it will be more isolated. When after the reign of terror, a
new beau monde sought pleasure with intoxication, its luxury and its preten-
sion to elegance were insolent in proportion to their frivolity. The aris-
tocracy of mind will always repel ignorance and stupidity, for nothing can
suppress the inequality of human faculties, nor the inequality of instruction.
The aristocracy of riches will increase by the abasement of all the others,
for it comprises them all in itself, and its yoke becomes heavier when the
others appear to be broken. Philosophers may dream of a social order in
which all distinctions shall be annihilated, in which all men shall remain
equal; but they can only apply their theory by imagining a community
which will abjure all the advantages on which distinction is founded; a
community without memory of the past, without elegance of manners,
without instruction, and without wealth; a community where all labouring
for a common fund, would lose all the advantages which civilized life has
enabled man to acquire ; where all losing those motives to emulation which
now sustain courage, each one would put his private indolence in opposition
to the wants of the community, and would accomplish his task with repug-
nance under the rule of an authority which would soon become tyrannical
and de ested.
In reality, the end which the legislator ought to propose to himself, is to
intrust power to those who possess, or who deserve distinction ; that is to
say, to a constitutional aristocracy, instead of letting it be taken by the
natural aristocracies already pre-existing in society. This end is reasonable,
distinction is necessary for the exercise of power ; each kind of distinction
presents advantages of its own; each, nevertheless, if power is given up to
it without participation, will cruelly abuse it. It is in combi ing them with
one another, profiting by the advantages of each, guar dug by means of one
against the inconveniences which another would produce; if one is in oppo-
sition to the rest, by strengthening its relations with the great mass of the
people, that they may give it their support, that the art of well balancing
constitutions consists. *
Kemp and Fairfax, Printers, Lower George-street, Sydney.


H;
__ - --*> _


