

EARL OF SANDWICH, A LETTER TO. FORSTER
910. 4












A
LETTER
TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
The EARL of SANDWICH,
FIRST LORD COMMISSIONER OF THE BOARD OF ADMIRALTY, &c.
FROM
GEORGE FORSTER, F. R. S.
LONDON:
Printed for G. ROBINSON, in PATER-NOSTER-ROW.
MDCCLXXVIII




To the PUBLIC.
A FTER our repeated applications to the Earl of Sandwich,
and the mediation of friends, have failed of fuccefs, nothing
• ■» \ r *. ' ‘ \ \ \\,
is left but to complain to the public at large. It is barely doing
juftice to ourfelves, and paying the debt of gratitude to our friends,
to fay that we have never been unworthy of their protection. We
have been moft wantonly oppreffed, and are now undone, without
the fmalleft offence on our part. At the awful moment of
public calamity, the misfortunes of a fingle devoted family*
may perhaps not be noticed; but the exiftence of that family is
fo dreadfully precarious, that they muft run all hazards to be
heard. If the caufe of the oppreffed ever merited the attention of
men who have it in their power to check the oppreffors, it muft be
when friendlefs foreigners, trufting folely to the promifed rewards
of their afliduous labour, are cruelly deceived, arbitrarily deprived
of their due, and robbed of the means of miniftring to the wants
of feveral helplefs individuals who depend on them for fupport.
5 We


We may yet be heard; this is our laft hope; but we are
prepared for the word, even for the laft difappointment. If we
muft be utterly negle&ed, may thefe pages ferve to warn others,
unfortunate like ourfelves, neither to imitate us in credulity, nor
by giving a powerful enemy opportunities to exercife his talents, to
bring on themfelves a wretched and unmerited fate.
Percy-Street,
1778.


MY LORD,
PERMIT me to reprefent to your Lordfhip, the unhappy confequcnces
of which my father’s voyage round the world hath been productive
to himfelf, notwithflanding his irreproachable conduct. I date this matter
once more to your Lordfhip, who have already been often troubled with it,
iince your momentous occupations may poflibly have hitherto prevented your
viewing it in a proper light; and as we have been injured, feemingly
without fear of the world’s cenfure, fo I now publicly relate our grievances,
and hope for redrefs.
I fhall make no apologies for defending my father’s caufe. I am deeply
interefted in it ; I have been involved in his misfortune. He hath made
many unfuccefsful applications to your Lordfhip, and received your
injunctions to trouble you no longer with complaints. An unhappy father
of a family driven to extremity, might not be fo nice in the expreffions of
refpect as your lordfhip could juflly demand; it is fit therefore that I take
up the pen..
My father came into this country twelve years ago, and was well received by
many eminent men of learning, who valued his knowledge and favoured him
with their friendfhip. Among other branches of fcicnce, he had particularly
ftudied Natural Hiflory; he was employed to teach and to write in that
branch ; and his endeavours joined to the moft indefatigable afliduity gave
general fatisfadtion. The death of Dr. Gowin Knight in Spring 1772,
made a vacancy in the Britifh Mufeum, which was to be filled by one of
B the


the furviving officers. By that means an inferior place would have been
vacated, which there is every reafon to believe was deftined for my father.
He was alfo at that time engaged in an extenfive plan of literary publications
which if not very lucrative, were at lead; fufficient to fupport him.
Such were our profpedts, when we were appointed as naturalifts, to
accompany Capt. Cook on his fecond voyage in the room of two much
abler men, whofe defire to undergo perils and hardftiips at their own
expence, was unhappily frufirated. The lofs to fcience may eafily be com-
puted, when the confpicuous talents of thofe gentlemen are confidered.
The Honourable Mr. Daines Barrington firft propofed it to my father to
embark with Capt. Cook. My father faw the advantage which would
accrue to natural hiftory if fome perfons fkilled in that fcience were fent to
cultivate it in a part of the world not yet fcrutinized; * he confidered that
a portion of his own life might thus perhaps become of more general ufe ;
and he was promifed emoluments and advantages which would be the
fureft means of providing for his family.' He clofcd with the propofal and
gave up all other profpedrs.
The Honourable Daines Barrington was the only perfon employed by
your Lordfiiip in engaging my father and me to undertake that voyage, -p
I know not whether it was accidental or otherwife, that our conditions
were not committed to paper, but fettled entirely between Mr. Barrington
and my father, without any witnefles being prefent. Let the facts fpeak
for themfelves. Your Lordftfip knows, and I now inform the public,
that
* Though the firft naturalifls of the prefent age, had given up the thought of performing
a fecond voyage, it was better that another perfon fhould attempt to make up the lofs, at lead:
in part , than that nothing fliould be done for the moll important of all fcicnces..
f See Appendix, No. i. ■'


that my father and I, entirely relied upon the Honourable Mr. Bamngton
with regard to this tranfaftion, and that no writings of any kind whatfoever
were drawn up or figned on either fide by way of agreement, contraft
or obligation. Neither had we the honour of feeing your Lordlhip before
all was fettled.
It mud be owned that the plan and the conditions upon which wc agreed
to embark on this (to us) unfortunate voyage, were both apparently liberal
and generous. We had ftipulated £. 4°oo for the expences during the
voyage, befides the emolument of publifiiing the hiftory of its occurences,
together with a yearly provifion after our return. Government demands
nothino- on our part. The benefit which fhould accrue to fcience, and tie
additions to human knowledge in general, were {often/, bly) their ultimate
objeds; and they repofed the mod unlimited and honourable confidence
in our affiduity and judgment to colled, compare, and arrange new
materials. All that was defired of us was to make our difcover.es pub ic y
known as foon as poflible after our return. I fhall take the liberty,
my Lord, of enlarging further on the particulars of our appointment, as
thefe fair conditions have not been kept on your part.
The fum of £. 4000 which Parliament had granted towards the
expences of the voyage, and which was particularly intended as thefalary
of a perfon fkilled in fcience, was propofed to be given to my father and
myfelf. My father, without exaftly knowing how many palms were already
itchin- for a fhare of that fum, was however fufficiently apprized, that
our preparations would amount to a prodigious expence, and that the
overplus after the voyage would be very trifling. Therefore, having con-
Meted that he was going to refign all prefent profpedb of a provifion, and
to drop the literary publications, in which he had undertaken to work for
feveral years to come, -he concluded, that it was his indifpcnfible duty
to ftipulate an adequate provifion for himfelf and his family, left his voyage
B 2 ' fhould


fhould only prove the groundwork of his ruin. To this end, he propofed
two conditions, without which he could not think of failing with Capt.
Cook, * and had the precaution to deiirc they might be granted him in
writing under your Lordftiips fignature.
The firft condition was as follows : « that my father after his return
“Jhould be mpleyedto write the hiftory of the voyage, and enjoy all the prof ts
“ ,he nWcatm, together with fuch advantages as the admiralty board
“ ” UgU ,bink to annex thereunto, ,” in the fame manner as (the late)
T)r. Hawkcfworth was at that time favoured by the board,, whilft he was
(hawing up an account of the former voyages.
The Honourable Mr. Barrington gave the following remarkable anfwer
to this article; - that it was one of tire chief purpofes for which my
“ fa ' her WasfeM out ’ that he 33 a man of letters, and an. eye witnefs,
fhould afterwards deferibe the voyage. That Captain Cook had pleaded
“ h'f 1 ' 7 .' 0 Write “ account of his circumnavigation in the Endeavour,
anc lat entirely S ive “ tip all thoughts of becoming an author. That
“ I" COnfC<IUC!ICe ° f his rrfu61 ’ and that of the gentlemen who failed with:
‘ ,!lm ’ Dr ' Haw kefworth had been engaged, not by choice, but of „e.
“ Ceffity ’ W com pd e an account from their journals.. Finally, that an ap-
“ pllCatl °" t 0 the Admiralt y board > to ratify the propofed condition was
“ Wh ° lly (tiperfluous, fince it would only be requeuing the Lords Com*
“ m,ffion£rS W d °’ what the y adlually intended by the very aft of fending.
“ cut my father; that accordingly he might reft affined, he would be cm-
“ ployed to write the hiflory of the voyage, and enjoy the emoluments an-
“ nexed to that occupation.”
I he fecond condition which my father propofed, was « that a fuitable
“ tU “* " Penance might be granted him at his return, towards the fupport
of
* Sec Appendix, No.


u of his large family. To this Mr. Barrington replied, ee there was not the
leaf! doubt but wc would be provided for,” adding enough to convince
my father, that it would be fuperfluous,. and perhaps indelicate, to apply
for a of what could not efcape him.. Mr. Barrington faid,. “he
“ was fur-e he would behave to the fatisfadion of our employers; and that.
“ whenever, a perfon. employed in the fervice of the Britifh Government had
u done his duty, it was an invariable rule, never departed from*, to provide
u for him either by a penfion or place of emolument.”
After thefe anfwers from Mr.. Barrington, your Lordfhip’s foie agent and
plenipotentiary in this tranfadion, my father and I might juftly fet our minds
at eafe, and look upon the conditions we had propoled,. as entirely agreed
to. I believe it would not be doing juflice to Mr. Barrington’s character,
to fay, that he meant to avail himfelf of the quibble into which his words'
may be conftrued. We did not deal with a pettifogging Attorney, but
with the Honourable Mr.. Dailies Barrington, who was efleemed a man of
honour, an incorrupt judge,, and a real friend. Therefore we took his
word for every thing he promifed., We.relied upon it for the payment of
£. 4000, and why Ihould we not for the fulfillment of the two remain-
ing conditions ? A cunning bar-rider might fay,, that verbal promifes do
not hold good in law ; but is it the fear of the law , that binds a man of
honour to his word ? Men of principle will be honed:,, though there were
no fuch thing as the gallows.. The Honourable Mr. Barrington being
our profefled friend,, your Lordfhip will allow, that for us to have aded
with more of what the world calls prudence ,. in this cafe would have been
ungenerous dijlruft.
Before I proceed to complain,, that our conditions have not yet been
fulfilled on the part of your Lordfhip, it may not be improper to examine
how far we have been benefited by the lum of money we received, and what,
reafons we had to aik for further reward or preferment,
1 In


In the fir ft place, my Lord, we did not receive the whole funi of
£. 4000. The fees of the clerks in the treafury and of the tellers of the
exchequer, amounted to no lefs than 200 pounds. Our equipment which
was made in ten days time and wholly at our own expence, cod; us
/. 1200. Inftruments, books, colours, paper for drawing, writing and
herbals, together with clothes for three years fuitable to various climates,
were to be provided at a moments warning, and on that account the greater
part cod; us nearly the double of their ufual price. Books are very dear,
but a naturalill without them, is like an artift without tools ; our botanical
travelling library, (which was much damaged on the voyage) was very
imperfect, and yet was paid with £. 30c. O ur ex P ence t^ie
that of boarding with Capt. Cook, the unavoidable difburfements in ports
belonging to European powers, fuch as Madeira, the Cape of Good Hope,
St. Helena, and Fayal, and the wages of a fingle fervant, altogether amounted
to £. 750. Our commons in particular proved a heavy article to us,
fince we contributed at firfl two thirds, and afterwards three fourths towards
the expence of the Captain’s table, though in the firft cafe we paid for two
perfons, and the Captain for three, and in the latter, both parties paid for
three perfons. -f Before we left London Mr. Barrington had indeed ad-
vifed us to put up for peace’s fake with charges of this nature, (which he
predicted)
* The Tailor who wadies, fweeps, cleans, carries for you, &c. mud be paid.
•j- I would not be mifunderftood. Captain Cosk and two officers, whom he daily invited,
were three perfons. Dr. Sparrman, my father and myfelf, were three others. He paid
one fourth for his three, and we paid three fourths for ours. By right he fliould have borne
one half of the expence at leaf for he fed moreover from the fame dock three fervants to
our one. Though urged by the neceffity of felf-defence it is with the utmod reluftance I
touch upon the failing of a man whom I refpeft as a navigator of didinguidied ability. But
perhaps what I have here faid, is no difparagement in your jLorddiip’s eyes; it is faid you
never looked upon the adoration of Manimou as a crime..


predicted) though they fhould happen to be unreafonable. I beg your
Lordfhip’s pardon for mentioning this trifling circumftance; but it has been
miftakenly fuppofed, that our table coft us nothing. A fum of £. 75a
was neceflary to maintain during three years my mother and flx children*
moft of them grown up; and to place one of them in a merchant’s
accompting-houfe. At Mr. Barrington’s defire we ufed every poflible
means to colled: in the South Seas, and purchafed at the Cape of Good
Hope a number of live animals, which we had the honour to prefent tqp
Her Majefly immediately after our return. This expence together with
the price of a large colledion of diied Ikins of animals which we bought at
the Cape, and gave to the public, by fending them to the Britifh Mufeum,
amounted to more than £. 250. At our return, our dwell ing-houfe
was broken into and robbed of eflfeds to the amount of £. 150.*
Adding to thefe feveral difburfements, the falary we gave to our afliflant
whom we engaged at the Cape,, and other articles of leis import, what re*
mained in our hands at the end of the voyage fell fhort of £. 500*
Out* of this fmall fum however, we did not hefitate to employ a painter to
copy my fketches of animals and plants,, and fmifh them with the utmoft
care, in order to their being laid before His Majefly. This too was done
by Mr. Barrington’s advice. When about thirty of thefe drawings were in
readinefs, fuflicient to ferve as a fpecimen, His Majefly refufed to fee them,
(your Lordfliip beft knows from what motive) inftead of ordering us to
have all the reft done in the fame manner. They ftill remain upon our
hands, after putting us to the expence of a hundred guineas. We likewife
publifhed a botanical work (dedicated by permiffion to his Majefly) three
months after our return. We were reimburfed as to the expence of the
impreflion, but lofers if we reckon the toil which this work has coft us.
But it may perhaps be imagined, that the time which wepafled on board,
glided away infenfibly,, amidft a continual variety of pleafing events, too
' valuable


valuable to be purchafed with any money.. Every man will be able to
determine from the perufal of Cape. Cook’s as well as my own Narrative of
the Voyage, whether it deferves to be looked upon as a party of pleafure.
Whether the peculiar fituation of my father and myfelf was fuperlatively
happy, may be queftioned from the following fhort remarks.
In order to fit the fiiip for fea fhe was cut down at Sheernefs, * and the
round-houfe, formerly intended for the Captain’s reception, was thrown off.
.This fo much leflened the room in the fhip, that we, as the laffc comers,
found only two fmall cabins, one on each fide, nearly abreaft of the main
mall, and unconnected with any other cabins. They had been patched up
in a hurry, and Handing where the fhip fupports the greateft {train, were
open to the winds and waves, which forced into them through every cranny.
The Captain was fo fcnfible of their uncomfortable condition, that he offered
of his own accord to enlarge my father’s cabin and make it contiguous to
that of the matter. The Captain, firft Lieutenant, Aftronomer, and
Matter had excellent roomy cabins on the fame deck, Supported by each
other, and not torn to pieces by a continual ttrairu They had large fcuttles,
which admitted fufficient light, whiltt we could fcarcely fee a
glimmering
* This will be better underdood, when I have faid, that the fliip was fo over built, as to be in
the mod imminent danger of overfetting, as (lie dropped down from Deptford to Sheernefs.
I could clearly deduce from this very circumftance, your Lordfliip’s real motive for fending
us as naturalifts with Capt. Cook ; but I will not go fo far out of my way at ‘prefen t, for if
the learned can reap but the fmallcfl advantage from our having been on the voyage, it mud
be very immaterial to them whether a laudable zeal in the caufe of fcience, or revenge and
private pique were your Lordfhip’s motives. They will however not fail to refled, that if
you had been aduated on that occafion by the love of knowledge, you would have fent at
lead one man of letters with Capt. Cook, when he failed on his third great voyage in
July, 1776*


glimmering through a (mail hole overlhaded by the chain plates. Morning
and evening every day, on wafhing the decks, our cabins were filled with
water over the ancles, and by this means, or when it rained, or as often as
a wave ftruck over the fhip, our beds were thoroughly drenched; -and this
hardfhip was wholly confined to ourfelvcs, all the other cabins being water-
tight and warm. By living in thefe wretched hovels, my father was tortured
with rheumatic pains, w'hich frequently confined him to his cold damp
bed, and once laid him up during two whole months, whi lit we cruifed to
the Southward among the ice in December, 17 73> and January, 1 7 74-
was likewife plagued with frequent illnefs and fcorbutic complaints.
It was our misfortune that we had never feen the fhip before fhe came
into Plymouth Sound, and that your Lotdfhip was failed from thence
before her arrival, that is, before you could realife the kind affurances
which you gave us on board the Augufta Yacht, “ that every poffible
accommodation fhould be given us.” We no fooner reminded Capt. Cook
of his promife to enlarge one of our cabins, than the mafter oppofed it-,
by maintaining that the empty fpace which the Captain intended for us,
belonged to him. He had always been averfe to include that fpace in his
own cabin, but his wifhes were fufficiently gratified, when he prevailed fo
far that we did not obtain the benefit of it- The want of a (lore room
©lmpropriated to our own ufe was productive of many difagreeable confe-
quences; and we had the mortification to fee a great part of our collection
.■of natural curiofities in fpirit-s entirely fpoiled, not having had it in our
power to change the fpirits as often as it was requifite. To thefe circum-
ftances, my Lord, let me ad-d that my father, by a violent fall on the
mountains of O-Taheitee, where he went to botanize, received a dangerous
rupture, which forces him to wear a bandage, is very painful at times
and renders him unfit for any laborious excrcife,
C Such


Such were the peculiar difcomforts which fell to our- lhare during the
voyage. Let us weigh them with the (mail fum which remained in our
hands at our return, and methinks three years of hardlhips and morti-
fications, are a hard bargain for fuch a price. Befides this, injured in his:
health, advanced in years,, entirely thrown out of his former connections,,
my father had the world to begin again, at a period when it is generallv
time to withdraw to tranquility; a tranquility which he juftly thought he
had fecured to himfelf by what palled between Mr. Barrington and him,
when he made his terms,.
There are however, no hopes fo well grounded;, no good fortune fo,
fpecious,. which malice and envy cannot deftroy. This never Ihewed itfelf
more clearly than in our prefent cafe. We received £. 4000, of which ■
nine tenths were enjoyed by others. We received a promife of being
fupported for life,, which has never been fulfilled. The emoluments of an
exclufive publication of the voyage were fecured to us, if your agent’s
honour may be called fec.urity ; but they have been molt unjuftly with-held
to this moment, and we have been robbed of our due,.ftep by ftep. At firft
my father was to divide the profits with Capt-.C00k,, and to compole one
fingle account from his own and the Captain’s journals.. Then,, each was
to draw up his own according to a written agreement. In both cafes my
father made fpecimens, which were rejected without rhyme or reafon.
He was then directed to write fomething that Ihould be no connected narra-
tive. He complied, but when his manufeript was ready, he was-told,
your Lordlhip had no concern with him.. You had the power, my Lord,
to be unjuft, and you exercifed it moft arbitrarily, changing your con-
ditions as often as you found we complied with them, and cutting us oft* at
laft from the profits which you had fecured to us by writing, without
afligning fo much as one word by way of motive. The only fpring of your
aCtions was this; malice dictated, and you obeyed.
It


It was unfortunate for us, that we were not prefent, when your Lordihip
came on board the lhip (Refolution) loon after her arrival in the river
Thames. You were accompanied by a lady, who having feen our live
birds, which we had deftined for the Queen, manifefted an unbounded af-
fection towards the pretty creatures, and a violent longing to be made mif-
ipefs of them. The keeper had no orders to part with them, and therefore
the lady after repeatedly fignifying to him that Ihe wilhed to have them, went
away highly difiatisfied. When we heard of this circumftance, it was too
late to apply a remedy. Our birds had already been announced, and we had
obtained Her Majefty’s moft gracious permiffion to bring them to Kew.
I mult entreat your Lordlhip, not to think too hardly of me for recalling
to your mind what may be a very infignificant circumftance. My reafon for
mentioning it, upon fo ferious an occafion as the prefent, is briefly this. Your
conduCt towards us, has been fo uniformly unjuft, that I have in vain put
my invention to the rack, to difcover a flaw in my father’s behaviour, which
could have given your proceedings the fainteft colouring of juftice. Unwil-
ling, however, to believe, that a man of your Lordlhip’s judgment aCted
without any motive whatfoever, I turned over in my mind a variety of cir-
cumftances, which at laft gave me the option to conclude, either that your
motive was the moft wanton, and moft fanguinary difpofition for cruelty, a
difpofition too diabolical to be fuppofed to exift in a human breaft; or, that
our misfortunes owed their origin to the influence of the lady juft mentioned,
as Ihe might perhaps have found a great pleafure in revenging herfelf upon thofe
who were very innocently the caufe of her difappointment. This faid, my
Lord, I (hall no longer ftop to confider the impulfes, which led you to unjuft
aCtions, but proceed to the faCts themfelves, which need no furmifes to
heighten their atrocioufnefs.
I have already obferved, that Captain Cook, at his return from his firft
voyage, declined to write an account of it, and laid all thoughts of
* C 2 ever


ever becoming an author. My father had therefore been fent out on the
fecond voyage by the board of Admiralty, purpofely to write the hiftory of its
events. Mr. Barrington had in exprefs terms declared this to be the inten-
tion of the board, previous to our departure, and by that means prevented
my father’s intended application to your Lordfhip and the board, praying
the grant of this appointment by writing. After our return, my Lord, you
have arbitrarily annulled this condition, you have not even fuffered my fatheF
to foare the emoluments of the publication with Captain Cook, and you have
wholly excluded him from all profits whatever.
Dr. Hawkefworth’s publication which had been fent to meet Capt. Cook at
the Cape, with the news of the prodigious profits of the compiler, infpired
him with the defire of becoming an author. Immediately upon our arrival
in town, it appeared that he had made intereft with your Lordfhip, to
obtain a fhare in the emoluments of the hiftory of the voyage. The firft
ftep being ever the moft difficult, they had rightly conjectured, that after
fecuring a fhare, they could eafily trick my father out of the whole.
Your Lordfhip’s firft plan allotted two fifths of the profits to Capt. Cook,
as much to my father, and one fifth to the painter from whofe drawings the
plates for the work were to be engraved. The whole profits were my father’s
by right; but from a defire of peace he acquiefced too readily in the treaty of
partition; and the facility with which he fuffered himfelf to be deprived of his
due, no doubt encouraged his antagonifts to continue their game.
Captain Cook proceeded from two fifths to obtain one half; he found
means to prevail upon your Lordfhip, to exclude the painter, who was pro-
vided for by a penfion, and to fhare the future profits equally between him*
felf and my father. At a meeting in your Lordfhip’s prefence, it was agreed,
that my father fhould write the hiftory of the voyage, and have the ufe of
Captain Cook’s journals for that purpofe. Your Lordlhip defired to fee a
a fpecimen of the work as foon as it could be provided. My father received
4
fevcral


leveral fheets of Captain Cook’s manufeript, and within a few weeks drew
up a fpecimen, *in which he had melted into one conneded narrative
tfce occurrences and obfervations which he found in the Captain sand his-
own journals. This fpecimen which he can fhew to fuch as may wilb
to fee it, might probably have been approved by the public, had it been
adopted. Your Lordfhip faid you had perufed it; and then rejeded it
without deigning to give one Tingle reafon for fo doing. Your condud in
this inflance muft appear unaccountable indeed.
Though it was now clear that your Lordfhip did not confblt the advantage
of the public, my father ftiU was paffive, not earing how the accounts
were drawn up, provided he was at liberty to fhew by his writings, that he
had not been fent out in vain. After fome previous deliberations in your
Lordfhip’s prefence on the 13th of April, 1 7 7 a new P^ ao was f ett^
according to which, the work, to be publifhed under the aufpices of the
Admiralty board, was to be divided into two parts; the nautical one by
Captain Cook; th z philofopbical one by my father. An agreement fpecifying
this divifion at large was drawn up, and triplicates properly figned and wit-
nefled, were delivered to hfr. Stephens, Capt. Cook, and my father.
In the fame written agreement -p figned by Captain Cook and my father,
and witneffed by your Lordfhip and Mr. Stephens* it was fpecified, at your
command, that the profits of the work fhould be divided in equal fhares,
between Captain Cook and my father, and that a number of plates fhould
be engraved at the expence of the Admiralty-board, which fhould likewife
become their joint property. A great number of drawings were forthwith
put into the hands of the moll eminent engravers, under the direction of
* the
» it was an account of our tranfa&ions during the time we lay at Dufky Bay in New
Zeeland. See Capt. Cook’s Voyages, vol, i, p. 6g»
•f See Appendix, No. 2.


the painter Who had gone on the voyage; and my father was directed to
fuperintend the drawing and engraving of feveral other plates, reprefentin£
the weapons and utenfils of the different nations, together with a few objedts
ef natural hiftory. Thefe plates like the others, have been publifhed with
Capt. Cook’s account of the voyage.
After figning an agreement in form, authenticated by your Lordfhip's
own fignature, one might have fuppofed that the profits therein allotted to
my father, were for ever fecured to him. But fuch was not the intention
of his enemies. Accordingly, when my father prefented a fecond fpecimen
to your Lordfhip, conformable to the new plan fettled on the 13th of April,
17 76, you told him that the Honourable Mr. Barrington muft correß his
manufeript.
My father now difeovered that he had long been the dupe of a fecret
contrivance, and traced the artful game ftep by Hep, as I have related it.
Refolving however to know what your Lordfhip meant by fending his
manufeript to be correßed , he waited on the Honourable Mr. Barrington.
That gentleman had already received his cue. He fhewed my father the
alterations he propofed to make in his manufeript, by means of which that
account of the voyage would have had no more connexion than a book
©f aphorifms; and muft have conveyed the moft contemptible idea of its
author. In order to make the effedt of fuch mutilations more obvious to
the readers of this letter, let them take an hiftorical book, and fcratch out
at random wherever chance directs the pen, as many paragraphs as they
choofe, till the refidue will not admit of any fenfe whatever. This was
exadtly the cafe of my father’s manufeript when corredted by Mr. Barrington.
Where is the man of fuch finifhed impudence, who will confent' freely
to be reprefented to the world as in a ftate of infinity? And yet
dus was the only light in which an author could appear, who fhould have
ventured


ventured to publifh fuch a manufcript as my father’s, after it had been
caftrated by Mr. Barrington.
My father could not fubmit to the indignity of having his manufcript
correaed in a manner which totally deprived it of common fenfc; and
therefore complained of the injuftice which was done him.—Another
battery was immediately opened upon him. “ The agreement,, the agree-
“ ment,” was thundered in his ear. The fame man who had folemnly
affured him that he Ihould be employed to write the hiftory of the voyage,,
now declared it did not Hand in the agreement, that his part of the work
Ihould be drawn up in form of a connefted narrative. The matter indeed
was fo artfully exprelfed, that the word narrative had been eluded. In
vain my father obferved, that your Lordlhip had underftood the matter
differently on the day when, the agreement was drawn up, becaufe you had
then declared, that his obfervations Ihould be committed to paper in the
order of time as they occurred, and in fuch a connexion as a narrative
required, provided only no nautical matters were touched upon..
My father could not prevail on .the Hon. Mr. Barrington to relinquilh-
his unjuft pretenfions to mutilate the manufcript, he profeffing to adt iolely
by your Lordlhip’s direction, and appearing refolved to convince you of
his unconditional and implicit obedience to your mandates. *On this
occafion mv father appealed repeatedly to your Lordlhip and to Mr. Stephens,
but without any kind of fuccefs. You ftill referred to Mr. Barrington,
and-
» This was our friend, it may be faid. But who is fo ignorant now a days, not to know
the meaning of that word, in the modern court vocabulary? Friendfliip is the (mile of
approbation bellowed upon us, for kneeling to the idol of authority. Attempt but to draw the
neck from under its foot, and you are dilcarded for ever. Belides this,, a great man always
requires that his friend ftiould even on philofophical fubjefts, and in matters of opinton,
* ’ implicitly


•and loft all things to that gentleman’s judgment, threatening in exprefs
Tvords to deprive my father of all the emoluments which were promifed him in
■the agreement, if he did not fubmit his manufeript to the prtferibed cor-
reftion. My father once more reprefented to Mr. Barrington, the injuftice of
this proceeding, and Hated to him in a very explicit letter the conditions
upon which he had engaged to go on the voyage, and to which Mr. B.it-
tington now adted in diametrical oppofition, by your Lordfhip’s command.
Waving that point however for the prefent, he begged he might he
allowed to draw up his narrative to the bell of his abilities, or that if
it mud be mutilated, he might obtain a fmall fum, in confutation of which
he would give up his journals into the hands of any compiler who ihould
be appointed by your I.ordihip to undertake the job. He only wiflied
for quiet, and would have purchafed that almolt at any rate, except by
the ignominy which mull have followed, had he ptihlilhed in bis own
vame > 11 e littered remnants of his manufeript. Mr. Barrington did not
think fit to deny that the conditions he had formerly agreed to, and the
prefent proceedings did not harmonize; but adopted the more’ forcible
argument, in which power has ever the advantage of the defenceiefs,
namely the repetition of your Lordihip’s threats to deprive my father of his
fhareof the profits. My father not fubmitting fo readily as was expedled,
your Lordlhip ventured to abufe the-ear of his Majelly with falfe and in-
jurions
implicitly adopt his fancies. Hinc ill* lathr ym *. If the patron maintains that fait-water
cannot freeze, and. his friend ventures to trull his own eyes and believe the contrary; or if
the great man dreams of a'Southern continent, and his client has the audacity to divulge that
* C haS failed ° VCr the f P ot where “ been found ; -woe to the poor find;
not the fea, but his patron’s heart will be intently converted into ice, and from thence forward
to find one Angle fentiment of philanthropy or even common juftice in the frozen mafs, willhe
its utterly impoflible as to meet with lands where it has pleafed heaven to placp an ocean.


jurious afperfions againft him. You mult indeed have cruelly mifreprefented
this matter to the fovereign, if there was any truth in the paragraph of
one of Mr. Barrington’s letters, which mentions that you had “ His
“ Majefty’s command to expedite the publication of Capt. Cook’s narra-
({ tive only, unlefs my father fubmitted to fuch alterations and corrections
as Mr. Barrington might think proper.” In confequence of this,
Mr. Stephens demanded the plates to be delivered up to him, which had
been engraved under my fathers infpedtion, thereby intimating that no
more were to be engraved.
It now occui*ed to my father, that by giving up the point of writing a
narrative, he might at lead; be allowed to cad; his obfervations in a fyftematic
mould, and divide them into different heads, according to the variety of
natural objedts to which they related. But it was diametrically contrary to
V -
the plan you had hitherto purfued, that fuch a reafonable propofal fliould
fucceed; it was determined nothing diould be accepted from him but the
f craps of his remarks which Mr. Barrington might leave. In fad, when
my father fometime afterwards acquainted your Lorddiip, that he had
nearly finilhed this work upon anew plan, you wrote to him that you would
hear nothing from him on the fubjedt of the publication of the voyage,
that he had no further concern with it, and no claim to the emoluments
annexed to it.
Thus did your Lordlhip at laffc arbitrarily deprive my father of his
property, when you could or would no longer try his patience, by propofing
new conditions upon which he was to earn, what had originally been
granted unconditionally. You had changed thefe conditions four times,
and he had always complied; Your laft ftep, when he had done every
thing that the mod unreafonable tafk-mafter could exaCt, was to fay, “he
« Jhall have nothing of what I have promifed , hecaufe lam a great man , and
« have the power to opprefs him.” This was the lhorteft way of going to
D work,


work, and it would have been a favour had yon told us as much the firft
day wc had the honour of waiting upon your Lordfhip after our return
from the voyage. To deprive us of our due, was only unjuft; but it was
adding the moft wanton cruelty to delude us with falfe promifes, and
empty hopes during fifteen months. Seeing that your Lordlhip had at laft
thrown off the mafk, nor hefitated to break through verbal promifes and
written agreements, I applied myfelf with great aftiduity to draw up for
publication my own obfervations on the voyage, in order to, alleviate if.
poffible, in fome meafure,, the difficulties to which your arbitrary proceed-
ings had reduced my father and his. unhappy family. I fcarcely touched
however upon this real caufe of the publication in my preface, ftill hoping
that by the mediation of fome candid and honeft friends, your Lordfhip
might be prevailed upon to do us juftice v By dint of unremitted labour,
I got my account of the voyage into fuch forwardnefs,. as to.publifh it about
fix weeks fooner than Capt.. Cook’s appeared. I fliould have compafled the,-
end for which I had toiled, if you had not framed anew contrivance tou
prevent it.
But my Lord, if you did not choofe to keep conditions which you or
your plenipotentiaries had granted, and others which you had figned, or if
you were refolvcd not to reward us; was it neceffary that you fhould inhu-
manly deftroy our other means of getting an honeft livelihood ? You gave
orders to the publishers of Capt. Cook’s voyage to fell that work at the fame
price as mine, though a work with 63 elegant copper plates engraved by
the firft artifts, inftead of being fold for two guineas, would without your;
Lordfhip’s interference have been fold for four guineas, agreeably to the
cuftomary price of fuch publications. Thus you enticed the purchafers to
prefer the Captain’s book to mine, for this plain reafon, that with it they
received 63 plates into the bargain. In order that Capt. Cook’s profit might
not be leffened through your generofity to the public, you made him a
5 - . prefent


prefent of the expences of paper and print, over and above the gift of afl
the plates. By thus lavtlhing the public money, you were enabled to
retail the books below prime coft: like that charitable flioe-maker who
ufed to fteal the leather, and to give away for nothing the Ihoes which he
made of it. The contrivance had the defined fucccfs; and lam a loler by
two thirds of what I muft otherwife have earned.
There is another article, my Lord, in the agreement ot the 13th of
April, 1776, which has been arbitrarily infringed, to our prejudice. It
was expreffly ftipulated in that agreement, that my lather lhould
receive the fheets of Capt. Cook’s narrative, as fall as each was printed off,
and proofs of the plates as foon as any were engraved, for the purpofe of
giving him an advantage in point of time, to make inflations of the work
j ßt o the French and German languages. Capt. Cook left England long
’before his manufeript was put to the prefs; and appointed certain agents
to manage the publication of the work in concert with my father. Thefe
perfons refufed to furnifh my father with fteets and with proof-impteffions
of the plates. He inflantly applied to your Lordfhip for redrefs; but you
were pleafed to refer him back to the very perfons of whom he complained.
He hath your letters on the fubjedt I believe no man ever heard of a
more flagrant violation of common equity. Capt. Cook’s agents feeing
they were not controuled, perfifted to refufe the fulfilling of the agreement,
and deprived my father of an advantage, which at the very loweft would
have been worth to him £• 1000.
My Lord, if you could be prevailed upon not to perform your engage-
anenis with regard to the publication of the voyage, it is not to be expeded
you would do us juftice in other refpeas, or provide for us according to
•promife. Let me congratulate your Lordfhip on the facility with which
'you evaded the fecond condition, which my father had propofed to the
Hon Mr. Barrington before his departure, and which your Lordflup
D a knows


knows that gentleman agreed to. Full of the idea which he had communi-
cated to us, “ that if we did our duty, during the voyage, we Jheuld infallibly
“he rewarded my father took an opportunity of requefting your Lordfhip
to declare whether you were fatisfied with our labours ? You condefcended
to affure him that we had compaffed the objeft of our million and behaved
entirely to the fatisfadhon of your Lordlhip and the board of Admiralty. *
My father now ventured to hope he Ihould be provided for. You told him
dryly, he could not exped preferment in the naval line. Cold as this anfwer
was, he obferved there were other lines, and hinted that an application from
your Lordlhip to any other department could not fail of fuccefs. In reply
to this he heard, that you had laid it down as a rule never to make fuch an
application, and your Lordfhip pronounced this (how lhall I call it) ?
without a blulh. Thus put off a fecond time, his lalt requeft was, to be
reprefented to the king by your Lordlhip as a perfon who had done his duty,
and merited (nay what was more, had bargained for) encouragement and
fupport. This you folemnly promifed to do.
I could hardly bring a ftronger proof that you have not fpoken in our
favour to his Majefty, than barely faying you promifed to do it. Your
I.ordlhip’s promifes are grown proverbial. But the event hath fhewn that
you mull have done the very oppofite of what you gave us room to expeft.
You mutt have ufed the moll fubtle arts to mifreprefent us in the eyes of
the King. If you did not calumniate your fovereign, your own words
are a proof of what I now advance, when you told Mr. Barrington that
his Majefty ordered your Lordlhip to proceed with Capt.. Cook’s narrative
only, unlefs my father fubmitted to your pleafure. It is impoffible his
Majefty could have given fuch orders, if he had not from your inlinuations
been induced to believe that we were unworthy of his patronage. And how
falfe
* See Appendix No. 2.


fahe, how groundless Such infinuations mult have been, I have methinks
fufficiently evinced. To you my Lord, philofophifing may feem imperti-
nent, but I cannot forbear making this one remark, that princes are very
unhappy when the good they with to do, is fo often defeated by the dupli-
city ol fervants who feem to be univerfally agreed upon this dreadful maxim,.
that it is iawjul to deceive a King .
There arc other evident proofs, that your Lordfhip was bold enough to
abufe their Majefties confidence with regard to my father. I have already
obferved that we had the honour of prefenting a valuable collection of live-
animals to Her Majejiy , which was moft gracioufiy accepted. I have
obferved too, that the king permitted us to dedicate to him our work on
the plants of the South Sea Iflands, which we had the honour to prefent at
the levee in November 1775. It is a thing unheard of amongfi: civilized
nations, that a fovereign fhould receive prefents without returning fomething
morefubftantialthan thanks for them; and it would have been incompati-
ble with the dignhy and honour of a Queen if Ihe had received a prefent
of the value of £. 200 from a poor man, , without intending to make him
ample amends. Fortunately I have now in my hands a letter from a gentle-
man to whom the Queen did. the honour to fpeak on this fubjedt in fuch
terms as do complete juftice to her character; fhe was certainly of opinion
(my friend writes) that my father’s prefents deferved a retribution,, and
repeatedly expreffed a defire of rewarding him. What then could operate
fo ftrongly, my Lord, againft thefe difpofitions, as- to prevent
their having taken effedt to this moment? It is not to be doubted that you
have mifreprefented us to her Majefty as well as to the King.,
What but your influence too,, could have fo far injured us in the King’s
opinion, that he refufed even to fee the drawings which we had taken care to
provide at a heavy expence to ourfelves ? Thefe drawings reprefented
objedts of natural hiflory hitherto unknown, and not unworthy the infpe&ion
of.


of a great prince, nor unfit to occupy a place in his cabinet. The Hon.
Mr. Barrington had at leaft judged well of them, when he directed my
father to employ a fkillful painter to finifh them with the utmoft care, from
the rough draughts which I had taken during the voyage. I have the
honour to affure your Lordlhip, they were of a very different nature from
the plates in Dr. Hill’s vegetable fyftem, though it is well known how
liberally that performance was patronized. _
Your perfection my Lord, did not flop even there, you juftly appre-
hended that my father might take the orfly road open to a poor man, in order
to obtain redrefs. The confcioufnefs of unjuft adtions naturally implies the
fear of being difeovered, and this led you to make your judges macceffible
to us. Yes, my Lord, we have repeatedly tried to lay our diftrefles at the
foot of the throne ; we have begged for redrefs, nay limply ror a hearing.
But we have never been heard ; our petitions have been returned unopened.
Impoffible! will every honeft Briton fay; impoffible, that the King of a
free people, fliould refufe to hear the complaints of his fub>tto, and thus
negleft a duty, the exercife of which is the very effence and condition of his
dignity. Impoffible, he Ihould forget, what on the like occafion an oppreffed
fubjedt nobly ventured to tell one of the moft powerful monarchs ! * But if
'this is impoffible, on the other hand it muft be evident that our petitions have
never reached the fovereign. Men who tremble at every minifter’s power,
live upon his fmiles, and are annihilated by his frowns; men who dare not
difoblige you with a look, much lefs a word or act, would never fuftcr
plain truth in her thread-bare weeds, to pafs the facred threfhold, and
of you.
All poffible flops have been taken wholly to cut off our means of exigence,
;and I may fafely life the term-to deftroy us. We are not only unrewarded,
but
* Plutarch. Apophtheg. Philip of Maccdon refufing to hear a poor woman’s petition,
Hold her, he had no time to attend to her trifling complaints. She replied ; thm no longer
‘ pretend to he <i King” She was heard.


but every other hope, every profped of thriving and fupporting an humble
exiftence is dallied to the ground. In a letter to the Hon. Mr. Bairington,
your Lordlhip Galls my father an impracticable man . In your Lordlhip s
circles he is likewife honoured with the epithet of quarrelfome which like
the former was given becaufe he did not put up with oppreflions without
groaning under their weight. This epithet too, has fpread as rapidly as
mifchief commonly does* Conlidering the flight acquaintance of your
Lordlhip with the church, ,it is fomewhat remarkable, that it was found in
the mouth of a prelate.. A friend who applied for my father in order to
obtain a place at the Britilh Mufeum for him, which he might have had
fix years ago,, was told “ the man was quarrelfome .” lam fenfible that by
implication,, the objedions which are raifed again!! my father are
become obftacles to my own progrefs in life : though young and Angle as I
am, they cannot hurt me in the fame proportion. lam in good fpirits,
my Lord, Europe is all before me, I work chearfully, and thus no,
doubt I lhall lind means- to live. My motto is, übi bene ibi patria ; and
this mult be the fentiment of every poor man, whofe. conception of things
is juft enough,, to .make, him value his life only in proportion to its ufeful-
nefs. Such an one will be in fad a citizen of the world, though he muft 5 -
exped (even in England) to meet with prejudice and unfeafonable pride,
which treat alike the induftrious ftranger and the vagabond . My father has
met with illiberality in this Ihape,. though he had perhaps a good excufe
for vifiting this country. His anceftors fettled in Pruflia, being deprived of.
their pofleflions in.Yorklhire by Oliver Cromwell. He returned to England,
from a natural prediledion to it, as a mother country*. If he is not yet
entirely weaned of this prejudice, it is not your Lordlhip’s fault; you have
done your endeavours to make him deteft this country..
It is time to put a period to this long letter, though I have in referve a
variety of witnefles whom for the prefent I lhall not callup, as I think the.
evidence;


evidence is already decifive again# your Lordfhip. It is certain then that
in your private tranfadtions with abfeure and unknown individuals,, you
preferve the fame character as in your public conduct,, which laft I am told
hath been fufficiently weighed'and found wanting.. I only add that in both
cafes the evil hath; probably originated from one and the fame caufe.. It is
true, I think I could clear your Lordfhip of every charge which is brought
againfl you but to effect that,, perhaps a little jefuitical mental refervation ,
would be indifpenfibly Your Lordfhip’s. Cruelty towards
us is unaccountable,, unlefs I have hit upon the true motive, by attri-
buting it to the influeuce of Mifs Ray,
If what the world reports of your Lordfhip,. be confonant to truth,, our
demands upon you are trifling in companion to thofe of the public, and
ought to be anfwered,. becaufe your agent had promifed much more. I
lhall leave to your own determination to fix the amount of our annual
provifion; but with regard to my father’s profits of the publication, they
are as follows. Had his work been printed with Capt. Cook’s, the whole
together would have formed three volumes in Quarto, which according to
the common price of books of prints, mufi: have been fold at fix guineas,
but I will only put them down at three , conformably to the price of Capt.
Cook’s account of the voyage, which was fixed fo low by your Lordfhip,
in order to injure the fale of mine. Three thoufand copies have been fold
of Capt. Cook’s work, and as,many would have been fold of the joint
publication. The nett produce of this daft,, after deducting certain expences,
would have been at the very lowed, fix thoufand pounds. One half of this
fum is my father’s due, by the written agreement of the 13th of April, 1776.
If he had been furnifhed as it was fiipulated in the agreement, with
proof-flieets and proof-impreflions of the plates, he would have cleared
£-5 00 by the French tranflation, and as much by the German. He
therefore demands £.4000 upon the flrength of an .agreement figned by-
-5 your ?


your Lordfhip, -even though he fhould wave the advantage, which thc-
conditions agreed to by the Hon. Mr. Barrington fecured to tiim. I repeat,,
my Loid, that if there is any thing like equity in the world, you cannot
refufe to pay my father four thoufand pounds, which will not yet make him
amends for what he has fuffered whilfl it hath been unjuftly withheld. For
the prefent I muft entirely leave it to your love of juftice, whether you will
pay, or not pay my father. But do not, my Lord, perfevere in oppreffive
adts, for no other reafon, but becaufe there is now no power to controul you.
Should this laft addrels to your Lordfhip, in favour oL an injured man,
pro\e umuccefsful, which yet I would hope will not be the cafe, you fhall
never hear from us again, unlefs a longer arm than ours be ftretched out in
our favour. Calumny, falfhood, and the fcurrility which may once more
be employed againft us, fhall never provoke us to think and write of you
again; and as to actual oppreffion, I think we may almoft defy its efFedts,
fince you have taken all we had ;
Cantat vacuus coram latrone viator.
Having with the moft fcrupulous confciencc laid a true ftate of the cafe
before the public,, there remains -in our hearts one fpecies of tranquility
and comfort, perhaps unknown to your Lordfhip, but powerful enough to
diftule chearfulnefs and confidence, when every other ray of hope is fled,.
I have the honour to be
My Lord,
Your Lordfhip’s.
moft obedient
and moft humble Servant,
Percy Street ,
May 2s>th,„
m B ~
GEORGE FORSTER.




APPENDIX.
I i y h faTh
cu->ulH in anv wife have drawn upon us his Lordlnip s diipieai , 6
rf a perfon whofe influence over him is generally acknowledged to be very confidenble
°Ttr his T nrdfhiD had not this motive to perfecute us, he had none at all, except lie
TVm veVS™ oth"nking:°"»«he 0 th"nking:°"»«he fa«s, of which I have Lord<hip,
need any other voucher than the veracity of honeft men , ut we a unac-
“tify them with a folemn oath, in order to give them judicial - Whol y unaC:
rt r" upon which Save
dance of our friends, wno renecru.g up • • d that in order to compleat our
hitherto been put in praftice againtt us, have imagined, Ul * l ~,, , r
diftrefs, our opponents might probably not fcruple to defcen o
No. I.
(copy.;
In the King’s Bench.
G r nn pr FORSTER, of Percy-ftreet, in the pariftvof Saint Pancras, in the
coumvrf Middlelx, Gentfeman, maketh oa’th, and faith that he this Deponent,
i ’rh Tnhn Reinold Forfter (this Deponent’s father) being engaged as natu
to ao o J n a voyage m the Somh Seas and round the world in the fervice of the
Honourable the Lords Coinmiflioners of the Admiralty, in order to collect, ftudy, and
examine, fuch objeds of Natural Hiitory as might prefent themfel ves or occur dun g
f , ’ j; j nnrfuant to luch encasement, embark on the Eleventh day Jy,
OneZ&d 'ste'n hundred o and^Seventy- two,’on board his Majefty’s floop called the
Solution fitted out tor the faid voyage, and then lying at Plymouth Sound, and did
anyothrpS'whftfocvcr (except the faid Dames Barrington)
s'-


-refpefling the terms of their appointments or going the faid voyage; but performed the
BnrSfsS 7 Ik lhe engagement and affurinces of .hcfaidDau'es
.carnngton, and in the firmeft reliance and dependance on being naid the fum nf v
thoufand pounds, and having fuch other emolument anS prmflT onthe^rlm’a
as mentioned and ftipulated by and between this Deponent’s faid’Father and the f id
ffar hi! P 6 ?”' And thlS De P onent further faith, that neither he this Deponent
of this n! d at , lCr ? ° r an y° ter P erfon on their account, to the knowledge of belief
this Deponent, have or hath received any more or greater part of the faid fnm nf
than the fUm 0f Three “ a " d Fifteen
GEORGE FORSTER.
Sworn in Court, T), . 1
26th May, i 7 78. By the Court.
In the King’s Bench,
J °msX fhe E of Middlefex f j Percy - ftr ' et > in * e P ari<h of Saint Pan-
r DatTSiniM: s hS; r s f^
able the Lords Commiffioners of • n name on the behalf of the Honour-
to engage this Deponent and his Son Geolge V°,h '"s D ?°, nent
and round the world in the fervice of the fiid Lords CoLSSS in nr j°n itf
TT' fuch ob J e « s of Natural Hiftory as (hould prefent themfefvei o?
rl,r j U< r-°^ a ® e » anc * t^l * s Deponent, after taking into confideration fnrh
pofal, did, on the firft day of June One thoufand Seven hundred nni * pr °'
at the chambers of the faid Daines Barrington in the Temple aforeLM fllr'''’ 0 ’ “i*
h.mon the tetms and conditions on which he was to make fuch voia’ge
&d Daines Barrington promifed and undertook, that in cafe this Denon™, n- o he
n U ] ,K n p er ; a t - ,he m V °y and lhould embarl ' hoard L SOn
called the Refolutton, commanded by Captain James Cook (which was thin fftt,H P ’
for a voyage on Dtfcovery) that this Deponent (hould be paid the fum of Four ,( ° Ut
fand pounds, granted by an Aft of Parliament paffed in thi Twelfth iiar of hi/ V
Majeftys reign for making difcoveries in the South - which fum hif r> f P rent
thinking a fufficient or adequate fatisfaflion for hazard ani which"h/ "a
his faid Son (hould run or might be expofed to during the voyage ■he this I W ?
then tdd the fa,d Daines Barrington he could not confent toVo for t e
thoufand pounds only, but propofed to him thip ») r• 1 t? g ? r “ ie a Four
the faid Lords Comrniffionersftoul^engage 1 this ’^ oul “ nd P°“"ds,
the Hiftory or Account of the faid Voyafefaid its o~’J a„Sn I Tt ■ wri,e
nent to have and enjoy all the nmfifs rff tin. uv . urrcn *- es > an ° permit tms Depo-
perforin


perform the faid voyage : In anfwer to which laid propofal of this Deponent, he the
faid Daines Barrington a flu red this Deponent, that the objeft which the faid Commif-
fioners had chiefly in view by fending this Deponent on the faid voyage, was that he
might be an eye-witnefs of, and thereby the better enabled as a man of letters, to de-
scribe and publifli the Voyage and occurrences ; for that the faid Captain James Cook
having before declared his inability to write an account of his circumnavigation in his
Majefty s bark Endeavour and entirely given up all thoughts of becoming an author,
and the Gentlemen who failed with him on that voyage having declined fuch an under-
taking, Doaor Hawkefworth had been engaged, not by choice, but of neceflity, tocom-
f l e h an A5 CCOU n °i V ° ya ? f [°‘ n their J° urnals i and th “ therefore an application
to the Admiralty Board to ratify the terms propofed by this Deponent for engaging him-
felt to w rite the account of the faid voyage, was not-only unneceflary, but luperfluoils,
as it woukl only be defiring them to do what they the faid Lords Commiflioners mani-
fetted their intention of doing, by the very aft of fending this Deponent on the faid
voyage ; and the faid Honourable Dames Barrington added, that this Deponent miaht
be well allured he would be employed to write the Hiftory of the Voyage, and enjoy ?he
profit and emolument thereof. And as to the place, penficn, or provifion for mainte-
nance, which this Deponent defired to have engaged or fecured for him, he the faid
iJaines Barrington told this Deponent, he need not be under the leaft doubt but that
he and his family would be provided for on his return from the voyage, as the faid
Dames Barnngton was well convinced that this Deponent would behave himfelf to the
latisfacrion of the Right Honourable the Earl of Sandwich, and the other the Lords
Commiflioners of the Admiralty; and the faid Daines Barrington alfo allured this De-
ponent, that whenever a perfon engaged by or employed in the fervice of the Britilli Go-
vernment had done ms duty, it was a fettled rule never departed from, to provide for him
either by a penfion, or place of emolument; and that therefore it would be unnecelTary
and premature to make application then for a provifion, which he this Deponent could
not fail to receive at his return. And this Deponent further faith, that from fuch the
reprefentations and aflhrances of the faid Daines Barrington, and in the firmed reliance
and confidence of the truth thereof, he this Deponent was induced to believe that the
terms aforefaid would be ratified and performed on his return from the faid vova-e •
that is to fay that this Deponent would then receive the fum of Four thoufand pounds
m calh, and be employed to write the Hiftory of the faid Voyage, and enjoy the profit
and emolument thereof, together with a penfion or provifion for the future fupport of
th!s Deponent and h.s family; and therefore this Deponent and his faid Son George
horlter, did content to go; and accordingly on the Eleventh day of July One thoufand
feven hundred and feventy-two, did embark on board the faid floop Refolution then
lying at Plymouth Sound, and proceed on and perform the fad voyage to the South
Seas, and round the world, and return and arrive from the Yaid voyage at Spithead
on the thirty-firft day of July, One thoufand Seven hundred and Seventy-five And
this Deponent further faith, that he this Deponent and his faid Son GeorgeForfter
undertook and performed the faid voyage in confideration of, and entire dependence on
being paid the faid fum of Four thoufand pounds, and having fuch emolument reward*
and provifion as before mentioned, granted, fettled and allowed them at their return and
from no other motive, view, or confideration whatever; and that he this Deponent in
expectation thereof, did foon after his return from the faid voyage, wait upon and applv
to the Right Honourable the Earl of Sandwich, to know if his this Deponent’s condu/t
and behaviour during the laid voyage was fatisfafto ry or approved of; when the faid
Earl of Sandwuih told this Deponent, that he (this Deponent) had behaved intirely to
the fatisfadion of him (the faid Earl) and the other Lords Commiflioners of the Admi-
ralty,


ralty, and that they were unanhnoufly of opinion, that this Deponent had done hi*
duty during the faid voyage ; from which approbation and anfwer of the faid Earl this
Deponent was in full hope and expe&ation that he fhould be engaged to write the
account of his faid voyage, and that fome provifion would be made for him and his
family, according to the ftipulations between him and the faid Daines Barrington ; but
on his application to the faid Earl of Sandwich for that purpofe, his Lordfhip told this
Deponent, that he this Deponent could not exped preferment in the naval line ; upoa
which this Deponent obferved, that his Lordfhip could make application for this De-
ponent in any other department under government; but the faid Earl then telling this
Deponent, that he made it a rule never to make fuch applications, this Deponent then
intreated, that he might be reprefented to his Majefty by the faid Earl of Sandwich as-
a perfon who had done his duty, and deferved encouragement and fupport; and the
faid Earl folemnly promifed to make fuch reprefentation to his Majefty in behalf of this
Deponent. And this Deponent further faith, that he this Deponent hath received about
the fum-of three thoufand eight hundred and Fifteen pounds fterling, part of the faid-
fum of Four thoufand pounds promifed to him by the faid Honourable Daines Bar-
rington (in the names and on the behalf of the Lords Commiffioners of the Admiralty
as aforefaid) and no more; nor hath this Deponent’s faid Son, or any other perfon on
their account, to the knowledge and belief of this Deponent, received any more or
other part of the faid fum of four thoufand pounds; and that the other ftipulations
agreed on and promifed to this Deponent by the faid Daines Barrington have never
been fulfilled, this Deponent having been excluded from the faid employment of writing
the Hiftory of the faid Voyage, and the profits and emoluments arifing thereof, and
having never received any place, penfion, or other maintenance or provifion
for himfelf and family. And this Deponent further faith, that lie this Depuncnt did not
(nor did his faid Son George Forfter, to this Deponent’s knowledge or belief) ever in
any manner agree or treat with the Right Honourable the Earl of Sandwich, or any
other perfon whatfoever (except the faid Daines Barrington) refpefting the terms of
their appointment to or going the faid Voyage.
JOHN REINOLD FORSTER,
Sworn in Court, R-rr fl-ip
26th May, 1778. D y tne VjOUrX *
No. II;


No. 11.
(COP Y.)
At a meeting at the Earl of Sandwich's at the Admiralty on the 13 th
of April, 1776.
Prefent,
Earl of Sandwich,
Captain Cook,
Dosl or Forfter,
Mr. Stephens.
It was agreed by Captain Cook and DoCtor Forfter, with the approbation of
Lord Sandwich,
THAT Captain Cook’s Journal, containing a Narrative of his late Voyage, with
his nautical Obfervations, and alfo his Remarks upon the Cuftoms and Manners
of the natives of the Iftands he touched at in the courfe of the Voyage, be the-firft
Volume of the Work intended to be publifhed.
That DoCtor Fnrftet-’a tJbfervations upon Natural Hiftory, and upon the Manners,
Cuftoms, Genius, and Language of the natives of the feveral Iftands, with his philofo-
phical remarks in the courfe of the voyage, and a general introduction to his own work,
be the fecond Volume.
That the type and mode of printing and paper be fimilar to thofe of DoCtor Hawkef-
worth’s Collection of Voyages, and that DoCtor Forfter have it in charge to fee that it
be properly executed.
That DoCtor Forfter have the correcting of the prefs of his own part of the work,
and that the correcting the prefs of Captain Cook’s part thereof be left to fuch perfons
as the Firft Lord of the Admiralty (hall approve of. And that the perfon or perfons em-
ployed to print the work be alfo firft approved of by his Lordfliip.
That Captain Cook and DoCtor Forfter do aid and aflift each other, in whatever may
contribute to render the work compleat. That the expence of paper and printing, as
well of the Letter-prefs as plates, be borne by them equally, and that the neat profits of
the work be divided in equal portions between them.
That they do continue to employ proper perfons to engrave plates to illuftrate and
adorn the work, viz. Captain Cook thofe of Maps, Charts, and Surveys, and DoCtor
Forfter thofe of Natural Hiftory, Utenfils, Implements of War, &c. of the natives of
the feveral iftands.—The expence of which, Lord Sandwich was pleafed to declare, will
be defrayed by the Board of Admiralty, who referve to themfelves the diftribution of the
faid plates, as well as of thofe which are to be engraved under the infpeCtion of Mr.
Hodges, in fuch portions as they (hall judge proper to allot to each Volume $ the plates
to be afterwards the property of Captain Cook, and DoCtor Forfter.
That


That Doftor Forfter be furnifhed with proof-Iheets of Captain Cook’s part of the
work, as Toon after they have been corre&ed as conveniently may be, to enable him to
go on with a tranflation of the whole work into the French and German Languages.
T hat Doctor Forfter be alfo furnifhed in a reafonable time with a proof of each of the
plates above-mentioned, in order to have other plates engraved from them for the tran-
flation before-mentioned.
But that neither the French nor the German tranflation of the faid work, be publifhed
in lefs than three months after the publication of the original.
( Signed )
SANDWICH;.
PH. STEPHENS,
JAMES COOK,
JOHN REINOLD FORSTER.


J S/tr <' i iruf /fZj'pc//*/' onJuj - / / (%&p/eWTs/.
(y '"•••- ■ , ■ *
The German Doctor with his Family on his Travels to England conducted by Mynheer thinder Knech[?].
sold by J.Williams Bookseller No.39 Flèt Street. Price [?].














