



Sir Norton Foseph Knatchbull. Bar.
Mersham Hatch.


A LETTER
TO THE
LORD LIEUTENANT AND MAGISTRATES
OF THE
County of Norfolk,
ON THE
PROPOSED INNOVATION
IN THE
RURAL POLICE.
BY THE REV. C. D. BRERETON, A. M.
Rector of Little Massingham, Norfolk.
Audi alteram partem.
SWAFFHAM:
FOR J. HATCHARD AND SON, 187, PICCADILLY,
LONDON.
Price Two Shillings.


A LETTER
TO THE
LORD LIEUTENANT AND MAGISTRATES
OF THE
County of Norfolk,
ON THE
PROPOSED INNOVATION
IN THE
RURAL POLICE.
BY THE REV. C. D. BRERETON, A.M.
Rector of Little Massingham, Norfolk.
Audi alteram partem.
SWAFFHAM:
FOR J. HATCHARD AND SON, 187, PICCADILLY,
LONDON.
Price Two Shillings.


Swiitl'hiuu *. t’rintod T>y J. S. Gowina:.


POSTSCRIPT.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
The history of this publication
is as follows:—Living in retirement, 1 was not aware,
till the meeting of the Magistrates in October last, that
any intention was entertained of introducing the New
System of Rural Police into the county of Norfolk.
From the character of that meeting, the opposition that
was expressed, the feeble and doubtful accents in which
it was supported, and above all the silence of the Lord
Lieutenant, and many of the Nobility and Gentry of the
county, I was induced to think that such a measure
would not be adopted. After the resolution was passed
on the 22nd of November last, I thought it might be of
some service to discuss the subject in one or two letters
in the provincial journals, under the anonymous title of
“ A Freeholder.” As I proceeded in the investigation I
soon found it impossible,to confine it within such nar-
row limits, but the speed, the rapid speed, with which
the Magistrates proceeded, allowed no time for changes
and corrections and I therefore wrote off hand the follow-
ing Letter, with the freedom with which an anonymous
writer generally pursues his course.
“ Ludere quse vellem calatno permisit agresti,”
but not I hope without regard to candour and truth.
On perusing what I have written, I perceive the faults


of rapid composition (for which I am not altogether to
hlame) but as there is nothing in the nature of the argu-
ment which requires anonymous concealment, I shall
throw aside the supposititious character, and avow my-
self the author of this Letter, a course most straight-
forward in itself and most congenial to my own feelings*
It will thus appear, that the opinions contained in the
following pages have not been taken up hastily or capri-
ciously but that they accord with those which I published,
on a kindred subject, some sixteen years ago, in the con-
viction of the truth of which, time, observation, and
experience, have confirmed me. I shall also (whatever
disadvantage may attach to me from a hasty publication)
have the satisfaction of knowing that I have expressed
no sentiments in secret, which I have not avowed in
public, among which, my Lords and Gentlemen, are not
the least genuine those of the highest respect for your
order and office, and with the most sincere wish that you
may long enjoy the privileges vested in your rank, with
honour to yourselves, and discharge the responsibilities
which attach to your station, to the welfare of the country,
I have the honour to subscribe myself,
Your obedient and humble Servant,
CHARLES DAVID BRERETON.
Rectory, Little Mnssinyham,
December 1 ith, 1839.


A LETTER,
&c.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
Of late years the proceedings
of the Magistrates in our General or Quarter
Session Court have assumed a character of so
much importance, that they have been reported
to the public, and of course are open to the
observation and remark of all who take an in-
terest in the well-being of society. Of all matters
which have been there discussed and adopted
few, if any, have equalled in interest and mo-
ment the change which has been recently
decreed in the Police and Constabulary Force of
the county. The old system was so ancient in
its origin, so uninterrupted in its continuance,
so well adapted in its organization to the
B


provincial subdivisions, especially in the rural dis-
tricts of Norfolk, that its sudden denunciation
was calculated to surprise those who, born and
bred up under it, had conceived it to be truly
English, generally acceptable to the feelings and
congenial to the habits of the people, and who
had no previous idea that such a system could
have been offensive either to the magistracy of
the county or the government of the country. —
I certainly was one of those who participated
in that surprise, mingled, as I believe it to be,
in the minds of many with the sincerest regret.
The Lord Lieutenant stood forward at the head
of the magistracy of the shire to condemn the
humble institutions of this system, and to recom-
mend, without further delay or consideration,
the adoption of a new scheme which should ulti-
mately supplant them. It may seem therefore
useless and hopeless to make any observations
on the measure, or the subject of the measure,
which, on the nervous recommendation of the
Lord Lieutenant, the majority of the Magistrates
have adopted. To such as may have this pre-
judice, I would observe, that if no other benefit
should arise from the publication of this Letter,
the Lord Lieutenant and the Magistrates, who
must have condemned, from necessity and not
from choice, our humble English institutions
with which their own privileges, duties, and


honours have been so long associated, may feel
a satisfaction that any regret should be expressed
at their fall from those for whose benefit theyh ave
administered them, and who still feel and are pre-
pared to vindicate their value. Some may even
take up this Letter with a prejudice that it is in a
degree presumptuous in an individual freeholder
to discuss the subject at all, and more especially
in the form of an address to the Lord Lieutenant
and Magistrates of the county, after what appears
to be an irrevocable decision. But surely, if
Magistrates can without presumption dash to
the ground the fabric of society, any private
citizen may without immodesty still linger about
the edifice, admire the contexture of the parts,
and vindicate the feelings and prejudices which
are entwined around them. In entering upon
this controversy, I willingly confess that I do so
with regret, but with a motive and confidence
which lam not anxious to conceal; with regret
that the proposed innovation should be supported
by such arguments and pleaded for by such
advocates; with a motive to distinguish between
good and evil, and where that distinction can be
discovered, to point it out with all the freedom
which truth demands ; with a confidence that
no proper expression of sincere opinion, founded
upon patient inquiry, however it may oppose
the judgment or even the decision of the court


can be offensive to its members; and with a
further confidence, that, if I shall point out a
clear perversion of good and evil, that bitter is
put for sweet and sweet for bitter, the verdict,
may still be suspended or set aside. It is. pos-
sible that as the Lord Lieutenant and Magistrates
have evidently proceeded on erroneous calcula-
tions and statements which will not bear the
trial, they may feel that as it respects the county
of Norfolk there are practical difficulties in the
application of this system—in its enormous
expense, as well as in its invidious and unpopular
character; and that they may not be unwilling
to avail themselves of an opportunity to correct
their mistake. It may appear that advocates of
new systems have been too eager and enthusiastic
in their conjectures of the future, as well as
partial and short-sighted in their judgment of
the present and the past. Certainly, my Lords
and Gentlemen, there were some over-sanguine
predictions—some illogical syllogisms—some cu-
rious arithmetical and statistical representations
brought forward in this memorable discussion
on the merits of the old and new Rural Police,
to which I shall take the liberty freely to refer.
It would seem that the subject in principle and
detail, especially as it respects the county of
Norfolk, may yet admit, with advantage, of that
calm consideration which subjects of controversy.


involving so many interests, do not always receive,
and generally cannot receive in a viva voce dis-
cussion which is terminated by a plurality of
votes determined by a previous canvass. Feeling
a sincere attachment for that system which the
Magistrates have condemned, and strong suspi-
cions and apprehensions (in which many par-
ticipate) of the innovation adopted by the court,
I shall proceed to state the grounds and reasons
of this attachment to the former, and this aver-
sion to the latter, without reserve.
I am no friend to notions of perfection in any
thing connected with practical life, and I do
not set out with the idea that either the one or
the other of these systems is to be condemned
because it lacks perfection. Such notions are
generally the offspring of weak and hypocritical
minds, and too frequently impede works of real
benevolence and true policy. But in questions
of politics as well as morals, (and modern times
have shewn us how intimately these sciences
are associated) we must maintain and uphold
the importance of systems. It is not enough to
bring forward isolated facts or intense illustra-
tions which may strike the imagination at the
moment, but we must direct our thoughts to
principles which are universal, and which on
account of their general prevalence and national
characteristics distinguish ephemeral schemes


from systems properly so called, which contri-
bute not only to executive centralization but
to what is of infinitely more importance, political
and social union.
The Lord Lieutenant and Magistrates of
Norfolk must remember that by their late vote
they have condemned a system of self-govern-
ment and internal jurisdiction, which the people
of this county have always cherished as their
inalienable right. They have condemned a
system, which, is perfectly agreeable to the
great mass of the population, and which they
have always regarded with equal jealousy and
respect, that is, a system of law administered
in its daily and ordinary course by the resi-
dent proprietors of the soil and other officers
elected and appointed from the body of the
freeholders and householders for their mutual
protection and advantage. They have con-
demned the civil power , that is, a body of peace-
officers consisting of citizens and inhabitants well
known to each other, and chosen for the preserva-
tion of the peace of the neighbourhood. There
were peculiar reasons why the county of Norfolk
should have been the last either to abandon the
old regime, to which from its regular sub-division
it is peculiarly adapted, or to adopt the new, to
which it is for the same reason, in an equal
degree incongruous. They have condemned


a system that is fixed, local, and pervading
every parish and small district of the county,
leaving (where it is carried out as it ought to
be) no place or hamlet without a recognized
guardian of the peace, to whom any citizen can
at all times, within five minutes, refer. This
they have done for a movable rambling police,
which no one will ever know where to find.
They have condemned a system, which combines
all the advantages of monarchial authority with
democratic and almost republican arrangements,
and yet so blended and harmonized that no
collision has for centuries ever arisen between
the Justices of the Peace holding their com-
mission from the crown, and the Constabulary
Force nominated and appointed by the parishes
and courts leet.
It is a system perfectly free from the vices,
which in modern times have been perhaps some-
what exaggerated, of a self-appointing regime.
The Magistrates do not elect themselves but are
appointed by the the crown ; Magistrates do not
elect the Constables, who are appointed by the
parishes. It seems strange and almost perverse,
that while all the other institutions which were
self-electing have been reformed and thrown
upon a principle of open and free election, the
reform contemplated in the Rural Police should
be just the reverse, should destroy the principle


so much applauded in modem times, and intro-
duce that of rotten boroughs, depriving the peo-
ple not only of the control of their own expenses,
but of the guardians of their own persons and
properties. But such is the enlightened spirit
of the age, pervading as it seems the statutes of a
reformed House of Commons, and what is more
remarkable, captivating Lords Lieutenant and
Magistrates of counties. Reform must be radi-
cal. Principles and systems are not worth a
thought, you must change and if you do change
it must be topsy turvy. Temperance may be a
virtue but moderation is a vice; you must pass
at once from gin to tea and nothing else, and vice
versa , (as in this case) from the frugal beverage to
the ardent and expensive spirit. If your system
was before self-appointing, or for life, it must now
be elective and annual or triennial; if it was before
elective and annual, it must now be self-appoint-
ing and without control. If it was unpaid, un-
clothed, unaccoutred, and unexpensive, it must
be without consideration or delay, paid, clothed,
accoutred, and expensive. What was round
must be squared, what was square must be cir-
cular, on the profligate and crazy principle that,
whatever is, is worst.
Rides: quid mea cum pugnat sententia secum ?
Quod petiit spernit reperit quod nuper omisit ?
iEstuat et vitse disconvenit ordine toto ?
Diruit fedificat mutat quadrata rotundis ?


And, my Lords and Gentlemen, with whom
and from whom does this change originate?
From the Constables, because they are unpaid,
and have too many duties to perform ? From the
several parishes? From the clergy, freeholders,
inhabitants in general? Have they petitioned the
parliament? Have they petitioned you? No-
thing of the kind. The only memorial present-
ed to the court, was by Mr. Weyland, signed at
the markets of East Harling and Watton, by one
hundred and sixty landowners and occupiers,
praying that the Magistrates would not adopt
a system of Rural Police, such as was then con-
templated ; that the county did not require it,
and that in the event of any disturbance they
could by associations put it down and quell it
with much less expense. And if, my Lords and
Gentlemen, a moment’s delay had been given,
as proposed by Mr. Weyland, similar memorials
would have been signed at every market town in
the county. If the freeholders act up to their
feelings, as it is not improbable they may, similar
memorials will be signed at every market town,
perhaps in every parish of the county. And then,
my Lords and Gentlemen, what will be your po-
sition ? You must by report in writing declare
that it has been made to appeal' to you that the
ordinary officers appointed for the preservation
c


of the peace are not sufficient for the preserva-
tion of the peace, for the protection of the inha-
bitants, and for the security of property within
the county I And how has this appeared ? By
what evidence, by the memorial from Watton
and East Hading? By the general dissatisfac-
tion felt ? By a county meeting ? By hundred
meetings called by the Magistrates in their
immediate neighbourhoods ? No, my Lords and
Gentlemen, it must have been self-evident to
you, or the conviction must have come from
your own arguments to your own minds.
In the city of London, the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Common Council did not separate
themselves from the citizens and truckle to
Secretaries of State, whig or tory, to barter away
their inalienable rights of internal jurisdiction
and self-government, but they resisted these
innovations ; received the thanks of their fellow
citizens, and preserved their English character.
In towns and boroughs, parishes or what is a
similar thing, wards have the power of electing
their own administrators of finance and police,
but the Magistrates of Norfolk have decreed
that parishes, freeholders, and householders,
shall have nothing whatever to do with finance
or police, but to find the ways and means as they
may be levied upon them by a new company


made up of Magistrates, Chief Constables of
Police, and Secretaries of State. And what will
you gain by this manoeuvre if you introduce your
system ? Gan it last based upon such wrong and
unconstitutional principles? Are you anxious
to introduce household suffrage ? If you thus
shuffle away all control of one kind, your con-
trol over others as well as the control of others
over you, you must expect that a control of
another kind will arise, and your unpaid order
of patronage be extinguished. Do not the mem-
bers for the county and the expectant candi-
dates for the representation foresee some awk-
ward questions that may arise on a bloated
county rate ? You rate and levy from every
householder down to the lowest cottager for
poor rate, workhouses, gaols, and now for
livery servants to Magistrates and Secretaries
of State, but no freeholder or householder shall
have any voice in these matters. Do you
intend, instead of the satisfaction which the
inhabitants in general feel in seeing these offi-
cers elected from and by themselves, to give them
the satisfaction of electing members of parlia-
ment and so of controling county families, and
Secretaries of State ? Things of this sort go by
systems, by tides and currents, which it is not in
the power of the Hon. Gentleman, who pro-
posed this measure to stop by his “polo flos


boio.”* You propose to remove, or, what is the
same thing, to let fall to ruin these institutions,
the natural defences of society which spring out
of and are parts of society itself, and which
for so many ages have guarded us like a solid
shore from the waves of internal tumult. If
you remove this strand along which every
Briton has walked securely, even under a sense
of wrong and injury,
“Silent he roamed the loud remurm’ring' shore”
you will let in tides, and currents, and waves, to
which your new embankment may not be able to
say “ Hitherto shalt thou come and no further.”
If you open a battery against the rights and
privileges of freeholders and inhabitants, you
must expect that those who feel an interest in the
defences of our liberties and social habits will
* I will not misrepresent; the lion. Gentleman’s anecdote, and I hope
I do not misunderstand the joke in this travesty dress of an Homeric
epithet which every school boy and perhaps some Constables wordd com-
prehend without terror;—
“ It was said they were about to imitate the gendarmerie of France, and
gentlemen became frightened. It reminded him of a story told him by a
friend who was extremely annoyed with poachers in his preserves; the
notices of mantraps and spring guns being set were at last entirely un-
heeded by them, and they continued their unlawful pursuit without any
fear from those measures ; finding this, and knowing what man understands
he cared little about, whilst on the contrary if anything w r ere started which
he did not understand, curiosity was excited and notice taken of it, his
friend accordingly took down the old notices and put up the following—
“ Notice, polo flos boio set here.’’ This appeared to arrest the attention
of the poachers, they considered it was something in earnest but which
they could not understand, and the preserves after this were left in peace
and quiet (Laughter). This in some measure might be applicable to them
except that their measure was divested of all terror,” — lion. and liev. It.
Jr iLon's Speech .


attempt to spike your guns and turn your artil-
lery against yourselves. It is far better thaf'this
question should be well examined, that feelings
of hostility should not brood in secret, that the
wisdom and justice of the proceedings, the truth
of arguments, and the reality of facts should be
investigated.
The Hon. and Rev. mover of the resolution
may be supposed to have digested for himself,
and to have collected from others behind the
scenes, the most important and valid arguments fot
this great constitutional change. There are other
arguments for and against, but it may be conve-
nient to analyse those which the Hon. mover of
the resolution for a new Rural Police has put
forth, as we may presume, not only for the con-
viction of the Magistrates but for the satisfaction
of the public. His arguments or facts may be
referred to one or other of these classes
Vagrants, Thieves, Constables, New Police, and
the expenses of each.—First, as to vagrants :
the Hon. Gentleman produced two Facts, on
which he computes the number and cost of
vagrants. The first is received on information,
“that very many of these (receiving) houses
existed in Norwich, where from 20 to 40 of these
creatures were to be found at night mixing toge-
ther and sleeping in one room.” The second
fact rests on a similar on dit authority.—“ He


was told that in one house in Attleborough, in
this county, not less then 2,000 nights’ lodging
were paid for by vagrants.” Now these are
kindred cases, Attleborough being about a day’s
journey for a vagrant or pedestrian from Norwich.
At first sight it might seem that this statement
would rather apply to Norwich, in which there is
a sort of new police, than to the county of Nor-
folk where the old prevailed. Certainly, it is a
case much more likely to be remedied by a men-
dicity society in Norwich than by a new armed
Rural Police. But admitting the accuracy of
the statement, I ask, are these pedestrians,
lodgers, creatures, and vagrants, such as the new
police or any police can or ought to send to gaol ?
I knew Norwich very well under the old police
and was well acquainted with the Alsatia of the
city j I knew these lodging houses and those who
kept them ; I have frequently been in the long
rooms, and seen there cases of distress and mis-
fortune which called for pity and charity rather
than the rigour of a policeman. I knew one of
those houses which contained, I believe, as large
a lodging room as any in the city, kept by a
Christian widow and her family, and frequented
by vagrants and trampers of every kind. There
were victims of vice and misery, but all such
ought not to be sent to a gaol, especially in times
of sickness. There were also travellers going from


one part of the kingdom to another; workmen of
various kinds from London, Manchester, Leeds,
and other places as the state of trade might in-
dicate. The railroads have thrown the course
of these travellers through London and Cam-
bridge instead of through Lincolnshire and
Lynn, and it is possible that the number of tra-
vellers through Attleborough to Norwich, and
from Norwich to other parts of England may be
greatly increased. This increase would intimate
that they are generally workmen and travellers
and not vagrants, inasmuch as vagrants do not
commonly pass by railroads, but by cross and
indirect roads. Many, 1 should say most, of
these travellers pay their lodgings not from what
they beg, but from some little store of their own,
or if that store is exhausted, from the pawning
of their goods. And what right have Policemen,
Captains, Majors, or Colonels, (even if they would
condescend to do so) to interfere with the lodg-
ing rooms at Attleborough any more than with
the Cock Hotel, at which gentlemen change
horses. All trampers and travellers are not stur-
dy beggars, I believe the latter class to be on the
decrease; certainly, it is desirable that they should
be suppressed to the utmost, but as Mr. Jermy
observed, no police can put down vagrancy
entirely, because no police can make the distinc-
tions which would be necessary. Next we will


examine the Hon. Gentleman’s arithmetic. He
says 2,000 lodgings are paid for at Attleborough.
A traveller, such as I have described, would not
be above three days on the road in the county
out of the 365 in the year. Vagrants from the
nature of their profession do not abide, and so
far as I have examined them, few pay more than
a triennial visitation to the same place, and yet
the Hon. Gentleman proceeds to calculate that
the half or 1,000 of these vagrants spend the 365
days in the county of Norfolk at the expense of
£OO,OOO per annum, more than half of which is
paid by the cottagers. He calculates that these
are all full grown sturdy beggars—no account is
taken of women and children, but 1,000 full
grown sturdy beggars at 24 5. per week, (enough
to tempt a policeman to desert his livery, for
which case a provision is made in the act) to the
amount of £60,000. The Hon. Gentleman says,
“ This sounds very largely” as indeed it does,
but “ looking at the calculation he has made,” I
cannot “ find it to be a fair one.” Without ex-
hibiting the arguments in a syllogistic form, or
the arithmetic exactly according to Cocker, I
may pronounce the former unsound and the
latter, together with “the vexatious taxation of
cottagers” to the tune of £30,000 per annum,
to be mere moonshine.
Next, as to thieves.—ln one statement, made


on the authority of some police report, the
Hon. Gentleman states the number of thieves
at 1,500, in another account he states the num-
ber to be 1,800, and these two accounts may be
reconciled, if the number of convictions is 303,
and the period of a thief’s coming to maturity in
the country is, according to the police report,
six years, on a gross calculation the number
would be 1,800; but deducting secondary cases,
and allowing for some other circumstances, the
number may more accurately be stated at 1,500,
which is in a liberal way reduced again to 1,000.
Then, supposing thieves and vagrants to be equal-
ly successful, the earnings of thieves are taken
at 24 5. per week, which amount to exactly the
same sum of £60,000, throwing off some £2,000
against himself. But while we can calculate the
earnings of vagrants in hard pence, in the case
of thieves we must, as the Hon. Gentleman
states, take into the account tare and tret and
commission, for, (I suppose on the authority of
the police report) these thieves sell their stolen
goods at one third of their value; and conse-
quently that thieves may live as well as vagrants
and better than policemen, this sum of £60,000
must be multiplied by three, which gives the
sum of £lBO,OOO stolen from the householders,
farmers, and cottagers, who are still so stupid as
to be satisfied with the Constables, if not with
D


the Magistrates. But the Hon. Gentleman is
liberal again, and takes only the half of this sum,
though if the calculation be founded on a police
report and be true, there can be no necessity for
this liberality. This sum of £90,000 for thieves
added to the sum of £fio,ooo for vagrants
gives the sum of £150,000 to he all saved , for
the expenditure of only £lO,OOO for this New
Armed Police. Of this police and the £lO,OOO
we shall speak hereafter, but the inhabitants of
Norfolk must remember that there are to be no
more thieves, no more stolen goods, pigs, corn,
&c. One part of the prayer of Agur the son of
Jakeh, may be blotted out of the book of Scrip-
ture, “ Give me not poverty lest Ibe poor and
for though poverty may not be entirely
removed by the new poor law, yet the temp-
tation will be done away by the New Police, and
prayers to heaven unnecesary for the poor
must be converted into prayers for the troubled
consciences of policemen, “Make me not a po-
licemen lest I desert the Magistrates and join
Mr. O’Connell and the order of mendicants, or
the thieves, and favorites of Mercury !”
We are not informed, whether in ascertaining
the amount of theft, reference was made in the
police report to the nature and amount of the
larcenies set forth in the indictments. If that
had been done I think it would have been diffi


cult to have arrived at the £IBO,OOO or even at the
£90,000, or a tenth of that sum; We have no
analysis presented to us of the crimes and clas-
ses of crimes for which the 303 convictions take
place; we are not informed how many are for
poaching hares, trespassing with intent to kill
game; how many for leaving their families to the
workhouse, how many relieving officers, masters
of workhouses, and clerks of union for embezzle-
ment, in order to ascertain how far Captains,
Majors, or Colonels, and 120 strange Policemen,
spread over 2,092 square miles are likely to detect
and apprehend them; but these 1,000, 1,500,
or 1,800 thieves, as the fact may be, are all said
to live by theft and theft only. Every Magis-
trate and every inhabitant of the county must
know that rural thieves are persons who commit
only occasional acts of dishonesty, and have
regular work or business for a great part of the
year. The statement therefore is founded upon
a baseless calculation and idle use of numbers,
which represent nonentities. I dwell upon
these points because they are inaccurate and
unfit materials for the basis of an argument for a
measure of such importance. I dwell upon these
points because in other cases, the most gross
delusions have been practised and the most
preposterous results produced by idle and un-
founded calculations and a total ignorance and


disregard of real statistics. The building of
workhouses for instance, computed to cost two
or three hundred thousand pounds, has cost as
many millions. The reports and returns of Mr.
Rickman are the most valuable parliamentary
papers that I have seen, and worth all the other
folios that have been published; they are accu-
rately and beautifully true which cannot be
said of others.
The next subject is Constables.—Hitherto
Constables and Squires have borne the good
humoured joke together, a species of notice that
was complimentary to the conduct of both officers
as well as to the character of the rural population.
But now the Justices rise up against their old
economical and faithful associates, load them
with slanderous imputations, complain of their
clothes and infidelity, and sue for a divorce—
the case is Justices versus Constables. Shallow
versus Dogberry. We will consider the charges
in detail, for this is an important part of the sub-
ject. The charges are, that they are unpaid (like
the Justices) and therefore cannot be expected
to discharge their duties gratuitously as a paid
officer would do—that they do not apprehend
thieves with sufficient dexterity, and sweep away
vagrancy and theft from the face of the earth—-
that they are appointed by the parishes and live
among their friends and relations—that on


particular and special occasions the Magistrates
are obliged to appear at the head of the police
themselves, and take a practical part in the
preservation of the peace.
This is, I believe, a fair statement of the libel
put in and pleaded for the divorce of Constables
at the late meeting of the Adjourned Sessions.
The answer to the first count is, that Constables
are not unpaid.—ln making a distress they may
deduct their expenses and reasonable charges,—
in apprehending and conveying prisoners to gaol
they are paid either by the prisoner, the prose-
cutor, or the county. For all business trans-
acted in and for the parish they may present
a just and lawful bill, and receive payment
from the overseer; that is, a Constable is paid
for what he does, and not for lounging and loiter-
ing about his parish whether he has or has not
any thing to do for the public service.
As to the apprehension of thieves and the
dexterity of Constables, I will take the evidence
of the Hon. Gentleman himself. “He would
refer to the calendars of the county for the
Assizes and Quarter Sessions during the last
two years, and it would be found that the
average number of convictions had been 303,
the average number of acquittals 91> and the
average number of bills ignored 37” Has the
Hon. Gentleman examined the parallel case


in the Central Criminal Court, where the
New Police is in full operation, and this court is
under the practice of experienced lawyers and
learned judges ? I will hazard a prediction that
the comparison (taking into the account the very
trivial cases indicted and the difficulty of identi-
fying agricultural property) would not be unfa-
vorable to our calendar convictions, acquittals,
and bills ignored. The Hon. Gentleman adds,
“ now it could not be supposed that in this num-
ber of acquittals and bills ignored the parties
were innocent characters ; it was clear they could
not in all cases be free from crimes, although
they could not accuse (convict?) them of guilt.”
And are Constables to be blamed and con-
demned to extinction for this? Would the
Hon. Gentleman reduce the number of charges
and convictions to a perfect equation ? Are
there no doubts in circumstantial evidence which
may lead a jury (especially where the charge
is for stealing a tea-kettle or a turnip) to acquit
an innocent man as well as a criminal? Are
there no flaws and technicalities discovered by
shrewd counsellors ? No errors in indictments
inspected by Magistrates, or depositions taken
by Magistrates, or their clerks, or attornies in
their causes ? Are Constables the only witnesses,
and is it desirable that all persons should swear
to a doubtful fact with as much readiness as a


paid policeman ? It is not fair to make Consta-
bles scape-goats for every thing, for bills ignored
and blunders of all other parties—and not only
for blunders but for expenses. The expenses
of conveying prisoners to gaol is £6OO, and
the saving by the New Police is calculated at
half; we shall see how the bills for horses and
caravans and depots of the commander-in-chief
will prove. The expense of conveying vagrants
is £l 16, and though these Constables are so negli-
gent in this particular, and their successors are to
be so energetic, half this is to be saved. Expenses
of prosecution charged to the Constables X 1,400
per annum, half again to be saved. I suppose
hills ignored and expenses of prosecution are
charged to the Constables, because it is not
wished to inform the respectable solicitors and
attornies of the county, that they may be put up
to auction under the New Police Bill to the
lowest bidder, as the surgeons and apothecaries
of the country have been under the new poor law
bill. I do not know that there is much to be
complained of in the various particulars of the
calendar, or the expenses, but if there be, it is an
argument for a public Prosecutor and instructed
Barristers rather than against the efficiency not
of unpaid but too highly paid Constables.
But again, there are computed to be 1,500
thieves and there are 431 persons apprehended,


and not only apprehended but indicted through
the agency of the existing police at the Quarter
Sessions and Assizes. Taking into the account
the number acquitted and convicted at the Petty
Session, the number of apprehensions, for ought
I know, would approach the half of 1,500; but it
could not be less than 500 ; that is, the number
of apprehensions by the inefficient Constables of
parishes, by summons or otherwise, is to the
number of existing thieves as one to three. Can
the London Metropolitan Police produce a case
like this ? Can any city police produce a similar
case? Does it look like uselessness and ineffi-
ciency in parish officers ? Especially if we take
into the account the difficulty of identifying
agricultural property, the immense amount of
agricultural property which must under any
police in the world be exposed to plunder and
depredation. Farmers and others who live in
the country cannot lock up all their possessions
in warehouses and barns. Poultry must be open
to theft—game must be wild—wood, hay,
and turnips must be exposed—corn, cattle, and
horses, of which we export not less than three
millions annually, must be intrusted without a
guard. If the Magistrates would allow me to
include them and the Quarter and Petty Ses-
sions in my panegyric, I would say that the pro-
portion of property plundered in the county of


Norfolk, in proportion to the property exposed
to plunder, is a credit to the Rural Police, Magis-
trates as well as Constables, to the clergy and
peasantry, masters and servants, and all classes
of the community. In spite of this mushroom
act of parliament, in the face of Secretaries of
State and sneers of Justices of the Peace, I will
assert that parish officers for the business of the
parish and locality, under proper judicial gui-
dance and control, are the best and the most
efficient.
But it is pleaded against the Constables that
they are elected by the parishes and live in the
parish with their families and among their cus-
tomers and neighbours. Yes, and happy has it
been for this county that in your small towns and
villages you have not less than 1000 Constables
—so many hostages in every place for peace and
order—small tradesmen and husbandmen, fathers
uncles, brothers and relations of various degrees
to those among whom they dwell, joined with
the proprietors and occupiers of the soil in the
conservation of the peace without force of arms.
And what can be the mischief of this institution
under which the villagers of England have lived
for many centuries with so much confidence and
security? This institution has stood the test of
all our national convulsions—the reformation,
revolution, the French revolutionary war, and
E


even the physical agitation of our own times.
Under it I have been a villager for twenty years
and never received a personal injury, though I
have been out at all hours, and never lost any
property of any amount that I know of, and I
believe nine-tenths of the Magistrates, who have
voted its condemnation, might make a similar
declaration. Constables living among their
friends, from their very calling and office, must
have a direct influence, and an influence which
produces no re-action, in preventing disturbance
in the overt act, in checking mischievous opinion
that would encourage injury to property, and
barbarous acts which would endanger themselves,
their families and customers. These humble but
meritorious officers, my Lords and Gentlemen,
you have voted hastily to disgrace and extin-
guish.—You have voted hastily to substitute for
them, Captains, and Majors, and Colonels, and
a race of men without fathers and mothers, with-
out habitation and home (coming, as the Hon.
Gentleman says, from a distance, perhaps Ire-
land) not drawn from the social circle—not
interested in the preservation of peace and order
as the present Constables are, but only so inte-
rested that they will detect crime by profession,
give evidence for preferment, and check violence
by accoutrements.
One other count in the libel remains,—that


on special occasions the unpaid Magistrates and
even the Lord Lieutenant are obliged to appear
at the head of the police themselves and take a
practical part in the preservation of the peace.
I thought, my Lords and Gentlemen, this was
considered in special cases a duty and an honour.
In speaking of the Justice of the Peace, Black-
stone observes, “his commission first empowers
him singly to conserve the peace , and thereby
gives all the power of the ancient conservators
of the common law in suppressing riots and
affrays , and in apprehending and committing
felons and other inferior criminals.” Magis-
trates, Lord Lieutenant included, are first of all
conservators of the peace and Police Magistrates.
On special occasions it may be necessary to do
their duty singly to suppress affrays—to appre-
hend and take a practical part in the preserva-
tion of the peace. The manly feelings of English
gentlemen prompt them to lead others, where
difficulties arise, and they have never been
backward to do so. The conduct of the Lord
Lieutenant of Norfolk, in suppressing the Char-
tist meeting at Wymondham, became an
English gentleman—did infinite service to the
public as an example, and won deserved praise.
Lord Leicester, some years ago, though advan-
ced in life, apprehended singly and committed
some daring disturbers of the peace, whom he


met in a public highway in the time of tumult.
The Mayor and Magistrates of Monmouth have
won from the crown and the public, honours and
golden opinions for similar conduct. Such ac-
tions teach unworthy vagabonds that Englishmen
will defend themselves, and assist in defending
the lives and property of their neighbours —these
actions need no repentance, and the Lord Lieute-
nant might have put them forth more fairly in
vindication of the English character and the civil
power, than in advocating a standing army of
policemen. These actions on certain occasions in
no way detract from the respectability of Magis-
trates, as many in the court seemed to think,
when they cheered expressions of regret and
dissatisfaction that Magistrates were obliged to
act in some instances as police themselves. In
these observations I must not be misunderstood
to mean that the civil power should be left in
a neglected state, or that, in the ordinary course
of things, duties of this sort should fall upon
the Magistrates. It is not impossible that in
the extensive and populous parish of Wymond-
ham (the largest and most populous not included
in the boroughs) the number of Constables may
have been insufficient—yet, the Lord Lieute-
nant was not vanquished, and there is certainly
the power of increasing the number for that
parish in general, and the hamlets in particular.


This is the only large parish in the county of
Norfolk, and surely while the act provides for dis-
tricts, it cannot be necessary to have an armed
police for East and West Norfolk on that account.
It is also true that there ought to be some prin-
cipal officer under the Magistrates to superin-
tend and direct the Constables of parishes, and
to see that the orders of Magistrates in the se-
veral parishes are executed by the parochial
officer. For this the law provides in form and
substance in the office of High Constable, which,
as an office of police, has been allowed to fall
into desuetude. If this office were restored to
its original and proper purposes, there could be
no necessity for “ pay, clothing, and accoutre-
ments,” for reference to Secretaries of State, for
uniform and rules, or for a commander-in-chief
in each county. The law provides in this officer
a superintendent of police with petty Constables
of parishes “ subordinate to him to assist him.”
Dr. Burn justly observed “that the far greatest
part of the business of the High Constable is
not at all appropriated to them as High Consta-
bles, but only as officers to execute the precepts
of the Justices of the Peace, which any other
person may do as well as they. The original
and proper authority of an High Constable, as
such, seems to be the same y and no other within


his hundred , as that of the Petty Constable within
his Vill ” I venture to say that the freeholders
and householders of the County would cheer-
fully acquiesce in any proposition to restore
this necessary but neglected chain in our Rural
Police. They would feel, I believe, no objection
to the appointment of an High Constable with
a proper salary, and if necessary, with a proper
house, which might be a police office for a
hundred or two hundreds, as the case might
require. Such an officer would acquire infor-
mation through the parish Constables more
easily than through strolling aliens; and the
constitutional police force of parish officers would
thus act, under the Magistrates, with spirit,
confidence, and unity. This is all that the
county of Norfolk, without any heavy masses
of population, divided into 33 hundreds and 722
parishes, including 20 market towns, can pos-
sibly require. Certainly, on this plan, there
would be no Chief Constable with five hundred
a year, and superintendents with horses and
policemen from a distance, but there would be
an organized civil power always at command;
constitutional, more creditable, (and one would
think) more agreeable to the Magistrates as well
as to the freeholders and inhabitants than a
gendarmerie, or a constabulary contrived for


Ireland in insurrection, or the new locomotive
police establishments with the livery of the
Secretary of State found by the parishes.
The next subject is the New Police—its
adaptation to the purpose intended and its ex-
penses. This new police the Hon. and Rev.
Mover tells us “will be the means of cooling the
hot bed of crime, of removing those baneful
scenes of immorality which cramped the youth of
the land—of restoring peace, honesty, and good
order throughout the rural population, and tend
to the glory of God and the welfare of the
country.” With all respect for the feelings
which dictated these opinions, I cannot believe
the prophecy. I do not see the connection
between the glory of God, the religious character
of the people, or the education of the young, and
hired armed policemen. I see the tendency of
this change to check and discourage generous,
charitable, and manly feelings—to promote an
abject selfish spirit—to engender secret vices
and abominations, to which we have been stran-
gers ; and, as Mr. Weyland observed, “to lead
from bad to worse till at length the spirit of the
country would be entirely broken.” The ques-
tion lies between the merits of a civil social
power armed with the force of law and manly
spirit, and an alien force, with “pay, clothing, and
accoutrements.” It is the main intention of this


change to substitute martial force for civil power.
What else can uniform, and arms, and military
commanders mean ? One gentleman who adver-
tises instanter for “your support and patronage”
for the office of commanding the constabulary
force, informs us, “I have been twelve years in
the army, and during that period more than once
quartered in Ireland , where the opportunity has
been afforded me of becoming well informed as
to the organization and working of the police
establishment in that country.” Subsequent ad-
vertisements are in a similar strain, and I should
not be surprised if some new candidate should
yet start, with superior claims on the support and
patronage of the Lord Lieutenant and Magis-
trates, in some such advertisement as this; —“ My
Lords and Gentlemen, since the peace, I have
resided as an officer on half-pay in foreign
countries, and for the last ten years during the
late tumults and revolutions of France, in the
city of Paris. I was well acquainted with the
Prefect of Police, and Monsieur le Colonel of the
Gendarmerie Roy ale de Paris was my particular
friend. That admirable force consists of ten
companies of foot and horse with ‘pay, clothing
and accoutrements,* and if I should be so fortu-
nate as to be elected to the honorable office of
commanding the constabulary force of the county
of Norfolk, my friend the Colonel has promised


to send over, as my chief superintendent and
locum tenens in case of sickness, (persons from a
distance being recommended) one of his most
experienced officers to assist me in the organi-
zation and training of the New Police, and I
have no doubt, that before the end of the year,
you will have a Police Force as well accoutred,
clothed, and paid, and as expert in all the finesse,
adroitness, and subtilty of true policemen, as any
that can be found in la belle France” I should
not wonder if our squires were to be captivated,
and that the Jleur-de-lis were blazoned on the
accoutrements instead of the shamrock.
Before either of these events take place, I
must repeat again the words of the chairman of
your Quarter Sessions, Mr. Weyland ; “It must
then go forth that the gentlemen of England,
with those under their protection, (and he blush-
ed he was ashamed to say it) were unable to
protect themselves, notwithstanding all their
means and power.” But England is not France
or Ireland—Norfolk is not Wexford orTipperary,
and if Lord Wodehouse and the gentlemen of
the county will “ blush and be ashamed” and
actually repent, this libel on their native county
and the villagers of Norfolk, who do not deserve
it, may be thrown back with scorn. Look again
at the Norfolk calendar, at the petty and trivial
nature of the crimes, and say whether an armed
F


force or any new force be required. So small
were the offences at the last Quarter Sessions,
that the learned chairman, Mr. Dover, apologised
to the court and jury for the Magistrates in
committing on such trivial charges, by pointing
out the obligation of the law and the necessity
of punishing first offences. There is absolutely
no case, and we are not called upon by the cir-
cumstances of the county of Norfolk to consider
the respective merits of a civil power and an
Armed Police—but since we are obliged to
examine this question, in consequence of the
resolution of the Magistrates, we may ask a few
plain questions. Have not secret societies and
violent emeutes increased in proportion to the
rigour of an Armed Police ? Has not the confi-
dence of the common people in their superiors,
and of all classes in each other, been weakened
by it ? Are there no secret societies, tumults,
murders, and deeds of malice in Ireland, where
one of the models, which we are called upon to
imitate, exists in such exuberance, and with a
large standing army ? Have not certain name-
less crimes, and crimes of malice accompanied
with the use of armed instruments increased in
London under the metropolitan police, (neces-
sary with such undivided masses of population)
and no one can tell us how it happens to be so ?
Prance, from' one end to the other, is covered


with police, municipal guards, gendarmes, an
immense standing army, and a National Guard,
in which every citizen is obliged to take up arms
as a profession in the protection of society. Is
France tranquil? Are there no tumults, no
secret societies and secret crimes and deeds of
violence ? I have seen thieves in France brought
before a mayor or to a common gaol with a
troop of gendarmes with horses, cocked hats,
laced dress, swords, pistols, and carbines, (“pay,
clothing, and accoutrements”) and doubtless by
this splendid process, every detected or suspected
thief felt himself secured. In England we see
thieves and disorderly persons trotted off to the
Justices or the prison in a pony or donkey cart,
marked “Simon Glover,” Henry Smith,” or,
“ Timothy Long,” and deposited quite as safely
by the constable, cordwainer, carpenter, or baker;
and what is the philosophical and natural reflec-
tion on this comparison ? Why this, how feeble
is law and social compact where such exhibition
of force is required, and how strong is law and
respect for law, where without force or pompous
display the humblest officer can give it effect!
We have no such display, nor is it necessary, for
justice is administered in rural districts without
expensive establishments, failure of execution,
or provocation and disgust. Ido not know that
we have more crimes, considering that we have


more property, but we have less deceit and fraud,
less of sous le pav6 vices and stealthy abomi-
nations, than in those countries in which the most
rigid and vigilant police, and with it the largest
standing armies are found. Violent emeutes
rebellion and treason, cannot be put down by
the new or the old police without military or
disciplined force.* Where armed force is levied
armed force must be employed to aid the civil pow-
er and it is unjust to charge peace officers with
inadequacy and inefficiency for outbreaks, which
have arisen from lamentable political causes and
absurd sumptuary regulations for the poor. Po-
lice officers cannot remove the causes of sedition,
nor are they in many instances answerable for it,
in as much as they do not exist. In many parts
of England, especially where tumults, chartism,
and insurrections have chiefly prevailed, there
* The following is the opinion of Major Loftus and I believe of most
men on the subject;—
“ I have heard an argument used by the Noble Lord and the Hon. Mo-
ver of this question, both of whom I am sorry to differ in opinion with,
that it would stop Chartists and Chartism, and that this Police Force was
to be brought to act against mobs. With every deference for the opinion
of the Noble Lord, viewing this part of the subject with a soldier's eye, I
am quite sure it would not be found at all to answer the purpose, and be
totally inefficient; for without military dicipline, or without some know-
ledge of military movements so as to act together, they would be totally
inadequate for any such purpose; and as we have seen of late in Wales,
though unfortunately with much loss of life, a few well disciplined infantry,
by acting together in military order, disperse an immense assemblage of
armed men. The same would be the case with cavalry, who could only
act with effect to disperse a mob, armed or unarmed, by the rush or charge
altogether. But, Sir, my great objection is the unconstitutional tendency
(hear, hear) of the bill before me ; it is too strongly tainted with the Gen-
darmerie system carried on in France ; and with these views I shall cer-
tainly not vote for the adoption of this measure.”


are no civil and religious institutions for large
masses of the population*
“ Part, such as appertain
To civil justice, part, religious rites
Of sacrifice,”
for which neglect, the legislature and the Govern-
ment alone must be held responsible. So far
as power is required to execute law or preserve
the peace (except where no police armed or
unarmed, without military aid can secure it) the
existing Rural Police is and has been for centuries
adequate and efficient. If the country for the
time is unnaturally excited and the army reduced
to a standard.insufficient for the empire, that is
not the fault of Constables, nor a reason for up-
rooting the ancient and permanent institutions.
These institutions have stood the test of greater
trials—the reformation, restoration, and revolu-
tion, and at the last mentioned period, if King
James had had Lords Lieutenant to introduce
the measures of his Secretaries of State, though
they might not approve them, and Chief Consta-
bles of counties with an Armed Police subservient
to Secretaries of State, that great event might
never have taken place, and certainly would not
have been brought about without bloodshed.
But the execution of law, with as littleappearance
of force as possible, is of more consequence to
the morals of society and the freedom of citizens


than many imagine; and if the good humour
with which law has been administered and peace
preserved in rural districts must be lost, then, to
use again Mr. Weyland’s language, will “be
introduced into parishes the worst feelings of
hostility, and brute force often be resorted to,
where moral persuasion should be exercised.”
We will next examine the adaptation of this
force to the county of Norfolk, and its expenses.
—H is proposed, that the number of men to be
appointed should be “ one Chief Constable at a
salary of £SOO per annum ; 12 Superintendents
at £IOO each, and to keep a horse ; and 120 Con-
stables at £l each per week.” Mr. Wilson adds,
“he had also made some division of the county
by which, he had allotted to each Superintendent
and his men a distance of 12 square miles,
which would give them watch over a distance
of 144 square miles.” We will begin with the
superficial area of the county of Norfolk. The
county contains 2,092 square miles, equal to
1,338,880 statute acres, so that the Police Force,
which is put forth as the beginning of this
innovation, is only for one fourteenth part of
the county, and taking the calculation given
for this one fourteenth part, for pay alone, the
expense for the whole county will be £B,OOO
x 14= £112,000, without “ pay, clothing, and
accoutrements,” and we must add establish


merits, depots, and other “ necessaries” to
be demanded by the rules of the Secretary of
State. The calculation according to the area
would* be for Superintendents 12x14, or 168,
and for policemen 120x14, or 1,680, and of
course one Chief Constable for each division
of the county. In fact, the whole thing in
Norfolk and lightly peopled districts must be
either a farce or a preposterous exaction, being
the more inapplicable as well as expensive in
proportion to the area. I happened to have
an argument with an old friend, a few weeks
ago, in Trinity Combination Room, in Cam-
bridge, on two very popular subjects, the Rural
Police and Tee-totalism. My friend was, to
my surprise, an advocate of the former and a
professor of the latter. He was not, however,
an universal defender of the principles of either.
He said, he felt himself honest in his profession
of tee-totalism in his own neighbourhood, but
hypocritical among his friends, inasmuch as he
had adopted its rules, not from personal con-
viction, but for the sake of those amongst whom
he lived, many of whom were much addicted to
drunkenness. In the same manner he advo-
cated the Rural Police for his own district, and
not for the whole county of Leicester, because
a large and neglected population had grown up
of manufacturing workmen, low and vicious in


their habits, without adequate civil and religious
institutions. I found that the act was applied
in this particular district for Constables and a
Superintendent, and that though the population
was dense, they had found it necessary to take
the limit of the act and appoint a Policeman
to every 1,000 people. In a densely peopled
neighbourhood, and in the streets of towns you
can calculate the space and duties to which a
Policeman is competent, and you can connect
their operations. But how can you calculate
for an area of 1,338,880 statute acres ? How-
ever, for the sake of making a moderate calcu-
lation, I will not take the area (which the advo-
cates of the new system will find to be the great
difficulty) into the account, but the population
only. There are in Norfolk, deducting Norwich,
Yarmouth, Lynn, and Thetford, about 300,000
souls. The population approached this in 1830
and probably may exceed it in 1840. Appoint-
ing therefore one Policemen to 1,000 souls, you
would require at least 300 Policemen, three times
the number of Superintendents proposed, and
two Chief Constables provided for by the act,
one for each of the two divisions of the county.
This establishment, taking into the account the
horses, could not amount to less than three times
the sum assumed, viz. £B,OOO, that is, £24,000,
without taking into the account clothing


ami accoutrements, police establishments, depots
and all the necessary expenses at present charg-
ed to the Constables* account by the Hon, Gen-
tleman. If these sums be added, the expendi-
ture on the lowest calculation would exceed
.£30,000; and if the ratio of the area' were
compounded with that of the population, I doubt
whether the half calculation (which has been so
much employed) of the amount computed for
the area alone, viz. —“ or £56,000 would
cover the expenses. Yet the Hon. Gentleman
now complains of an expenditure of £1,400 and
proposes an expense, varying from £30,000 to
£50,000 in order to provide for the case of the
county of Norfolk, in which there are 303 annual
convictions, more than half of which are for the
most trivial offences, by an establishment of
Chief Constables, Superintendents, and 300
Policemen, or a Policeman to every single con-
vict in the year. Have the gentlemen who
proposed this measure examined it in its bear-
ings statistically, arithmetically, and above all,
legally, as well as in a moral and social point of
view ? The advocates seemed anxious to begin
with great caution as to the expenses and
with great haste as to the time. It could
not be intended to conceal from the freeholders
and inhabitants what must be the necessary
expenses. It could not be intended to bring us
G


under the yoke, and to get all the appointments
snugly filled up before the whole case should be
disclosed* Much may be accounted for by the
natural propensity of all enthusiasts who have a
scheme in embryo to conceal from observation
the forthcoming * progeny, ' but I must say it
would have been only common justice to the
public, and it was almost necessary on* the part
of the Magistrates to avoid the imputation of
fraud, that before the resolution was adopted or
the officers appointed, the case, the whole case
should have been laid before the freeholders of
the county. With such arithmetic, such frac-
tional accounts,- are the freeholders to have a
doubled county rate put upon them in order to
see liveried Policemen sauntering about their
farms and villages for a silly if not an impractL
cable experiment? Is the old framework so
useful and acceptable to the people to be shat-
tered in pieces and thrown away like potsherds,
never again to be re-united, for arguments and
advertisements such as we have seen ?
I read the hasty act of parliament and the
clandestine powers contained in it with astonish-
ment. I read the first discussion with interest
and with a firm persuasion that such a measure
could not possibly pass by the vote of the Ma-
gistrates till a serious investigation had been in-
stituted and the results of it made known to the


public. But when I read the final discussion
and saw all the results that accompanied the
adoption of the resolution, I could not but ex-
claim “ 0 tempora !, 0 mores !” As in the affairs
of private life we often, in moments of disquie-
tude, turn from the actual to the ideal, from
what occasions present grief and pain to the re-
collection of the past, anticipations of the future,
or dreams unreal or imaginary; so I could not
but in imagination look back upon the past gene-
ration of English gentlemen as a solace from the
contemplation of the present. I imagined how
the old Marquis Townshend, Sir Edward Astley,
Sir Armine Wodehouse, Sir Martin Folkes, Col.
Wodehouse, when he represented six thousand
freeholders, and Lord Leicester in his early days
and up to the period of his elevation to the peer-
age, would have scorned this whole transaction.
But one individual the Right Hon. William
Windham of Felbrigg, known in his day as
Windham of Norfolk, arose especially to my re-
collection; I imagined that accomplished States-
man (would to God we could revive that genera-
tion of statesmen of all parties in politics ) con-
cluding the discussion at the court at Norwich
with a sturdy negative supported by his vigorous
eloquence. Ido not presume to penetrate his
political sagacity, imitate his finished oratory, or
ding his polished shafts of irony, but I did ima


gine that his manly spirit would have expressed
its indignation in some such language as this:—
“ Sir, when one of the Hon. Chairmen of this
court, Mr Weyland, said he blushed and was
ashamed that it should go forth to the world,
that we the gentlemen of England, with those
under our protection, were unable to protect
ourselves, I felt the justice and the sting of that
imputation of a mean spirit arising as it did na-
turally out of his virtuous argument against this
resolution; but I felt at the same time the
injustice of the stigma which will attach, I will
not say to myself, but to the inhabitants of this
county if the majority of the court should adopt
that resolution. As an individual I shall acquit
myself of the charge of being unable to defend
myself, or unwilling to assist in the defence of
my neighbours, and propose a direct negative to>
this resolution. My instinctive repugnance to
this measure, no less than a regard for my own
reputation and the honour and welfare of my
native county would prompt me to this course—
I feel that the libel contained in the hypothesis
on which this measure is proposed is as false
of the yeomen, subordinate officers and peasantry
of this county as it is of myself. It is well known
’that I have always been of opinion, that the
happiness no less than the security and pre-emi-
nence of my country depended on the manliness


and self-confidence of its inhabitants, and 1 shall
not on this occasion turn traitor to my own senti-
ments. I have listened to the statements which
have been made, the facts asserted and the induc-
tions drawn, and without intending to treat them
with disrespectful scepticism, I must declare
that they seem to me in some instances to be
exaggerated, in others irrelevant, and in all to
fail in producing evidence on which to establish
a conviction that we ought without delay or con-
sideration, without a committee of inquiry, with-
out a report laid before ourselves and published
for the satisfaction of the public, to decide such
a momentous question involving such changes.
I see no reason to entertain this resolution at all,
and I am persuaded if the subject matter of it
were presented to this court, in its capacity of
grand inquest in the form of a bill of indictment,
with no better evidence than we have heard,
that it would be unanimously ignored and thrown
out of court. I see no reason to sanction a reso-
lution which is nothing less than a sentence of
condemnation passed on that deserving body of
citizens, the Constables, who have always dis-
charged their duties to the public and the Ma-
gistrates with moderation and effect; and at the
same time asentence of civil excommunication on
the freeholders and inhabitants of the county,
whose feelings and opinions, where they appear


to me to be just and patriotic, I will never betray.
If this resolution pass, I shall feel that this is no
longer an English court whose constituent mem-
bers are proprietors of the soil, representing and
consulting for the landowners and inhabitants of
the province, but I shall, feel myself the mem-
ber, of a Divan which levies exactions at its plea-
sure with the revenue of which it surrounds itself
with a pretorian guard of Janizaries.
“ The Hon, Gentlemen who have drawn the
resolution and suggested the proposition which
will follow, seem to be aware, that it will prove
an enormous exaction on the public. They tell
us, we must not regard the expense in con-
sideration of the moral and religious advantages
that will follow. I never knew, Sir, that Eng-
lishmen learnt their morals or. religion from
Policemen. History and observation would
not lead us to suppose that these invaluable
blessings will ever flourish luxuriantly in that
school. The advocates of the resolution tell
us, we must begin by degrees, and that we
can increase afterwards ; and of course, if we
trust to this act of Parliament, we and Mr.
Secretary of State can play what pranks we
please. These gentlemen seem to me to have
consulted in private some political empiric, who
has impressed his advice in the most earnest
manner in some such prescription as this; —‘The


patients arc undoubtedly sick, and the medicine
you propose is applicable to the disease, but the
misfortune is, these patients do not feel their
sickness, and have strong prejudices against
medicine of this sort, and especially administered
to them in this form. Besides, as Lord Bacon
would say, it happens in the body politic as in
the body natural, that we can only proceed by
degrees, begin with small doses, and increase
them from time to time as the stomachs of the
patients will allow; I advise you therefore,
gentlemen, in this case to begin with a teaspoon-
ful of £IO,OOO the first year, which may be
increased to a dessert spoonful of £20,000 the
second, and in the third, if the medicine should
not produce constitutional derangement, you can
apply the maximum dose of a full large table
spoonful of from £30,000 to £40,000/ I expect,
Sir, these prejudiced patients will shut their
teeth, close their lips, and fairly reject the first
dose of £IO,OOO. The medicine comes to the
court honied and sugared, and decked out with
‘pay, clothing, and accoutrements/and patron-
age, but the rate payers and freeholders have
no palliative provided for their nausea, to them
it must be, in its present form, pure drug
and offensive physic.
“ I confess, Sir, that I have never taken that
active part in the discharge of the duties of a


Justice of the Peace which perhaps 1 ought
to have done. In public affairs I have found
that which is called policy, and change of policy
has had little effect in curing the maladies of the
state, and I have therefore regarded those as
the most patriotic and useful politicians, who in
public debates have had it rather in view to
uphold the national spirit and character, than
those who attempt to display their sagacity in
trifling and meddling changes. In provincial
affairs 1 have had a corresponding impression
that Magistrates, combining great discretionary
powers with legal and ministerial duties, had a
temptation to think too highly of what they
ought to do, andean do, to alleviate the evils to
which society, as well as . individuals, in this
state of imperfection is and must be liable.
I have never, therefore, been an advocate for
increasing the discretionary powers of the
Justices of the Peace, nor have I ever very
assiduously used those powers myself.—l have
been disposed, in the ordinary affairs of country
life, to trust as much as possible to the vis
medicatrix of the social system. —I have not
been indifferent to the well being and character
of ray countrymen, but I have rather devoted
my humble abilities to the encouragement of
a free and independent spirit, as much more
likely to prevent them from falling into crime,


than any terrors which my authority as a Justice
of the Peace could interpose between them and
temptation. '
“ Prevention it is said, is better than punish-
ment, I grant it; but I doubt the efficacy of that
prevention which partakes too much of the
nature of punishment and deters from crime
by breaking the spirit or hardening the heart
From a schoobboy to the present day I have
never been fond of coercion, and I believe every
Englishman down to the peasant feels in some
measure, as I do, that he would rather be
governed by law, which applies equally to all,
than by force and coercion, which may fall
unjustly on a few. When, therefore, hon. gen-
tlemen tell us, that this new force will deter
from crime, I have strong apprehensions that
such may not be the result, but that force, bla-
zoning on its banner jealousy, suspicion, and
distrust, may carry in its train irritation, hatred,
and malice propense.
“ I have observed the conduct and influence
of Constables, the humble officers of the law
in villages.—l have always found them unas*
suming in their deportment to their neighbours,
and, at the same time, ready to fulfil their duties
ministerially and officially. I have no wish to
see them use their quarter-staff and handcuffs,
much less swords and pistols in the service of
H


a conceited philosophy or morbid philanthropy*
If they be ready to suppress affrays, to check
indecency and breaches of the peace, to protect
their neighbours when called upon, and to fulfil
the instructions of Magistrates, they do all that
we ought to expect or to wish such officers to
do. If they be sometimes too backward rather
than too forward to implicate their neighbours
in charges of crime, I have thought that was
the evil of the two less likely to provoke the
irritation of the passions, which more commonly,
even than want and necessity, impels to crime.
In the case of trivial trangressions we often
admire the moderation, the falling short of
severity, with which the best lawyers and
judges administer the criminal law T ; and if
Constables from their connection with the
society in which they fulfil the duties of their
office have acted in the same spirit, I believe
that on the whole it has been a gain rather than
a loss to the community.
“It is evident from the calendars and the
number of apprehensions that Constables do
perform their duty. An Hon. Baronet* has
*~ It was said this measure would lead to & paid Magistrarv. He for
one, <iid not care how soon that came, for he was satisfied from what he
had seen of late that it would he a benefit to the comm uni tr. How fre-
qnenlly did it happen 'when the Constables took a man thev did not know
where to go 'with him, he was dragged first to one Magistrate’s residence
<iud then another, and often without success. Macistratcs were not
always to be found at home, and when they were, the dutr they were


confessed that Constables are more easily
found to apprehend criminals than Magistrates
to commit them. He has had the manliness
to take to himself the blame of negligence rather
than to charge it on those officers who act under
him. Indeed, I can hardly call the Hon.
Baronet the Constables* enemy, for he spoke
of them rather like a passionate lover when he
added to his intention to murder them, his
determination to commit suicide on himself. I
should regret both these events.—l should re-
gret that the peace-officers of the country should
make room for accoutred Policemen, and that
Noble Lords, Hon. Baronets, and country Gen-
tlemen should commit an act of felo-de-se to
make room for paid Barristers; and if there be
not that ardent love, strong in death, between
Magistrates and Constables which the Hon.
Baronet alone has avowed, I am not ashamed
to own that we belong to the same family and
must stand or fall together. If you disturb
the foundation you will endanger the super-
structure.—lf you substitute gendarmes (or
called upon to perform, was often intricate and doubtful, and then if the
least flaw should happen to be made they were pulled before the public,
and with great inconvenience, as Mr. Postle could feelingly testify (laugh-
ter) , made to pay a sum of money for some trifling and unintentional error.
—He would much rather be tried before a Barrister than two Magistrates,
the latter not knowing any thing of the law, or at least he did not, for he
left it all to their clerk; for if he once pretended to have any accurate
knowledge of the law he was quite sure he should have no time for
any thing else, lie should therefore support the motion.” — Sir J. . Isih-i/i'
Speech,


whatever you may call them) for peace-officer s,
you must expect to see Juges de Paix for Jus-
tices, and Prefects of Department instead of
Lords Lieutenant of counties.—lf you take away
the statute of Winchester you may endanger
the law of primogeniture—you may carry your
French tastes and fashions to an extravagant
and imprudent degree.
“ Indeed, Sir, when I hear the Hon. Baronet
(forgetting his rank and station in society, and
their consequent trusts and responsibilities) avow
his desire from motives of pleasure or self-con-
venience to desert his post, and when I connect
with that avowal the object of this resolution
to substitute for the civil power the habitual
employment and display of force, I feel at a
loss to know where the country is to look for
J ustices of the Peace but to lawyers by profession.
For if instead of citizens for peace-officers we
are to have soldiers and semi-soldiers, 1 foresee
that the Hon. and Rev. Mover of this resolution
and his Rev. brethren, may soon have scruples
how far it may be consistent with their profession
or feelings to act in the commission of the
peace.’ If the Petty Session is to become a
court martial, and transgressors of the law are
to be apprehended with swords and not with
staves, I foresee that these Rev. Gentlemen
may hear behind them a voice which they dare


not disregard, * Put up thy sword into his place,
for all they that take the sword shall perish
with the sword.* Not that I would insinuate
that they would desert their commission from
timidity, but for conscience* sake, lest by their
example in encouraging the use of force and
arms they should teach the peasantry to turn
their plough shares into swords, and their pru-
ning hooks into spears. If this should be the
result of the Hon. and Rev. Gentleman’s reso-
lution, then shall we lose, (I will avow it though
I have never been an advocate for multiplying
clerical magistrates beyond the necessity of the
case) we shall lose some of our best informed
Justices, those who are constantly resident, best
acquainted with the habits of the people, and
more disposed from their professional feelings
to heal the evils of society by moral persuasion
than by severity of law and punishment.
“ I will now advert, Sir, to the act of parlia-
ment itself on which this resolution is built.
It is not improbable that if we proceed on the
powers of this statute difficulties will arise, and
the subject may come directly into the superior
courts; should that be the case it would be
difficult for a learned Judge to express his ac-
customed reverence for the law. I imagine
him reading this statute and commenting to
himself in a tone just audible to the court.


‘This is a very vague and extensive statute.
We have nbt had many permissive and optional
acts of this kind. That for inclosures has many
restrictions and was passed with difficulty.
This statute allows the Magistrates at any
Quarter Session or Adjourned Session to change,
by a plurality of votes, the subordinate institu-
tions of the country, and enact a system of
taxation that may be carried to any extent
without the consent of those who pay, and for the
patronage and convenience of those who levy.
This statute needs no large interpretation from
the court/
“ But, Sir, this is the statute on which we are
proceeding to act, and we must take care how
we proceed, for we can expect no indulgence
from the rate payers or the courts above. This
statute does not legislate distinctly and defini-
tively for or against certain rights, but permits
certain things to be done or altered, in certain
.prescribed ways, by Magistrates and Secretaries
of State. The act then permits you at your
option to initiate and effect certain changes,
but you must initiate and effect legally, that
is, as the act provides. You propose a resolu-
tion on the strength of your own intuitive
knowledge of the state of the county, and against
the only external evidence, properly so called,
which is before the court: You adopt the reso


lution, you draw up a report in writing, declaring
to the Secretary of State that the existing in-
stitutions of the county of Norfolk are not
sufficient to preserve the peace and protect pro-
perty. The act prescribes that the Justices
shall decide either for the whole county, or
for separate divisions. If for divisions, then
they shall appoint Superintendents and Police-
men, If the apparatus be for divisions, the
districts benefited shall alone pay the levy,
and the other parts of the county be unin-
cumbered. But if a Chief Constable be ap-
pointed for the whole county, the Constabulary
Force must be for the whole, or the whole
cannot be taxed. Divisions cannot be taxed for
Chief Constables, and counties cannot be taxed
for Divisions.* Now it may appear as well on
* Note 2nd. and 3rd. Victoria, cap. 93. § XXL And be it enacted,
That where this act shall he adopted for any division or divisions, and not
for the whole county, it shall be lawful for the Justices of the Peace for
the said county assembled at any Quarter Sessions of the Peace, or any
adjournment thereof, from time to time, to order the county rates, made
upon the said division or divisions, to be increased, and for that purpose to
rate every Parish, Township, and other place, whether parochial or extra-
parochial, within such division or divisions, in the same manner as now
authorized and practised by law, for county rates, at such additional sum
over and above the sum needed for the other purposes of the county rates
as shall be needed for raising from such division or divisions, re-
spectively, the sums needed for the purposes of this act within such
division or divisions respectively, and the total amount of county
rate, increased as aforesaid, to be levied upon every Parish, Township,
and place within-any such division, shall be specified in the war-
rants issued for the purposes of the county rates by the Justices to the
High Constables of every Hundred or other such district within the county
comprising any part of the said division; and the high Constables shall
issue their warrants accordingly to the overseers of the poor, others author-
ized in that behalf, in every Parish, Township, and place within the said
division or divisions.


evidence that may hereafter be given, as on that
you have already received, that your resolution
and your report are against truth and fact.
But if your report and resolution be according
to fact, your proposition is against the report,
the resolution, the fact, and the statute itself.
Your proposition is to provide a Chief Constable
for the whole county, and to be paid as he
would be for the whole county, while you pro-
vide only Superintendents and Policemen for
one fourteenth part of the county. This may
be a convenient way of creating a piece of
preferment, but if only one portion of the
county be benefited, how can you collect a
rate for the whole, or legally appoint a Chief
Constable at all? I will not presume to say
that in your haste you are committing a gross
blunder, but I will say, that you will find it
difficult, if not impossible, to make such a rate,
or at least to collect such a rate with the consent
of irritated rate payers and learned judges.*
In my humble judgment, this act is unnecessary
for every acre of Norfolk, but the act itself seems
* I do not see how this argument of the Right Hon. W. Windham is to
be met, especially when the Clerk of the Peace shall refer to the Magis-
trates for his instructions as to the precepts for the county levy. The
Magistrates knowing Mr. Copeman's worth and experience, may wish to
leave the details to his judgment and decision, but I should rather presume
that he will decline the responsibility and refer the court to the Secretary of
State, and I doubt further how a Secretary with all his power of changing
rules, and with all the temptation of a contract for clothing and accoutre-
ments, would advise as to the details of the levy.


to presume, that in most cases, Justices would
have the prudence and good sense, as Mr.
Burroughes suggested, to proceed in a way of
trial and experiment, beginning with one or
more divisions, and not arriving at an establish-
ment for the whole county, till the experiment
should have been fairly tried; but in some way
or other, the temptation of a Chief Constable
with £SOO per annum seems to have been
irresistible.
“ The object, Sir, of this proceeding evidently
is, and if carried into effect, the result must cer-
tainly be, to break down the smaller local, fixed
institutions and to substitute for them a large
plan of unions similar and corresponding to
those which have been formed under the new
Poor Law Bill, and centring (as in that case
through the Poor Law Commissioners) in the
Secretary of State. I doubt the policy of this
system of union and centralization in respect
of these particulars. That the minor courts of
the kingdom should be subject to the higher is
advisable, because law is the fountain of right
and liberty.. That the general revenue should
be collected and deposited in the national -
treasury is evidently necessary, in order to its
dispensation for the service of the crown and the
country. Various other important parts of the
constitutional system ought to perform their
i


functions in the same way, and pass and circu-
late the blood through the heart. This, I admit
to be the rule, but to every rule there are ex-
ceptions, or rather what are called exceptions
are frequently rules and laws of another genus.
I have always regarded the wants of the poor
and the offences of criminals, as the infirmities
and diseases of the State which it was not advi-
sable to draw to one part, especially a vital part,
there to fester into a state of putrescence to the
danger of the system itself. The parochial in-
stitutions of the land seem to be the fibres and
absorbents which must be employed, and trusted
to, as the organs to carry off these evil humours,
which being thus diffused through the frame
threaten no danger to the constitution, and
pass off by its general health and vigour. This
was the opinion of our most eminent statesmen
and lawyers for many generations. In the reign
of George the First, and afterwards by Mr.
Gilbert, and other weak minded politicians, the
system of collecting together these infirmities
with a view of relieving them on a more econo-
mical principle (which proved, however, as it
always will prove, an expensive one) was adopted
and much applauded. I recollect that some dis-
tinguished men, and especially the most eminent
lawyers of my time. Lord Kenyon, Mr. Justice
Fuller, and all the other judges of the King's


Bench (perceiving the evils of this system) decla-
red seriatim their opinions ‘against it. They
declared that they would never encourage that
principle, where they could prevent it, and that
they would, whenever they could do it legally,
support the contrary principle of sub-dividing
even to the smallest hamlet, and sanction the
appointment of officers for the smallest districts.
At that time unions were local; the administration
was not even provincial, we have made it national.
In an ill-omened moment the legislature of this
country taught all the indigent of the land to
look up to the Secretary of State (through the
Poor Law Commissioners) as the fountain of
maintenance and relief, or at least of the rules
and regulations of that repellent discipline un-
der which they were to be dispensed. The
poor of the whole land and the government of
the country in its highest departments were thus
brought into immediate collision with each other,
and this, Sir, has evidently been the fountain
head and source of Chartism. You fastened this
chain made up of the links of misery and discon-
tent to the easy chair of the Secretary of State,
who has found the weight of the chain and the
constant drag upon it disturb the comfort and
endanger the safety of.his seat, and now he has
thought it advisable to pass this Rural Police
Bill, which might by the seductions of patronage


and arbitrary power, gain over the magistracy
of England to advocate its introduction, and so
by its clandestine clauses counteract the rising
energies of disaffection. The Lord Eieutenant,
in his professed obedience to the Secretary of
State, seemed to have the conviction that this
was the origin of this act, and that this circum-
stance, under a sense of honour ought to deter-
mine his duty. Secretaries of State may hope
(as this statute would intimate they do hope) by
holding the check-chain of the New Police in
* their hands, to control the agitation they may
perceive from the other dragging at their feet.
For myself, Sir, I must say I should be sorry
to occupy such a station under such a system,
and the sooner the Secretary of State’s office is
separated from this sort of centralization of either
kind, the happier will it be, not only for the Min-
ister, who may occupy that high station, but for
the nation at large. What has happened and
what is happening, convinces me that we ought
not to admit this innovation, and abandon .the fix-
ed, local institutions and officers of the country.
“ By a sort of miraculous perfection the old
system of police has never been converted to
purposes of tyranny or corruption. I see in
the old, what I cannot see in the new, a plan
constiucted for uses and purposes independent
of, and beyond itself. These old institutions of


the country can in no way be considered as
founded or acting for the benefit of the govern-
ment —the parties in the state—the machinery,
or the employed, but simply for the purpose of
checking vice, and protecting person and pro-
perty. That they have conduced to this one
end—that they have preserved the character of
a system—that they do not aggravate and accu-
mulate mischiefs—that they preserve a national
character is clear from their having continued
for ages and generations, year after year, peace-
ably and quietly carrying on the work of their
calling. There may be defects but who would
destroy such a system as this for defects ? They
are defects which may be remedied, defects not
arising from the system, when rightly and ade-r
quately applied, but from the partial, or non-
application of it, and from the neglect of certain
parts of it, which may be easily restored. I
shall support that system on its own intrinsic
merits, and the rather when I compare it with
this innovation, even in the freshness of its birth.
“ Who does not see that this innovation brings
not only in its train, and by the natural process
of corruption, tyranny and oppression, but that in
its front, and even in advance of its actual exist-
ence, jobbing, local intrigues, and private interest
of families stamp its character. 1 see in this
new plan a system of patronage and favour from


which the old is free, and to which it holds out
no temptation. I see that five hundred pounds
a year is a temptation to Magistrates to work
this system by favor, and to Captains, Majors,
and Colonels to receive it on a due application
in the usual flattering terms, —‘My Lords and
Gentlemen, your support and patronage.’ I see
in this mounted cavalry, lounging intriguers,
spies, and eves-droppers, a system that will dis-
gust, degrade, and irritate the feelings of the
people, and at the same time corrupt the virtue
and the honour of the gentlemen and Magistrates
of England, and therefore, Sir, I shall give my
decided negative to this resolution.”
So would have spoken the Right Hon, W.
Windham of Felbrigg, on a resolution for a
New Rural Police in the county of Norfolk.
Some gentlemen not liking the title page of this
pamphlet, may have begun in the Hebrew
fashion to read it at the end, and not having
read the prefatory remarks may take it for a
posthumous speech, aud trace in it the usual
imperfections of uncorrected publications of
that sort. The old aquaintances of the Right
Hon. Secretary, who may yet be alive, whether
political friends or foes, will at once without the
aid of anachronisms, discover the apocryphal
character of the writing; yet, such will I think
perceive what would have been the sentiments


of that English gentleman, what in his day
would have been, and still ought to be their own.
You will excuse me, my Lords and Gentle-
men, if I point out the indelicacy of your haste
in endeavouring to effect this change, especially
as it has been asserted, that these Constables,
from the Chief Constable downwards, will not
only be paid by your precepts, but may be
dismissed at your pleasure. They will then
be the Constables of the court and not of the
people. They will be the Constables of the
Petty Session, which is not a court of record—
the proceedings of which are not reported to
the public—and in which numerous cases will
henceforth be decided on the suffrages of the
Judges and the evidence of their paid servants.
Honourable gentlemen may see more convictions
in proportion to apprehensions in consequence
of persons being well trained and well paid to
give evidence, but it may well be doubted,
whether they will in a like proportion secure
the confidence of the people in their court or
in themselves. If there be objections to making
soldiers, who have the honourable pride of a
noble profession, too distinct from the people,
surely there are objections to making armed
and mercenary Policemen, brought from a
distance, distinct from society, the objects of sus-
picion, and like all such, suspicious themselves,


the principal witnesses in causes, as they must
be, especially in remote districts where the
accused can have no benefit of attorney. Here
is indeed an opening for ‘‘ambition, avarice,
and resentment.” It cannot be that the respect-
able solicitors and attornies of the county, who
enjoy a distinct, an honourable and a privileged
profession will be so indifferent to the interest
of the inhabitants at large, who in virtue of
their privileges are at once their clients and their
patrons, as to let this change pass without a
remonstrance. We do not live under a Code
Napoleon , and these respectable gentlemen,
must from the very rudiments of their profes-
sion know how much modes of prosecution,
process of indictment, trial and conviction de-
pend in an English court, and before an English
jury, on the nature of the evidence. They
must see how much the value of evidence will
be reduced by substituting the new for the old
Constable, and how the advantages derived from
the talents of Barristers in detecting fraud and
sifting circumstantial and parole evidence, by
which jurors may discover the reality of facts on
which verdicts are given, involving the rights of
person and property, must be sacrificed. They
must see how evidence that cannot be sifted,
and consciences that cannot be touched, must
weaken confidence in trials, and remove those


defences which protect the. innocent, a much
more important object to Englishmen in general,
who happen to be neither rogues nor traitors,
than to convict a few Jack Cades.
We might almost suppose from the haste with
which the measure is hurried along, that some
dreadful plot existed in all the villages of Norfolk
which was about to burst forth in the destruc-
tion of Lord Lieutenant and Magistrates—l
know of no such conspiracy. The only confed-
eracy which need occasion us anxiety is the
confederacy of whigs and tories, the confederacy
of Carlton and Reform Clubs, and whig and tory
Secretaries of State, to carry this unpatriotic and
mischievous measure—l will not touch upon
politics, but these things do lead us to observe
the truth" and sagacity of Lord Brougham’s
remark, so often repeated of late, that it would be
better for the country to have a stronger govern-
ment, and a more spirited opposition. But
should any disturbance occur, insufficient as
these 120 Policemen from the extent and sub-
division of the county must be, who are to have
the benefit of their services ? What are they
among so many? There will be scarcely one
policeman to a brace of Justices, and what is to be-
come of the rest of the county, even if they were
equally distributed among the Magistrates, which
is by no means probable ? Partiality and interest
K


would not allow, them a fair chance, and the
inhabitants, after having paid an enormous tax-
ation, must still by association defend themselves.
Thus, in a county peculiarly fitted to defend it-
self by a civil power distributed in all its parts, you
will, by a new pretending system of combination
absolutely leave every part in uncertainty as to
which, at the discretion of a stranger Chief Con-
stable, is to be the defended part.
It may be thought that the landowners and
farmers of the county of Norfolk are so happy
with a guinea per coomb for barley, that they
will part with their old police and accept the new
police of the Magistrates without a thought, and
that if they can sell their corn for a good price,
they will sell their liberties and privileges at a
high price too, and pay the purchase money out
of their own pockets—There may be found Ma-
gistrates, landowners, and sensible men of all
ranks who will resist this octroi system of taxation
and resist it effectually—lt is but fair, however,
that they should act forthwith. At present they
will deprive no man of an emolument, they will
subject no one to a loss by defeating this measure,
but if it shall be allowed to proceed, and officers
and men be brought from a distance with their
wives and families, they will hereafter be asked,
why they did not from every part present their
remonstrances, and not subject these respectable


persons to unnecessary disappointments and
vexation. It has been the character and it
must always be the duty of Englishmen to act
openly and fairly, and good feeling will tell them
it is better in every case not to promise than to
promise and not to pay, and wisdom will tell
them that it is easier to prevent an abuse than
to reform it.
At the last meeting of the Magistrates when
Lord Normanby’s polite letter, with the offer of
every possible assistance, was received, there
seemed to be a good deal of commotion, from
what cause did not exactly appear, whether that
the rules and regulations did not square with the
wishes and plans of all, or from alarm from some
other cause. The nests appeared to be made
and feathered, and the golden eggs laid, but the
brooding birds seemed to raise their wings and
flutter, and certainly there was a good deal of
excitement in the court, which the learned chair-
man, who has taken a lively interest in the
measure, could with difficulty suppress. As the
period of incubation is not complete, this does
afford some hope that after all, before the
January Session, the nests may be deserted and
the eggs all addled. This would certainly be a gra-
tifying conclusion of the affair.—One still more
satisfactory would be that the Lord Lieutenant


should come forward with that spirit and integ-
rity which every man in Norfolk knows him to
possess, and avow that on examination of this
measure in its details, he was convinced that it
was impolitic and impracticable, in the county.
But the best result of all would be, that a full and
unanimous feeling from all classes should arise
not only against the introduction of the system
into this county, where indeed it is pre-eminently
unnecessary, but against the act of parliament
itself, with all its unconstitutional principles.
Scarcely any measure could be conceived
more calculated to carry suspicion and distrust
into every corner of the land, and put notions
into the peoples* heads which they would never
otherwise have entertained, and thus prepare the
way for secret societies, political enthusiasts, and
traitorous demagogues. On the contrary, the
rejection of this Rural Police, accompanied with
the manly and generous expression of confidence
in ourselves, our neighbours, our laws and insti-
tutions, and in those who administer them with
so much accuracy and forbearance, will do more
than all the Police you can bring into action to
allay and charm that evil spirit which has taken
possession of the ignorant and unwary : but if
you attempt to exorcise with violence and not
with reason, by force and not by law, he may


take with him other spirits more wicked than
himself, and the last state may be worse than
the first.
The great object of the wise and good must
be to relieve the country of that morbid temper
which has disturbed the general healthiness of
the State, and to restore that cheerfulness of
spirit on which vigour and comfort depend. The
object of this Letter has been in some humble
degree to aid in this restoration to health, and if
this honest opposition to an innovation, fraught
with mischief, and an equally honest vindication
of the character of my countrymen, shall con-
tribute in any, the smallest measure, to produce
that glad result, I have my reward.
I have the honour to be,
My Lords and Gentlemen,
Your obedient Servant,
A FREEHOLDER.
Swaffham; I’rinted by J. S. Gowing.


ERRATA.
Page 30 line 2, for "Monmouth” read "Newport.”
Page 51 line 21, for "prepense” read "prepense.” .
