

ft '''****■t
" A r a P |<
. Rim j;$»% 3
* “>
V;iv%’/» ' ' .1
»-
U.i, .iV^l'
■' <" *
j- /
%*?' ' '7T V V/ff*
,,/V /
j* / vy«
' '
• ■ J f ! ':
jk •
% ‘
r-i: %.
A ’ ■ *
'
'•
*
.s' \
■
4- k
»x''


*
'
* *
.
.
,
i'
*
.
.
>
I
■ •


A LETTER
Containing Remarks on the Moral State of
Tahiti, New Zealand, &c.
Br Capt. R. FITZROY and C. DARWIN, Esq, of H.M.S. ‘Beagle.'
A very short stay at the Cape of Good Hope is sufficient to con-
vince even a passing stranger, that a strong feeling against the
Missionaries in South Africa is there very prevalent.
From what cause a feeling so much to be lamented has arisen,
is probably well known to residents at the Cape. We can only
notice the fact: and feel sorrow.
Having lately visited some of the principal islands in the Paci-
fic, and passed time enough in Australia to become acquainted
with the opinions of some of the first men in that country respect-
ing Missionaries, and the Missionary system, we were wholly
unprepared for such notions as those so predominant in Cape Town.
Before requesting a few minutes’ attention to some facts con-
nected with this subject,—let me ask, whether the ideas expressed
in the two following extracts from the works of Sir James Mac-
kintosh, are not of higher value than the hastily formed opinions,
—I would hardly say prejudices,—of people who think but little ?
Speaking of England, Sir James says, “Our scanty information
relating to the earliest period of Saxon rule leaves it as dark as it
is horrible. But Christianity brought with it some mitigation.
“The arrival of Augustine in Kent, with forty other missiona-
ries, sent by Gregory the Great to convert the Saxons, is described
in picturesque and affecting language, by Bede, the venerable
historian of the Anglo-Saxon Church.
“It cannot be doubted that the appearance of men who exposed
themselves to a cruel death for the sake of teaching truth, and
inspiring benevolence, could not have been altogether without
effect, even among the most faithless and ruthless barbarians.
Liberty of preaching what they conscientiously believed to be
Divine truth, was the only boon for which they prayed.”
Again Sir James says, “Let those who consider any tribes of
men as irreclaimable barbarians, call to mind that the Danes and
Saxons, of whose cruelties a small specimen has been given,
were the progenitors of those who, in Scandinavia, in Normandy,
in Britain, and in America, are now among the most industrious,
intelligent, orderly, and humane, of the dwellers upon earth.”
If it is said that the races of men above mentioned always
surpassed the Hottentots, the Bushmen, or the Gaffers, in natu-
ral abilities and disposition, I will ask, are there any tribes of
savages in the world, in a state more degraded than those just
named? I presume the answer will be “yes, the New-Hollanders,
and the natives of Terra del Fuego.”


Yet some of those most degraded of human beings, four natives
of Terra del Fuego, were carried to England in the Beagle; were
placed under the care of a schoolmaster, in whose house they lived,
(one excepted) and there learned to speak English, to use common
tools, to plant, and to sow. They were taught the simpler religious
truths and duties; and the younger two were beginning to make
progress in reading and writing when the time arrived for their
return to their own country. I landed them among their people,
by whom they were well received, but very soon plundered of
most of the treasures their numerous friends in England had given
to them. No dulness of apprehension w r as shewn by those natives
—quite the reverse.
The dispositions of all, especially the younger ones, were so
good, although with failings inseparable from a thorough-bred
savage, that ii was hard to believe that, in the latitude of 54 degrees
south, they once went naked, destitute of any covering, except a
small piece of seal skin, worn only upon their shoulders; that they
had devoured their enemies slam in battle; or that they had
smothered, and afterwards eaten, the oldest women of their own
tribe, when hard pressed by hunger during a severe winter!
Surely, if three years sufficed to change the natures of such
cannibal wretches as Fuegians, and transform them into well
behaved, civilized people, who were very much liked by their
English friends, there is some cause for thinking that a savage is
not irreclaimable, until advanced in life; however repugnant to
our ideas have been his early habits,
Humboldt says, —
“If, in the great and useful establishment of the American
missions, those improvements were gradually made, which have
been demanded by several bishops; if, instead of recruiting
missionaries at hazard in the Spanish convents, young eccle-
siastics were prepared for these functions in seminaries or colleges
of missions founded in America, the military expeditions which
I propose would become useless.
“ Even those Indians, who, proud of their independence and
their separate state, refuse to suffer themselves to be governed
by the sound of the bell, receive with pleasure the visit of a
neighbouring missionary.
“By leaving the Indians to enjoy more of the fruits of their
labors, and by governing them less, —that is, by not shackling
every instant their natural liberty,—the missionaries would see
the sphere of their activity, which ought to be that of civiliza-
tion, rapidly increase.
“ Monastic establishments have diffused in the equinoctial part
of the New World, as in the north of Europe, the first germs of
social life.
“ They still form a vast zone around the European possessions ;
and, whatever abuses may have crept into institutions, where all


power is confounded in one, they would be with difficulty replaced
by others, which, without producing more serious inconveniences,
would be as little chargeable, and as well adapted to the silent
phlegm of the natives.
“ I shall recur again to these settlements, the political import-
ance of which is not sufficiently understood in Europe. It will
be sufficient here to observe that expeditions of discovery, accom-
panied by an armed force, would be useless, were the govern-
ment and the bishops to employ themselves seriously in the
melioration of the missions.
“The progress of the missionaries would become rapid, if
(after the example of the Jesuits) extraordinary succours were
assigned to the most distant missions ; and if the most intelligent
and courageous ecclesiastics, and those best versed in the Indian
languages, were placed in the most advanced posts.
“In both Americas the missionaries arrive every where first,
because they find facilities which are wanting to every other
traveller.
“ ‘ You boast of your journeys beyond Lake Superior/ said an
Indian of Canada to some fur-traders of the United States ; ‘ you
forget, then, that the black coats passed it long before you; and
that it was they who showed you the way to the west ? ’ ”
But who can hear, or read of the wonderful exertions and
effects of missionary zeal in South America, without admitting
their important utility? Very many parts of that extensive
continent are now almost unknown, and inhabited only by
savages; which, before the expulsion of the Jesuits, were the
seats of flourishing establishments of Indians,, at the least semi-
civilized, increasing, and improving yearly.
Yet in how few years had the missionaries effected so much!
Southey informs us that the first six Jesuits who set foot in
the New World, landed at Bahia de todos Santos, in April, 1549.
“ Most distinguished among them was Manoel de Nobrega, the
Apostle of Brazil, contemporary of the illustrious Xavier, and
his rival in disinterested exertions for the good of his fellow-
creatures.
“ The obstacles they had to encounter in the works of civili-
zation were most formidable, but their zeal and assiduity rose
with the difficulty of the enterprise, and the most salutary effects
resulted from their exertions.
“ They began by teaching the native children the Portuguese
language, and thus, while they fitted them to become interpre-
ters, were also learning the Indian tongue. The greatest obstacle
they had to surmount arose from the cannibal propensities of the
natives. In feasts of this horrid description, their pride, their
religion, their greatest luxury, were all implicated. The mis-
sionaries resolved to try to conquer this diabolical habit; but
though they succeeded in putting down drunkenness —in healing


intestine feuds —in making a man content with one wife; the
delight of feasting on the flesh of their enemies was too great to
be relinquished; this propensity they could not overcome !!”
A remarkable characteristic of the zealous spirit of those earlier
American missionaries was their “ entirely gratuitous performance
of every religious ceremony.”
«Nobrega had a school near the city of Bahia, where he
instructed the native children—the orphans sent from Portugal—
and the children of mixed breed. Reading, writing, and arith-
metic were taught them; they learned to assist at mass, and to
sing the church service. <
“ Frequently they went in procession through the town. The
singing had a great effect, for the natives were passionately fond
of music,
“When on an expedition to a strange, and perhaps hostile
tribe, Nobrega took with him a few of the little choristers,
“At approaching an inhabited place, one of them carried the
crucifix, in advance, the others followed singing the litany.
“ Every where the savages received him so joyfully, that Nobrega
began to think that the story of Orpheus, however exaggerated,
had a better foundation than that of a fable. The pleasure of
learning to sing was such a temptation, that the little children
sometimes ran away from their parents to put themselves under
the care of the Jesuits.
“ Nobrega died in the fifty-third year of his age, prematurely
worn out by a life of incessant fatigue, consequent on unexampled
exertion, and heroic virtue. The day before his death, he
took leave of all his friends, as if he were about to undertake a
long journey. ‘They asked him where he was going?’ He
replied, ‘ Home! to my own country!’ ”
Quitting opinions, and the tale of other times, it may be desira-
ble to see what has been doing at Otaheite (now called Tahiti,) and
at New Zealand, towards reclaiming the ‘barbarians.’ That
epithet is, however, inapplicable to the natives of Otaheite, who
were semi-civilized when discovered by Wallis, in 1765.
The Beagle passed a part of last November at Otaheite or
Tahiti. A more orderly, quiet, inoffensive community I have
not seen in any other part of the world. Every one of the
Tahitians appeared anxious to oblige, and naturally good tem-
pered and cheerful. They showed great respect for, and a thorough
good will towards, the missionaries (of the London Missionary
Society); and most deserving of such a feeling did those persons
appear to be, with whom I had the sincere pleasure of making
acquaintance,—Messrs Pritchard, Nott, and Wilson.
The missionary body have a considerable influence over the
Queen of the Society Islands, as well as over her council, being
considered the wisest men, and the truest friends, whom t e
natives of Tahiti can consult; but the Queen and the Chiefs are far


from allowing any approach to dictation, or authority, on the
part of any foreigner; they are tenacious of their own honor and
independence; and only yield to advice when their reason is suf-
ficiently convinced of its propriety.
To detail all that occurred, during even our short visit, tending
to shew the beneficial effects of missionary exertion in that distant
island, would occupy too much of your time; I will only copy a
few of the notes which are in our journals, (Mr. Darwin’s and
my own,) taking them as they occur—without alteration —be-
lieving that, in their original language, the feelings excited at the
time will be shewn better than by an abridgment.
Monday, 16th Nov. 1835. At Tahiti. —The Beagle was
scarcely secured at her anchorage, before a number of canoes
had assembled around her. All could not get alongside—but
those whose outriggers obliged them to keep at a distance, con-
tained natives who appeared to be as happy, and as civilly-dis-
posed, as those who patiently waited by the ship’s side until leave
was given for them to come on board. The necessary work being
completed, permission was given, and in a few minutes our deck
was thronged by men and boys. No women appeared.
Every one was more or less clothed, excepting a few little boys.
D.* —I suppose the number of natives on board the Beagle
could not have been less than two hundred. It was the opinion
of every one, that it would have been difficult to have selected an
equal number of the lower order of any other nation, who would
have given so little trouble, or behaved so well.
Mr. Darwin and I landed among a mob of amusing, merry
souls, most of them women and children. Mr. Wilson, a
missionary who came out in the ship Duff more than thirty years
ago, was at the landing place, and welcomed us to his house.
The free, cheerful manners of the natives, who gathered about the
door, and unceremoniously took possession of vacant seats, either
on chairs or on the floor, shewed that they were at home with
their instructor, and that churlish seclusion, or affected distance,
formed no part of his system.
* s); #
* * *
Two chiefs walked into the room; they shook hands, sat down,
and conversed familiarly with Mr. and Mrs. Wilson, in quite an
European manner. They were cleanly, and, for the climate, well
dressed. Their appearance and manners were prepossessing, and
totally different from those of savages.
* * ♦ * sfc
A proof that the missionary influence is not paramount, I may
copy from Mr. Darwin’s journal,—“A very unbecoming custom
is now almost general. The natives cut their hair so closely, that
* N.B. The letter D. prefixed, denotes an extract from the Journal of
Mr. Darwin.


the heads appear shaven like those of monks, who leave only a
small circle of hair. The missionaries have tried to persuade the
people to change this habit, but they say ‘it is the fashion:’ a
definite answer at Tahiti, as well as at Paris.
19 th November. —Walking towards the house of Mr. Nott, I
saw an elderly native writing, in his cottage, and apparently very
intent upon his employment. I asked to see what engaged his
attention. It was a Tahitian version of the book of Jeremiah,
written by Mr. Nott, which he was copying in a good distinct
hand. Mr. Nott, the senior missionary upon the island, has almost
completed a great work, —the translation of the Old Testament.
November. —
* ♦ ♦ * ♦
D.—Suspended, as it were, on the mountain side, there were
glimpses into the dark depths of vallies; and at the highest pinna-
cles of the central mountains, which, ascending to within sixty
degrees of the zenith, hid nearly half the sky. It was a sublime
spectacle to watch the shades of night gradually covering the
highest summits.
Before we laid ourselves down to sleep, the elder Tahitian fell
on his knees, and repeated a long prayer. He seemed to pray as
a Christian should, with fitting reverence to his God, without
ostentatious piety, or fear of ridicule. 1 9th. D. At daylight,
after their morning prayer, my companions prepared an excellent
breakfast of bananas and fish. Neither of them would taste food
without saying a short grace. Those travellers, who hint that a
Tahitian prays only when the eyes of the missionary are fixed on
him, might have profited by similar evidence.
D. —About two years ago, although the use of the Ava*
was prohibited, drunkenness, from the introduction of ardent
spirits, became very prevalent. The missionaries prevailed on a
few good men, who saw their countrymen rapidly working their
own ruin, to join with them in a Temperance Society. From good
sense and shame, the Queen, and all the chiefs, were at last
induced to become members. A law was then immediately passed
prohibiting the importation, or sale, of any kind of spirit. With
remarkable justice, a certain period was allowed for the sale of stock
in hand; but on an appointed day a general search for spirits took
place, from which even the closets or trunks of the missionaries
were not exempted.
D.—When one reflects on the effects of intemperance on the
aboriginals of both Americas, one may estimate the gratitude due
from the Tahitians to their missionary counsellors.
* * * * *
2Qth. —Conversing with a Mr. Middleton about the Low Islands,
* Obtained from a native root.


(those coral islands extending eastward from near Tahiti to
beyond the Gambier group,) among which he has spent much
time, I was much struck by the personal dislike and jealousy
shown by him, when alluding to the missionaries themselves; and
by the strong terms in which he mentioned the good effects of
their intercourse with the Low Islanders; and how much more
missionaries were required. His own words, as I have them in
a paper written by himself, are : “ The inhabitants of those
Islands are now familiarized to Europeans, and are becoming
partly civilized, owing to the gospel having been preached to
them by the missionaries/’
In another place he says, —“On this island there are inhabitants
enough to require the constant residence df two missionaries.”*
His own antipathy to the individuals, has arisen, I find, from
personal differences.
*** * . *
At the door of a house I saw the owner reading a book atten-
tively. It was the New Testament. I shall not easily forget the
expression of that man’s countenance, as he read aloud, thinking
himself alone. To my mind, such a sight tells more than any
descriptions.
5jC >}C
21st.—One of the officers slept in a house inhabited by a large
family of the middling class of Tahitians. He told me that before
sleeping the oldest man said prayers; one of the young men read
a short portion of the New Testament; and then a hymn was
sung by the whole family. lam informed that this was no more
than the general custom in Tahitian families.
22nd, Sunday. —A party of us went to Papiete; others to Mr.
Nott’s church. Those who could not go far from the ship
attended Mr. Wilson’s Sabbath meeting, to see the natives at
divine service.
At Mr. Pritchard’s church in Papiete, we found an orderly,
attentive, and decently-dressed congregation. I saw nothing
grotesque, nothing ludicrous, (as some late voyagers have seen) ;
nor any thing which had a tendency to depress the spirits, or dis-
appoint expectation. The church was quite full; many were
sitting outside. I suppose six hundred people were present,
besides children. The fluent delivery of Mr. Pritchard, while
preaching in the Tahitian language, surprised, and very much
pleased us. Two of them were making notes of the sermon
upon paper. A few were inattentive, but very few, compared
with the number present.
* From Tahiti, many natives have gone, as missionaries, to other Islands.
Of late years, the natives have opened the way for the European teachers.
By their united influence and unabated exertion, Christianity, and conse-
quent civilization, is spreading rapidly amongst the natives of Polynesia.


It was evident the children had not been treated with harshness,
for they clustered about their minister so closely, that he could
not move without pushing them aside.
D. —Mr. Pritchard was regularly educated at the Mission
College. He appears to be a sensible, agreeable gentleman, and
a good man. I have already mentioned Mr. Wilson with respect.
Mr. Nott, the senior missionary whom we have seen, has resided
forty years on the island. His occupations are now chiefly lite-
rary. He bears a very high character. I have said this much of
these three persons, because the character of those who labour in
the cause to which they arfe devoted, has been so often attacked.
.. * * * * *
D.—One of my impressions which I took from Beechey and
Kotzebue, was entirely wrong. I thought that the Tahitians
had become a gloomy race, and lived in fear of the missionaries.
Of the latter feeling I saw no trace. As to discontent, it would
be difficult to pick out of an European crowd so many happy,
merry faces.
D.—On the whole, it is my opinion that the state of morality
and religion in Tahiti is highly creditable. Perhaps those who
attack the missionaries, their system, and the effects produced,
do not compare the present state of things with that of twenty-
years ago, nor even with that of Europe at the present day.
Looking only to the high standard of gospel perfection, they seem
to expect that the missionaries shall effect what the apostles
themselves failed in doing. In proportion as the state of things
seems to be short of their high and ideal standard, the missionaries
are blamed.
Credit due for what has been effected, is not allowed. It ap-
pears to be forgotten by those persons, that human sacrifices, —
the bloodiest warfare, —parricide, —and infanticide, —the power
of an idolatrous priesthood,—and a system of profligacy unpa-
ralleled in the annals of the world, —have been abolished, —and
that dishonesty, licentiousness, and intemperance have been
greatly reduced, by the introduction of Christianity. In a voy-
ager it is base ingratitude to forget these things. At the point
of shipwreck, how earnestly he/wHT hope that the lesson of the
missionary has extended to the place on which he expects to be
cast away!
*****
25 th, Wednesday. —At day-light this morning I went to Mr.
Wilson’s school-house, now used also as a chapel, the old church
at Matavi* having been blown down by a violent gale of wind.
♦ Mr. Pritchard lives at Papiete, near the Queen’s usual abode. Matavi
is the name of the village in which Mr. Wilson lives, about eight miles from
Papiete.


(On each Wednesday morning a short service is performed in
each of the Tahitian Churches.) This morning a hymn was sung,
an extempore prayer followed, and then another hymn. The
congregation was numerous and very attentive. I noticed that
all the principal men of the district were present. Mr. Wilson’s
manner pleased me much. It was the sincere and naturally im-
pressive manner of a kind-hearted, honest man, earnestly perform-
ing a sacred duty.
* * * * *
The Queen, and a large party, passed some hours on board the
Beagle. Their behaviour was extremely correct, and their
manners were inoffensive. Judging from former accounts, and
what we witnessed, I should think that they are improving
yearly; and that the conduct of the missionaries, and their
families, has an influence over them exceeding that of a very
differently disposed people by whom, unfortunately, they are
often visited.
Thursday, 2 6th. —At daylight this morning some of our party
went to the school at Papiete. As we had heard of ‘ compulsion’
and ‘unwilling attendance,’ I went early without having said a
word to any one which could lead them to expect a visitor. In
and about the large church, I found groups of elderly, and even
old, people sitting together helping each other to read. While one
read, the other listened; and if able, corrected him. One man,
with spectacles, not less than sixty years of age, was learning to
read! Some came in, others went out, just as they chose.
During about an hour after sun-rise, these elderly people were
instructing one another in this manner, previous to beginning
their daily employment.
Meanwhile in the school-house, a number of children (about
ninety) were occupied in reading aloud, writing on slates, or
answering questions, in the usual manner of infant schools.
Mr. Pritchard asked me to desire them to write a sentence. I
raid ‘the captain wishes you much happiness.’ Mr. Pritchard
having interpreted, they wrote his words instantly, and some
of their own accord, added, ‘and we wish happiness to the
captain.’ The hand-writing of many, indeed most of the elder
girls and boys, was very good. The questions they answered
readily; and though apparently in good discipline, a merrier, or
more cheerful looking set of children I never saw.
Returning by way of the (Tahitian) church, I saw Hitote, and
several other chiefs, engaged in eager discussion. Mr.
Pritchard and I went in. “ You are come just in time,” said they,
“We are disputing about the lightning conductors on board the
Beagle; and cannot determine whether they end in the ship’s hold,
or whether they go through her bottom into the water.” Mr,


Pritchard interpreted to me, and I tried to give them an expla-
nation.
* * * * *
* * * *
As to the morality of these islanders, and especially that of
the women, which, though reprobated by some, has been defended
by no less authorities than Cook and Turnbull, I would scarcely
venture to give a general opinion, after only so short an acquaint-
ance ; but I may say that I witnessed no improprieties, neither did
I see anything that would not incline me to suppose that their
habits of morality are better than those of many civilized nations.
It appears to me that the missionaries have succeeded in carry-
ing attention to religion, and general morality, to a pitch at
which it can hardly be maintained in future years, when inter-
course with other countries will undermine their influence, _ ,
Human nature in Tahiti cannot be supposed superior to erring
human nature in other parts of the world.
With respect to those who have severely censured the interfer-
ence and effects of the missionary system, —I subscribe entirely to
the following remark of Mr. Darwin :
D.—l do believe that, disappointed in not finding the field of
licentiousness so open as formerly, and as was expected, they
will not give credit to a morality which they do not wish to
practise, nor to the effects of a religion which is undervalued, if not
quite despised.
>■. * * * * *
Is it not a striking fact, and one which ought to be recorded to
the lasting honor of missionaries, that, owing to their example
and influence, a Nation has solemnly rejected the use of ardent
spirits ?
NEW ZEALAND.
21s? December. —In a conspicuous, solitary position, anEnglish-
looking house, without a building, or indeed any object except a
flag staff, near it, presented a remarkable contrast to the fortified
villages of the natives, and impressed one’s mind with a conviction
of the great influence already obtained over the wild cannibals of
New Zealand. ' , .
In that lonely house lives the British Resident, his sole defence
our national flag ; his interpreters, and only supporters, the mis-
sionaries of the Church of England.
*****
* *
From the anchorage, in the Bay of Islands, the view is \ery
pleasing. One of the most conspicuous objects is the new church,
now building by voluntary contributions.
*****


22nd. —I walked with Mr. Baker (missionary) about the little
village of Paihia, Mr. Henry Williams, who was formerly a
lieutenant in the navy, was absent on an exploring and nego-
tiating expedition, to the southern parts of the island.
I much regretted having missed seeing him. He is considered
the leading person among the missionary body in New Zealand;
and is said by every one, who speaks of him, to be most
thoroughly devoted to the great cause, in which he was one of
the first, and most daring.
Afterwards we went to Kororadika a village at the side of the
harbour opposite to Paihia.
The new church, before mentioned, is a slightly built edifice of
bricks, with an abundance of bad glass windows. Placing a
church at the head quarters of iniquity, at such a notorious place
as Kororadika, is certainly a bold trial.
Notwithstanding the ill-will entertained towards the missionaries
by our spirit-selling countrymen, and by the evilly-disposed of the
native population, not a pane of glass has been broken, nor has
the slightest impediment been offered.
In a long list of subscribers to the building, I saw the names of
many masters of merchant ships and whalers, placed before very
considerable sums.
D.—This little village (Kororadika) is the very strong hold of vice.
Although many tribes, in other parts, have embraced Christianity,
here the greater part of the people are still heathens. By them
the missionaries are held in no esteem; but their conduct is inno-
fensive compared with that of our own countrymen. Strange as
it appears, I have heard the missionaries say, that the only protec-
tion they now need, or on which they securely rely, is that of the
native chiefs; and that too against their own countrymen, —English
settlers.
23rd.—With Mr. Baker I went to Tapuna, the place where the
first missionaries, Mr. King and Mr. Kendal established them-
selves in 1813. Mr, King was absent. His son told me that he
was travelling amongst the natives. He was on horseback, the
son said, but quite alone. Mrs. King described the former state
of things which she witnessed herself, in very strong terms. She
could not look back to those days without a shudder.
Many times they were told that ‘ before morning their house
would be in flames/ and that ‘ stones were heating in the ovens in
which they were to be cooked.’ But Mr. King found a trusty
friend in a well-known chief named Waripoaki, and to him he
always sent for assistance.
Returning, we landed upon an island lately purchased by two
Englishmen, not long ago masters of whale ships. The verbal
attacks upon the missionaries made by these men, their illiberal


aspersions of Mr. Busby’s* character, and their own manners,
and disgusting conversation, prevented our remaining many
minutes in their company. Such men as these, —strongly pre-
judiced, deaf to reason, and often habitually vicious, —run-away
convicts, whose characters may be imagined,—and democratic,
untractable natives, cause the principal difficulties against which
honest, upright settlers, and the whole missionary body, have to
contend.
* , * >K * *
24 th. —I went with Mr. Baker to a native village at some dis-
tance, called Cawa-cawa. It was pleasant to witness the cordial
greetings which passed between Mr. Baker and the natives whom
we occasionally met. He had been asked by them to visit their
village in order to settle some disputes which had arisen between
their neighbours and themselves. He also wished to gaiii advo-
cates for the abolition of the use of spirits. By temporising, talk-
ing to both parties, and inducing each to go half way, Mr. Baker
succeeded in amicably settling the disputed affairs. •
Is it not gratifying to find that even in this savage country the
missionaries are appealed to, and act as mediators and peace-
makers ?
In our return I went a little way out of the path to look at two
oxen, lately imported.
Near the door-way of a house, in a retired'place, a sick woman
was reading a book. It was a copy of the Gospel of St. Matthew,
printed at Paihia, in the New Zealand language. Now there could
have been no affectation nor hypocrisy in the occupation of that
woman; her being seen was quite accidental and unexpected.
Enquiring about her afterwards, I found that she was one of a
long list of invalids, who depend upon the mission for advice and
medicine. Mr. Baker told me that one of the most troublesome,
though gratifying duties of the Missionaries, is that of acting, or
attempting to act, as medical men. No regular practitioner
having as yet established himself in the land, every complaint is
entrusted to their attention and good will, but slight medical
knowledge. How necessary it must be for a missionary to have
some knowledge of medicine and surgery!
The successful wanderings of the Jesuit Faulkner would be a
sufficient demonstration, if numerous other instances were wanting.
Owing to his skill in medicine, Faulkner was enabled to be a soli-
tary instance of a white man living many years in safety among
various tribes of wandering South American Indians.
28 th. —I went to Waimate, the settlement lately formed by the
Mission, with the view of introducing agriculture, and the me-
chanical arts, among the natives. The thoroughly English ap-
* The British Resident.


pearance of three well designed, respectable houses, surrounded
by gardens, out-houses, and well cultivated fields, was surprising
and delightful. About twenty acres of land seemed to be worked.
Corn was in full ear, and looked well. I was received by a per-
son whose intelligent, kind, and truly respectable demeanor at
once excited a kindly feeling. This was Mr. Davis, the superin-
tendant of the farming establishment. Mr. William Williams
and Mr. Clarke, were absent, having gone to the opposite side of
the island to attend the funeral of a young missionary of the
Wesleyan persuasion. In the gardens all English vegetables
seemed to thrive. The farm yard was thoroughly English. A
large barn, built entirely by natives, under Mr. Davis’s directions;
a blacksmith’s shop and forge; English carts and farming imple-
ments, successively engaged attention. In the barn two natives
were thrashing corn; another native was attending to the winnow-
ing machine. A mill, and mill-dam, entirely the work of the
natives, were next examined. They were good works of their
kind, and would have been interesting, independent of their lo-
cality. Mr. Davis told me that when the mill was finished and
first put in action, nothing could exceed the surprise and delight
of the natives, especially those who had assisted in the work.
They called it ‘a ship of the land!’ ‘wonderful white men,’ said
they, ‘ fire, water, earth, and air, are made to work for them, by
their wisdom!’
I was much struck by the harmony and apparent happiness of
the three families of whose society I had too slight a glimpse.
Instead of hours, I should have enjoyed passing days with them.
An air of honesty, and that outward tranquillity which is the
result of a clear conscience and inward peace, offered a forcible
contrast to the alleged gloom, and even misanthropy, of which
some missionaries have been accused by those persons whose own
habits, or associates, made them perhaps most undesirable acquain-
tances for an English family.
It was very satisfactory to mark the lively interest taken by
them-in every detail connected with the Fuegians. Again and
again they recurred to the subject. Their anxiety also about
the state of other South American Savages, and about other
islands in the Pacific, gave me a high opinion of their true mis-
sionary spirit. It was striking to find all the members of this
isolated society so anxious to hear about and to talk of Fuegians,
and other distant tribes of savages, rather than to draw attention
to their own doings,—to their troubles, their success, or their
wants.
Speaking of the agricultural settlement at Waimate, —Mr.
Darwin says, “All this is very surprising, when it is considered


that three years ago nothing but fern was seen on the place now
occupied by houses, gardens, and com fields.”
D. —Moreover, native workmen effected this change. The
lesson of the missionary has acted like an enchanter’s wand.
Houses have been built, windows framed and glazed; fields
ploughed, and even trees grafted by New Zealanders.
At the mill, a native is seen, powdered over with flour, like hi*
brother millers elsewhere.
'When I considered this whole scene, I thought it admirable;
not only because England was vividly brought to mind; nor
solely because of the triumphant feeling excited by seeing such
effects- of English energy and devotion to a good cause; but
chiefly because of the.moral effect it must have upon the natives.
* * * * *
D.—The young men and boys employed about the houses
seemed to be very merry and good humoured. In the evening,
they were playing at cricket with the sons of the missionaries.
The young women who attended in the houses had a tidy,
healthy look, very different from that of the women about the
villages of Kororadika and Paihia.
D.—Late in the evening I went to Mr. W. William’s house,
where I passed the night. I found there a large party of children
(of the missionaries) assembled to pass Christmas day together.
They were sitting round a table at tea; a nicer, or more
merry group, I never saw. (To think that this sight was in the
land of cannibalism, and all atrocity!)
The cordiality and happiness so plainly visible in the faces of
the"young ones, seemed to be equally prevalent among the older
persons of the mission.
* * * * *
D.—When I took leave of these families, it was with thank-
fulness for their kind welcome, and with feelings of high respect
for their evidently superior characters. I think it would be diffi-
cult to find men better adapted to discharge the duties of their
important office.
*****
D. —As far as I can understand, the greater proportion of the
inhabitants of the northern parts of the Island profess Christianity,
It is curious, that the religion of the others has been altered,
and is now partly Christian and partly heathen. More-
over, the outward conduct of the unbelievers is said to be improv-
ing, in consequence of the general spread of some of the Christian
doctrines. How far those who profess Christianity are sincere, I
have had no opportunity of judging. Mr. Busby, the British
Resident, mentioned a pleasing fact:
One of his young men, who had been accustomed to read pray-
ers to the rest of the servants, left him. Some weeks afterwards,


happening to pass, late in the evening, by an out-house, he saw
and heard another of his men reading the bible, with difficulty,
and by the light of the fire, to the rest of his companions.
Afterwards they knelt down and prayed. In their prayers they
mentioned Mr. Busby, and his family, and each of the missionaries.
Dec. 30th. —By all accounts the New Zealanders are improving
yearly; so are the natives of other islands which have been visited
by missionaries. Those islanders who Tiave been visited only by
whalers, or purveyors for Chinese epicures, have in no way pro-
fited. On the contrary, they have learned to shew less respect to
their own ordinances, and have learned no better ones.
The most abandoned, profligate habits and ideas have been
taught, or encouraged, by their visitors. Fire-arms, ammunition,
and spirits, have been exchanged for provisions, and for women.
Escaped convicts have done very great harm in the Pacific.
Unrestrained by any principle, those abandoned men have been
the springs of excessive injuries. The murder of the missionaries
at the Friendly Islands was caused by the dark and revengeful
intrigues of a convict who had escaped to those Islands from
Sydney. Judging from all I have heard on the spot, and since,
I should think it difficult to form any moderate estimate of the
tumultuous anarchy, and destruction of human life, which has
been prevented during the last twenty years by the presence and
active exertions of missionaries.
Without estimating the ships of other nations, under the colors
of the United States, and of our own country, more than five
hundred sail of vessels have been annually employed in the Pacific
during late years. For refreshments and supplies, only those
islands can, with safety, be now frequented, on which either
European or native missionaries have established themselves.
When a merchant ship approaches a remote island in the
Pacific, her first object is to ascertain whether it has ever been
visited by a missionary. If it has, she knows she may approach
with confidence; if it has not, she keeps under sail in the offing,
and if she does communicate with the shore, it is with the utmost
caution, and with much reluctance.
But even while profiting by the influence of the missionaries,
and even assisted by them in intercourse with the natives, many
persons have not hesitated to ridicule the means by which the
missionary has gained that very influence by which they are pro-
fiting; and, in direct opposition to his entreaties, or well-known
wishes, encourage the natives in immorality, and in the use of
spirits.
Moreover, they abuse, and seek for faults in a system, and in
the conduct of individuals, which has a tendency to check, or


expose, the impropriety of their own hitherto unrestrained im-
morality. ,
If the opponents of missionaries, and of the missionary system,
allow no other good character to have been earned in the Pacific,
by those hard working men, never can they be deprived of that
of Peace-makers.
Surrounded by those who are engaged in commerce, annually
increasing; unavoidably involved in local dissensions; referred
to on all occasions as interpreters or mediators, and, I may say,
as the consular agents of white men of all nations; does it not
argue very favourably for the missionaries, that, although sneered
at by nominal friends, censured by enemies, and always strug-
gling against opposition, they have as yet upheld the character of
their sacred office ? Speaking of them as consular agents is, be-
cause they now attend to most of the local affairs between natives
and foreigners, which would employ the time of a consul, where
national agents are established. At Tahiti there is, nominally, a
British Consul; but he lives at the Sandwich Islands! and might
as well be at Kamschatka! At New Zealand there is a British
Resident; —an anomalous appointment destitute of authority, yet
ostensibly important.
In those places the greater part of the duties to which our
government expect their agents to attend, are, in fact executed by
the missionaries, not by choice, but because, as Christian men,
they cannot tamely withdraw from difficulty, and deny that assist-
ance which they are able to give, although they see those in offi-
cial situations set the example of the Levite in the Parable.
After reading these statements, it will not be difficult to form
an idea of the secular embarrassments which perplex the South Sea
missionaries; after having overcome the primary dangers and diffi-
culties of first establishing themselves among hostile and cannibal
savages, yet, although they are now able to assist their own
countrymen, who have eagerly profited by their exertions, and
are now settling in every direction upon those very lands to which
access was attained by their hardy, daring enthusiasm, their own
strength is failing! Embarrassments of many kinds are arising.
One is a mean jealousy of that very influence, which has enabled
those who are jealous, to approach the place where they now revile
those to whom they owe gratitude for enabling them to be there.
While their assistance was wanted, no praise of the missiona-
ries was too warm for the adventurers to bestow, who were seek-
ing fx settlement. But when once established, and a knowledge
of the language attained, “Why should Mr. have more
influence over the natives than I?” is too frequent a thought. A
few respectable settlers, such as Mr. Clindon, Mr. Bicknell, Mr.
Main, and Mr. Henry, have acted in a very different way: in the
most honorable, and truly English manner. But for their sup-


port, the few, almost isolated missionaries, would have to con-
tend alone against a host of reprobates.
To me it appears that the steady support, and respectable
countenance of those upholders of the true character of Britons
has, in a quiet, unpretending manner, assisted in a very great
degree the progress of incipient civilization and Christianity.
By those who dislike the natural influence of the Missionaries,
an outcry has been raised against their alleged attempts to
‘monopolize the land’
Say those men —“ Why should a missionary be allowed to
purchase so much land as to prevent those who come after him
from obtaining an eligible piece of ground near a frequented part ?”
or, —“ Why should Mr. be allowed to prevent Wari-
poaki and his tribe from selling me that piece of ground, because
he thinks that I shall sell spirits, or build a public-house ?”
“Have not,” (say they) “Have not the missionaries already
monopolized the best lands, in the finest situations ?”
Now, lest it should be thought that undue advantage had been
taken by any members, or by the whole of the missionary body,
it ought to be here explained that a large extent of land was long
ago purchased in New Zealand, by the ‘Church Missionary
Society’; and that it is not, as supposed by some, the private
property of individuals. Other lands from time to time have been
purchased by individuals of the missions, for the future main-
tenance of their families.
And what else could those do who have divided that tie which
held them to a country which could not be their children’s home?
Around them are a group of little ones, who will acknow-
ledge New Zealand to be their country and their home.
Shall the missionaries be debarred from endeavoring to make
that home acceptable to those children, and from providing for
their future maintenance ?
If a missionary, and a recent settler, are each in treaty for a
particular piece of ground, and the former obtains it upon easier
terms than the latter, in consequence of the good-will of the
natives, is it not a natural and legitimate advantage earned in the
fairest and the most honourable manner ?
Many of the natives understand and appreciate the motives of
the missionaries, and are, moreover, personally attached to their
little children, whom they like to consider as belonging to their
country.
If anathemas, indulgences, or excommunications were resorted
to by protestant missionaries, one might have a suspicion of undue
influence; but as such engines of power have not emanated from
a British mission, may we not take it for granted that the influ-
ence of missionaries appointed by the Church of England or
London Missionary Societies, is not undue?


■ .I'Sji ■ * '• iS-':
18 Remarks on the Moral State, Sfc.
The facts, in their simplicity, are these: —As opportunities
offered, the missionaries, always upon the spot, and watching their
opportunity, have bought lands upon terms more advantageous
than those which could be obtained by visitors or recent settlers,
strangers to the natives.
Owing to the same natural advantages, —those of local acquain-
tance, and being always near at hand, —the missionaries have
selected the best lands they could afford to purchase.
Ought they to have taken the worst ? After all, the property
(that island in New Zealand) of the Church Missionary Society,
and of individuals of the missions, taken together, does
not bear a larger proportion to New Zealand than the country of
Rutland does to Great Britain and Ireland! Is there then no
room left for settlers ?
With a remark or two applicable to all missionaries, this letter,
already long, —though not too long for such a subject, —shall be
concluded.
In the Pacific, not a single avowed disagreement, or misunder-
standing, has yet taken place between officers of government and
missionaries; but there are plain signs of an increasing and
mutual approach towards a kind of jealousy which cannot too
soon be prevented.
When authorized agents of government assume active func-
tions in newly-settled, or recently civilized countries, is it not
time for the political agency of the missionary to cease? His
work, as connected with affairs of policy, or government, is done,
and the crowning proof that so great a point in civilization has
been gained, in consequence of his energetic exertions, is the
appointment of such an officer.
From that time ought not the missionary to separate himself
from secular affairs ?
Should he not reflect, that however he may have been called
upon to act during former emergencies, the special duties of his
sacred calling ought to be separated from politics, or any kind of
hostilities or dissensions.
Excepting as peace-maker, his voice should not be heard, neither
should his influence be exerted in other than offices of religion
and education, —while the authorized officer, or agent of govern-
ment, can be referred to in secular affairs.
ROBT. FITZROY.
On the whole, balancing all that we have heard, and all that
we ourselves have seen concerning the missionaries in the Pacific,
we are very much satisfied that they thoroughly deserve the warm-
est support, not only of individuals, but of the British* Govern-
ment. Robt, Fitzroy.
At Sea, 28th June, 1836. Charles Darwin.
Printed hy G. J, Pike, Cape Town.
