

A LETTER
TO
LORD GLENELG.


A
LETTER
TO THE
RIGHT HONORABLE
LORD VISCOUNT GLENELG,
Her Majesty’s Secretary of State for
the Colonies.
BY
JOHN BINGLE.
OF PUEN-BUEN, NEW SOUTH WALES.
WITH DOCUMENTARY EVIDENCE,
fyc. Sfc. fyc.
LONDON:
HENRY STOCKING, 25, LUDGATE-HILL.
1837.


LONDON s
PRINTED BY MANNING AND SMiIHsON,
IVY LANE, PATERNOSTER ROW,


CONTENTS
PAGE
Letter to Lord Glenelg . . . I—-521 —-52
Appendix—
No. 1. Letter, &c., to Lord Glenelg . . 53
No. 2. Second Letter, &c., to ditto . . 85
No. 3. Letter of Magistrates to ditto . . 100
No. 4. Letter of Mr. D. Thompson to Mr. Bingle 102
No. 5. Trial of Messrs. Bingle and Were . 105
No. 6. Article from “ Sydney Herald” . . 163
No. 7. Article from “ Colonist” . . . 175
No. 8. Article from “ Sydney Gazette” . . 186
No. 9. Article from “ Sydney Herald.” . 191
No. 10. Letter of Mr. T. Walker to His Excel-
lency, the Governor. . . . 192


e< We have received Sydney papers to May 12th, extracts
from which will be found subjoined. The Colonist paper contains
comments on a trial, which has occasioned considerable sensation
there, of Mr. Bingle, a magistrate, for the alleged crime of cattle
stealing, attributing the charge against the accused to the circum-
stance of his being at political variance with the government of his
Excellency Sir Richard Bourke. The trial occupied the court eighteen
hours, viz., from its sitting in the morning to the following morning
at four o’clock, when a verdict of acquittal was returned. Chief
Justice Dowling, who presided on the occasion, appears by his con-
duct to have won for himself golden opinions, for he is described as
having * acted the part of a shrewd, discriminating lawyer, an upright,
conscientious judge, as well as a feeling and independent man.’ ”
Extract from the Morning Herald, Sept, 6th, 1837.
M Of all the political prosecutions which have figured on the arena
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales, we remember few that
ever equalled, and certainly none that ever surpassed, in direct and
powerful hold upon the sympathies of the public mind, the one which
was brought forward in that court on Monday last. A variety of
causes had combined to invest the case of Mr. Bingle with more than
ordinary importance. Not only did it exhibit the revolting spectacle
of a gentleman of ample fortune and unsullied honour being charged,
upon grounds which were generally believed to b q prima facie, trivial,
with the despicable crime of stealing a few head of cattle ; but it
exhibited also a fearful contest between the authorities and one of the
B


many independent gentry who were known to have incurred by poli-
tical circumstances the signal displeasure of the Executive Govern-
ment. If the public had not grievously erred in looking upon the
case as peculiarly and emphatically political —prompted by political
feelings, and intended to answer political purposes —we have indeed
good reason for pronouncing the contest a ‘ fearful ’ one. To the
gentleman himself, what could be more fearful than the odds with
which he had to contend? while to the respectable community at
large, what could be more fearful than a supposed disposition on the
part of the Government to wage battle with its political antagonists
by the help of indictments for felony ? The reign of Castlereagh, in
the mother country, has been execrated as the reign of terror, for its
frequent recourse to ex-officios for sedition and treason; the reign of
Darling, in this colony, has been denounced as the reign of terror,
for its frequent recourse to ex-officios for libel; but ex-officios for
felonious stealing out-herod them all!”
Extract from the Colonist , New South Wales paper, May 1 \th, 1837.
“ We now come to the second branch of our week’s review —the
Court , —of course we mean the Supreme Court, which on the first
two days of its present term, was the scene of some tough contests
between public liberty, and that formidable gladiator, his Majesty’s
Attorney General. The memorable case of Mr. Bingle, whom the
Attorney General, in virtue of his unconstitutional, though legal
monopoly of the power of a Grand Jury, had placed in the felon’s
dock to answer the charge of cattle stealing, was naturally taken up
by the press in that spirit of alarm and indignation, which such a
case could not fail to inspire in every British bosom.”
Extract from the Colonist, New South Wales paper, Bth June, 1837.


TO THE
RIGHT HONORABLE
LORD VISCOUNT GLENELG,
&c. &c. &c.
Kent Cottage, Dec. 1, 1837.
My Lord,
The first extract at the head of this
letter contains the assertion of a circumstance which
concerns myself personally, the second and third give
to that circumstance a character of no small interest
to my fellow-subjects of the mother country ; and of
fearful importance to those of the unfortunate Colony
where such things have taken place, and demand from
your Lordship, as Colonial Secretary, an attention
and, I trust a redress, which if it cannot, as yet, fully
satisfy an indignation such as I should feel; if it can-
not as yet soothe, with full healing, the wrongs I have
received, wrongs, which this our common country,
thank God! as yet knows not —may still serve to
convince their unprincipled authors that, if such things
be, they shall not be with impunity ; and that justice
is not yet so lost to England, but that, at sixteen
thousand miles distance, her arm can still be felt, and
the outraged character of our country find ample,
though late redress.


My Lord, it is one of the greatest excellencies of
the human heart, veiled, as it is, in a thousand in-
firmities, to rise against oppression, and wrong
a feeling almost allied to exaltation, at such times,
accompanies, strengthens, and sustains the truly inno-
cent, which none other can know: this feeling it is,
which takes from me the necessity of apologizing to
your Lordship for breaking through the distance
which extraneous circumstances have thrown between
us; I have a right my Lord, to demand your atten-
tion, and I will not doubt but you will respond to my
demand.
The regulations of office requiring that all com-
munications to the Secretary of State at Home, should
be transmitted through the Governor of the Colony,
I had the honour on the 28th May, 18-36, of address-
ing to your Lordship, a memorial* containing charges
against His Excellency, Sir Richard Bourke, the
Governor of New South Wales; and in January,
1837, I placed in his hands, for transmission to your
Lordship, a second letter,f with further charges against
His Excellency: within a fortnight after that date,
I was, by his orders, accused of cattle stealing ! On
applying at the Colonial Office, for information of the
transmission of my second letter as above to England,
I received the following official note :
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 21 st January , 1837.
Sir,
I have the honour to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter of the 17th instant, which was
only received yesterday; and in reply, lam directed
* Appendix, No. 1.
f Appendix, No. 2.


by the Governor to inform you, that His Excellency
does not propose to despatch your communication,
therein alluded to, to the Secretary of State, until he
is informed of the result of the inquiry ordered to
take place at Invermein, upon which the Attorney
General has communicated with you.
I have the honour to be, &c. &c.
(Signed,) E. Deas Thomson.
To John Bingle, Esq., Sydney.
It is rather for your Lordship, than myself, to
inquire the reason for the delay therein expressed;
sufficient is it for me, to claim the especial attention
of your Lordship to the coincidence ! My Lord, the
romance of real life, is full of strange coincidences,
and this may possibly have been one; but how much,
or how little, my charges against His Excellency’s
government and conduct might have had weight with
the authorities at home, it was certainly a something
towards the rebutting of those charges, if, on their
reaching your Lordship’s hands, there could attach to
their author the hideous character of felon.
In reference to those charges, and to place, in a
clearer light, my position with the Governor, suffer
me, my Lord, to refer your attention back to the
period of Sir Richard Bourke’s first arrival in the
Colony, and to a train of troubled circumstances,
occurring in almost uninterrupted succession, up to
the period in question, and which, as these were con-
tained in my memorials, or letters above referred to,
I have taken leave to add, for your Lordship’s re-
perusal, in the Appendix, (Nos. 1 and 2).
In summary allusion to these circumstances, it may


be proper to state here, that a dispute, originating in
the improper interference of a neighbouring magis-
trate with my just authority as a Justice of the Peace,
(and which terminated in a letter of censure on that
gentleman, from the government) led to the same
party’s bringing forward a charge against myself, as
a magistrate, founded on an occurrence of several
months prior date.
The charge in question, was the holding of a Petty
Sessions in my own house, and there procuring the
punishment of certain convict servants of mine. Now,
my Lord, independent of its having, at that time,
been long the custom, in the interior of the Colony,
and at this present moment in some places still con-
tinues, even with the knowledge and consent of
government, for magistrates to hold courts of Petty
Sessions in their own houses,* —although, at great
sacrifice of their domestic privacy,—arising, solely
from there not being, perhaps, for many miles, any
other building or erection, even of the meanest de-
scription, wherein to hold such courts, independent of
the fact, that my own house, at the time, was the
usual place for the holding of the courts of Petty
Session for the district, and independent of the ap-
proved fact, that I did not, on that occasion, myself
sit in judgment as a magistrate, the bench being
occupied by a neighbouring Justice of the Peace, of
as high and honourable character as might well be
found, there were, as that Memorial will I trust fully
shew, sufficient of other urgent and irksome reasons,
why I should feel, —impatiently feel, the excessive
* See correspondence and documents appended to memorial, No. I
Appendix.


injustice of that censure, and for my seeking redress
from it, by an appeal to the then Colonial Secretary,
my Lord Stanley.
What representations might have accompanied the
transmission home of that Appeal, necessarily made
through His Excellency’s hands, I know not; but this
I do know my Lord, and this I must be permitted
boldly to assert, that had my Lord Stanley given that
grave attention to the case, which was due to me as a
gentleman, and as an honest and independent magis-
trate, or had he possessed that information of the
local circumstances, which was absolutely necessary
for a true understanding of the affair, that Right
Honorable Lord would not and could not have sup-
ported the view taken of it by His Excellency the
Governor (who when he gave his opinion was not of
six months residence in the Colony), nor have further
aided to wound feelings he had not either the time
or the knowledge, properly to comprehend and ap-
preciate.
My Lord, I am here simply seeking my own re-
dress ; and it is not for me in this place—however, as a
lover of my own country, I may lament that which
works my country wrong, it is not for me to request
your Lordship’s attention to other results of this treat-
ment of the independent magistracy, or its natural
consequences on the minds of a population teeming
with headstrong, turbulent, and disorderly materials,
the necessary concomitants of a penal settlement; suf-
ficient is it for me, to assert my own bitter and un-
merited injuries, and, if I cannot obtain redress, I
may at least deserve it.
Passing to the month of August 1835 —having then


become (since November 1834) a resident in Sydney,
upwards of 180 miles from my own district, I attended
the Bench there, on the examination of a notorious
convict of the name of Watt; the memorial trans-
mitted by me to your Lordship, bearing date January
3d, 1837 (Appendix No. 2), will inform your Lord-
ship of so much of the nature and circumstances of
that inquiry as are necessary, and it will also inform
your Lordship, that on the issuing of a new Commis-
sion of the Peace, by His Excellency the Governor,
I, with other magistrates who took part in that in-
quiry, and whose conduct and principles, on all public
and private occasions, had ever been of the highest
and purest order, had the painful fortune to find our
names omitted.*
It may be, my Lord, that no man, however ele-
vated, in station, or talent, or reputation, may, as a
matter of right, lay claim to the commission of the
peace; but I think it may be fairly asserted, that a gen-
tleman, being once admitted to that honour, the omis-
sion of his name in a new commission, without reason
assigned, or cause alleged to justify it, must ever be
attended with most painful feelings to the neglected
party, and with the public must operate to his preju-
dice at least, if not to his dishonour. I may be mis-
taken, but I believe, in the mother country it is not
usual so to trifle with the feelings, or fetter the inde-
pendence of the magistracy,f or to remove gentlemen
from the commission, except for actual impropriety,
or loss of property; one, or the other of these
causes, must, necessarily, be inferred in the case of
the distant, though not less estimable, magistrate of a
colony.
• Appendix, No. 3.
f Appendix, 9, and 10.


I am now, my Lord, arrived at the period, when I
placed in the hands of the Governor, Sir Richard
Bourke, my last letter of accusation, for your Lord-
ship’s perusal, and I am thus brought to the point
whence I first started, —the accusation of myself for
cattle stealing.
In the beginning of November, 1835, two convict
servants of mine, on my estate of Puen Buen, were
charged before the Bench at Invermein, with cattle
stealing. My presence being thought necessary, on
the receipt of a letter to that effect, from my super-
intendent Mr. Were, who made the charge, I came
from Sydney, and attended the Bench, as a witness
rather than as a magistrate. These men, Jesse Cole-
man and David Grover, held tickets of leave, and
rented of me a cultivation paddock, on my upper
farm, and possessed also some cattle, which, without
my permission ran with my herds. The decision of
the Bench on the case, was, that a recommendation
should be made to government, to cancel their tickets
of leave, and remove them from the district, to break
off their connexion with a gang of cattle stealers
there, and that their cattle should be confiscated to
the crown, after the payment of their just debts.*
As I was myself a creditor, of upwards of 50/., my
own demand was of course included.
* “ Bench of Invet'mein, November 4th, 1835.
« Sir,
We have the honour to report for the information
of His Excellency the Governor, that we have this day directed that
Jesse Coleman, Midas, 1827, and David Grover, Marquis Hast-
ings, holding tickets of leave for this district, be forwarded to the
goal at Newcastle, being convicted before us of slaughtering cattle not
their own, and without any authority, and also for branding cattle im-
B 2


My herds, to the number of fifteen or sixteen hun-
dred, with which these were mingled, ran wild, over
a range of mountainous and forest country, varying
from twenty-five to thirty or even forty miles in extent.
I have not had them mustered for five or six years,
and some of them are so wild, and the country of
such a nature, that most probably I never shall be
able to muster the whole ; indeed, the only means we
have of ascertaining the extent of our herds, is to
brand and register the young calves, which, if omitted
then, we should almost wholly lose possession or cog-
nizance of them, and it is only from the registry thus
made, we can calculate our herds. It is requisite I
should premise this information, for your Lordship to
comprehend, how, when the Bench came to their
decision on the case of these men, the question neces-
sarily arose, how were the confiscated cattle to be
obtained for the crown ?
properly. With respect to these individuals, we beg to observe that it
appears to us desirable that these parties should not be allowed to re-
main in this part of the country, and would request their removal be
directed to another district—in addition to the above charge it appears
in our proceedings that a bribe was tendered to the principal evidence
to get out of the way, under authority of the prisoners, which although
denied on their part, clearly proved to us, the party stating he was
authorized to make the offer has perjured himself, and for which we
have punished him. We have therefore reason to believe the state*
ment of the principal witness, that the bribe was offered to him.
We have further directed that the cattle the property of these individuals
may he conf seated to the Crown , after payment of just claims.
We have the honour to be, &c. &c.
(Signed) William Bell Carlyle, J. P.
William Dumaresq, J. P.
T. Potter Macqueen, J. P.
To the Principal Superintendent
of Convicts, Sydney.”


To have instituted an express mustering for this
purpose, so as to have procured the whole, from the
price of cattle at that time, and the labour and diffi-
culty of the task itself, would not have been worth
the expense—what then should be done ? Captain
Dumaresq, an upright and intelligent magistrate, who
took a principal interest in the inquiry, asked my
superintendent Mr. Were if he would collect them;
and on his replying, that he would undertake to do so
with my concurrence, the Bench authorised me
TO HAVE THE CATTLE SO COLLECTED, TO PAY THE
JUST DEBTS OF THE CONVICTS,* AND TO REPORT
FINALLY TO THE BENCH ON THE WHOLE.
My Lord, it has been alleged that the magistrates
had no power to confiscate those cattle—for, on the
cancelling of the tickets of leave, all property reverts
to the Crown:—the propriety or legality of the deci-
sion of the Bench, is not my concern; they acted on
a jurisdiction they deemed their own, and their
authorisation was my ample indemnity, certainly
against a charge of crime, and as certainly against
one of dishonour.
Here, my Lord, I must request that my circum-
* “Mr. Michael Macartney.—l am a surgeon. I was present in
November 1835, when Coleman and Grover were before the Bench ;
the decision of the Bench was that the tickets be recommended to be
cancelled. Coleman owed me 4/. 165., and I applied to the Bench
to know how I was to be paid, and I was told Mr. Bingle had autho-
rity to pay debts and collect cattle—he has paid me—we have had a
settlement, and Mr. Bingle has credited me with the money. Cole-
man told me in the presence of the chief constable the day he was
going down the country that Mr. Bingle would pay me.*’— Evidence
taken on oath at the trial before Chief Justice Dowling. See notes of
the trial, Appendix, No. 5.


stances, as well generally, as with relation to this
affair, may be especially kept in view.
It is my pride, my Lord, that by my own honoura-
ble exertions, I have accomplished that decent compe-
tence, which renders it unnecessary I should toil and
labour with my own hands. The artificer of my own
fortunes, having won my ease, I have the power also
to enjoy it. I had in consequence, twelve months
before this occurrence, taken up my residence at
Sydney, nearly 200 miles from this place of Inver-
mein, and my estate of Puen Buen ; —hence, it must
be apparent, that in permitting the delegation of
Coleman and Grover’s affairs to myself and my super-
intendent Mr. Were, I did not, neither could the
Bench comprehend, that by my individual labours, or
personal exertions, the cattle in question should be
collected; it could only be expected I should do it
through the instrumentality of my servants; and,
although permitting, as I did, those in my employ to
undertake the duty, and enjoining them thereto, I
perhaps did so far legally become responsible in my
purse for their acts, it could never be argued, inferred
or charged on me, that I should be responsible for
crime, if they had committed crime, or for error,
Involving personal dishonour. It is not enough for
me, my Lord, careful as a gentleman should be, of
unsullied reputation,—it is not enough for me, to free
my character from crime;—l claim further; on a calm
and dispassionate view of all the circumstances of the
case itself, and of my own position in respect of
station, and distant residence, I claim, my Lord, to
stand exonerated, even from impropriety.
After the decision of the Bench, and daring my


subsequent short sojourn at Puen Buen (three or four
weeks), I took such incipient measures in the matter
as presented themselves, for the purpose of paying
the debts of the men as requested by the Bench, and
returned to Sydney; leaving to Mr. Were to get in
the cattle and fulfil the wishes of the Bench as
speedily as opportunity offered and his other avoca-
tions on the estate would permit, and here I may say,
that my personal interference in the affair terminated,
for I did not return to my estate (except for four or
five days in the month of March, when I found Mr.
Were absent) till July or August, seven or eight
months after. How then, my Lord, if this statement
be true, can crime, or dishonour, be made to attach
to me ? I repeat, that here, my personal interference
wholly terminated; and if I enter on any explanation
of subsequent circumstances, I do it, not entirely as
defending my own character, which, in common rea-
son, must be superfluous; but I do it to defend the
character of my superintendent, and prove still fur-
ther the utter want of all ground whereon to found
a charge of crime or dishonour, and which, as against
me, determined hate and malice alone could bring.
In the interim I have just stated, several of the
cattle were got in by Mr. Were, and six or eight
of them by his directions, slaughtered; an account
thereof being taken by the store-keeper, and fully
entered in his book of accounts. There are three
especial points or charges, my Lord, presented in the
case, for my explanation and remarks.
“The slaughtering of these cattle by Mr. Were, to
which I have just alluded.
“ The delay in getting in the cattle.


“ The not having finally reported to the Bench.”
With respect to the first charge: I am not here,
my Lord, to defend the slaughtering of the beasts.
In this whole affair, under the magistrates’ authority,
Mr. Were was equally with myself, a principal; in
my own affairs, as my agent, or my bailiff, or call
him what you will, he needs no individual orders of
mine, neither does he seek them ; he no more refers
to me what beasts he shall kill of my own herds or
what cattle he shall dispose of, than your Lordship’s
bailiff or steward would do to yourself, from any
estate you may have in the north of England, to your
residence in Westminster; and, if in this instance,
Mr. Were killed any of these confiscated cattle, it
was wholly his own act, wholly beyond my know-
ledge, and if error there was, it was solely his own.
But, my Lord, am I here throwing crime, or evil
suspicion, on that highly respectable young man—
honour and reason forbid! If I say Mr. Were was
in error to kill those beasts, I impute it only as an
error of judgment, not of intention; if Mr. Were
killed the six or eight cattle he did it openly.* It is
in evidence that he called in the officers of the
Crown, the mounted police, to shoot them; and with
a perfect, obvious, and assured freedom from all
sinister motive, or purpose of evil, he fairly entered
* “So in the case of those beasts that were slaughtered they were
killed in the light of day ; sometimes some of the mounted police
were called in, from their being very good shots, to kill the beasts,
and an historical statement of the whole matter kept in a book. If
the parties had intended to commit felony, would they have acted
thus? would they thus subject themselves to the chance of being dis-
covered ?”—Extract from Chief Justice Dowling's charge to the Jury on
the trial ,


them (as did the store-keeper)* in his accounts, in all
their particulars; which accounts were carefully kept,
for the demand and inspection of the magistrates
under whose authority he acted, whenever that Bench
thought proper to call for them.
Did this, ray Lord, shew evil intent in Mr. Were s’
and if he erred in slaughtering the cattle, was he the
skilful lawyer, with knowledge at his lingers’ ends
to comprehend intuitively, the strict legality of his
act ? It was enough that he knew I had, with others, a
just demand against the property in question; that I
had authority from the Bench to pay these debts;
(surely my own claim was not to be excluded); it
was enough, that by the Bench, whether rightly or
wrongly, he knew the property was vested in me;
these are more than enough, to account for his con-
duct as an error of judgment, and want of know-
ledge, not unnatural, nor inexcusable in him, but
which the openness of his act in calling in the aid of
the police to shoot the beasts, and his keeping regular
and just debtor and creditor accounts in his books of
the transaction, fully and fairly relieved from the pos-
sibility of all taint, and suspicion of crime, or evil
intent. His motives and his actions, my Lord, were
throughout so plainly obvious, that it is not necessary
I should call up my own indignation, to repel with
scorn and contempt, the folly and hideous villany of
the imputation, that this thing was done with an un-
lawful purpose for my benefit. Suffer me, my Lord,
to insert here the lucid words of Chief Justice Dow-
Kng, in his able or impartial summing up, on my trial.
M And then arose the question — where, in what manner.
* See Ledge’s evidence on the trial.


at what place, and at what time, the cattle were to be
collected ? And on this point there was no evidence of
the precise terms ; all was left to the impression of par-
ties ; no one spoke positively; the witnesses all said it
was understood —that it was their impression—that the
cattle were to be delivered at the pound; but there was no
injunction. If the prisoners had had any authority to
dispose of the cattle, and ultimately account to the
Crown, it was clear there could be no case of felony. In
looking at the case, one very important point was, had
there been any attempt at concealment ? If there had
been any attempjt to conceal the property, then the Jury
might have thought there had been a design to commit
felony. Look at the time the three bullocks
were branded; they were branded openly, and
THE CONDUCT OF THE ACCUSED, IN THIS RESPECT, WAS
FAIR TO THE WORLD. So IN THE CASE OF THE BEAbTS
THAT WERE SLAUGHTERED —THEY WERE KILLED IN
THE LIGHT OF DAY ; SOMETIMES SOME OF THE
MOUNTED POLICE WERE CALLED IN, FROM THEIR
BEING VERY GOOD SHOTS, TO KILL THE BEASTS, AND
AN HISTORICAL STATEMENT OF THE WHOLE MATTER
KEPT IN A BOOK. If THE PARTIES HAD INTENDED
TO COMMIT FELONY, WOULD THEY HAVE ACTED
thus ? Would they thus subject themselves to
the chance of being discovered? It ivas strange,
also, that none of the parties were able to say on what
terms the cattle were delivered to Mr. Bingle ; they could
only speak to their impression. If Mr. Bingle had
really and bona fide ground for believing that
he WAS authorised to sell the cattle, and
ACCOUNT FOR THEM AFTERWARDS, THE CHARGE OF
FELONY MUST FALL TO THE GROUND. It WHS alleged


that the prisoners had given in no account ; bid then on
the other hand it was not alleged that the magistrates had
called for any account His Honour then recapitulated
the whole of the evidence, pointing out as he went along
the different facts that appeared to shew there was no
felonious intention on the part of the prisoners : and re-
marked ON THE UNUSUAL CIRCUMSTANCE OF A REPLY
FROM AN ATTORNEY-GENERAL ON EVIDENCE, AND
THE UNCOURTEOUS BEHAVIOUR OF Mr. Day TOWARDS
Mr. Bingle, and towards the Magistrates at
Invermein, in respect to the manner in which
THE ORIGINAL DEPOSITIONS WERE TAKEN ; and to-
wards the end of his summing up, which teas both labo-
rious and minute, observed, that from the evidence, the
fair presumption was, that something might have induced
Mr, Bingle to believe he was authorised to sell the cattle*
So far, my. Lord, on the first point: and now as to
the delay of getting in the cattle.
My Lord, I have spoken of the nature and extent
of country over which my herds ran; I have shewn
the difficulty of mustering them at any time, and of
our not being in the habit of attempting it, except on
particular and unusual emergencies (such as removing
them to new runs), attended as it was, with serious
expense and labour, even to the exhaustion of men
and horses. Could it ever be, then, in the contem-
plation of the Bench, when it requested Mr. Were,
or by implication, myself, to undertake the gratuitous
office of acquiring these cattle for the Crown, to
appoint a set period for the doing it? or could it be
expected he should so neglect his own arduous and
proper duties, and farm engagements, as to institute
• See notes on trial—Appendix, No. 5.


an express and particular search, and mustering of my
herds (remembering what such an affair is), solely to
acquire a few beasts, which, under their then circum-
stances, and with relation to the expense and labour,
and the then prices of stock, were, I must say, less
than worthless ? My Lord, no time was or could be
fixed; it was not in the nature of the undertaking
itself, nor in Mr. Were’s position, nor my own, that it
should have been expected of us: all that could
possibly be looked for, was, that as the cattle should
chance to be met with amongst mine, they should
be taken possession of by Mr. Were for the Crown,
and rendered, on his or my final report, to the Bench.
I have stated, that very shortly after the case
originated, I left that part of the country, and was
absent at Sydney for some seven or eight months. It
is in evidence, that on my return in July,* and again
in November, I urged on Mr. Were, who was then,
and had been for some time, in a most distressing
State of ill health, the propriety and necessity of com-
pleting the undertaking; but, whatever might have
been my own desire, I was compelled to be satisfied
* <( There was a quarrel between Mr. Were and Mr. Bingle in
November. Mr. Bingle was excessively annoyed to find, that the
account had not been settled, and the cattle got in; Mr. Were
pleaded ill health, and the extreme difficulty : in December, he par-
ticularly directed my attention to these cattle of Coleman and Grover,
it is not true that he kept the matter a secret from me ; it was Mac-
naughton and Were that told me about the arrangement.” Extract
from Mr. Stokes * Evidence as Witness for the Crown on the Trial.
Mr. Were has been very ill; in July last I heard Mr. Bingle
talking very loud to Mr. Were about the cattle; he said they should
have been got in ; in November I recollect the same ; Mr. Were said
the horses had been knocked up.” Extract from William Ledge's
Evidence, as Witness for the Crown .


with the reasons he then assigned, especially as he
was at that time incapacitated by his illness from
rendering me any explanation, even on my own
affairs:—further I had not then the power to do, or
effect, and I shortly after returned to Sydney.
My Lord, I have said, that an independent muster-
ing of the cattle in question, was not, and could not
be expected. At the period of these men’s conviction
a great drought prevailed, to such an extent as
seriously to affect the sustenance of the herds; the
herbage was burnt up, and the water failing: the
cattle were dropping, and dying in the water holes,
without strength to extricate themselves, and their
price generally had become so depreciated, that, if
the Bench at that time had offered me the whole, at
twenty shillings per head, (having to collect them
independently,) I should have declined the purchase,
although, running as they did with my herds, they
were, necessarily, of twice the value to me they
could have been to any other person. lam speaking
now of the conclusion of the year 1835, and beginning
of 1836. It was known to my neighbours, that in
consequence of this state of things, it was Mr. Were’s
intention to muster and draft off my herds to a station
he was forming for me in Liverpool Plains, 200 miles
distance in the interior, where the pasturage was
better and more certain, and where more effectual
means were afforded of restraining and taming the
cattle; it was principally for this reason, that Mr.
Were was requested by the Bench to undertake the
duty in question; and this, my Lord, will prove that
the task was never intended to be an independent one,
but was wholly concurrent with the purposed mustering


of my own herds; that mustering although commenced
in 1835, was not completed in 1837, when I left the
colony, as I had at that late period, upwards of five or
six hundred head not got in, and although I urged my
superintendent to the duty, I well believe him, when
he stated, “ the men and horses were exhausted in the
task, and he had done all that he could.”
It may sound oddly to English ears, there should
be so great a difficulty in such an undertaking; suffer
me, my Lord, to digress for a moment, on the nature
of our Colonial avocations and habits.
The mustering of the herds, on an estate like mine,
placed, as it is, in a w r ild, wooded, and mountainous
country, is a task of great and exhausting labour, and
not to be performed at all by the usual stockmen, but
requires the aid and concurrence of the stockmen or
herdsmen of my surrounding neighbours, added to my
own; for, although the bulk of my herds may be
depasturing on my own runs, a great number will
necessarily stray on to my neighbours’, and their cattle
will do the same on my grounds; there is no hindrance
or limit to their wanderings, and to attempt to sepa-
rate completely my herds from those around, would
be a task wholly impossible, unless all mutually en-
gage therein, and so, by driving the herds, as I may
say, in bulk, into fitting spots, or stock-yards, there
make the separations. A herd, so collected, of even
1000 head, may be driven by five or six men, but the
same men could not drive a herd of six or eight; the
wild kangaroo is not more wild than a New South
Wales cow; and whilst the bull there, contrary to
its nature in England, is generally a quiet and
harmless animal, the cow and bullock are frequently


met with, vicious, and frantic, and wanton as the wind:
to drive them in small numbers, is a matter impossi-
ble ; place half a dozen, with their heads towards any
destined spot, and the stockmen on horseback behind,
the tips of their tails may be seen, and they may be
kept in chase till the next herd is met with, no matter
whose, or where, and then, separate them who can,
unless the whole, or a large portion, be driven to the
stock-yard. An individual beast may be ridden down,
and frequently is, but the horse is ridden down also,
and where is the gain ?
It has been necessary to state this, my Lord, be-
cause observations have been made, as to the propriety
of Mr. Were’s sending the confiscated cattle, as he got
them in, to the pound, 13 or 14 miles distant from
my stock farm. To have so driven these beasts alone,
in such small numbers as he acquired them, would, I
well believe, have been impossible; and it could only
have been effected by sending a herd of my own beasts
along with them : this was a thing wholly impractic-
able, from their impoverished condition, the result of
the excessive drought, and the fatigued and exhausted
condition of the horses, which was such, that the
stockmen required three horses to drive a herd a
journey of a day or two.
The stockman Donoghue, in his evidence for the
Crown, states on oath, —“ if you wanted to get them
into the pound, at Puen Buen, you would find one
here, and another 20 miles further.—l would find one
of theirs with fifty of ours.” So much for the taking
of them by twos or threes to the public pound.
To revert to the intention of sending my herds to
the depot at Liverpool Plains, in consequence of the


drought. Mr. Were, acting thereon, effected three
such drafts before the month of August 1836, when I
returned to Puen Buen as I before stated. The cross
examination of Donoghue, the stockman, proves the
condition of the cattle generally, and the reasons for
not separating such of Coleman and Grover’s as were
then collected. He says, “ the feed was so bad, and
the cattle were so mixed, that it was impossible to
muster them (Coleman and Grover’s;) we took them
away because no man could herd them; the first draft
we took was 80, some of Coleman’s were amongst
them, I had three horses to ride when the grass was
so bad; it would be more than three horses could do
to drive them over the range, the first day or two; if
we had let them out of the yard, it would have been
double the trouble to find them, when Mr. Bingle’s
cattle were gone ; our only choice was to take them to
Liverpool Plains, or let them on the old run again. I
recollect, when we were branding the cattle, Mr.
Docker stood by with a book, to take them down, and
we put two anchors reversed on the calves, to distin-
guish them from the others; Mr. Bingle’s brand was
a single anchor and aB. Mr. Bingle is generally in
Sydney: I have only seen him once in eighteen
months, that was at the court at Invermein.”
So much, my Lord, for the delay of getting in
these cattle. Why, the whole transaction was of that
nature, that had the delay been the entire result of
inattention, it could not in Mr. Were’s circumstances
have been criminal, and in mine, my Lord, —what!
resident 200 miles from the spot, —faugh !
With respect to the third point, the not finally re-
porting to the Bench, it is so wholly involved in the


causes of the delay, and from the very nature of the
engagement, and the duty itself, it must, of necessity,
so entirely have depended on the completion of the
work, that it is wholly needless I should trouble your
Lordship with one word thereon.
Again, my Lord, I am compelled to ask how I can
be implicated in this transaction, or arraigned at the
bar of public justice as a felon ? A Bench of Magis-
trates, having, or imagining themselves to have the
power, confiscate a property consisting of cattle,
almost wild; they request as a favour, an individual to
collect these cattle; he complies with their request, as
granting a favour; they give him the authority neces-
sary for this duty, verbally certainly, but confirmed on
oath by these Magistrates themselves: circumstances
chiefly the result of the operations of providence,
render this, at all times a laborious task, in the present
case, doubly difficult; this individual happens to be
the manager on a large estate, the property of a gen-
tleman resident 200 miles distant, and who does not
visit that estate for seven or eight months: in this in-
terim, some forty of these beasts are gradually got
together, and retained amongst the general herd of
the estate; although after eight or ten months’ good
pasturage, and careful superintendence, and a most
unprecedented rise in the price of stock, the result of
the termination of a fatally long drought by favour-
able weather, and the natural reaction thereon, these
cattle finally are sold for 353/, yet, at the time of
their collection they were not worth 40/.; the Magis-
trates in giving this authority to take possession of
these cattle, authorise this individual, or his master,
who happens to be a magistrate of the said Bench,


prior to rendering up the cattle, to pay the just debts
of the parties who had owned them : it is no matter
whether the Magistrates had power or not, to give
such authority, they gave it, and this is sworn to.
Under this power, debts are paid to the amount of 20 1.
—whence was to come the money ? This said
manager, to whom the whole affair was confided,
slaughters, on his own judgment, and wholly without
the knowledge of his employer, some six or eight of
these beasts, keeping a regular written account thereof
as to weight, description, and all necessary particulars,
as a registry for the inspection of the Magistrates,
under whom he acted, —his directions are, when all
the cattle are got in, he shall report on the whole
transaction to the Bench; he has collected forty head ;
full forty more (by Coleman and Grover’s statements)
are still to be collected; while this is pending, in steps
the Government, from whatever motive, in place of
applying to the Bench of Magistrates by whose
judicial act it claimed to be possessed of the property,
in steps the Government, seizes the cattle, and brings
a charge of stealing them, against the luckless mana-
ger and the gentleman his employer, who by a sin-
gular coincidence, had happened some week or two
previous, to have brought personal charges implying
serious maladministration, against the head of the
said Government. Surely, my Lord, this is out-
rageous enough ; but, as if to crown the whole, how
is that charge of stealing brought, and by what means
are the facts produced ? One of the convicts (Cole-
man) calls upon me, to inquire what has been done
about the cattle which had been his. How came he
to inquire about that, which he had long ceased to


have concern in ? I beg, particularly, to call your
Lordship’s attention to this act of Coleman’s, and to
further circumstances connected with him, —further
links in this chain of singular coincidence. My Lord,
one part of the decision of the Bench at Inver-
mein, as I have stated, was, that a request should be
made to Government, to cancel these men’s tickets,
and remove the men themselves to some other distant
district, in order to separate them from evil con-
nexions they had formed with a gang of cattle stealers
in the neighbourhood. What attention the Govern-
ment gave to this request of the Magistrates shall
be shewn.
The possibility of the decision of the Bench not
being entirely orthodox, or not in exact legal routine,
has been hinted at, and indeed broadly stated in the
address of the Attorney-General on the trial; who,
my Lord, should at once have corrected this, if cor-
rection were needed? The Government on the
day of its taking place, were apprised of the de-
cision; did the Government inform the Magistrates
their decision was informal ? O no! not till after
three months’ application did the Government even
cancel the men’s tickets; —but did it also remove the
men, as requested in November 1835, by the Bench?
Let this letter of the *23d July, 1836, inform your
Lordship.
Invermein Police Office, July 23 d, 1836.
Sir,
We beg to refer you, for his Excel-
lency’s information, to the accompanying copy of a
letter, addressed to the principal superintendent of
c


convicts,* suggesting the propriety of the convicts
therein mentioned being assigned in another district
than this. We are informed, that they have been
assigned to the Messrs. Sparkes, near Maitland, who
have property on the very spot where these men
lived at the time they were carrying on their nefari-
ous practices, consequently their communication and
connexions with this district, are very likely to be
kept up, to the prejudice of the stock-holders here.
We therefore suggest the expediency of their being
removed entirely from the Hunter’s River districts.
(Signed) Francis Little, j. p.
Arch. Little, j. p.
T. Potter Macqueen, j. p.
To the Honorable
The Colonial Secretary, Sydney.
What answer did this elicit from Government ?—lt
is here.
Colonial Secretary's Office, 14 th Sept. 1836.
Gentlemen,
In reply to your letter of the 23d July,
I do myself the honour to acquaint you, that instruc-
tions have been given for the removal, from the
Hunter’s River districts, of the two men named in
the margin, Coleman and Grover, reported by you to
be assigned to the Messrs. Sparke, near Maitland,
and considered improper characters to remain in that
* See official letter from the Bench (at page 9, ante), a copy of
which letter was sent with this, being nearly eight months afterwards.
Is it not very singular, that official letter, though thus twice sent, was
not forthcoming or producable at the inquiry, although pressed for
by my friends on that occasion ?


part of the country. Orders have been given for the
Messrs. Sparkes’ being furnished with other servants
in their room.
I have the honour to be, Gentlemen,
Your most obedient Servant,
(For the Colonial Secretary,)
(Signed) T. C. Harington.
Bench of Magistrates, Invermein.
Your Lordship will say, this was satisfactory,
although, perhaps, somewhat late : but the still small
truth peeps out through all: these men, even after
this promise, never were removed, but were kept in
the same employ, and in the same part of the country,
although the Magistrates had stated reasons so power-
ful, and which, in any other case, would have been a
hundred times more than sufficient. Was this the
fault of Government, or was it the fault of Mr. Ryan
Brenan, principal superintendent of convicts, and
cousin to Sir Richard Bourke ? My Lord, was this
accidental? was there no reason for it, no reserve,
nothing in petto, cannot a fair inference be drawn
from such unusual conduct ? What! a Bench of inde-
pendent Magistrates call publicly on the Government
to remove two convict felons from their evil connexions
to another district; the authorities give the request
no attention: eijjlit or nine months afterwards the
Bench repeat the call; the authorities reply, that they
have ordered the request to be complied with: the
Bench rely on this, and what then ? and on what have
they relied ? The men are never removed at all, but
are still retained amongst their evil connexions, in
face of the public, and repeated remonstrances of the


Magistracy of the district. How must this have
operated on the feelings of those gentlemen ?—how
on the public mind ?—how on the felon and convict
population? But was there, my Lord, indeed, no
reason for this ?—is it too much to say, that the Gov-
ernment, on the first receipt of the decision of the
Invermein Bench, saw, or fancied it saw a something,
not wholly regular therein: it did not take that step
which a just, or well informed, and well intentioned
Government would have taken ; it did not correct, or
call the attention of the Magistrates to the error: O
no! powerless to amend, it sought only an opportu-
nity to strike: the machinery was prepared, the arm
was kept in readiness, the blow was struck. My
Lord, the blow has hurt not me; what says Sir
Richard Bourke to the recoil?* To proceed:—the
* I append here an extract from the Sydney Herald , of July 3, 1837,
as bearing upon this point, and expressing the opinion of the public
press on the transaction.—“ Many months before the prosecution was
heard of, a letter was addressed by Mr. Bingle to the Secretary of
State, setting forth certain charges against the Governor. His Excel-
lency refused to forward it through the proper channel; but it was
sent, nevertheless, by Mr. 8., together with a letter explaining the
cause of the deviation from the usual and appointed course to be taken
in making such communications. A short time previous to Mr. Bin-
gle being made acquainted with the intention of Government to in-
stitute the ‘ inquiry’ at Invermein, he had forwarded another packet
of charges to the Governor, which was in His Excellency’s possession
for some days before Mr. Bingle received a note from the Attorney-
General, conveying to him the very first intimation that any charges
were hanging over his head; and another, a day or two after, from
the Colonial Secretary, acquainting him that his letter could not be
transmitted home until the result of certain proceedings, about to be
instituted by the Attorney-General, should be known. We leave the
Government, therefore, to extricate themselves from this dilemma
how they can. Either the prosecution was not thought of until after


convict Coleman called upon me, to ask what had
been done about his cattle,—his cattle, which he knew
had been confiscated to the Crown. If I felt any in-
dignation, I shewed it not, I simply referred him to
the Bench of Magistrates at Invermein. Was this
the possible act of one seeking to do wrong ? He,
my Lord, has gone to his long account; he died, at
the very period of the inquiry into this case, by the
hand of violence; but if he is not here to confirm my
statement, his companion Grover has sworn* to Cole-
man’s having repeated it to him; and what does
Grover at the same time further swear, —“ that he
would not have come forward on this charge, if he had
not been sent for by Mr. Day,” the Stipendiary Police
Magistrate at Maitland.
My Lord, I would at all times prefer, if that could
be, you should hear the particulars of my case in other
language than my own. The identical point to which
1 am now taking leave to draw your Lordship’s atten-
the charges were preferred, or the agents of the Government had
been, for a long time previous, occupied in the creditable employment
of raking up evidence—taking the depositions of convicts—behind the
back of Mr. Bingle, for the purpose of getting up a case against him !
At all events, we have shewn that one set of charges against the Gov-
ernor were sent home many months before the prosecution took place;
and we have a right to assume that the prosecution was not com-
menced till after the second series of charges was in the hands of the
Governor, seeing that no intimation was given of an intention to pro-
secute Mr. Bingle, previously to their being transmitted to His Ex-
cellency.
* On the second day of the inquiry before the Crown Solicitor
Mr. Fisher, his words are—“ When Coleman returned from Sydney,
he said he had seen Mr. Bingle, and that Mr. Bingle told him if we
wanted to know anything about the matter we must apply to the
Bench at Invermein.


tion, is so well unfolded in the leading article of the
Sydney Herald, May 15th, 1837, that it will not be
necessary I should apologise for inserting here a
portion of that article for your Lordship’s perusal.
“ Then, how was the case got up ? This is worthy of particular
notice. The convicts whose cattle were ordered to be confiscated
became, we are told, uneasy that they could obtain no account of
them from Mr. Bingle! What right had they to any such account
from that gentleman ? What right had they to any account at all
under the circumstances? But Mr. Bingle told them to apply to
the Invermein Bench, whose mere agent in the matter he was,
where, there was no doubt, they would obtain every information
they might be entitled to. This was very like the act of one who
contemplated a felonious conversion of these very cattle! Did
they apply to the Bench as directed? They did not. Now, had
such application been made, it would, in all probability, have
been the means of inducing the Invermein Magistrates to make a
formal requisition to Mr. Bingle, as to his proceedings with respect
to these cattle—a step which, even to this day, they have not
taken. Then, whence originated the prosecution ? The answer
to that question involves a most material feature of the case. Mr.
Bingle referred the parties to the Invermein Bench—he directed
them to the only source whence they could acquire the informa-
tion they pretended to desire. But did they go ? Not they—they
did not go where they were directed to go; but they made their
complaint to Mr. Wentworth, who was accidentally stopping at
Sparkes’ Inn, eight miles from Maitland! Well; Mr. Went-
worth’s obvious course was just the one taken by Mr. Bingle—
namely, to refer the complainants to the Invermein Bench of
Magistrates, who were cognizant of the whole affair. But Mr.
W. did not do so; he referred them to—who? the Invermein
Bench ? no ; to the paid Police Magistrate at Maitland, who could
know nothing of the matter, save on the mere ex parte statement
of two felons, who, as they had no longer any interest in the cattle,
and avowed that their object was to prevent Mr. Bingle from retain-
ing them under any circumstances, ought to have been directed by
that Magistrate to apply to the proper quarter. Mr. Day, how-
ever, thought otherwise. In the exercise of his discretion, he


Sorry am I to occupy so much of your Lordship’s
time, but there are still other points which I am com-
pelled to bring to your notice, especially illustrative
took the depositions of these men, in the absence, and entirely
without the knowledge, of Mr. Bingle! We have next to inquire
what were this gentleman’s subsequent acts. Did he cause Mr.
Bingle to be apprehended, or even summoned to attend before
him? No! Did he forward the depositions to the Bench of
Magistrates at Invermein, of which Mr. Bingle had been a mem-
ber 1 No!! What did he do with them? Why, he transmitted
them to the Governor, through the Colonial Secretary : from
whose office they reached that of the Attorney-General! ! ! Mr.
Attorney-General called his God to witness that wo political feel-
ing entered into this prosecution. The motives which influence
men’s acts are often obscure, even to themselves; and we are,
therefore, disposed charitably to think that Mr. Attorney-General
did not, on this occasion, knowingly exercise his great power to
crush an individual, from merely political motives; But we view
the transaction, not in parts, but in the whole; and so viewing it,
we cannot but admit—even had we already detailed all the cir-
cumstances of the case—that enough has been shewn to lay a
reasonable ground upon which Mr. Bingle was warranted in sup-
posing that something else beside a mere abstract love of justice
originated the prosecution against him.
“But we have not yet stated all the reasons upon which our
opinion that this was a political prosecution is formed. That it
was not a mere ordinary prosecution, must be evident to every
sensible and unprejudiced man. In the first place, depositions
against the party who was the chief object of accusation, were
taken in an unusual manner, and at an improper place. There
was a Bench of Magistrates at Invermein—why were not the
complainants sent there? The depositions so irregularly taken
were forwarded to the Colonial Secretary. Is that a usual course
of proceeding? Is there, in fact, any precedent for it? Then,
what followed upon this? From the Colonial Secretary’s Office,
the behind-back-taken depositions found their way into the office
of the Attorney-General, who forthwith directs a preliminary
trial under the mild name of an “ Enquiry”—just to ascertain if
Mr. Bingle was influenced by an animus furandi ! To call him,


of the nature of this prosecution and of the spirit and
feelings of those by whom it was instituted: still
further then, my Lord, to ascertain motives from
point blank, a thief, would not be polite; and so Mr. Attorney
instituted an “ enquiry” to ascertain the existence of the animus
furandi!
‘ Just where a naughty word came pat in,
He wrapped it up in lawyer's Latin.”
“ But mark the manner in which this ‘ enquiry’ was pursued,
and look at the parties by whom it was conducted. We are told,
with the utmost vehemence, both of gesture and words, that the
proceedings throughout this memorable case were in no respect
influenced by political motives. Believe it who can! What
made Mr. Patriot Wentworth give such information to Mr. Day,
as caused the latter to send for Coleman and Grover? With
what decency did Mr. Day receive the depositions of these men,
not only behind the back of Mr. Bingle, but in a case which he
must have known to be one for the exclusive consideration of the
Invermein Bench—seeing as he must have seen, that it entirely
arose out of proceedings before that Bench ? If the men, Coleman
and Grover told the whole truth to Mr. Day, he must have at
once seen that an enquiry into the matter belonged, of right, to
the Invermein Bench. If they told less than the truth, there
was nothing into which any magistrate could enquire. At the
very outset, then, we find a paid magistrate entertaining a com-
plaint, not only' unknown to the accused party, but also in which
several of his brother magistrates were mixed up. To those
magistrates he did not give the slightest intimation of the course
he was pursuing, though it was his obvious duty to have commu-
nicated with them in the very first instance. Then, having
taken the depositions of Coleman and Grover, how did he act?
Did he issue a summons, or a warrant, to compel the appearance
before him of Mr. Bingle? No. That would have been the
straightforward course—the every-day and proper course of pro-
ceeding. But Mr. Day does—what? Why, in the most stealthy
manner possible, he sends the depositions to the Colonial Secre-
tary in form, but in fact, to the Governor!! Does Mr. Day so
deal with all depositions taken before him ? If not, why did ha


actions, let me refer your Lordship to the Attorney-
General’s address on the trial. He stated that “ the
depositions on which he founded the charge having
been taken by Mr. Day, the stipendiary police magis-
trate, in Mr. Single’s absence, he did not consider it
fair to act on them: he accordingly wrote to Mr.
Bangle requesting him to call at his office.”*
My Lord, I did so call on the Attorney-General; I
saw the depositions: and the explanations I have now
given, I then gave to him. Do these explanations
satisfy your Lordship ? why did they not satisfy the
Attorney-General ? But, my Lord, I did more than
this; for on the following day I again called on the
Attorney- General, along with a most respectable
go out of his way on this particular occasion? It would, indeed,
seem to be the fashion with some of our “paids” to consult the
Governor in certain cases. We remember one case wherein a
“ paid” took the trouble to go all the way from Sydney to Parra-
matta, to ascertain whether it was the Governor’s pleasure that
he should entertain a charge against a convict. We have now
an instance before us, of another “ paid” transmitting depositions,
charging a gentleman with cattle-stealing, to the Governor! The
cases are nearly analagous, except in this instance—namely, that,
in the one His Excellency gave an opinion favourable to the
convict, and in the other the Attorney-General went to work!
However, an ‘enquiry’ was instituted at Invermein, and the
Crown Solicitor was sent there to conduct it!
* “ The Attorney-General’s compliments to Mr. Bingle, will feel
obliged if Mr. Bingle will do him the favour of calling at his office,
in the Court House, on Monday next at ten o’clock, or any other
hour that may be more convenient to him. The Attorney-General’s
wish to see Mr. Bingle, is relative to matters in which his name is
mentioned in documents now lying in this office.
Attorney-General’s Office, January 14, 1837.”
Received 16th January, one o’clock p.m. J. B.


magistrate, Mr. Carlyle, who formed one of the Inver-
mein Bench when the cattle were confiscated; the
explanations I had given, were fully confirmed by
that gentleman; the Attorney-General was fully
assured by him of the authority delegated to me, by
that Bench; was the Attorney-General contented
then ? No! no! my Lord, it was too difficult a
thing to content the Attorney-General herein, even
though he had the assurance of two of the Invermein
Bench as to the nature and facts of the affair: had I
indeed brought before him every member of that
Bench, honourable, and independent, and unimpeach-
able in all their magisterial character, as each one of
them individually is, it would have been insufficient
to satisfy that most justice-loving functionary. It
required, so he stated,* that the conduct of those gen-
tlemen should be inquired into as well as mine; it
required that a person of more spotless character—of
more nice honour—of more elevated station, should be
found than the Invermein Bench could supply, to
search out my peccadilloes and theirs, and to judge
* “ When he considered that the depositions were made by pri-
soners of the crown ; that those prisoners of the crown had been in
the service of Mr. Bingle, he certainly looked with suspicion on
them, and if Mr. Bingle had satisfied him that they were false, no
further steps would have been taken. But the defence of Mr. Bingle
going to implicate the Bench of Magistrates at Invermein, who, he
was bound by his office to consider had acted properly, he thought
it best to direct an enquiry on the spot, in order that the case might
be fully heard. The police magistrate at Maitland, Mr, Day, was
ordered to attend to conduct the investigation, in delicacy to the
Invermein Magistrates; for if Mr. Bingle was right, of course the
Magistrates were wrong, and if the Magistrates were right, Mr.
Bingle was wrong.”
Attorney-General's Address to the Jury on the Trial.


between them; to the paid police magistrate, who
had already exhibited the superiority of his qualifica-
tions for the office, by taking, in the absence of the
accused party, depositions, which even the Attorney-
General blushed to act upon; to this same Mr. Day,*
* As further marking the feeling of the public press, on this
gentleman’s conduct, I insert an Extract from the Monitor, N. S. W.
newspaper:—
“We have been informed that the police magistrate of Maitland,
(Mr. Day) instead of apprehending Mr. Bingle, after accusations had
been made on oath in the usual way, sent the depositions thus taken
before him in the first instance, to the Colonial Secretary .
“ Now, in our opinion, the Colonial Secretary, on receipt of such
documents, should have immediately returned them with the following
note.
{< To Lieutenant Day, Police Magistrate , $c. $c.
“ Sir.—I have the honor to acknowledge the receipt of the depo-
sitions taken by you in the case of Mr. John Bingle, of Puen Buen,
and I am directed by his Excellency the Governor, in reply; to say,
that without adverting to the motive which might have induced you to
deviate from the usual course of justice, he at all events disapproves of
your not proceeding with this case against Mr. Bingle in the usual
course , without any application to the government whatever. The
Governor makes this remark, upon a general principle of law, namely,
that the Executive should not be mixed up with the administration of
justice. But when his Excellency reflects, that Mr. Bingle was
formerly a magistrate, and that it is publicly known he is under the
impression, that in relieving him of the magistracy, he has cause of
complaint against his Excellency the Governor, considers that your
having transmitted me the depositions in question to have been in
singularly bad taste , and that you have betrayed a want of knowledge and
tact of your rnagisterial duty , which, however to be excused in a gen-
tleman not brought up to the law, is nevertheless greatly to be
regretted in the present instance.
“I return the depositions, and have to request you will proceed
with the case in the common way of all such accusatio?is, neither
turning to the right hand nor to the left, but pursuing the single
straight path of your duty, as if Mr. Bingle were no more than any
other of His Majesty’s subjects.”


then, out of delicacy to the Invermein Bench, was
deputed the delicate office of scrutinizing the judicial
conduct of these unpaid and independent and honour-
able gentlemen. It is from the Attorney-General’s
opening address we learn this to have been the purpose
of the inquiry,—but was that really the motive? or
shall I seek for it in a desire to take the case out of
the hands of those, with whom, from their knowledge
of my character, and their intimate acquaintance with
all the facts of the case, and with whom, as the
authors of the ease, so far as I was concerned, my
reputation would have been safe, my honour unassailed,
and the hideous pollution thus attempted to be poured
out on me, restrained in those impure sources, where
alone it could have been engendered ? The inquiry
then, my Lord, was instituted, no matter from what
motive, before Mr. Day, by his previous conduct so
aptly fitted to the duty; to whom was added Lieut.
Beckham,* of the 28th foot, also a stipendiary magis-
trate, who was ordered by the Governor from a distant
station, —(two magistrates being necessary to commit
me), and in addition, the Crown Solicitor, Mr. Fisher,
was sent from Sydney (180 miles) to assist.
I have already stated that the Attorney-General
had my own and Mr. Carlyle’s assurance of the
* Mr. Beckham was a Lieutenant of the 28th Regiment, which
was doing duty in the colony, and for a few months had been in
charge of the mounted police at Jerry’s plains, thirty miles distant
from Puen Buen, by which appointment he became a magistrate of
the colony. Mr. Day was a lieutenant of a foot regiment, stationed
in India. He came to the colony on sick leave, and obtained a clerk-
ship under Mr. Deas Thomson, clerk of the council, (the son in law
of Sir Richard Bourke) ; about twelve months before the inquiry
he was appointed a stipendiary police magistrate.


nature and facts of the case, and at the very opening
of this inquiry by Mr. Fisher, a third Magistrate of
the Invermein Bench, Mr. Potter Macqueen rose to
affirm the facts as stated by us. He addressed himself
to Mr. Fisher, and said, “ the Bench had authorized
Mr. Bingle to be receiver and to pay debts, also
that everything was to be taken by Mr. Bingle, to
pay claims,” —was not this third confirmation suffi-
cient? No, my Lord, even this was not enough.
The man Grover, was then called in, and gave his
evidence; and on his falsely swearing, “ that he had
not been recalled by the Bench, on the day of his
conviction, and that his debts were never mentioned
by the Bench, and that the Bench never said a word
about them or Coleman’s.” Mr. Macqueen indig-
nantly again rose, and said, “he would put a stop to
the proceedings, as he was ready to swear, that he
sent for Grover and Coleman, by Ferry the chief
constable, and stated before them, that Mr. Bingle
would pay their debts.” What reply made the Crown
Solicitor to this ? The Crown Solicitor, who had
BEEN SENT 180 MILES TO DISCOVER THE TROTH,
STOPPED Mr. MACQUEEN FROM PROCEEDING.
On the fourth day of the inquiry, Mr. Macqueen
gave his evidence on oath at my request. On Mr. Fisher
stating that he did not require Mr. Macqueen’s evidence,
he says, “ I considered that Mr. Bingle had a general
authority from the Bench, and that he would legally
dispose of cattle, for the purpose of paying Mr.
M'Cartney’s, or any other debts, but still to be re-
sponsible to the crown.” It is not necessary, my Lord,
in this place to state the whole of that respectable
magistrate’s evidence; but how did the Crown Solici


tor again receive it ? My Lord, whenever Mr.
Macqueen touched upon anything likely to explain
the affair, he was repeatedly interrupted by the
Crown Solicitor, declaring he would not allow him to
state this, and reminding him, that he implicated or
involved himself. What! my Lord, then the Crown
Solicitor, the chosen delegate of the Attorney-General,
did not it seems after all, go down to Invermein to
inquire into the conduct of the Magistrates, and the
nature of their decision in the case of Grover and
Coleman. As I suspected, there was some other motive
than that assigned by the Attorney-General, for the
inquiry not being referred, as was the obvious and
honest course, to the Invermein Bench, and for the
eager Mr. Day being produced and prolonged upon
the scene. Oh, truth ! truth ! what a very Paul Pry
thou art! that not all the skill of these two cunning
lawyers can keep thee from thus eternally peeping
out. My Lord, I have before affirmed, that had the
whole Bench appeared before the Attorney-General,
and sworn to the authority they had given me, it
would not have been sufficient.* Well then—the
• “ Mr. Bingle was placed in a felons’ dock, and prosecuted with
the utmost zeal! He did not, as might be in the case we hav.e
assumed, ask for delay, or appeal to the testimony of obscure persons.
No; he met the charge at once, and called as witnesses in support of
his explanation, magistrates who were present at the inquiry, but
whose evidence Mr. Crown Solicitor would not receive! But what
was the reason assigned for refusing to receive the testimony of the
Invermein Magistrates? Why, really, if there were no other feature
in this case to manifest its generally supposed character, this alone
would suffice. Mr. Fisher’s tender regard for the magistrates—his
anxiety that they might not criminate themselves, caused him to
refuse evidence which would at once have relieved Mr. Bingle from
the outrageous charge that had been trumped up against him ! Did


fourth and only remaining Magistrate, who was pre-
sent at the conviction of the men, —the fourth Magis-
trate —Captain Dumaresq, came forward at the in-
quiry, and on oath confirmed and reconfirmed all that
has been stated—What! the whole Bench and still not
such a proceeding manifest a desire to come at once to the facts of the
case? or did it not, rather, evince a determination to put the accused
upon his trial? The act of despatching a paid magistrate to inquire
into the case was unseemly enough; but to reject exculpatory evi-
dence, elevated suspicion to certainty, with respect to the motives in
which the prosecution originated. But we maintain, also, that even
if Mr. Fisher’s objection to the evidence offered on this occasion was
an honest one, it was, at all events a foolish one —an objection which
we could not have believed that any man, calling himself a lawyer,
would have made. How could the magistrates have criminated them-
selves? There was no charge against them ; and, besides, magistrates
are protected by law, even for the exercise of an excess of authority, if
it appears that they have merely acted erroneously. In what possible
way then, we once more ask, could the magistrates have criminated
themselves? But supposing, even that the case were otherwise, and
that those gentlemen were willing, in justice to Mr. Bingle, to take
the whole blame upon their own shoulders—what was that to Mr.
Fisher? Is not here another fact for our case? Again, if such an
objection would lie before the Magistrates, so, also, it would before
the Supreme Court. Why, then, was it not taken at the trial? No
magistrate in the Colony would have committed Mr. Bingle had he
heard the explanations which were given by Captain Dumaresq, Mr.
Macqueen, and Dr. Carlyle; and we ask, therefore, is not the cir-
cumstance of the Crown Officer inducing the paid Magistrates to re-
ject that evidence, under so foolish a pretext as the one set up, another
fact to shew a fixed determination to send the accused for trial 1
Here was a gentleman who had taken his passage to Europe, com-
pelled to forfeit his passage-money, his mind placed in the utmost
state of anxiety, and put to several hundred pounds expense in Jaw
proceeding—although he was prepared, the moment the charge was
preferred, to produce the very evidence which subsequently put an
end to the case! And is Mr, Bingle to have no redress for this?
Let not certain parties “ lay such flattering unction to their souls,”
for the day of reckoning will arrive.”
Extract from article, Sydney Herald , 3 dJuly, 1837.


enough. No ! no, my Lord, still not enough—even
although they had the evidence of Mr. Stokes, as to
the instructions I gave him (on my making over to him
the agency of my estate, preparatory to my coming
to England) to conclude this affair of Coleman and
Grover as speedily as he could; even, although Mr.
Stokes swore, that I, in his presence, had quarrelled
with my superintendent Mr. Were, three months
before this inquiry, for not having completed this
affair; still it was not enough to satisfy this truth-
seeking official, but insult, even throughout the in-
quiry, repeated personal insult was offered me by him,
and finally, he took upon himself, (your Lordship will
know by what authority, whether legal, or constitu-
tional), —he, the Crown Solicitor, Mr. Fisher, took
upon himself to commit me to custody, and only per-
mitted me bail, because my superintendent Mr. Were,
(who was put into the felons’ dock for a most plain
and obvious reason), was too ill, as certified by
his medical attendant, to bear confinement. It re-
quired this, my Lord, to crown the precious work, and
I, perhaps, ought to feel thankful for such an exhibi-
tion of that madness of hate, which makes men blind,
and which thus “ runs a muck,” confounding all
right and reason that stands betwixt it and its object.
Power, my Lord, has its instruments ever at hand,
for good assuredly! but if for evil, the willing tool
requires no distant search—“ How oft the sight of
means to do ill deeds, makes deeds ill done.” Permit
me, in confirmation of the character of this inquiry,
again to quote from the public press thereon.
“ But, somehow or other, Mr. Fisher appears to
have acted as if he had mistaken the object for which


he was despatched all the way to Invermein. Assum-
ing that object to have been the furtherance of justice,
Mr. Fisher must have laboured under some very ex-
traordinary hallucination of intellect, when he acted
as he did. The inquiry conducted by him was not a
cool inquiry; nor acted upon accordingly. It was to
this effect—send Mr. Bingle to trial under any cir-
cumstances. The inquiry was all on one side ; a great
mass of evidence tendered to the Bench was rejected
—and particularly evidence in favour of Mr. Bingle.
The mode of proceeding was so unusual and so in-
decent, that one gentleman, totally disinterested in
the matter, felt constrained, from a pure desire to see
justice administered, to request of Mr. Day to take
down evidence which, as it went in favour of the
accused, Mr. Fisher somehow omitted. Throughout
the whole proceeding, the conduct of the Crown Soli-
citor was more that of a political partizan, than of a
man desirous to arrive at the truth. Evidence which
would have at all events shewn that Mr. Bingle acted
bona fide , however erroneously, was opposed by him.
The Magistrates were told that they must not crimi-
nate themselves—most improperly told so. The prin-
ciple of law whereby the Crown Solicitor’s position
may be maintained, is one entirely in favour of an
accused party. It might have been very proper to
warn persons against criminating themselves; but if
those persons—conscious of integrity, and regardless
of anything but truth, chose to criminate themselves,
what was that to the Crown Solicitor ?”
Sydney Herald, 15th May, 1837.
Such, my Lord, was the character, such the pro-
gress of this inquiry: one word only further upon it,


the Attorney General, in his address to the jury,
affirms that “if Mr. Bingle could satisfy them he
did all in his power to have an account kept, no man
would be more delighted than he would at his ac-
quittal.” Did not then the Crown Solicitor, when
he transmitted the depositions taken at the inquiry,
inform his employer that such accounts, —clear, satis-
factory, and indisputable accounts, were kept, and
produced at the inquiry, and rejected by him, Mr.
Crown Solicitor Fisher, and why rejected? My
Lord, these were the accounts of my superintendent
and myself; whose else could they possibly be ? Shall
I ask after this, why Mr. Were was placed in the
felons’ dock with myself ? Was this, my Lord, an
inquiry into the truth ? w 7 as it not rather an inquiry
instituted “to trammel or hide the truth?” did the
eager deputy then transmit the records of this inquiry
to his employer curtailed and incomplete ? A desire,
a redeeming desire to find some small Oasis in this
desert of human feeling, makes me wish to believe,
that the Attorney-General, before the trial, was not
entirely informed on every point and fact of the
evidence produced at this previous inquiry; but,
my Lord, when the assembled crowd who had so
often listened in former judicial assemblies, to the
pleadings of that person, heard his altered tone, his
new-born fervour, his impassioned zeal, so strong, so
strange, and yet so new, they felt that he was there
for no school-boy’s play; that if he had noisome more
mighty opponent in the field, he had some unknown
spirit to incite him : they saw him in bis armour
of proof, and they needed not to hear far-fetched
deductions, drawn from simple and untainting facts,


they needed not to listen to assertions, which the next
tenant of the witness box dispersed in thin air, and
proved to be as false as they were unfounded; they
needed not these, and a host of others, to feel that no
mere hireling voice was there ; they saw, they
heard, and he stood at once confessed, the Advocate
and Partizan. But how! when conviction, and more
than conviction, was heaped on all around, and driven
in and home on the Attorney-General’s mind, that he
had no ground, whereon to fix a charge,* or fasten his
• Now, we ask, what did Mr. Attorney-General succeed in proving
on that trial, more than was contained in the depositions handed to
him by the Crown Solicitor 1 Did he, in fact, substantiate any one
portion of his acrimonious address to the jury. In the opinion of every
decent bystander during the trial, his case completely broke down
under him. The enquiry from one to another throughout the Court
was, “What does the Attorney-General mean by charging these men
with cattle-stealing ? Then why should the case look more like one
of “ embezzlement” before than after the trial—seeing that the prose-
cutor called no other witnesses than those who were examined at the
previous trial (called an “enquiry”); and totally failed in eliciting
any fact not already set forth on the depositions?—Does not the
whole of the evidence taken on the trial show that there was not the
slightest ground, at any time, for placing the accused in the dock on
any such charge 1 Speaking of Mr. Bingle, the writer proceeds : his
acts, with respect to the thankless “job” which he took in hand, were
open as the day—he held himself strictly responsible for every head of
cattle which came into his possession, or which were appropriated to
his use—this was proved incontestibly on the trial. With the whole of
the evidence before him, the Attorney-General must have known that
fact previous to the trial: he must have seen that Mr. Bingle never
could have contemplated the fraudulent appropriation of a single head
of cattle—the evidence adduced on the trial has enabled the public
also to make up their minds as to the fact—and they do ask, and will
continue to ask, what could be the Attorney-General’s object in placing
Mr. Bingle on his trial for felony ? Was there anything lost to the
Crown ? Nothing whatever. Was there any solitary fact adduced from
which an intention to defraud the Crown could possibly be inferred?


blighting plague spot, when in the rage and fever of
his disappointment, he had turned on a witness, (Mr.
Stokes) with, “ Why did you not tell us this before?”
My Lord, was there then no passing ray of mercy, no
drop of generous life-blood in the lawyer’s heart to
make him pause in his endeavour, to make him hesitate
in his career ? None ! none ! my Lord ; party has no
heart; owns none, feels none. The Attorney-General
knew none of these; he rose in his place, and blushed
not while he rose, before the astounded Court and the
still more astounded Chief Justice, to demand, what
modern ears, and modern and more just times had not
heard or known, —the antiquated and long obsolete
right of reply in a criminal case. By the Law of the
land, however, long and justly dormant, by the old
Star-Chamber law of the land, he had that right; by
Not one ! —Was Mr. Bingle ever called upon by the Bench, from whom
he derived his authority to act in the matter, for an account of his
stewardship ? Never ! —Did not his books show that he was prepared
to render such account at any moment ? They did ! — Did not the
evidence taken before the most irregular court of “enquiry” show that
he manifested the utmost impatience to have this particular matter
arranged, and that he actually quarrelled with his Superintendent on
account of what lie, at the time, considered a want of proper diligence
in arranging it ? It did ! —Did not the evidence of Captain Dumaresq,
Mr. Macqueen, and particularly, of Dr. Carlyle, manifest, that even
if Mr. Bingle acted erroneously, he at all events, acted bona jide, ac-
cording to the impression which might have been made on his mind,
as to the nature of the authority with which he was invested by the
Bench of Magistrates? No man who heard that evidence can doubt it !
Are we not, then, warranted in echoing the public voice, by demand-
ing of the Attorney-General, to know how, with all these facts before
him, he could have put Mr. Bingle upon his trial for felony! We do
not notice the case of Mr. Were, because the motive for putting him
in the felons’ dock was too apparent, even to the most obtuse observer
—although what that motive was, we must not state for obvious rea-
sons.—Sydney Herald.


the law of justice and honest feeling, and manly de-
cency, better for him had he withered in his seat of
office, than have risen before his fellow-men, to
demand that right, whose exercise left him the mark
and obloquy of his time. Even in that dark hour of
his fame, well he knew that his country, that England,
had already repudiated and abolished the right; had
already given,—what was, in some respects, her shame
not sooner to have done, —had given to the criminally
accused, a right to be heard by counsel ; well he
knew, my Lord, that but for a mere form, which an-
other month might have produced, my humble powers
might then have had the aid of counsel, might then
have demanded and employed talents apprenticed to
the art, able as his own, to make my honest tale be
heard, my simple case appreciated, and the innermost
structure of those feelings and secret springs of action,
which had been brought to bear upon me, unveiled
and laid bare, before the astounded court and indig-
nant audience. He knew this, my Lord, and yet he
paused not; he rose, as he said, to reply to character,
—he sat not down till he had ransacked and sifted
through all the evidence.
The Attorney-General will protest, perhaps, that
he had no party or personal feelings ; my Lord,
from the Attorney-General, so protesting, I appeal
to the Attorney-General on the trial, the assem-
bled court and crowded audience shall be the jury,
and if one impartial or respectable person pro-
nounce him free, my verdict also shall be in his
favour. The Attorney-General will call the heavens
to witness he acted under no dictation, or what is
perhaps to him of more soothing sound, under no wish


to oblige; whence then the refusal, even on the re-
peated application of my legal advisers, to allow me,
before I stood on my trial, a copy of the indictment,
or even the slightest information, as to what I was to
be charged with, or on what point I ought to be pre-
pared to give evidence, or make a defence ? Whence
too, those other monstrous and unusual efforts to con-
vict ? But the Attorney-General has heard the mild and
dignified rebuke of the Chief Justice. It is the first
TIME I HAVE EVER HEARD AN ATTORNEY-GENERAL
exercise the right of reply on such an occa-
sion !! !” He heard this, and if the trammels of his
office have left him one spark of honest shame and
feeling, he will not need my rebuke, to awaken his
regret for the part he took, in this most shameful, most
political prosecution.
One word more, and a last one, with the Attorney-
General, —if the course he pursued in this affair has
led me to misjudge him, he has to blame himself
alone : the world in which he moves does equally with
myself so misjudge him—wronged as I am, I bear
him no malice, I owe him no hate ; but I leave him to
his own feelings ; and shall not be the last to rejoice,
if they can acquit him.
The Crown Solicitor, with all his sayings and all
his doings , I leave—to him who set him on, —not the
Attorney-General ; here I am freely inclined to
exonerate that gentleman. The Crown Solicitor had
his instructions from Sir Richard Bourke; to those
instructions the Governor’s signature was affixed; to
the orders, under which he acted, the name and au-
thority of the Governor were attached, and from his
Excellency the Governor, against whom I had, but a


few days before alleged matters of accusation, for
transmission to your Lordship as Colonial Secretary,—
from the Governor, in whose hands those documents
then lay, detained as he said, till it could be known
whether I should have the felon’s brand upon my front
—from Sir Richard Bourke, the Governor,
and not the Attorney-General, emanated this
hideous attempt, to stab and murder a reputation not
all his arts could befoul, —and to torture into crime
and felony, circumstances, which needed but to be
fully stated, in order to stand divested of all shame or
blame.
If I, my Lord, brought charges against Sir Richard
Bourke, they were founded on personal wrongs, which
I had received, or imagined myself to have received.
I sought no injury to him, —I sought, and asked only
redress for myself; even under all, my own heart
inclined me to think the censure he took upon himself
to pronounce on my conduct as a magistrate, was the
result of principle misdirected, and to be ascribed to
his recent arrival in the Colony, and consequent igno-
rance of its local circumstances and necessities. And
when he refused to withdraw that censure, or to be
influenced by the many public and other documents
which I laid before him, I imputed it rather to a
secret objection to confess error, than to any want of
sound-heartedness. Llow then, my Lord, could I
look for a blow, monstrous and malevolent as this.
Stealing, my Lord!—that vice of the wholly lost alone !
—how swells with bursting indignation the pure life-
blood of the true in heart at the charge ? If to my own
humble yet unsullied name I could attach no title of
Knighthood, or the still more courteous term of Excel


lency, —still, had I, no less than Sir Richard Bourke,
the station, feelings, habits, and honestly won compe-
tence of an English gentleman :My Lord !he who
could fling a charge like this on the head of his oppo-
nent, if not dead to all conception of the true attri-
butes of a gentleman, is indeed a renegade from their
practice.
This horrible accusation, I do avouch to have been
as wilfully, as it was wantonly brought. The obvious,
and honest course of a just government would have
been, on the receipt of Mr. Day’s dispatch, to apply
to the Bench of Invermein for information; but in
place of this, government sends down two of its paid
police magistrates, and a crown solicitor, to take the
duty from those—who alone could explain it.
I have adduced circumstances connected with the
non-removal of the men, that give me a right to infer
an unusual feeling in the authorities —was there no
pre-determination, no previous espionage hereabouts ;
or must I give to Mr. Day the full credit of that
mean ministration to a master’s will, which prompted
him to depart from all justicial custom, and gentle-
manly courtesy, and transmit secret depositions, with
as secret haste, to hands which he well knew would
welcome the gift, and could reward the giver. If at
the subsequent inquiry (instituted professedly to dis-
cover the truth), an officer of the Crown adopted a
line of conduct, in which official insolence was only
exceeded by an insufferable onesidedness, wholly de-
structive of justice and subversive of truth, thereby
exhibiting a proof that whatever might be the capa-
city, there was too plainly the inclination to strike,
I have still only inference to support an accusation,


and therefore he stands unaccused by me; but I will
ask, was the sending down of that commission, so
constructed, the original suggestion of Sir Richard
Bourke? or was there some small hireling near, to
prompt a course honour would have spurned, and
passion alone could have lent an ear to? If this
indeed were the case, then have I, my Lord, no need
to call upon my own powers to illustrate a picture,
already painted to the life,
“ It is the curse of Kings to be attended
By slaves, that take their humours for a warrant.
* * * Hadst thou not been by,
A fellow, by the hand of Nature mark’d.
Quoted, and sign’d to do a deed of shame,
This had not come into my mind :
******
Hadst thou but shook thy head, or made a pause,
When I spake darkly what I purposed;
Or turn’d an eye of doubt upon ray face;
******
Deep shame had struck me dumb.
My Lord, it would be a wearisome task for you,
and an endless one for me, to take up every point and
ground of vantage, which present themselves to my
mind in reviewing this dark affair, and its various pre-
cursory circumstances; on every side spring up reasons
ample and strong, to testify its character; can one, —
can even a solitary one, be brought forward to support
or defend it ? Malice itself could not substantiate one.
Was the charge brought on public grounds, or for the
public good? Why the cattle which my luckless
superintendent had mustered under the authority of
the Bench, were certainly seized, and sold, by order
of the Governor, as it was most politic they should be,
D


before I was placed in the felons’ dock. But where,
my Lord, are the remaining forty or fifty
head ? —still with my herds ; still running wild, and at
large on their native hills, and where they may, and
most assuredly will run, till death itself outstrips them,
before the Government there will take one step to
recover what they well know are not loorth the expense
and trouble of collecting : unless indeed the last few
words should move it to take such a step.
What then was the object of the accusation? O !
my Lord, I sicken at the continued contemplation of
motives so obvious. Let him who formed and gave
them action, bear their burden; —if he have remorse
in him, they are of a weight to press him down, far
below my future anger and resentment. Yet, setting
aside all private grounds, it cannot on public ones be,
that so shameless a prostitution of public power, to
private hate, should pass unnoticed or unredressed.
The national character cannot and will not suffer it.
Profligacy in high places, like the felon’s grave,
demands a stone from every passer-by, to mark it
with present infamy, and render it a beacon to the
future. The shout of execration and reproof which
has rung through the colony of New South Wales, —
doing me there, full and perfect justice, will, I doubt
not, find a faithful echo here at home. To that noble
English character then, the growth of centuries of
freedom and honour, I earnestly and eagerly appeal;
I cannot, —I will not, fear the result.
I have now, my Lord, but one further duty to per-
form. In committing to the press, this letter, which I
have taken the liberty of addressing to your Lordship,
I am most desirous it should not be imputed to me,


that I have been induced thereto, by any want of
courtesy, or respect to yourself, in either your official
or private capacity. The publicity, which the trans-
actions herein recorded, have received throughout the
Colony, even to the full occupation of public atten-
tion for no inconsiderable period, and the natural
anxiety of my friends in England,—but imperfectly
informed thereon, —have rendered it most imperative,
so far as I am concerned, that a full statement thereof
should be placed in every man’s hand who feels an
interest in me. In making this statement as complete
as my humble powers would permit, I am too well
convinced of the irresistible force of truth, not to be
equally solicitous it should be correct; and lest, in
the obvious necessity of my being the hero of my own
tale, any doubt may be supposed to attach to my own
version of either circumstance or motive, and as the
public press, in speaking the sentiments of the many,
may naturally be expected to carry greater weight,
than the statement or opinion of an individual, I have,
(notwithstanding occasional marginal references, from
like sources, and with a like object) taken leave to
add in the Appendix, three leading articles from the
three principal papers of the Colony, as expressive of
the feelings there entertained on this affair; —forcible,
convincing, and independent, they require no com-
ment from me, unless it be, the expression of my pro-
found gratitude, for the generous sympathy they
evinced in the cause of an humble, and most
shamefully persecuted man. The notes of the trial
(in the Appendix) are a full and attested copy of
those taken on the occasion; they were drawn up


without reference to their present use, and are a
verbatim copy of the original.
In conclusion, my Lord, I have but to add the ex-
pression of my own unfeigned respect, and
I beg to remain,
MY LORD,
Your Lordship’s
Most obedient, humble Servant,
JOHN BINGLE.


APPENDIX, No. I.
Puen Buen , DartbrooJc, New South Wales,
30 th June, 1836.
My Lord,
As, according to a regulation established by
a predecessor of your Lordship’s in the Colonial Depart-
ment, it was provided, that all communications, such as that
which I have herewith the honor to transmit to your Lord-
ship, should be forwarded to the Home Office through the
Governor of the Colony ; it is necessary I should state why,
upon this occasion, I have departed from the prescribed
official usage.
Having prepared the accompanying communication in the
form in which your Lordship will have received it, I trans-
mitted the same to his Excellency Sir Richard Bourke,
■with a respectful request that he would be pleased to for-
ward it, in the usual manner, to the Secretary of State for
the Colonies. This request, however, his Excellency de-
clined acceding to, as your Lordship will observe by the
accompanying letter from the Honorable the Colonial
Secretary.
As, however, I felt that I had an act of injustice to com-
plain of, and also reasonable grounds for assuming the pro-
bability that such injustice was occasioned by a misnppre


hension on the part of a former Secretary of State, or
owing to ex-parte statements forwarded to him, I ventured
to presume that the unofficial form in which the accom-
panying statement is transmitted to your Lordship will not
prejudice the merits of my case ; and particularly as the
non-compliance with the prescribed regulations is not
attributable to me. Neither will I allow myself to believe,
for one moment, that the reason alleged by Sir Richard
Bourke, as the ground of his Excellency’s refusal to trans-
mit my complaint through the regular channel, will even be
suffered to stand between me, as one of the King’s subjects,
and that justice to which I feel I am entitled, and which I
therefore ask with confidence from your Lordship as a
Minister of the Crown.
In reference to that portion of my statement which
alludes to my dismissal from the Magistracy by Sir Richard
Bourke, it is necessary to acquaint your Lordship, that a
circumstance has occurred within these few days, which
prevents me from transmitting as I proposed, in immediate
succession to the accompanying document, a full detail of
all the facts out of which that transaction originated. One
of its results has been, that I have been compelled to insti-
tute an action for a libel, published in a newspaper well-
known to be under the influence of certain members of the
present government of this Colony ; but the trial of the
cause, which was expected to have come on ere now, has
been postponed in consequence of an application on the
part of the defendant to amend his pleadings. And, as the
result of the trial will form a very important part of the
case which I have still to submit to your Lordship, lam
unavoidably obliged to pause until the result shall have been
known.
Under all the circumstances, therefore, I rely upon your
Lordship’s consideration, that you will be pleased to reserve


the expression of any opinion until the whole of the case
shall have been placed before you; being quite satisfied
that your Lordship will see, that the series of facts which
I have still to communicate have naturally arisen out of
those with which I have already made your Lordship ac-
quainted, and that no satisfactory conclusion can be arrived
at, except upon a review of the whole of the public trans-
actions, which have taken place between the present Govern-
ment and myself.
I have the honour to be, My Lord,
Your Lordship’s most obedient humble servant,
(Signed) John Single.
To the Right Honorable Lord Visct, Ghnelg ,
Secretary of State for the Colonies.
(Transmitted by ship Abel Gower, 28th July, 1836.)
(COPY.)
Colonial Secretary Office, 7th June, 1836.
Sir,
Having laid before the Governor your letter
of the 27th ultimo, I am directed to inform you that his
Excellency must decline transmitting to the Secretary of
State the application therein enclosed, for a reconsideration
of your complaint is contrary to official practice. The
Papers are, therefore, herewith returned to you.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) Alex. McLeag.
John Single, Esq,
tyc. fyc. tyc.


Copy of the Letter referred to in the preceding Note,
addressed to the Right Honorable the Secretary of
State for the Colonies, with other Documents.
Puen Buen, Darthrooh, New South Wales,
28 th May , 1836.
My Lord,
Certain occurrences which have taken place in
this Colony, and with which it is my present object to make
your Lordship fully acquainted, have induced me to place
before you the following statement, and to solicit from your
Lordship’s justice such redress for the grievances of which
I am about to complain, as it is my hope and my belief I
shall obtain.
It is necessary that I should acquaint your Lordship, at
the onset, that I am a settler of many years standing in
this Colony, and have held a commission as a Magistrate of
the territory, from 1829 to the commencement of the pre-
sent year, when my name was omitted in a new general
commission issued by Governor Sir Richard Bourke, for
reasons which his Excellency has refused to explain, but
of which I hope hereafter to make your Lordship fully
informed.
In the latter part of the year 1831, I resided on my
estate called Puen Buen, situated on Dartbrook, in the dis-
trict of Invermein, county of Brisbane, where I had also
resided for several years previous, and exercised the office
of a Justice of the Peace, to the satisfaction of my neigh-
bours and the benefit of the district generally, as will be
seen from the documentary testimony which I shall have
occasion to append to this letter. [No. 1.] —A misunder-
standing having arisen between me and Mr. Sempill—a
neighbouring Magistrate, residing on an estate called Segen-
hoe—respecting the dismissal of a convict constable, a
variety of correspondence ensued between us, and also with


the local Government, with which it is not now necessary
to trouble your Lordship ; but which, in effect, terminated
in a letter addressed to me by the Colonial Secretary, dated
the 6th of March, 1832, of which the following is an extract,
and alludes to the conduct of Mr. Sempill in reference to
the case of the constable to which I have already adverted :
“ In reply, I am directed by his Excellency to acquaint
you, that the case alluded to in your letter as above, was
brought before him soon after his arrival; and that as
relates to Mr. Sempill, a communication was addressed to
him in consequence, on the 16th December last, censuring
his conduct , and requiring him to he more circumspect in the
discharge of his magisterial duties in future.”
This, however, my Lord, is mere matter of inducement
—matter merely alluded to in order to shew the probable
state of Mr. Sempill’s feelings towards me at the time when
he preferred the most unfounded charge to which I am about
to call your Lordship’s particular attention, and the result
of which was, what I must ever consider an act of very
great injustice to me, sanctioned by Lord Stanley, then your
Lordship’s predecessor in office, upon (as I have every reason
to assume) the ex parte representation of his Excellency Sir
Richard Bourke. The extract of a letter from the Colonial
Secretary, which I have inserted above, is dated as your
Lordship will have observed, the 6th March, 1832 ; and
with that letter, after applying to the Governor for copies of
certain documents connected with the case to which it
refers, but which were refused me, this particular matter
seemed to have been set at rest. Some time after, however,
it was intimated to me, officially, that Mr. Sempill had pre-
ferred “ charges of a most serious nature” against me to the
Governor; but my application for a copy of those “ charges”
was most unaccountably refused. The only intimation, in
fact, with which I was favoured was a peremptory order to
d 2


appear before the Police Magistrate at Maitland, with cer-
tain assigned servants of mine, who were alleged to have
been illegally punished, at my instance, in the month of Sep-
tember in the previous year. This charge was preferred by
Mr. Sempill, and was to the following effect—namely, that
while a brother Magistrate was on a visit at my house, I
induced him to try and punish three of my convict servants.
Nothing could be more erroneous —nothing more untrue
than this statement, in the meaning which it was meant to
convey.
In order to enable your Lordship to arrive at a just con-
clusion upon this part of the case which I have the honour
to submit to you, and of which I take leave to beg an im-
partial reconsideration, it is necessary that I should endea-
vour, as briefly as the subject will admit, to make your
Lordship understand the nature of the Magisterial duties in
the remote districts of this Colony, and the facilities that
circumstances afford for the due performance of those duties.
Whether the system be or be not one which ought to be
continued, it is not my purpose to offer any opinion ; but it
is necessary that your Lordship should be reminded that
the general duties of Magistrates in this Colony bear no
analogy whatever to the duties of Magistrates in the mother
country. Except in the principal towns, there are few
regularly organised Benches; and even where a Bench is
occasionally got together at remote stations, it arises from
the voluntary act of the respectable settlers who are in the
Commission, and who feel that for the protection of the
general interests in their immediate neighbourhood, it is
necessary, by their own zealous exertions, to make up for
that lack of energy which I am sorry to say has been so
greatly manifested by successive Governments in this Co-
lony. The Magistrates here are not in Commission for
mere Counties or Districts, as in England—they have juris


diction over the whole territory; and your Lordship will
observe from the section of a Colonial law hereafter quoted,
“ that any two or more Justices of the Peace, assembled and
sitting in open Court, in any part or place of the Colony or
its dependencies, shall be and be deemed to be a Court of
Sessions.” It is this cause which has created that sort of
“floating tribunal” which has existence in the interior of
this Colony, and but for which so remote are the distances
of regularly appointed Benches from many of the stations
of the principal settlers, that a state of utter lawlessness
among the convict population must be the inevitable result.
But your Lordship will also observe that it was not only
found necessary to constitute any two Magistrates a Court
of Sessions, but, also, under certain circumstances, to invest
a single Magistrate with the like jurisdiction, as appears
from the third section of the Colonial law hereafter quoted ;
limited, however, to places not within a certain prescribed
distance from a regular Bench. My private residence,
wherein, at a great inconvenience to myself and family, I
had for a considerable period prior to the transaction which
is the subject of this letter, appropriated an apartment as a
Police Court, was then, and is still, thirty miles from the
nearest Bench; and having thus made your Lordship
acquainted with these preliminary facts, I shall proceed to
draw your attention to the matters out of which have origi-
nated what I must consider just cause of complaint on my
part, and, in justice to me, worthy of your Lordship’s inter-
position, with a view of affording such redress as the nature
of the case may appear to deserve.
I have already informed your Lordship, that the charge
preferred against me to the Government, by Mr. Sempill,
was not preferred until several months after the transaction
of which he complained ; and not, also, until after he him-
self had been censured by the Government for improper


interference with me in performance of my Magisterial
duties. That charge was, as I have already stated to your
Lordship, that I had improperly induced a brother Magis-
trate, who happened to be in the neighbourhood, and not
my guest at the time, to try three of my assigned servants ;
in other words, that I had influenced the Magistrate, and
perverted the course of justice. Upon this statement an
investigation was held by order of the Governor, at the
Police Office, Maitland, a distance of eighty miles from my
residence; when, after Mr. Sempill had informed the Bench,
on oath, of what he had heard from the very Convict
Constable (O’Donnell), whose notoriously bad character
may be known by a perusal of the document No. 2., about
whom our previous misunderstanding had arisen, the an-
nexed evidence was taken and transmitted to the Governor:
—[No. 3.]
From these depositions, your Lordship will be enabled
to collect the state of facts which formed the ground of
imputation against me —an imputation which I take leave to
assert, is completely removed upon the very face of the
proceedings themselves. The investigation, as your Lord-
ship will have observed, took place on the 7th of May,
1832 ; and on the 28th of the same month, after repeated
applications in the proper quarter for his Excellency’s
decision in the matter, I received the annexed letter from
the Honourable the Colonial Secretary : —[No. 4.]
Now, my Lord, against the unmerited censure in the
above letter, and which was confirmed by Lord Stanley (to
whose dispatch I shall presently call your Lorship’s atten-
tion), I respectfully, but firmly protest. I assert that in
availing myself of the accidental presence of a brother
Magistrate, to cause my servants to be brought before him,
1 not only acted in strict accordance with the usages of the
Colony, as I shall show hereafter ; but also in strict accord


ance with the law of the Colony. In reference to the law,
as applicable to this case, I beg to call your Lordship’s
attention to the annexed clauses of an Act of Council for
better regulating the Powers of Justices of the Peace,
passed the 20th May, 1830 [loth Geo. 4, No. 7], which
was one of the local laws in force at that time, and for a
few months after the arrival of General Bourke in this
Colony: [No. 5.]
The correspondence which I shall have the honour to
append to this letter, will prove to your Lordship incon-
testibly what were the usages of the colony in such cases ;
but I would very respectfully ask your Lordship whether
in this case there has been the slightest violation of the
strict law? His Excellency the Governor has not even
charged me with having acted illegally —the numerous
magistrates whose communications I append [No. 6], tes-
tify that I only acted according to usage. and I would,
therefore, again ask your Lordship whether I have been
deserving of the censure cast upon me ? The question, 1
apprehend is, not that my refractory servants were tried in
my house —not that I ought to have sent them to be tried
by Mr. Sempill, (who certainly was not at Segenhoe at the
time to my knowledge) but whether a brother magistrate
had authority to try them in one of the usual places for
transacting Police business in the district —even though
that place was my private residence ? It has not been
shown that I took any part in the proceedings —it has not
been shown that I attempted to prejudice the case against
the accused in any way ; —on the contrary, the weight of
the respectable and unimpeachable evidence of James
Thompson, Esq., goes to prove that I was not even pre-
sent at the examination ; and again, therefore, 1 would ask
your Lordship, why have I been censured ? and why, also,
has a censure been passed by implication, upon Mr. Pike,


who is still in the Commission, and whose authority to
deal with the men cannot, I apprehend, be disputed P It
has frequently occurred at Sydney, when the Police Court
was held in the building in which the late Superintendent
of Police then resided, that that gentleman’s servants have
been brought up to be dealt with by the Magistrates sitting
upon the Bench with him—no one complained of that. I
might have taken my servants before Captain Pike had he
been sitting as a magistrate, upon other business at my
house ; for what good reason, therefore, should I have been
censured for availing myself of that gentlemen’s casual pre-
sence ? Does it necessarily follow that he would administer
more impartial justice in his own parlour than in mine ?
Is it to be presumed that the prospect of a night’s enter-
tainment would influence to injustice the mind of a gen-
tlemen considered sufficiently independent and honourable
to hold a Commission of the Peace ? I apprehend that
your Lordship will not suppose so.
But, my Lord, I waive all questions of presumption or
probability. I respectfully submit, that in no part of the
proceeding to which I have the honour to call your Lord-
ship’s attention, has there been illegality, or irregularity.
The Invermein Bench had been, in a manner, broken up ;
the Government, though respectfully applied to, refused to
provide even a temporary Court-house ; yet, sooner than
occasion any injury to the neighbouring settlers from the
total absence of any controlling power over their convict
servants, I continued to transact public magisterial busi-
ness in my own residence —availing myself of snch occa-
sional assistance as I could obtain from other magistrates ;
and as Captain Pike had undoubted authority to try my
servants, had I called upon him specially to do so, I am of
opinion that your Lordship will see no ground for censure
in the fact of my having availed myself of his casual pre


sence —particularly -when my residence was the usual place
at which Police business was transacted, and all corre-
spondence directed to my house, and from which all returns
were forwarded to the Government.
The only portion of his Excellency the Governor’s letter
of censure, to which I think it necessary to call your Lord-
ship’s particular attention, is the following:—“ And it
further appears that these men were sentenced to receive
two whippings of fifty lashes each, and were sent to another
district, at a distance of fifty miles, to have the punishment
ordered, inflicted upon them.” The insinuation which this
passage is meant to convey, is too apparent to render it
necessary that I should occupy much of your Lordship’s
attention in dwelling upon it. I reply, briefly, that, at the
time alluded to, the flogger, a prisoner of the crown, at-
tached to the Invermein Bench, had absconded ; and that
up to the present time it is frequently necessary to send
prisoners sentenced in one district, to be punished in an-
other, from the want of the means of inflicting punishment
on the spot. But, it may be asked, and the question is
implied in the passage of the letter which I have quoted
above —“ Why, seeing that it was necessary to send the
men for punishment to another district, they were not also
sent there for trial P ” The answer, my Lord, is a reference
to what his Excellency the Governor must have known
to he the state of large agricultural and grazing establish-
ments in this Colony, upon which numbers of convict
servants are employed under the management of Overseers.
In this case, had it not been for the casual presence of a
brother Magistrate, I must either have submitted to the
misconduct of my convict servants, or have sent my Over-
seer off the farm—leading the establishment without suffi-
cient control, for three days at least, to a distance of thirty
(not fifty) miles, for the purpose of giving evidence against


them, for I repeat that Mr. Sempill had only recently
arrived at Segenhoe, and that was unknown to me, and the
residence of the next nearest Magistrate, was that of
Captain Pike, who was then casually at my house. Surely
then, my Lord, I may be permitted to ask, “ wherein have
I erred ?’’ Such are the circumstances under which Sir
Richard Bourke was pleased to censure my conduct, though
his Excellency has admitted that I violated no law, and
though I had shown that I only acted in conformity with
the usages of other Magistrates in similar cases.
My Lord, the censure so passed by the Governor, was
subsequently confirmed by the then Secretary of State,
Lord Stanley, of which I was made acquainted by the
receipt of the annexed letter; —[No. 7.]
Your Lordship will observe that the above letter refers
not only to my printed statement addressed to the Secretary
of State, but also to “ other documents connected with the sub-
ject of the dispute between Mr. Sempill and myself." Here,
then again, I am sure your Lordship will admit that I have
cause of complaint, when 1 state that, upon hearing from his
Excellency the Governor that serious charges had been
preferred against me, in connexion with the case of my
assigned servants, I repeatedly applied for copies of these
charges as well as for the name of my accuser, but was refused
either. Relying on the justice of my cause, as detailed in
my printed letter to Lord Stanley, I cannot allow myself to
suppose that his Lordship could see any thing to censure in
the straight-forward transactions therein detailed; and lam
justified, therefore, in assuming that his Lordship’s approval
“ of the manner in which his Excellency has disposed of
the case” in question, was founded on those “ other docu-
ments” of which I was refused copies ; in other words, that
his Lordship decided upon the ex parte statements of a con-
cealed accuser. With respect to that portion of the letter


which implies a want of courtesy from me towards Lord
Stanley, as a Minister of the Crown, I respectfully, but
firmly, deny that any part of the communication addressed
by me to hi s Lordship, will warrant such an imputation; but
in questions of general concern (and charges against a
magistrate are so,) there is no law of government or rule of
decency, that forbids open examination and public discussion.
I shall, therefore, not betray by a mean apology, that
right which no man has power, and I should have supposed
no man would desire, to deny me —the right of vindicating
myself in the eyes of my friends and neighbours, as well as in
the eyes of His Majesty’s government at home. The good
opinion of the government under which he lives, is of value
to every loyal and dutiful subject; but to deserve that, he
must also deserve well of the community of which he may be
a member. It was publicly known that I had been censured
by the Governor for “ perverting the ends of justice;” and
it was due to myself and family, due to my friends, due to
my brother Magistrates, that my vindication should be as
public. That any act of mine has displeased a Minister of
the Crown, I am sorry to learn; but, in justice to myself,
and in the honesty of truth, I feel bound to declare, that
what I have done in this matter, 1 would again do, under
similar circumstances, but without the most distant intention
to act discourteously towards the Secretary of State.
I have, therefore, most respectively, but still most
earnestly, to beg a reconsideration of my case by your
Lordship. Though not now a Magistrate of the Colony (but
upon this subject I shall have occasion again to address
your Lordship,) I feel that my public character has been com-
promised by the undeserved censure of the present Governor,
sanctioned by a predecessor of your Lordship. I have
shown that, in no respect, have I acted illegally —that I
have acted not only according to the usages, but also to the


necessities of the Colony; and I assert also, that the course
of conduct pursued by me, has since been generally sanc-
tioned by the present Governor, not only in his Excellency’s
own nominees, but in older Magistrates, some of whom
refused to act, if their powers were restricted as Sir Richard
Bourke, in my case, would seemingly wish to restrict them.
I believe this statement may be authenticated by reference
to several instances ; but of one case lam myself cognizant.
A gentleman named Wyndam, a Magistrate at Hunter’s
River, though residing within eleven or twelve miles of a
Bench, expressed a determination not to act, unless he were
authorized to do that, for doing which I was virtually
censured. That gentleman addressed the Government on
the subject, and received an official reply, dated in February,
1833, stating the opinion of his Excellency the Governor,
that there is nothing in the Act of Council to prohibit him
from holding a Court in his own house; provided he re-
stricted himself to the jurisdiction conferred by law upon
a single Magistrate, and complied with the other requisitions
of the Act, by keeping records and making returns of pro-
ceedings under it.
Such was precisely my case. 1 did no more than hold a
court in my own house. Nay, I did less. I merely
allowed a brother magistrate to hold a court in my house—
which, it should be remembered, was the usual court-house—
my servants were taken before that magistrate, by my over-
seer, and in my absence, aud they were dealt with by the
magistrate. Upon what ground, therefore, have I been
censured P It is said that Mr. Pike was my guest. I can
hardly trust myself to reply to the insinuation which such
an assertion is intended to convey. I have already ac-
quainted your Lordship with the duties necessarily devolving
upon magistrates in this Colony, and the necessity that they
should exercise a widely-extended jurisdiction in the interior.


Captain Pike was my “ guest!” True; any magistrate who
came to my house to transact magisterial business, must be
my “ guest.” As a way-farer —a mere accidental passer-by,
I might have claimed his assistance ; yet, because he called
at my house, and my overseer availed himself of his
presence, I have been censured by the Governor, and that
censure has been confirmed by the Secretary of State.
Whenever magistrates travel in the interior of this Colony —
whether accidentally or not —they must, in a majority of
instances, become the guests of their brother magistrates,
or of respectable settlers ; and I would respectfully ask
your Lordship, whether, by so becoming, they virtually di-
vest themselves of their magisterial functions for the time
being, —whether your Lordship will sanction such an im-
plied libel upon respectable men ?
I have, therefore, earnestly to beg of your Lordship a
reconsideration of this case; and that the most undeserved
censure by Lord Stanley may be reversed by your Lord-
ship, as an act of justice to me and my family, as well as
to my fellow-colonists, who feel with me, that the integrity
and independence of the magisterial office cannot but be
brought into suspicion by interference and groundless
censure, such as that of which I complain.
My Lord, although I have thus entered so minutely
into this portion of the transactions between me and the
present Government of this Colony, and of which I again
most respectfully request a reconsideration, as an act of
justice to me and my family, I would entreat you to
suspend your decision, until in another letter I shall have
detailed what I cannot but look upon as the sequel of this
part of the case. There is nothing in my public conduct
as a Magistrate, which I have any desire to conceal from
your Lordship, or from His Majesty’s Government, or
from a proper Court of Enquiry; on the contrary, the


more minutely (if also impartially) that conduct may be
inquired into, the more certain I shall feel of ultimately
obtaining that justice which I claim, and which I know I
merit, by removing from me the imputation that I have, in
any respect acted other than as a faithful subject of the
King and an independent Magistrate —departing from no
usage —transgressing no law—and, therefore, undeserving
of that reproach from which I pray your Lordship to
relieve me.
I have the honour to be, my Lord,
Your Lordship’s most obedient and humble servant,
(Signed) JOHN BINGLE.
To the Right Honourable Lord Glenelg,
His Majesty's Principal Secretary
of State for the Colonies, fyc. tyc. tfo.
No. 2.
In addition to his former conduct and punishment (vide
Official Correspondence,') the following is a summary of the
offences which this depraved character was convicted of,
and the punishments inflicted on him during the period of
twelve months; being the only documents I have been
enabled to obtain, but which, no doubt, will be deemed a
sufficient proof that the veracity of such a person cannot be
relied on :—“John O’Donnell, (Sophia).—April 24, 1833,
two days cells ; having fire-arms in his possession. May
13, 1833, fourteen days treadmill; drunkenness—repeated
offence. June 29, 1833, twenty-one days treadmill; ex-
torting money from prisoners. August 6, 1833, fifty
lashes; absconding. September 11, 1833, twenty-five
lashes; absconding. April 15, 1834, fifty lashes; ab-
sconding.


No. 3.
“ TO QUESTIONS FROM THE COURT.
“ Mr. Sempill states, on my arrival, no Magistrate (as I
understood) was doing duty in the district; I believe Mr.
Bingle has sometimes done duty at his house; had the
three men not been tried at Mr. Bingle’s, they must have
been tried at Merton or Segenhoe, my residence.
“ Sworn before me, this 7th day of May, 1832.
"P. N. ANLEY, J. P.”
“John O’Donnell being sworn deposeth:—On the 27th
September last, Captain Pike was at Mr. Bingle’s house;
three of Mr. Bingle’s men were given in charge to me by
Mr. Bingle’s overseer; on the 26th Mr. Bingle informed
me he would require my services on the morrow; on the
26th I acquainted Mr. Bingle that Mr. Sempill was at
Segenhoe ; on the next day (27th) I went to Mr. Bingle’s,
when I received the men as before stated ; I remained at
Mr. Bingle’s huts for some time with the men in charge,
until Captain Pike arrived from Mr. Little’s; some time
after Captain Pike arrived, Mr. Bingle called me; I was
desired by Mr. Bingle to fetch in the prisoners; I saw
Captain Pike sitting at a table in the parlour, on the right
hand as you go into the front door; Mr. Bingle was
present; I think Henry Hughes was called in first; he
was charged with neglect of duty ; Mr. Bingle rose on his
feet and said, this is one of the Bermuda out-and-outers,
and addressing himself to the prisoner, said, when I have
occasion to fetch you to Court the next time, Sir, I ’ll
send you three years; the man said to Captain Pike he
had been due for shoes for some time; he stated on his
defence that his eyes were bad, that he could not see at a


distance; he was sentenced one hundred lashes; the charge
was neglect as a shepherd; he received the one hundred
lashes in my presence, fifty on one evening, and fifty on
the morrow, without the presence of a doctor; Mr. Single’s
overseer was the prosecutor in this case. Henry Ralston
was the next case; he was charged with neglect of duty
and disobedience of orders ; I am not sure both these
charges were brought against him; he stated in his defence
that he had a burnt arm ; he also said he was one of the
best shepherds Mr. Single had got; Captain Pike said
then, he would give him a hundred lashes for being a good
shepherd; he ought to have known better; he received
the hundred lashes in my presence, in the same manner as
the first man. John Hall was the third man called in ;
a charge of neglect of duty as shepherd was lodged against
him; the overseer was the prosecutor in the three cases ;
he said on defence he had no shoes ; he asked for a pair ; I
cannot be sure either Captain Pike or Mr. Single refused
them, and he was sentenced one hundred lashes; he re-
ceived it in the manner as the other two, in my presence.
I have been in the habit of bringing prisoners to be tried at
Mr. Single’s house; I have seen prisoners tried at Mr.
Single’s house, but never saw any prisoners tried in that
room before ; I have heard that Mr. Single refused to act
as Magistrate ; I think Mr. Single went out of the room
once during the time the men were being tried; he was not
out more than a minute ; Mr. Single, in my presence,
signed no papers; the sentences were pronounced by
Captain Pike, and that Mr. Single sat at the same table
with Captain Pike the whole time , except about a minute.
“Sworn before me, this 7th day of May, 1832.
“P. N. ANLEY, J. P.”


“John Tuckey, overseer to Mr. Bingle, being duly
sworn, deposes—About September last, three of Mr. Bingle’s
servants were brought before Captain Pike on a charge of
neglect of duty; Henry Hughes was charged with having
left his flock twice in the bush ; I myself found the flock
without him, and brought them home ; I was the evidence
against him ; to the best of my belief, the last neglect he
was guilty of was on the 10th ; on the morning Captain
Pike was there, I complained to my master, Mr. Bingle,
•of Hughes; Mr. Bingle said Captain Pike was there, and
you may see if he will try the case; Captain Pike tried the
case, and the man was punished; I did not report the
neglect to Mr. Bingle until the morning when the prisoner
was tried; my master was out during the greater part of
the trials; I swear he never once sat down at the table with
Captain Pike.
“ Henry Ralston was the second man. I charged him
with letting his flock get mixed with another flock of
wethers and rams ; he was absent from them at the
time; this was about the 17th or 18th; on the 18th I
found one of his sheep short, and afterwards found it
killed and eaten ; prisoner, on my asking him if his flock
was all right, said it was ; I did not think it worth my
while to report it to my master; as 1 have his orders, when
the men deserve it, to take them before a Magistrate,
without troubling him; I did not mention this to my
master until the morning Captain Pike sat at Mr. Bingle’s,
and until this particular morning. Mr. Bingle did not
know what men I was going to bring up ; I live at the
sheep station, about two and a half miles from Mr. Bingle’s,
and was frequently in at the farm between the time the
men committed the offence, and the morning the men were
tried; Hughes stated in his defence that he had sore eyes ;
he had bad eyes when I first came to the farm; Hughes


said to me he wanted shoes, which I told the store-keeper,
who said he would get some shoes made; Ralston was
convicted and punished. John Hall was the third man ; I
charged him with being absent from his flock ; this was about
the latter end of the month ; constable O’Donnell was coming
from the farm, and passing the station where I live, left
word that he had seen a flock of sheep, and no one with
them ; about three o’clock I discovered the flock, as O’Don-
nell had stated to my wife, without anybody with them ; I
left them near the spot, and went home to get something to
eat; previous to my leaving them 1 called repeatedly, and
Hall did not answer; when I returned, I could not find
him, and going to the station where Hall lived, I found
him driving his flock home; I asked him where he had
been with his flock all day; he said down on the flats ; on
my asking him if he had seen the constable or me during
the day, he said he had not seen either; he was then taken
from the sheep, and made a watchman of; 1 desired him to
go and clean out the yards; he behaved insolently, and
refused to do so, saying he would not for me or my master;
I did not report this until the morning he was tried ; he
was convicted and punished.
“ Sworn before me, this 7th day of May, 1832.
“P. N. ANLEY, J. P.”
“ Henry Hughes, per Royal Admiral. I was assigned
servant to Mr. Bingle in September last, and am a shep-
herd ; I was brought up for neglect by the overseer, John
Tuokey ; he had never, to ray knowledge, found fault with
me before ; a fortnight after I had committed the offence, 1
was brought up by the overseer; I thought I had been for-
given ; I was punished at Mr. Ogilvie’s; I received one
hundred lashes, fifty in the evening, and fifty in the morn


ing; Captain Pike tried me, and in Mr. Bingle’s house ;
Mr. Bingle was not present during the first part of my trial;
he came in during the last part of the trial, and gave me a
bad character; at the time I was tried, I had been without
shoes or boots for some time ; I cannot say I was due for
them.
“ Sworn before me, this 7th day of May, 1832,
“P. N. ANLEY, J. P."
“ Henry Ralston, (per Midas), being sworn, states : I was
shepherd to Mr. Bingle ; some months ago I recollect being-
tried by Captain Pike for neglect; the last charge of neglect
was about three days before I was tried ; I was tried in
Mr. Bingle’s house ; I recollect seeing Mr. Bingle in the room
some part of the time ; I cannot say he was there during the
whole time; both my master and overseer gave me a good
character; at the time I committed the last offence, the
overseer did not tell me he would bring me to Court,
although I expected he would do so ; I was sentenced to
and received a hundred lashes ; I was punished at Mr.
Ogilvie’s.
“ Sworn before me this 7th day of May, 1832,
“P. N. ANLEY, J. P."
“ John Hall, (Marquis Huntly), being sworn, states : I
recollect being punished for neglect as a shepherd ; about
seven months ago I was tried at Mr. Bingle’s ; I was
punished at Mr. Ogilvie’s ; I was tried for losing sheep ;
the offence for which I was tried took place about a week
before I was brought before Captain Pike ; I was given in
charge to O’Donnell, along with Ralston, by the overseer.
“ Sworn before me this 7th day of May, 1832,
“P. N. ANLEY, J. P."
73


“ Mr. Bingle was present during this investigation, but
stated he did not feel it necessary to make any statement.
“P. N. ANLEY, J. P."
“ James Thompson, Esq., of Darfbrook, being sworn,
deposeth : that he was present on the day of the trial of Mr.
Bingle’s men by Captain Pike, in Mr. Bingle’s house;
deponent also states upon oath, that Mr. Single was not pre-
sent until about the time Captain Pike passed sentence on the
last man , who was brought up for trial: deponent also states,
that he considered it an open Court ; that any person coming
to the house on Magisterial business would have been shown
into the room where Captain Pike was trying the men ;
deponent also states upon oath, that one of the prisoners
made a complaint against his master for not having received
his due proportion of slops ; that Captain Pike told him he
never listened to a prisoner when a complaint had been
made by his employer, but that if he wished, at another
time, he would hear any complaint he had to make; depo-
nent also states, that one of the prisoners was brought back
(after sentence being passed) by the constable O’Donnell
for having made use of abusive and threatening language to
Mr. Bingle’s sheep overseer, who had brought the charge
against him.
(Signed) “JAMES THOMPSON.
“ Sworn before me, this 30th day of April, 1832,
“WM. DUMARESQ, J. P.”
No. 4.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney,
(No. 2-424.) 28 th May, 1832.
“ Sir, —The Governor having had under consideration
the depositions taken before the resident Magistrate at


Maitland, touching the trials of three of your assigned ser-
vants, as named in the margin (Henry Hughes, Royal Ad-
miral, Henry Ralston, Midas, John Hall, Marquis Huntly)
on the 27th September, 1831, and the record of their con-
viction before Mr. John Pike, J. P., who heard the three
several complaints against them, and by whom it appears
the record of their conviction was lodged with the Bench at
Merton.
“It appears to his Excellency from the above deposi-
tions, that you availed yourself of the presence of Mr. Pike
to cause complaints for neglect to he lodged by your over-
seer against the three men above alluded to, who were thus
brought to trial before your visitor, a Justice of the Peace,
usually acting in another district, there being at the same
time a Magistrate within the district in which your house is
situated, at about eight or nine miles distant, who commonly
held a weekly Court at one of the places appointed for a
General Sessions, by the 10th Geo. IV., (No. 7), and it fur-
ther appears that these men were sentenced to receive two
whippings of fifty lashes each, and were sent to another dis-
trict, a distance of fifty miles, to have the punishment
ordered, inflicted upon them.
“ The Governor regrets that he is constrained to desig-
nate these proceedings as irregular and reprehensible, as it
was clearly your duty to have lodged the complaint before
the nearest Bench or Justice, at the usual place of holding
Courts or transacting Magisterial business. For the same
reason that the law forbids a Justice of the Peace to exer-
cise a summary jurisdiction over felons in his own service,
you ought to have avoided bringing your complaint to a
hearing before your guest. His Excellency is not prepared
to say that the transaction was wholly illegal, hut it appears
to him that the jurisdiction given by the Colonial law to a
single Magistrate, is not to be exercised without reference


to time and place, and that therefore a more unnecessary,
indiscreet, and unseemly exercise of such jurisdiction,
cannot well be imagined than that now under consideration.
“ With reference to the trials and sentence of the men
alluded to as stated in the record of their conviction, it
appears that it was upon the testimony of one witness only,
and it would seem that the offences so proved were visited
with great severity of punishment. This is more particu-
larly in the first case, that of Hughes, where it may be
observed the evidence of the overseer went in some degree
to support the defence of the accused.
“ His Excellency, however, is not disposed to attribute
your proceedings on the present occasion to any other cause
than an erroneous judgment, and he will therefore abstain from
taking any steps than to express a hope that you will in
future adopt a more safe and discreet line of conduct in the
discharge of your Magisterial duties.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“Your most obedient servant,
(Signed) “ ALEXANDER M'LEAY.
“ To John Single, Esq., J.P.”
No. 5.
II.—“ And be it further enacted, that any two or more
Justices of the Peace, assembled and sitting in open Court,
within any part or place of the said Colony or Dependencies,
shall be, and be deemed to be a Court of Sessions within
the meaning and intention of the said law or ordinance;
and such two or more Justices shall have and exercise such,
and the like summary jurisdiction, power, and authorities
over felons and offenders, as in and by the said law or ordi-
nance, or by this or any other law or ordinance, are or shall
be vested in the said Courts of General or Quarter Sessions.
HI.—“ And whereas it is expedient that a summary


jurisdiction should in certain cases, and under certain limi-
tations, be confined to one Justice of the Peace; Be it
further enacted, that such and the like jurisdiction, power,
and authority, as are in and by the said law or evidence,
vested in the said Courts of General and Quarter Sessions,
for the taking cognizance in a summary way of any com-
plaint made against any such felons or offenders as afore-
said, for drunkenness, disobedience of orders, neglect of
work, absconding from the service of his or her master or
employer, abusive language, or other disorderly conduct,
and for punishing such offences, or any of them, shall be,
and all such powers, authorities, and jurisdictions are, and
is hereby vested in any one Justice of the Peace for the said
Colony or its Dependencies .”
No. 6.
(COPY).
No. 1. “Sydney, 1st June, 1832.
“ Sir, —I am favoured with yours, and in reply beg to
say, that when any magisterial business was transacted
during my residence at Segenhoe, it was done in my dwell-
ing house, and usually in the parlour, and when I have
acted as a magistrate in the neighbourhood, I have done so
in a private dwelling, as I was not aware of any public
court-house being in that district; for any further infor-
mation on that subject which you may wish, I beg to refer
you to Mr. Little, J. P., Mr. Ogilvie, J. P., and Mr.
Forbes, J. P., all of whom have done magisterial business
in the parlour, at Segenhoe.
“ I am, Sir,
“ Your most obedient humble Servant,
“PETER M‘INTYRE, J.P.
“ To John Bingle, Esq., J.P.”


(COPY).
No. 2. “Sydney, 2nd June, 1832.
“ Sir, — I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of yesterday’s date, requesting me to state
whether it does not frequently occur, that magistrates
exercise their duties in their own private houses : in reply,
I beg leave to state, that where court-houses have been
established by the Government it is not the practice ; but,
when they are very remote, it is then essentially necessary
to take the advantage of the most convenient place, and
from my local knowledge of the part of the country where
you reside, and act, that you could not discharge your
magisterial functions without embracing the convenience
which your private house affords.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Yours very respectfully,
“ARCHIBALD BELL, J.P.
“John Bingle, Esq., J.P.”
(COPY).
No. 3. “ Bong Bong, 2nd June, 1832.
“ Dear Sir, —In reply to your letter of the 29th May
last, relative to the usual places of holding courts, where
no regular court-houses are in the district, I beg to inform
you, that before one was built in this district, that courts
were held in our own houses, or any convenient place, and
that I believe it to have been, and is, the usual custom in
the interior.
“ I have the honour to be, dear Sir,
“ Your obedient Servant,
“C. THROSBY, J.P.
“ To John Bingle, Esq., J.P.”


(COPY).
No. 4. “ Sydney, 2nd June, 1832.
“Sir,— ln reply to your letter of the 29th ult., I have
the honour to acquaint you, that I have found the practice
to exist in all , but more particularly in the distant parts of
the Colony, of magistrates holding courts, and exercising
jurisdictions in cases in which they were not personally
concerned, in their own, or other private houses, when
situated at an inconvenient distance from the court-houses
of their respective districts.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your most obedient humble Servant,
“J. D. FORBES, J.P.
“ Captain Commanding Mounted Police.
“ To J. Single, Esq., J.P.”
(COPY).
No. 5. “ Sydney, 4th June, 1832.
“ Dear Sir, —I have to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 29th ult., requesting to know from me
whether it is customary to hold courts, and do other
magisterial business at private houses in those parts of the
Colony in which court-houses have not been erected by
the government for this purpose. In answer, I beg to
state, that I have not visited any of the remote parts of the
Colony, but I should take it for granted, that where court-
houses do not exist, the business of the magistrates must
be conducted in private dwellings, nor do I see that any
evil can arise from this system, when no injustice is done
to the parties who may be brought before them.
“ I remain, dear Sir, very truly, your’s,
“RICHARD JONES, M.C.
“John Bingle, Esq., J.P.”


(COPY).
No. 6. “ Sydney, 4th June, 1832,
“ Dear Sir, — I have received your letter of the 29th
ult., requesting to know whether it is customary for magis-
trates in remote districts to hold courts in their own houses,
and have to say in reply, that I believe there is no alter-
native, from the want of court-houses, but I have heard
more than one magistrate complain of being compelled to
do so, merely from its inconvenience.
“ I recollect of assisting Mr. Brown, of Appin, one day,
some years ago, at his particular request, in a Court held
in a room of his own house, and I believe he held in the
same place a regular weekly Court.
“ I remain, dear Sir, your’s, very truly,
“ALEXANDER BERRY, M. C.
“ John Single, Esq., J. P.”
(COPY.)
No. 7. “Sydney, 4th June, 1832.
“ Sir, —In answer to your letter of the 29th May, I heg
to state it has always been the practice, as far as I am
aware, of Magistrates having prisoners brought to trial
before them at private houses, provided there is not a Bench
of Magistrates within a reasonable distance, or during the
absence of the Magistrates of the district.
“ From the great want of labourers, settlers in the inte-
rior cannot spare the labour of their servants for weeks, to
wait the return of a Magistrate of the district, and for many
faults (such as refusing to work, &c.) .they will not be re-
ceived into the lock-up houses to await their trials ; the
settler must therefore make one man watch the other, thus
losing the labour of two.
“ 1 am Sir, your obedient Servant,
“HELENUS SCOTT, J. P.
“John Single, Esq., J. P.”


(COPY.)
No. 8. “ Invermein, Hunter’s River,
“24 th June, 1832.
“ My Dear Sir, —It is a subject of wonder to me, that
any person at all acquainted with the situation of the
Colony, could gravely bring a charge against you for hold-
ing Courts under your own roof, as I know it has been the
practice for Magistrates to do so, or in any house they
might deem convenient to meet at, ever since I arrived in
the Colony, a period of about nine years, and from the dis-
tance we reside one from the other in the interior, it is a
common occurrence for the Magistrate to become the guest
of the complainant, or the complainant the guest of the
Magistrate. Mr. M’lntyre and your humble servant were
the first resident Magistrates in this district, and agreed to
meet at Segenhoe and Invermein, alternately, or as it might
suit our convenience, until the Government could be in-
duced to build us a Court-house ; at first we dated' our
letters, &c. to the Government from Segenhoe, because Mr.
M’Queen’s establishment being the largest, the intercourse
between that place and Sydney was the greater; but Mr.
M’lntyre’s avocations taking him frequently to Sydney, the
greater part of the Police business was transacted in my
parlour, and in consequence the Government was requested
to address all communications made to the Bench of this
district to Invermein. About eighteen months ago, upon
declining to act as a Magistrate, I mentioned to the Gov-
ernment that I had sent the only constable at the time be-
longing to the Bench, to Puen Buen, as you were the only
Magistrate residing in the district at the time, and the
Police business has been generally transacted in your house
since, until you built a hut upon the Government Reserve.
I believe that Mr. Sempill sat as a Magistrate three or four
times at Segenhoe, and Captain Dumaresq as often at St,


Hilliers; but as to a Court being held weekly at any place
in the district except at your house, or in the said hut, if
there has been, it never came to my knowledge, nor do I
know who the magistrates were that could have presided at it.
“ I remain, my dear Sir,
“Your’s very sincerely,
“FRANCIS LITTLE, J. P.
“ J. Bingle, Esq., J. P.”
(COPY.)
No. 9. “ St. Hilliers, 15th June, 1832.
“ Dear Sir, —I have to acknowledge the receipt of your
letter on the subject of the custom prevailing in the Colony,
respecting the holding Courts for the trials of offenders in
the country districts, where no regular Court-houses are
established by the Government. In reply, I beg to inform
you, as far as my experience goes, I have ever found it to
be the practice, under such circumstances, to hold the Courts
in private houses.—I have been present at, or assisting in
trials held in the following private dwellings :—At Luskin-
tyre, near Maitland, at Mr. Ogilvie’s, before the present
Court-house was erected ; at Mr. Little’s, Invermein, before
he declined acting as a Magistrate ; afterwards (last year) at
your house; and when you left the country for Sydney, in
order that the country should not suffer the inconvenience
of having no Court for trials, I most unwillingly held them
at St. Hilliers. 1 consider that had not these facilities and
conveniences been afforded by the gentlemen of the country,
the ends of justice would not unfrequently have been
defeated.
“ I remain, dear Sir,
“ Your’s obediently and truly,
“WILLIAM DUMARESQ, J. P.
“ J. Bingle, Esq., J. P.”


(COPY.)
No. 10. “ Upper District of Hunter’s River,
“ 26th June, 1832.
“ Sir, —We, the undersigned resident settlers in your
neighbourhood, have learned with extreme regret, the result
of an investigation which his Excellency deemed necessary
to make into your conduct as a Magistrate, arising from
information given by a brother Magistrate touching certain
acts of yours.
“ We cannot but express our surprise that you should be
singled out and censured, for adopting a practice, which to
our knowledge, has been general in all the districts of
Hunter’s River, as Courts have (previous to the erection of
buildings for the purpose by government) been very ge-
nerally held in the dwelling houses of the Magistrates, under
circumstances precisely similar to your own case; and we
beg to assure you, that we still, as formerly, appreciate the
active and independent manner in which you have always
discharged your Magisterial duties.
“ We have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your most obedient servants,
“ FRANCIS LITTLE, J. P.
“ JAMES SCOTT.
“ ARCHIBALD LITTLE.
“ H. DUMARESQ.
“ WILLIAM DUMARESQ, J. P.
‘•JAMES THOMPSON.
“ JOHN SCOTT.
“JOHN RANKIN.
“ MATTHEW H. HALL.
“ HUGH CAMERON.
“ LOCKHART MILLER.
“WILLIAM MILLER.
“ STEPHEN COXEN.
“ WILLIAM FORSYTH.
“ EDWARD SPARK, Jun.
“ W. H. WARLAND.
“WILLIAM DANGAR.
“ J. Bingle, Esq., J. P., Puen Buen, Dart Brook.”


No. 7.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 8th Nov., 1833.
No. 33,789.
“ Sir, —The Right Honourable the Secretary of State
Laving perused your printed letter to him of the 18th
August, 1832, and other documents connected with the
subject of the dispute between Mr. Sempill and yourself, I
have the honour, by the Governor’s commands, to signify to
you, that the Secretary of State approves of the manner in
which his Excellency has disposed of the case in question,
and directs you to be informed that the indulgence in such
controversies as are detailed in the paper alluded to above,
is highly unbecoming the office you fill, and that the re-
currence of them cannot fail to bring the Colonial Magis-
tracy into contempt.
“ I have further the honour to acquaint you, that the
Secretary of State has deemed it necessary to notice your
objectionable conduct in availing yourself of Mr. Pike’s
visit to your house to punish your assigned servants, as well
as in publishing to the world a letter addressed to his
Lordship, before you had received an answer to it, and even
before it had reached him ; and that the Secretary of State
has expressed a hope that he may not again have occasion
to comment upon transactions so irregular and improper as
appears to have taken place between Mr. Pike and yourself,
and that you will in future recollect the courtesy which is
due to a Minister of the Crown, should circumstances
require your communicating at any time with the Colonial
Department in England.
“ I have the honour to be, Sir,
“ Your most obedient servant,
“ (Signed) ALEXANDER M'LEAY.
“ J. Bingle, Esq., J. P., Invermein,”


APPENDIX, No. II.
Sydney, Jan, 9, 1837.
Sir,
I have the honor to submit, for the consi-
deration of the Right Honorable the Secretary of State,
the inclosed letters, with the documents appended thereto;
and respectfully request that your Excellency will be pleased
to forward the same by the earliest opportunity.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient, humble servant,
JOHN BINGLE.
To his Excellency the Governor, &c. &c. &c.
Letter to the Right Honorable the Secretary of State for the
Colonies ; with other documents.
Sydney, New South Wales,
January 3, 1837.
My Lord,
On the 28th of May, last year, I did myself
the honour of addressing a letter to your Lordship, solicit-
ing an act of justice at your Lordship’s hands, in the re-
moval from me of an undeserved censure, passed by his
Excellency Sir Richard Bourke, and sanctioned by Lord
Stanley, for an imputed misuse of my authority as a Ma-
gistrate of the Colony; the particulars of which I then fully
set forth for the information of your Lordship. Upon that
occasion, also, I respectfully entreated your Lordship to
suspend your judgment upon the matters then submitted,
until I should have detailed what I could not consider other
i


than the sequel of that case ; but which, at that time, I was
prevented by circumstances from detailing. I now respect-
fully take leave to resume my statement.
In the month of Januaiy, 1836, a new “ Commission of
the Peace ” was issued by his Excellency Sir Richard
Bourke, in which my name, together with the names of se-
veral other gentlemen—including the whole of the Civil
Officers of the Colony —were omitted. His Excellency
condescended, in a Government notice, to assign a reason
for the omission, in the new “ Commission,” of the names
of the Civil Officers of Government; and it becomes no
part of my present purpose to offer any opinion as to the
cogency of those reasons. However, as I have already
stated, the names of other gentlemen, not connected with the
Government —other than as honorary Magistrates —were
also omitted ; and, in the opinion of those gentlemen, par-
ticular circumstances called upon them to request of the
Executive Authority a reason why they were treated with
seeming contumely. I was one of the parties so omitted in
the new “ Commission and one, also, of those who ad-
dressed a respectful letter to the proper quarter, soliciting
to be informed of the grounds upon which a step had been
taken which certainly was calculated to lower me in public
estimation. To that letter I received for reply, that His
Excellency the Governor did not think proper to assign any
reason. I therefore feel justified in assuming one —and
one, also, which, after your Lordship has been made ac-
quainted with all the circumstances, you will have little dif-
ficulty in believing to be the true reason.
At this particular period, and long before, a man named
Watt, a convict still under the sentence of the law, was well
known to exercise very great influence over the manage-
ment of a newspaper called the Sydney Gazette. That
paper was so notorious for its continual libels upon the


whole respectability of the Colony, upon the independent
Magistrates —upon all, in short, who were disposed to keep
the prison population in their proper places, and especially
upon every gentleman who was supposed even to differ in
opinion from the Government on the subject of convict dis-
cipline, that a general (and certainly not unfounded) opi-
nion prevailed, that this man, Watt, was, for some reason or
other, protected by the Authorities. To such an extent did
the licentiousness of this particular newspaper go ; and so
well known—so capable of proof —was it of the almost ex-
clusive sway being in the hands of a convict, that repeated
complaints were forwarded to the Governor upon the sub-
ject by those persons who were almost daily slandered in its
columns. His Excellency absolutely refused to interfere;
and that fact, as a matter of course, strengthened the gene-
ral belief that Watt was shielded in high quarters. In short,
it was universally considered useless (and boasted of by the
man himself) to prefer any charge of the kind against him.
This man, also, is the author of a notorious libel upon the
independent Magistrates of the Colony, published in the
form of a pamphlet, under the signature of “ Humanitas,”
of which your Lordship has doubtless heard. Is it, there-
fore, very extraordinary that a strong feeling of indignation
should be excited in the minds of the respectable Colonists
at even suspecting the existence of such a state of things ?
However, ground for still stronger suspicion was soon
afforded. This man. Watt, was prosecuted before the Su-
preme Court of this Colony, in conjunction with others, for
inciting to the commission of an act of felony in a respect-
able printing establishment. He was defended, upon that
occasion, with a pertinacity almost unexampled, by Mr.
Commissioner Therry, a well-known confidential adviser of
the present Governor ; Mr. Therry being at the time well
aware (this can be proved) that his client was the author of
f 2


“ Humanitas.” The prisoners were acquitted, in the face
of as conclusive evidence as ever was brought forward in a
court of justice; but so little satisfied with the verdict was
the presiding Judge, (Mr. Justice Burton,) that on the repre-
sentation of His Honor, His Excellency Governor Bourke
was constrained to direct Watt’s removal from Sydney ;
without, however, depriving him of his ticket-of-leave.
It is absolutely necessary that your Lordship should be
made acquainted with the foregoing facts, in order that you
may clearly understand those which followed close upon
them.
In the course of Watt’s defence upon the trial to which I
have already alluded, he took occasion to utter a gross slan-
der against a Magistrate then in Court, and who was not at
all a party to the case : that Magistrate was Mr. Mudie, of
Castle Forbes, Hunter’s River. He was proclaimed in
open Court, by the prisoner in the dock, the “ murderer of
his convict servants.” The learned and honorable person
who presided as judge upon that occasion was, doubtless,
unwilling to cramp a prisoner in his defence ; and so the
atrocious libel passed unheeded, except by the surrounding
rabble, who manifested, as far as they dared do in a Court
of Justice, the satisfaction which its utterance afforded them.
The gentleman of whom it was spoken, however, sought re-
dress ; and now, my Lord, I come at once to the obvious
cause of the attempted indignity which I complain of hav-
ing been offered to me by His Excellency Sir Richard
Bourke, in the omission of my name from the Commission
of the Peace.
Mr. Mudie knew that for many months previously he
had been the object of most gross attacks, in a newspaper,
by this man ; in the course of the trial he was publicly,
wantonly, and most grossly assailed by name. The time for
any further forbearance had ceased. He preferred a charge


before the Magistrates against Watt, under their sum-nary
jurisdiction, for the public slander uttered in Court; and,
in addition, for habitual lying and gross immorality. It
soon, of course, became publicly known that such charges
were preferred ; and, no doubt, it was the previous noto-
riety of the accused which induced an unusual number of
Magistrates to attend on the occasion ; and also a con-
course of auditors, particularly of a certain class of persons,
unprecedented at any such inquiry, /was one of the Ma-
gistrates who sat on that occasion. I had been residing in
Sydney, with my family, for several months previously. I
was led to the Police Office by accident, and was induced to
remain by curiosity. The inquiry lasted eight or ten days.
Again Mr. Commissioner Therry attended in behalf of
Watt; and notwithstanding that the Magistrates, one and
all, decided that counsel should not be permitted to inter-
fere in such a trifling case, continued so to press his right to
be heard, and thus so interrupt the proceedings, as to leave
no doubt upon the mind of any respectable, unprejudiced
man present, that, for some reason or other, an unusual so-
licitude was entertained for the man at the bar. I, for one,
at once stated that, “if it were usual to allow convicts
counsel in such cases, then by no means let there be any
exception in the case of the man Watt—let him have the
assistance of counsel by all means.” The Bench, includ-
ing the stipendiary Police Magistrates, unanimously agreed
that counsel should not be permitted to interfere ; and the
investigation proceeded, interrupted only by the occasional
interference of Mr. Commissioner Therry, who would per-
sist, despite of all the Bench could say or do ; and who
only ceased his interruption when it was plainly stated by
a Magistrate that he would leave the Court if such irregu-
larity were persisted in.


The first charge fell to the ground. The opinion of the
then Attorney-General was taken ; and that learned law
officer of the Crown stated that, as the Judge did not inter-
pose on the trial, a Convict could not he punished for slan-
dering a Magistrate in open Court. Against the soundness
of this opinion I, of course, hare nothing to urge.
The other charges were then proceeded with. In the
first place, the Convict at the bar was proved, upon the
testimony of witnesses, some of them the most respectable
in society, to be an habitual liar ; but as, in the opinion of
the second Police Magistrate, they were merely what his
worship was pleased to designate “ lies of vanity,” this part
of the case was got rid of. Then came the charge of gross
immorality. In the course of this inquiry, it was distinctly
proved that the Convict at the bar had committed a breach
of the Colonial regulations, by having cohabited with a fe-
male Convict, whom he had procured to be assigned to a
convenient friend, who lent his name for the purposes of
prostitution. This was proved.
But mark, I pray you, my Lord !
In the course of this part of the inquiry, it was suggested
by one of the paid Police Magistrates, that this charge,
being of long standing, ought not to be entertained. Wit-
nesses, however, were produced, who distinctly proved that
it was the act of the First Magistrate of Police himself which
prevented it being entertained many months before. It was
proved that the First Police Magistrate, the chairman of
the then assembled Bench, had had correspondence with
the very Convict at the bar on the subject of that accusa-
tion, which was preferred many months before. It was
admitted by the Chief Magistrate himself, that he had even
gone so far out of the ordinary course of his duties as to
communicate with the Governor of the Colony upon the case


of this Convict; and to act upon His Excellency’s sugges-
tion not to entertain the charge preferred against him.
Did not this naturally excite strange surmises in the
minds of the independent Magistrates present; particularly
when they beheld a Government officer attending daily to
watch their proceedings with such pertinacious assiduity 1
Such is an outline of the case upon which I accidentally
sat—influenced by curiosity to go in the first instance, and
subsequently to sit from duty as a Magistrate of the Terri-
tory. The assembled Magistrates at last grew tired of it;
and, after an unexampled investigation of many days, they
relinquished the inquiry, having accidentally discovered
that the prisoner had not mustered his ticket-of-leave,
according to the regulations, for a very long time; and
that, of itself, being sufficient ground upon which the Exe-
cutive Authorities were called upon to deal with him
according to law.
In the month of January succeeding this disgraceful
inquiry, my name, together with those of other Magistrates,
who, in the discharge of their public duty —in the exercise
of their undoubted right to sit upon it —were dismissed the
Magistracy, without any reason for such dismissal being
assigned 1
Subsequently, however, upon the subject being taken up
by one or two independent papers, a letter was published
in the Australian newspaper, such as, the writer stated,
might have been sent by His Excellency the Governor, in
reply to the request made by myself and other gentlemen,
to know the grounds upon which our names were omitted
in the New Commission. In that publication it was im-
puted to us, (Mr. Lamb and myself,) that we had misused
our Magisterial functions for the express purpose of bring-
ing the Government into contempt; and more particularly
alluded to me as having previously incurred censure for


Magisterial delinquency; as having been, at the time of
the Watt inquiry, “ out of my district,” and insinuating,
therefore, that I had no right to sit on that occasion !
The newspaper in which these libellous assertions were
put forth, being universally believed to be the organ of the
sentiments of the present Government —it being a noto-
rious fact that two Government officers, in particular, are
frequent contributors to its columns—l felt it due to my-
self to take the most prompt, and, at the same time, the
most satisfactory means of setting myself right with my
friends, and with the respectable Colonists generally.
I was charged with conduct (and the charge was, at
least demi-official) disreputable to me as a gentleman : cri-
minal in me as a Magistrate ; —I was branded with the
imputation of having rendered my Magisterial powers
subservient to the attainment of a base purpose. I afford-
ed my accuser an opportunity of proving his injurious
charges. I did not proceed against my traducer, (whose
name was given to me by the nominal proprietor of the
Australian,) by criminal process, as I might have done. I
put him upon his justification, and a special jury awarded
me damages to the amount of £loo—certainly nominal
damages, under the circumstances ; but which, I have
reason to believe, were so rated from the full knowledge
which a respectable jury possessed, that my motive, in
coming into a Court of Justice, on that occasion, was not
merely to recover pecuniary damages.
The verdict of a jury having thus acquitted me of any
improper motive in being present at the Police Office, on
the occasion of the Watt inquiry, do I presume too much
in asking your Lordship what could have been the ground
upon which every Magistrate who was even supposed to
disapprove of the conduct of that most impudent person ;
and who was anxious to find out how and by whom, it was


that he was suffered to persevere in his most objectionable
career —was virtually dismissed the Magistracy ?
How did an universal opinion prevail, that William
Watt, a convict under sentence of the law, was so mixed
up, in some way or other, with the Government of Sir
Richard Bourke, that the trials of such a man for felony
committed in this Colony—for habitual lying —for gross
immorality —for utter disregard of one of those regulations
for the breach of which thousands of convicts have been
punished severely — how is it, I most respectfully ask your
Lordship, that such a man, or any thing ever so remotely
connected with such a man, could ever form a ground upon
which an indignity could be attempted to be offered to
respectable gentlemen by a Governor of this Colony ? I
most respectfully heg your Lordship’s attention to this
part of my case. What was it which kept the newspapers
employed, and the town of Sydney in a ferment for nearly,
if not full, a fortnight, discussing the case of a Convict
taken before the Magistrates, on the charge of having
committed offences over which they had summary juris-
diction ?
It was because the opinion was universal, that this Convict
was protected by the Government! —that he was encouraged
in his course of libelling the independent Magistrates, and
respectable Emigrant Colonists generally U
I shall not, my Lord, trespass any longer upon your
Lordship’s patience. My motive in at all addressing your
Lordship, I have already stated. In my former letter I
showed, I think clearly, that I had been made the object of
undeserved censure from a very high authority —that of
Lord Stanley, a predecessor of your Lordship in the
office of Secretary of State. I think that I have now shown
in an equally satisfactory manner, that the recent omission
of my name from the list of Magistrates of this Territory
f 5


was equally unjustifiable ; and I confide in your Lord-
ship’s sense of justice for such measure of redress as will
have the effect of completely removing the stigma which
those acts of which T complain are calculated to affix to
my character as a gentleman, an independent Magistrate,
while I had the honour of holding the Commission, and a
loyal subject of my King.
The Colonial regulations require that this letter should
be transmitted to your Lordship through the Governor.
As, however, his Excellency, Sir Richard Bourke, refused
to forward my last letter in the ordinary course, I may
reasonably expect that this will meet with a like refusal.
Should it be so, I have to hope that your Lordship will not
attribute to me as a fault, a departure from established re-
gulations with which I could not comply.
I have the honor to be, my Lord,
Your most obedient, humble servant.
JOHN BINGLE.
To the Right Honorable Lord Glenelg,
Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies, &c.
P.S. —I also take the liberty, my Lord, of transmitting
herewith, certain documents, relating to the case I have
done myself the honour to detail to you ; and which I re-
spectfully submit, will enable your Lordship to ascertain
the whole of its merits, without the necessity of my sub-
jecting myself to the imputation of being unnecessarily
tedious.
Colonial Secretary's Office,
Sydney, Wth January, 1836.
Sir,
I have had the honour to receive and lay
before the Governor, your letter of the 11th instant, re


questing to be favoured with the grounds upon which your
name has been omitted in the New Commission of the
Peace, published in the Government Gazette of the 6th of
this Month : and in reply, I do myself the honour to inform
you, that his Excellency does not think it necessary to
assign any reason for using his discretion in the selection of
Justices of the Peace for this Colony.
1 have the honour to be, Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
ALEXANDER M‘LAY.
John Single, Esq., Sydney.
(Copy.) Invermein, New South Wales,
25th January, 1836.
John Single, Esq., Puen Buen.
Sir,
We, the undersigned Magistrates, Land-
holders, and Residents of the district, beg leave to offer you
our sincere regret for the omission of your name in the
lately promulgated Commission of the Peace, after having
for so many years discharged the duties of a Magistrate
with the utmost zeal and integrity ; and proffer you our
best thanks for your activity in personally opposing the
depredations of combined, outlawed, armed Convicts on the
property of others, previous to the establishment of an effi-
cient Mounted Police, by his Excellency, General Sir Ralph
Darling.
We are the more especially moved to offer you our sen-
timents from the circumstance of your having submitted to
the annoying inconvenience of appropriating your private
dwelling for a Public Court, previous to your erecting a
Hut for that service ; and for having made all the necessary


official returns, committals, and correspondence, prior to
the appointment of a paid Police Clerk.
(Signed)
Wm. Dumaresq, J. P.
James Thompson
William Forsyth
Michael M'Cartney
Lockhart Millar
David Bell
Donald MTntyre
Henry Nowland
A. Stewart Wightman
John Button
John Dangar
W. B. Carlyle, J.P.
Francis Little, J.P.
Arch. Little, J.P.
William Millar
John Scott
Edward G. Cory
Stephen Coxen
J. Johnson Cory, R.N.
Frederick Cruick shanks
Jos. Docker
William Cox, Jun.
Henry S. Steel
Hugh Cameron
Alex. Livingston
Charles Coxen.
REPLY.
To the Magistrates oe the Invermein Bench, Land-
holders, and Residents of that District.
Gentlemen,
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your
flattering address, on the subject of my name being omitted
in the late Commission of the Peace, and for my having so
many years discharged the duties of a Magistrate with zeal
and integrity.
I beg to assure you, that the compliment paid me by so
respectable a body of gentlemen is highly flattering at a
time when my character has been assailed by the public
press, and motives assigned for some of my acts, that, if
true, would be both disgraceful to the character of a gentle-
man, and highly dishonorable to that of a Magistrate.
These attacks, accompanied by his Excellency the Gover-
nor’s refusal to my respectful request for the cause of so
unprecedented a step —a request as an Englishman, I con-
ceived it my birthright to expect, and which opinion lam


borne out in by a late speech from his Honor the Chief
Justice in the Supreme Court to a complaining Magistrate,
“ that if it was ever his duty to pass a censure upon a
Magistrate, he should never do so without giving the Magis-
trate an opportunity of answering for himself,” —are mo-
tives that make me deeply feel the handsome manner in
which your sentiments are conveyed of my former services
to the District, in endeavouring to protect it against the at-
tacks of lawless convicts which occasionally disturbed the
public peace, and for having attended to all the details of
public business in my private dwelling,
I must therefore beg you to accept my best thanks, and
to assure you, I consider (in whatever light the Govern-
ment have construed my actions) I have only conscien-
tiously done the duty of a true and loyal subject, and an
independent Colonist.
I have the honor to subscribe myself,
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) John Single.
(Copy.)
Bench of Magistrates, Invermein,
17 th February, 1836.
Sir,
We have the honor to acknowledge the
receipt of your letter addressed to the Bench of Magistrates
at Invermein, dated 8th instant, requesting a reply to
certain questions contained therein.
On these points we beg to state our opinion, that at all
times, when present in the District, you have been an
active and attentive Magistrate, anxious in the proper
administration of justice, and the maintenance of the laws.
It is not within our knowledge that you ever made this
Bench (and we venture to say that you never did) the seat


of corruption, and the arena to accomplish interested mo-
tives, to vent excited passions, or did injustice to effect
political purposes.
We take this opportunity further to add, that it was
with regret we noticed the omission of your name in the
list of Magistrates lately published, as we had always great
satisfaction in acting with you as a member of the Bench.
We have the honor to be, Sir,
Your obedient Servants,
(Signed) William Dumaresq, J. P.
W. B. Carlisle, J. P.
Archibald Little, J. P.
Francis Little, J. P.
To John Bingle, Esq., Sydney.
Appeared before me this day, John Bingle, Esq., of
Puen Buen, Dart Brook, in the County of Brisbane, and
maketh oath, That he has seen in a newspaper dated the
26th January, 1836, called the Australian, an attack upon
his character as a Magistrate, totally false, unfounded, and
malicious, tending to injure him as a Magistrate and a gen-
tleman ; and that in consequence of a speech from the
Solicitor-General, in the Supreme Court, in the case Lamb
v. Hardy, wherein he referred to that statement of the
Australian newspaper of the aforesaid date, as a matter of
fact, to the injury of the Deponent’s character; it has
given to the Deponent an opportunity of making a state-
ment on oath— First, that he never knew, directly or in-
directly, any thing of the notorious Convict Watt’s case
alluded to in that Journal, till the day (and only then by a
mere accident at the moment of passing the Police Office)
that a Warrant or Summons was granted for him, Watt, to
appear the day following at that Office; that he, Deponent,


went the following day from curiosity, without the slightest
intention of taking a seat on the Bench ; that he had not
been long in Court (the case having commenced) when a
difference of opinion existing among the Magistrates, four-
teen or fifteen in number, the Chairman singled De-
ponent out for his opinion, which, as a Magistrate of the
Territory, he conceived he was bound to give, and after
having passed an opinion on one point he, Deponent, felt
himself called upon to sit to the end of the case, which he
expected would have terminated that day. That Deponent
further swears, that he had never seen, or spoken to Mr.
Mudie, respecting Watt—and that he was not even on
terms of intimacy with the said Mr. Mudie, or ever heard
previously, that charges of any nature were to be brought
against Watt; and that Deponent was not actuated by any
other motive than to do strict justice as a public and in-
dependent Magistrate, after being called on by the Chair-
man ; and that he, Deponent, regretted, and endeavoured
to put a stop (as far as his voice went) to the disgraceful
scenes and personal insults that he witnessed in a Court of
Justice, without receiving that protection he was entitled
to from the Chairman ; that Deponent distinctly swears, he
never used his power “ as a Minister of Justice not to do
Justice, but to effect a political purpose.” That Deponent
so far from wishing to make the Court “ an arena for the
accomplishment of interested motives, or to vent excited
passions,” went personally to several of the sitting Magis-
trates to endeavour to put a stop to such proceedings ; that
he also saw the Chief Police Magistrate on the same sub-
ject, and that if he, the Deponent, had shown any warmth
of temper during the proceedings, it was occasioned by the
prisoner, a Convict, wishing to produce certain Govern-
ment correspondence, which he had no right to produce, as
it was not at all connected with the case at issue.


That Deponent further states, that it was the first in-
stance he ever knew or saw in the Colony of a prisoner of
the crown, in Summary Jurisdiction cases, being allowed
by a Chairman of the Bench of Magistrates, to challenge
the right of a Magistrate to sit on his case, or to have a
legal adviser, and that Deponent believes it to be unprece-
dented.
JOHN BINGLE.
Sworn before me, at Sydney,
the 9th day of June, 1836.
A. B. Spark, J. P.
APPENDIX, No. III.
(Copy.)
Sydney, 30 th January, 1836.
My Lord,
We, the undersigned Land-holders, in the
Colony of New South Wales, beg respectfully to represent
to your Lordship, that after having filled the office of
Magistrates for many successive years, and performed the
duties thereof with zeal and fidelity, and (we believe) with
benefit to the inhabitants of our several districts ; our
names have been omitted in the New Commission of the
Peace, recently issued by his Excellency Sir Richard
Bourke.
The accompanying copy of correspondence with the
Colonial Secretary, will prove to your Lordship that we
have in vain requested to be made acquainted with the
reason which induced his Excellency to adopt a course,


tending to degrade us in the eyes of our fellow-colonists,
and to aifect our reputation in other quarters, independent
of the injury thus inflicted on us individually : we submit
to your Lordship, that a serious evil has been done to the
Colony by the creation of an opinion amongst the Convicts
under sentence of transportation, that Magistrates obnox-
ious to them will be removed. In the conscientious dis-
charge of our Magisterial duties, it is probable that we, in
common with other active Magistrates, may have displeased
many men of that class. And some of us in our own
persons, or in the persons of our nearest and dearest rela-
tives, have had signal and awful proofs of hostility. The
brother of one of the Magistrates thus dismissed was
murdered in his bed. The house of another was plundered,
and his son-in-law narrowly escaped with his life. The
confidential Overseer of a third was shot to death on
the highway. A fourth was reviled, and insulted within
the precincts of a Court of Justice; and was knocked
down and otherwise maltreated at noon-day, in the streets
of Sydney —these several outrages were committed by
Convicts, as will be found recorded in the Colonial Courts.
In addition to the triumph our degradation has afforded
to the prison population, and to the many who are
connected with them by the ties of kindred and associ-
ation, we have the mortification of finding ourselves the
object of libels, daily disseminated in papers conducted
by, or the property of convicts. And the peculiar struc-
ture of our Jury system deprives us of all means of redress.
The most virulent of these Journals is the Sydney Gazette,
the proprietress of which is, by permission of His Excel-
lency the Governor, about to be married to a convict
named William Watt; and many gross libels which appear
in it are from the pen of this man. As the law does not
suppose him to be possessed of any property, a civil action


for damages cannot be brought against him. And if we
proceed by criminal information, the prisoner, exercising
his right of challenge, would most likely strike out every
unsullied name, and leave an array of jurymen not likely
to return a verdict, whatever might be the nature of the
evidence placed before them.
Thus circumstanced, we trust your Lordship will direct
an inquiry into the causes which have led to proceedings
casting so serious a reflection on our characters; it being
our anxious desire to openly meet those charges which, in
His Excellency’s opinion, have rendered us unfit to con-
tinue in the Commission of the Peace.
We have the honor to be,
Your Lordship’s most obedient Servants,
(Signed) John Lamb,
J. Mudie,
John Maclaren,
John Bingle.
To the Right Honorable Lord Glenelg,
Secretary of State for the Colonies, &c.
APPENDIX, No. IV.
Colonial Secretary’s Office,
Sydney, 10 th of February, 1837.
Sir,
The Governor having transmitted to the
Right Honorable the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
your letter of the Ist of February, 1836, I am commanded
by His Excellency to acquaint you as follows;
His Majesty has been graciously pleased to sanction and


approve the revision of the Magistracy which His Excel-
lency thought it advisable to effect at the beginning of last
year.
In reply to the complaint which your letter conveyed,
on account of the omission of your name in the new list,
the Secretary of State has been pleased to express his
opinion in a despatch addressed to Sir Richard Bourke,
dated the 22nd of August, 1836, number 194, in these
terms.
In proceeding to the consideration of this subject, I
would in the first place advert to a distinction, which,
although of no light importance, seems to be overlooked
by the gentlemen who have remonstrated against your
proceedings. I advert to the difference which subsists
between the erasure of the name of an individual from the
Commission of the Peace, and the omission of his name in
the list of Magistrates, when a new and General Com-
mission is issued. In the former case, the measure seems
necessarily to presuppose some misconduct on the part of
the person who is thus removed from an office of trust and
honor; and the unfavorable impression which it is cal-
culated to produce on the public mind, justly entitles him
to demand a distinct statement of the grounds of the
removal, But when the existing Commission of the Peace
is revoked, to make way for a new and revised list of
Magistrates, the case is otherwise. It is the avowed and
well understood object of such a proceeding to review the
choice which has been previously made of the Justices of
the Peace, and to make from the whole body of society a
new selection, with the benefit of the experience which
former times have afforded, of the qualifications of the
various candidates for the Magistracy.
Thus an opportunity is offered of passing over any
members of the former Commission who, without -the


slightest imputation of delinquency, may yet have been
found wanting in those qualities, whether natural or ac-
quired, which are indispensable for the correct discharge of
such duties. On such occasions, no man is reasonably
entitled to demand an explanation of the motives which
have led to the omission of his name, because that omission
implies no reproach, but is to be accounted for by the
obvious and simple consideration, that a sufficient number
of persons have been found with qualifications for the
Magistacy, superior to their own.
In New South Wales there are urgent reasons for this
occasional review and correction of the Magisterial list.
In no other part of the British dominions are the Magis-
trates invested with powers so large, so capable of dan-
gerous abuse, and demanding so constant an exercise of
sound judgment, temper, and moderation. If the lists
were not, from time to time, revised, these powers must be
permanently left in the hands of any man to whom they
had once been committed, unless he should be guilty of
some positive offence, which would justify his dismission.
But men blameless and estimable in all other personal
conduct, and private character, may yet be totally unfit for
so delicate a duty, and the unfitness may be of such a
nature as not to be brought to light, except by actual
proof of incapacity. It can hardly be maintained by any
one, that of such experience, when acquired, the Executive
Government ought not to avail itself, by the removal of
such Magistrates. But as I have shown, such removals
could not be accomplished, except by those occasional
revisions of the entire list.
I have the honor to be, Sir,
Your most obedient Servant,
(Signed) E. Deas Thomson,
(Colonial Secretary.)
To John Single, Esq., &e &c.


APPENDIX, No. V.
SUPREME COURT, SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES.
TRIAL OF JOHN SINGLE AND WILLIAM WERE,
FOR FELONY.
Monday, 8th May, 1837. —Before the acting Chief
Justice and the following Civil Jury : —Mr. James Hind-
marsh, Commissariat Clerk; Mr. Peter Howel, miller,
Penrith; Mr. Walter Howel, miller, Penrith; Mr. Charles
Hadley, grazier, Penrith; Mr. Thomas Hadley, grazier,
Penrith ; Mr. J. Howison, builder, Parramatta ; Mr. Rich-
ard Hunt, landholder, Parramatta; Mr. Henry Harvey,
landholder, Parramatta ; Edwin Atwel Hayes, South-head-
road ; Mr. Hadfield, dealer, Parramatta-street; Mr. J. Ha-
milton, boot-maker, Kent-street; and Randal F. Hume,
Esq., Appin.
John Single, Esq., of Puen Buen, was indicted for
stealing three oxen, fifty cows, fifty heifers, twenty cows,
and ten bulls, the property of Jesse Coleman, on the 23rd
of December, 1836 ; and William Were was indicted for
aiding, assisting, comforting, and abetting the said John
Bingle in the felony aforesaid. Other counts laid the
property as belonging to one David Grover, and to our
Sovereign Lord the King.
The Attorney-General opened the case, as counsel for
the Crown. He said it was his duty to conduct the trial,
and the first part of that duty would be to lay before the


Jury a statement of the facts that he intended to produce
in evidence in support of the indictment. By the informa-
tion the Jury would have learned that the prisoners were
charged with a very grave offence—cattle stealing. The
information contained six counts: the first count charged
Mr. Bingle with stealing cattle the property of a person
named Coleman; the second count charged Mr. Were with
aiding, assisting, and abetting in the commission of the
felony ; the third and fourth counts laid the property in a
person named Grover; and the fifth and sixth in our Sove-
reign Lord the King. The charge of cattle stealing was
always a most serious charge when brought even against
persons in the lowest stations of life ; but when brought
against gentlemen —men moving in a respectable sphere of
life, one of whom held the honorable and responsible office
of a Justice of the Peace —men of large fortune—the Jury
had a most important duty to perform in investigating it.
There should be strong evidence given before the charge
could be entertained, to rebut the presumption that men hold-
ing the character of gentlemen must be above the low and
mean feelings which actuate the minds of those who are guilty
of the crime of cattle stealing, especially when they were men
of large fortune, and the causes that often led to the commis-
sion of crime could not be supposed to operate. When all
these circumstances were combined, it would require strong
evidence indeed to rebut their presumptive innocence. In
the exercise of that most unpleasant, and, to him, most
anxious duty, that of acting as Grand Jury —acting in the
place of twenty-three individuals —he had paid great atten-
tion to these presumptions. No man would more rejoice
than he would at the Attorney-general being relieved from
acting as Grand Jury; feeling as a British subject, and
estimating and revering the institutions of Britain, he
could not consider that he was acting constitutionally when


occupying the place of a Grand Jury; but at present he
was compelled to do it. It had been suggested that he, as
Attorney-general, had been ordered to institute the present
prosecution; but he positively denied it. He would not
allow any power on earth to influence him: he was sworn
to exercise the authority of his office to the best of his
judgment, and he would do so, as he had always done, un-
assisted, unaided, uninfluenced by any one. He could not
shut his ears to the rumours that had been industriously
circulated, that the present prosecution was got up for poli-
tical purposes—that it was a political prosecution ; and
those rumours must have reached the ears of the Jury.
With the present prosecution politics had nothing whatever
to do, and the Jury must dismiss such an idea from their
minds. If the Jury had any preconceived opinions on the
case, they must have been formed without knowing the
facts of it, and they must decide on the evidence that
would be brought before them : on the evidence that would
be adduced the case must either stand or fall. Of Mr.
Single he knew but little—of Mr. Were he knew less ; but
he would rejoice if the Jury, on their oaths, could acquit
them of the crime for which they then stood at the bar.
Although the circumstances of the case occurred as far
back as October, 1835, they had not come under his notice
until January last, when he received three depositions made
before the Police Magistrate at Newcastle, one made by
Jesse Coleman, who was unfortunately killed in Feb-
ruary last, and whose evidence he should not there-
fore be able to lay before the Jury ; a second, made by
David Grover, who would come before the Jury to be
examined; and a third, made by Mr. William Sparke, a
respectable settler at Hunter’s River. When he saw that
the affidavits had not been made in the presence of Mr.
Single, he did not consider it would be fair to act on them,


and he accordingly wrote to Mr. Bingle, requesting him
to call at his office; and when Mr. Bingle called,
he placed the depositions in his hands. When Le
considered that the depositions were made by prisoners
of the Crown ; that those prisoners of the Crown had been
in the service of Mr. Bingle, he certainly looked with
suspicion on them ; and if Mr. Bingle had satisfied him
that they were false, no further steps would have been
taken; but the defence of Mr. Bingle going to implicate
the Bench of Magistrates at Invermein, who he was bound
by his office to consider had acted properly, he thought it
best to direct an inquiry on the spot, in order that the case
might be fully heard. The Police Magistrate at Maitland,
Mr. Day, was ordered to attend to conduct the investigation,
in delicacy to the Invermein Magistrates; for if Mr. Bingle
was right, of course the Magistrates were wrong; and if
the Magistrates were right, Mr. Bingle was wrong. The
Crown Solicitor also went down to conduct the prosecution.
An investigation took place, when it appeared that Coleman
and Grover had been in Mr. Bingle’s service ; having ob-
tained their tickets-of-leave, they rented a piece of ground
from Mr. Bingle, known as Sparke’s Farm, at 50 1, a
year, and they were to be allowed the use of fifty cows,
to be reasonably milked so that they could support their
calves ; afterwards they agreed to act as stock-keepers to
Mr. Bingle ; Coleman at 25 1., and Grover at 1 81. per
annum, which was very nearly the rent of the farm ;in
October, 1835, a charge was made against Coleman and
Grover by Mr. Were; certainly a most extraordinary
charge for Magistrates to decide on themselves; they were
charged with slaughtering cattle not their own, and brand-
ing cattle improperly. The examination lasted several
days. Captain Dumaresq and Mr. Little were the Magis-
trates until the last day, the 4th of November, when Mr.


Little was not present, and Dr. Carlyle and Mr. Macqueen
took their seats on the Bench. The opinion come to by the
Bench was, that the prisoners were guilty, and they recom-
mended their tickets to be taken away, and their property
to be confiscated. The case was not a case for Magistrates ;
it was a case for the decision of the Supreme Court, but
with that the Jury had nothing to do. When men holding
tickets-of-leave are found guilty of any delinquencies, an
account is taken of all their property, which goes to the
Crown. As the Crown, by allowing the men to hold
tickets, allows them to get into debt, all bona fide and just
debts are always paid out of the proceeds of the property
taken possession of by the Crown ; and from his experience
in the Crown Office he was enabled to say, that claims for
debt not bona fide due were often made, but after the sale
of confiscated property just debts were always paid. When
the Bench came to the decision, they sent a letter to the
principal superintendent of convicts, f acquainting him with
the confiscation of the cattle; but in so doing the Magis-
trates laboured under a mistake ; they should have sent
the information to the Attorney-General. Mr. Hely was
an officer who did his duty as well and as zealously as any
officer in his Majesty’s service, but he knew what that duty
was, and he did not step beyond it ; he acted on that part
of the letter which concerned him, but took no notice of
that which did not. On the last day of the examination of
Coleman and Grover, Mr. Bingle gave evidence, and it
appeared that Coleman had sixty-eight head of cattle, and
Grover twenty-five bead. After their conviction, Mr.
Bingle requested that the men might be allowed to go home
to their wives to settle their affairs, which was consented
to, and it was agreed that the small things about the house
should be allowed to be kept by the men’s wives, and
taken no notice of. As the cattle of Coleman and Grover
o


which were branded G and J. C. were on Mr. Single’s land,
Mr. Single and Mr. Were said they would collect the
cattle ; the Bench thought Mr. Single was conferring a
favor on them, and accordingly appointed him to collect
the cattle, and make a report to the Bench. The Bench
gave no further authority ; they could give no further
authority ; they only gave such an authority as they would
have given to a constable, if Mr. Single had not undertaken
to collect the cattle. The district constable or the mounted
policemen must have done it if Mr. Single had not. When
the Bench gave permission to the men to go home, they
of course did so. There were three working bullocks on
the farm belonging to Coleman, which Mr. Single caused
to be branded with his brand, an anchor and the letter B.
Captain Duraaresq has some recollection that Mr. Single
said the prisoners owed him 30 I. ; but the men said the
balance was the other way ; at any rate Mr. Single never
sent in his bill. Dr. Macartney claimed 51. for medical
attendance, which it was agreed should be paid out of the
proceeds of the sale of the cattle. The prisoners could not
have been in Mr. Single’s debt; for it would be seen that
their wages as stockmen nearly equalled the rent of the
farm, and, besides that, they had supplied him with a ton
of hay and one hundred and fifty bushels of wheat; they
also had an agreement for four hundred and twenty rods of
fencing, at 2s. 9d. per rod, and for eighty hurdles, at Is. 6d.
each. All these facts clearly showed that they could not
be indebted to Mr. Single, but that Mr. Single must have
owed them money. But no matter whether Single owed
them money, or they owed Single money, the Bench never
gave authority to Mr. Single to pay himself, and place any
value he thought proper on the property he appropriated to
himself. The prisoners had two colts, and the day after
they arrived at the farm Mr. Single asked them where they


were; they replied they had sold them to Rushforth for 51. ;
when Mr. Single told them that he thought the Bench
would he angry if they knew the colts were sold while they
were in the watch-house, and recommended them to get off
the bargain, and he would take them at the same price, and
pay them afterwards when they were assigned down the
country. The bargain with Rushforth was broken off;
the colts were taken possession of by Mr. Single, and
he never made any return of them to the Bench.
In the possession of Mr. Stokes they would find a
book which fully corroborated him in what he said.
The colts were given over to Mr. Stokes, along with the
other property of Single, and Mr. Stokes had one of them
broken in for his own use. Mr. Single also bought some
harness, and paid for it; Grover’s share was 2 1. 16s. Soon
after the men lost their tickets, Mr. Were, Mr. Single’s su-
perintendent, wrote to the Colonial Secretary to know how
it was that the names of Grover and Coleman did not ap-
pear in the Government Gazette, as having lost their tickets
of leave, as he had obtained a verdict against them, and
their tickets were recommended by the Bench to be can-
celled. Not receiving an answer, he wrote a second letter
to the Colonial Secretary, and finally addressed a letter to
the Governor on the subject. Although Mr. Were dis-
played such anxiety to have these men’s tickets taken
away, there was not a word said about the property all this
time; and it would be for the Jury to say whether this
anxiety was bona fide from an abstract love of justice, or
with the intention of getting the men away, that they might
keep the property ; for if the men’s tickets were not can-
celled, the property would of course have to be given up
again. Captain Dumaresq made several inquiries as to
what had become of the cattle, and was always answered
that they had not been got in ; that nothing had been done,
g 2


though at the time three of them had been branded, and
eight or nine of them had been slaughtered in Mr. Bingle’s
yard. This fact was not denied by Mr. Single —it could
not be denied ; it was too strong a fact; it was known to
all his men, and some of them had been slaughtered before
the letters were written to the Colonial Secretary by Mr.
Were. Patrick Donoghue, Mr. Bingle’s stockman, w'ho
had appeared as a witness against Coleman and Grover, got
directions to bring in Mr. Bingle’s cattle, but not a word
about these men’s cattle. Thirty-five of them were driven
over to Liverpool Plains; they were in the stock-yard
at Puen Buen, but they were not given to the Bench :
they were not placed in the pound. These cattle must have
increased : no account of the increase had been kept; they
had merged into Mr. Bingle’s stock. The three working
bullocks which had been branded were used in his team
until he sold them to Mr. Goggs, thereby making them
entirely his own. The only object of the Bench was to
have them collected at once for confiscation ; and the only
authority given to Mr. Bingle was only such an authority
as would have been given to a constable, to make his re-
turn. Since these proceedings had been instituted the
Mounted Police had been sent to Liverpool Plains to look
for the cattle, and although not one half of them had been
collected—only twenty-one cows, fourteen bullocks, and
eleven calves, with the two colts and a chestnut mare —
they had been sold at Maitland for upwards of Be-
fore the inquiry commenced, Mr. Bingle had engaged his
passage in the Cragievar, and had entered into an agree-
ment with an honorable and respectable young man, Mr.
Frederick Michael Stokes, to take charge of his property,
and Mr. Stokes had given up a respectable and lucrative
situation, as joint Editor of the Sunday Herald, to proceed
there. In giving up the accounts, Mr, Bingle made no


difference between the branded diamond G cattle and the
J. C. cattle and his own ; in fact, Mr. S. had one of the colts
broken in for his own use. About the 30th of December,
Mr. Were left Mr. Single’s employment, but remained
living at Mr. Stokes’s as his guest. Had Mr. Single gone
before any inquiry was instituted, he would ask if any ac-
count would ever have been furnished ? Indeed he looked
upon this as the most damning fact against Mr. Single, as
clearly proving he intended to make a property of the cattle.
It might, perhaps, be said that Mr. Single being authorised
to collect the cattle, had legal possession ; and that if he
afterwards converted them to his own use, it was fraud,
not felony : but in the first place the Bench had no autho-
rity to give any person possession; they could only act for
the benefit of the Crown. In the second, of “ Russell on
Crimes,” it was laid down, that if it appeared a person had
only a bare charge of property, he could commit a larceny
by converting it to his own use. The question would be
whether, ah initio, the animus furandi existed. There was
a circumstance which occurred in December last, which
showed Mr. Were’s connexion with the affair. Coleman
got permission from his master to come to Sydney and see
Mr. Single ; he came, but as he was since dead, they could
not learn what the result of that interview was. He after-
wards applied for leave to go before a Magistrate, and that
coming to the ears of Mr. Were, he requested Captain Du-
maresq to give a statement of his recollection of what took
place at the investigation respecting Coleman and Grover.
Captain Dumaresq wrote back, that he thought the cattle
were to be put into the pound and sold ; but this was not
satisfactory to Mr. Were, who requested Captain Duma-
resq to leave out about the pound, and asked him if he did
not recollect that the cattle were to be sold after just debts
were paid; and Captain Dumaresq not suspecting there


was any sinister motive, destroyed his first letter, and gave
Mr. Were a second letter to the effect required. As to any
difficulty Mr. Bingle might labour under in collecting the
cattle, he must have known that the Crown would pay any
expenses that were incurred ; but numbers of them were
within his reach, so much so that he got thirty-five of them
into his yard, and sent them to Liverpool Plains. These
were the facts he meant to prove ; the Jury would receive the
law from the Judge, and if Mr. Bingle could satisfy them
that he did all in his power to have an account kept, no
man would be more delighted than he would, at their ac-
quittal. Much had been said about the difficulty of his
situation in acting as Grand Jury, but in the present case
he had experienced no difficulty, for his judgment very
much deceived him if, on the prima facie case, there would
have been one dissentient voice ont of twenty-three Grand
Jurors as to the propriety of putting the prisoners at the
bar on their trial. The Jury, he trusted, would not be in-
fluenced by what they had seen or read, but try the case
entirely on the evidence. He would be sorry to pxtt any
case on the testimony of prisoners of the Crown alone ; but
in the present case he had other testimony. The circum-
stances of the Colony required that persons should be ad-
mitted into the witness-box who would not be admitted in
England, but that should make the Jury the more circum-
spect in examining their evidence. Many of the witnesses
were gentlemen, and if they had any feeling in the case,
it must be in favour of the prisoners, who were gentlemen.
After a few general remarks, the learned gentlemen pro-
ceeded to call witnesses.
Mr. James Raymond, Clerk of the Records, in the Co-
lonial Secretary’s Office, said, —1 produce the Indents of
the ship Marquis of Hastings (2). I find the name of David
Grover by the Marquis of Hastings; he was sentenced to


fourteen years ; and Jesse Coleman, by the Midas, sen-
tenced to life.
Mr. J. R. Brenan, Superintendent of Convicts. — This
document is signed by Mr. Ryan, the Chief Clerk in the
Office ;it encloses tickets of leave for cancellation ; I be-
lieve the word “ cancelled” under the names of Grover and
Coleman to be in the Governor’s handwriting, the tickets
were cancelled accordingly ; I produce the record; the
tickets were destroyed by Mr. Ryan, who received them
from the Clerk of the Bench at Invermein ; on the 19th of
January, 1836, I received directions from the Colonial Se-
cretary to forward the letter of the Bench, requesting the
cancellation of the tickets, but it could not be found.
David Grover. —I am a prisoner of the Crown ; I arrived
in the Colony in 1827, in the Marquis of Hastings ; I was
assigned to Mr. Drew, who resided on the Wollombi; I was
with him two years and ten months, after which I went to
Mr. Bingle, with whom I remained until I got my ticket in
1834; I knew Jesse Coleman; he was in Mr. Bingle’s ser-
vice ; he got his ticket before me ; he and I married two
sisters ; we took a farm from Mr. Bingle, at Dartbrook ; I
know this paper; I am no scholar; I can write ; 1 cannot
read ; this is my name ; we took thirty-five acres ; the rent
was to be 50 1, per year; we were to have the milk of fifty
cows, and a team of bullocks; it was called Sparke’s farm;
I was employed by Mr. Bingle as stock-keeper; I was to
receive 2 51. a year and the use of a man ; the man was to
do my work when I was looking after the stock ; C oleman
was afterwards employed; he took another man’s place
as stock-keeper; he was to receive 18k per year; I recol-
lect being brought before the Bench at Invermein, in No-
vember, 1835 ; it was about a month from the time we
were first brought up until we were discharged by the
Bench ; Mr. Were was superintendent to Mr. Bingle; he


brought us up ; my ticket was cancelled ; Coleman was
brought up at the same time ; his ticket was cancelled ; I
told the Bench I had twenty-five cows, bullocks, and
calves; I branded them with a diamond and the letter G ;
they were all branded but one calf; Coleman said he had
sixty-eight; I could not swear he had that number ; he
had more than I had ; his cattle were branded with the let-
ters J. C. ; I do not recollect felling the Bench I had any
other property ; the Bench told me they would cancel my
ticket, and the property would go to the crown; outside the
Court, Mr. Bingle said, “ It was a bad job, and he was
very sorry he asked us if he could do any thing for us ;
we said we would be much obliged if he would ask the
Bench to let us have a pass for a few days to settle our
affairs, as we owed a little money, and were owed some;
Mr. Bingle told Coleman he had better go himself, but at
length Mr. Bingle went; he was gone about five minutes,
and said it was granted, and we were to have a week’s pass
in charge of a policeman ; we went to the farm in charge
of Curtis ; our wives went with us ; we passed Mr. Bingle
on our road up, where the men were washing sheep ; about
half an hour after we got there, Mr. Bingle came ; we were
to give over to him the things on the farm belonging to
him ; we gave them up safe; Mr. Bingle said the Bench
had authorised him to take our property ; he did not say
what property ; he did not say what for ; he took one of
my working bullocks ; and one of Coleman’s; thev were
branded; I branded them with an anchor and the letter B,
Mr. Single’s brand ; he ordered two of his own servants to
brand them ; I think there were three branded that morn-
ing ; the policeman was present when they were branded :
our. cattle were running on Mr. Bingle’s farm ; I did not
see any more of our cattle about the stook-yard ; Coleman
had a mare and a foal; I had a foal; not at the time I lost


nv; ticket ; I sold him before, while I was in the lock-up,
to Rushforth ; Coleman sold his young horse ; we gut them
back; Rushforth gave me an order for 10Z.; after I lost my
ticket I saw Mr. Single at his own house, when he asked
me about the horses, I told him ; Coleman was present;
he said he thought the Bench would not be pleased, and he
asked me if the man would take his money back, and I
said I dared say he might; he asked me what kind of colts
they were, 1 told him they were strong colts, and he said if
Rushforth would take his money back he would take them
at the same price as he had got the rest; I saw Rushforth
and gave the order back, and he gave up the colts ; Mr.
Bingle agreed to take them, and gave 51. each for them ;
he said he did not think it advisable to pay us then ; as our
tickets were only recommended to be cancelled he did not
know how it might be, and if we were assigned down the
country we were to write to him and he would send the
money ; the horses were on his farm at the time ; we brought
some things down the country on a dray lent us by Mr.
Bingle ; our wearing apparel, that’s all ; we sold some har-
ness to Mr. Bingle ; after we had returned him his own
things, he said the harness was no good to us and he would
buy them ; he did so ;my share was 2 1. 165.; I was paid
by an order on Mr. Francis Mitchell; I left it with the
landlord of the ‘ Black Swan,’ near Maitland ; we settled
no accounts ; I did not consider we owed Mr. Bingle any
thing; I thought he owed us about 30 1. for labour ; for
stock-keeping ; we did four hundred and twenty rods of
fencing at 2s. 9 A. per rod ; this is my name ;I do not
know whether this is the agreement ; we made eighty
hurdles at Is. 6 d. each ;we sold him one hundred and fifty
bushels of wheat and one ton of hay ; when he gave us the
money for the harness he did not say we owed him any
thing ; he said if we got assigned out down the country to
g 5


tell the master to write to him, and he would send a cha-
racter of us; we went to the lock-up when our pass was
out, and from that to Newcastle Gaol; I was assigned to
Mr. Edward Sparke, near Maitland ; Coleman was assigned
to Mr. William Sparke ; I told Mr. Sparke about the cha-
racter, and he said he did not require one; Coleman died
about three months ago ; I saw ray cattle in the team just
about Christmas ; they stopped at our place ; they were in
charge of a bullock-driver and two or three other men ; I
knew the bullocks ; I was not surprised at seeing them, as
I heard before they were at work ; I never saw Mr. Single
himself afterwards; Coleman went to Sydney with his
master; he said he would call on Mr. Single; I got some
information from Robert Carter about the cattle ; I went
before a Magistrate in company with Coleman after Christ-
mas ; I was sent out after the cattle with a policeman ; I
got forty-six altogether; there were four policemen; the
cattle were given up to Serjeant Lee; Mr. Were was not
at our place when the three bullocks were branded ; fifteen
of the cattle I got lately were mine ; they had my brand
on ; the anchor was not on any of them but one ; that was
branded by mistake; there was a steer of Coleman’s with
two anchors; the stock-keepers said there were two or
three other head of cattle; I went to Mr. Bingle’s station
on the Gwydir River; if the cattle had been collected when
we lost our tickets more would have been collected ; I
could have got all mine within one or two; my cattle
would have seven or eight increase in a year; I do not
know how many Coleman’s would have been, but I heard
him say he got fifteen or sixteen every year; when our
tickets were cancelled we were in Mr. Bingle’s employ.
Cross-examined. —I came from the lock-up-house ; I was
in custody ; I have not got my ticket back; my cattle were of
different ages ; they had different brands ; I bought them,


and bred them ; I do not know whether I was apprehended
on a charge of cattle stealing ; I was not at large after I was
brought before the Bench; I never heard that the hides of
the cattle supposed to have been stolen by me and Coleman
were found with the brands cut out; we were in possession
of the farm about sixteen months ; we had some flour,
sugar, salt, and soap, from Mr. Bingle, but we returned
wheat in lieu of it; not the wheat before alluded to ; we
returned some of the things back, weight for weight; Ido
not recollect who was store-keeper at the time; we got
about 12 1, from Mr. Bingle ; every thing we got from the
store for the first six months we were to return ; Mr.
Docker got meat from Mr. Bingle ; he might have had
other things ; we broke the shaft of the dray ; there was a
cross-cut saw; the plough was better when we left than
when we got it; the harrow was as good when we left as
when we went; I never owed Mr. Young 8 1. 10s.; Ido
not know whether Coleman owed Mr. Macartney any thing ;
he attended Coleman’s wife, but he had a cow ; I never
joined in any order on Mr. Bingle; I owed Mr. Coxen
nothing ; there were near one hundred and fifty bushels of
wheat delivered either to Mr. Sutherland or Mr. Bingle,
at 3s. 6d. per bushel ; I could not swear to a few bushels ;
there was a ton of hay at 4 1. ; Coleman put up the fence
with some of the men ; he had put up a fence for Mr. Little
before ; I saw the fence lately ; there was a panel or two
down ; I do not know that the posts are split, nor that the
rails are falling down from being too short; Mr. Fisher
sent me to Mr. Bingle’s station at Liverpool Plains to look
for the cattle ; we found the cattle the day after we got up,
some of them ; Mr. Bingle’s is a large run ; I never brought
the whole of my cattle to the yard ; Mr. Bingle insisted on
ticket-of-leave men registering the whole of their cattle ;
I registered mine at the Redbank Court, about four years


ago ; I often brought my cattle into the stock-yard; Do-
noghue has seen my cattle ; we were to be allowed the use
of fifty cows ; Mr. Bingle knew we had cattle ; I could
have collected my cattle ; Mr. Bingle had not a thousand
head of cattle when 1 lost my ticket; I could have got
Rushforth’s order cashed down the country ; Mr. Bingle
persuaded me to give up the order, and he took the colts ;
I should not have given the 10Z. to Government; after we
were convicted we had no use for bullock-yokes and bows ;
there were twenty-five bushels of wheat in the house, which
we never got any thing for; when the Bench took away
our tickets they said the cattle were to be confiscated ; the
things in the house were to be allowed us ; a policeman
went with us to the farm ; I dare say he saw the brand
put on the cattle ; he was within sight of the yard : those
bullocks I saw in the dray ; it was the wool season ; there
was a soldier with me to prevent my selling; w'e sold the
colts outside of the lock-up ; we never had a settlement; I
made the charge to Mr. Day ; Mr. Bingle was not present;
Mr. Bingle was brought up shortly afterwards ; Mr. Bingle
promised to give us a good character ; I never heard Cole-
man say that his master had applied to Mr. Bingle for a
character; the cattle at Liverpool Plains were branded as
they always were.
Re-examined. —I do not understand the account just
read ; I considered Mr. Bingle was indebted to me ; a few
days before the lease we had a settlement, when the balance
due to me was 10Z. ; this is the account in Mr. Bingle’s
handwriting (accounts put in.) Just after we lost our tickets
I told Mr. Bingle we owed no person anything, but the
tailor, about 1 1. ; the one hundred and fifty bushels of
wheat were independent of what we gave for the flour ; the
cheeses were never paid for, as we did not know the market


price. There was never any complaint made by Mr. Single,
or the superintendent, about the fencing ; Mr. Single and
his men knew more about the run than any one else ; I
should have thought the cattle would have been as safe
without Mr. Single’s brand as with it; Mr. Single said as
they were there it would be better to brand them ; it was
well known in the neighbourhood that we had lost our
tickets ; I made a complaint to Mr. Sparke about the cattle
being kept.
Mr. William Sparke. —I am a settler, residing on the
Hunter’s River, between Newcastle and Maitland. A man
named Coleman was assigned to me ; he died in January
last from a blow ; Grover was assigned to my father ; I had
some conversation with Mr. Single about Coleman; I
asked Mr. Single what sort of character Coleman was, as
Coleman requested me to do so ; he said he was a bad
character ; that was the only conversation I had with Mr.
Single about him ; as Mr. Single was turning away, I said,
“ He says he has got some cattle,” and Mr. Single said,
“No, they were confiscated.” Coleman many times asked
me to let him go to Mr. Single ; he said he would sooner
let the cattle go to the Crown than to Mr. Single, and I
allowed him to go to Sydney to make inquiry ; he was not
satisfied, and I gave him permission to make his complaint,
and he told Mr. Wentworth about it, and then he was sent
for by Mr. Day ; Mr. Single did not seem to avoid the
conversation about the cattle ; he was turning away when
I spoke to him about them ; Grover was sent for at the
same time.
Cross-examined. —I told Coleman Mr. Single had given
him a bad character.


Captain William Dumaresq. —I acted as a Magistrate at
the Invermein Bench, in October 1835 ; I recollect a com-
plaint being made against Coleman and Grover ; they were
charged with slaughtering cattle not their own, and branding
cattle improperly ; Mr. Were, Mr. Single’s superintendent,
was the prosecutor; the case was under investigation from
October the 14th, to November the 4th ; there were several
adjournments ; Mr. Bingle’s deposition was taken on the
4th of November, (decision of the Bench read ;) Mr. Little
and myself took all the depositions, with the exception of
Mr. Bingle’s evidence ; after the property was directed to
be confiscated, the question was how the cattle were to be
collected to he handed over to the Crown ; 1 saw Mr. Were
in the body of the Court; I understood the cattle were with
Mr. Bingle’s on his run, and I said, “ Mr. Were, will you
undertake to collect the cattle?” understanding he was
acting as the superintendent of Mr. Bingle, and he said he
would ; he was present when the decision of the Court was
given ; I am impressed with the belief that he was aware
of the decision of the Bench ; I believe Mr. Bingle was
aware of the decision of the Bench ; I recollect Mr. Bingle
getting a pass for the men; I cannot' say whether Mr.
Bingle was present when Mr. Were agreed to collect the
cattle ; the Bench must have found a person to do so ;
there was nothing said about it, but my idea was, that when
any cattle were collected, it would he reported to the Bench
for further instructions ; in that authority to collect, Mr.
Bingle or Mr. Were had no authority to appropriate them
to their own use ; there was nothing said about the cattle
being placed in the pound ; my idea was that would be
the proper place to put them in ; no report was made by
Mr. Bingle or Mr. Were ; two or three times in the course
of that year, I asked Mr. Were if he had been able to do
any thing in collecting the cattle, he said “No I was


aware the seasons were adverse, and therefore I did not
press the thing; Coleman stated that the cattle should
amount to sixty-eight, and Grover’s to twenty-five; Ido
not recollect any thing about horses ; I never spoke to Mr.
Bingle on the subject; this note is my hand-writing ; it is
dated December 10, 1836; before that date, Mr. Were
asked me if I recollected what the decision of the Bench
was in the case of Coleman and Grover ; I sent an answer,
that, speaking from memory, the cattle were to be confis-
cated to the Crown, after paying just debts, and the prison-
ers’ tickets to be cancelled ; when collected the cattle were to
be sold at the pound ; after this, Mr. Were called on me and
stated that that part of my note which related to the sale of
the cattle at the pound was not necessary for the purpose
he wanted it; as that part of my note was not part of the
decision of the Bench, I wrote this note, and destroyed the
other; the impression on my mind was that he wanted the
note to send to Mr. Bingle ; Mr. Were did not say any
thing about working Bullocks ; it was on another occasion
that I gathered from him that some of the cattle had been
killed, and I told him he had done what was not right; I
cannot swear it was at another time ; he asked what was to
be done, and I said he had better communicate with the
Bench; lam not aware that the Bench at Invermein had
any communication on the subject of the cattle; Mr.
Bingle said the men were indebted to him, but the men
said Mr. Bingle was indebted to them ; I do not conceive
that the Bench gave any authority to Mr. Bingle to pay
himself; there was no account produced; I do not con-
ceive that any more authority was given to Mr. Bingle than
would have been given to the Chief Constable under si-
milar circumstances.
Cross-examined. —It was on Mr. Were’s deposition that
the men were apprehended ; 1 think Mr. Bingle was super


intending sheep-washing ; he was absent ; we waited for
his evidence; after Mr. Bingle's evidence the case was
closed the same day ; I do not think the cattle could have
been collected but by the assistance of Mr. Single and his
men ; that was the opinion of the Bench ; Mr. Bingle and
Mr. Were agreed to collect them ; it was understood he
was to collect them when he collected his own, and that he
was about collecting his own immediately ; it was men-
tioned that the parties owed some debts ; Mr. Macartney
said he had a debt for medical attendance ; Mr. Bingle
came to me and said, “ Do you think I will be safe in
paying Macartney’s debt ?” I said I had no doubt the
Government would attend to what we had recommended,
meaning that just, debts should be paid ; I do not recollect
that the Bench authorised Mr. Bingle to pay the debts ;
we understood the debt was for rent or their transaction as
his servant; I did not understand that the directions of
the Bench were that the debts should be paid by Mr.
Bingle ; I had some conversation with Mr. Were about
the payment of debts ; this note is what I recollected of the
decision of the Bench ; I think Mr. Were said he had killed
two or three head of cattle; I understood that Mr. Were
was in bad health ; Mrs. Dumaresq made him some jelly
and sent him ; Mr. Bingle was a Magistrate at the time of
the proceedings against Coleman and Grover; I have
known Mr. Bingle nine or ten years ; I always considered
Mr. Bingle a man of the strictest integrity; I have very
little knowledge of Mr. W r ere, hut I always understood
him to be a respectable man ; when I was asked by Mr.
Were for the second letter, my impression was that it was
wanted to send to Mr. Bingle; I had not heard they were
in any scrape at that time ; Mr. Were said two or three
head of the cattle were slaughtered ; if he had done wrong
it was his own fault, and upon his own responsibility ; f


did not understand that Mr. Single was authorised to pay
debts; my impression was that when any cattle were
sold, the Bench would be authorised by Government to
pay just debts, and the remainder would be appropriated
for the benefit of the Crown ; I understood Mr. Bingle
was getting in his cattle ; it was a matter of necessity to
remove them from the great drought; I was not aware
that the Mounted Police were employed collecting cattle ;
the suggestion that nobody could collect the cattle so
well as Mr. Single’s people decidedly did not come from
the prisoners.
By Mr. Kerr.' —I supposed that the Bench would pay
the debts ; Mr. Bingle might have a different impression.
Thomas Potter Macqueen, Esq., J. P. —l sat as a Magis-
trate at Invermein on the 4th of November; I signed the
decision that was come to on that day ; the Bench decided
that the tickets of Coleman and Grover should he can-
celled ; when their tickets were taken away their property
fell to the Crown ; it appeared that each of them had a
wife and children ; acting on behalf of the Crown, I did
not suppose that the Crown would take away the bedding
and small articles, so that at once I concurred that they
should be left for the benefit of the family; I recollect
Grover saying there might be a few shillings, more or less,
due to him on settling accounts with different people;
there was a medical man and a tailor; he said he owed
small debts, and there were debts due to him ; I recollect
something about Mr. Bingle’s accounts, but I am not
aware that any positive charge was made by Mr. Bingle ;
the cattle were to be placed at the disposal of the Crown ;
these cattle were running over a very wild and moun-
tainous part of the country, and they authorised Mr.


Single to collect them, which was the only mode they had
of obtaining the cattle ; I distinctly understood that Mr.
Single would collect them when he was collecting his own,
and when he had done so, he was to place them at the dis-
posal of the Crown ; it was rumoured that Mr. Single
was about to sell or let some part of his stock, being about
to go to Europe; neither I nor the Bench gave any
authority to Mr. Single to appropriate those cattle to his
own use ; nothing passed that could induce Mr. Single to
think so ; no official report of the collection of the cattle
was made to the Bench ; at the time I speak of, Mr.
Single formed one of the Invermein Bench.
Cross-examined. It came out in evidence that there were
some debts due to these men ; I considered from the state-
ments of the men that the dead stock on the property would
pay the debts, leaving the cattle untouched; Mr. Macart-
ney made a claim of 41. 16s. ; if the wheat and harness did
not pay the debts, I considered an account would be sent to
the Bench; the men said some debts were due to them ;
Mr. Single was to be answerable for the returns of the
cattle ; I am not aware that I said Mr. Single had authority
to dispose of the cattle ; I thought he was authorised to dis-
pose of the dead stock ; the main object was to secure for
the Crown all the property, except after debts were paid ;
we considered it was the most beneficial plan for the Crown
to get Mr. Single’s overseer to collect the cattle ; Mr. Were
has been in very ill health ; it was impossible for him to
go out after cattle ; the clothes and furniture were given up
out of charity ; I heard there was some wheat and some
bullock chains; Grover was questioned about his debts ; I
heard Grover giving evidence, but I do not recollect inter-
rupting his evidence; I recollect the question was raised
whether he was swearing falsely or not; Grover was cer-
tainly checked once or twice for some inaccuracies ; Grover’s


examination lasted two days, and from his former conduct
I had a decided prejudice against him; Captain Dumaresq
was the senior Magistrate when the business was gone
through ; I heard Mr. Were saying something about the
cattle to Captain Damaresq about twelve months ago ;
Captain D. asked if there had been any return, hut I did
not hear Mr. Wcre’s answer; Mr. Were was then in a very
precarious state of health, and had come to the Court to
meet my surgeon.
Re-examined. My distinct understanding was, that the
cattle were to be collected as soon as they could; Mr.
Bingle offered himself to collect the cattle ; if I had thought
any of the things would have been sold to Mr. Bingle,
I would not have authorised their detention by Coleman
and Grover; I considered we were serving the Crown by
the arrangement we were making; Grover gave his ex-
amination very accurately generally; there were some
technical mistakes about dates.
Re-examined for the prisoners. He said he had met some
man on the road, which was doubted; 1 may have stopped
him for saying he had not been examined about the debts ;
his conduct throughout appeared to be very improper; I
understood it was Mr. Single’s offer to take charge of the
cattle ; the impression on my mind is, that Mr. Bingle, to
meet the views of the Bench, made the offer ; I cannot
swear he was not asked.
By the Attorney-General. There was a doubt as to
whether Grover had been examined about his debts, and
the Chief Constable reminded me that he was sent for him;
the point was satisfactorily cleared up afterwards.
Thomas Curtiss, private 4th regiment —in November,
1835, I was in the Mounted Police at Puen Buen; I was
ordered to take Grover and Coleman to the farm on some


particular business ; I saw Mr. Bingle washing sheep ;
the prisoners spoke to him and Mr. Bingle spoke to
them ; Mr. Bingle came up to the house; it was the day
after the magistrates gave them in charge to me ; there
were chairs and tables and bullock chains ; I saw no
wheat; I saw some cattle; I saw some working bul-
locks ; I saw three branded by Mr. Bingle’s orders ;he
told a man that was there to assist Grover in branding
them ; another man heated the irons ; I heard Coleman
say, there were two J C and one diamond G ; Mr. Bin-
gle’s brand was put on ; I saw no money at the time ; I
did not hear all the conversation that took place ; I
heard them talking about the bullock chains; I cannot
say whether they made any bargain about the chains.
Patrick Donoghue.—l am a stockman ; I have been
free about three years ; I am in Mr. Single s employ ; I
remember Coleman and Grover losing their tickets ; I
was one of the witnesses against them ; I know they had
some cattle, but I do not know how many ; the most I
ever saw at one time was ten ; I saw their cattle about
the time they lost their tickets ; Mr. Bingle removed his
cattle about nine months afterwards to the Gwydir;
some of Coleman’s went with them ; I cannot say how
many ; we brought them in three drafts ; I think we
took thirty-five of the cattle belonging to Grover and
Coleman; we considered them as belonging to Mr. Bin-
gle, as they ran with his ; I never had any distinct
orders about them ; we had them in a stockyard ;it
would have been bad to collect Coleman’s by themselves;
what we had in the stockyard we could have kept; we
branded the calves with an anchor in order that we
might know them from Mr. Bingle’s; I know that some
of Grover and Coleman’s cattle were killed by Mr. Were’s
directions; about six or eight head; they were killed in


Mr. Bingle’s yard ; I cannot say when they were killed;
we killed a bullock a week for the farm, other cattle
were killed in intermediate times; the meat from those
six or eight head was used on the farm ; some of those
cattle were lately got by the mounted police ; we had a
difficult job to draft them ; they broke the yard down ;
two colts were running at Sparke’s farm ; I do not know
whether they were considered as Mr. Bingle’s; they
were on the farm when Mr. Stokes came ; I do not
know how many bullocks Coleman and Grover had ;
some of their bullocks were used in Mr. Bingle’s team ;
they were branded anchor B, and I considered they be-
longed to Mr. Bingle.
Cross-examined. —l cannot say the exact time that the
cattle were taken up the country ; the feed was so bad
and the cattle were so mixed that it was impossible to
muster them ; we took them away because no man could
herd them ; the first draft we took was eighty ; some of
Coleman's were among them ; I had three horses to ride
when the grass was so bad ; it would be more than three
horses could do to drive them over the range the first day
or two ; if we had let them out of the yard it would have
been double the trouble to find them when Mr. Bingle’s
cattle w-ere gone ; our only choice was to take them to
Liverpool Plains, or let them on to the old run again ;
I recollect when we were branding the cattle, Mr. Docker
stood by with a book to take them down, and we put two
anchors reversed on the calves to distinguish them from
the others ; Mr. Bingle’s brand was a single anchor and
aB; the mounted police generally come and shoot our
cattle for us; the brand and weight of every head of
cattle slaughtered is entered in a book; Mr. Bingle is
generally in Sydney ; I have only seen him once in
eighteen months, that was at the court at Invermein.
Re-examined. —l was on the farm generally about


every two months, but I never saw Mr. Bingle there ; I
heard he had been there ; if you wanted to get them into
the pound at Puen Buen, you would find one here and
another twenty miles further ; I would find one of their’s
with fifty of our’s; I should never see twenty of their’s
in one drove; it might take two months to have got them
all in ; I was about three weeks getting the first draft
that was taken to Liverpool Plains; we got them all up
in three months ; we never attempted to draft Coleman’s
and Grover’s cattle ; we got no directions.
Robert Carter. —l am a bullock driver by profession ;
I was assigned to Mr. Bingle ; I am now free ; I recol-
lect Coleman and Grover losing their tickets ; they had
some cattle ; shortly after they lost their tickets I saw
some of them about; I should think they might have
been caught; I assisted to kill two or three of their cat-
tle ; I had no particular orders ; I cannot say who gave
me the orders; the cattle were generally killed by order
of the storekeeper; I was there six years, but did not see
many killed, being generally on the road; some of their
bullocks were driven by Mr. Bingle’s men ; one or two of
the bullocks were branded -with Mr. Bingle’s brand ; I
have seen ten or twelve of their cattle about the yard.
Mr. Frederick Michael Stokes. —l have lately made an
arrangement with Mr. Bingle ; I am his agent and at-
torney for the entire management of his affairs on his
going to England ; he spoke to me about going home
on the Bth or 9th of December; he was to go in the
Craigievar; she was detained a long time ;he had taken
his passage in her; she was to sail early in the year ; I
do not know when she sailed ; his daughter went in her ;
Mr. Bingle was up with me at Puen Buen in Novem-
ber ; he was at the sheep-shearing; we had been nego


dating for two years off and on ; we came down in De-
cember ; he did not intend going to Puen Buen again;
I had charge of his stock of every description ; on giving
charge of the stock he apprised me there was stock be-
longing to Coleman and Grover; he did not particularise
them; he gave me directions to settle several accounts,
and among them he told me that Grover and Cole-
man had some cattle, and in consequence of some
conversations which I had heard, he wished me to
settle it as soon as possible; this was in December; I
never heard that Coleman had threatened to bring the
matter before the magistrates; I went down with Mr.
Were to get a statement of what had taken place; this
book was copied from Mr. Bingle’s private ledger; that
is the ledger ; I saw it when the negotiation commenced ;
this is the day-book that was produced before the Inver-
mein bench ; it has been in my charge since ; there is an
entry on sth November, 1835, of Coleman and Grover
having sold two colts for KM.; there are debts for rent,
damage to dray and cross-cut saw ; credit for three bul-
locks, 21. 10s. each, one mare, 12 I.; on the 11th Novem-
ber there are debits to the same account; Young’s bill,
81. 10s.; repairing harrows, ploughs, tin dishes, &c.; no
list of cattle was handed to me; I was to get charge of
anchor B cattle; the sheep and horses were given to
me, but there was no specific number of cattle ; there
were J B cattle and J G cattle; I knew there w'ere dia-
mond G cattle at Liverpool Plains, but I had no charge
of them; I have not heard what has become of the three
bullocks for which credit is given to Coleman ; I under-
stood two of them were sold; I think Mr. Goggs told
me he bought them ; I know I have not got them ; Mr.
Bingle told me in December that I was to get the ac-
count settled; I heard there had been a negotiation be-
tween Mr. Potter M'Queen, Captain Duraaresq, and


Mr. M'Naughton, the superintendent ; I understood
from Mr. Single that they had been in his service, and
that he was to collect the cattle ; I do not recollect that
the crown was mentioned, but they were under the di-
rection of the bench of magistrates : I heard that the
negotiation was going on, from hearing it talked of at
our table ; I should be surprised to hear there was no
such negotiation ; I heard that Mr. Coxen and Mr. Hall
were to be referees between the government and Mr.
Single ; the subject of the reference was to be the price
of some cattle that had been slaughtered, and as to the
disposal of those that were to be got in; I should not
have believed that government property could have been
trifled with so, if I had not heard the proceedings before
the bench, who authorised a private individual to get in
government property ; Mr. Were was in Mr. Single’s
employment in November ; I am not aware of any at-
tempt before Mr. Were left to get the cattle in ;we
were to get in the cattle ; I understood the negotiation
had been acted on, because I heard that these two parties
were to be appointed to fix a price.
Cross-examined. —l am not lawyer enough to know r
that it w ould be compounding felony to take payment
for the slaughtered cattle ; there was a quarrel between
Mr. Were and Mr. Single in November ; Mr. Single
was excessively annoyed to find that the account had not
been settled and the cattle got in ; Mr. Were pleaded ill
health and the extreme difficulty ; in December, he par-
ticularly directed my attention to these cattle of Cole-
man and Grover ; it is not true that he kept the matter
a secret from me ; it was M‘Naughton and Were that
told me about this arrangement; Ido not think Mr.
Single told me what the brands were ; I suppose I should
have had no difficulty in finding them out; it was well
known that Mr. Single was going away; it was adver


tised that I had taken possession of his property ; I do
not know whether he advertised he was going home;
this book, which contains an account of the cattle slaugh-
tered, has been in my possession since January; the in-
vestigation at Puen Buen was before Mr. Day and Lieu-
tenant Beckham ; Mr. Fisher was prosecutor ; Mr.
M'Queen and Mr. Little were examined ; I took down
the proceedings—all that took place; I was present
when Mr. M'Queen was examined ; Mr. Scott, Mr. Fra-
zer, Mr. Fisher, and Mr. Day took down the depositions;
I think Mr. Dumaresq wrote his own deposition; Mr.
Scott and Mr. Frazer were unable to take them down;
before Mr. M'Queen was sworn, he said the bench au-
thorised Single to be the receiver and payer of debts ;
he recollected about bows and chains being mentioned
as to be sold, and also that everything was to be taken
by Bingle to pay claims; during the examination of
Grover, Mr. M'Queen said he was ready to swear he
sent Perry to Grover and told him Mr. Bingle was to
pay debts, and if there was any blame, he had a right
to share it; Mr. Fisher here told Mr. M'Queen he was
not called on to implicate himself, or words to that ef-
fect ; I cannot recollect whether it was in evidence or
not, but Mr. M'Queen said he considered Mr. Bingle
could legally dispose of the cattle, but was still respon-
sible to the crown; Mr. Were was in very ill health ; I
have had these books in my possession since December;
it appears that accounts have been kept of the transac-
tion between Mr. Bingle, Coleman, and Grover.
Re-examined. —l took down Mr. M'Queen’s evidence ;
I have not taken notes lately ; I took notes at the Old
Bailey, twelve years ago ; I also took notes abroad eight
years ago ; I cannot swear that I might not have made a
mistake ; I do not pretend to say I took down the exact
words ; very few reporters take down speeches verbatim ;
H


even the best note-takers sometimes make mistakes ; Mr.
Bingle told me he had cattle belonging to Coleman and
Grover running with his ; he told me they had lost their
tickets; after Mr. Were left Mr. Bingle’s employ, he
was no more bound to assist in getting in the cattle, than
one gentleman would be to oblige another ; lam aware
from these books that the cattle were slaughtered; when
Mr. M'Queen said that Mr. Bingle had authority to sell,
I will not swear he did not exclude the cattle; there
was no number of either Grover’s or Coleman’s cattle ;
the S O cattle were placed with Mr. Bingle by a rela-
tive ; the increase of them were to be branded SO; I
should have branded the increase of the diamond G
cattle with the same brand as their mothers : Mr. Bingle
told me to manage the affair, as it had caused him great
anxiety; I was informed that some of the cattle had
been killed, I believe by Mr. Were; I got no directions
to hand the cattle to government, but to settle the affair.
Mr. M‘Qneen was recalled, and the evidence of Mr.
Stokes, as to what Mr. M‘Qtceen said, was read. —The
general authority which Mr. Bingle had was to collect
the cattle, to permit the appropriation of the apparel for
the family, and to dispose of the dead stock for the pay-
ment of debts ; at the time I quitted the court I believed
the dead stock was sufficient to pay the debts; had it
not been so, I should have said the just debts must be
paid : Mr. Macartney’s account was directed to be paid
by Mr. Bingle : I cannot say that I ever intended to pay
the debts : Mr. Bingle was to pay the debts and collect
the cattle : I was not aware that Mr. Bingle claimed a
large amount: my conception all the way through was,
that the debts were to be paid by the dead stock :Mr
Bingle was the landlord of these men, but I question
whether he was entitled to be so, they being ticket-af


leave holders : I know nothing about Mr. Bingle’s rent:
I consider I was acting illegally in even allowing the
clothing to go to the family, I was incurring a respon-
sibility ; I think Mr. Stokes made my remark about the
cattle too general: Captain Dumaresq took the lead in
the whole affair : since I was in court I have spoken to
the chief constable, and I can speak to the point I was
examined by Mr. Foster, which I misunderstood : Grover
denied having been called back, and I reminded the chief
constable that he had called him back, but it was of no
consequence: Grover was recalled, his account of the
debts being contradictory : I knew he had been examined
about the debts, and when he swore he had not, I con-
tradicted him, but I thought the point was of no conse-
quence.
William Ledge. —l am a store-keeper to Mr. Bingle :
I recollect Grover and Coleman : they had some cattle
branded J C and diamond G : five of them were slaugh-
tered by Mr. Were’s direction : they were entered in the
store-book : I kept the book and entered the brands, on
the 15th November, 1835: aJ C cow was killed: the
entry was made the day after the cow was killed:
December the Ist a diamond G bullock was killed : on
December 14th a diamond G cow ; March 9th a diamond
G bullock : March 25th a diamond G cow ; May 7th a
diamond G bullock : these entries were made the day
after the cattle were killed ; sometimes there were four
or five people present : the policemen have shot some of
them : ray duty was to see the stock killed, and to tell
Mr. Were what beast was killed : the hide was salted in
the usual way, and the meat was turned into the store
for the use of the men ; the first beast appears to have
been killed nine days after the men lost their tickets : the
beast was brought in by the stockmen, and Mr. Were
h 2


desired me to kill it: I do not think Mr. Bingle was
present; I cannot say whether he was in Sydney ;it was
in sheep-shearing time.
Cross-examined. —Mr. Bingle was never present when
any of these beasts were killed ; he might have been on
the establishment; he has resided generally in Sydney ;
the cattle were killed in the usual manner, and the
entries were made in the book the day after they were
killed, when they were weighed in ; these books were
handed over to Mr. Stokes after he took charge ; by re-
ference to the book Mr. Stokes would have been able to
see about the cattle. Mr. Were has been very ill ; in
July last I heard Mr. Bingle talking loud to Mr. Were
about the cattle ; he said they should have been got in ;
in November I recollect the same ; Mr. Were said the
horses had been knocked up.
Re-examined. —l cannot say that Coleman’s stock was
referred to more than the rest of the cattle : Mr. Were
was ill last April: he was not particularly ill before then :
Mr. Were looked over my books, and kept accounts from
them : Mr. Bingle never troubled me for any accounts :
Mr. Were kept an account of the cattle slaughtered.
By Mr. Foster. —Mr. Were was not laid up at the
sheep-washing, but he was very weak.
Mr. Raymond recalled.— These letters were received
and registered by himself,- they are dated I3th Decem-
ber, 1835, and the 30th January, 1836, from William
Were to the Colonial Secretary : the third is dated 17th
February, and is from William Were to the Governor :
these letters are all Mr. Were’s writing.
[The different documents put in, were read.J
Corporal George M‘Knight. —l went in quest of cattle
on Mr. Bingle’s station : three men went with me: we
got forty head : I think we were thirty-two days away :


I think we went two hundred and fifty miles from
Jerry’s Plains : we had not much difficulty, as we were
assisted by Mr. M'Naughten and Mr. Bingle’s men,
who were getting in cattle; we got them all in that I
saw : there might have been three or four left : I brought
in forty-six head ; two calves knocked up on the road :
they were sold at Maitland: I do not know that any
search was made at Puen Buen.
Cross-examined. —We were out thirty days : some of
Mr. Bingle’s men assisted us : Mr. M'Naughten assisted
me ; we were eleven days there.
Edward Denny Day, Esq. —l am police magistrate at
Maitland : some cattle were lately brought down from
Mr. Bingle’s station ; they were sold for 353 Z.; I am
not aware that any search has been made for the other
cattle.
Cross-examined. —Mr. Stokes told me where the three
bullocks were; I think it was by the crown solicitor’s
order the cattle were sold; it was Coleman made the
first complaint to me, I think in the latter end of De-
cember ; I subsequently took further evidence at Inver-
mein ; I sent for Coleman and Grover to inquire into the
statement made to me by Mr. Wentworth ; he said that
Coleman had made a statement to him, as a magistrate,
which he did not feel called on to inquire into, but re-
commended them to apply to me. I did not send to Mr.
Bingle about it; it was made before me in the course of
business; I forwarded the depositions to the colonial
secretary before I apprised Mr. Bingle, or took any other
proceedings.
Re-examined. —These are the depositions : Mr. Went-
worth is a magistrate of our district, and attends the
bench when in the district.
The Attorney-General. —This is the case for the crown.
Mr. Sydney Stephen. —l would ask your honour what


sort of a case it is ; is it a case you will call on the pri-
soners to answ T er ?
The Acting Chief Justice. —1 must let the case go to
the jury. John Single, do you wish to say any thing to
the jury.
Mr. Bingle then read the following defence : —
MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONOR.
Gentlemen of the Jury.—-The case of the crown being
now closed, it becomes my duty to address to you some
observations, for the purpose of placing before you the
real merits of the case. Although we are deprived the
benefit of the preliminary investigation by a grand jury,
I thank God that we have left us the great bulwark of
our liberties—trial by jury. Gentlemen, this is no ordi-
nary every day prosecution ; you cannot but be aware of
tlie extent to which, what is in this colony called poli-
tical feeling, has been carried. Individuals, for merely
exercising their right of opinion on certain public matters,
have become marked men; and when argument has been
found insufficient to crush an opponent, the power of the
attorney-general to institute a prosecution for felony has
been brought into operation. The mode of proceeding
has throughout been of an extraordinary character ; the
first intimation I received of this charge was not a war-
rant or a summons from a magistrate, but a note from
the attorney-general, the legal representative of the head
of the government, dated 14th January, 1837- I accord-
ingly called upon him, and finding that the subject of his
note related to the cattle of Coleman and Grover, I stated
to him all particulars, and the reason why the business
had not been previously wound-up. He observed the
papers had been forwarded to him by the colonial secre-
tary in an irregular manner, and said I must attend at


the Invermein bench, as he should recommend a court
of inquiry there immediately, when I should have an
opportunity afforded of detailing all particulars. Gen-
tlemen, the crown solicitor was dispatched, and two
stipendiary military magistrates were sent, one from
Maitland, eighty miles distant, and the other the mounted
police officer from Jerry’s Plains—these gentlemen were
officially sent “ out of their district.” If there was
nothing else to show the real character of this case,
would not this fact furnish an instructive commentary
upon it ? It has been asserted that the mode adopted in
my case, was adopted out of consideration for me —that
the manner in which this case has hitherto been con-
ducted, evinced a desire to spare my feelings ! Gentle-
men, such an assertion is false. The object was not to
spare ray feelings— not to show any consideration for
me—but to give the case an appearance of the greatest
importance—to make it stand forth as an enormity even
in the history of colonial cattle-stealing ! I wanted no
consideration shown to me —l wanted, and still want,
nothing but justice. Why should this case have been
taken out of the ordinary course, if it was not for the
express purpose of clothing it with a sort of political im-
portance, to serve a. political purpose ? Gentlemen, such
is the reason why it has been taken out of the ordinary
course ; and I could prove the fact were it on an occa-
sion like the present allowed for me to do so. Why, a
few days after this crime is alleged to have been com-
mitted, I was absent from ray farm acting as a magistrate
in the endeavour to discover the perpetrators of a foul
murder. Yet, gentlemen, thirteen months after, depo-
sitions against me, affecting my character relative to
matters which occurred about that period of time, were
taken in my absence. Witnesses were examined in pri-
vate, and their statements transmitted to Sydney ; and


upon those statements a preliminary trial was instituted,
under the name of an inquiry, at which the ostensible
prosecutor was the crown solicitor and the magistrates
military officers, paid by, and under the immediate orders
of the government. Gentlemen, if such scenes as these
do not occur in the ordinary course of administering cri-
minal justice, is it too much to call upon you to ask
yourselves, whether some most disgraceful influence was
not exercised somewhere in my case ? Gentlemen, I
know how, and where, and for what reason, such influ-
ence was exercised; and, with the blessing of God, I
will, at a fitting time, make all this known to the world
Gentlemen, notwithstanding the high-sounding “ note
of preparation” with which this case has been ushered
in—notwithstanding the influence arrayed against me,
and the attempts made to prejudice the trial—l shall rely
for my own exculpation upon a simple statement of facts:
by so doing I shall better promote my own interests, and
consult your convenience, than by entering at any very
great length into what I religiously believe to be the
real motives which gave rise to this prosecution. I shall
also abstain from what, under the circumstances, I should
consider deserved animadversion, because, gentlemen,
the real prosecutor is not here. Begging of you to bear
in mind, that this is a prosecution altogether out of the
ordinary course, as I have already shown—l shall pro-
ceed briefly to state the reason why it ought to be scouted
from this honourable court with the contempt it so justly
merits.
Gentlemen, it is perhaps known to most of you, that
for many years past I have been a settler residing in the
upper district of Hunter’s River : I have also, until very
lately, been a magistrate of the territory. To these facts
I shall make no further allusion.
In the latter end of the month of October, in the year


1835, I left Sydney for ray estate at Puen Buen, 180
miles distant from Sydney, with a view, partly, of being
present at the sheep-shearing there; but also, in conse-
quence of a letter received by me, just before, from my
superintendant, Mr. Were, in which he informed me that
my evidence was required in a case of alleged cattle-
stealing then pending before the bench of Invermein,
against two men, named Coleman and Grover, holders of
tickets-of-leave, who rented a cultivation paddock on my
upper farm, and who also possessed some cattle of then-
own, which (but without any permission from me) ran
with my herd, and depastured on my land. The en-
quiry, as was stated to me, had been postponed till my
arrival; and I accordingly left Sydney, for the purpose
of affording any information of which I might be in pos-
session, and which might be required of me. The first
court held at Invermein after my arrival, was on the 4th
of November, and, after my evidence had been gone into,
the bench caused a recommendation to be forwarded to
the government, that the prisoners should be deprived of
their tickets-of-leave, and sent to another district, and
that the cattle over which they exercised an ownership
should, after the payment of all just claims against them,
be confiscated. On the occasion, some conversation oc-
curred as to the readiest means of getting the cattle toge-
ther ; and as they were known to be running on my land,
and my people were then endeavouring to collect my
cattle, the bench solicited Mr. Were and myself to act
for them in this matter, by causing the cattle to be col-
lected for the purpose of paying all just debts—and,
among others, one due to myself. On the next day, I
being then at my upper farm, superintending the sheep-
washing, Coleman and Grover were brought to me in
custody of a mounted policeman, requesting, that as they
were about to be removed to gaol, I would go with them
h 3


to their dwelling, and see that they took no property of
mine away with them. I went with them; and pre-
viously to their departure, I purchased several articles of
them—such as bows, chains, and furniture, which the
bench had permitted them to retain, in order to enable
their wives and families to proceed to Newcastle, to the
gaol, at which place the prisoners were ordered to be re-
moved to await his Excellency’s decision. That decision,
gentlemen, was not made known until after a lapse of
three months, when an official notice appeared in the Go-
vernment Gazette, dated Bth February, 1836, stating that
his Excellency had directed that the tickets-of-leave of
these men should be cancelled.—To this fact, gentlemen,
I beg to call your special attention. While at the pri-
soners’ dwelling, I observed three small bullocks come
to the stock-yard.—l asked the prisoners what bullocks
they were, and I was told that they were young bullocks
belonging to them, which they had broken in, (and
branded with the prisoners’ brands). —I then directed
them to put my brands in the fire ; and when the irons
were hot, Grover branded the bullocks in the presence
of the mounted policeman and others. While Grover
was thus employed, the two colts alluded to in the course
of the evidence for the crown, came down to drink; I
asked to whom they belonged, and I was answered by
(I think) Coleman, that they belonged to him and Grover;
but that they had sold them to a person named Rush-
forth (a man of bad character) for 10/.— 51. each. I said
I would not permit that man to come on my farm, or any
one to remove the colts on his behalf; but that I would
take the animals myself, at the same price. The mare
which I had purchased from Coleman some months be-
fore, was with them at the time I speak of. And here,
gentlemen, I must request your indulgence to me in
what, under other circumstances, might be considered a


digression; a reference irrelevant to the matter into
which you are now assembled to enquire, but which I
think requires explanation, in order that you may be
made acquainted with all the circumstances of this case.
The mare to which I have thus incidentally alluded, had
formerly belonged to one of these men (Coleman), and
was in fact considered mine, with his full knowledge and
concurrence- During my absence from the farm, Mr.
Were wrote me several statements respecting what was
going on there ; and, in his letter, expressed a wish that
I would sell him this very mare for his own use; I ac-
ceded to his request, and told him he might have her for
12 1., the same sum which I had given credit in my books;
on that understanding he became the owner of the ani-
mal, the possession of which is this day imputed to him
as a crime, and relied upon as evidence that he was my
associate in alleged guilt. On the day upon which the
bullocks were branded, or the day following, I sent my
groom for the colts, and had them put in a paddock at
Puen JBuen ; and on my return home, on the very evening
of the day in which I caused this to be done, I made en-
tries in ray day-book, crediting Coleman and Grover for
the bullocks and the colts, and debiting with the reason-
able value of certain articles deficient on the farm, toge-
ther with the amount of damage done to dray, &c. This
was in the sheep-shearing season, and I being then par-
ticularly occupied in superintending the shearing of my
own flocks, nothing further to my knowledge was done
about the cattle while I remained up the country. Mr.
Were was present before the bench at the investigation
in the case of Coleman and Grover; and the order of the
magistrates respecting the cattle in question, was equally
directed to him as to me, and he acted in my absence
under those orders. And here, gentlemen, I must beg to
state, that, on the court-day above alluded to, a conver


sation occurred with the magistrates, Mr. Were, and my-
self, as to the value of the men’s cattle then running wild
in the bush, and what credit ought to be given, as they
were indiscriminately collected. Gentlemen, a value
was put upon them per head, but what that value was I
cannot say; and it was in consequence of my forgetful-
ness, and Mr. Were’s uncertainty on that point, that I
wished him to see the magistrates on the matter. Gen-
tlemen, some of these cattle were, it seems, killed by
order of Mr. Were, to secure them, as they were indi-
vidually brought into the stock-yard, he being fully
aware of my claim against Coleman and Grover; and no
doubt under this impression he conceived he had a right
to satisfy that claim by appropriating to my use so much
of their property as was necessary for its liquidation ;
but were they killed furtively ? is there a single animal
unaccounted for ? What then becomes of this mighty
matter of cattle-steaiing ? Was there, I again ask, any
attempt at concealment ? was not an entry made in my
farm-books of every animal appropriated ? and may I
not ask any man of common sense, whether a better
course could have been adopted with wild cattle? On
again visiting my farm in July or August last, I found
Mr. Were in so weak a state of health, that I was unable
to obtain from him any information respecting the cattle,
or any other matter of business; but I requested that as
soon as he should be able, to get in and muster the cattle,
and that he would by no means neglect it. After that,
I came to Sydney, and was not at my farm again until
the beginning of last November. On the day I left
Sydney to go to the farm, Coleman called on me, and in-
quired about his cattle. I told him I had nothing to say
to him on the subject; that he must apply to the Inver-
mein bench for the information he required. And, gen-
tlemen, I would press this fact upon your attention, as


evidence, even if it stood alone, that the whole of my
acts in the course of the proceedings now before you
were open—that I concealed nothing, and wished to
conceal nothing. The authority under which I under-
took to act in this matter, was the authority of a bench of
magistrates; to that authority alone I was accountable—
and to it I referred the man Coleman for the information
he required. Where was the attempt at concealment here?
If Coleman had a complaint to make, I myself told him
where he might make it. I told him to apply to the In-
vermein bench, and he went away. On arriving at my farm
in November, one of my first acts was to enquire of Mr.
Were, (who still continued dangerously ill) if he had got
in and mustered the cattle; the information I received
was by no means satisfactory, and, gentlemen, it was the
dissatisfaction I felt at what I then believed to be Mr.
Were’s neglect, which caused the angry conversation of
which Mr. Stokes has spoken in his evidence to-day,
and which also caused me to engage Mr. M‘Naughten
for the express purpose of collecting and mustering my
cattle; this duty, gentlemen, I would have performed
myself, but having late in an evening received a letter
requiring my immediate presence in Sydney, I came away
before daylight the following morning, accompanied with
Mr. Stokes. On that gentleman becoming ray agent in
contemplation of my departure for Europe, I handed
him over all my books and papers, with instructions to
arrange all matters connected with my estate, and par-
ticularly this very affair respecting the cattle of Coleman
and Grover. Mr. Stokes knows that I considered my-
self in the light of an agent to the Invermein bench of
magistrates in this matter, and he knows also that I
evinced the utmost anxiety, when I was at Puen Buen,
to have it finally and properly arranged. Gentlemen,
such is a brief, but, in the presence of God, I aver, a


faithful outline of all the circumstances within my know-
ledge connected with the alleged crime for which I am
this day placed on my trial before you ! Can you, gen-
tlemen—can any jury, discover even a shadow of guilt
throughout the whole course of my acting in this man-
ner ? Then why do I stand here to-day ? Gentlemen,
I will not now say why ; but the time will come—the
occasion will present itself—when I may and will de-
nounce the motives in which this prosecution has origi-
nated—when I will show that my real prosecutor has
not been in court to-day—when I will prove that it is a
political prosecution—a base attempt to depreciate my
character for the purpose of nullifying my complaint to
his majesty’s ministers. Gentlemen, if you should be of
opinion that I have allowed myself to betrayed into too
great a warmth of expression, you will, I am sure, admit
that it is a natural warmth ; hunted down, as for some
time past I have been—standing in a felon’s dock, with-
out the shadow of a case against me—can you wonder
that I address you under excited feelings ? Could you
feel surprised even if I were to denounce publicly, and
by name, those parties whom I believe to have been the
occasion of this outrage upon the character and feelings
of a respectable colonist ? Throughout the whole history
of public transactions there will not be found, even in
this colony, an instance of political atrocity to match
that whereby it is attempted to crush me. Gentlemen,
since the commencement of an enquiry so absolutely un-
precedented as this, certain cattle have been seized at
Liverpool Plains, and sold by order of the crown officers,
as the property of these men, Coleman and Grover ; ac-
cording to Mr. Were’s statement, three drafts of my
cattle—collected together after very great pains—were
sent off to a station of mine at Liverpool Plains, which I
had formed for the purpose of a general depot, to secure


the cattle as they could be collected. Gentlemen, do not, I
beg of you, forget what I have already stated—namely, that
the cattle claimed by these men, Coleman and Grover, were
running with my herds, and over my estates; at the time
when the cattle thus collected by direction of Mr. Were,
were sent o!f to the depot station at Liverpool Plains,
they were so collected in consequence of the herds gene-
rally being in a very weak condition for want of food
and water, owing to the then prevailing drought ; of the
lots so sent, it since seems that some of the cattle belong-
ing to Coleman and Grover formed a portion ; but, gen-
tlemen, does it appear, that I was a party, in any way,
even to the collection of these cattle ? Ido not mean to
say that had I been on the spot I would not have acted
just as Mr. Were acted ; I think I would ; but I was not
on the spot; I believe that Mr. Were acted as he did, to
prevent further losses from deaths and cattle stealers; I
believe that such were the motives that influenced him.
Gentlemen, the main fact of this part of the case, to which
I desire to call your particular attention is this—namely,
that the whole of the cattle which had been seized and
sold by the crown, consists of those very cattle collected
and secured by Mr. Were, upwards of twelve months
ago, and herded by my stockmen until the remaining
portion were secured. Gentlemen, these are said to be
only a portion of the cattle belonging to Coleman and
Grover, yet how is it that, after so great a lapse of time,
no more have been secured. If it was in the power of
the magistrates, at the time these cattle were ordered to
be confiscated, to have done without my assistance—if it
was so easy to collect cattle on my estate and those that
spread over the adjoining country, how is it that the law
officers have not yet caused means to be taken to gather
in the remainder, which are said to be still running with
my cattle ? Why does not the crown look for the rest ?


Why is it that these which my people have collected
and herded have alone been disposed of by the crown ?
Why were they alone pounced upon ? In what way does
it appear that there was any attempt at a fraudulent con-
version of these cattle to my use ? I had authority to
collect them; but how could they be collected except
with ray own cattle ? They were driven with my own
cattle publicly, and to a well-known run. They were
not secreted, their brands were not altered; they were
ready to be given up whenever required. And let me
ask the crown solicitor, whether it was owing to any dili-
gence or superior sagacity of his that these cattle were
found out and taken by the crown into their possession,
or whether it was not ascertained on the first enquiry ?
But it may be alleged that the cattle seized by the crown
realised high prices when sold. What had Ito do with
that ? At the time they were collected, they were almost
valueless ; their present value is owing solely to a rise in
the market. If the cattle now claimed by the crown
had been impounded and sold at that period when they
were recommended to be confiscated, the crown would,
in all probability be now indebted to me. Gentlemen,
if the object of the law officers really was to protect the
rights of the crown, how is it that they have not taken
any steps to collect the remainder of these cattle ? They
have now much finer weather for the purpose than the
end of 1835 and the beginning of 1836 afforded. Why
do they not, then, take active measures to get in the re-
mainder of the cattle ? There are still about five hun-
dred head of my cattle yet uncollected; and, no doubt,
among them many more of Coleman’s and Grover’s.
Then, let me ask you, why, with all the alleged anxiety
to preserve the rights of the crown, these cattle have not
been sought after ? Gentleman, it is because the go-
vernment originators of this prosecution, know that they


could not find these cattle, or if they could find them,
the cost of doing so would be more than the cattle are
worth.
But, gentlemen, I will not trespass upon your time
by pursuing this theme ; I will, as briefly as I can, refer
to facts which I have already stated to you.
My defence amounts to this, that I was the mere agent
of the Invermein bench in the matter which is the subject
of this inquiry ; and that 1 have never yet been applied
to by the bench for any accounts or any explanation re-
specting the course of proceedings I adopted, though I
was always prepared to render my account, had it been
demanded. Was not the authority of the magistrates to
take possession of these cattle, under the circumstances I
have detailed, sufficient warrant for me to act in the matter ?
Was anything done which that authority did not fully
sustain? Was there any concealment—the very essence
of conscious guilt—attempted ? Why, Coleman and
Grover branded the bullocks themselves in the presence of a
mounted policeman—who then had them in charge ? Was
there any secresy here—anything denoting a consciousness
of wrong ? Gentlemen, why did I interfere in this matter
at all ? I will tell you,—the bench of which I was a
member directed that the cattle in question should be
confiscated to the crown after the payment of all just debts
due by the parties who claimed a right to them. I was a
creditor of those parties—the cattle were running on my
lands—l only, or some of my people, could get them in
—who then so fit a person as myself to be invested with
the authority under which I justify my acting in this
matter ? Creditors of individuals who die intestate are
almost daily invested, by this honorable court, with the
power of administering to the estate and effects of the
deceased ; and would it be asserted that even if the party
so administering was guilty of an irregularity, arising


from ignorance, or any other honest conviction, in satis-
fying his own claim first, that he would be guilty of
felony? At the time the tickets-of-leave of these men
were cancelled, they were in debt to me to the amount of
about fifty pounds ; independently of which I afterwards
paid cash (admitted by them as just debts) on their
account, amounting to about twenty pounds more. I
credited them with seventeen pounds ten shillings for the
colts and working bullocks—their full current value at
that period but still there remains a considerable balance
due to me, from which the value of the cattle slaughtered
during my absence in Sydney is to be deducted. Is this
felony ? And, gentlemen, I ask you, whether I could
have supposed that when the magistrates authorised me
to pay just debts, they specially excepted the just debt
to myself? Had I not, in fact, a lien on the property of
these men for rent, and sundry other claims which have
not been attempted to be disputed ? What are the ex-
pressions in tlie letter of the magistrates to the govern-
ment ?—“ we have further directed that the cattle, the
property of these individuals, may be confiscated to the
crown, after the payment of just debts." The government,
in the absence of all directions to the contrary, must be
assumed to have acquiesced in that direction of the ma-
gistrates. Without my assistance it would have been in
vain for the magistrates of Invermein to order these men’s
cattle to be collected for the purpose of confiscation—as
I have already told you, they were, and still continue, on
my runs, and amongst my herds—they could not have
been got in except by me, or some of my people. That
task I undertook, at the request of the bench. Three
magistrates, who were present at the time, state that I
did so. These gentlemen are Captain Dumaresq, Doctor
Carlyle, and Mr. Potter M’Queen. Their testimony in-
dividually ought at once to have put an end to this case;


but no, there was an object —a political object to be
gained by exhibiting me in the felon’s dock. The very
day after the decision of the bench in the case of these
men, I credited them in my books with the value of the
working bullocks and col s—in thus acting I have fol-
lowed the spirit, if not the very letter of the magistrates’
directions. I have acted upon their authority, and not-
withstanding, gentlemen, I this day stand arraigned at
this bar ! Even at the unprecedented inquiry which has
led to this trial—unprecedented, not only in technical
forms, but also in the temper and spirit displayed in its
management, and other circumstances by which it was
characterised, I afforded every information required of
me. I shrunk from no investigation ; on the contrary, I
courted it—and handed several written documents to the
bench for the purpose of enabling them to comprehend
the merits of the case, and the motives under which I
acted throughout. From first to last, I have felt and
manifested the utmost anxiety to have the matter satis-
factorily concluded. Mr. Were and I had actually
quarrelled in consequence of my belief that he had not
been as diligent as he might have been in arranging these
matters. Does this look like conspiring with Mr. Were?
No—but it appears the evident wish and intention to
couple Mr. Were with me, for the sole purpose of depri-
ving my case of the benefit of his evidence, which evi-
dence alone would have exonerated me from all improper
motives, and at once have cleared up my character of all
suspicion or fraudulent intent. I say the most diabolical
part of these proceedings is the putting Mr. Were in the
dock with me, to prevent my having the benefit of his
testimony. Gentlemen, I have nearly concluded all I
have to offer in refutation of the vile charge which 1 now
stand here to answer. But as my address has been ne-
cessarily lengthy, and as ray frequent appeals must have


diverted your attention from what I consider the prin-
cipal features of my case, I will recapitulate briefly.
First—
By drawing your attention to the unnecessary, harsh, and
unprecedented manner it has been got up, by taking
depositions concerning this matter in my absence.
By sending paid military magistrates, with the crown
solicitor as prosecutor, to inquire into it.
By stopping Mr. T. P. Macqueen’s evidence proceeding,
when found favourable to me.
By refusing to examine my accounts, which was necessary
before determining the case.
By depriving me of Mr. Were’s evidence.
This, gentlemen, bear in mind, was a departure from
the customary mode in criminal cases, and must have
been for a particular purpose. It was my anxiety that
you should be made acquainted with even the most
minute details, which induced me thus to trespass on
your patience. Such details I have presented to you;
and, relying on your justice, I ask whether you can find
the slightest grounds for placing me in the position in
which lam now standing before you ? Gentlemen, I
have established the fact—
That I acted as an agent of the government by order of
the bench of magistrates, who of themselves are minor
judges.
That these men’s debts were ordered to be paid by the
bench, and I was deputed to see this done.
That they were my debtors.
That in my books credit was given for the value of
bullocks and colts.
That those books are authentic documents, and have been
in Mr. Stokes’ possession.
That my accounts would have been produced when ap-
plied for by the bench.


That the working bullocks were openly branded on the
day after the decision of the bench.
That they were branded by the two men themselves, in
the presence of the mounted police.
That I had a lien on the property.
That throughout there has been no concealment.
'Thaton Coleman’s application to me in Sydney, I referred
him to the Invermein bench; which shows that I had
no intention to defraud him or the government, or that
I had any felonious intent.
Gentlemen, I have ever borne the character of an
honest man—of this I challenge contradiction ; and feel-
ing that I may do so fearlessly, is it too much to ask you
whether I, already possessed of tolerably ample means,
would, for the sake of two or three head of cattle, steal—
blast my own character, and render miserable for life
those who look up to me for countenance and protection ?
Can you credit that another respectable man would de-
scend to aid in a purpose of the kind, merely for a portion
of the paltry value of the cattle spoken of to-day ? Gen-
tlemen, need I say more? I feel that I need not. Yet
whatever may be your verdict, let it, I implore you, be
founded upon a conscientious view of the whole merits
of the case. Send me from this place untainted, even by
suspicion, or consign me to infamy for life.
Gentlemen, I have nothing more to urge—my case is
now with you. You are my judges, and I place myself
with confidence in your hands.
William Bell Carlyle, Esq., J. P. —ln 1835 I was one
of the Invermein bench : I was present on two days of
the proceedings against Coleman and Grover ; I re-
member Mr. Bingle being examined: the men alleged
they had branded the cattle under his orders, and the
case was remanded for his evidence: their cattle were


ordered to be confiscated after the payment of their just
debts : the men were originally charged with stealing
cattle : I have seen nothing of the proceedings of the
bench for the last twelve months, since I left the district:
after the sentence was given. Captain Dumaresq observed,
“ how are we to get these cattle in ?” I do not know
whether Captain Dumaresq spoke to Mr. Single or
Single to Captain Dumaresq : it was agreed he should
get them in, as it was conceived he was the only person
who could do so : we agreed he should get in the cattle,
and carry the sentence of the court into execution. of
course it alluded to the payment of the just debts and the
confiscation of the cattle after the debts were paid : that
I understood to be part of the sentence: I should think
that Mr. Single’s branding three of them would be the
best way to secure them for the crown : Mr. Single has
been a magistrate many years, and I always considered
him an upright honorable man, and an active magistrate ;
so far as has reached my observation, Mr. Were is an
honorable active young man.
Cross-examined. —l was two days at the bench—l might
have been present without taking part in the proceedings
—we sometimes sit in two courts for the despatch of
business—Mr. Single did not sit as a magistrate—l do
not recollect with whom the proposal originated—it was
one of the inducements to employ Mr. Single to get in
the cattle, that it would be done speedily—l thought they
would have speedily been made available—l think Mr.
Single said that they owed him 60 1. —1 sold cattle a
twelvemonth ago which the purchasers have not yet got
—I did not consider there was any power in the bench
to kill any of the cattle—it is impossible for me to judge
of the mind of another person—l considered that after
the cattle were collected, accounts should have been sent
in—l recollect being very much struck at their having


more cattle than they could possibly have come honestly
by—the men were not perhaps aware they were going to
lose them when they specified the number—l never heard
anything about the working bullocks—until the com-
mencement of these proceedings I knew nothing of the
working bullocks —I do not recollect any one suggesting
that the dead stock would be sufficient to pay all debts—
I was much astonished to hear that the cattle were
slaughtered.
Re-examined. —l do not see what interest Mr. Were
had in slaughtering the cattle when they were entered in
the public books of the farm—they might have easily
antedated an order for the delivery—but no one would
buy Coleman and Grover’s cattle with Mr. Single’s brand
on—had I been taking charge of these cattle I should
have put a distinguishing brand on them—l always con-
sidered Mr. Single was to carry the orders of the bench
into execution.
By the Court. —l perfectly recollect what was said on
the 4th November after the sentence was passed—no
time or place was fixed or appointed at which the cattle
should be got in—nothing was said, that I recollect, about
selling them at the pound—l cannot say whether this
sheet of paper was entire when I signed the decision—l
am not aware of any memorandum to Mr. Single—it
was left entirely to Mr. Bingle to carry into effect the
sentence of the Bench.
Mr. Michael Macartney. —l am a surgeon: I was pre-
sent in November, 1835, when Coleman and Grover
were before the Bench—the decision of the Bench was,
that the tickets be recommended to be cancelled—Cole-
man owed me 41. 165., and I applied to the bench to know
how I was to be paid, and I was told Mr. Bingle had
authority to pay debts and collect the cattle—he has


paid me—we have had a settlement, and Mr. Single has
credited me with the money —Coleman told me in the
presence of the chief constable, the day he was going
down the country, that Mr. Single would pay me.
Cross-examined. —The chief constable is here—Captain
Dumaresq, told me that Mr. Single was authorised to
collect or receive the cattle and pay the debts—Mr.
Single said a considerable sum was due to him—l have
been living with Mr. Single, but not for the last two
years.
Re-examined. —Cattle at that time were very cheap—
cattle were lying in every water hole—they had got
there, and could not get back to feed.
Thomas Young, —l am a tailor—-I knew Grover and
Coleman—in 1835 Grover owed me 3 1. 10s. 6d., and
Coleman owed me 5 1, for clothing and a little money
lent—l recollect their losing their tickets—they sent for
me to Mr. Single’s—they admitted that they owed me
the money, and said that Mr. Engle had orders to pay
all just debts—if Grover has sworn he only owed me \l.
he has sworn what is false—directly I took my account
to Mr. Single he gave me credit in his books.
Cross-examined. —He ow'ed me 31. 10s. 6d, for clothes
—there was a waistcoat (articles enumerated) —I saw
Grover the Sunday after I was paid, and I told him I
was paid Grover owed me the money for eighteen
months —there are gentlemen in the court at this time
that have owed me money for clothes for eighteen months
—Grover had paid me money before—at the time he
came from being married he paid me 2/. on account of a
suit of clothes he went down to get married in—l ahvays
considered the money sure—l put my signature to the
account when Mr. Single paid me, a short time after the
tickets were taken away—Coleman was in my debt


longer than Grover—l never asked Coleman for the
money—l saw them when they were in the lock-up, and
they told me, whatever happened, I should be paid.
Alfred Charles Palmer. —l am servant to Mr. Single—
I knew Coleman and Grover—l recollect seeing Coleman
on 4th November, —he came to my master’s house and
said he wanted to know what had become of his cattle—
ray master said he knew nothing about it, and referred
him to the bench at Invermein—l met him the same
day; he told me he had seen the governor while at
Newcastle, and spoke to him personally.
Cross-examined. —I recollect it was the 4th of Novem-
ber—my master left the house immediately after he had
spoken to Coleman.
Martin Herring. —l am a farming man—overseer to
Mr. Docker—l have been a fencer for fourteen years.—
(At the suggestion of the court, this witness was not ex-
amined any further.)
Thus closed the case for the defence.
The Attorney General recalled David Grover. —l never
owed Young more than from eighteen shillings to a pound
—I never had more than one pair of trousers from him
—I got a wedding suit from him, and paid him 31. ss. for
it —I never owed him for more than the trousers—l
never recollect his telling me that Mr. Single had paid
him—l never had the trousers from him—l should have
owed him the money if I had taken the trousers—Young
purchased a bedstead from me, which he paid for.
Cross-examined.- —I never asked my master to pay
Young anything—l told him I owed Young eighteeen
shillings, which he said he would pay—l came out here
for fourteen years for receiving stolen property—l have
I


three years and eight months to serve—l do not expect
to get mv ticket-of-leave again, on the issue of this.
William Ledge. —l recollect the tailor buying a bed-
stead and some glass—l do not know what he paid—
I used to keep Young’s books—l made out an account
of 61. 10s. for Coleman and Grover—the Sunday after
their tickets were taken away, I heard them ask Young
if the account had been presented to Mr. Bingle, and
Young said it was all right, on which Grover said, “if it
was 20/. you would be paid.”
The Attorney General said that he should claim his
right to reply.
The Acting Chief Justice. —l cannot deny your right,
Mr. Attorney.
Mr. Sydney Stephen. —This is the first time, may it
please your Honor, that I ever knew' a crown officer
exercise his right of reply in a case like this.
The Attorney General said, that he considered it right
and proper, after the imprudent and ill advised line
Mr. Bingle had adopted in his defence, to insist on his
privilege of replying on the prisoner’s case. He should
consider he was unworthy to wear the gown upon his
back, or hold the situation he had the honour to fill, if
he allowed such remarks as had been made by Mr. Bingle
to pass unnoticed. The line of Mr. Single’s defence
went to accuse him (the attorney general) of being the
tool of some person behind the scenes, and insinuated
that the instigators of the prosecution were actuated by
political motives; and he would not allow the case to go
to the jury with the odium which such a charge involved.
Whatever situation he might be placed in, he should
always have too much regard for his character, both as
a private man and as a public man, to be made the tool


of by any one. Although it was not stated, the insinua-
tion was too broad to be misunderstood, that in insti-
tuting the prosecution he was actuated by other than
bona Jide motives. He would only reply to that portion
of Mr. Single’s speech, which had been made for him by
some political firebrand, that stated the prosecution was
brought forward from political motives; thus converting
an ordinary prosecution into a political case. In the
exercise of his duty he would make no difference be-
tween a gentleman and the meanest person in the colony.
Since he had come to the colony, he had kept away from
all politics ; and while the functions properly belonging
to a grand jury were lodged in him, he felt it his duty to
do so. He would “rather be a toad, and feed on the
noisome vapour of a dungeon,” than be a tool to any
man, and when any man wanted a tool, he must not
come to him. He would not bind himself to any person,
and he denied the right of the governor or any one else
to direct him to prosecute any person, and if the governor
did attempt so to direct him, he would be stepping out
of his duty; if the governor did so, he would tell his
excellency that he was infringing on his province. He
would never put any man on his trial against whom he
did not consider there was a prima facie case. As to
the prosecution being a political one, it was very evident
that the defence was a political one ; it was a weak,
paltry, miserable defence. The foolish document had
been written out of court, and assumed facts directly
opposite to those proved in evidence. What was the
evidence of Captain Durnaresq (the learned gentleman
then spoke to evidence at considerable length, and con-
tinued) ; “So help me God,” gentlemen, I put this
case to you apart from all political feeling, and from a
conscientious sense of duty. Who or what is Mr. Bingle,
that the government of this colony should wish to crush
i 2


him ? What does the government care w hether Mr.
Bingle is friendly or hostile to them ? The learned gen-
tleman concluded by saying, that he thought he had
clearly proved a case that authorized him to call on the
jury for a verdict of guilty.
His Honor commenced his summing up by observing,
that the King’s Attorney General, in the exercise of his
undoubted right, had replied on the evidence. It was
undoubtedly his right, although it was the first time he
had ever heard an Attorney General exercise the right.
The Attorney General was probably induced to do so, in
consequence of the topics urged by the prisoner in his
defence—that the prosecution was instituted from politi-
cal motives ; but there certainly had not been any thing
proved before them that day, to show that the prosecution
had been instituted on any other than public grounds.
Had there been any evidence to show that the gentle-
men at the bar had been persecuted from political mo-
tives ; he would have been the first to interpose and pro-
tect them; but it certainly did not appear that the pro-
secutors had been actuated by any thing but an abstract
love of justice. A court of justice was always a bad
place in which to manifest political feeling, and especially
a criminal court of justice, wherein politics should never
be allowed to intrude themselves. As one who had the
honour to hold a commission as one of the king’s judges,
he would not allow the temple of justice to be polluted
by the entrance of political feelin . Even at sixteen
thousand miles from our native land he trusted that jus-
tice could be as faithfully administered as in England ;
and he joined with the Attorney General in entreating
the jury to dismiss from their minds all that they had
heard out of doors, respecting the case ; for they were to
decide according to the evidence, and according to the


evidence only; and he trusted that the jury would
apply their minds to the Case with the same impartiality
that they would if the prisoners were the meanest of the
king’s subjects, instead of being the persons they were
stated to be : they were not to bear in mind the rank of
the parties, but coolly, calmly, and dispassionately deter-
mine the case. There could be no doubt that if the
prisoners got possession of the cattle to dispose of, and
afterwards converted them to their own use, they were
guilty of cattle stealing. There were two positions in
the case : first, had the prisoners a felonious intent ah
initio 9 did they get possession of these cattle with intent
to convert them to their own use ? if they did, they were
certainly guilty of felony ; but he was bound to tell the
jury, there was no evidence in support of that position,
and they must therefore fall back on the second position,
which was, that if a person had the bare charge of pro-
perty, and afterwards converted it to his own use, he was
guilty of felony, and it was to this point he must draw
the attention of the jury. The case certainly was,
whether, having a bare charge for the benefit of the
crown, they converted the cattle to their own use, not in-
tending to account for the property they had so converted.
It certainly appeared that the prisoners were employed
as agents; had they so conducted themselves, as to lay
themselves open to a criminal charge ? if the prisoners
had had a specific charge, and had abused it, they would
come within the meaning of the cases quoted. The
question would simply have been, had the prisoners ap-
plied the cattle for the specific purpose or for another
purpose ? but it appeared from all the witnesses that the
prisoners had had a general and not a specific direction;
and then arose the question where, —in what manner, at
what place, and at what time, the cattle were to be col-
lected ? and on this point there was no evidence of the


precise terms ; all was left to the impression of parties ;
no one spoke positively ; the witnesses all said it was un-
derstood—that it was their impression—that the cattle
were to be delivered at the pound, but there was no in-
junction. If the prisoners had had any authority to dis-
pose of the cattle, and ultimately account to the crown, it
was clear there could be no case of felony. In looking at
the case, one very important point was, had there been
any attempt at concealment ? If there had been any at-
tempt to conceal the property, then the jury might have
thought there had been a design to commit felony. Look
at the time the three bullocks were branded ; they were
branded openly, and the conduct of the accused, in this
respect, was fair to the world. So in the case of the
beasts that were slaughtered; they were killed in the
light of day ; sometimes some of the mounted police
were called in, from their being very good shots, to kill
the beasts, and an historical statement of the whole matter
kept in a book. If the parties had intended to commit
felony, would they have acted thus ? Would they thus
subject themselves to the chance of being discovered ?It
was strange, also, that none of the parties were able to
say on what terms the cattle were delivered to Bingle ;
they could only speak to their impression. If Mr. Bin-
gle had really and bona fide ground for believing that he
was authorised to sell the cattle, and account for them
afterwards, the charge of felony must fall to the ground.
It was alleged that the prisoners had given in no ac-
counts ; but then, on the other hand, it was not alleged
that the magistrates had called for any account. His
Honor then recapitulated the whole of the evidence,
pointing out as he went along the different facts that
appeared to show there was no felonious intention on the
part of the prisoners ; and remarked on the unusual cir-
cumstance of a reply from an attorney general on evi


dence, and the uncourteous behaviour of Mr. Day towards
Mr. Bingle and towards the magistrates at Invermein,
with respect to the manner in which the original depo-
sitions were taken ; and towards the end of his sum-
ming up, which was both laborious and minute, observed,
that from the evidence, the fair presumption was, that
something might have induced Mr. Bingle to believe he
was authorised to sell the cattle.
At a quarter before three in the morning, the jury
retired, and, after an absence of an hour and a quarter,
returned a verdict of Not Guilty.
APPENDIX, No. VI.
To show the opinions entertained in New South
Wales on this accusation and prosecution, I have
added here the leading articles of its three principal
newspapers.
They are from
The Sydney Herald, May 15, 1837-
The Colonist, May 11, 1837.
The Sydney Gazette, May 13, 1837-
(From the Sydney Herald, Monday, May 15, 1837-)
In our present number will be found a detailed report
of the trial and acquittal of Messrs. Bingle and Were for
alleged cattle stealing. The trial commenced at ten
o’clock on Monday morning last, and did not terminate
till four o’clock on the following morning, when the jury
returned a verdict of Not Guilty. Every one knows that
the present government is eminently one of professions;


and, accordingly, the attorney general professed through-
out his opening speech (we shall come to the other speech
by and by) that the prosecution of the gentlemen then at
the bar originated in the purest motives, and the most
disinterested and anxious desire to evince that, where
public justice is concerned, all men, whatever their grade
and character in society, are alike in the eyes of the be-
neficent, liberal administration, by which the people of
Botany Bay are at present so happily governed ! But,
notwithstanding all the learned attorney general’s fiery
eloquence—notwithstanding all his deprecatory warmth—
we, whose passions are not easily roused, and whose
imagination is not swayed by the declamation of a paid
advocate; we thought that, somehow, he did “ protest
too much.” Over anxiety to disclaim what, after all, is
but an inference drawn by an opponent, has the effect
rather of strengthening the grounds of a suspicion already
excited in the mind; and when we witnessed the forensic
furor of the attorney general, and the zealous eagerness
with which he laboured to repudiate the imputation that
political motives in any way influenced the prosecution of
Mr. Bingle, we could not help thinking that a great
point was gained by this implied admission, that such
motives ought not, at all events, to have influenced it.
How Mr. Attorney General proved this part of the case,
we shall see presently.
Our report of the trial being so detailed, it is only ne-
cessary to recapitulate the main facts here. Two con-
victs, holding tickets-of-leave, rented some few acres of
cultivation paddock from Mr, Bingle, under an agree-
ment which it is here unnecessary to make further men-
tion of. They were also possessed of some cattle which
ran with his own herds, dispersed over a space of five-
and-twenty miles of country. For an offence over which
a bench of magistrates thought, at all events, they had


jurisdiction, the two convicts alluded to were adjudged
to have their tickets cancelled—the bench also recom-
mending that their cattle should be confiscated to the use
of the crown, after the payment of all just debts due by
the former holders. But how were the cattle to be got
in? That was a question which the magistrates could
not solve—it was a problem which they could not work;
at all events, without assistance. However, such assist-
ance happened to be at hand. The cattle were running
with Mr. Bingle’s. Would he undertake to get them in,
and account to the bench ? “ Yes,” said the defendants,
“ it is necessary, in consequence of some arrangements
we are about to make, that the cattle should be mustered,
and in that operation we shall be able to get in the cattle
you want, which are running with ours.” This was the
understanding. No time was fixed within which Mr.
Bingle should complete his self-imposed task—no place
was appointed at which the cattle were to be gathered
together; Mr. B. had a discretionary power, in each of
these respects, to a full extent. But there was also said
something about the payment of just debts. Here, then,
was another discretionary power. Mr. B. did pay some
of these debts with the full knowledge of the magistrates
from whom he considered he derived his authority. A
few working bullocks were brought in about this time;
and, in order that a positive distinguishing mark should
be on them, they were re-branded. This was done
openly, and partly by the very men who claimed the
ownership of those cattle; and they were subsequently
used openly in the service of Mr. 8., who had an un-
doubted lien upon them; but who was still aware that
he must ultimately account to the magistrates, when all
the cattle should have been collected. Well; the dry
state of the season rendered it necessary that herds of
cattle should be driven off to Liverpool Plains. A num-
i 3


ber of the confiscated cattle were driven with them—it
could not be avoided, in order to save those cattle; and
yet this fact is relied upon as evidence of an intended fe-
lonious conversion ! After a number of these cattle had
been got in, the crown officers come forward and pick
them out, as evidence of an intention on the part of Mr.
Single to appropriate them! but it was triumphantly
asked, “ Why were they not brought to the pound at
Invermein ?" We reply by asking, if selecting wild
cattle scattered over a distance of twenty-five miles, and
driving them to a pound, were so very easy a matter,
why did not the magistrates direct somebody to do so ?
why impose that duty upon Mr. Single, and express
themselves gratified at his readiness to undertake it?
But then, it is urged that he had no authority to appro-
priate any of the cattle. Now, as we take it, the legiti-
mate meaning of the word “ appropriate,” used as it is
here, is to make a property of these cattle, or some of
them, without rendering an account to any one. Was
there a tittle of evidence to show that Mr. Single, or any
one considered to be acting on his behalf, ever attempted
to do any thing of the kind? And here, we would re-
mark, that the true question was not what was the nature
of the authority the bench intended to convey to Mr.
Single with respect to these cattle ■ but what he under-
stood had been conveyed to him. That is the question.
If it is asked, how his understanding with respect to the
nature of his authority is to be collected?—we reply,
from his subsequent acts. From the fact that what he
did, he did openly ; and, therefore, the presumption is
in his favour that he, at all events, acted lawfully, accord-
ing to his judgment.
But it is also put forward, as evidence of a felonious
intent, that some of these cattle were slaughtered, and
made use of on Mr. Single’s farm. But how does that
fact affect him ? He was not there the whole of the time;


and admitting a certain extent of misunderstanding on
the part of Mr. Were in this part of the transaction, we
ask, where is there a tittle of evidence to impute to any
one an intended fraudulent conversion of those cattle ?
Mr. Were was, no doubt, cognizant that Mr. Single had
a claim upon the cattle; and he thought he could not
fall greatly into error by appropriating a few towards the
liquidation of that claim. People do not usually call in
the mounted police to aid in the commission of an in-
tended felony! those who intend fraudulently to appro-
priate the property of others, do not preserve a minute
description of it, to be produced at any moment, nor debit
themselves with its value in accounts, which may be
called for they know not how soon! Such are the acts
from which the jury were called upon to infer that the
accused committed felony!
Then, how was the case got up ? This is worthy of
particular notice. The convicts, whose cattle were
ordered to be confiscated, became, we are told, uneasy
that they could obtain no account of them from Mr.
Single ! What right had they to any such account from
that gentleman ? What right had they to any account at all
under the circumstances? But Mr. Single told them to
apply to the Invermein bench, whose mere agent in the
matter he was, where, there was no doubt, they would
obtain every information they might be entitled to. This
was very like the act of one who contemplated a felo-
nious conversion of these very cattle ! Did they apply
to the bench as directed ? They did not. Now, had
such application been made, it would, in all probability,
have been the means of inducing the Invermein magis-
trates to make a formal requisition to Mr. Single, as to
his proceedings with respect to these cattle—a step
which, even to this day, they have not taken. Then,
whence originated the prosecution ? The answer to


that question involves a most material feature of the
case. Mr. Bingle referred the parties to the Invermein
bench—he directed them to the only source whence
they could acquire the information they pretended to
desire. But did they go ? Not they—they did not go
where they were directed to go; but they made their
complaint to Mr. Wentworth, who was accidentally
stopping at Sparke’s inn, eight miles from Maitland !
Well, Mr. Wentworth’s obvious course was just the one
taken by Mr. Bingle—namely, to refer the complainants
to the Invermein bench of magistrates, who were cog-
nizant of the whole affair. But Mr. W. did not do so ;
he referred them to —who ? the Invermein bench ?No ;
to the paid police magistrate at Maitland, who could
know nothing of the matter, save on the mere ex parte
statement of two felons, who, as they had no longer any
interest in the cattle, and avowed that their object was to
prevent Mr. Bingle from retaining them under any cir-
cumstances, ought to have been directed by that magis-
trate to apply to the proper quarter. Mr. Day, however,
thought otherwise. In the exercise of his discretion, he
took the depositions of these men, in the absence, and
entirely without the knowledge, of Mr, Bingle !We
have next to enquire what were this gentleman’s subse-
quent acts. Did he cause Mr. Bingle to be apprehended,
or even summoned to attend before him ? No ! Did he
forward the depositions to the bench of magistrates at
Invermein, of which Mr. Bingle had been a member !
No! ! What did he do with them ? Why, he trans-
mitted them to the Governor, through the Colonial
Secretary ; from whose office they reached that of the
attorney general! !! Mr. Attorney General called his
God to witness that no political feeling entered into this
prosecution. The motives which influences men’s acts
are often obscure, even to themselves ; and we are, there


for 6% disposed charitably to think that Mr. Attorney
General did not, on this occasion, knowingly exercise his
great power to crush an individual, from merely political
motives. But we view the transaction, not in parts, but
in the whole ; and so viewing it, we cannot but admit—
even had we already detailed all the circumstances of the
case—that enough had been shown to lay a reasonable
ground upon which Mr. Bingle was warranted in sup-
posing that something else besides a mere abstract love
of justice originated the prosecution against him.
But we have not yet stated all the reasons upon
which our opinion that this mas a political prosecution,
is formed. That it was not a mere ordinary prosecution,
must be evident to every sensible and unprejudiced man.
In the first place, depositions against the party who was
the chief object of accusation, were taken in an unusual
manner, and at an improper place. There was a bench
of magistrates at Invermein—why were not the com-
plainants sent there ? The depositions, so irregularly
taken, were forwarded to the Colonial Secretary. Is that
a usual course of proceeding ? Is there, in fact, any pre-
cedent for it ? Then, what followed upon this ? From
the Colonial Secretary’s office, the behind-back-taken de-
positions found their way into the office of the attorney
general, who forthwith directs a preliminary trial under
the mild name of an “ Enquiry”—just to ascertain if
Mr. Bingle was influenced by an animus fur andi ! To
call him, point blank, a thief, would not be polite; and
so Mr. Attorney General instituted an “ enquiry ”to
ascertain the existence of the animus fur andi!
“ Just where a naughty word came pat in.
He wrapped it up in lawyers’ Latin.”
But mark the manner in which this “ enquiry” was
pursued, and look at the parties by whom it was con


ducted. We are told, with the utmost vehemence, both
of gesture and words, that the proceedings throughout
this memorable case were in no respect influenced by
political motives. Believe it who can ! What made
Mr. Patriot Wentworth give such information to Mr.
Day, as caused the latter to send for Coleman and Grover?
With what decency did Mr. Day receive the depositions
of these men, not only behind the back of Mr. Single,
but in a case which he must have known to be one for
the exclusive consideration of the Invermein bench—
seeing, as he must have seen, that it entirely arose out of
proceedings before that bench ? If the men, Coleman
and Grover, told the whole truth to Mr. Day, he must
have at once seen that an inquiry into the matter be-
longed, of right, to the Invermein bench. If they told
less than the truth, there was nothing into which any
magistrate could inquire. At the very outset, then, we
find a paid magistrate entertaining a complaint, not only
unknown to the accused party, but also in which several
of his brother magistrates were mixed up. To those
magistrates he did not give the slightest intimation of the
coarse he was pursuing, though it was his obvious duty
to have communicated with them in the very first in-
stance. Then, having taken the depositions of Coleman
and Grover, how did he act ? Did he issue a summons,
or a warrant, to compel the appearance before him of
Mr. Single ? No. That would have been the straight-
forward course—the every-day and proper course of pro-
ceeding. But Mr. Day does—what ? Why, in the most
stealthy manner possible, he sends the - depositions to the
Colonial Secretary in form, but, in fact, to the Governor ! !
Does Mr. Day so deal with all depositions taken before
him ? If not, why did he go out of his way on this par-
ticular occasion ? It would, indeed, seem to be the
fashion with some of our “ paids” to consult the Governor


in certain cases. We remember one case wherein a
“ paid” took the trouble to go all the way from .Sydney
to Parramatta, to ascertain whether it was the Governor’s
pleasure that he should entertain a charge against a con-
vict. We have now an instance before us, of another
“ paid" transmitting depositions, charging a gentleman
with cattle-stealing, to the Governor ! The cases are
nearly analogous, except in this instance—namely, that,
in the one his Excellency gave an opinion favourable to
the convict, and in the other the attorney general went
to work ! However, an “ inquiry” was instituted at In-
vermein, and the crown solicitor was sent there to conduct
it ! In the eyes of stupid people, this seemed a strange
step. They had known Tom, Jack, and Bill to be “ had
up” for cattle-stealing; but, “my eyes!” they had
never before seen so important a personage as Mr. Fisher
sent all the way from Sydney to Invermein, to take care
that justice was done them ! Stupid people as they must
have been, they actually thought that the government
was deeply interested in the fate of Mr. Single, when
they saw T no less a man than Mr. Fisher appointed to
watch over his interests, and, for that purpose sent all
the way from Sydney to a remote part of the Hunter’s
River district. Such a course was so very usual, that
we are really surprised at any person manifesting the
folly displayed in asserting that political motives in-
fluenced the prosecution ! Dolts as they are, did they not
know that Mr. Bingle, at the very time when a charge
was being “ got up” against him, was himself getting
up charges—nay, had got them up—against Sir Richard
Bourke himself? Under such circumstances, who dares
doubt the magnanimity of the government ? Who can
doubt that Mr. Fisher was sent to Invermein, for the
express purpose of guarding the interest of Mr. Bingle
against the possible influence of prejudice ? What thick


headed people they must be, who believe, and venture to
assert, that this was a government political prosecution!
But, somehow or other, Mr. Fisher appears to have
acted as if he had mistaken the object for which he was
despatched all the way to Inverraein. Assuming that
object to have been the furtherance of justice, Mr. Fisher
must have laboured under some very extraordinary hal-
lucination of intellect, when he acted as he did. The
inquiry conducted by him was not a cool inquiry ; nor
acted upon accordingly. It was to this effect—send Mr.
Bingle to trial under any circumstances. The inquiry
was all on one side ; a great mass of evidence tendered
to the bench was rejected—and particularly evidence in
favour of Mr. Bingle. The mode of proceeding was so
unusual and so indecent, that one gentleman, totally dis-
interested in the matter, felt constrained, from a pure
desire to see justice administered, to request of Mr. Day
to take down evidence which, as it went in favour of the
accused, Mr. Fisher somehow omitted. Throughout the
whole proceeding, the conduct of the Crown solicitor was
more that of a political partizan than of a man desirous
to arrive at the truth. Evidence which would have at
all events shown that Mr. Bingle acted bona Jide, how-
ever erroneously, was opposed by him. The magistrates
were told that they must not criminate themselves—
most improperly told so. The principle of law whereby
the crown solicitor’s position may be maintained, is one
entirely in favour of an accused party. It might have
been very proper to warn persons against criminating
themselves ; but if those persons—conscious of integrity,
and regardless of anything but truth—chose to criminate
themselves, what was that to the crown solicitor ? The
fidelity of the notes taken by Mr. Stokes, and which
were produced on the trial, no one pretended to deny.
They, in fact, bore intrinsic evidence of accuracy. These


notes exhibited facts of which, we are sure, the attorney
general knew nothing. The attorney general acted upon
the dry statements of witnesses transmitted to him—he
knew nothing of the means whereby that testimony was
elicited. He was evidently misled: had he conducted
the “ inquiry,” we are satisfied that he never could have
filed an information.
Much of the evidence in favour of Mr. Single was
withheld from the attorney general ; he was compelled
to act upon a mere one-sided case. And, if the matter
had rested there, if the attorney general had done no
more than file an information, we should not have
thought that his conduct was open to much censure.
But the attorney general did not stop there ; he made
the case a political case, notwithstanding his vehement
disclaimer, and he must now take the consequence.
From first to last, his manner of conducting it, showed
that something lay at the bottom. Instead of the calm
manner in which such cases are usually placed before a
jury, we had a display of the fiery zeal of a partizan.
We had an opening speech, not confined to facts, but
abounding in deduction of the most prejudicial nature
to the accused. In short, never did we witness a case
conducted with so much personal acrimony. We have
been present at the trials of some of the most notorious
cattle-stealers that ever infested the colony, yet never
did we witness any one of them prosecuted with that
pertinacity which distinguished Mr. Attorney General in
the case of Mr. Single. Yet that gentleman professes
himself indignant at the charge of his having suffered
himself to be influenced by political motives! But
what weight had Mr. Attorney’s professions when op-
posed to facts? Was it total disinterestedness which
induced him to astound the accused and every intelli-
gent man in the court, by a reply upon the prisoner’s


case ! What ! -tell us that no political matters were
mixed up in the inquiry, when we behold the attorney
general rising to patch up a case against the prisoner, in
the most unconstitutional manner ! We say, that the
power exercised by the attorney general, at present, is
unconstitutional. That learned gentleman, besides, could
not but have known, that an act of parliament has re-
cently passed, whereby prisoners are allowed the privi-
lege of addressing the jury by their counsel; yet, with
that knowledge, he, for the first time, rises to reply upon
a prisoner’s defence, in a case of felony ! Will this be
believed in England ? Does John Hubert Plunkett de-
sire to immortalise his name ? Had the attorney general
merely replied to that part of Mr. Bingle’s defence which
assumed that the prosecution was got up from political
motives, we could have excused the learned gentleman—
we should have thought, that if he had not adopted a
usual , he had, at all events, adopted a reasonable course.
But Mr. Plunkett spoke to evidence ! Let that not be
forgotten. At the very time when the British parlia-
ment had admitted the necessity of allowing counsel to
address juries in behalf of prisoners, our “ liberal” at-
torney general of New South Wales availed himself of a
right which had not only become obsolete, but which, in
the memory of every man at the bar, had not before been
exercised! Yes, let it not be forgotten, that the first
crown prosecutor on record, who replied upon a pri-
soner’s case, on a charge of felony, was Mr. J. P.
Plunkett, the attorney general, for the time being, of
New South Wales! And let it not be forgotten, also,
that the same gentleman, in the delivery of as acrimo-
nious a speech as ever was delivered in a court of justice,
called his God to witness, that in the course pursued by
him, he was wholly uninfluenced by political motives, at
the very moment when every word he uttered, proved


almost to demonstration that he acted, and was then act-
ing, under a political bias ! We have much—very
much to say upon this subject ; but, for the present, we
must pause. In an early number it is our intention
calmly to review the conduct of the whole of the parties
concerned in “ getting up” this extraordinary case. The
acts of Messrs. Wentworth, Day, Beckham, the Ray-
monds, &c., shall not be forgotten any more than the
acts of the attorney general, and his deputy, Mr. Fisher.
APPENDIX, No. VII.
(FROM THE COLONIST.)
THE TRIAL OF MR. BINGLE.
Of all the political prosecutions which have figured on
the arena of the Supreme Court of New South Wales,
we remember few that ever equalled, and certainly none
that ever surpassed, in direct and powerful hold upon
the sympathies of the public mind, the one which was
brought forward in that court on Monday last. A va-
riety of causes had combined to invest the case of Mr.
Single with more than ordinary importance. Not only
did it exhibit the revolting spectacle of a gentleman of
ample fortune and unsullied honour being charged, upon
grounds which were generally believed to heprimafacie
trivial, with the despicable crime of stealing a few head
of cattle ; but it exhibited also a fearful contest between
the authorities and one of the many independent gentry
who were known to have incurred, by political circum


stances the signal displeasure of the executive govern-
ment. If the public had not grievously erred in looking
upon the case as peculiarly and emphatically political—
prompted by political feelings, and intended to answer
political purposes —we have indeed good reason for pro-
nouncing the contest a “ fearful” one. To the unhappy
gentleman himself, what could be more fearful than the
odds with which he had to contend ? while to the re-
spectable community at large, what could be more fear-
ful than a supposed disposition on the part of the govern-
ment to wage battle with its political antagonists by the
help of indictments for felony? The reign of Castle-
reagh, in the mother-country, has been execrated as the
reign of terror, for its frequent recourse to ex-officios for
sedition and treason ; the reign of Darling, in this colony,
has been denounced as the reign of terror, for its fre-
quent recourse to ex-officios for libel; but ex-officios for
felonious stealing out-herod them all! Libel, sedition,
and treason, are frequently no more than conventional
crimes, not necessarily implying moral guilt, as the
pages of history abundantly testify. These, therefore,
are imputations which, though they may impair a man's
fortune, or take away his liberty, or even sacrifice his
life, may leave his honour without a stain ; but felonious
stealing! —that is a charge which touches at once pro-
perty, liberty, life, honour, and salvation !
Of the trial of John Single, Esq., late a magistrate of
this territory, for the alleged crime of cattle-stealing, a
full report will of course be given by The Colonist and
other newspapers ; all we can do this week is to examine
the main features of the case, guided by the knowledge
we have derived from a personal attendance at court, or
from other sources equally undeniable.
It is important that the reader should understand, at


the outset, the two facts which have imparted to this
case its peculiar character, and must form the basis of
our principal animadversions.
Those facts are,
Ist. That Mr. Bingle was at political variance
with the Government of his Excellency Sir
Richard Bourkb ; and,
2nd. That the prosecution was instituted on
THE EX-OFFICIO INDICTMENT OP THE ATTORNEY GENE-
RAL.
As to the first of these facts, it is well known to the
colonists, that immediately after the accession of Sir
Richard Bourke to this government, Mr. Bingle was so
unfortunate as to come into collision with his Excel-
lency, in consequence of certain proceedings of that
gentleman, in his magisterial capacity, being visited by
expressions of his Excellency’s displeasure. Mr. Bingle,
conceiving that he had acted right, and that his Excel-
lency had censured him unjustly, appealed to the Se-
cretary of State for the colonies. The appeal was un-
successful, the noble Secretary holding that the Governor
was right, and Mr. Bingle wrong. This controversy, it
will be supposed, left no good feeling towards Mr.
Bingle in the mind of Sir Richard; and, though not
immediately deprived of his commission as a magistrate,
he was excluded from government house, never being
honoured with invitations either to private parties, or
even to the annual ball and supper on his Majesty’s birth-
day. But it is currently believed, throughout the in-
telligent circles of the colony, that out of this rupture
with Mr. Bingle arose that stern policy towards the ma-
gistrates as a body, and that lenient policy towards the
convict population, which led to the celebrated Hunter’s
River petition, and laid the foundation of Sir Richard’s
unpopularity among the respectable classes of emigrants.


This, of course, could not tend to assuage the feelings
with which his Excellency had previously regarded that
offending gentleman ; and it followed, as a looked for
consequence, that when a new commission of the peace
was issued, at the beginning of the year 1835, the name
of Mr. Single was left out.
But though Mr. B. might consider this a natural con-
sequence, he was far from considering it a just one ; and
therefore wrote to his Excellency requesting to be in-
formed for what offence he had been thus punished.
The answer was, that his Excellency declined to assign
reasons ; but the government newspaper, the Australian,
thought proper to answer for his Excellency, by publish-
ing such a letter as the editor assumed his Excellency
might have addressed to Mr. Bingle. For that letter,
Mr. Bingle commenced an action against the writer, and
recovered damages to the amount of 10(W.
All these transactions put together, from first to last,
involved what Mr. Bingle conceived to be a series of
such unjust treatment on the part of the colonial govern-
ment, that he at length determined upon laying his whole
case before the Secretary of State, and claiming redress.
His appeal was accordingly prepared, and enclosed to
the Colonial Secretary, early in January last, for trans-
mission to Downing Street. Receiving no acknow-
ledgment of the receipt of his packet, he wrote to the
Colonial Secretary, requesting such acknowledgment;
when he was honoured with the following communica-
tion :
To John Bingle, Esq.
Colonial Secretary’s Office, Sydney,
January, 21, 1837.
Sir, —I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of
your letter of the 17th instant, which was only received


yesterday; and in reply, lam directed by the Governor
to inform you, that his Excellency does not propose to
despatch your communication therein alluded to, to the
Secretary of State, until he is informed of the result of
the enquiry ordered to take place at Invermein, upon
which the attorney general has communicated with you.
I have the honour to be. Sir,
Your most obedient servant.
E. DEAS THOMSON.
Such is a brief outline of the position in which Mr.
Bingle stood, in reference to the colonial government,
up to the very moment at which this prosecution was in-
stituted.
The second fact we have referred to, is, that the at-
torney general was not only the Crown prosecutor, but
also, by a highly unconstitutional anomaly, the grand jury
of the country ! The colony has for several years been
deprived of that great bulwark of British liberties,* and
to a single individual—the attorney general for the time-
being, himself a paid servant of the government —has
been entrusted that awful power which the British con-
stitution deems it unsafe to place in any hands but those
of twenty-three intelligent and independent subjects.
The only ground upon which this perilous innovation
was ever justified was, that the colony was in the main
a community of rogues, and that a grand jury might
therefore be expected to have so deep a sympathy with
felonious culprits, as would frequently lead them to
“ ignore” bills which ought to have been returned
“ true.” It was deemed that there was, on the whole,
less danger to the public liberties from crown prosecu-
tion, than to public property and life from thieves and
murderers. But whatever degree of truth there might
* It was so deprived before the arrival of the present Governor.


have been in this objection to grand juries, it plainly did
not apply to such cases as that of Mr. Single. For him
—an emigrant, a gentleman and a magistrate—this lar-
cenous sympathy could not have arisen. Here the shield
interposed by the constitution between the Crown and
the subject was peculiarly needed. The Crown was the
party complaining of injury, and yet the Crown stood
forth in the double capacity of prosecutor and grand
jury.
The attorney general was obliged to acknowledge at
the trial, that the power he had exercised was unconsti-
tutional, and declared that he deeply regretted that such
power had been invested in his office. This declaration
may have been sincere, but we are told he has been so
long in the habit of using it as a preface to his prosecu-
tions, that we cannot help asking how it is that he has
not induced the head of the government to release him
from the dilemma, by introducing the grand jury system ?
His Excellency, it is understood, has all along possessed
the power of doing so, and with these declarations of the
attorney general continually ringing in his ears, we can-
not understand why his Excellency, if he regarded them
as sincere, should not have removed their cause.
Mr. Plunkett (the attorney general) also protested, in
reference to certain insinuations of one of our contem-
poraries, that he had been “ordered'’ to commence this
prosecution, that no such “ orders” had been given; and
so sensitive was the learned gentleman to this grave im-
putation, that, in his final speech to the jury, he even
swore — “ So help me God” — that it was not true ! Of
Mr. Plunkett, both as a man and a public officer, we
have always entertained a high opinion ; and we readily
give him credit for as much sincerity as sinful mortals
are capable of, when he thus asserts his independence of
government influence. But he must have poorly studied


the science of human motives, if he is not aware, that in
emergencies like the present, the human heart is led
astray in spite of its own better impulses, and even with-
out its own consciousness. It is to a knowledge of this
subtlety and treachery of our common nature, even when
disciplined by education, that we are to attribute the
jealousy with which the British constitution guards the
rights of the subject. It could never be supposed, for
instance, that such a man as Sir Richard Bourke would
in so many words “ order’ his attorney general to find a
true bill against a political enemy, accused of felony ;
and it would be equally impossible to suppose that such
a man as Mr. Plunkett would obey such an order, or in
any other way wilfully and knowingly violate his oath
of office. But, while we admit so much for the integrity
of “men of honour,” we cannot shut our eyes to the
great Scriptural truth, that men of honour, in common
with their race, are fallen beings, possessing hearts “ de-
ceitful above all things, and desperately wicked.” Sir
Richard Bourke, though it be in spite of himself, cannot
but exercise an influence upon those about him; and
we cannot give Mr. Plunkett’s mind credit for such su-
perhuman fortitude as would be proof against an influ-
ence by which all other men, in similar circumstances,
would be more or less affected.
Look at Mr. Plunkett’s position, and then reflect upon
the subtle tendencies of man’s frail nature. When he
had to sit as a grand jury upon Mr. Bingle, did he not
know that for the last six years that gentleman had been
on bad terms with the Governor? Was he not well
aware, that even at that very moment a packet lay at
Government House containing a series of grave charges
against the Governor, prepared by Mr. Bingle for the
King’s ministers ? Could he shut his eyes to the fact,
that this charge of felony, if at all susceptible of proof,
K


would be the most triumphant vindication that his Excel-
lency could desire—would for ever silence Mr. Bingle’s
impeachments—and would inflict a stunning blow upon
that strong and influential “faction/’ from whose machi-
nations the Governor was even then suffering serious an-
noyance, and of which Mr. Bingle had long been con-
sidered one of the leading members ? Is it likely, is it
conceivable, that these considerations did not pass through
Mr. Plunkett’s mind ? And even giving him credit, as
we most ingenuously do, for an honest struggle to free
himself from their influence, does it come within the
compass of moral possibility, that that struggle would
be wholly successful ?
In his opening address to the jury, the attorney ge-
neral, in the hope of proving his freedom from improper
influence, ventured the assertion, that no twenty-three
honest men in the country could have sat as a grand jury
upon Mr. Bingle’s case, without coming to the same con-
clusion as he had come to—namely, that it was prima
facie bad, and ought to be sent to a jury. Now, if this
came from his heart, and was not employed as a mere
rhetorical flourish, Mr. Plunkett will be rather startled
when we tell him, that every person in court with whom
we conversed—and we conversed with many of all grades
and parties—agreed with ourselves that even on his own
showing he had no case at all! Before he had brought
forward a single witness, the conclusion was irresistible,
that his own statement of the facts, strongly coloured as
it was with all the arts of forensic ingenuity, did not ex-
hibit a single act which could be even suspected of felo-
nious intent. Upon the faith of our own impressions,
and the impressions of those around us, we venture to
meet Mr. Plunkett’s assertion with another—it is this, that
had the case proceeded no farther than his own ex-parte
speech, no twelve honest men could have returned a ver


diet of “guilty!” The evidence with which he at-
tempted to make out his charge, served but to strengthen
these impressions. Every crown witness that left the
box, left the case in a still worse predicament than it was
before. But never did we behold so strenuous an en-
deavour in a king’s counsel to extract from his witnesses
testimony favourable to the prosecution —never so de-
termined an interference with the cross-examinations of
the counsel for the prisoner, binding them down to the
most rigorous technicalities of law—as we beheld in Mr.
Plunkett on Monday last. If his own life, and the lives
of his nearest-and dearest kindred, had depended upon
the issue of that trial, he could not have entered with
more heart and soul into his duty as a barrister—he
could not have summoned up his energies to a more
desperate struggle—he could not more resolutely have
brought out all the stores of his legal knowledge, all the
resources of his natural ingenuity, all the quirks and
quibbles of his professional tact, to bear upon the one
darling point of conviction. But all was unavailing !
The more he groped in the darkness of his case, for “fe-
lonious intent,” the more it eluded his grasp. The autho-
rity of the magistrates for what Mr. Bingle had done-
the frank and open manner in which that gentleman had
acted from beginning to end—the utter want of any
thing that bore the remotest semblance to trickery or
fraud—continued to stare the court in the face at every
turn, and to foil the skill of the indefatigable prosecutor.
No one present at the trial could fail to be struck with
three circumstances in the proceedings of the attorney
general; namely,
Ist. His disaUowal of Mr. Bingle s account books. —
These were offered in evidence to prove that Coleman
and Grover were in Mr. Bingle’s debt, and that the ap-
propriation of such of the confiscated cattle as had been
k 2


applied to the discharge of debts was at the time duly
entered to the credit of the account. But they were re-
jected by Mr. Plunkett, because they could not be legally
proved. And why could they not ? Because the person
best able to prove them, stood in the dock, indicted as an
accessory ! Mr. Were, the superintendent of Mr. Bingle,
would have been the best possible witness for the de-
fence : but of this advantage Mr. B. was deprived by the
placing of that witness by his side as a fellow-prisoner !
2. His impassioned manner. —Usually Mr. Plunkett is,
as Crown prosecutors ought always to be, cool, collected,
and forbearing, affording to the prisoner every fair ad-
vantage ; but on this occasion he displayed a zeal, an ar-
dour, an impetuosity, which could not have been sur-
passed had he been pleading for the life of his own
brother.
3. His availing himself of the obsolete right of reply. —
This, we understand, is a privilege of which counsel for
the Crown have never, for some hundreds of years at
least, availed themselves in England, except in cases of
high treason; while in this colony it is altogether with-
out example! The reason for this manly forbearance is,
that as counsel for the defence are not allowed to address
the court, their privilege being confined to the examina-
tion of witnesses, the Crown’s claiming the “last word,”
would be an unfair and indelicate advantage. And the
acting Chief Justice, who presided at Mr. Bingle’s trial,
could not forbear to advert, in a most pointed manner, to
the extraordinary deviation of Mr. Plunkett from this
old-established usage. Why he thus deviated, the public
must judge for themselves.
Of the conduct of the acting Chief Justice Dowling,
throughout the whole of this arduous and anxious case,
which occupied the court full eighteen hours, it is impos-
sible to speak too highly. We have sometimes had occa


slon to find fault with his Honor, and we are on that ac-
count the more free to bear our humble testimony to the
able and candid manner in which he presided on the
present occasion. He acted the part of a shrewd, dis-
criminating lawyer—an upright, conscientious judge—a
feeling, sound-hearted, independent man.
Of the jury we must say that, considering they were,
with some two or three exceptions, plain, uneducated
men, they proved themselves honest Britons, in with-
standing the formidable battery of the attorney general’s
impassioned eloquence. Had they all been men of edu-
cation, we are satisfied they would have stopped the case
before the defence came on.
We cannot conclude without some notice of the feeling
manifested by the audience. Although the trial was not
over until about four o’clock in the morning, the court
continued to be crowded to the last moment, and when
the attorney general first intimated his intention to
reply, the judge making some observation which was un-
derstood by the audience to be a refusal of the learned
gentleman’s right to do so, there was a sudden burst of
applause; but when his Honor distinctly said that the
attorney general had the right, there was a general hiss-
ing ; and no sooner had the words “ Not Guilty,” dropped
from the lips of the foreman of the jury, than there was
a loud, vehement, and prolonged cheering throughout
the court! This spoke volumes for the popularity of this
memorable prosecution.
When a report of the trial shall have been given to the
public, we may feel it our duty to return to the subject.
If we are not much mistaken, the trial of Bingle and
Were will lead to consequences which will assign to it a
prominent place in the chronology of New South Wales.
k 3


APPENDIX, No. VIII.
(From the SYDNEY GAZETTE, Saturday, May 13, 1837 )
MR. SINGLE’S CASE.
Another of those very extraordinary prosecutions for
which Sir Richard Bourke’s administration is so pecu-
liarly noted, has just been disposed of by the Supreme
Court, before his Honor the acting Chief Justice and a
civil jury. Mr. Single and Mr. Were have been ac-
quitted of the charge of cattle-stealing, maliciously
brought against them; and, in spite of the “ Devil and
all his works,” these gentlemen are at last freed from the
fettered and contaminated air of the felon’s dock. This
case having, therefore, been so far decided by a legal
tribunal, it becomes the peculiar province of the press to
make some remarks upon so singular a trial; and God
be praised, that such liberty is ours; for though a jury
may consider it proper to charge parties with “ impro-
priety” while they acquit them of all felonious intent, it
will be found that there is still a higher tribunal than
even that of a jury, by which men’s actions may be fairly
judged—that tribunal is— public opinion. Mr. Single
states in his defence, that this was a prosecution “ got
up” to gratify a political animosity. It will be our aim
to enquire into some circumstances preceding the event
which first gave rise to this case, and from them leave
the public to come to a correct conclusion, as to whether
Mr. Single is, or is not, fully borne out in his supposi-
tions by facts. It is no doubt well known to most of
our readers, that in the year 1832, almost immediately
after the arrival of the present Governor, Mr. Single, as
a magistrate, was censured by his Excellency for acting


as every other justice of the peace residing in the coun-
try districts, of far longer standing, had done before him
—and as some magistrates to this day do! —viz. holding a
court of petty sessions in his private house; before which
his own servants were tried by a neighbouring magis-
trate, who was casually his visitor. It is quite unneces-
sary for us here to show that Mr. Single was unjustly
censured. It will be sufficient for our purpose to state,
that he considered himself so ; and in consequence ap-
pealed, though unsuccessfully, to the Secretary of State.
For this act Mr. Single was dismissed the magistracy,
his name being omitted in the new commission of the
peace issued at the commencement of 1835. From that
hour to the present has Mr. Single openly and avowedly
been actively engaged in further endeavours to obtain
that justice which has been denied him both here and
elsewhere ; and two weeks only previous to the “ cattle-
stealing” charge, he had forwarded to Sir Richard
Bourke, for the purpose of being immediately transmit-
ted, through him, to Lord Glenelg, a series of heavy ac-
cusations against his Excellency, which were detained by
the Governor, as his secretary states, “ until his Excel-
lency was informed of the result of the enquiry ordered
to take place at Invermein,” —meaning this identical bu-
siness. And here we may be allowed to digress a little,
to exclaim against the manifest injustice of so arbitrary a
step. What had Mr. Single’s case of 1836 to do with
his impeachment of Sir Richard Bourke, which related
solely to matters that transpired in 1832?—he was not
then charged with felony! Why, therefore, was his
complaint not forwarded? We need not answer the
question. The circumstances we have related are all
matters of general notoriety, they indeed created no un-
usual stir in their day, and have tended in no small de-
gree to brand the local government with the unpopularity


under which it now in vain would grapple. They must
have been known to the attorney general; and as that
officer represents the grand jury of the country, a situa-
tion of no ordinary responsibility, it behoved him to have
acted with the greatest possible caution in any charge
brought against Mr. Single—he should have watched
narrowly the proceedings throughout—lie should have
most minutely weighed well the evidence put before
him, before he decided on sending the case to a jury ;
and if a thought flashed across his mind that the slightest
political feeling pervaded the transaction, he should have
flung back with indignation in the very teeth of the par-
ties who would have made him pander to their political
appetites—the imputations they were desirous of casting
upon him. But perhaps such a thought did not strike
the attorney general. From his high standing at the
bar—from his reputation, both public and private—we
are willing to believe him free from such an imputation.
But it is a melancholy fact, and one that cannot for a
moment be denied, that where political feeling runs high,
it has the effect of blinding a man’s better judgment—he
does a grievous wrong in spite of his intentions, and firm
determination to do right; and such is the light in which
we view the attorney general’s conduct in this case, be-
fore coming into court. But we regret we cannot stay
our strictures here ; we must fearlessly proceed and af-
firm, that at the trial he allowed himself to be betrayed
into a warmth of manner, which overcame his otherwise
mature judgment; and however leniently we may feel
disposed to be, still, in the discharge of our duty, we
must, to use the mildest term, affirm him to have been
guilty of much indiscretion. It was well known to the
attorney general, that the Prisoners’ Counsel Act, which
allows liberty of speech to the accused, as well as for the
prosecution, is now the law of England, and that in a


short time it will be in force here, requiring only the
meeting of council to set it in operation. It was well
known to the attorney general, that in claiming the right
of reply, he was adopting a course which the judge told
him plain enough he had never known exercised before,
and which we tell him, has never been taken advantage
of, even in England, within the last 200 years, except in
cases of high treason. It was well known to the attor-
ney general that he had a jury to address, who, with one
or two exceptions, were selected from the more humble
walks of life, on whom a rampant and violent speech
must naturally have had considerable effect, particu-
larly when that speech contained the “ last word.” Still,
with the knowledge of all these powerful circumstances—
instead of using a becoming delicacy, which in ordinary
instances would have been adopted—did the attorney
general press his rights with singular pertinacity to the
last, and endeavoured in the most pointed way to draw a
distinction, prejudicial to the prisoners, between them
and the jury, from their different position in society,
which it would not have been in his power to have done
had the accused been tried by their peers, to which,
though denied, they had an undoubted right. It is true
that it may be legal to draw such an invidious distinc-
tion—but, under the circumstances, was it fair ? The
attorney general’s excuse for claiming a right of reply,
proved indeed but paltry : it was, he said, to rebut the foul
charge of having lent himself to this prosecution, because
it was a political one. He flew into a most outrageous
passion at Mr.Bingle’s impudence in making the assertion,
quite overlooking the slight circumstance, that Mr. Bingle
was at that moment standing his trial on a charge that
involved his liberty for life; on a charge which nine-
tenths of the colonists believed to have been founded from
political influence, and therefore ought he to have been
allowed the utmost latitude. But if this was the reason


for the attorney general claiming his right of reply,
why did he consider it necessary to comment so minutely
on the whole of the evidence—could he not have con-
tented himself with rebutting Mr. Bingle’s assertions ?
The public would then have been far better satisfied of
the propriety of his conduct, throughout. In now dis-
missing the attorney-general, we again remark, that we
believe him to have been actuated by no bad feeling to-
wards Mr. Single—if the public think differently, he
has himself and himself solely, to blame ; the manner
in which he conducted the prosecution having left an im-
pression on the public mind, which he will indeed find
difficult to remove; and although he laboured hard to
make the court believe this was an ordinary trial, his
every action tended still firmer and firmer to impress on
all who were attentive to his conduct, that Mr. Single
stood before them a victim to excited political animosity.
But what is the opinion that every man entertains of
Mr. Bingle’s character, who heard the trial ? We will
record it, and could if necessary bring a hundred wit-
nesses to prove its truth. Not one we are certain would
be found, not excepting the learned judge himself, to
state, that the slightest imputation is to be attached either
to him, or Mr. Were.—That he has acted throughout the
whole transaction, as every honest man would have done,
if placed in a similar position. In concluding our re-
marks we feel it but just to Mr. Justice Dowling to say,
that though the case assumed so much of political influ-
ence, on that side too, which as a private individual, his
Honor is known to be warmly attached, and in which we
shall ever be his sturdy opponent, no judge could have
endeavoured more impartially to administer justice, than
Mr. Justice Dowling. No violent remarks characterized
his conduct—he was free from all party influence —and
with the most scrupulous and anxious care, throughout a
laborious and trying eighteen hours, never relaxed in the


least in his exertions, to hold the balance of justice, as
became an honourable and independent man. He did
his duty faithfully; his reward—he can have no higher—
will be his own conscience—his Maker’s praise !
APPENDIX, No. IX.
As evidence of the light in which a dismissal from
the commission was regarded by other magistrates of
the territory, the two letters following have been
copied from the Sydney Herald, March 31, 1836,
and February 27, 1837-
“ MINUTE.
“ Perceiving that the power of the Governor to remove
magistrates from the commission of the peace without
cause assigned has recently been enforced, and con-
sidering therefore that my present appointment subjects
me to such an indignity, either from misapprehension or
from other motives; it is my deliberate conviction that
I am not called upon to continue in a position that may
subject me to a degradation from which my character
and station in life have hitherto exempted me.
“ I therefore, after mature reflection, record my inten-
tion not to act, under present circumstances, as a member
of this bench, or as a magistrate of the territory.
“ (Signed) Wm. Dumaresq.
“ Court House, Invermein, Feb. 1, 1836.”
“ I have abstained from acting on the above notification
of my intention to decline the office of a magistrate until
this day, owing to the absence of the other resident ma-
gistrates from the district.
“ (Signed) Wm. Dumaresq.
“ Court House, Invermein, March 2, 1836.”


APPENDIX, No. X.
Sydney, 20th February, 1837-
Sir, — Having perused a letter, dated 10th instant,
addressed by command of your Excellency to John
Lamb, Esq., and finding from it, that the Secretary of
State for the Colonies upholds a prerogative claimed by
your Excellency, the existence of which, must, in my
opinion, tend to degrade the magisterial office, and the
exercise of which, might, if I remained a magistrate,
subject ray own character to imputations and stigmas
which never could be attached to it, were I out of the
commission of the peace, I feel it incumbent on me, after
mature consideration, not to delay a moment in retiring
from an office entailing such liabilities; and I, therefore,
beg most respectfully that your Excellency will be pleased
to accept this my resignation of the magistracy.
The prerogative to which I allude, is that of dismiss-
ing the magistrates of this colony without either assigning
your Excellency’s reasons at the time, or even yielding
an explanation subsequently, on the respectful solicita-
tion of the parties dismissed.
This prerogative, exercised by your Excellency, and
upheld by the Secretary of State, must now, I presume,
be considered the tenure of the magisterial office, and it
is one which, in ray opinion, strikes at the root of the
most important attributes of the magistracy—its inde-
pendence, impartiality, and integrity,
I have the honor to be. Sir,
Your Excellency’s most obedient humble servant,
(Signed) Thomas Walker.
To His Excellency, the Governor,
SfC. tyc. Sfc.
LONDON : Printed by MANNING and SMITHSON,
Ivy Lane, Paternoster Row.
