

A LETTER
FROM MINISTERS
OF THE
FREE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND
TO THE
FREE PRESBYTERIAN SYNOD
OF VICTORIA.
HPJ m litotes
STATEMENT AND ADDRESS
BY THE
PRESBIfERT OF TASMANIA.
i
< i
is
j Tasmania:
A ROBERT HARRIS, PRINTER, CHARLES-STREET, LAUNCESTON,
\ J (TASMANIAN PRINTING OFFICE.)




A LETTER
FROM MINISTERS
OF THE
FREE CHURCH OF SCOTLAND
TO THE
FREE PRESBYTERIAN SYNOD
OF VICTORIA.
STATEMENT AND ADDRESS
BY THE
PRESBYTERY OF TASMANIA.
ROBERT HARRIS, PRINTER, CHARLES-STREET, LAUNCESTON.
(TASMANIAN PRINTING OFFICE.)




xi -1
INTRODUCTORY STATEMENT
AND ADDRESS.
After the disruption in 1843, the two bodies previ-
ously composing the Church of Scotland, addressed
circulars to the Presbyterians in the various colonies
and dependencies of the British Empire. The circular
sent to this colony by the Free Church was addressed
to the Presbytery of Tasmania —then the Presbytery
of Y. D. Land —in our collective capacity ; the circular
from the Established Church was addressed to the
ministers individually. Few, if any, answers, it is
believed, were returned to the latter —the mode of ad-
dress not being generally approved of; to the former
we replied officially through our Moderator.
In the letter of the Free Church we were ear-
nestly invited to fraternise with her. At the same
time it was distinctly stated that she was imperfectly
acquainted with the relations subsisting betwixt the
Presbytery and the Colonial Government, and knew
not how far, nor whether at all, they were of a nature
to endanger the liberties of a Christian Church. No
opinion therefore could be offered, and no advice given


as to the propriety or necessity of relinquishing state
aid. That question must be left for the determination
of the Presbytery. The Free Church felt assured it
would be decided on the ground of principle.
Our reply was to the effect, —that we heartily sym-
pathised with the Free Church, and approved of the
course she had followed in the circumstances in which
she had been placed: that we held the principles for
the sake of which the Free Church had suffered the
loss of all things ; that the position of the Presbyterian
Church in this colony, as regarded both ministers and
people, was one of perfect freedom from secular do-
mination : that if an attempt were made to deprive us
of our spiritual independence, or our people of their
religious rights—of which however there seemed no
likelihood, and for which there existed no pretence —
we trusted we should be enabled to lift up a testimony
as the Free Church had done : but that whilst undis-
turbed in the exercise of our Christian privileges, we
did not feel ourselves called upon to relinquish, and
would not consider ourselves justified in relinquishing,
of our own accord, advantages conferred on us by the
state not for our behoof so much as for behoof of our
people.
This answer to the Free Church was unanimously
agreed to. The members of our court latest from home,
excellent men and faithful ministers, zealous Free
Churchmen, approved and in great part dictated the
terms of it. No further communication on the sub-
ject was received from the Free Church. After some


time this silence began to be commented on. By the
majority it was thought to intimate acquiescence on
the part of the Free Church, in the view we had taken
of our position and duty. By the brethren just alluded
to it was considered symptomatic of displeasure, and
an evidence that enough had not been done in res-
ponding to her call. Accordingly, a formal enuncia-
tion of principles was prepared and subscribed by the
Presbytery —in this instance also without a dissentient
voice.
The principles laid down in this record were iden-
tical with those of the Free Church —ecclesiastically
and theologically —and would have been deemed per-
fectly satisfactory, if in the progress of the contest in
which she had been compelled to engage, and in the
posture of antagonism to the national church which
she was constrained to assume, there had not arisen in
the minds of many of her adherents, a feeling of
estrangement which could brook nothing short of the
expression of an actual hostility to that establishment.
Such an expression we were not prepared to give. We
concluded it to be sufficient if we signified approval of
the conduct of the Free Church in her choice of the
alternative to which she had been reduced, professed
attachment to her principles, and pledged ourselves, if
need were, to follow her example. But this course not
appearing to meet the expectations of her partizans in
the colony, and observing an inclination to impute to
us unworthy motives, the Presbytery by a formal reso-
lution—again unanimously assented to —declared the


Presbyterian Church in the colony to be independent
of every other, and consequently free to receive minis-
ters from any other Presbyterian Church, if called by
the people, of good education and standing, and willing
to sign the prescribed formulas.
Strictly speaking this resolution effected no
change in our relations with the Church of Scotland.
It did not withdraw us from her jurisdiction, for on
her own shewing, Colonial church judicatories are not
under her jurisdiction ; with reference to them she has
no right, and claims none, but to advise or instruct
when appealed to —as any other church may do, if ap-
pealed to. And having no jurisdiction, she has no
title, and no power, to interfere betwixt the civil gov-
ernment and a colonial church —supposing the latter to
be state-supported. The resolution of the Presbytery
on this occasion was simply an unmistakeable assertion
of what we conceived to be our undoubted right, viz.,
to accept of ministers from any Presbyterian Church
—such ministers, on joining us, fulfilling the requisite
conditions.
This position —taken up in 1844 —has been main-
tained ever since—unshaken, but not unassailed. Some
refused to believe that we could be sincere in our ap-
proval of the principles of the Free Church, and yet
decline to follow her example ; state aid ought to be
given up. Others insisted that we were not in earnest
if we did not promulgate a determination to admit no
minister from the Scottish establishment. We were
credibly informed that men high in the Free Church


at home, looked grave when this question of supply
was mooted. We were even expressly told by offi-
cial persons —but not officially —that our grand diffi-
culty was still to be encountered ; where should we be
when it became necessary for us to seek for ministers ?
We could see no force in these objections. The
Free Church party, before the disruption, had striven
for years to be allowed to hold the very position, with
reference to the state, which we occupied, and have all
along occupied, without thought of disturbance. Had
the Free Church party been able to retain this position,
there would have been no disruption. When it did
take place, the leaders of the movement studiously re-
pudiated the voluntary principle, and pronounced it to
be, in their opinion, the duty of a government to assist
the church, and the duty of the church to accept of
government assistance, provided there was no encroach-
ment on spiritual privileges. Why then should the
Presbytery of Tasmania be required to do, or be
blamed for not doing what the Free Church of Scot-
land in the same circumstances certainly never would
have done —what on the contrary she would have con-
sidered it to be her duty not to do %
As for taking supply from the Church of Scot-
land —the Free Church received and welcomed minis-
ters from that establishment who professed her princi-
ples, and why should not this Presbytery be allowed a
similar privilege on the same conditions 1 Besides, a
Presbyterian congregation here might be desirous of
calling a minister from the Established Church, and to


refuse to sanction such a call on the sole ground that
the minister came from the Church of Scotland, seemed
to us an infringement on the liberties of the Christian
people, so earnestly contended for by the Free Church.
We conceived we were not entitled to reject a minister
chosen by the people, and otherwise eligible, who was
prepared to sign our formulas, and to profess himself
thereafter a bona fide member of our body alone, and
amenable to no other jurisdiction.
Meanwhile time went on ; years passed away ;
the heat of controversy gradually abated, and things
began to stand out in their proper colours, and dimen-
sions, and bearings. Division in the Presbyterian
Church was felt to be unseemly. The conviction
deepened that in these colonies there was no absolute
necessity for it —not even a reasonable cause. Efforts
were made to bring about a better state of things :so
far successful that after much discussion the Presbyte-
rian Synod of Victoria, the Free Presbyterian Synod
of Victoria, and the Presbytery of Tasmania, had
agreed upon a basis of union—November, 1855 —when
certain members of the Free Synod becoming appre-
hensive that the united body might take ministers from
the Church of Scotland, which the basis of union did
not preclude them from doing, opposed themselves to
the farther progress of the measure, and prevented, or
at least postponed its completion. In the end these
members were expelled by the body to which they
belonged—April, 1857 —and forthwith assumed them-
selves to be the only Free Presbyterian Synod, the


proper representatives of the Free Church of Scotland;
—proceedings on both sides with regard to which this
Presbytery are not called upon to express an opinion.
Then followed references to the Free Church at
home, and a request that she would send a deputation
from a list of ministers named, with the hope of still
bringing to a successful issue negociations so unhappily
interrupted. These ministers, it appears, find it impos-
sible to come out; and they have addressed a letter to
the Free Synod —14th November, 1857 —admirable
for its careful discrimination, perfect candour, and
sound sense. They do not write officially, but they
intimate that their letter may be received as conveying
the mind of their church on the matters brought
under her notice.
In this able paper —given in the sequel of this
pamphlet —there is a virtual approval of the position
held by the Presbytery of Tasmania throughout the
long controversy which has agitated the Presbyterian
Church. It has been mentioned, and is well known,
that on the subject of state aid to religion this Pres-
bytery and the Free Church of Scotland have always
been at one. Here no interference with spiritual pri-
vileges is either permitted or attempted —consequently
it has ever been our duty, on Free Church principles,
to accept of aid from the state. And now we find the
Free Church adopting the views we have held from
the beginning, and earnestly exhorting to union and
incorporation. “ The facilities for union,” she tells her
adherents, “are greater in the colonies than in the


mother country ; there are causes of separation at home
which need not occasion difficulty abroad, and contro-
versies to be adjusted at home, which need not be
raised abroad. She desires to see Presbyterians in
these colonies forming one independent church, on the
sure basis of the Word of God alone. She does not
perceive how ministers, if duly qualified, and prepared
to sign the appointed formulas, can be refused admis-
sion into such a church, whatever denomination they
may have previously belonged to, it being understood
that thereafter they shall be amenable to no foreign
jurisdiction.” She indicates, in short, as the true course
to be followed, the very course to which we committed
ourselves fourteen years ago, and recommends it now
upon the grounds on which it then approved itself to
us.*
* In giving these details, it is but just to state—and we are glad of the
opportunity—that with reference to the great ecclesiastical controversy of the
times, our position and procedure, now so amply vindicated, are mainly attribu-
table to the enlightened ideas and untiring exertions of the Eev. Dr. Lillie,
Minister of St. Andrew’s Church, Hobart Town. To this distinguished Clergy-
man, Presbyterianism in the Southern Hemisphere is deeply indebted. His
cares and labours have not been limited to his own immediate field of action.
When the attempt was made to unite in the Victorian Synods, his presence was
solicited, —both parties willingly acknowledging the value of his assistance ; and
subsequently the Free Church of Scotland have substantially testified to the
correctness of his views. His representations, in correspondence and personal
intercourse with leading men, have, we believe, in no inconsiderable degree, in-
fluenced that church to approve of the course she now advises ; and which, if
followed up in the spirit in which it was conceived, may be anticipated to be of
incalculable benefit to colonial Presbyterian Churches—giving them a fresh
starting point, and better vantage ground. It is matter of deep regret that Dr.
Lillie’s health has not supported him in the prosecution of the important objects
to which he was devoted ; and that he has been compelled for a time at least to
quit the scene of his labours. He carries with him the affection and gratitude of
his brethren.


At the same time, we readily admit that our vindi-
cation infers no blame upon the Presbyterian Church
in the colony, from which we have hitherto been sepa-
rated. The letter which virtually justifies us, virtually
justifies our brethren of that church also ; for while
it testifies to the fact that there do exist causes of
separation which occasion difficulty, and controversies
requiring adjustment, it is the first authoritative an-
nouncement, as far as we are aware, that these are to
be admitted as elements in the consideration of the
question at issue, not abroad , but at home only. Up
to the present time the Free Church here has been
acting upon her understanding of the mind of the
Free Church of Scotland ; and up to this time she
appears to be right in having so understood it: and it
is never to be forgotten that in thus acting she was
casting her bread upon the waters, and staying her-
self upon the Lord her God,
We conceive the foregoing details to be due not
more to ourselves than to our people. Opportunity
serving, we think it right to show that in the judg-
ment of men as eminent as any in the Christian
Church, our conduct throughout the most important
religious controversy of modern days, has been influ-
enced by considerations other than personal and pecu-
liar. It is true, at an earlier period we might have
proved this with the same force of reason, but not with
equal weight of testimony ; and in many minds, from
prepossession or inattention, authority goes farther
than argument.


But our chief object in this publication—encour-
aged by such approval of our position and principles
—is to respond to the appeal of these distinguished
ministers, and to solicit attention to their earnest ex-
hortations on the subject of union among colonial
Presbyterian churches. Their words are remarkable ;
they speak of the “ extreme desirableness, if not ab-
solute necessity, of such churches seeking union and
incorporation ; they had hailed with hopeful joy the
movement in that direction, which in the meantime
has so unhappily failed of success ; they feel that the
interests of Presbyterianism in these colonies, and to
a large extent the interests of true religion, and the
welfare of immortal souls, are involved in the question
—* can there again be union and peace?’ For the
sake of these high and holy interests —for the sake of
generations yet unborn —they implore all to meet this
question in the spirit of mutual forbearance ; not only
with an intense desire, but, in dependence on the grace
of God, with an humble determination to have it
satisfactorily answered.” Language this, breathing
the very spirit of that Divine Teacher who appeared
on earth bringing peace and goodwill toward men.
Brethren, beloved in the Lord, and we venture to
address ourselves to all of the Presbyterian commu-
nion, we beseech you suffer from us also the word of
exhortation. We need not point out to those who
read the letter which follows, that from the path of
Presbyterians in these colonies who profess adherence
to the principles, and have respect for the opinion of


the Free Church of Scotland, every reasonable obstacle
to union is now removed. Some may indeed go beyond
the Free Church —like the dissentients in the Victorian
Synod, who think it wrong to countenance the Scot-
tish Establishment even so far as to take ministers from
her, willing to sign their formulas. We do not sympa-
thise with such. Theirs is not the spirit, as it seems
to us, which enjoins unlimited forgiveness of a brother
who is conceived to have offended. Nevertheless we
doubt not they are persuaded in their own minds. But
of this, brethren, we would have you aware —this we
intreat you to believe —disunion among Christians is
no light thing. Even when arising from causes legi-
timate and sufficient, it is an evil; if arising from causes
deemed sufficient, but which are not so, it is an error;
if from causes of the sufficiency of which our under-
standing and conscience do not give us full assurance,
it is sin. However arising, jealousies, animosities,
estrangements, are its inevitable attendants. A good
man may separate from brethren, and under the influ-
ence and guidance of the Holy Spirit, he may do so
without any harsh manifestations of displeasure —al-
though no imperfect, perhaps no created mind, can have
entire charity for the agent in condemning the act;
but he will be sensible that he is incurring an awful
responsibility. He is giving vent, and apparent sanc-
tion, to feelings—if not to passions—in others less
gifted than himself, which ought ever to be vigorously
repressed. He is tempting those to claim merit for
their offerings of mint, and anise, and cummin, who


may be neglecting the weightier matters of the law.
He is helping to gild the outside of an edifice which
has possibly undergone no internal purification. “Of-
fences must come, but woe to him by whom the offence
cometh!” and the doom is pronounced not more against
the man who commits the offence, than against him
who is needlessly the cause of it.
And your children, who erelong will fill your
places in the world and in the church —consider how
this matter affects them. They can observe before they
can discriminate. Why should they have to witness
division instead of union,, and discord where ought to
be harmony ? Why should they see in you that tem-
per which if it rejoice not in iniquity, is at least not
indisposed to blazon defects % Why should your exam-
ple operate as a chill upon the kindly affections of
youth, and obstruct the impulses of the charity which
thinketh no evil? The faith of the Syrophenician
woman was avowedly independent of modes and forms,
and it obtained for her from the compassionate Redeemer
the cure of her daughter’s bodily ailment. And it is
like faith in us —simple, direct, unqualified, —which
the same Saviour still blesses for the healing of the
moral maladies of our children.
We speak to you, brethren, of the evils which
disunion introduces, but we would not have you for-
getful of the benefits •which it as certainly intercepts.
Selfishness and uncharitableness cannot enter into the
heart of the Christian without displacing so much of
the love of God. We have no right to expect, nor


any reason to hope, that we shall keep perfect the
unity of the spirit, if we break the bond of peace.
Put asunder the billets on the household hearth, and
the fire pales, if it be not gradually extinguished ; the
glow and the warmth are gone. And even so is the
spiritual temperature lowered by the causeless separa-
tion of brethren.
If you ask us what we would have you do in fur-
therance of union % We answer —do as the remnant
of Israel did under the leading of Nehemiah, when
they set about restoring the walls of Jerusalem, Let
every one act his own part —and build up his own
share of the breach. All cannot direct and superintend,
but all may be employed in clearing away the rubbish,
and labouring at the foundations. Come to the work
in a spirit of mutual forbearance, with sincerity of
heart and singleness of purpose; in the memorable
words already quoted, “ with earnest desire and humble
determination, depending on the grace of God, to see
it satisfactorily accomplished f laying aside envy, and
jealousy, and distrust, and evil speaking; in lowliness
of mind each esteeming other better than themselves.
Then may you hope for the blessing which rested on
the Jews on the occasion referred to, when success
crowned their exertions, and “ all their enemies round
about were much cast down in their own eyes, perceiv-
ing that the work was wrought of God.”
“ And now, brethren, may the God of peace, that
brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great


shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the ever-
lasting covenant, make you perfect in every good work
to do his will, working in you that which is well
pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom
be glory for ever and ever, Amen.”


TO THE REVEREND
THE MODERATOR AND BRETHREN
OF THE
FREE CHURCH
PRESBYTERIAN SYNOD
OF VICTORIA.
Edinburgh, November 14, 1857.
Reverend and Dear Brethren —
We, the undersigned, having been invited to
visit you in your present trying circumstances, and
having felt ourselves obliged to decline the invitation,
consider it right and respectful to express to you, in
this written communication, our deep sympathy with
you, as well as our sense of the honour conferred upon
us, by your placing such confidence in us as to desire
our presence among you.
We beg to assure you that no ordinary obstacles
would have been allowed to stand in the way of our
acceding to your request. We thoroughly agree with
you in opinion that the crisis which has occurred in
your branch of the Church is so grave and serious as
to demand from all parties who may have to deal with


it, every sacrifice excepting that of principle and duty.
And it would have been a source of high satisfaction
to us if we had been able, at whatever personal incon-
venience to ourselves, to give you, to the best of our
power, the aid you sought at our hands. It is matter
of sincere regret that our public and professional
engagements cannot be so arranged as to admit of our
enjoying that satisfaction.
It would obviously be improper for us, in this our
letter of apology, to discuss the merits of the different
steps that have been taken, and the questions that
have been raised, in the course of those proceedings,
which, for the present —and, we venture to hope, only
for the present —have issued in so unhappy a misun-
derstanding among brethren. We are reluctant to
express a judgment, or to offer advice, about matters
which, in all probability, can be fully known and
correctly estimated only by parties on the spot. At
the same time, it seems to us that it would indicate
a want of candour on our part, and a want of due
consideration for you, if we were to avoid all notice
of these things. And perhaps, looking on from a
distance, as calm —though by no means cold —observers,
we may be enabled, by the help of God, to present
some of them in a light that may have been lost sight
of in the excitement of contention, and that at all
events may be not unfavourable to the restoration of
peace. We are persuaded that you will receive our
remarks with forbearance, and take any suggestions
we may make in good part. And we have such an


opinion of the esteemed brethren now in a position of
estrangement from you, as to be fully persuaded, with
respect to them also, that if we use the liberty of
adverting to their proceedings, they will give us credit
for doing so in the spirit of brotherly affection, and
with the most anxious desire to close, and not to
widen, the breach.
On the extreme desirableness, if not absolute ne-
cessity, of Presbyterians, in such a colony as yours,
going as far as they possibly can, consistently with
essential principles, in seeking union and incorporation
among themselves, we need not enlarge, farther than
to say, that we have all along hailed with hopeful joy
the movement in your Synod for an incorporating
union with the other Synod of Victoria ; as well as,
also, we may be allowed to add in passing, the advances
made towards another ecclesiastical body, which, we
regret to perceive, have in the meantime failed of
success. W e are decidedly of opinion, moreover, that
the facilities for union are greater with you in the
colony, than with us. in the mother country ; that
there are causes of separation at home, which need
not occasion difficulty abroad ; and controversies to be
adjusted at home, which need not be raised abroad ;
and that consequently, in any negociation for union,
as well as in any settlement of the terms of union,
Colonial Presbyterians do well to avoid those questions
of ecclesiastical standing, of national rights and claims,
and of historical precedent and identity, which force
themselves on the Scottish Churches ; and to be sa-
D 2


tisfied with such a form of sound words as a Free and
Independent Church might adopt for herself as her
basis, were she framing her constitution for the first
time, according to the Word of God. These general
considerations, affecting the manner in which union
in your colony may be sought and consummated,
commend themselves to us as well as to you ; they
seem to be the dictates of common sense and sound
Christian wisdom ; and we are happy to observe that,
so far as appears, there has been no difference of opinion
among you in regard to them.
The particular basis of incorporation agreed upon
mutually by you and the other Synod, appears to us
to meet and satisfy the general conditions of a sound
and safe union which we have been indicating. The
truth of God is faithfully asserted, and asserted in
the terms rendered venerable by the Presbyterian
associations of centuries. Not only are the doctrines
of the common faith of Christendom embodied in it,
but also, as we understand the document, the distinctive
principles of the Church of Scotland, in the sense in
which the Free Protesting Church of Scotland holds
them, respecting the supremacy of Christ in his church
and the liberties of his people.
In consenting to this basis, and in coming under an en-
gagement to unite with the other Synod on the footing
of this basis, your Synod seems to have been unanimous.
The brethren now in a state of separation were con-
curring parties in both of these acts. So far as we can
judge, but for the necessity of an Act of the Colonial


Legislature being passed for the settlement of some
questions of property, the union might have been
effected on the spot and at the instant, when upwards
of two years ago the two Synods formally adopted the
basis ; and it would have been effected with entire
and unbroken harmony on all sides.
The delay afforded room for reflection and re-
consideration. It was not designed for that purpose ;
but certainly any of those who had sanctioned the
measure were at liberty to recall their sanction, in the
event of new facts or circumstances coming to their
knowledge, or new views presenting themselves to
their minds, of such a character as to render the
measure, in their judgment, no longer justifiable.
We endeavour fairly to put ourselves in the
position of the brethren, who, in point of fact, began
to have a serious difficulty on the subject. Their
position was delicate and embarrassing in no common
degree.
Their difficulty, as we understand it, did not arise
out of any attempt, in any quarter, to change or
modify the formal conditions of the union. It was
occasioned by certain statements of ministers belonging
to the Synod with which the union was to be made.
It does not appear that that Synod itself was respon-
sible for these statements ; but as our brethren con-
sidered the statements to be inconsistent with sound
principle, they sought to have them explained, or
withdrawn, or disowned. And seeing that they failed
in obtaining the satisfaction they desired, they were


led to hesitate about proceeding farther towards the
consummation of the union, until the question now
raised was clearly settled.
That question, if we understand the matter rightly,
had reference to the intercourse which the new Synod
—to be constituted by the union—was to have with
other churches; and in particular, to the source, or
sources, in this country, from whence it was to look for
its supply of ministers and probationers. By the pro-
posed terms of union it was simply fixed that the new
Synod should hold communion with all “ faithful
churches.” No definition was attempted of what was
to be recognised as a faithful church ; nor were any
churches, by name, either admitted into that category
or excluded from it. The statements objected to by
our brethren were to the effect that the general ex-
pression “ faithful churches” did not preclude the new
Synod from being on friendly terms with the Estab-
lished Church of Scotland, and receiving such of her
ministers and probationers as might be willing to sign
the Synod’s formula ; that formula being a declara-
tion of adherence to the doctrines and principles on
which the union was to be based.
It is not for us to say how far we might have sym-
pathised with our brethren in their scruples if we had
been in their place. We do not see how ministers or
probationers of sufficient education and good standing,
prepared to sign your formula, could well be refused
admission into your body, whatever denomination they
might have previously belonged to, it being of course


understood that thereafter they would be bona fide
members of your body alone, and amenable to your
jurisdiction alone. But waiving consideration of the
merits of the question, and assuming for the sake of
argument, that we might have felt very much as the
brethren now separated from you felt, it seems to us
that there might have been more than one course open
to us for our adoption. We might have been inclined,
for instance, to ask how far it was absolutely necessary
to raise, by anticipation, such a question at all, upon a
practical point of difficulty, which in fact might never
have occurred \ Whatever might be the views of in-
dividual ministers belonging to the other body, that
body itself was not officially committed to them. And
in the new or joint synod, the question might never
arise in any practical form; or if it did, the Synod
might deal with it to our entire satisfaction. Might
we not, in these circumstances, leave the practical in-
terpretation and application of the clause about
“ faithful churches,” to the decision of the new Synod,
if a case calling for a decision should present itself 1
Might it not be time enough for us then, when a decision
came to be pronounced, to use our influence in securing
that it should be a right one, and in the event of its
being a wrong one, consider what our duty might
be, whether to protest, or to resist, or to secede ? So
we might have been disposed to reason, for the sake of
peace.
But let us suppose that we had felt it to be our
duty to move in our own Synod, with a view to arrest the


negotiations for union, until this newly-raised question
was disposed of; and that having done so we had failed
in persuading the great body of our brethren to view
the matter as we did. In spite of our reasoning and
remonstrance, our Synod, let us suppose, by a large ma-
jority, continuing to be satisfied with the basis of union,
and holding itself pledged to the other party to go on,
resolves to persevere in what seems to us an unsafe and
unsound line of action. Still might we not have ex-
onerated our consciences and met the exigencies of the
case, by entering our dissent and awaiting the practical
issue. We might have done so, protesting, perhaps,
that if the new Synod should actually construe for
practical purposes the clause about “ faithful churches,”
as we feared they might do, we would not hold ourselves
bound by its decision. Such a course would doubtless
have implied on our part that we were to give no far-
ther active opposition to the union being finally con-
summated ; but we might have been inclined to think
that it sufficiently saved our conviction and consistency
in the meantime, and sufficiently reserved our liberty
of action as regards the future. On the supposition,
however, that we could not see our way even to such
an extent of acquiescence or submission, and so far yield
to the majority, under protest, as to allow the union
to be effected, ourselves continuing members of Synod ;
—we might still have seen it our duty, either to retire
at once, voluntarily and unconditionally, as seceders,
or to wait until an actual crisis arose, calling for action,
either on our Synod’s part or on our own.


But one thing we must say —However warran table
and right our act of secession might have appeared
to us to be —if we had determined at once to secede
from our Synod ; —or however oppressive their act of
ejecton might have appeared to us to be —if our Synod
took the responsibility of ejecting us ; —though we
might have regarded ourselves as suffering wrongfully
for our adherence to the truth, and as the only asser-
tors of the right principles of Christ’s kingdom, when
these had, in our judgment, been practically surren-
dered or compromised by the conduct of the Synod
from which, whether by secession or by ejection, we
were compelled to separate; we do not see how we
could have been justified in assuming ourselves to be
the Synod, or expecting -to be recognized in that cha-
racter by the church at home. We would have felt,
we think, that although that church might continue
to acknowledge us as ministers of her communion, se-
parated from the Synod for conscience sake, she must
still continue to own the act of the majority as the act
of the Synod, She might not approve of the act.
But unless she looked upon it as an act of clear apos-
tacy from herself or from her principles, she could not
well ignore or unchurch the Synod with which she had
been in communion, or substitute another body, how-
ever conscientious and respectable, in its place.
We have been the more free in thus indicating
how we might have felt and acted had we been in the
position of the brethren who are in the meantime se-
parated from your Synod, because we wish to be


equally free in saying to you that there are some things
in your proceedings which we do not understand, and
of which, as at present informed, we must frankly tell
you, we are not prepared to approve.
It appears to us that it might have been well, in
every point of view, if upon the brethren’s first state-
ment of their difficulty, you had resolved to pause for
further deliberation, and even to wait for a consider-
able time, in the hope of your being all brought, by
prayer and mutual brotherly consultation, to see
eye to eye. That the union should in the end be con-
summated harmoniously, and with entire satisfaction
to all parties, we would have considered far more im-
portant than that it should be consummated soon ;
however desirable that might be, and whatever danger
there might be in delay. Nor, we trust, will you mis-
understand us, or take it amiss, if we venture to
suggest that some such measure as you adopted after
the separation might have been of equal, if not
greater, use before it; and that a reference to the
church at home, or an application for a deputation, at
an earlier stage, might by Gods blessing, have done
some good, and prevented some evil. We do not
pretend to say that you were not justified in resolving
to go forward with the union on the grounds on which
you did resolve to go forward. All that our remark
implies is that possibly you might have gone forward
ultimately with more cordiality if you had seen your
way to consent to some little delay.
But we honestly tell you that what chiefly perplexes


us is your mode of dealing with the separated brethren.
After all the consideration which we have been able to
give to their statements and yours, we must confess
ourselves at a loss to see how your procedure in their
case can be reconciled with the usual practice of Pres-
byterian Church Courts, or how it was fitted to promote
the edification and peace of the Church in your colony.
We are far from maintaining that the brethren
gave no offence. We do not justify them in their
refusal of the overtures which, so far as we can judge,
in a friendly spirit, you made to them, with a view to
an amicable settlement of your differences. But when
matters came to an extremity in your opinion, and you
found it necessary to pronounce a judicial sentence, we
observe that you did not, so far as we can see, consider
the question whether or not you were bound to proceed
in the ordinary ecclesiastical way, by serving a libel on
the brethren of whom you had to complain, and al-
lowing them the opportunity of formal explanation or
defence. We cannot but think that your doing so
might have brought out the real merits of the question
at issue, so completely and definitely as either to produce
harmony, or to make the responsibility of harmony
not being produced unequivocally apparent. But apart
from this, we desiderate evidence of that prolonged
brotherly dealing which is usually considered right
among ns, before a minister, for whatever cause, is de-
clared to be no longer a minister of our church.
We notice what is stated as to your having in
view the effect which your acting in one way rather
' E 2


than in another might have on the disposal of questions
of property between you and the separated brethren.
But we frankly express our opinion ; on the one hand,
that so far as we can judge, no shape or form which
you might give to any procedure of yours, was likely
to affect the decisions of a court of law in civil suit
about property ; and on the other hand, that even if
what you did, or your manner of doing it, were likely
to have any such effect, we would greatly have pre-
ferred that such a consideration should not have entered
as an element of any weight at all into the forming of
your judgment ; and that it should have been beyond
all dispute clear that your ecclesiastical and spiritual
procedure was based exclusively on ecclesiastical and
spiritual grounds and principles ; with no reference
whatever to the civil consequences which might follow.
This seems to us to have been especially necessary,
when the matter assumed the aspect of a prosecution
of individual ministers.
We have commented the more unreservedly on
these particulars in your proceedings, because it humbly
appears to us that, viewed in connection with what we
have adverted to in the conduct of the separated bre-
thren, they suggest some hopeful standing ground for
the healing of the breach.
To come to the point at once, our idea is that there
might be a certain retracing of steps on both sides.
We do not pretend to indicate what that should be on
either side. We do not even pretend to say that what
we desiderate is attainable, on both sides, or on either


side. We merely throw out for the consideration of
friends —for both sides, in this sad misunderstanding,
are our friends —a sort of flag of reconciliation.
We tell the separated brethren, if our voice can
reach them, that in our opinion their position is un-
tenable. We do not see that they exhausted all the
competent, legitimate, and constitutional means of
public redress or personal exoneration within the body
to which they belonged ; all which means ought to
have been exhausted, before their case came within
sight of either secession or ejection. And we can see
no standing ground whatever for their assumption of
the character of the Synod from which they have been
separated; even if the separation were warranted as
a separation by secession, or forced as a separation by
ejection. It humbly appears to us that some of the
steps taken by the separated brethren may fairly admit
of review and reversal on their part.
On the other hand, it appears equally clear to us
that, if there is to be any hope of peace, you on your
part, as a Synod, must be willing, to a certain extent,
to go back upon the past. There may be reasons which
make this impossible. We do not say that we can
confidently affirm it to be possible. You are the only
competent judges. If you, on deliberation, find it to
be impossible to undo what has been done, we have no
more to say. The church at home, in that case, may
be placed in an embarrassing predicament. We
venture to think that we have sufficiently indicated
the ground likely, in our opinion, to be taken. In all


probability our Church would feel herself bound to
stand by your Synod, as long as your Synod professes
to stand by her principles. But at the same time she
must inevitably be involved in perplexity and embar-
rassment, if it shall turn out that brethren differing
from you honestly on what in their view is a point of
conscience, and having some plausible ground of
complaint as to your treatment of them, make their
appeal to her for some sort of recognition or acknow-
ledgment.
But we cannot abandon the hope of a better issue
out of this apparent dead-look being still possible. It
certainly is a crisis in the view of which no true Pres-
byterian, alive to the interests of Presbyterianism, and
indeed of Christianity, in your colony, will be disposed
to stand upon martinet punctilios, or scruples of exact
ecclesiastical law and order. There must, we are per-
suaded, be an earnest desire on all sides for peace
and union ; and disposition to concede, to the utmost
extent to which concession is lawful. If so, “ where
there is a will there is a way ” We do not presume to
determine what the way may be. All that we can say
on that head is, that considering on the one hand what
seems to us to be the utterly untenable position of
the separated brethren, and on the other hand,
the somewhat questionable procedure of your Synod
in the matter of their separation, we can scarcely
imagine any case of misunderstanding among brethren
joined together in ecclesiastical union, being ever
capable of amicable adjustment, if in the present in-
stance that result turns out to be impossible.


We have nothing more to add ; excepting only to
assure you of our deepest sympathies with you, and
our most earnest prayers for you, in your present dis-
tress and difficulty. e feel that the interests of
genuine Presbyterianism, and indeed, to a large extent,
the interests of true religion and the welfare of im-
mortal souls, in your colony, as well as also in other
colonies besides yours, are involved in the question,
Can this breach be healed I—Can1 —Can there again be union
and peace \ For the sake of these high and holy interests
—for the sake of generations yet unborn —we would
implore all parties to meet this question in the spirit
of mutual forbearance ; and not only with an intense
desire, but, in dependence on the grace of God, with
an humble determination to have it satisfactorily an-
swered. The day of such a consummation would be a
day of relief and joy to many an anxious heart among
the people of the Lord. May the Lord himself hasten
it, for his own name’s sake.
With earnest wishes and prayers that you may
receive the best guidance in this important matter,
We are, Reverend and Dear Brethren,
Ever yours faithfully,
WILLIAM CUNNINGHAM, D.D.,
Principal of the New College, Edinburgh.
ROBERT S. CANDLISH, D.D.,
St. George's, Edinburgh.
THOMAS GUTHRIE, D.D.,
St. John’s, Edinburgh.
JAMES BEGG, D.D.,
Newington, Edi
WILLIAM WILSON,
St. Paul’s, Dun
WILLIAM NIXON,
Newington, Edinburgh.
St. Paul’s, Dundee.
St. John’s, Montrose.
Printed by Robert Harris, Charles-street, Launceston.


TAtkj
SL6LIO
R 4567
Kl ccjU'


>■
■ ■■■" '
% -
A .■ % '■
.
i


