



This recalls Sydney Smith’s comment on Governor qMacquarie’s
social policy of inviting freed convicts who had prospered
to meet, at Government House functions, those who had come
out free. It was a social error, thought the great Liberal
vit, thus to force people, possibly quite estimable in their
way, upon “the undetected part of the population."
/Ce A-V'Vv~' tA/i- f'xl.c lt ki'’' > ■ *-(,
t+ |l»|^










A
LETTER
TO
VISCOUNT SID MOUTH,
&c, &c, &c.




A
LETTER
TO
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
VISCOUNT SIDMOUTH,
IN
Refutation of statements
MADE EY
THE HON. HENRY GREY RENNET, M. P.
IN A PAMPHLET
“ ON THE TRANSPORTATION LAWS. THE STATE OF THE HULKS,
AND OF THE COLONIES IN NEW SOUTH WALES.”
BY LACHLAN MACQUARIE,
MAJOR-GENERAL, AND GOVERNOR-IN-CHIEF OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
LONDON:
PUBLISHED BY RICHARD REES, NO. li>, PERCY-STREET.
Printed by R. M‘Millan, Bow-Street, Covent-Garclen,
;
1821.




To
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
VISCOUNT SIDMOUTH,
&c. &c. &c.
Government-House,
Sydney, New South Wales,
31st January, 1820.
MY LORD,
It is with great reluctance that I
adopt this mode of defending my private
honour and my public conduct, while in
the government of this distant Colony,
against the aspersions which the Hon.
Henry Grey Bennet has, with no sparing
hand, cast upon both*. As he has thought
* See “ Letter to Viscount Sidmouth, Secretary of State
for the Home Department, on tiie Transportation Laws,
the State of the Hulks, and of the Colonies in New South
Wales, by the Hon. Henry Grey Bennet, M. P.” London,
1819.
B


proper to prefer his Charge in a Letter
addressed to your Lordship, and dated
the 27th December, 1818, your Lordship
will, I am sure, from a love of truth and
justice, excuse me for offering my Vindica-
tion in the same form, and giving it the
same publicity, as the calumny with which
I have been assailed.
Had Mr. Bennet confined his accusa-
tions within the walls of Parliament, I
might have found, in the heat of his argu-
ment or his passions, some excuse for his
virulence and invective: certainly I should
have evinced more respect for his privilege
of speech, however abused, than he has
shown for that claim to forbearance which
an absent man is allowed to possess by
every just and liberal mind; but as Mr.
Bennet has, coolly and deliberately, made
the Press, that powerful engine of evil and
of good, the vehicle for circulating, far and
wide, his unfounded attacks, I am compelled
to have recourse to the same means for re-
pelling the slander.
I feel, my Lord, all the disadvantages
and hardships under which I labour, from


the length of time that must necessarily
intervene between the Charges and the
Refutation.
After three and forty years service to my
King and Country, with, at least, an un-
tarnished reputation; while engaged, “at
the distance of half the globe,” in discharging
the duties of the least grateful and most
arduous government in the King's Domi-
nions, I am called upon to uphold, what is
dearer to me than life, my Character for
humanity, for justice, and even for veracity,
against Charges, which, if true, would justly
expose me to the execration of mankind.
But, conscious of my integrity, and rely-
ing on the justice of my country, I trust
that the golden maxim, “ Audi alteram
partem” though lost sight of by Mr.
Bennet, in the blindness and intemperance
of his zeal for the Convict at the expence
of the Governor, is not forgotten by the
People of England; and as truth must
sooner or later prevail over falsehood, I
cannot entertain a doubt that I shall ulti-
mately stand fully acquitted at the bar of
that Public, before which Mr. Bennet has
B c 2


ventured on ex parte statements, the most
suspicious of all testimony, to arraign and
vilify my conduct.
I will now, my Lord, proceed with my
Remarks on Mr. Bennetts Letter, in which
I propose to confine myself chiefly to that
part of it, which relates to this Colony.
So far from the subject of transporta-
tion having, as Mr. Bennet states, met
with “ ignorance, inattention, and mis-
rule,” I have ever considered its humane
attention to, and the ample provision made
for the most degraded of her subjects, among
the brightest characteristics of the British
Nation. The kind of accommodation pro-
vided for Convicts on their passage from
England, must necessarily subject them
to great inconveniences, but not to more
than have been felt by every gallant Sol-
dier serving His Majesty on distant sta-
tions ; nor does it seem to me possible,
that a Transport can ever carry with it an
idea of comfort. All that the most hu-
mane mind can hope to accomplish, is, to
preserve the health of the Soldiers or Con-
victs, thus conveyed from one side of the


globe to the other. The experience of ten
years, and the most minute attention to
this subject, enable me to assure your
Lordship, that whenever the Convicts
have been treated with humanity, and have
been supplied with the food and comforts
appropriated for their use by Government}
they have been landed here in perfect good
health and spirits; and I am happy to
add, with grateful feelings towards those,
whose kindness gave them a claim to
such a return. On these occasions, they
cheer the ship when they quit it, as the
only mark of cordial good-will and thank-
fulness which they have it in their power
to bestow for the favours they had re-
ceived.
The mortality on board the Surrey, in
1814, and the General Hewitt, Captain
Earl, Hughes Surgeon, in the same year
(which ship lost 34 Male Convicts), was, I
have no hesitation in believing, occasioned
by the Convicts giving up their provisions
to the Captain, on the promise of receiving
in return tobacco, tea, sugar, See. In
crossing warm latitudes, the appetite fails,


men become regardless of food, and wil-
lingly part with what is absolutely neces-
sary to the support of their health and
strength, in exchange for those little arti-
cles of luxury, which at all times they pre-
fer to a proper allowance of wholesome
food.
On the occurrence of these contagious
maladies, I called on the Medical Staff at
Sydney to inquire into the particulars,
and to give me their opinions on the sub-
ject. The result of their inquiries, I had
the honour to forward to Lord Bathurst,
and the case met with that attention at the
Colonial Office which it required. This
able Document was written by Mr. Red-
fern, Assistant Surgeon on the Medical
Staff.
From the appointment, according to Mr.
Redfenfs advice, of a Surgeon and Super-
intendant to each ship, (who, as they have
informed me, have been required to read
his remarks on the subject), the most happy
consequences have resulted.
Under this new system, whereby a
check is imposed on the conduct of the


Captains of the ships, and the Convicts
are furnished during their passage with
proper medical assistance, every provision
which the mind of man can devise is made
for their safety.
A reference to the casualties which now'
occur, will shew, that in regard to the
preservation of life and health, the present
system requires no alteration.
I am not able to enter into the merits
or demerits of Colonel Collins" description
of New South Wales, as that Gentleman
has never been in this part of the Colony
since my arrival.
I cannot but feel it to be one of the
many trials attendant upon the office I
have the honour to hold, that my conduct
should be stigmatized with every epithet
of abuse which the tongue or pen of ma-
lice could employ, previously to an inves-
tigation, and upon authority unworthy of
belief; the Charges, too, being promul-
gated by a man I have never seen, and
with whom I have never had any inter-
course. The incitement to this unpro-
voked attack I have yet to learn.


It is an unpleasant task for a man to be
under the necessity of sounding his own
praise; but I can with truth assure your
Lordship, that the utmost efforts of my
mind, and my most unremitting personal
exertions, have ever been devoted to the
service in which I happen to be employed;
and most certainly, the time and attention
I have devoted to the improvement of this
Colony, have not been bestowed in vain.
I must now advert to the particular
Charges brought against me. The first re-
lates to the treatment of convict women on
their first arrival here. The method which
is adopted in regard to them, is as follows:
My Secretary takes a muster of all the
prisoners on board each ship as it arrives,
stating in the muster-roll, the name, age,
sentence, and trade of each person. I in-
spect the male prisoners on their landing,
and inquire into the manner in which they
have been treated on board, the state of
their health, &c. The female prisoners
are removed from the ships in which they
arrive, in boats, which convey them direct
to Parramatta, with the exception of those


who are assigned as servants in Sydney*
all demands for them, from respectable
families, being complied with. Single men
are not allowed to have female convict
servants, unless in solitary instances, where
the mother of a family is cut off, and a
woman is required to take charge of the
children.
Some few convict women have arrived
here possessed of property, and occasion-
ally with recommendations from persons of
the highest respectability in England:
these women, if they have the means of
supporting themselves, are allowed tickets
of leave.
If any female prisoners have access to,
or permission to go on board, the ships
they came out in, they must be those who
are employed as servants in Sydney. In
one instance only have I allowed a female
prisoner to remain on board the ship that
brought her out. Captain Moore ot the
ship Wanstead, a married man, and in a
bad state of health, asked for a woman
who, he said, had acted as his attendant
during a severe illness which he had before
c


his arrival here; and indeed his appearance
indicated every symptom of disease and
debility; and I (not suspecting any sinister
motive), permitted this woman to stay on
board while the ship remained in the cove.
Having, on hearing of this part of Mr.
Bennet's calumnies, made every inquiry
into the circumstances of the case, lam
enabled, on satisfactory grounds, to declare
my firm conviction, that his statement is
false and unfounded.
That a proper receptacle for female
convicts at Parramatta is much wanted, is
an undeniable fact; but that the want of it
has ever been the occasion of enormities at
all commensurate with those mentioned in
the statement of the Rev. Mr. Marsden, is
so far from being true, that any person
seeing the town of Parramatta by nigbt or
by day, would not believe it to be the same
place as that which the Rev. Gentleman has
described. As the town is nowin the same
condition as it ever has been, I shall refrain
from entering into a minute detail of the
particulars relating to it, referring your
Lordship to the Report which will be made


by Mr. Commissioner Bigge, from which
I hope the People of England will obtain a
knowledge of the real state of this Colony,
with respect to all its circumstances.
The buildings erected for the accommo-
dation of the Medical Officers, being com-
bined with the Hospital, to which they form
wings, are more spacious than is necessary
for their intended purpose; but at the time
this contract was entered into, and the
erections made, the Colony did not possess
an Architect capable of directing so great a
work with the requisite ability. Many
faults exist in it, but it is well calculated
for providing comfortable accommodations
for the sick.
As to the “Temples round pumps” which
seem to furnish the Honourable Writer of
this most scurrilous Pamphlet with a sub-
ject of raillery, I must inform your Lord-
ship, that the town of Sydney is supplied
with only one spring of running water,
which is of the utmost importance to the
inhabitants. Governor Bligh, in order to
secure that valuable spring, had a building
constructed for its preservation: this had
c 2


been demolished before my arrival, but I
had the materials, consisting of cut stone,
collected, and employed the original builder
to complete it agreeably to his first de-
sign. This building is certainly more useful
than ornamental. Colonel O’Connell, with
my approbation, sunk a well, and erected a
pump in the Barrack-square, for the use of
the troops; and I am now about to con-
struct a building for a similar purpose in
another situation, which is the first of this
description, be it for foppery or utility, for
which I can merit either censure or praise.
It is unfortunately too true, that much
ill health is occasioned in this Colony by
intoxication; but I am not aware that any
measure of mine has tended to augment
the evil. It has been, on the contrary,
my anxious wish to counteract the pre-
vailing passion for ardent spirits ; but,, as
the importation of them is not altogether
prohibited, I know no other means in my
power, but that of rendering the price to
the consumers as high as possible. The
statement on this subject, like every other
in Mr. Bennefs Pamphlet, is mixed up


with wilful falsehood. The duties paid by
the Contractors for the spirits imported by
them, did not go towards the erection of
the Hospital, but were paid into the Co-
lonial Fund.
The privilege granted to them, was that
of being the only Importers during the
term of their Contract. The Civil and Mi-
litary Officers were permitted to purchase
certain quantities of spirits, to the amount
of a moderate consumption in their own
families, only paying the usual duties, dur-
ing the existence of the Contract. Cap-
tains of ships, who felt themselves aggrieved,
were also permitted to sell moderate quan-
tities, to pay for the repairs of their ves-
sels, &c. But as these numerous indul-
gences interfered with the right of the
Contractors, I was obliged to extend the
period of their monopoly beyond its ori-
ginal limits. When I arrived in this Co-
lony, there were no funds with which any
new work could be undertaken, and the
few public buildings which had been pre-
viously erected, were all in a state of de-
cay; I therefore gladly availed myself of


the offer of building an Hospital, which was
then so much wanted, by laying a Duty,
however enormous, on the consumption of
the article which, beyond every other
cause, operated to render an Hospital ne-
cessary.
The Rev. Mr. Marsden, being himself
accustomed to traffic in spirits, must ne-
cessarily feel displeased at having so many
public-houses licensed in his neighbour-
hood. On my arrival here, the impro-
priety of so many houses being licensed to
sell spirits, struck me forcibly, and I im-
mediately reduced the number, to what I
considered a reasonable and sufficient one;
but notwithstanding every severity of pu-
nishment the law could enforce, (and I
strictly conformed to the letter of the law',
in the punishment of illegal venders of
spirits), I found that the people persisted
in a contraband traffic: it therefore ap-
peared to me best, upon the whole, to ex-
tend the number, and thus obtain for the
legal venders already established, an equa-
lity as to profits with the illegal traders,
by making the latter pay for Licenses:


and a considerable additional revenue was
created by this proceeding.
The price of these Licenses operates also
as a check ob* the manners of the people ;
for if any riot or disorder takes place in a
licensed public-house, the License is in-
stantly withdrawn.
A regular register of births, marriages,
and deaths, has been kept, and transmitted
home annually, ever since my arrival here ;
and I cannot but remark to your Lordship,
that crimes of a deep die are, of late, of
much more rare occurrence, than they were
in the first years of my residence here, not-
withstanding the great increase which has
taken place in the population.
That a very great improvement in the
morals and habits of the people, has taken
place within the last ten years, only re-
quires investigation to be proved. The
following fact induces me to hope, that the
Convicts become more orderly and better
behaved after a few years residence here;
namely, that it is common, in applications
for convict servants, to stipulate that they
should not be “ New comers I” because


these are generally found to be the most
unmanageable.
Having bad no opportunity of witness-
ing the effect produced by penitentiary
establishments, I shall not attempt to en-
ter in this place on any discussion of their
utility, compared with that of transpor-
tation *
That the latter mode of punishment fre-
quently succeeds in reclaiming men from bad
habits, and rendering them as good sub-
jects as any other description of persons, I
hope no one will attempt to deny, who
has had an opportunity of knowing the
manners and circumstances of the people
in this Colony. That others never have
been reclaimed, or at all improved, is
equally true. The greatest disadvantage
in both cases, to those who are not har-
dened in guilt, I consider to be, associat-
ing with men of worse principles than them-
selves.
The abuse which is levelled at this Co-
lony in the following passage, I regard as
wholly unmerited ; and I wish, for the sake
of his personal conviction, that the writer


had come to view with his own eyes the
actual state of things and persons here. If
he were possessed of any feeling (which,
judging from his Pamphlet, I should much
doubt), he could not but be severely hurt
at being the medium of falsely representing
a people, who, considering all things, are
now in such a state of reformation, as must
be gratifying to every humane mind.
The passage to which I refer is as fol-
lows : “ Joined to this loss of money, is
the knowledge, that the New England we
have formed on the other side of the globe,
is little better than the deposit of all the
vices and crimes which have been, and are,
the scourges of the more civilized inha-
bitants of the Mother Country*.” Mr,
Marsden's statement, on which this opinion
is founded, appears to have been drawn up
with the view of acquiring a great name for
himself, by detracting from the claims or
merits of other persons; and it is to be la-
mented, that where so wide a field is open
for this Gentleman's exertions, he does not
D
• Mr. Beimel's Pamphlet, p. 92.


devote his pursuits to the acquisition of po-
pularity by some more laudable means. As
to Mr. Marsden's troubles of mind, and
pathetic display of sensibility and humanity ,
they must be so deeply seated, and so far
removed from the surface, as to escape all
possible observation. His habits are those
of a man for ever engaged in some active,
animated pursuit;—no man travels more
from town to town, or from house to house;
his deportment is at all times that of a per-
son the most gay and happy: when I was
honoured with his society, he was by far
the most cheerful person I met in the Co-
lony. Where his hours of sorrow were
spent, it is hard to divine; for the variety
of his pursuits, both in his own concerns
and in those of others, is so extensive, in
farming, grazing, manufactories, public and
private agencies, and bartering transactions,
that, with his clerical duties, he seems, to
use a common phrase, to have his hands
full of work : and the particular subject to
which he imputes this extreme depression
of mind, is, besides, one for which few peo-
ple here will give him much credit. But I


cannot be surprized at Mr. Marsden’s ani-
madversions on my enforcing the attendance
of the Convicts at church; for when I came
here very few persons attended at Parra-
matta ; at present the congregation is large
and respectable. It is true, indeed, that
you do send us from the Mother Country,
men who are stained by “ vice and crime”
of every description, but happily for them
and us, many who came out vicious, do
not remain so; and some few have taken up
their voluntary abode with us, who would
be an honour and credit to any country.
As to those base and restless spirits, who
have ever eaten the bread of unthankful-
ness ; who have never been satisfied with
any administration here during its exist-
ence; who, being themselves bad, “ are al-
ways for evil, and never for good;” who,
gaining the ear of all strangers by offers ot
civilities , which they liberally bestow' for
the purpose of obtaining a free and fami-
liar intercourse with them; employ all
their means and abilities to poison the
minds of such persons, by representing
every thing as wrong; and above all, by
i) 2


impressing them with that which is to them-
selves the grand “ sine qua non” the shut-
ting of the door of advancement for ever
against men who had been once in the situ-
ation of Convicts, let their present charac-
ter and circumstances be what they might;
though at the same time availing them-
selves, with glaring inconsistency, of an inti-
macy with such individuals of this class as
they find suited to their purpose :—if these
discontented and factious men had been re-
moved, or even promoted, by being trans-
planted to some other Colony, happy would
it have been for this Settlement; and their
removal would have relieved it, and those
concerned in its management, of one of the
greatest evils, and perhaps the only insur-
mountable malady, with which it has had to
grapple.
I perfectly agree with Mr. Bennet, in
lamenting the heavy and enormous expence
of this Colony to the Mother Country. The
strict injunctions I have at all times received
on this subject, from His Majesty's Minis-
ters for the Colonies, could not be ex-
pressed with a greater degree of decision ;


and it has been my anxious wish to pro-
mote the economy they recommended, as
well as every other object included in my In-
structions, so far as was compatible with the
necessary improvement of the Settlement.
I shall be very happy to hear that my
Successor evinces equal anxiety to fulfil the
various duties imposed on him, and that he
is at least more successful in affording that
satisfaction at home and abroad, which is
the most gratifying reward for hard-earned
services; but I think it will require a far-
ther interval of time, before this country
will be able to refund any considerable por-
tion of the very great sums which her exist-
ence, as a British Settlement, now requires
for its maintenance. When the restrictions
are taken off, (which I sincerely hope they
soon will be), that fetter her powers, her
progress will, I trust and expect, be rapid.
The permission to distil her own spirits,
and the removal of the present impediments
to her maritime exertions, will give the
people an opportunity of shewing what they
can do.
In the mean time the article of Wool, the


staple commodity of the country, gains
ground in the attention of the Settlers; and
there is solid reason to hope, that a few
years will add progressively to the increase
of the quantity produced, as the climate
has already contributed to the improvement
of its quality.
As the number of Convicts sent out in-
creases, the expenditure of Government
must also increase; for even supposing they
were at once disposable to Settlers, yet the
increased population must demand an in-
crease of all the accommodations of civilized
life. For I cannot suppose that it is the wish
of the British People, that this their Colony
should be allowed to remain in the state of
nature in which it was found, and her Set-
tlers and Convicts turned adrift into the
woods, without churches, schools, courts,
barracks, hospitals, and all the other ac-
commodations of civilized nations. Now it
requires little explanation to prove, that such
buildings, and other improvements, are not
to be procured without much labour of man
and beast; and this labour must occasion a
large expenditure of money; for although


Government commands the labour of Con-
victs without pecuniary reward, yet they
must be fed, clothed, and lodged, or al-
lowed time to work for themselves to obtain
lodgings. The expence of feeding draught
cattle is also very great; for in the neigh-
bourhood of Sydney, where the principal
works are carried on, the ground is so bar-
ren and unproductive, as to afford little
nourishment for cattle.
In the appropriation of Land, I have
been guided by what I thought right, in
conformity with my Instructions. No two
persons will exactly agree on these matters;
but I am ready and willing to explain the
grounds on which I have disposed of every
acre located by me, if I am called on so to
do: Gentlemen will then be able to form
their own opinions. I have acted according
to the best of my judgment, in this and
every other matter entrusted to my care.
In regard to “ the unjust profusion of
P ardons” with which I am charged, I shall
content myself with submitting the follow-
ing observations to your Lordship: I have
been induced, from the reasons which I


shall state, to extend this great boon beyond
what, but for the particular circumstances
in which I found myself placed, I should
have thought it proper to do. When I ar-
rived here, 300 persons had received free
and conditional pardons from the usurped
Government. These were all immediately
cancelled; but the disappointment of the
individuals thus raised to the summit of
their wishes, and then plunged into the abyss
from which they had considered themselves
for ever delivered, requires consideration.
It took me upwards of four years to re-
store these men to freedom, by making
selections of the most deserving first. Be-
sides the impropriety of granting so many
pardons at once, I was also restrained by
the consideration, that the services of these
people were required by the Government;
for such was at that time the scarcity of
men to perform the necessary labours of
agriculture, &c. that during the stay of the
73d Regiment here, the greatest proportion
of work was executed by that gallant and
active Regiment, which, in peace, or war,
ever willingly performed the services re-


quirecl of it. One cause which frequently
induced me to grant emancipations was,
persons who came out as Convicts being
possessed of property to a large amount,
and sometimes those without property, hav-
ing families to provide for, who are now
permitted to follow them.
These men being unaccustomed to la-
bour, are totally useless to the Govern-
ment ; I have therefore given them eman-
cipation much sooner than they were, in
my opinion, entitled to receive this great
favour, for the purpose of enabling them to
support themselves and their families; for
while a man is a Convict, he is not qualified
to hold land, nor able to enter into trade
on an equality with Free Men.—l very
much question the propriety of this exten-
sion of lenity at an early period after convic-
tion in England; but the enormous expence
of these people and their families to Govern-
ment, and their vagrant and troublesome
habits when in a state of idleness, starva-
tion, and misery, contrasted with the won-
derful progress they make in acquiring an
independence, and even riches, when eman-
E


cipated, formed so powerful an inducement
to extend this indulgence to them, that, with
the view of rendering them quiet and useful
members of the community, I yielded to it,
farther than I shall probably continue to
do during my short stay in the Colony.
For the sake of my successor, I hope these
matters will be so settled, as to save him
from the abuse which has been levelled at
me, from a quarter whence I certainly ex-
pected it as little as, I hope, I have de-
served it.
“ The Monopoly of all articles of Trade
in the hands of the Civil and Military
Officers of the Colony was at the first
commencement of the Settlement a mat-
ter of necessity. By the time I arrived in
it, a class of Merchants was established, and
goods were imported from different quar-
ters; but such an enormous per centage was
charged upon them, as rendered it neces-
sary for the Government still to send out
agricultural tools and other necessaries for
O ..
the use of the Settlers; it was, however, full
time for trade, with this exception, to be
confined to its usual channels. To the Or


der I published on this subject, I beg leave
to refer your Lordship*. I have since en-
deavoured, by every means in my power, to
put a total stop to the practice complained
of; and I believe it to be nearly extinct. If
at present any of the Officers of Government
carry on trade, it is by underhand means.
And now that I am called on to mention
this subject, I cannot but remark, that it
would be very greatly for the benefit of
this Settlement, if the Civil Servants were
removed occasionally bodily to some other
Colony, as the Military are. Much trou-
ble and irregularity would have been avoid-
ed, if this plan had been adopted long
ago. It is a difficult matter to break old
habits, or to render men, who are na-
turally turbulent and discontented, quiet
and happy. Persons long domesticated
in a country, naturally colonize, and form
themselves into combinations destructive
of social order, and of an uninterrupted
attention to the duties of their respective
professions. To prevent a recurrence of
E 2
* Appendix, No. I.


these evils, I earnestly hope this plan will
engage the attention of Government; and
I am much mistaken if it would not be
found beneficial, particularly in a new Co-
lony. Time, and long-established usage,
are necessary, to bring a system of Go-
vernment to that degree of order which it
is so desirable it should attain.
The trade of this Colony has long re-
quired new modelling; it has remained,
since my arrival, much as I found it, with
the exception of an additional duty on
Spirits. It is a subject of great satisfaction
to myself, and to every well-wisher to the
Colony, that this important branch of
economy is about to be regulated by the
Legislature at home; and I hope it will be
so arranged, as to facilitate the exertions
of the Colonists in obtaining that indepen-
dence, towards which they have already
made a rapid progress,
“ The limitation of the price of Labour ,
and the imposition of a maximum on Corn f
—are subjects on which I must trespass
on your Lordship's time, by explaining the
motives from which I acted in both cases.


From January 1810, when I took the
Command of this Colony, until April 1817,
Day-labourers were paid by notes of
hand, or in colonial currency, and all
small payments were made in the same
way. This currency was of very uncer-
tain value, both as to its sterling worth,
and the depreciation of per centage, when
taken in exchange for sterling money.
The uncertainty of these payments, and
the scarcity of hands, occasioned much in-
convenience to the farmers :—wages were
unreasonably high, and there was no stand-
ard medium by which they could be re-
gulated.
The late Mr. Judge-Advocate Bent, a
man whose discrimination and judgment,
in reference to this subject, could, I think,
hardly be excelled, applied to me to re-
medy the evil resulting from the unreason-
able demands of labourers; stating at the
same time, that the low price of wheat
rendered it impossible for the grower to
cover the expences of raising it; and
strongly recommending that some encou-
ragement should be given, on the part of


Government, so far as to secure for the
farmer a fair and certain price for his
grain. I requested Mr. Bent to call a
meeting of the Magistrates, and to give me
their opinion on these matters.
In consequence of their suggestions, I
promised the farmers, that I would give
them ten shillings per bushel for their
wheat; and the prices of labour sanctioned
by the Government, were settled at the
same time.
I consider giving ten shillings a bushel,
as a great encouragement to the growers of
corn; and both these regulations, although
condemned with unqualified abuse by the
Author of the Pamphlet on which I am
animadverting, have been found extremely
useful here. There is no reference made
to the price given by the Government in
the public market. Wheat has been occa-
sionally unsaleable in the Colony, from an
over-abundant crop; at other times, in con-
sequence of bad weather and floods, it has
been scarce : neither of these evils is, how-
ever, likely again to recur, as the dis-
tilling, now about to be permitted, will


provide for the consumption of the surplus
grain; and in bad seasons, wheat can be
easily procured from Van Diemah’s Land,
where the crops have not yet been liable
to the vicissitudes which we experience here.
The establishment of a Bank, under the
sanction of the Government of this Colony,
took place in April 1817. This has hitherto
proved the most valuable Institution of the
Settlement. Sterling money is now the
only medium of traffic. I cannot deny
myself the satisfaction of informing your
Lordship, in this public manner, that I feel
myself much indebted to the present Judge-
Advocate of the Colony, Mr. Wylde, and
to my Secretary Mr. Campbell, for their
assistance in the formation of the Bank;
and it is my earnest wish that it may con-
tinue to prosper, for the benefit of all
ranks, and particularly of the lower orders
of society.
Mr. Bennet alleges against me, in the
form of accusation, “ The selection of im-
proper persons to fill the different Offices —
the appointment of Convicts to officiate as
Magistrates-—the open and avowed encou


ragement shewn to men , whose characters
are far from being even problematical”
Upon this general attack, which con-
veys a degree of censure, not only on my
own conduct, but also on that of the per-
sons who have acted in official situations
under my authority, I must take the liberty
to request that your Lordship will have
the goodness to bestow some consideration.
On my arrival here, I found the Colony
under the nominal Command of Colonel
Patterson, who, from extreme ill health,
and total debility, was disqualified for busi-
ness. The next in Command, General
Foveaux, was in fact the Acting Governor,
and no man ever exerted himself more to
promote the public service than he did,
from the time of his arrival until he em-
barked for Europe. A more zealous and
active Officer I have never met with: every
work I found in progress had been com-
menced by him: for many years preceding
his last arrival in this Colony, all improve-
ments appeared to have been at a stand. I
found General Foveaux a man of honour and
of perfect candour, possessing the will and


the power to make himself useful to me ;
and he made himself serviceable to a de-
gree, not to be understood but by those
who have been accustomed to see his ex-
traordinary attention to the various objects
connected with the public service of this
Colony.
All the inhabitants being strangers to
me at the time of my arrival, I applied to
General Foveaux for information regarding
them, which he was good enough to give
me, with a discrimination of judgment in
which I have never had cause to think him
mistaken. I have ever since availed my-
self of the services of those whom he re-
commended as most useful and merito-
rious.
I am well aware that an opinion has
been expressed in England unfavourable to
the practice I have followed, of restoring
men to that rank in society, to which, by
birth and education, they belonged pre-
viously to their being transported, when I
considered them to be entitled, by their
personal merit, to that degree of conside-
ration. But with all due submission to the
E


judgment of every respectable unprejudiced
man, I cannot but hope that when I ex-
plain the situations in which I found the
persons who have been thus favoured by
me, (with the exception of one, who arrived
here since), and the faithful and long ser-
vices they have performed, the humanity
and justice which influenced the decision of
the Committee of the House of Commons
in 1812, will not be lost sight of in 1820,
although the Committee of the latter year
may not have the advantage of Sir Samuel
Romilly's talents to assist their delibera-
tions.
Mr. Fulton was transported to this Co-
lony in consequence of his political princi-
ples, in 1800. He was immediately ap-
pointed to act as Chaplain at Norfolk Is-
land, where he continued discharging the
duties of that office \intil 1804, when he
was removed to this part of the territory.
He afterwards officiated as Chaplain at
Sydney and Parramatta, until the arrest
of Governor Bligh. On that occasion he
was one of the Governor's dinner party,
and the only man in the Colony who inter


posed personally to save him from the
attack which was made upon him. He
stood in the door-way, and declared to
the mutineers, that they must make their
way through his body before they could
reach the Governor. • When Governor
Bligh left Sydney for Van Dieman’s Land,
he entrusted Mr. Fulton and Mr. Palmer
with his secret dispatches, addressed to the
Commanding Officer of the succours which
he expected to be sent from England for
his relief. These Gentlemen continued
faithful to their trust, and delivered the
Governor’s packet to me on my arrival.
Mr. Fulton accompanied Governor Bligh
to England as one of his principal wit-
nesses ; —he returned in 1812, and has
ever since acted as Chaplain and Magis-
trate at Castlereagh, where he has a semi-
nary for boys. I consider Mr. Fulton to
be a zealous man in the discharge of the
several important duties he has' to fulfil,
and an useful and respectable member of
society.
Andrew Thompson was transported to
this Colony in the year 1792, at the age
f 2


of sixteen. Governor Phillip, immedi-
ately on his arrival, employed him in a
situation of trust, having committed to
him the charge of the men’s provisions.
The year following, he was appointed a
Constable at Toongabbee. In 1796 Thomp-
son was removed to Windsor, where a
Constable of sober habits, and of a good
character in other respects, was wanted;
and here he took up his permanent abode.
Governor Phillip, on leaving the Co-
lony, recommended him to the notice of
his successor, who finding him useful and
deserving, continued him as Constable of
the different districts in his neighbour-
hood s *. In this situation he continued for
nine years, to the perfect satisfaction of all
his superiors, and particularly of the Go-
vernors in succession. Thompson was a
sober, industrious, and enterprising man;
he built several vessels for the purpose of
sealing, which trade he carried on to a
considerable extent. For the last eight
* In 1801, lie was appointed Chief Constable by Go-
vernor King.


years of his life, he always employed from
80 to 120 men, and latterly had annually
from 100 to 200 acres of his own estates in
cultivation.
In the calamitous floods of the river
Hawkesbury, in the years 1806 and 1809,
at the risk of his life, and to the permanent
injury of his health, he exerted himself
each time, during three successive days and
nights, in saving the lives and properties
ol those settlers whose habitations were in-
undated.
Soon after my arrival here, I found Mr.
Thompson to be, what he always had been ,
a man ever ready and willing to promote the
public service, for this was the character he
had obtained from all my predecessors. In
consequence of his merits, and being the
only person at that time in his neighbour-
hood fit to fill the office, I appointed him a
Justice of the Peace, and Chief Magistrate
of the Districts of the Hawkesbury, where
he had acted in that capacity, though not
invested with the title of Magistrate, for
eight years previously. In the fulfilment of
this duty he caught a severe cold, which


terminated his existence, in the 37th year
of his age. Mr. Thompson was born of a
respectable family, who, from the time of
his conviction, entirely discarded him from
all intercourse with them. He felt so much
gratitude for being restored to the society
he had once forfeited, that in his will he
bequeathed to me one-fourth of his fortune.
Mr. Redfern, in consequence of the
Mutiny at the Nore in 1797» was, at his
own particular request to Sir Jeremiah Fitz-
patrick, then Inspector of the Transport
Service, sent to this Colony in 1801. Dur-
ing the passage, he assisted the Surgeon,
and kept the Journal of the treatment of
the sick. A few days after his arrival in
this Colony, he was sent to Norfolk Island
as Assistant to the Surgeon stationed there.
General Foveaux, shortly after his arrival,
appointed him to the sole charge of the
Hospital. On my taking the Command of
this Colony, General Foveaux personally
introduced, and recommended Mr. Redfern
to my notice in the strongest terms, as to
his conduct, character, and professional
abilities, stating, that in order to secure to


the Settlement the advantages of his profes-
sional skill, he had appointed him Assistant
Surgeon in the Colony, and solicited Lord
Castlereagh for his confirmation. His ap-
pointment was confirmed by His Royal
Highness the Prince Regent in 1811.
Mr. Redfern's singular abilities are well
known here, and I believe there are few
families who have not availed themselves of
his services. His duty in the General Hos-
pital has been laborious, and most certainly
fulfilled with a degree of promptitude and
attention not to be exceeded.—l have heard
many poor persons, dismissed from the
Hospital, thank him for their recovery; but
have never known a patient complain of his
neglect.
Mr. Redfern had obtained a grant of 500
acres of land from Colonel Patterson, as a
remuneration for his services to the Military
at Norfolk Island; which grant I con-
firmed, making at the same time an addi-
tional one of 1390 acres, in consequence
of his useful services here. Mr. Redfern's
farm is allowed by all who have seen it, to
be laid out and cultivated in a manner more


nearly approaching the English style, than
any other in the Colony.—He has now, after
eighteen years' service, retired from his pro-
fessional pursuits to his estate. I have ap-
pointed him a Magistrate, and as far as m} r
opinion goes, no man in this Colony is bet-
ter qualified to execute the duties of that
office, with credit to himself and benefit to
the public service.
Richard Fitzgerald was transported to
this Colony at the age of 17. His conduct
on the passage induced Lieutenant Bowen
of the Navy (then Agent of Transports), to
bring him on shore when he first landed,
and to recommend him to the Governor, as
worthy of his notice. Governor Phillip
immediately appointed him principal Over-
seer of 800 men, who were then employed
in agriculture. In the year 1794, Fitzge-
rald received an appointment from the
Treasury as Superintendant.
I believe no individual in this, or any
other Colony, has performed more useful
and faithful services than this excellent man
has done, during the course of twenty-eight
years. He is universally esteemed, and the


testimonials of all tire Governors prove how
highly they thought of him.
In consequence of General Foveaux’s
opinion in his favour, he received from me
the charge of the King’s Store at Windsor,
which trust he filled for nine years to the
ehtire satisfaction of all his superiors.
During my residence here, Fitzgerald
has been honoured by the personal friend-
ship and intimacy of Lieut.-Col. O’Connell,
and the late Mr. Judge-Advocate Ellis
Bent. He is a man of modest and retired
manners, and of such known probity and
good faith, that the most opulent persons
in the Colony have derived much benefit
from his assistance in the management of
their concerns.
James Meehan, a native of Ireland, was
transported to this Colony in 1800, on ac-
count of the Rebellion, in which, although hh
was implicated, he never took an active part.
Oh his arrival here, he was assigned to
Mr. Grimes, the Surveyor-General. In
the employment of this gentleman Mr.
Meehan assisted in exploring the Coal River,
King' s Island, and Port Phillip.
G


In 1803 Mr. Grimes went on leave of
absence to England: previously to his de-
parture, he assured Governor King that he
might rely on the abilities and integrity of
Mr. Meehan, and that he was qualified to
carry on the duties of his department in his
absence: on this Mr. Meehan received a
conditional pardon from the Governor.
Another person was appointed as Acting
Surveyor in Mr. Grimes' absence, but be-
ing totally ignorant of the science, the
whole duty of the department devolved on
Mr. Meehan.
In 1803 he was sent to explore the river
Derwent, where he formed the first esta-
blishment for Colonel Collins. On this occa-
sion he suffered greatly from fatigue, and
privations occasioned by the want of pro-
visions.
In 1805 he was sent, in conjunction
with Lieutenant Kent of the Buffalo, to
explore Shoals Haven, and that part of the
coast. On this service they were blown
out to sea for three days in a boat, and
very nearly lost.
In 1806 Mr. Grimes returned from


England, and stated to the Governor, that
every part of his duty had been executed
as faithfully and impartially as if he had
been present.
Previously to my departure from Eng-
land, Mr. Meehan was recommended to
me at the Secretary of State’s Office, and
also by Hararess Lloyd, Esq. M. P. The
good character I received of him in Eng-
land, was fully confirmed by all the respect-
able persons in authority here. I accord-
ingly confirmed his appointment as Acting
Surveyor General.
Mr. Meehan accompanied me to Van
Dieman s Land in 1811 ; also to Bathurst,
and on all such tours as I have deemed it ex-
pedient to make. I have had thus an oppor-
tunity of witnessing his indefatigable assi-
duity in the fulfilment of his arduous duties.
I believe that no man has suffered so much
privation and fatigue in the service of this
Colony .as Mr. Meehan has done ; and, in-
deed, few are capable of such exertions as he
has made. His integrity has never, to my
knowledge, been impeached; and I certainly
consider him to be, both on account of his
g 2


professional skill, and the faithful and labo-
rious discharge of his duty, a valuable man.
Simeon Lord, at the age of nineteen,
\vas sentenced to seven years' transporta-
tion : he arrived here in 1791? in the ship
Atlantic, commanded by Lieut. Bowen,
Agent for Transports, from whom, to use
his own words, <e a gratitude, that can
terminate only with his existence, calls
upon him to declare, he received the most
humane and indulgent treatment, and al-
most paternal kindness/'
By the intercession and strong recom-
mendation of this gentleman, after eighteen
months’ servitude, Mr. Lord was employed
as an Assistant in the Victualling Stores ;
in which capacity he served the remainder
of his sentence, in a manner highly satis-
factory to his superiors. During that pe-
riod, by his own exertions and economy,
he built two houses, and cultivated about
an acre of garden ground ; and by rearing
pigs and poultry, and engaging occasion-
ally in trade, he accumulated, even before
the expiration of his term, property to the
amount of several hundred pounds.


With a part of this he purchased a house,
and also an allotment of ground, on which
he erected a commodious house and ware-
houses. At the expiration of his sen-
tence being appointed an Auctioneer, and
also employed as a General Commission
Agent, he gradually acquired a large pro-
perty, which enabled him to commence
business on a more extensive scale, as a
merchant and ship owner. Pursuing
these engagements successfully for several
years, he became at length possessed, in
whole, or the greater part, of several ships
and small craft, which he principally em-
ployed in procuring oil, seal-skins, beech
lemar, pearl-shells, sandal-wood, and other
articles of export to the Mother Country
and the East Indies ; while the benefits
derived by the Settlers from his specular
tions, which opened a vent for their pro-
duce, for which there was otherwise no
market, were by no means inconsiderable.
In the course of these mercantile pursuits,
Mr. Lord, in conjunction with Mr. An-
drew Thompson, formed an establishment
at New Zealand, to procure flax, hemp,


timber, and other productions of that
country, for the home market. He also
chartered the ship Boyd, freighted with
coal, cedar, and other timber for the Cape
of Good Hope, and the English market.
This vessel touching at New Zealand for
the purpose of filling with spars, was
unfortunately cut off by the natives.
Owing to this loss, with others of a great
amount, occasioned by the misconduct and
speculations of his agent in England, and
the equally unfaithful conduct of his agent
in India, his affairs became so embarrassed,
that his mercantile exertions were nearly
paralysed for seven years. During that
interval, however, having married, and
having a numerous young family, he made
a successful attempt to establish a manu-
factory of woollen cloths, hats, blankets,
and carpets, in which he now employs,
and for several years has employed, victu-
alled, clothed, and paid, from fifty to one
hundred persons, principally Convicts. He
has also greatly improved his lands, which
comprise five thousand acres, obtained
principally by purchase, on which, both in


this Colony and at Van Dieman’s Land,
be has reared very considerable herds of
cattle ; and has erected houses, warehouses,
and manufactories at Botany Bay and at
Sydney ; the latter of which are decidedly
superior to any of a similar description in
the Colony,
Mr. Lord was one of the persons re-
commended to me by General Foveaux.
I appointed him a Magistrate in 1810.
He is allowed to have been useful and at-
tentive in the discharge of his public duties:
his large commodious house has been a
home to those who were in distress, and
I have always found him to be an indus-
trious and enterprising man. His readiness
during the time of his prosperity, in ap-
plying his money towards the support of
Settlers and others in distress, from whom
he received repayment as it suited their
convenience at distant periods, and without
interest, is remembered with gratitude by
those who were saved from ruin by his gene-
rosity ; for although Mr. Lord has always
been considered litigiously inclined, he was
never known to oppress a poor man.


Mr. Greenway was transported to this
Colony in the year 1813, under sentence for
fourteen years, in consequence of a breach
of the Bankrupt Laws. He brought me a
letter from Governor Phillip, recommend-
ing him strongly to my protection, and
informing me, that he was an Architect of
eminence, who had been employed in
erecting public buildings at Bristol and
Clifton. Feeling great respect for that
most excellent man, I had much pleasure
in attending to the first request he ever
made to me. Mr. Greenway being the
only regular architect here, has been ever
since his arrival, the sole designer, and
the Assistant Engineer in the erection
of all the public buildings in the Colony,
in which he has displayed much taste and
great abilities. He received a conditional
pardon from me on his completing the
new Light-House at the South-Head; and
has lately received a free pardon. He has
thus been restored to his former rank in
society, which he promises to maintain with
credit to himself and usefulness to the
Government, as well as for the benefit and


support of a respectable wife and nu-»
merous family.
These are the men, my Lord, whom I
have thought fit to invite to my table, and
to treat with the respect to which I have
deemed them entitled, from the offices they
have held under my Government. To those
offices they were, in general, promoted in
consequence of their meritorious conduct,
and the many services they had rendered
to the Government in their different pro*
fessions and employments. Their good
conduct had obtained for them also the
good opinion of the most respectable in-
habitants of this Colony, as well as my
own: and it is with real satisfaction, that
I have to bear testimony to their uniform
fidelity and zeal in the discharge of their
respective public duties. They have been
peaceable and loyal subjects, and ever
ready to assist the government.
Discontented persons, in every part of
the world, eagerly hunt for matters which
they may be able to convert into occasions
of dissention. The admitting into society
men who have had the misfortune to incur
H


the penalty of transportation, has been
laid hold of here as a fit subject for this pur-
pose ; and I really believe that nothing in
the conduct of such unfortunate individuals,
let it be ever so meritorious, and as correct
as human nature admits of, would recom-
mend them to the notice of the parties to
whom I allude, on a footing of equality
even with the greatest villains that can be
found, provided only that they have not
been convicts.
But I am happy in believing that this
unchristian disposition is confined to a few
individuals, and those few not much to be
envied for their feelings and principles.
Their minds must be composed of very
different materials from that of our great
Moralist, who was heard to say, 44 that he
never saw a man going to be hanged, that
he did not think he ought to be in his
place/"
Previously to my arrival here, the men
whom I have named above, although fill-
ing the most respectable offices, were re-
ceived into society only as it suited the ca-
price of the other inhabitants to single


them out for notice, or as they happened
to be personally useful and agreeable to
them. Every person holding the rank of
a Gentleman, had been in the habit of
occasional intercourse with them. So far
back as Governor King's time, one man,
even while he was a convict, was received
at the Governor's table, and admitted to
the general society of the place : this man’s
name was Bellassis; he had been a Captain
in the East India Company’s service at
Bombay. The 73d Regiment received
Sir Henry Brown Hayes, while he was
in like manner under sentence of trans-
portation. This I consider to have been a
disrespect to the laws, highly indecorous
and improper.
Colonel Molle and the Officers of the
46th Regiment, were in the constant habit
of visiting at the house of a gentleman in
the neighbourhood of Sydney, whose wife
had been a convict. The Ladies of the
Regiment were in the same manner in ha-
bits of intimate intercourse at this hospi-
table mansion. Such was also the case
with the Officers of the 48th and their
h 2


Ladies. I cannot understand with what
grace persons cavil at the adoption of a
principle, when they have themselves acted
in conformity with it.
It is extremely unpleasant to be under the
necessity of thus descending to particulars;
but I consider it indispensable, in order
to explain this subject to your Lordship,
and to shew the ground of those proceed-
ings, which have been charged against me
as serious violations of the duties of my
office.
As to the appointment to the Magis-
tracy of men who had been transported,
my immediate inducement to do this was,
that at the time such appointments were
made, they were the most eligible persons
whom I had it in my power to select for
that office at the several stations in which
they resided; and I am well satisfied that
they have proved worthy of the trust re-
posed in them.
It is true, that the situation in which
they had formerly been, lays them open
to the reproaches of disorderly persons who
are brought before them in their magister


rial capacity ; for instances of such taunts
have occurred : but great as this objection
is, I do not think it to be of such impor-
tance, as to overbalance the good effects
which their promotion must have on the
minds of sensible and reformed Convicts,
who cannot but reflect on the encourage-
ment thus held out to them, to aspire to a
similar advancement, by imitating the con-
duct which had occasioned it.
Mr. Bennet reproaches us for the ma-
terials of which our Colony is composed.
That we are not all Moravians and Qua-
kers is indeed to be lamented: but he
should recollect, that this Settlement was
formed, not for the purpose of depriving
England of her virtuous subjects, but to
relieve her of her vicious population. In
condemning us all in the lump, as the most
dreadful description of persons collected
together in modern times, he seems to
lose sight of one small matter of fact,
which it is rather surprizing should escape
his observation. Suppose that we, the old
inhabitants and offenders of New South
Wales, should all feel disposed to mend


our manners; yet, Mr. Bennet should
have recollected, that we receive numerous
annual importations from the other side of
the water, of persons who are not consi-
dered the most correct in the world, as to
their principles and behaviour, and that
it will be impossible for us all to become a
reformed people, unless time be given us
to breathe, contemplate, and amend, be-
fore those new supplies of delinquency and
guilt are sent out to us, which we are con-
demned by this gentleman for possessing :
for even allowing that the old stock has
been improved by a change of clime, yet
while new grafts continue to be added to
it from Newgate, and other similar nurse-
ries, however these may in time be bene-
fited by the change of situation, some
fruit of a bad, and even of the worst qua-
lity, must be perpetually produced, and
perhaps the former contaminated, in every
successive period, after each successive im-
portation.
With respect to the detention of per-
sons here who were originally free, or had
become so, the charge is altogether un


founded; unless it relate to such deten-
tions as have taken place at the instance of
the creditors of the party. In order to
prevent fraudulent debtors quitting the
Colony, every person who is about to
leave, is required to publish his or her in-
tention three times in the Sydney Gazette.
This regulation, which existed at the time
of my arrival, I considered highly neces-
sary, in order to prevent a debtor making
his escape beyond the reach of his credi-
tors. The creditors, if there are any such,
lodge a detainer at the Judge Advocate's
Office, and no person is permitted to quit
the Colony without obtaining a certificate
from the office, that no detainer has been
lodged against him.
When a man or woman once becomes
free, no obstacle whatever is interposed to
detain them in this country; and I think
that any industrious man or woman might
easily earn as much during the time of
their servitude, as would defray their ex-
pences home. It seems to me nothing
short of mere quixotism, to provide a con-
veyance back for persons who have been


sent here for their crimes. For those who
do not reform, it would be necessary to
establish a regular packet; as they would
not be long in England before it became
necessary to ship them off again. Here
they have a much better chance of esta-
blishing themselves, and becoming useful:
they are under the immediate eye of ob-
servation if they commit a trespass, and
they need never want employment if they
be trust-worthy and industrious.
If the punishment of transportation be
too severe for the crime of which it is the
penalty, the error and injustice must be
ascribed to the Criminal Code. Here, the
Government has only to act ministerially,
and to see that the sentence is put in
force; but as transportation is meant
not only for the punishment, but also
for the reformation of the criminals, I
think it best to receive them all on a foot-
ing of equality. The difference in the
degrees of their criminality, I consider
to have been provided for at home, by the
different lengths of the periods for which
they have been sentenced to banishment;


and in order to give them every induce-
ment to reform, I always make it known
on their arrival, that I entirely overlook
the errors of their past lives, but mean
to punish or reward their future conduct
according as it may deserve.
It is natural enough for persons unac-
quainted with this Colony, when a convict
attracts their attention, to feel a desire to
be informed of the crime he had commit-
ted, I felt that myself on my first arrival;
and it appeared to me that it would be
proper to send a statement of their offences
with the convicts. lam now, however, of a
different opinion, and see the wisdom of the
Legislature in withholding this information.
Some men's crimes are of so deep a die,
that if they were known here, no one would
feel at ease in having the perpetrator in his
employment: 66 His hand would be against
every man, and every man's hand against
him." He would in consequence feel him-
self so dreadfully degraded, as to be past
the hope of ever being considered by his
fellow-men with any portion of respect;
i


and this would naturally repress every
effort to better his condition.
The power possessed by a Bench of Ma-
gistrates in this Colony, is exactly the
same as that possessed by a similar body
in England; only that here they are au-
thorized to pass sentence on convicts in a
more summary manner than a Bench of
Magistrates could do in England on free
persons.
It is true that, until 1814, the Magis-
trates assumed a degree of authority which
I considered highly improper; and in con-
sequence of some severities coming to my
knowledge, I issued an Order, requiring a
return to be made to me of the number of
punishments, and the particulars of the
crimes committed in each district, in every
quarter; and at the same time prohibiting
any Magistrate, singly, from awarding a
greater corporal punishment than fifty
lashes*.
Mr. Bennet appears to lay great stress
* Vide Appendix, No. I.


on the circumstance of my having ordered
three free men to be corporally punished,
for trespassing in the government domain
at Sydney.
On the first view of the subject, and
attending only to Mr. Bennetts erroneous
statement of the case, it may probably
appear to many people rather an arbitrary
act, to order any corporal punishment to
be inflicted for so venial an offence; but 1
trust it will appear in a very different
light to every impartial mind, when the
real circumstances of the transaction are
known, and therefore I will now state them
as briefly as I can.
A piece of ground was marked out by
Governor Phillip, on the first establish-
ment of the Colony, as a government do-
main, for the exclusive use of the Governor
and his family. This land 1 found, on my
arrival here, only partially enclosed. As
it abounded in beautiful plants and shrubs,
I deemed it worthy of being preserved,
and therefore, in 1812, had the whole of it
properly fenced in, partly by a stone wall,
and partly by a wooden paling; leaving,
i 2


however, two gateways, or entrances, tor
the ingress and egress of the inhabitants, for
their recreation and exercise on foot. This
fence had not however been long completed,
before a number of idle disorderly per-
sons broke gaps in that portion of the wall
which enclosed the most distant parts, and
committed much depredation in the shrub-
bery. Government orders were repeatedly
published, and stuck up on the wall, pro-
hibiting these trespasses, and the breaches
in the fence were often repaired. But the
orders issued on this head continued to be
totally disregarded, although threats were
held out in them, that persons detected in
repeating the offence would be severely
punished.
It was at length discovered, that these
frequent breaches in the wall were made
by thieves and lewd profligate persons,
who passed through them into the shrub-
bery to conceal their stolen property, or
for the purposes of prostitution; thus mak-
ing this part of the domain a place of assig-
nation, or rendezvous, for all the common
prostitutes of Sydney, as well as for all the


rogues, vagabonds, and lewd dissolute per-
sons who chose to meet them there for the
purposes of prostitution, or for planting
(as the slang phrase is here) their stolen
goods.
These abominable and disgraceful meet-
ings had at length become so common and
notorious; the wall had been so repeatedly
broken down, and the shrubbery so much
destroyed, that I deemed it absolutely ne-
cessary to adopt some strong and decisive
measure to put a stop to these wicked and
immoral proceedings, so long carried on in
defiance of my authority, as well as in
violation of all decency and good order.
I accordingly directed two constables to
be stationed within the domain, near the
breaches which had been last made in the
wall, with instructions to seize the first
persons who should enter the ground either
through those breaches, or by scaling the
wall, and to lodge them in gaol until they
should receive my further commands. The
first persons who were seized under this
order, were William Blake, William Ilens-
hall, and Daniel Reid, who were carried


to gaol, and imprisoned therefor the night.
On the following day, after I had fully in-
formed myself of all the circumstances of
the case, from the two constables who had
apprehended them, I ordered each of the
trespassers to be punished with twenty-five
lashes; and to be then released, which orders
were accordingly carried into execution.
This punishment was inflicted in the gaol-
yard at Sydney, on the 19th of April 1816,
and was so slightly laid on, that it was hardly
felt by those who received it. In fact, it
was ordered to be inflicted merely for the
sake of example, and with a view of de-
terring others from the commission of si-
milar offences, and not from any motives
of revenge, cruelty, or tyranny. Neither
was it ordered hastily, or from any imme-
diate impulse of passion or anger. On the
contrary,! ordered it coolly and deliberately,
and after maturely considering the probable
effect it might produce; and in the result I
was not mistaken; for this punishment,
slight as it was, had the desired and de-
signed effect of completely putting a stop
to those abominable, wicked, and disgrace


ful scenes which had for four years been
carried on in the government domain.
As to the characters of the three men
who were thus punished as an example to
others, it is necessary to undeceive the
Public, so far as merely to observe, that
they were far from being respectable. They
were, it is true, free men at the time; but
neither of them had come out to the Colony
as a “free settler ,” as Mr. Bennet would
wish to intimate.
Two of them, Henshall and Reid, came
out as convicts; the former was a good
tradesman, but depraved and dissolute in
his manners; the latter was a man of very
loose bad character, and had been tried
herein the year 1811, at the Criminal Court,
for a robbery, but was acquitted from want
of evidence, though there were strong rea-
sons to believe he was guilty. William
Blake certainly came out free , having
worked for his passage as a sailor, on board
the ship in which his wife came out as a
convict; and on his arrival I gave him
permission to stay on account of his wife,
although he had no permission from the


Government at home for coming to, or
remaining in the Colony. But no one
ever considered him as either a good man,
or a respectable character ; on the contrary,
he was looked upon by the Police here
with a very suspicious eye, and considered
as a receiver of stolen goods ; besides which
he was known to keep an irregular house.
From this statement, I think it will be
allowed that the characters of these men
were far from respectable, and that they
were consequently very fit subjects to be
made examples of; it being evident that
they broke over the domain wall with in-
decent, and criminal designs.
In vindication of myself, for having order-
ed these profligate men, though at the time
free, to be corporally punished, I can only
say, that I did at the time consider, and
now still remain of the same opinion, that
I was legally authorized, in my capacity as
Governor-in-chief and first Magistrate of
this territory, on such positive and clear
proof of their guilt, to direct them to be
punished in this summary manner, without
any regular trial or examination before a


Court. The punishment inflicted on each
was twenty-five lashes very slightly laid on,
and entirely for the sake of example, and
from the laudable motive of preventing a
recurrence of similar crimes; and happily
it had the desired effect.
But even granting that the ordering of
those men to be corporally punished in this
summary manner was, according to the
strict letter of the law, legally wrong (which
I do not by any means allow), still I main-
tain, that ordering such punishment was
morally right; and on this ground I am
neither ashamed of, nor sorry for the act.
With respect to these men going home
in the manner they have done to prefer
their complaint, at an expence none of them
could afford, it was well known here at the
time, that they were advised and prompted
to do so by the Rev. Mr. Marsden, Mr.
Justice Bent, and a few other factious dis-
contented men of lower ranks in the Colony,
all of whom joined in making a subscription
to defray the expences; and but for the
pious advice of the Rev. Mr. Marsden,
and other equally amiable counsellors, these
K


poor men would never have thought of
quitting this country to seek redress in
England.
If I have in this instance unintentionally,
and from good motives, acted contrary to
Law, I am of course personally amenable to
my country, and must stand the conse-
quence. But I must still think it very un-
fair, unjust and unmanly in Mr. Bennet
to make such illiberal remarks on my cha-
racter, without knowing the real merits of
the case, or my motives in what I did,
which are thus avowed, and laid before the
Public.
That the Governors of this Colony ever
possessed any power over the decisions of
the Courts of Justice, I consider impos-
sible; and it would be derogatory in them
to interfere, even if they were authorized.
It was Mr. Ellis Bent's opinion, and mine
also, nine years ago, that Trial by Jury
was highly desirable. We also concurred
in the necessity of recommending, that a
salary should be allowed by the Govern-
ment, as an inducement for respectable
Attornies to come here; this part of the


practice of the Court having, until that
time, been wholly in the hands of Attor-
nies who had been Convicts: but it ap-
peared to me an act of severity and injus-
tice, to deprive men of a privilege which
they had been permitted to enjoy for
twenty-six years, without having any crimes
or misdemeanors to lay to their charge
during the time they had acted in that
capacity, to call for such a measure; which
could not fail also to injure their clients.
These motives induced me to recommend
their Petition to the favourable considera-
tion of the Court, where the power of ad-
mitting or refusing practitioners solely rests.
The members at that time composing
the Court, were, Mr. Justice Jeffery Bent,
Mr. Broughton, and Mr. Riley. The
hardship of depriving these men suddenly
of the means of their support, is a subject
which I fear has not met with much con-
sideration ; but the case as it exists at this
time, proves the fact as to their clients;
Mr. Crossley, one of the most obnoxious
of them, being now empowered by the
Judge of the Supreme Court, at the dis-
K 2


tance of six years since this question was
agitated, to carry on the causes entrusted
to his care previously to that period.
The almost entire failure of the experi-
ment, as a place of Reformation,” is an asr-
sertion the truth of which I positively deny.
The number of families now established
as Settlers, living on their farms, useful,
industrious, and I really believe, taken
generally, as respectable as the yeomanry
of any other country, will prove this to
any one who will condescend to inquire
into their characters; for although many
of them occasionally revert to their former
habits of drunkenness and gambling, others
never do, and the male offspring of both
the ill and well behaved, are remarkable
for temperance and industry. The female
race are certainly not so promising; but
it is to be hoped that as the population
increases, their reformation will follow, by
the female peasantry being reared with
more industrious habits than they have
hitherto been. Nor do I know any other
country similar in extent as to popula-
tion, where the custom so much prevails,


as it does here, of the adoption of orphan
children.
The Convict Settlers have 92,618 acres
of land in cultivation; they have 40,643
head of horned cattle, and 221,079 sheep.
By far the greater part of the trade of
the Colony is in their hands; the town
of Sydney, as well as the other town-
ships, have been chiefly erected by them.
With the exception of Mr. Campbell the
merchant, they have been the only per-
sons who have carried on the sealing and
oil trade to any extent. In fact, to them
we owe our existence as a Colony: it
was founded for their punishment and re-
formation; they and their families form
nine-tenths of the population*: they only
have supplied the King's stores with grain.
The few Free Settlers I found here, had
certainly honored this convict country so
far as to establish themselves in it; they
accepted lands and stock from the Govern-
ment; these they have taken care to in-
crease, and by disposing of the meat at the
* Vide Appendix, No. 111.


store, and trafficking with the Convicts and
others, have become possessed of property
to a large amount: but it is only lately
that these gentlemen have commenced
cultivation; nor is the Government yet
indebted to them for any assistance in the
supply of grain, but in so small a propor-
tion as to be unworthy of notice.
To contrast them therefore with the
Convict Settlers, in regard to the improve-
ment of this Colony, is altogether out of
the question; and I must again repeat,
that I do not think vices and crimes prevail
here, by any means to the extent which
any reasonable person would expect from
the nature of the materials of which the
population is composed.
My expectations may perhaps be thought
by some people to have been moderate;
but I freely own, that the Convicts are
more easily managed, and much less dis-
orderly, than I had expected. That the
number of heinous offences has greatly
diminished, although the population is now
more than tripled in less than ten years,
may be proved by a reference to the state


ment of trials and punishments sent home
annually to the Colonial Office.
That the people “ are discontented,” I
also deny; and I think it would be nothing
less than an act of justice to the inhabi-
tants of this Colony and to myself, if Mr.
Bennet were to inquire into the characters
and progress through life , of the disaffected
persons here, who have laboured hard to
disseminate dissatisfaction in the Settlement,
and to promulgate the opinion at home that
it does exist. He would then indeed be en-
abled to say with truth, that he had encou-
raged and published defamation at the in-
stigation of those whose characters “ are far
from being even problematical.” But if these
people only are to be heard and attended
to, both here and at home, then indeed
the truth never will be known. It is be-
yond my hopes to find men virtuous and
contented here, who have found themselves
unfit subjects for His Majesty’s Navy and
Army , or who, from their embarrassed
circumstances, have taken an asylum here
to avoid their creditors at home. But it is
my firm belief, that every respectable well


disposed man in this Colony, whether living
here as a Clergyman, in the employment
of the Government as a Civil Servant, or
as a Free Settler, is perfectly satisfied with
the place, and grateful for the liberal as-
sistance allowed by Government; although,
no doubt, jealousies as to individual claims
exist, and ever will exist where dona-
tions are made.
On the general subject of the good or
bad policy of Transportation, I shall not
presume to address your Lordship: I leave
that very important matter for the consi-
deration of those better qualified for the
discussion; but I cannot avoid saying, that
this country should be made the home,
and a happy home , to every emancipated
convict who deserves it. By returning to
England, they are likely to associate with
those who were before instrumental in their
ruin; they find themselves cut off from re-
spectable society; their parents and friends
are ashamed of them ; they, on their part,
cannot fail to feel themselves degraded and
distrusted, and few families would employ
them : thus they are driven to a repetition


bf those crimes which occasioned their ori-
ginal banishment.
Here , according to my system, they feel
themselves encouraged and protected, if
they deserve it, and are on a footing of
equality with the general population. I
consider it for the interest of England, that
her convicts should remain here, when they
become free, and I deem this to be also
essential to the improvement of this Colony.
Now that their families are permitted to
come to them, they are certainly happier
here, and enabled with greater facility to
provide for them, if they be industrious,
than they could be in England. But if
they are in future to be kept in a state
of perpetual degradation, all idea of reform
and change of habits must be abandoned,
and the sooner those who become free can
remove themselves, the better; for their
situation here would be that of awful de-
pression. This may be proved by a re-
ference to the manners and custo ms of the
free inhabitants here, both antecedently and
subsequently to my arrival. At present,
t


(and the same has been the case for some
time past), if a convict does not give
offence, I am happy in believing that he
feels himself secure from personal insult,
being only under the controul of those who
are placed in authority over him. A slave
is the property of his master; a convict the
property of the Crown : thus the security
which avarice gives in the one case, is not
to be found in the other; nor do I see the
justice and propriety, now that they have
made it what it is, of converting this Colony
in future to the sole use of Settlers. If the
Free Settlers are not well disposed towards
the population of the country which they
have selected from among the number of
His Majesty's Colonies as the place of their
abode, they do not deserve a settlement
here; and it appears to me to be a duty of
the first magnitude in every man's office,
who accepts of a civil appointment in this
Colony, to come here with the full deter-
mination of holding out every encourage-
ment to the reformation of the people, by
associating with those who have proved


themselves worthy of regard, in the same
manner as if they had ever been free.
If military men act differently, their con-
duct cannot be considered in the same light,
as they are obliged to take their turn of
duty here: but any other man who has the
freedom of choice, should, in my humble
opinion, avoid incorporating himself as a
member in a community which he is de-
termined to consider as unworthy of being
associated with.
If I were singular in this sentiment, I
should have more dread than I feel, of being
in the wrong; but I have seen it acted
upon by men of the greatest respectability
both of civil and military professions, who
did not deem themselves contaminated in
thus accommodating themselves for the
benefit of the people, to the circumstances
of the place to which, by duty, they for a
time belonged. Nor is it perhaps easy for
a professional man to avoid partiality in his
decisions, when his mind is biassed entirely
in favour of one set of persons, and violently
prejudiced against the other; and it cannot
L 2


fail to be a source ot continual irritation to
him, to come in daily contact with his fel-
low creatures, whom he cannot look on
without feelings of horror and detestation;
and to avoid all intercourse is impossible,
lor his own sake, therefore, as well as for
the sake of those he is hound to serve , I
should certainly think it best were he to
avoid establishing himself here.
lor my own part, I have always endea-
voured to act in conformity with my inten-
tions, as made known to the people on my
taking charge of this Government, in the
following words: 66 It is the earnest wish of
our Most Gracious King, and his Minis-
ters, to promote the welfare and prosperity
of this rising Colony in every way possible;
and it will, therefore, be the fault of the
inhabitants themselves, if they are not as
comfortable and happy as any others of
His Majesty's subjects."
“To make them so, as far as depends
upon me, is not only rny duty, but will at
all times constitute my chief happiness;
and the honest, sober, and industrious in-


habitant, whether Free Settler or Convict,
will ever find in me a friend and protector.”
—Nor do I see how any other principle
can be acted upon towards these persons,
unless the British Laws are altered, and it
be settled that a man who had once been
a convict, shall be doomed to perpetual ig-
nominy during his natural life, without any
power of reversion. For I cannot suppose
that the British Nation would ever sanction
the idea of professing what they do not
mean to fulfil; and what else would it be, to
confer a free pardon on a convict, and still
to consider him under his original sentence ?
Nothing is more desirable than to prevent
crime; and as punishment is one mean to-
wards that end, let it be as severe as may
be necessary to effect that grand object;
but when what the Law 7 has ordained, has
been fulfilled, for the sake of mercy and
justice there let it terminate.
“ This is the whole of his sentence, and
ought therefore to be the whole of his suf-
fering. No one could desire to visit many
different degrees of guilt with the same


measure of punishment*” —Nor would any
one, I hope, venture to do evil, that good
may come.
<e A merciful and enlightened jurispru-
dence, like the Author of all that is merci-
ful and wise, does not rejoice in the death
of a Sinner, but rather that he should turn
from his wickedness and live.”
But how’ is he to live, if he is for ever
doomed to feel the weight of punishment,
even after that portion which was awarded
to him by the Law has been suffered ? for
if a maifs crime and sentence, long since
past and expiated, are to be had recourse
to in contradiction to his present acquire-
ments and fitness for any situation; is not
that trying and condemning him, time after
time, during his whole life ? It would be
better not to hold out hope to a man, by
pronouncing a short sentence, or by giving
him a free pardon, if he is ever after to be
treated as infamous.
“ Punishments are inflicted that crime
may be prevented, and crime is prevented
by the reformation of the criminal;” —“ and


that he being amerced of one period of his
life, may be enabled to spend the remain-
der more respectably.”
Let me ask, would the Legislators of
the British Empire appoint to places of
confidence and trust, men who are less
worthy to fill them, in preference to more
deserving persons who have been Con-
victs, merely because the latter had once
J %/
incurred the penalty of the law ?
My principle is, that when once a man
is free, his former state should no longer
be remembered, or allowed to act against
him : let him then feel himself eligible for
any situation which he has, by a long term
of upright conduct, proved himself wor-
thy of filling.
What can be so great a stimulus to a
man of respectable family and education,
who has fallen to the lowest state of degra-
dation, as to know, that it is still in his
power to recover what he has lost, and
not only to become a worthy member of
society, hut to be treated as such ?
I trust the British People will not adopt


a principle, which every liberal man must
disclaim and banish from his breast, namely,
that of never forgiving an injury; but, on
the contrary, that they will continue to
cherish the more generous one upon which
they have hitherto acted, of tempering
Justice with Mercy.
I have the Honour to be,
With great respect,
MY LORD,
Your Lordship's most obedient
and humble Servant,
LACHLAN MACQUARIE,
Governor in Chief of New South Wales.


APPENDIX.
No. I.
(COPY).
GOVERNMENT AND GENERAL ORDERS.
Government-House, Sydney,
Saturday, 1 7th Aug.
The Governor having, in a Despatch from the
Right Hon. Earl Bathurst, His Majesty’s Principal
Secretary of State for the Colonies, under date the
4th Dec. 1815, received His Royal Highness The
Prince Regent’s Commands, in the name and on the
behalf of His Majesty, to notify to all persons hold-
ing situations under this Government, that they are
not to be permitted, on any account whatever, to carry
on, or be concerned in. Mercantile or Commercial
Transactions; and that in the event of any Officers
under this Government, either commencing, or con-
tinuing, any kind of mercantile occupations after the
promulgation of this Notice, they shall be dismissed
from their said situations : It is now hereby notified,
that in obedience to His Royal Highness’s Command,
and in order to carry the same into due effect, His
Excellency the Governor orders and directs, that
from and after the first day of January next ensuing,
no Officer, or person holding any Commission or Ap-
M


pointment under this Government, whether Civil or
Military, shall be, directly or indirectly, concerned in
any Mercantile or Trading Transaction whatever, on
pain of being dismissed from his situation j and such
Officer or Officers as shall make his or their election,
to commence, or continue Mercantile, or Commercial
Occupations, in preference to retaining their Civil or
Military Official Appointments, are hereby called upon
and required to make the same known to the Governor,
in a written communication, on or before the said first
day of January next, in order that properly qualified
persons may be appointed to succeed to their situa-
tions.
By Command of His Excellency,
(Signed) JOHN THOMAS CAMPBELL,
Secretary.
(True Copy)
L. MACQUARIE.
(COPY).
(CIRCULAR).
Secretary’s Office, Sydney,
20th Sept. 1814.
SIR,
His Excellency the Governor having authorized
and directed, in His Government and General Orders
of 10th instant, the immediate establishment of Gaol
Gangs at the Towns of Parramatta, Windsor, and
Liverpool, in addition to the present existing one at
Sydney, to the extent and under the Regulations pre-
scribed in those Orders, which I had the honor to
transmit you on the 17th instant, I have it now in


Command to instruct you to adopt, as soon as pos-
sible, the necessary measures for conveying those
Orders into the desired effect.
In addition to the Instructions expressed in those
Orders, it is the Governor’s desire, that the Delin-
quents in those several Gangs at Sydney, Parramatta,
H indsor, and Liverpool, shall be constantly wrought
in double irons, under the direction of an Overseer,
and that the wearing of the distinguishing party-
coloured dress , shall on no occasion whatever be dis-
pensed with. Any person who shall resist the wear-
ing of this dress, whilst under sentence in the Gaol
Gangs, is to be corporally punished, at the discretion
of the Magistrate of the District who committed him,
or of him to whom the complaint shall be made by
the Gaoler, and he is to be compelled to submission.
In regard to the extent of corporal punishment to
be resorted to, on the foregoing, or any other occasion ,
it is the Governor’s desire, that not more than fifty
lashes shall, at any time, after the 30th inst. be in-
flicted on a Delinquent by order of a Magistrate.
Solitary confinement, or hard labour, being substi-
tuted in those Orders, as a more humane kind of
punishment, and, at the same time, more likely to
produce the desired effect of reformation in the moral
conduct of the ill-behaved.
I have the Honor to be.
Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
(Signed) J. T. CAMPBELL, Sec.
(True Copy).
m 2


Addressed to
The Rev, Samuel Marsden, Principal Chaplain and
Justice of the Peace, Parramatta;
The Rev. Robert Cartwright, Assistant Chaplain
and J. P., Wilberforce;
D’Arcy Wentworth, Esq. J. P. Sydney ;
William Cox, Esq. J. P. Windsor;
James Milebam, Esq. J. P. Castlereagh; and
Thomas Moore, Esq. J. P. Liverpool.
(True Copy)
L. MACQUARIE.


No. 11.
(COPY.)
GOVERNMENT AND GENERAL ORDERS.
Government-House, Sydney,
Saturday, 10 th Sept. 1814.
His Excellency the Governor, viewing with the
greatest regret and abhorrence, the frequent com-
mission of robberies and murders, which for some
time past have rendered the situation of the well-
disposed and industrious Settlers of the country truly
distressing, feels it his duty to adopt such Regula-
tions as appear to him best suited, in co-operation with
the ordinary course of the Laws, either to repress the
further commission of such crimes, or to bring the
perpetrators to more speedy and effectual punish-
ment.
With a view to this desirable object, and in the
hope at the same time to ameliorate the condition,
and improve the morals of the Convicts who are now,
or may hereafter be assigned as Government Men to
the Free Settlers or Landholders, whether on or off
the Stores, and of those Convicts also who have the
indulgence of Tickets of Leave, His Excellency has
framed the following Regulations, for the mutual
guidance and government of the persons possessed of
Government Servants, and of those Servants them-
selves ; the Magistrates and other Peace Officers
within the several Districts of the Colony, being


hereby strictly enjoined to enforce, according to their
authority, the fullest compliance with them.
It having come to the knowledge of the Governor,
that the practice of remunerating Government Men
for their extra time and labour, either by permitting
them to employ certain portions of their time for
their own benefit, wherever they may choose to
engage themselves, or to cultivate grain, and rear
pigs and other animals, in lieu of giving them the
wages prescribed by the established Regulations of the
Colony; His Excellency cannot avoid tailing the
attention of the Public to the consideration of the ill
consequences necessarily resulting from either the one
commutation or the other. Those persons who have
been in the habit of giving up portions of their time
to their Government Men, in lieu of their wages,
must be aware, that they thereby enable idle and dis-
orderly persons in the class of Assigned Convicts, to
pass into parts of the country where their persons are
not known ; whilst the latter, availing themselves of
that circumstance, commit the most flagrant and
atrocious acts, under the idea that they will thus
avoid detection. That robberies very frequently escape
punishment, by the sudden retreat of the perpetra-
tors from that part of the country where they com-
mitted their depredations, is too notorious to be con-
troverted :—this fact fully evinces the necessity for
doing away the practice.
Those Government Men who have the indulgence of
cultivating ground, and rearing stock, instead of re-
ceiving their prescribed wages, frequently become the
receivers of stolen grain and provisions, which being


blended with that of their own rearing, baffles detec-
tion, and justice is thereby often defeated.
Ist, Under the consideration of these evils, it is now
His Excellency the Governor’s Order and Com-
mand, that from and after the 30th instant, all
Settlers and others having the services of Govern-
ment Men of any denomination, whether on or off
the Stores, shall retain them altogether in their own
service, and pay them agreeably to the Govern-
ment Regulations established in the year 1804, and
in no other way whatever.
2nd, Settlers or others, who do not require the entire
services of the men assigned to them, or who can-
not afford to pay them for their extra labour, are
required to return them forthwith to the Principal
Superintendant of Convicts at Sydney, or to the
Magistrates of the Districts to which they respec-
tively belong.
3rd, All complaints, either of neglect of duty, or of
ill treatment on the part of the Government Men,
or their employers, are to be made to the District
Magistrate, whose duty it will be to punish and
redress mutually the ill-behaved and injured party.
4th, All the Male Convicts, whether assigned to
Settlers, or on Tickets of Leave in each District,
(with the exception of Stockmen, and such other
persons as the Magistrates, under particular cir-
cumstances, may see fit to exempt), are to assem-
ble and be mustered by the District Constable every
Sunday morning, at ten o’clock, in such central
part of the District as shall be pointed out by the


Magistrate; and to proceed from thence under
the direction of the Constable, to the nearest
Church, or place of Divine Service, in case there
shall be one within three miles of the place of
muster. On these occasions, it will be expected
that the Assigned Servants, and persons on Tickets
of Leave, shall be not only punctual in their at-
tendance, but also clean and decent in their ap-
pearance ; and any of them who shall attend either
unshaved or intoxicated, or absent themselves, ex-
cept in cases of sickness, or other unavoidable
cause, are to be reported by the Constable to the
Magistrate of the District, who is to reprimand for
the first offence, and punish every subsequent
one, by placing the offender in the stocks for one
hour.
sth, Ticket of Leave Men are to muster on the right
of the Assigned Government Men; and if there
should be no place of Worship within three miles
of the place where they assemble, they are to be
dismissed there, after answering to their names,
and to such questions as the Constable shall find
necessary to put to them. Settlers or others de-
riving the advantage of Assigned Servants, are
particularly called upon to render every assistance
in their power to the due execution of this Order ;
—whereby they will shew themselves worthy of
further indulgence; whilst on the contrary, if it
should appear that they throw any difficulty in the
way of it, such conduct will be punished by the
withdrawing altogether from their service those
Convicts already assigned to them.


6th, The District Constables are to keep Books, in
which they are to enrol the names of all the Go-
vernment Men within their respective Districts,
and the names of the persons in whose employment
they are, whether as Assigned Government Men,
or Persons on Tickets of Leave. The form of this
Muster-Roll will be furnished forthwith to the
Magistrates of the Colony ; and they are to give
them to the District Constables. Each Sun-
day’s Muster, with the List of Absentees, and of
those appearing in any way neglectful of the en-
joined form, either as to dress, cleanliness, or so-
briety, is to be submitted on the Monday following
to the Magistrate of the District; whose orders
thereon are to be carried strictly into effect by the
Constables. It is expected that the Magistrates
will from time to time attend these Musters person-
ally, in order to their being held according to the
true intent of this Order.
7th, For the purpose of avoiding, as much as possi-
ble, the necessity for resorting to corporal punish-
ments, His Excellency has deemed it advisable to
establish Government Gaol Gangs at the thfee
principal towriships in the interior; namely,
Parramatta, Windsor, and Liverpool; and to these
places of punishment. Convicts found guilty of
serious offences are to be sent, to be employed at
hard labour for a limited period of weeks or months,
according to the measure of their offences, instead
of undergoing corporal chastisement; and in order
to brand their ill conduct with a public mark of
N


disgrace, and to distinguish them from the better
behaved, they are to be clothed in a party-coloured
dress, half black and half white, which they are
to wear at all times during the time they are sen-
tenced for. For this purpose, the respective Gaolers
will be furnished with the prescribed dresses, and
they are to take charge of the clothes which the
Convicts shall bring with them, until such time as
they shall be discharged, when they are to be re-
turned to them, and the gaol dresses received back
into their stores. The Gaol Gang at Parramatta is
not to consist of more than ten •, that at Windsor
of more than eight j and that at Liverpool of more
than six Convicts ; all of whom are to be lodged in
their respective gaols every night, and to be daily
employed (Sundays excepted), under Government
Overseers, in the repair of the roads leading into
the towns, and in the improvement of their streets ;
or in such other public work as the Magistrates
may consider more necessary.
Bth, The foregoing Gaol Gangs, as also that already
established at Sydney, are to receive and commence
wearing their party-coloured dresses on Sunday the
2nd day of October next ensuing j and are never
to be permitted to appear in any other during the
term of their respective sentences, unless a remis-
sion of their sentences, in consequence of good
conduct, should be extended to them.
9th, It being a matter of great importance, as well for
the sake of encouraging and rewarding the merito-
rious, as for restraining and punishing the idle and


ill-behaved, that the Governor should be made fully
acquainted with the characters of the inhabitants at
large; and more especially with those of the Con-
victs of both sexes, in whatever manner they may
be employed, His Excellency directs, that the seve-
ral Magistrates shall transmit him, (through the
Office of the Secretary to this Government, Quar-
terly Returns, of all Fines and Punishments ordered
by them on Delinquents of every description resid-
ing in their respective Districts. These Reports are
to specify the names and situations in life of the
offenders, and their usual places of residence, with
the offences committed by them, and the sentences
passed on them.—All remissions of punishments are
also to be reported.—For the Town and District of
Sydney, it will be the duty of the Superintendant
Magistrate of the Police to make these Reports.
The first Return of these Quarterly Reports is to be
made in the first week in January next, compre-
hending all the Magisterial Proceedings for the
Quarter which will commence on the Ist of Octo-
ber next; and the Governor recommends in the
strongest manner to the Magistrates, to inflict cor-
poral punishment as seldom as possible; but to
substitute in its stead, confinement in the stocks for
petty crimes, and either solitary confinement, or
hard labour in the Gaol Gangs, according to their
judgment of the degrees of offence; still keeping in
view the general conduct and character of the De-
linquents.
10th, It is His Excellency the Governor’s desire, that
N 2


these Government and General Orders shall be read
during the time of Divine Service, by the Chap-
lains, at their respective Churches, or Places of
Public Worship, on Sunday the 18th, and on Sunday
the 25th, of the present month of September.
By Command of His Excellency the Governor,
(Signed) J. T. CAMPBELL,
Secretary.
(True Copy)
J. T. Campbell, Sec.


Quality.
d
QJ
S
Women.
Children.
Total Number
of Men, Wo-
men, and Chil-
dren.
Quantity of
Land in Culti-
vation.
[ Total Number
of Acres held.
Number of
Horses.
Number of
Horned Cattle.
' Number of
Sheep.
New SouthWales
Ditto
Came free
794
4002
190
576
31
189
245
2005
103
290
17
75
453
3854
211
324
43
143
1492
9961
504
1190
91
407
Acres of
13,133
34,840
13,920
41,524
6121
16,254
145,054
192,060
16,301
48,511
7351
17,585
1310
2262
95
183
31
54
18,028
24,761
5421
12,262
1821
3620
39,316
36,053
34,972
92,636
12,130
92,390
C Came as Convicts, but 1
X now free )
Came free
Hobart Town ....
Ditto
( Came as Convicts, but)
X now free )
Came free
Port Dalrymple..
Ditto
C Came as Convicts, but 1
\ now free )
No. 111.
A Statement of the Number of Settlers who came free, with an Account of the Land in Cultivation , and
Stock in their possession: also of those who came Prisoners, but now free; with an exact Account of the
same, as per General Muster, taken by His Excellency Governor Macquarie, assisted by Deputy Com-
missary-General Drennan, in 1819; together with those returned for Van Diemaris Land.
Sydney, 25 th January, 1820.
L. MACQUARIE,
Governor-in-Chief of New South Wales.


Civil Department.
Persons who came
free.
Persons who came
Prisoners, but
now free.
Convicts.
-S ~
Remarks: in the New
South Wales Esta-
blishment, accord-
Station.
C
S
CD
o
£
c
<D
S-.
2
5
"3
H
5
s
.
QJ
a
o
£
G
<D
u
2
2
O
a
o
H
G
QJ
S
G
0J
£
s
2
6
2
o
H
C
CD
S
C
CD
S
O
£
G
CD
2
6
2
3 !*?
c/1 ‘D
S
Com
t -1 V3 "3
ing to the Parlia-
mentary Estimates,
are,
viz.
37
8
5
16
13
7
70
27
16
10
8
5
2295
1198
1419
939
3
6158
2564
3400
1902
28
9
1062
327
11,209
4646
Governor and Commander-
6
I'M
173
27
Lieutenant-Governors.
Secretaries.
Judges.
2
2
v 1 C7
97
26
75
21
3620
846
208
3282
988
1 2
4
808
1716
570
Provost Marshals.
Chaplains.
Principal Surgeon.
Assistants ditto.
Surveyor-General of Lands.
Deputies ditto.
Naval Officers.
On board colonial vessels
Hobart Town > Van
Port Dalrymple * D ~’f
ii
7
o
5
199
179
24
101
17
206
43
199
486
84
9
468
189
270
75
324
143
1445
483
196
66
72
32
52
156
943
333
665
1941
5659
3550
6321
15,45d
10,848
1328
573
12,749
30,296
Boat-builders.
Clerks & Superintendants.
A General Statement of the Inhabitants of New South Wales ; shewing the Description of Persons, and the Station they reside in, as
per General Muster taken by His Excellency Governor Macquarie and Deputy Commissary-General Drennan, commencing the 27th
September, and finally ending the 12 th November, 1819; with an exact Account of the same at Van Diemaris Land.
Sydney) 25th January , 1820.
L. MACQUARIE,
Governor-in-Chief of New South Wales.


His Majesty’s v
48 th Regi- >
ment ••••!}
Royal Veteran 1
Company $
Total • • • •
Hi
1
Governor.
Governor and
his Personal
Staff.
Hi
1
Aid-de-Camp.
Hi
I
Brigade-Major.
Hi
1
Lieutenant-Colonel.
*0
1 to
Majors.
w
1 w
Captains, B. M.
o
M Ot
Captains.
Hi
CO
Hi
CO Ox
Lieutenants.
1
Ensigns.
Hi
1
Adjutant.
Hi
1
Paymaster.
Hi
1
Quartermaster.
1
Surgeon.
to
1 to
Assistants ditto.
Ox
co
CO
Serjeants and Corporals.
Hi
CO
Hi
tO Hi
Drummers and Fifers.
»-i
CO
627
91
Privates.
Hi
CO
to
145
47
Women.
to
Ox
151
103
Children.
Hi
JO
o>
CO
1013
255
Total.
Hi
I
Deputy Commis-
sary-General.
Commissariat
Staff.
Hi
1
Assistant ditto.
Ox
1
Deputy Assist-
ants ditto ditto.
1 -M
Total.
A Statement of the Army in New South Wales and its Dependencies, together with the Commissariat Staff.
Recapitulation.
Accounted for on the preceding page, 30,296
Military, 1268
Commissariat Staff,
Grand Total, 31,571 of souls.
Sydney, 25 th January , 1820. MACQUARIE.
B. M'Millan, Printer,
Bow. Street, Corent-Garden,










