

.;v/, •
S


* ■'


A LETTEK
THOMAS BARING, ESQ., M.P
ON THE
EFFECTS OF THE CALIFORNIAN AND AUSTRALIAN
GOLD DISCOVERIES, ETC.
Sir,
The distinguished position which you oc-
cupy in the City of London and in the commercial
world, will, I hope, account satisfactorily for the
liberty I take of addressing you on the subject of
the gold discoveries of the present day. The sub-
ject is, of necessity, familiar to you. It would be
superfluous to do more than allude to the large and
varied operations which constantly engage your at-
tention, and of which financial matters form so con-
spicuous a part. By connecting your name with
my subject, I shall have the certain advantage of
attracting numerous readers, stimulating new in-
quiries, and obtaining an accession of important in-
formation. The desire to arrive by these means
at the most complete knowledge of a matter, full
of interest, but also full of difficulty and obscurity,
will, I make sure, be accepted by you as an ap-
propriate apology for this letter, and secure to me
your friendly indulgence.


Permit me to add, that having been accustomed
through life to form independent opinions, I trust
that, should I run counter to those which you may
entertain, or to those of the eminent authors to
whom I have occasionally referred, as authorities
on subjects bordering on that under consideration,
no presumption will be laid to my charge.
It has appeared to me to be sufficient to use the
late Mr. Jacobs’ statements on the supply of the pre-
cious metals, &c., because easily accessible to English
readers, rather than those of later writers, who are
mostly foreigners, amongst whom Mr. Michael Che-
valier shines so prominently. This gentleman has
attained greater accuracy and usefulness than Jacobs,
by furnishing separate accounts of the precious me-
tals, a distinction which the latter did not attempt.
But in a popular essay, this distinction appears to
be unnecessary, and would multiply words _ and
figures without benefiting the argument. The pre-
sent market quotations of Silver are a proof that no
disturbance of the relative value of the two metals
is as yet in progress.
The limits of a letter would hardly justify the
parade of chapters and systematic divisions, so ad-
vantageous in extensive performances ; for the sake
of easy reference, I shall, however, prefix a number
to each paragraph, hoping that the gravity of the
subject will palliate this assumption of something
like a scientific scheme of discussion.


1. The Californian and Australian Gold-discoveries
necessarily direct attention to the effects which a
great augmentation of the precious metals may have
upon the general range of prices. This is a matter evi-
dently of great importance. An increase of the mate-
rial of which money is made, as with the increase of
other materials, indicates the possibility or probability
of a depreciation of value. Alarms of various kinds
and degrees may be said to prevail. People used to
entertain fears, that free-trade, especially in corn,
would drain the country of bullion and empty the
coffers of the Bank of England; now these parties
are alarmed, lest we should be overwhelmed with
gold, and lest the Bank should be ruined by the
purchases, she is by law obliged to make.* We are
told that the fundholders will be beggared, and fixed
incomes give no security against want; Life In-
surances, Settlements, and Annuities are believed to
be in jeopardy, and though poor men may get rich,
yet the rich are told to direct their vision to the
dismal prospect of the Poor-law Union. Antici-
pation in such cases mostly exceeds reality. It
may then not be amiss to inquire, whether such
expectations are likely to be verified. A statement
of facts that would seem fairly to bear on the ques-
tion, and of conclusions, careful examination would
seem to justify, may diminish the alarm, now so
prevalent, may point out the.road to further in-
* Appendix A.


quiry, and may somewhat facilitate the researches
of others in the same direction. Such is the object
of this letter.
11. Of the great value of the Gold discoveries
there is no longer any doubt. A mercantile circular
from San Francisco, dated the* 10th January of this
year, states the total amount of gold, exported since
the first discoveries through the Custom-houses to
the end of last year, at 180 millions of dollars, and
that taken away by passengers at half this sum, or
together about 62 millions of pounds sterling. This
quantity would amount to about one-thirtieth part
of the entire supply of bullion furnished to Europe,
since the discovery of the new world. Mr. Jacobs has
estimated the latter, in his valuable treatise on the
orecious metals, down to the year 1829, at 1458
millions of pounds sterling,* to which about 160
millions may be added for the produce of the
various mines, including the Russian Gold Mines
down to 1849, making a total supply of 1600 millions
pounds sterling, supplied in three centuries and
a-half. M. Chevalier estimates the amount near
1800 millions, but extreme accuracy is not attainable,
nor is it necessary to this investigation.
111. The experience of the great rise of prices,
during the two centuries, succeeding the discovery of
America, and concurrent with the influx of the pre-
cious metals from thence, is generally alleged as
* Appendix B.


proof presumptive of what is now to be expected.
It will be, however, made manifest that circum-
stances differ, and that we ought to be cautious in
allowing our judgment to be guided by precedent.
Before entering into these circumstances, a few pre-
liminary discussions must be allowed.
IV. Abundance and scarcity of money are ex_
pressions of daily occurrence, and the opinion that
abundance of money occasions high prices is very
prevalent. Practically this has not always, nor
even very often been the case. On the contrary,
(as has been so ably shown by Mr. Tooke,) fre"
quently, in times when money was said to be scarce,
high prices have prevailed, sometimes as the result
of speculative operations, sometimes as the conse-
quence of bad seasons and catastrophes causing actual
scarcity of commodities, not to be remedied by abun-
dance or scarcity of money. In truth it may be
taken as a rule, that scarcity of money, in its ordinary
sense, means scarcity of credit; which is likely
enough to prevail in times of high prices, by which,
in fact, it is caused; —and this consideration would
seem to establish the probability of a concurrence
of low rather than of high prices with abundance
of money, and might predispose us to believe, that
the addition of a few or even of many millions to
our circulating medium, would not necessarily raise
prices, assuming, which is not to be done without
hesitation, that the circulating medium will be
largely increased.


V. It has also been assumed, and with much
semblance of truth, that the amount of labour and
capital bestowed in the first instance, on the acquisi-
tion of the precious metals, must determine their pur-
chasing power; but this view is liable to many and
important modifications. Probably no other commo-
dity has been brought to market at so great a loss
to the producers. In mining countries this opinion
is proverbial. Mining to a great extent is but
gambling; gold digging is essentially such. The
parties engaged in these operations, rarely enter
into nice calculations of profit and loss. The har-
mony between cost and value, or price, can only
be expected to be complete, where well conceived
plans—careful application of proper means to proper
ends—have been put into operation. Even the best
plans frequently will end in disappointment, for
price does not always mean cost; the will and
power of purchasers are important elements of price.
This may be said to attach pre-eminently to the
purchasing power of the precious metals, recklessly
got and recklessly parted with, to find their ultimate
value in the world’s market, independent of life and
labour expended on their extraction from the bowels
of the earth. It is then not so much the difficulty
or facility attending the production of the precious
metals that we have to look to, as it is their intrinsic
worth, their undoubtedly great and general use-
fulness, the estimate the world sets upon them,
and the power which exists of furnishing com-


modities in exchange for them. But were we to
reason on the largest scale, and to admit that in the
long run the value of the precious metals must be
equal to their cost, the inference might be justified,
that the mass of capital and labour sunk in former
mining operations must now find its compensation
in the sustained value of the produce of the fortu-
nate finder of Californian treasure, and this would
militate against the expectation of depreciation in
the purchasing power of gold.
VI. It is also proper to inquire how far the
precious metals do really form part and parcel, and
are a measure, of what we call at present money,
or what is now the circulating medium. If every
transaction were absolutely settled for in precise
quantities of gold or silver, this inquiry would
be superfluous. This, however, is not the case.
The retail business and daily traffic of the multi-
tude we find to be universally settled with more
or less depreciated tokens according to the mint
regulations of various countries, the smaller coins
being never issued at the full value of the
established standard of the monetary measure ; in
fact, not in accordance with the measure of value
which is supposed to regulate the wholesale price of
commodities. In England a hundred pounds of tea
are bought wholesale for twenty sovereigns, but are
retailed at four hundred shillings, to which the ordi-
nary retail profit, not to be here considered, is added.


These four hundred shillings are only worth eight-
teen sovereigns, but of that discrepancy the retailer
takes no note; the general understanding is, that
they are worth twenty pounds, and this is found
sufficient for the purposes of trade. Larger tran-
sactions are paid for in cheques or notes, intrin-
sically worth nothing. National commerce is car-
ried on by means of Exchange operations. Paper
money, costing little, is an ingredient of modern
financial economy. Public funds circulate from
hand to hand, from town to town, from country
to country. It is no secret that amounts of several
millions are daily arranged in London by means
of the clearing house with a comparatively small
sum in bank notes, and without the intervention
of any coin whatsoever. These huge masses of
money tokens (to use the shortest expression) must
surely exert their peculiar influences on matters
of traffic, and must be allowed to have their share
in the prices of commodities. The precious metals
and the actually existing coin would appear to
serve chiefly—as the small amounts paid each day
in bank notes at the clearing house—to settle ba-
lances. They may be found to be only measures
of value, without giving value, and we may not
perhaps be far wrong in looking upon them much
in the light in which we regard other measures ; the
pound, for instance, and the bushel, the greater or less
number of which in use, would not alter the weight


or bulk of the commodities to be weighed or mea-
sured. At all events, except on some grand and
universal settling day, hardly to be imagined and
not likely to occur, on which every man would
call in all outstanding demands and have them paid
in money of full intrinsic value, the measure of the
precious metals as money will necessarily remain
very indefinite ; on such a settling day the precious
metals would no doubt be found to be scarce, bear
a high value, and could most likely not be furnished
to anything like the amount required.
VII. These preliminary observations ought, it
would appear, to satisfy the inquirer that prices do
not regulate themselves according to the amount of
the precious metals existing, the cost of their pro-
duction or the proportion they may bear to the vast
amount of money tokens now in use. Upon the
supposition, however, that prices of commodities do
fluctuate in some strict ratio to the increase or de-
crease of these metals, and according to the prece-
dents of times in some measure parallel to ours, a
vast array of fads would be requisite to justify a
solution that might be deemed satisfactory. A few
of these facts will now be indicated, and it will
become manifest that they cannot be supplied either
easily or completely. But, as in the result mathe-
matical precision is not obtainable, so also is it not
requisite in the premises. Provided the latter be
sufficiently precise to justify a judgment of their


1500.
1852.
Population of the civilised world
60 millions
300 millions.
Millions Sterling.
Millions Sterling.
Stock of Coin ....
34
405
Stock of Plate, Ornaments, and
other accumulations of gold and
Silver .....
40?
550 ?
Amount of Paper Money, Bills of
Exchange, and National Debts
9
3000
Value of realised Property
9
9
Power of production
9
9
tendencies, we must be content. The alarm itself
has not yet assumed the shape of a numerical ratio;
no one has as yet ventured to value the apprehended
depreciation in figures. Generalities must suffice
where specific data are beyond our reach, and gene-
ral conclusions may admit of many exceptions with-
out being in the main erroneous. Temporary fluc-
tuations and casual departures from the expected
course of events ought not to militate against infer-
ences fairly drawn from obtainable data, and con-
clusions arrived at by means of a candid process of
reasoning. In these days no one would aim at
solving a difficult problem by peremptory dog-
matisms.
VIII. It would be very desirable to have the
blanks in the following table filled up accurately:—
The signs of interrogation speak for themselves;
most of these items are beyond conjecture. Yet
how can any calculation, such as is now under con-


templation, be accomplished without them? In-
crease of commodities would surely vary in its effects
in some ratio or other, according to already existing
quantities. And if the increase of Gold is to act
according to the same rules, the quantities pre-
viously existing, the number of recipients, the power
of production of commodities against which it is to
exchange, in fact, the opposing forces should be
clearly comprehended, not only as now in opera-
tion, but, if we go by precedent, as formerly exist-
ino-. Now, if all these data were furnished with
O 7
the nicest accuracy, one might fondly hope to de-
termine the future course of prices by means of an
elaborate algebraical equation; but the following
brief chronicle of the prices of wheat, stocks, and
coined money, from the beginning of the 16th cen-
tury down to our times, chiefly extracted from
Mr. Jacobs’ valuable work, will induce us to put
little faith in such calculations :
Stock of Gold Prices of Population of
and Silver Coin. Wheat. England and Wales.
Years 1500 34 millions Bs. 3,000,000
1600 130
1700 226
1809 380
1829 313
1849 315
1852 405
275. 3,600,000
365. 5,500,000
115s. 10,000,000
82s. 12,800,000
445. 18,000,000
425. 18,500,000
IX. The prices of wheat -are generally assumed
to be the best measure of the purchasing power of


the precious metals, and this need not be disputed,
when spread over considerable periods, and if we
could but believe them to be accurately recorded,
and to result from a state of affairs public and pri-
vate, somewhat analogous to what we are accus-
tomed to. Towards the close of the 15th century
wheat was particularly low, —below the previous and
subsequent average prices. Towards the middle, or
rather in the latter half of the 16th century, prices
rose materially and steadily. It is generally as-
sumed, that about 1650 prices had reached their
maximum, as far as they were influenced by the
influx of the precious metals. Subsequent rises and
fluctuations may be accounted for on the score of
other and well understood influences. The large
accession of gold and silver, (Appendix B.) after
that period has not left any traces of manifest in-
fluence on prices. On the contrary, some curious
anomalies have occurred in this respect even within
our own memory. In 1809 war and bad seasons, in
1829 bad seasons and the sliding scale, carried up
the prices of wheat to a great height. In the first
of these years, according to Jacobs, the production
of the precious metals had reached its maximum ;
but in England there was little bullion, the Bank
had suspended cash payments, paper money ruled
paramount, the guinea sold at a nominal sum far
beyond its legal value, and small coin of no value
whatsoever, constituted the only metallic money of
the country. In 1829, on the other hand, these


abuses had been rectified, but strange to say, that year
is set down as the year of the minimum production
and stock, of the precious metals. In contradistinc-
tion to these two instances, prices were extremely
low in 1822, when cash payment being just resumed,
the stock of bullion was large in England; and again
in 1834, when the stock of bullion was moderate,
and a duty of 30s. or upwards effectually checked
all foreign supplies. Such manifest aberrations from
the course, popular opinions about the influence of
bullion would imply, may raise some doubts as to
the actual influence of the influx of the precious
metals on prices during the 16th century. Other
causes may have been at work, now to us probably
occult.
X. It has been said before, that circumstances
have altered. They have indeed altered. Powers
of production, formerly unknown and unsuspected,
have sprung into life, and will be found to con-
stitute opposing forces of singular magnitude to this
Californian invasion. The limits of this letter will
not admit of fully illustrating so interesting a
topic; a few hints only will be given. It will, no
doubt, be readily conceded, that the equilibrium
between the precious metals and commodities, if the
production of both were to progress at an equal pace,
would at all events not be disturbed; —that commo-
dities of which the supply keeps fully pace with the
demand, cannot rise in price;—and that those com-
modities of which the supply exceeds the demand


and the ratio at which the precious metals are pro-
duced, might still fall in price, whatever be the
supply of bullion. These axioms it will be profit-
able to bear in mind, whilst the extent of the present
powers of production is under consideration.
XI. The fundamental cause of the vastly increased
power of production must be sought in the totally al-
tered state of society. During the middle ages, and in
the 15th and beginning of the 16th century, the feu-
dal system with its serfdom and vassalage prevailed
over all Europe;—the great business of life was war ;
—labour was dishonourable and unhonoured; traffic
contemptible; industry unprotected. It is needless
to extend this picture of the past; to put the present
in contrast with it will supply all deficiences. In our
days, labour has won for itself an honourable station,
and perfect freedom ; traffic and commerce have as-
sumed a high rank ; industry is respected ; idleness
condemned; considered an evil rather to be
eschewed than endured, certainly not desired or en-
couraged. Science and art, carried rapidly forward
on the road to perfection, are applied to useful and
profitable purposes. Steam and machinery upheld
by capital, system, division of labour and mutual sup-
port, enable ingenuity to perform marvels of enter-
prise. The results are truly astounding. Mankind
has certainly increased its wants and enjoyments;
but has assumed, as it were, an instinctive bee-like
activity, a pressure from within, an ability to antici-
pate, to outrun every demand, to furnish old or new


necessaries, conveniences and luxuries in never-
failing supplies, far beyond the power of consump-
tion, Though we are without records of what was ,
yet a glance at what now is will bear out this as-
sertion. Of most of the few commodities of which we
present the annual production, no traces are to be
found in the annals of the commerce of the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, and some were not yet
known bv name.
Present yearly production of Sugar 1,300,000
Coffee 300,000
Cotton 700,000
Tobacco 400,000
Tea 50,000
Iron 4,000,000
(Probably raised in the United Kingdom) Coal - 50,000,000
XII. The modern relations between demand and
supply deserve more special notice. It may seem
paradoxical to assert, that the wants of three hun-
dred millions are satisfied with greater facility than
those of sixty millions. Nevertheless, this is incon-
testibly the fact, and great demand has become an
essential cause and condition of abundance and cheap-
ness ; great demand secures the world against want,
nay, it furnishes to multitudes enjoyments which
they could not otherwise obtain. No one, no sove-
reign could individually enjoy the luxury of a news-
paper, —not even Her most Gracious Majesty, if
thousands of copies had not become a matter of daily
necessity to her subjects. The cheap convenience


of the omnibus can only be afforded where thou-
sands, or hundreds of thousands stand in hourly
need of it. If, some three hundred years ago, a
gentleman meant to journey to Oxford, he would
probably have required three horses, one for him-
self and a couple for his attendants, and it would
take him at least forty-eight hours to reach the end
of his journey. But in our days two men will carry
six hundred travellers that distance in less than
two hours. The progress in this instance —the
supply consequent upon demand—might be ex-
pressed by the formula - x 600 equal to 14,400,
omitting altogether from this calculation the com-
forts of railway travelling, so superior to a ride on
horseback, with saddle-bags, bad roads, the fear
of highwaymen, and other unpleasant accessories.
Nor will any one be disposed to deny, that, the
greater the multitude of travellers, the greater will
be the readiness and ability, and the smaller the
cost attending this important service. Here great
demand indeed causes great cheapness. Again,
that marvellous contrivance, the Post Office, affords
facilities and renders services not dreamt of at the
time of the discovery of America. The late improve-
ments in this public establishment further bear out
the assertion, that great demand not only allows
of, but causes, great cheapness. There is no chance
—unless the numbers of letters were greatly to
decrease —of the postage ever being raised above
the present rate, the smallest coin of the realm ;


at which rate it promises soon with daily in-
creasing facilities to furnish a large revenue to
the state. In manufacturing processes advances
quite as marvellous have been made. It is said
that six hundred millions of people could not
make by hand the quantity of cotton goods which
Manchester annually furnishes ; yet cotton spinning
only employs about 24,000 people in Lancashire.
One of the many pen manufacturers at Birmingham
states that he has produced last year 120 millions
of steel pens. Could the honest bird, that elabo-
rates on the pleasant village green its dozen of
quills in twelve months, comprehend economical
science , what would be its surprise at this enormous
advance upon its primitive mode of supplying us
with pens. Another manufacturer states that he
makes three millions of percussion caps in the
week. Where he finds a market for such quantities
is beyond comprehension These instances might
be multiplied ; in every branch of industry, ad-
mitting of the application of capital, system, divi-
sion of labour, order and regularity, with the ad-
vantage of large and constant demand for the
produce, similar results are obtained. It seems
hard to believe that any conceivable influx of bullion
can alter this state of things; it could only increase
demand, calling forth increased power of produc-
tion, larger and progressively cheaper supplies *
* Appendix D.


XIII. But some, who have gone so far along
with these views, might make a stand, when their
attention is directed to the produce of the soil. To
this they might see a limit, either on the simple
ground of past experience, or in accordance with
those subtle theories that have immortalised their
authors, fixing a limit to the increase of mankind
through the limitation of the increase of food accord-
ing to some exact mathematical rule. That may be
so, when this our globe shall be fully peopled; as
yet it is not. Agriculture seems just to be starting
into new life, calling in chemistry and mechanics to
push it onwards. There may be a limit to produc-
tion, but it has not yet been attained. Whilst the
population of these realms, increasing faster than any
other, progresses at the utmost at the rate of \\ per
cent, per annum, it may perchance happen, that
with the aid of competition, science, art, mechanical
power, guano, and the sewerage of towns (a vast
saving of waste) land shall increase its produce at
the rate of 1- or even 2 per cent. Agriculture has
no doubt progressed for some years past at a much
greater rate. In Great Britain the extent of land is
circumscribed; yet much remains unreclaimed. But
other countries have unbounded tracts unoccupied,
and admit of an increase of produce, difficult for any
per centage of increase of population to overtake.
If it be true that three men and four boys are an
ample allowance for the labour of a hundred acres of
land, and can in fact produce as much bread as is


consumed by four or five hundred people, the chance
of a rise of agricultural produce from any cause
other than bad seasons seems to be but small. The
fear of our landowners and farmers appears to be
altogether in the direction of low, not of high prices.
Turning from grain to other agricultural produce,
to flax, hemp, cotton, sugar, or cattle, those best
acquainted with these matters will readily admit
that the slightest advance of prices would largely
increase supplies. The same principles seem to
apply in all these cases. Demand insures abun-
dance and cheapness.
XIV. But although the number of consumers
generally can hardly be conceived to increase at a
faster rate than they do in Great Britain, yet it
might so happen that individually they might in-
crease their enjoyments. A progress of this kind
has manifested itself in a remarkable manner in
*
the last ten years, during which some of the chief
articles paying duty, have annually outstripped the
growth of population by three or four per cent.*
But this it would seem must have occurred, had no
California yielded its treasures. Of the quantity
of gold arrived on our shores but little has re-
mained here; the stock of bullion at the bank is
now barely two millions more than it was in Decem-
ber, 1849. It has passed through England as through
a sieve. Of what has remained we have not heard,
Appendix C.


that distribution has been made by any munificent
hand amongst the labouring classes. An actual
rise of wages is denied to have taken place. Then
how can Californian Gold have caused the growing
consumption now under consideration ? Had that
been occasioned by some specific enterprise, some
new employment of labour on a large scale,
affecting the working-classes to some considerable
extent, suppose as much as the construction of
railways of late years, the question would have
its answer. But nothing of the kind has hap-
pened. Complaints of want of life in business,
well or ill-founded, have been general. It is,
however of importance to the present argument to
state, that the railway enterprises had but a passing
effect on wages, and have left us with larger sup-
plies of produce, without exception at prices lower
than before. The improved condition manifest
through'increased consumption beyond the numeri-
cal increase of the people, points to no tendency of
decrease in the purchasing power of the precious
metals.
XV. It is stated (VIII.), that the inhabitants of
the civilised world amount to 300 millions. It will
require much gold, to admit of the addition of but
one sovereign to the yearly expenditure of the in-
dividuals, who constitute the humblest and most
numerous ranks of this mass, but other candidates
will put in claims for their share of the treasure.
There are T2O millions in India under Brilisli sway,


just passing the threshold of freedom and security—
hitherto unknown to them —acquiring habits of
civilisation and industry; they will offer the produce
of their labour in growing and huge amounts on
the markets of the world. Their desire for the pre-
cious metals is as intense as ours, perhaps more so.
China also with her 300 millions of busy inhabi-
tants is opening to the influences of European com-
merce and civilisation, and will not cease to furnish
her tea, her silk, and her many other commodities to
the world, that she may obtain her share in the
general scramble. Thus production progressing at
some unknown geometrical ratio far beyond the
numerical increase of mankind, is ever and every-
where on the rack, to tempt the owners of treasure
old or new to exchanges; it is an incessant and un-
tired bidder for the precious metals, and promises to
allay all alarm concerning their too great accumula-
tion and consequent depreciation.
XVI. The inherent worth of these metals fur-
nishes a ready solution of the phenomenon of this
general eagerness; they differ essentially from other
commodities in being durable, indestructible, —per-
manency is their distinguishing stamp. Of their
other excellent qualities it is not necessary here to
speak. The use of every thing else implies destruc-
tion ; —not used, time performs that office. Not such
is the nature of gold and silver. These do not cor-
rode, neither do they decay; they are not devoured
by vermin,—they do not become food for worms,


Neither fire nor water affect them. Like other pro-
duce, they are the produce of labour. They too are
brought forth by the sweat of the brow. Further
than this the analogy does not hold good. Destruc-
tion overtakes the one, perpetuity belongs to the
others They have this innate quality in preference
over all other things human, and that will cause
their ever being wanted in exchange for other, for
perishable fruits of human industry. The owner of
gold may waste profit, but his substance will remain
unimpaired, and however long he may keep it dor-
mant, the unprofitable steward is sure to find his
talent safe and unchanged to the last. As long as
mankind shall continue to extend its care and anxie-
ties beyond the pressure of the moment these durable
substances will be eagerly sought for. In this pecu-
liar quality another weighty argument may be found
against the apprehended depreciation.
XVII. Nevertheless, although the precious metals
are in their nature and essence indestructible, man
will use, waste, and hide them, and thus check very
materially the accumulation of the growing supply.
Manufacturing and chemical processes, and plate
for domestic purposes take oft’ a large portion. Hu-
man jaws may be said to devour half a million of
sovereigns in London alone, if it be true, as has been
stated, that this amount is used every year by our
dentists. The wear and tear of coin, though im-
perceptible in short periods, occasions a large waste,
as the present state of much of the existing money


demonstrates. In countries, where liberty and se-
curity are not fully established, large quantities are
hoarded. To escape plunder, official or ex-official,
poverty is assumed. Absence of locks and keys pro-
claim destitution. But the earth becomes in such
cases the savings’ bank. Millions of money buried
in her lap tell no tales, and in the majority of
cases never, or at least only accidentally after a long
lapse of time, she gives up these deposits, —rarely to
the rightful heir. The amount of all these items
has been variously stated at five to eight millions in
the year. Whatever it be, increase of supply is not
likely to prevent these processes. Luxury and avarice
will not be checked by abundance. It would then
seem, that whilst the innate worth of the precious
metals secures a constant and eager market for
them, these various practices and abuses perpetually
abstract from the superfluity, and tend to preserve
the purchasing powers of the remainder.
XVIII. A hasty recapitulation of the foregoing
suggestions may facilitate the inferences to be drawn
from them. The large amount of new treasure
admits of no dispute (II) ; but we must not form
our judgment on this single fact, nor on the ex-
periences of former times (III). Abundance of
money does not necessarily constitute a higher range
of prices (IV.) ; the purchasing powers of the pre-
cious metals seem to stand in no direct relation to
their cost of production (V.) ; and these metals are
but a small and indefinite part of the great mass


of circulating medium (VI.) Even if precedent
were to be our guide, the records of former times
are obscure (VII.); their correctness and the in-
ferences drawn from them may be fairly questioned
(VIII.); and analogy is not to be trusted, when in
our days, very anomalous fluctuations of prices have
run counter to popular opinion or theoretical deduc-
tions (IX). Altered circumstances, though they do
not militate against the ordinary principles regulat-
ing demand and supply (X.), exhibit society altoge-
ther under new aspects (XL) Production, as it
proceeds in modern times, is stimulated by demand
into a kind of self-propagating power, furnishing
progressively more abundant and cheaper supplies,
not only of articles of manufacture (XII.), but of
raw produce and food, by improvement and exten-
sion of culture (XIII.). Even the general and con-
siderable increase of consumption in England be-
yond the numerical growth of the people, has been
accompanied by larger supplies and lower prices
(XIV.) India and China add new producers, and
therefore new purchasers of the precious metals to
those that are considered to constitute the civilized
world (XV.) Finally, the inherent worth of these
metals, which is indestructibility (XVI.), and their
use and waste in various ways (XVII), must have
considerable weight in this inquiry.
XIX. Such an array of opposing forces to the
apprehended depreciation must justify doubts as to
its being realized. The only argument in favour of


it is an indistinct sentiment that it ought to occur,
because there is really a large addition to the pre-
cious metals. As yet, no symptoms of depreciation
are perceptible. Even at the very head quarters of
the El Dorado, at San Francisco, prices of com-
modities have settled down according to ordinary
commercial experience and rule. The gold-finder
prefers his treasure to merchandise he does not
stand in need of. Mercantile advices are replete
with caution as to shipments. Wages of labour
have receded to a moderate figure of two or three
dollars a day, which is no improvement upon what
can be got in the United States or England, con-
sidering the nature of the labour, and the expense
of getting there. Agricultural pursuits are in
favour, and the wants of a growing community
will, no doubt, be met by increasing and cheaper
supplies. Turning from California to the United
States, it will be found that there abundance and
cheapness is the order of the day. Their markets
are overstocked, and notwithstanding a largely pro-
gressing consumption, prices are as low as in every
other country. Gold comes in in large quantities,
only to depart as fast as it comes. In England,
notwithstanding the alarms of depreciation, com-
plaints run all in the opposite direction. Commo-
dities are too cheap. The mercantile and shipping
interest, agriculturists, landowners, every party pro-
fesses to be selling at a loss, and all hope of improved
prices has apparently been abandoned. Of the con-


tinent, it is not necessary to speak. Empty treasu-
ries, and impoverished and discontented people are
reported to be the one universal family feature.
Whether they have abundance or scarcity on the
continent, it is indifferent to know ; prices, where
not kept up by monopoly, as in the case of beet-root
sugar, are low enough; where bread is dear, bad
seasons, and not the abundance of gold are known
to have caused the rise of prices.
XX. Nevertheless, the possibility of an ovewhelm-
ing supply of gold is not to be overlooked. The sup-
position that gold may become as abundant as tin
and iron, is somewhat startling, and causes a species
of involuntary alarm. Would gold then become as
cheap as iron? Would a ton now coined into
127,195 sovereigns, purchase no more, than a ton
of iron which now costs five ? What ought to be
the supply of gold to effect such a revolution ? This
inquiry may be left to more curious speculators. It
is not possible to guess what would—but it is pos-
sible to show, what quantity will not produce such
effects. Sixty-two millions from California in less
than three years, with ten millions from Russia, and
probably thirty from other sources, the latter chiefly
silver, together one hundred and five millions, or
thirty-eight millions annually, have not affected
the general range of prices,—these have mostly
been declining. Recurring to the railway mania,
it will be found that, if not in bullion, yet in money,
an amount little short of two hundred and fifty mil-


lions, of which about two-thirds in England were
disbursed in five years, from 1843 to 1848, without
any permanent effect on prices of commodities. No
deficiency of labour for other purposes was ex-
perienced. The puzzle is, what the parties con-
cerned in the construction of railways would have
done with their labour and materials, if this vent
had not been found? To take another view, and
using the information, Mr. Jacobs has so amply
afforded, the supply of the precious metals in the
three centuries succeeding the discovery of America
was, —
In the 16th century 138 millions pounds sterling.
17th „ 337
18th „ 800 „ - „
and at this ratio our present century ought to have
a supply of (337 : 800 = 800 : 1908) 1908 millions
pounds sterling. So far, however, only 445 mil-
lions have been furnished, leaving a balance due of
1463 millions, which spread over forty nine years,
would make an annual sum of thirty millions neces-
sary, that this century may be closed in respect
to the precious metals analogous to the last. But
considering the accelerating rapidity of increase in the
population, an additional two-thirds, in round num-
bers fifty millions per annum, will in reality do no
more than preserve the equilibrium. As eight hun-
dred did not in the last, so 2800 million would prob-
ably not in the present century disturb the range of
prices. By the end of this century the population
of the civilized world will most likely have doubled,


and will be four times what it was at its beginning;
Great Britain will contain sixty millions of people,
London upwards of five millions of inhabitants. The
production of commodities will have enormously in-
creased ; so will the demand for the precious metals.
An annual average supply of fifty millions will pro-
bably be found not to have had any of the effects
now apprehended. The powers of production, stimu-
lated by great demand, bearing within themselves
the germ of further production and greater cheap-
ness, will have outstripped the imagined effects even
of this gigantic amount.
XXI. It would thus appear, that no present or pro-
bable supply of the precious metals is likely to de-
preciate their purchasing power, or to affect the
general range of prices in an upward direction. On
the contrary, promising to stimulate the enormous
productive powers of our days to further progress,
one might feel disposed to believe that prices would
generally still fall. Temporary and local causes
will not cease to have their usual influences upon
prices, but experience has shown that such circum-
stances leave no lasting traces. But should this
conclusion not be borne out by the event, —should
the increasing mass of gold and silver exhibit an
unexpected and overpowering influence—should it
have an irresistible tendency to realise popular ex-
pectations —it is not unlikely, that the first symptom
of this phenomenon would be a general and steady
rise of the interest of money , because lenders would
expect a premium, as it Vere of insurance, beyond


the rate charged for the use of money, to compen-
sate them for the loss of purchasing power in the
interval between loan and repayment. Admitting
the premises, this conclusion cannot be avoided,
though it certainly does not correspond with the
general expectations that money must now be abun-
dant and cheap. There would be plenty of bor-
rowers, but few lenders of money. There would
be few sellers, but plenty of buyers of real property.
Public funds would cease to be a favourite invest-
ment. Wages of labour would advance, unskilled
probably before skilled. On the same principle,
commodities entirely the product of nature, such as
furs or timber, would advance in the first instance
in price. Considering the enormous mass of things
to be affected, such a revolution would, however, at
best be very slow, and not to be compared with the
fluctuations, the offspring of ordinary vicissitudes
of commerce. Supposing, for instance, that wheat
were to rise, through this influx of gold, to double
its present price by the end of the century, that
would only amount to about tenpence the quarter
in the year. A rainy week at harvest time has
raised it as many shillings in a few days.
XXII. Yet will these events probably affect the
destinies of mankind marvellously, and future his-
torians will have to record our time as the beginning
of revolutions more mighty than those that were
ushered in by the printing press, the discovery of
the New World, and the Reformation. Consider-
ing that it is 350 years since Europe found its way


to the American continent, one might say that we
had made a poor use of this great discovery, and
allowed it to lie fallow. Room was found for a
thousand millions of human beings; the time elapsed
would have sufficed, at a low rate of increase, to
multiply the human race to far more than that, had
the energies wasted in destroying mankind through
war and strife, been devoted to the peaceful pur-
suits which California and Australia are now call-
ing into vigorous action.
XXIII. That many interests will be benefittedby
these discoveries cannot be doubted, and need not
be disputed. Emigration will be on the increase,
and that will, for instance, vastly benefit the ship-
ping interest, but then ships will be built in greater
numbers, of larger size and of better construction,
that is, ship-room will soon be supplied in in-
creasing abundance, and therefore at lower rates;
the fears of shipowners as already said, do not point
to a rise in the value of their property. A similar
conclusion will be arrived at, whatever commodities
may be subjected to such a scrutiny.
Having now brought this inquiry to a close, 1
have only to apologise for the imperfect manner
in which it will, no doubt, be found to have been
conducted, and
I remain, with sincere respect,
Sir, your most obedient servant,
The Author.
London, March, 1852.


APPENDIX A.
Very indistinct notions are afloat on the subject of the Bank
and Mint regulations respecting gold, whence so much is said
about the price of gold; though there is, in truth, no such price.
The process of coinage is nothing but an accurate division of a
given quantity of gold into smaller parts, in the same manner in
which a quarter of wheat is divided into bushels, or a tun of
merchandize into hundred weights and pounds. At the legal rate
of 31. 1 7s. 10 \d. (miscalled the Mint price) per oz. of standard
gold, 800 ounces of such gold are divided or coined into 3115
sovereigns, which weigh exactly 800 ounces, and are equal in all
times and at all places to that quantity exactly, and neither more
nor less; the change is in the division and shape, the weight
and value remaining unaltered. So much for what is called the
Mint price.
As regards the Bank, this institution by law is obliged to pur-
chase all standard gold offered to it, at the rate of 31. 1 7s. 9d.,
that is to say, it has to pay for 800 ounces of gold of standard
fineness exactly, 311 in sovereigns or notes. That is 51. less
on this quantity, than the actual value. These 51. are a com-
pensation to the Bank for the accommodation afforded to the
public, and for trouble and loss of time if the Bank sees fit to
send the gold for coinage to the Mint. It is a small compensa-
tion certainly, but still it is a profit to the Bank, and the latter
can only be a gainer, whatever the quantity of standard gold it
may be forced to purchased at this rate. The public on the other
hand, not being obliged to sell to the Bank, therein may entirely
suit its own convenience, and give the preference to any other
buyer. These regulations appear to be as far as the Bank is con-


cerned as perfect as possible; they combine great simplicity with
ease and advantage to every party interested in the matter. What
is said or written about the price of gold and danger to the Bank,
is simply delusion arising from a total misapprehension of the
facts.
The Bank may and does purchase and sell other gold not of
standard fineness, and foreign gold coin, but on terms fixed by
agreement, and without reference to the law, which has solely re-
ference to standard gold.
This perhaps too circumstantial explanation appeared neces-
sary. It is to be hoped that it will serve to relieve us of the
mass of nonsense promulgated in several public prints about
this matter.
Whether our mint regulations shall not undergo some change,
may be a question. On the first blush it appears unreasonable,
that the British Government should supply all the world, not
only its own subjects, free of charge with an excellent coinage.
It is, however, not unlikely, that to a certain extent, the perfec-
tion of the coin repays in a silent, unobserved manner its full
cost. I recollect having sold in Moscow a considerable number
of new sovereigns at more than 10 per cent, above their intrinsic
value, entirely on account of the beauty and perfection of the
coin. But suppose some large importer of foreign gold brought
so many millions, that the Mint were to be monopolised by it for
an entire year or longer? To such proceedings a limit would
have to be placed, or private coining under an efficient Govern-
ment control would have to be substituted. Eminent men are
frequently in advance of their age. Probably no one was so
much so on this subject as the late Mr. Ricardo, when he pro-
posed to stamp ingots of sixty ounces for the larger circulation,
or as deposits against notes; in California they have eight-cor-
nered pieces weighing two, three, or six ounces, a species of
rough-and-ready coinage, which, without government inter-
ference, nevertheless appears to be struck accurately and to the
satisfaction of the go a-head people of this El Dorado.


Produce of mines in 100 years ..
87,000,000
337,500,000
Transferred to India and China, partly by the
Philippine islands ..
424,500,000
33,250,000
391,250,000
APPENDIX B.
Account of the supply and consumption of the precious metals
according to Mr. Jacobs :
Millions of Pounds sterling.
Stock of current money existing in Europe at the
time of the discovery of America .. .. 34,000,000
Produced in the subsequent 112 years, making
allowance for natural wear and tear .. 138,000,000
1-72,000,000
Deducting what was conveyed to Asia, and what
is assumed to have been applied to the pur-
poses of commodities of all kinds .. .. 42,000,000
Would leave a stock of gold and silver coins in
Europe at the end of the year 1599 .. 130,000,000
From which deduct by abrasion and loss in the
course of a century to the end of 1699 .. 43,000,000
Deduct a fifth, converted to other objects than coin 60,250,000
331,000,000
Deduct further, for loss by wear and tear, &c. .. 34,000,000


Millions of Pounds sterling.
Stock of gold and silver coin at the end of the
year 1699 297,000,000
From which deduct by abrasion and loss in 109
years, to the year 1809 71,000,000
226,000,000
Produce of the mines from 1700 to 1809 .. 880,000,000
1,106,000,000
From which deduct for the trade of Asia, &c. .. 352,000,000
754.000.
For which may be supposed to have been applied
to other purposes than coin 352,000,000
402.000.
From which must be further deducted for wear and
tear 22,000,000
Leaving at the end of 1809 a stock of gold and
silver coin of .. .. .. .. 380,000,000
Of which deduct for loss by abrasion, at the rate of
one part in 420 in each year during 20 years 18,095,220
361.904.780
To which add the supply from the mines to the
year 1829 103,736,000
465.640.780
From which deduct for trade of Asia ~ ~ 40,000,000
425.640.780
Deduct further, supposed to have been applied to
other purposes than coin, &c. .. .. 112,252,220
Stock of gold and silver coin at the end of 1829,
therefore 313,388,560


Sugar, tons
212,773
329,315
5i
°2
per cent.
Cocoa, lbs.
1,930,764
3,024,338
°2
)>
Tea, lbs.
36,396,078
53,965,112
7 6
99
Timber, loads
1,103,374
2,037,077
H
99
Tobacco, lbs.
22,308,385
27,862,978
2 3
99
Coffee, lbs.
28,420,980
32,564,164
1*
99
Wine, gallons
6,460,018
6,554,429
No material increase.
APPENDIX C.
ARTICLES CLEARED FOR HOME CONSUMPTION.
1841, 1851. Increase pei Annum.
GOODS PAYING EXCISE DUTY RETAINED FOR
HOME CONSUMPTION.
1841. 1851, Increase per Annum,
Malt, bushels 35,656,713 40,337,412 percent.
Paper, lbs. 97,103,548 142,597,945 per cent.
Soap, lbs. 170,280,641 191,712,051 1} per cent.
APPENDIX D.
The progress of civilisation discloses mankind under new and
unexpected aspects. Rightly considered, it would appear that all
men might produce and vast numbers do produce a great deal
more, than they consume; hence the vast accumulation of pro-
perty. Mutual assistance, designedly given in private or public
enterprises, —or unconsciously, as in large cities or communities,
further enlarges the powers of production. Consumption on the


other hand, proceeds on different principles. No individual can
in his own person consume much more than another. No one can
eat more than one dinner and a few accessory meals in a day ; nor
wear out more than two or three suits of clothes in a year.
Beyond that, setting aside waste, not very common in civilised
society, expenditure implies the maintenance of others, useless or
otherwise as the case may be. The tendency of civilisation is
again less towards the useless than useful maintainance of others.
An African petty sovereign will have his thousands of attendants,
his harem of five thousand black beauties, his herds of slaves,
executioners and the like, deemed necessary to his regal state. In
wasteful expenditure he outstrips the sovereigns of more civilised
nations. The wealth and influence of the latter are used for better
purposes, and progressively more so. Men of station and rank
now lead the way in great and useful enterprises, and devote their
time and means to beneficial purposes. They have greater satis-
faction, we may suppose, in erecting a bridge or constructing a
railway, than in building a palace. Such is pre-eminently the case
in England. Thus we might say, that whilst production leads to-
wards constant extension, consumption diverges in the opposite
direction of curtailment. There is another feature of civilisation
to be noticed, namely, the vast amount of enterprise promoted by
association. These associations have a tendency towards a kind
of healthy communism, allowing every man according to his
means, to partake of the profits of every kind of enterprise, and
turning the community gradually into a species of mutual aid
and general assurance society, satisfactory to every one and with-
out danger, rather replete with security, to the State.
Effingham Wilson, Printer, 11, Royal Exchange.


►


'
