

THE SANDWICH AND BONIN ISLANDS.
A LETTER
TO A
NOBLE LORD,
ON THE IMPORTANCE OF SETTLING
THE SANDWICH & BONIN ISLANDS,
IN THE NORTH PACIFIC OCEAN,
ON THE PLAN OF A PROPRIETARY GOVERNMENT;
TOGETHER WITH
HINTS
ON THE PROBABILITY, IN THAT CASE, OF INTRODUCING
British Manufactures
INTO THE
GREAT EMPIRE OF JAPAN.
By T. HORTON JAMES, Esq.
LONDON:
PRINTED BY W. TEW,
34, QUEEN STREET, CHEAPSIDE, NEAR SOUTHWARK BRIDGE.
1832.




A LETTER, &c.
16, Great Trinity Lane,
London, 22nd August, 1832.
My Lord,
Having lately arrived from a voyage
round the world, and spent some months among the
Sandwich Islands in the North Pacific Ocean, I cannot
resist the temptation of urging to the Government the
desirableness that such a valuable group should become, as
soon as possible, substantially a British Possession.
Ever since our illustrious countryman (53 years ago)
completed this last and noblest of his discoveries, the
Sandwich Islands have been gradually retrograding in
happiness, population and productions; and from 400,000
fine athletic people in Cook’s time, they have now dwindled
down to about 75,000 souls, hardly able to obtain food,
and groaning under a Missionary tyranny of American
enthusiasts, worse even than that of Dr. Francia, in
Paraguay.
There can be no doubt that, but for the fatal accident at
Karakakooa Bay, on the 14th February, 1779, which
deprived the world of our great Navigator, these superb
Islands would many years since have been entirely British ;
for, had Cook lived to have returned to England, he must
have recommended the immediate settlement of them to the
then Ministry. Accordingly, since Cook’s time, by whose
splendid talents they became ours by right of discovery,
Vancouver in 1792 obtained the written and formal cession
A


of them to Great Britain from the then principal Chief,
Tamahameah. But it was neither the good fortune of
Cook, nor even of Vancouver, to discover that which now
forms the most important feature in the value of this fine
cluster of Islands; viz. the Harbour of Honoruru in the
Island of Woahoo, and although this Island ranks only
third in point of size, yet when its fine Haven is considered,
it is decidedly the most valuable of them all. All Navigators
had concurred in the superior fertility, greenness and beauty
of Woahoo; but it is only a few years since that the narrow
channel was discovered, leading to what the natives call
Honoruru or “ Fair Haven,” where there is water enough
at low spring tides for a frigate to enter with perfect safety;
and within a natural Dock, capable of containing 50 to
100 square rigged vessels, besides small craft, free from
every danger.
To shew the importance of the discovery of this Harbour,
I need only state, that there is no other place where a ship
can be hove down, within 3000 miles. In addition to this fact,
I have compiled a List of Arrivals of Shipping, for one year,
in this Port of Honoruru, (the year 1830) exhibiting the
names of 131 large vessels, amounting to 41,000 tons,
entering the Port either for the purposes of trade, refresh-
ment or repairs; an amount in this remote Island that would
do credit to many Ports of Europe, averaging, as it does,
100 tons per day, and upwards. In this List you will
observe that the large proportion of ships are American,
and employed in the American Fishery for Spermaceti
Whales, which the English participate in only to a very
trifling degree; the Americans being in the proportion of
about five to one of English.
The principal Islands forming the cluster of the Sandwich
Islands, you are aware, are as follows; viz.—
OWHYHEE, the first and largest, being two thirds as
large as Jamaica, and exactly the size of Corsica, containing


4000 square miles, and about 50,000 inhabitants, dispersed
principally along the Leeward Coast. It contains two lofty
mountains, each higher than the Peak of Teneriffe, and the
crater of a volcano of the most stupendous and terrific
character: but unfortunately there are only two spots that
can be called Harbours; viz. the Hides on the East, where
H. M. Ship Blonde, Captain Lord Byron, lately anchored;
and Toyeah on the North West; but the beauty, soil and
capability of the Island are inferior to none in the whole
world: and at Toyeah there is a plain of 70,000 acres
ready for the plough. There are several American Mission-
aries here. The next in size is
MOWEE, a splendid and lofty Island, as large as all the
French West India Islands put together. It contains at this
present time about 14,000 persons collected along the coast,
especially at Laheina, a tolerably good Roadstead. There is
a plain in Mowee of most excellent land, containing 50,000
acres, without a tree, and ready for the plough. There is
an American Missionary also here of great influence, and so
much involved in trade, that he will not allow any white
person to remain on the Island, for fear he should oppose
him in the sale of fire-wood and articles for the refreshment
of vessels, of which there are generally ten or a dozen at
anchor in the season.
The next in point of size, although the first of all in
importance, on account of its excellent Harbour, is called
WOAHOO, a large and fertile Island, abounding in lofty
pinnacles and luxurious vallies, four times as large as Bar-
badoes, and of the same size as Cephalonia, exhibiting one
of the prettiest pictures in nature. Its Port Honoruru, may
be called invaluable, for there is no other of any description
that deserves the name within 3000 miles; viz. at Otaheite
to the South, and the coast of California on the East; the
sooner this Island is in our possession the better, not merely
in name, but in fact. The next in point of size and value,
is 75 miles off, but in sight, called
a 2
5


ATOOAI, a fine Island exactly the same size as the last,
very mountainous, the first which our great countryman
discovered, or rather landed at. Could he get up from his
grave and see the desolation and havoc which civilization, as
it is called, has produced, none can properly judge of his
feelings but those who have travelled over it, as I have done,
within the last nine months ! The population has dwindled
to one tenth of what they then were, (53 years ago only) and
by the frenzied fanaticism of the Connecticut Missionaries,
( see note a) this Island, which might be made an earthly
paradise, bids fair to become entirely depopulated in a few
years. The chief hovels of the oppressed people are at
Wymea on the South coast, and Anare on the North. The
next Island in importance is called
RANAI, a small Island in comparison with the others,
but still rather larger than Tobago. It has good shelter on
one side for small vessels, and is capable of the highest
cultivation; but not possessing, like the other Islands,
mountains 10 to 18,000 feet high ; it does not rain so much
here, and is thought to be badly watered; because in the
other Islands every man may have a stream at his door; for
it rains in some of them on the high land every day in the
365, owing to the immense elevation of their mountains in
the interior. The next in size is
MOROKAI, a very good and pretty Island, hut very
thinly inhabited, owing to the natives having gradually
removed to the neighbouring Islands, more frequented by
the ships. This Island is about the size of Antigua or
Zante, and might become much more productive and popu-
lous. The next in size are called
ONEHOW and TOWROWA, rather poor places, hut
celebrated for producing the largest and finest vegetables of
all the group; they are just the same size as Jersey and
Guernsey. The natives here, as in all the Islands, though
poor and wretched, are kind and hospitable in the extreme.
6


The other two Islands have a name, but nothing else;
though, under aßritish system, they doubtless would acquire
a proportionate degree of importance with the others.
The group of the Sandwich Islands here briefly described,
are seated in the North Pacific Ocean, 19 to 22 degrees
from the Equator, and enjoying, without any exception,
what may be pronounced the finest climate in the world.
Unlike the West Indies, surrounded, in a sort of Mediter-
ranean sea, by extensive continents, and influenced by all
the atmospherical phenomena acting on them; by Columbia
on the South, Mexico on the West, and the United States
on the North; producing violent and instantaneous changes
in the air, with sweeping hurricanes and earthquakes, de-
structive alike to property and life; I say unlike these, the
Sandwich group, though so large, yet compared with the
vast ocean they are surrounded with, are but specks, and
being so distant from any other land, enjoy a climate, as
it were, of their own; and hurricanes, earthquakes, and
even gales of wind, are totally unknown. It never even
thunders, or very rarely, and by going up a little higher
in the interior, the happy inhabitants, when the present
black generation are passed away, (and they are fast going)
may enjoy any climate they please, from the burning cho-
colate plains below to the ice and snow of the arctic regions:
no man ever having yet ascended to the top of Mona Roa,
and most likely no man ever will be able, as it is 6000 feet
higher than Mont Blanc.
These immense and cloud-capped mountains are for ever
pouring down their gentle streams to the plains beneath; and
it was these innumerable cascades on every side as you
approach the land, which are the distinguishing feature of
the Sandwich Islands, and which threw La Perouse and his
companions into such extacies, when he first made the high
cliffs of Mow r ee.
But, the strongest reason for at once taking possession of
these Islands is, the intense wish of all the inhabitants that
a 3
7


it may be done; added to the vast importance of their
geographical position with regard to commerce. A three
week’s voyage takes you from any of the Islands, which are
all in sight of one another, to the rich coast of Mexico and
California on the East; the same duration of voyage taking
you to Canton and the coast of China, Manilla and Japan,
on the West; towards the North, three weeks takes you to the
numerous and valuable Fur Settlements of the Russians, at
Sitka, Petrowpowlowski, and Norfolk Sound; while three
weeks to the South carries you to Otaheite and the whole
group of the pretty little Society Islands. Such a position
is the happiest in the whole globe, and offers to an enter-
prizing nation like the English, advantages incalculable.
The Sandwich Islands may be considered also the very head
quarters of the Sperm Fishery, which I presume to say is
only in its infancy in this country, compared with what it
will become when these fine Islands shall be settled from
England.
The only white inhabitants on the Islands are first the Con-
necticut Missionaries, of whom and their ultimate views to
dominion there, I shall say nothing in this place; next a few
American Gentlemen, owners of vessels, who, liking the
climate, have built themselves houses; and a few English Gen-
tlemen, and about 200 to 300 Artisans, English and American.
These all to a man desire most strongly, that the English
Government would send a Governor there, and promote the
settlement of the country; perhaps of the two, the Americans
were most loud in their entreaties to me that I would make
known their wishes in this respect, as soon as I arrived in
London. The Missionaries, their families and servants, are the
most numerous class, and are living in a rich profusion of
all the elegancies and comforts of life, supplied by their willing
and simple contributors in the Eastern states of America, by
cargoes at a time. These men are desirous of no change, but
wish to have the Islands all to themselves.
The black natives are most anxious to be taken from the
8


oppression of their Chiefs; and indeed it would be an act of
the noblest benevolence, that the British Government should
step in, and destroy the overbearing tyranny now exercised
towards the labouring classes of the Sandwich Islands by their
black Chiefs and the American Missionaries.
A still further inducement to settle these Islands from Great
Britain, is the discovery, of late years, of a small cluster,
called the Bonin Islands, within a fortnight’s sail of the Sand-
wich Islands, and close upon the coast of Japan. Their position
on the Chart was given to an English Captain by a Japanese
vessel, and they turn out to be exceedingly valuable in their
proximity to that rich and powerful people. The Bonin Islands
were discovered perfectly uninhabited, covered with a valu-
able timber, in a fine climate, and within four or five days
sail of the Japanese territory; and there is no doubt, if ever
the British manufactures can be introduced into that extensive
empire, it will be through these Bonin Islands. ( b)
Of course these Bonin Islands would be an appendage to the
Government of the Sandwich Islands, and indeed already is
their value so well understood, that a small party of about a
dozen Englishmen, with native women, have been lately taken
to settle in the largest Bonin, where they maintain themselves
by fish and turtle, and the increase of the poultry which was
given to them by the respectable inhabitants, when they
embarked in the Schooner Washington, Captain Dowsett,
from Woahoo, in 1830.
It may also be remarked, that the rising and fine colony of
New South Wales would afford, by its comparative proximity,
being distant only about six week’s sail, great aid to the easy
settlement of the Sandwich Islands, by a large supply of
building materials and fuel, which are scarce in these latter
Islands, but which abound in the ports of Sydney and New
Zealand.
As however the British Government may not, at the present
moment, have any great predilection for the increase of its
a 4
9


colonies, especially so distant a territory as the Sandwich
Islands, they might be granted in fee simple to a Company
of Merchants of London, in the manner which the Argentine
Republic have lately granted the entire property of the
Malouines, or Falkland Islands, to Monsieur Vemet, on his
undertaking to convey a certain number of Emigrants to that
spot; and which Islands, considering the short time that has
elapsed since the first landing of the settlers, have already
become a very important, as well as most convenient station
for vessels to refresh at, coming round Cape Horn.
If the granting such barren rocks, situate in such an
inhospitable climate, amid eternal gales of wind, has been
productive of so great a benefit to navigation, as well as so
lucrative a fishery for fur seals and black whales, how
much more desirable is it to settle the great group of the
Sandwich Islands, which in a few years might be made to
produce all that the British West Indies now supply us with,
in sugar, ginger and turmeric, which are growing wild in
every direction; cotton, cocoa, coffee, pepper, indigo, rum,
molasses, arrow root, &c. &c. of the finest quality and in the
greatest profusion, and all by means of free labour, either
of the natives of the Sandwich Islands themselves, or of the
Marquesas and the Islands of New Zealand, whose inhabi-
tants are a willing, hard working people, and as soon as they
might be required, from an increase of settlers, would be
glad to remove under the kind treatment and protection of
English masters.
It may be thought an objection to this plan of settling, or
rather of granting the Islands to a London Joint Stock Com-
pany, which would undertake to convey settlers to the spot,
and be empowered to grant or sell them Land; that we have
no right to interfere with the existing state of society in these
places; that there is already an independent native government
established there, and that every well disposed person has
liberty to settle and carry on a peaceable trade among them;
and that, in confirmation of this, there was a King and Queen
10


of the Sandwich Islands, resident a few years ago in England,
recognized by the authorities of this country.
I can only say, in answer to this, that the natives are
completely in a state of nature. The persons at present called
King and Queen, Madame Boki, and the whole of the black
tribe, being very little removed above the natives of New
Holland and Van Dieman’s Land. And that there never was
such a ridiculous and laughable piece of humbug, to use a
vulgar word, as was practised upon the English people, when
these drunken blackguards, under the name of King and
Queen, were introduced here into polished society in
England, and waited upon by the junior branches of the
British nobility!
Madame Boki, as she has been nicknamed, may be seen
in almost a state of nudity, every day, in her straw hovel in
Woahoo, beastly drunk; a quart or bottle of strong raw rum,
in the course of the morning being nothing to her. And this
lady, the only one of the lot that has survived the visit to
Europe, from her intemperate habits, cannot be expected to
live long. If then this woman, who it must be admitted, is the
highest person by birth, manners, dress, &c. among the native
chiefs of all the Islands, notwithstanding the good example
which she has had of a better state of things, during her
temporary residence in the Adelphi, is so bad and abandoned,
what can be supposed of the others, who have not had such
advantages ? The demi-civilized chiefs of the Islands, I have
no hesitation in saying, are infinitely worse than any savages
I have ever seen in all the Pacific Ocean; and it is mortifying
to an Englishman’s feelings, that he should not consider
himself on his own soil, when he is treading those Islands,
so dearly purchased by the blood of the greatest Navigator
that ever lived.
The Russians attempted, some 8 or 10 years ago, to make
a settlement in the Sandwich Islands, seeing how convenient
they would be to keep up a communication with their numerous
and wealthy settlements on the N. W. coast of America;
11


and a vessel of war, belonging to the Czar landed her guns
in the port of Anare, on the North side of the Island of
Atooai, and built a very commanding fort, which still exists,
though the settlement was soon abandoned, in consequence of
a hint from the court of St. Petersburg, that it would be
displeasing to Great Britain. The Americans also, though
not fond of foreign dependencies, and not a colonizing people,
would be very glad if they could avail themselves of such a
central situation as those Islands offer, for the more easy
carrying on their increasing trade with China, and as a
permanent resort to their hundreds of spermaceti whalers,
but they also refrain from interfering with the prior rights of
Great Britain; and so, what with the apathy of the English;
the fear of giving offence on the part of the Russians, and the
generous avowal of the Washington Government, that they
cannot set up any claim to the Sandwich Islands; those
beautiful and invaluable places are rapidly going to ruin,
at present prostrate at the feet of an ignorant and fanatical
hierarchy of Mechanic Missionaries from America, who
interfere with every thing concerning the trade and
resources of the Islands, as well as its internal Government,
and connexion with vessels putting in for repairs and
refreshment, after foreign voyages, to the great loss and
embarrassment of the owners and captains.
The daily depopulation of the Islands, owing to the
existing tyranny, will, it is to be feared, leave, in a few years,
the country without inhabitants. But surely it is better that
an English system should be introduced, and tillage com-
menced, while there are yet a few thousands of the natives
left for the purpose, strong and willing to work, than that we
should wait until the Islands are a desert, and then have to
import the natives of other countries to do the labour.
In the hands of an English Company the Sandwich
Islands would immediately become a Colony of the first
rank and importance, quite as valuable, after some years, as
the British West Indies; for, in addition to the great variety
12


and value of their productions, and their proximity to China
and Japan, they are seated in the very centre of the Sperm
Whale Fishery, and could give, by that branch of industry
alone, a great impetus to the present drooping and melan-
choly state of the Shipping Interests of Great Britain.
Moreover, such a plan of granting these Islands would be
nothing new; for were not the successive Colonies of New
England, of Pensylvania and New Jersey, of Maryland, of
Virginia, of Carolina, of Georgia, &c, granted as propri-
atory Governments to enterprising and eminent Englishmen;
such as James, Duke of York, Lord Say and Sele, Lord
Brook, and the Plymouth Company; to Lord Bulkeley and
Sir George Carteret; to Admiral Penn, for his share in the
capture of Jamaica; to Lord Baltimore, Lord Delawarre,
Sir Thomas Gates, Sir George Summers; to Lord Grenville,
to Colonel Wood, and to Sir Wm. Alexander in Nova
Scotia?
It would be desirable indeed that this plan should be
followed, not only with the Sandwich Islands, but many
other places on the globe, now wasting to decay, wanting
nothing but the hand of man to create in all of them a
prodigious wealth.
Besides, it is important to consider at this moment, the
probable effect of the present agitated state of the public
mind in England, on the Question of Slave Labour in our
West India Colonies. Those who are best informed on the
Question, and they are generally the least noisy, it is
needless to say, have the most gloomy forebodings of the
early fate of Jamaica and our Caribbee Islands, should
the present false and feverish philanthropy of the English
public continue. Then where are we to obtain our four
million cwts. of sugar now supplied by English estates in
the West Indies; and how will the Exchequer support the
loss of nearly five millions of revenue from this one article
alone? That this is probable, we have only to look at the
13


wretched and altered state of St. Domingo since the eman-
cipation of the blacks; where they exported in 1786 nearly
150 millions of pounds of sugar, and 80 millions of coffee,
this fine Island now, in the year 1832, hardly exports a
dozen cargoes.
In the Sandwich Islands of course there will be nothing
but free labour, and any additional supply of labour that
may be required, above the limited means of the Islands,
can be procured from the Islands of the Marquesas and
New Zealand.
In the certainty of a great falling off, at all events, in
future years, of the supply of sugar from the British West
India Islands, it will be consoling to think that a com-
mencement has been made in the Pacific, of quite as
valuable a group; and whose supply of tropical productions
will amply make up for any new demand in Great Britain,
consequent either on the increase of population, the reduction
of duties, or the loss of our West India possessions.
As for the Island of Mauritius it is to be lamented that
the British Legislature should ever have countenanced the
introduction and consumption of French sugar amongst the
British people, to the serious detriment of the West India
proprietors.
The Isle of France is, with the exception of the autho-
rities, garrison, and a few English residents, as much a
French Colony as ever; all the owners of estates, nearly,
are Frenchmen, the language spoken is the French, and I
believe there is not any English Newspaper on the Island.
And the curious history of the manoeuvre of obtaining the
equalization of Duties, a few years ago, was known by
almost every body, except those most interested in it, viz.
the British Parliament; and it is to be hoped the day will
come when these sugars will again be considered foreign.
14


One word in conclusion, as to the Sandwich Islands. If
the British Government should still refuse to colonize
them or to grant them, which perhaps would be the cheapest
manner of the two; if, I say, they should still persist in
refusing to do either, it is at least to be hoped that the Beach
at Karakakooa Bay, the most sacred and classical spot in the
wide and vast Pacific, will not be allowed to remain in its
present degraded state, without a Memorial or Monument
to the great Man, to whose intrepid and insatiable devo-
tedness to Nautical Discovery we are indebted, for the
knowledge of these Islands.
While the captain and officers of a French corvette, not
many months ago, as well as the officers of an armed ship
of his Prussian Majesty, on her way to China, all went
ashore in succession in this celebrated Bay, prostrating
themselves on the Black Lava Rock, and actually kissed the
spot, hallowed by the massacre of Captain Cook, and for
ever identified with his imperishable name; we, his coun-
trymen, are satisfied with a cold and silent approbation, and
have allowed the place to remain for 53 years without any
thing more than a rude heap of loose volcanic stones, about
4 feet high, to mark the memorable scene of his sudden and
savage murder.
If the French Government sent out a corvette in 1826 for
the purpose of affixing a Tablet of Brass on the south head
of Botany Bay, marking the spot of earth last touched by
La Perouse in 1788, surely we ought to do as much for a
still greater man, our countryman, and on the spot of his
ever to be regretted loss.
I have the honor to be.
My Lord,
Your Lordship’s most obedient
and very humble Servant,
T. HORTON JAMES.
15


P. S. As the writer of the foregoing letter will shortly
embark again for these interesting Islands, he has been
careful rather to understate than exaggerate what he wit-
nessed there, particularly as regards the American Mission-
aries. The dark deed on the voyage from Atooai has not
been alluded to, nor the infamous treatment of those accom-
plished Catholic Missionaries, Messrs. Batchelier and Short,
with a few other’s of an interesting nature.
NOTES.
THE AMERICAN MISSIONARIES AT THE SANDWICH ISLANDS.
(a) Itis extremely painful to be obliged to say so much against the American
Missionary system, as I found it existing in these highly favoured Islands.
Whilst travelling in Europe the writer had always been friendly to the cause,
and had been also no mean contributor to Missionaries generally to the South
Seas, and therefore visited the various groups of Islands quite prepossessed in
favour of them; but truth compels him to say, that the personal observation
upon the spot, of the effects produced by the conduct of the American
Missionaries in the Sandwich Islands, wrought on him a sad and melancholy
disappointment.
No doubt, among so numerous a body as the American Missionaries there
are many very valuable men, who would do honour to any employment they
might be engaged in, and among these I have great pleasure in recollecting
Mr. ——— in Owhyhee, but “ exceptio probat regulam; ” and it is to be
regretted such instances are not more numerous. The system of exacting a
Spanish silver dollar from every black man and woman before the Missionary
will marry them, is certainly not one of their instructions, and is highly
oppressive among a population that can hardly obtain a dollar by any
exertions, coupled as this priestly regulation is by a summary denouncement
against all those who cohabit together without the form of marriage. A
sermon which I heard in the Island of Woahoo was frightful; it was something
in these words, “ You will go to the horrible place of torment in everlasting
flames, unless you rely solely on our Lord Jesus Christ. It is no use your
being honest, no use your being sober, feeding the hungry, and healing the


sick, and leading what the world call a virtuous and upright life one towards
another; all this I say is of no use; you and your children will be cast into
the fiery pit, which burneth for ever and ever, the bottom of which is paved
with the little bones of infants not a span long! ” I would ask any body if
this is the way to begin with people in a complete state of nature. The
preacher was a young man of about twenty, that had just arrived from the
establishment at Princeton in New Jersey; but it is to be hoped that he will
follow in the path so abundantly set before him by his elder brethren, and end
with the same amount of discretion as he has now of zeal, and thereby
accumulate, as I was informed the head Missionary, but ci-divant chair-maker
has done, twenty thousand dollars worth of property in his house at
Honoruru!
No wonder the population is gradually falling off, when, added to this
system of frightening the people, and charging them a dollar for getting
married, they are compelled to attend to church and school four days out of
the seven, and the fifth day is spent in compulsory labour for the Chiefs; thus
leaving only two whole days for the purpose of tillage and growing their
necessary food.
The Missionaries have prohibited—
Fishing, Bathing, Jews’ Harps, and the Surf Board,
and every other description of amusement among the native population;
besides which they have introduced an old law of the Connecticut puritans, and
will not allow an English or American gentleman to ride on horseback on
Sundays, or drink spirituous liquors, or play at bowls or billiards on any day
in the week; whilst they themselves are driven about the town and about the
country four in hand, with their wives and families, Sundays and working
days, not by horses, which are plentiful and cheap enough in those Islands,
but by human beings, by four naked black fellows, their own hearers, and
probably fellow communicants!
The Missionaries wanted to proclaim the ten commandments of Moses
as the supreme law of the land throughout the Islands, but some difficulties
were started, and the plan was abandoned.
In short, civilization, as it is unfortunately going on at present in the
Sandwich Islands, under the mismanagement of the American Missionaries,
is only another word for extinction.
The bulk of the people are in a state bordering on starvation, because the
adults are taken away from their enclosures of taro and potatoes to learn to
read and spell; thus beginning at the wrong end, and the time that should be
devoted to the agricultural and mechanic arts, is now fruitlessly wasted in
teaching old men of seventy to spell a b ab ! and where one naturally looks
for the outward signs of industry, the spade, the hoe, the fishing net, etc.
there is nothing but a vain and idle exhibition of the palapala or spelling
book, bought of the Missionaries at a high price.


In fact the whole system, with an honourable exception or two, is nothing
but a money making fraud, and instead of tending to the benefit of the
wretched people, may be considered almost as a visitation of wrath, and a
direct cause of the depopulation before spoken of.
First, by a tax on marriage much above the means of nine tenths of the
people, which tax is not received by the king or government, such as it
is, to be disbursed and circulated again, but goes directly into the pockets of
the Missionaries, to be hoarded by them, and taken out of the country when
they have snfficiently feathered their nests, and by denouncing eternal
torments on those who marry according to the ancient usages, that is, without
paying a dollar to the reverend fathers.
Second, by starvation, employing the natives four days out of the seven in
useless school learning, or otherwise taking them from the cultivation of
the soil.
Third, by disease, prohibiting bathing, which in that climate is almost as
essential to existence as fresh air; the natives from being the fine healthy
people they were in Cook’s time, are now covered with vermin and scorbutic
eruptions.
Fourth, by prohibiting their innocent sports, and by fruitlessly attempting
to bind human beings to a mode of life which is contrary to their nature,
their spirit is broken, and they have now become listless and enervated; and
should the present system continue, there will ere long be none but the
white population for the Missionaries to preach to.
American Missionary taking a Drive in the Sandwich Islands.
(b) —The BONIN ISLANDS.
Situate in 142° East longitude, and 21° North latitude, and within six day’s
sail of the Harbour of Nangasaki in Japan, from which coast the junks and
small craft would run over to Bonin, if they could purchase British goods
there.
18


Date.
Name.
Torino Nation.
Where from.
Jan,
21
Chinchilla
. .140. .Honoruru. .Fannings I.
23 Unity
.. 65..ditto
.Christina 1.
29
Andes
. .216..America .
.Lima
Feb.
7 Sultan
, .275. .Boston...
. Boston
26
Ontario
. .354. .Nantucket .Nantucket
Mar.
7
Louisa
. .222. .America .
• Boston
11
12 Columbus
. .360. .ditto
N. Bfd.
Richmond .
, .291..ditto
.ditto
15
Lancashire Witch
. .168. .English ..
.St. Bias.
17
Zenas Coffin ....
. .338. .America .
.Fishery
Rambler
•ditto
19 Avenak
. .385. .America .
.ditto
20 Caledonia
. .447.. ditto
• N. London
Canton
. Whale Fishery
23
Maria
. .360. .ditto
.ditto
Ocean
. .350. .ditto
.ditto
Isabella
, .200. .English ..
.Columbia River
William & Eliza.
. .321. .America .
.Whale Fishery
24
Fawn
. .485. .English ..
.London
M. Theresa ....
. ,340. .America ,
.Whale Fishery
Erie.
. .375. .ditto
• ditto
James Colvin ...
, .491. .English ..
.London
26 Hector
. .380. .America .
.Whale Fishery
28 Japan
..330. .ditto
.ditto
31
Enlerprize
.ditto
Peruvian
. ditto
April 4 4th July
.. 70..ditto
.Manilla
Fabias
. Whale Fishery
5
Diana
.London
• .450.. America .
.Whale Fishery
Rosalie
. .330. .ditto
.ditto
7
Harriett
• London Whaler
Fanny
.ditto
Palmer
.ditto
8
Richard Mitchell
. .386. .America .
.Whale Fishery
Washington ....
.ditto
13 Spartan
.ditto
16 Orion
. .350. .ditto
.ditto
17
Chinchilla
. .140. .Honoruru.
.S. S Islands
No. 1.
List of Arrivals in the Harbour of Honoruru,
ISLAND OF WOAHOO,
For One Year, (1830.)


Date. Name.
TonnS e Nation. Where from.
Apr. 20 Harvest
..360,.America ..Whale Fishery
Fortune.
. .273. .ditto ditto
Tenier
..150..ditto China
21 Montano
. .360. .ditto Whale Fishery
23 Howard
. .365. .ditto ditto
Kingston
. .312. .ditto ditto
24 Pochohontos ....
. .300. .ditto ditto
Meridian .... 0 ..
. .381. .ditto ditto
Golconda
. .350. .ditto ditto
Russell
. .300. .ditto ditto
Independence ...
. .350. .ditto ditto
Ann Alexander..
. .360. .ditto ditto
Sir Charles Price
.294. .English .. .London
29 Eagle
. .195, .English ...Columbia River
Cyrus
.. 335.. A merica .. Whale Fishery
May 3 Rose
. .350. .ditto ditto
10 Chelsea
. .400, .ditto ditto
Triton
. .300. .ditto ditto
June 1 Pacific
. .300. .ditto ditto
5 Dhaule
.. 182.. Honoruru., China
20 Kites
. .214.. French.... Bordeaux
29 Dryade
. .210, .English ...Columbia River
July 1 Lyra
. .304.. America., .Whale Fishery
11 He ton
.. 45. .Honoruru, .Tahiti
15 Johanne
,. 192,.Spanish,, .China
18 Titnolon
. .346, .America ..Whale Fishery
20 Volunteer
..235. .Honoruru.. St. Bias
Aug. 2 Kamelani
. .166. .ditto Oahu
3 Becket
..135,.ditto S. S. Islands
4 Chinchilla
. .140. .ditto California
20 Asnick
..385..America ..Whale Fishery
31 Hector
. .380. .ditto ditto
Ivanhoe
. .194. .ditto China
Sept. 1 Recovery
. .431..English ...London
12 Diana
. .200. .Honoruru. .China
13 Trident
. .450. .America . .Whale Fishery
Arwick
. .385, .ditto ditto
21 Unity
.. 75. • Honorura..Oahu
22 Rosalie
. .330.. America .. Whale Fishery
27 Ivanhoe.
. .192. .ditto China
30 Matilda
• .483. .English.. .London
Oct. 1 Conway
. .444. .ditto ditto
4 Triton
. .300. .America ..Whale Fishery
6 Susan
. .330. .ditto ditto
10 4th July
,.. 65..ditto Valparaiso
16 Spartan .,
,. .237. .ditto Manilla
Fortune ........
,. .273.. ditto Whale Fishery
18 J. Palmer
. .393. .English.. .London


Date. Name,
TonnS e Nation, from.
Oct. 18 Fame - .
. .360. .America ..Whale Fishery
, Sultan
.275..ditto N. W. Coast.
Owyhee
• 164..ditto Columbia River
Fawn
, .485. .English... London
21 Thetis
.323. .ditto ditto
23 Richard Mitchell.
• 386. .America . .Whale Fishery
24 Howard
.365. .ditto ditto
25 Russell
300. .ditto ditto
Rambler
.318. .ditto ditto
Maria
.360. .ditto ditto
Griffin
.180. .Honoruru. .Oahu
27 Louisa
.222..ditto N. W. Coast
28 Warren
,335. .English .. .London
29 Ann
.435. .ditto ditto
Portsea
.450. .ditto ditto
30 Ganges
.380. .ditto Bristol
Edward
.273..America...Whale Fishery
31 Meridian
.381. .ditto ditto
Nov. 1 Caledonia.......
.444. .ditto ditto
2 Ontario
.354. .ditto ditto
7 Richmond
.291. .ditto ditto
Convoy
.137. .Honoruru . .St. Francisco
0 Fabias
.432.. America .. Whale Fishery
10 Lancaster
.382. .ditto ditto
Independence....
.318. .ditto ditto
M. Mitchell
.350. .ditto ditto
Canton
.408. .ditto ditto
13 Kingston ,
.312. .ditto ditto
James Colvin ....
.400. .English .. .London
14 Alkania
.330. .America . .Whale Fishery
Chelsea
.396. .ditto ditto
Harriett.........
. 62, .Honoruru. .Oahu
19 Lucy
.160. .ditto ditto
24 Peruvian
.331. .America ..Whale Fishery
Harvest
.360, .ditto ditto
Enterprize
.415. .ditto ditto
Ganges
.265. .ditto ditto
27 Dbaule
.182. .Honoruru . .Oahu
Dec. 7 Montano
.365. .America . .Whale Fishery
Zenas Coffin
.338. .ditto ditto
27 Vancouver
. 70. .Honoruru . .Columbia River
Total,... 40,128 Tons.


Name.
Tonnage, Owners.
Trade employed in.
Louisa
. 300
French & Co,
California
Volunteer
. 250
Ditto
Sitka
Diana
. 250
Ditto
Russian Settlements
Dhaulle
. 180
Cole & Co.
China
Chinchilli ....
. 140
French & Co.
Gaymaz
Crusader
. 130
Hinkley & Co.
Kamshatka
Blanshard ....
. 80
Blanshard & Co.
F’eejee Islands
Truro
. 30
Jones & Co.
Shell Islands
Washington .,.
. 60
Ditto
Gulph California
Convoy
Grimes
St. Francisco
Waverley
. 130
Native Chiefs
Packet
Karamoku ....
. 140
Ditto
Eromanga
Tamarahana...
. 140
Ditto
No employ
Vancouver ....
. 70
Captain
Columbia River
Nio
. 230
Ditto
No employ
Griffin
. 180
Cole & Co.
North West Coast
York, and 10"
)
f CollectingTortoise
small Vessels, 1
amounting to |
\ 450
„ . , T j- • i i ) Shell, Beche de
Private Individuals Mer> car .
about
)
f vying Salt
Total .
.2890
Beef, per lb...,
- ■ s,
0
d.
6
Goat Mutton .,
0
2
Pork
3
0
Butter
0
6
House Rent...
.16 Dollars per Month
Yams
0
0
Cabbages ....
6
Sweet Potatoes
0
Bananas
..per Bunch of 35 lbs. 0
0
Pine Apples ..,
3
No. 2.
A List of Ships and Vessels belonging to the
Port of Honoruru,
ISLAND OF WOAHOO,
October, 1831.
No. 3.
Prices of Provisions at Wahoo, October , 1831.


Description.
Quantity
• Value. Market.
Sugar .Tons.
2000
£40,000 N.W.Coast of America
& New SouthWales
Rum Pun.
1000
20,000 N. W. Coast & Russian
Settlements
Molasses ..Barrels.
3000
3000 Russians and Shipping
Tobacco lbs
100,000
1000 Ditto
Ginger.... 1 Cwtge
1000
1000 England
1 urmenc ,. }
Coffee lbs.
500,000
12,500 Ditto
1,000000
25,000 Ditto
Indigo „
20,000
5000 Ditto
Tortoishell .... ,,
10,000
10,000 Ditto and China
Beche deMer, peculs
5000
20,000 China
Sandal Wood.. ,,
10,000
20,000 Ditto
Cocoa-nut Oil, Tons
1000
25,000 England
Sea Otter Skins ..
10,000
130,000 China
Martin, Beaver, Seal
and other Skins .
| V arious
50,000 England
Cocoa & Chocolate.
none, as
it requires ten years’ growth.
Maize, Rice & Pepper, only to be limited by want of hands
Sperm Oil. •. .Tons
15,000
750,000 England
Black Oil, from Sea i
1
Elephants, on Coast!
► 10,000
200,000 Ditto
of California '
1
Ships’ Disburse- j
ments. Beef, Pork, I
100,000
Yegetables,Fruit&c'
Total. .,£1,412500
No. 4.
Estimate of the probable Produce that might he
raised in the first Five Years , in the Sandwich,
Islands , together with its Value , under all the
difficulties of a first Settlement.
N.B. The Sale of Land in the Sandwich Islands might be made,
under a judicious plan of Settlement, to pay all the Expenses
of the Civil Government, and leave a good profit to the
Company.
Note. There is not a single English Missionary in the
Sandwich Islands.
TEW, Primer, 34, Queen Street, Cheapwdc, -Louden.
