

The Immortality of the Soul and
Life Beyond the Grave.
ANDREW ROSS, M.IL,
Master in Surgery of the University of Glasgow.
Formerly for several years Assistant Medical Officer under Dr. Digby, to the South District
of the West London Union, and Assistant Sanitary Inspector for the City of London.
And also, formerly.
Assistant Surgeon 68th Cambridgeshire Militia, quartered at Palatine Square
Barracks, Dublin.
Member of the Parliament of New South Wales.
“ Ye shall know them by their fruits.”— Matthew 7 & 16
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAME AND CO., PRINTERS, 146 PITT STREET.
1881.




F {to
.A. LBCTTJEE
( ON
THE PHILOSOPHY OF
MIND AND MATTER:
The Immortality of the Soul and
Life Beyond the Grave.
ANDREW ROSS, M. 0.,
Master in Surgery of the University of Glasgow.
Formerly for several years Assistant Medical Officer under Dr. Diyby, to the South District
of the West London Union, and Assistant Sanitary Inspector for the City of London.
And also, formerly,
Assistant Surgeon 68th Cambridgeshire Militia, quartered at Palatine Square
Barracks, Dublin.
Member of the Parliament of New South Wales.
“Ye shall know them by their fruits.”— Matthew 7 & 16.
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAME AND CO., PRINTERS, 146 PITT STREET,
1881.




DEDICATION.
THIS SMALL PAMPHLET IS RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED
TO THE
MEMORY OF MARTYRS
ESPECIALLY
JOHN BROWN, CAMERON,
AND OTHER FAITHFUL NOBLE COVENANTERS,
Who sacrificed their life for Civil and Religious Liberty and Faith in the
Village of Muirkirk, Ayrshire, Scotland; the village in which the writer
and author was born.
Through the liberality of a generous public, handsome monuments
mark the last resting place of each of those persecuted noble Covenanters.
The death of JOHN BROWN, on Priesthill, is one as sad cold-blooded
and brutal as ever stained the annals of history. He was way-laid while
attending his sheep on the hill-side by Claverhouse and party, and there
disembowled with a sword in the presence of his wife, who received his
bowels in her apron and was actually compelled to carry them home at the
peril of her own life. In this state he was left to die on the spot.
CAMERON’S death at Aird’s Moss, near Muirkirk, was one equally
barbarous, diabolical, and cruel. Well attended Sermons, lam proud to
say, have for many years been preached annually at both graves, and also
at Drumclog, the last resting place of other brave noble Covenanters.
Muirkirk and Glenbuck are in the very heart of the Martyr-land of
Ayrshire ; at the latter place a Church and Manse is shortly to be built, to
cost £2OOO, and not far from the grave of noble JOHN BROWN. Scenes
dear to Scotland, and most powerful in her religious history, lie scattered
in and around these two places.
“ Speak of me as I am : nothing extenuate
Not set down aught in malice.”
ANDREW ROSS, M D.
Molong, New South Wales,
June Ist, 1881.
tA 3>2>SS \ T\SO &8
iM-"l




A LECTURE *
ON THE
PHILOSOPHY OF MIND AND MATTER:
The Immortality of the Soul and
Life Beyond the Grave.
In attempting to deal with our subject, surrounded as it is I am ready
and willing to admit by many abstruse and profound perplexing
difficulties, it might nevertheless, be better simply to endeavour to
confine our attention to a brief review of our topic under the following
heads, viz. : —“ Moral versus Physical Strength, ” or, Mind and
Matter. Should the nature or heading of our subject seem, however,
to be in any way distasteful to some, then they may if they choose call
it “ Homoeopathic globules of loose religion by a Layman. ”
As we proceed you will doubtless then be much more readily able
to comprehend and recognise the essential character and apparent
distinction that exists between these two great elements of which our
nature is so universally composed—the amount of credit each is
legitimately entitled to receive in promoting the moral and religious
well being of society—the physical progress of the world and the many
wonderful changes now enjoyed in this 19th Century, compared with
what existed in the days of our early forefathers.
The records of ancient history inform us of many sad scenes of
physical hardship and sufferings that were patiently and unflinchingly
endured in early ages, whereby the upright moral spirit was made to
achieve a grand victory and supremacy over physical strength. No
instance of this great physical suffering is more conspicuously illustrated
than in that of the death of our Saviour on the Cross on Mount Calvary,
* The substance of the following Lecture was hurriedly composed on reading a paragraph in an
issue of a Melbourne paper, The Leader, of a Bishop of the Church of England (a Dr. Perry), having
become a convert to the Homoeopathic principles of medicine. In fact, the Lecture is intended as a
kind of quid pro quo to the Bishop for having bestowed so mis-placed a patronage on such a
monstrous delusive doctrine and abominable pseudo science—a science that ought to be scouted as
worthless by every honest rational minded person in the community.
[During the illness of the late Lord Beaconsfield, we have on record an illustration of rational
or scientific medicine coming into contact with homoeopathy, the result being that Dr. Quain and
Sir W. Jenner, declined to consult with or yet recognise the treatment of his Lordship on
homoeopathic principles, and which was endorsed by the President of the College of Physicians.
His Lordship therefore, it seems, was treated by the most eminent Members of the Faculty, in
accordance with the doctrine of scientific medicine, using Pharmacopoeial remedies and Pharmacopoeal
doses on ordinary scientific principles. From this contretemps it is clear that the College of
Physicians has not yet come to recognise the imaginary notions or principles of homoeopathy as a
science, and very properly too, and I hope never will.—Vide British Medical Journal of April last.]


and Noah’s family and the flood ; the Pilgrimage of the Israelites in the
Wilderness, the imprisonment of St. Paul at Corinth, where he wrote
his epistles, our. martyrs, reformers, and heroic Covenanters, &c.
Such faithful followers of the moral law surely well deserve to merit
consideration, if not the divine reward offered them of eternal life. Only
read the story of the death of some of our early Christians under
heathen persecutions. Mark the dying experience of those who suffered
at Oxford and Smithfield, under Queen Mary for Protestantism, Pind
if you can in the whole range of biography and death beds of non-
Christians which will bear comparison with the death beds of Christians
in the matter of faith, peace, hope, and strong consolation in the future.
You may search for ever and not find them. You will find St. Paul’s
truth of Christ dying and rising again is exactly the truth that fits
human nature, a truth that must have descended from God. This and
this only will enable fallen but spiritually re-deemed man to meet the
last enemy without fear, and to say like our noble covenanters and
martyrs who died for their faith, “ O death, where is thy sting, O grave
where is thy victory ? ” Here the lecturer proceeded to read some
striking passages or illustrations of physical sufferings from the “ Book
of Martyr’s,” by John Foxe, and the “ Last Days of the Martyr’s” by
Andrew B. Bonar, and quoted the case of Anne Askew, the sister of Sir
Francis Askew, or Ascough, of the noble family of Kymes of Lincoln-
shire, Patrick Hamilton, Whishart, Bradford, Bidley, Bishop of London,
Latimer, Bishop of Worcester, Archbishop Cranmer, and many others,
all of whom (the sufferers of vile persecution), were tied to the stake
and burned to death rather than renounce, recant, or forsake what they
considered and believed to be the true doctrines of religion. During the
reign of Mary (1558), the whole number burnt it is stated amounted to
284; nearly 400 more fell a sacrifice on these sad occasions, including
many others who died by imprisonment and famine. Such, then,
are a few of the lessons derived from the annals of England’s apostles,
and a few instances of victory gained by faith over sense, or the
mind or spirit over the material world. The wisest of men has,
3000 years ago, left his testimony of the superiority of moral or
spirit over physical triumphs, and pronounced that he who ruled
his spirit is greater than he who conquered an enemy or captured
a city. These are all never dying memorable lessons of importance
to us. Yes, and to others also, probably for ages yet to come;
for if such heroic people in those early dark-ages could have endured
so calmly • so many severe trials and bitter hardships when the
world was but little known and so thinly populated, how much greater
and more becoming is it not for us in this enlightened nineteenth
century to endure our physical lot, surrounded as we are by the
immensity of wealth or comfort so liberally bestowed on us through the
aid of so many wonderful inventions and scientific discoveries revealed
to us by an all-wise Providence. Within the short space of four
months we can now almost, in ease and comfort, travel round the globe.
Contrast this mighty advancement of the age with the many painfully
acute and incessant trials and sufferings attending the Israelites during


their forty years pilgrimage in the wilderness, and is the amount of
physical punishment then endured not extremely great indeed com-
pared with the easy and ready means now offered us to gain eternal
salvation. But God in his inscrutable wisdom can put man’s moral
sincerity to the test in many more ways besides subjecting his followers
to the agonies of death on a cross—a pilgrimage in the wilderness or
death at the burning stake. He may send devastation arising from
appalling epidemics, pestilence, floods, famines, droughts, wars, or He
may send a life long affliction on the proud and selfish, a cankering
wealth to the greedy and ambitious worldly-minded, adversity to the
covetous, and perhaps light, peace, and happiness to the poor, humble,
honest citizen and workman. No matter what our station of life may
be, without God there can be little or no real lasting happiness. God
is the sole distributer of our daily bread, our only strength and comfort
in sickness, poverty, and adversity. He measures the standard of our
wants not by a worldly but by a heavenly scale of life. It is not the
higher we stand on this earth, but it is on the spiritual standard
whereby we shall become heirs and joint heirs with Christ. It is not
worldly but heavenly wealth that is implied. Individual dignity is not
derived from birth, wealth, success in business, or from outward show,
but it consists in the richness of our godliness and the indestructible
principle of an untainted mind or soul. A man may be possessed of
unbounded wealth and every luxury the world can possibly produce,
and yet such a soul at the same time may literally be in utter darkness
of what constitutes the real riches of Christ crucified or of an Omni-
potent God. All his burdensome wealth offered at the gates of heaven
would not be acknowledged as a sufficient passport there. His cheques,
his bills, his bank-book, his thousands of cattle and tens of thousands
of sheep, his land, land deeds, and superb equipage—nay, his gold and
silver are all dishonoured there. And why ? Because, during a
prosperous life-time lent such by a generous loving infinite Father he
has probably not had enough spare time in his merry busy money-
making career to enable him to lay by anything in the shape of
spiritual morsels [only worldly things) to his credit in the Book of
Life. No, everything probably has been regularly and faithfully done
but this. Yes, but appeals now, however, are too late and in vain for
the name of no such depositor is known or yet to be found recorded on
the roll of the everlasting bank of life. Difficulty, darkness, and
despair must truly surround such a lost individual —an individual
strong in the physical or perishable things of this world, but weak
indeed in faith, moral, or spiritual matters. The mental pangs of such
must indeed lie greater than the loss of worldly wealth or credit,
because here, at the very gates of heaven, the soul now, as it were,
actually refuses to acknowledge the clayey tabernacle or body with
which it was associated on this earth hoarding and filling up the sensual
perishable things and dross of this world. But alas! all such species
of scrip are utterly unknown in heaven or eternity. There are no
cheating there, no monopoly, no forgeries, favouritism, despotism or
deception, political jobberies, land dummying, and no rising and falling


of money markets. No, everything is legibly and uniformly registered
on the eternal scroll of life, and read aloud by the voices of thousands
and tens of thousands of life members who have patiently endured toils,
trials, sickness—the burden of the cross and persecutions here in order
to inherit peace and everlasting life hereafter. Here then we have
instances of the endurances of physical strength placed in juxtaposition
with spiritual or moral power. Compare the death of a covenanter or a
martyr at the stake, yielding up his spirit to God in the midst of
flaming, torturing, burning embers with the death of a rich man, and is
the distinction or chasm between the two not something awfully solemn
and great! The one calmly resigns in his dissolving agonies his heroic
spirit to God while the other probably grudgingly and to the last clings
to his perishable idols and earthy possessions, and when the grasp is
finally broken then the soul lacking care and proper spiritual nourish-
ment here appears dwarfed as it appears before God for the immortal
soul of the rich is not wrapped in eternity only frozen to the temporary
perishable things of the world which the great King-death soon melts
asunder. The spirit of the martyr being strong in faith and eternity
is with God before he dies, (ye may destroy my body or flesh yet in my
spirit shall I see God) but the rich man probably clings to his fleeting
pleasures and frail earthy treasures until death if not even beyond the
grave. As Jesus said to His disciple “How hardly shall they that have
riches enter the kingdom of God.”
Such as it were enter eternity backwards, or rather with their face
still cleaving to the alluring wealthy treasurers and perishable things of
this earth. The martyr on the other hand joyfully moves face forward
to meet his God and to exchange the perishable for the eternal and
incorruptible—the just made perfect. The one appears clothed in
radiant garments of faith and glory—the other dwells in fear, doubt,
trembling and shame. The one is equiped in heavenly riches—the
other in perishable rags and worldly mindedness. Morally the one
conquers physical strength and for mortality puts on “ immortality.”
The other all and all in this earth but lost to eternity. Intellectual or
moral capacity it is obvious then must fairly you perceive outweight
physical power in this world in order that the proffered salvation of soul
over body may be reaped in the next—life for death—or the present life
for the future. The body must die, but the soul is for ever and ever.
Some keep putting this spiritual improvement off and off as they say till
some better or more convenient time, but it is the want of this begin-
ning which keeps the better time away. If we have misspent time here
assuredly it will never again be regained hereafter. Our race in life
must be slow, patient, enduring, and persevering in good works, then we
have no need to fear when the time comes for the approach of death,
eternity, or hellfire. I shall next proceed to consider other illustrations,
showing the value of moral over physical strength. Sceptics may, how-
ever, take exception and point to their inseparable connection, but I say
no, unless it is meant to convey the idea that animal instinct is equiva-
lent to intellectual or moral faculties. But animals again have no
reasoning faculties, therefore, man stands alone in the animal kingdom


as the only being of intellect and reason. It is by elevating this very
reasoning principle with which man is endowed above the animal by
our physical acts alone, whereby we shall again be brought back to God
and made to assume his spiritual image and perfection. When God
comes to judge mind in the human race will rule instead of matter or
sensuality.
As the age becomes enlightened then I believe we shall spiritually
approach to the Kingdom of God. Until then the world must continue
in a progressive state of moral improvement, ere this great and final end
is accomplished. It seems to be by this gradual state of metamorphoses
whereby perfection is again to be realized in this fallen world, by being
born and re-born from generation to generation till all mankind is again
made and become perfect in the sight of God. Jesus said to Nicodemus,
“ except a man be born of water and of the spirit he cannot enter the
Kingdom of God.” When mind overcomes matter the world or rather
worldliness then seems to end and become finally extinguished, if so,
those who remain will continue in this immortal and perfect state of life
and all will be joined by their friends in the resurrection, or as the
Scriptures say —“the just made perfect" —death then shall be swallowed up
in victory. It is by this means whereby we can realize anything like a
faint idea of the coming of God to judge the quick and the dead, viz., by
gradually refining the refined until all purity is attained or that mind or
morals shall prevail over matter. Their souls and not their bodies shall
be changed. I don’t, however, wish you to suppose that lam believer
in the Darwin or Huxley theory, that man is of the decent of the Pongo,
chimpanzee, gorilla, or the ape. Like Professor Blackie, of the University
of Edinburgh, one of Scotland’s greatest scholars, I feel quite content
with the Natural History recorded of man in the first few chapters in
the Book of Genesis.
Even in terrific warfare and the battle field, where thousands of
brave men have perished ; their courage, patriotism, and soul’s spirit will
still survive their death and live, to inspire other minds to similar acts
of patriotism bravery and suffering in the distant future, as sure as the
death of Christ enlists spiritual soldiers of the cross under his noble and
righteous banner.
Only compare a Christian’s Sabbath day now-a-days in this 19th
century, with a Covenanter’s Sabbath spent in the dark ages, when free-
dom and reformation first began to dawn upon the intellect of man, and
is the contrast and change not a remarkable one in this onward progress
of civilization—
THE COVENANTER’S SABBATH.
(By Weir.)
’Twas Sabbath morn, a lovelier never rose,
And nature seem’d in holy calm repose ;
No cloud was seen along the azure sky,
And the pure streamlets glided softly by ;
From tree to tree the warbling minstrels sung,
And heaven’s bright arch with nature’s praises rung ;
Tho’ all was still, yet persecutions rage,
With awful fury scourg'd a bleeding age ;


Then Scotland groan’d beneath a tyrant’s yoke,
Till her proud spirit seem’d for ever broke ;
Her sons were haunted from the abodes of men,
To savage wilds or some sequester’d glen ;
Justice stood mute, for demons gave the law,
And many a bloody scene her mountain saw.
What tho’ this morning rose calmly bright,
The eye which saw it, trembled at its sight;
On Loudon’s braes the birds might find a nest;
On Pentland’s hills the wounded deer might rest;
But terror there her gloom watch did keep,
Like the death storm which over hangs the deep ;
And homeless man from place to place was driven,
Bereft of hope, and every stay but heaven.
No gladsome bell announced the Sabbath day,
The solemn temples moulder’d with decay ;
God’s people met, amidst the lonely wild,
Like wretched outcasts from a world exil’d ;
In a lone cave, the eaule’s drear abode,
They met to worship, and to praise their God ;
The fretted rocks around their temple hung,
And echo’d back the praises as they sung ;
Tho’ half supprest the thrilling accents rise,
To God who hears, and answers in the skies ;
The preacher rose, and every voice grew still,
Save echoing breezes round the lonely hill;
With solemn awe he opens the blessed book—
Earnest in voice, and heavenly in look ;
While from his lips the soothing accents flow,
To cheer his flock, and mitigate their woe ;
For who could tell how soon the Sent’nel’s breath
Might give the signal of approaching death :
For every moment seem’d to them the last,
And days to come more gloomy than the past.
When that place, the sacramental board
Was spread in memory of their risen Lord.
While the deep thunder rent the thick’ning cloud
And lightning flashed along the mournful crowd
And when with lowly hands the bread was broke,
The sheeted flame fell on the living rock ;
Illum’d the table with its symbols spread.
As if heaven’s brightness rested on their head,
With placid looks they saw the dark’ning cloud,
Which hid Jehovah in his awful shroud ;
And when the voice fell deafening on the ear,
No murm’ring word proclaimed them men of fear,
But calm and sweet the heaven tuned “ Martyrs ’’ rose.
Like Zephyrs sighing at the tempests close.
Near to this place where mountain torrents flow
Thro’ broken rocks, to calmer scenes below,
How oft was heard the tender infant’s sigh,
Its name pronounc’d midst breezes passing by ;
While all unconscious of the holy rite,
It smil’d amidst the dangers of the night,
In caves and glens their Sabbath hours was spent
Till the pale moon illum’d the firmament ;
And there they wander’d at the dead of night,
When the dim stars withheld their glimmering light;
And oh ! how oft their wild retreats been found
By those who sought them like the blood-train'd hound,
And make that place, their oft frequented cave,
The holy Martyr’s solitary grave ;


Where nought but winds their dreary death-kneel rung,
And the scar’d bird their mournful requiem sung ;
Yet heaven wept, and bade their spirits rise
On angels wings, from sorrow to the skies ;
While all they suffer’d shall be ne’er forgot,
Their grave be hallow’d, and their dying spot;
For they to Scotland gave her Church, her laws.
And fell like patriots in their country’s cause.
Peace to their memory, let no impious breath
Soil their fair fame, or triumph o’er their death,
Let Scotia’s grateful sons their tear drops shed
While low they lie in honor’s gory bed ;
Rich with the spoils their glorious deeds had won
And purchas’d freedom to a land undone ;
A land which owes its glory and its worth
To those whom tyrants banish from the earth.
To the living, heroic dying acts and deeds of bravery are inscribed
on the pages of history, and will never die, for they live to give new
birth and fresh inspiration to ages yet to come, as much as many of the
noble acts of the past are remembered and commemorated by us in
the 19th century. The death of one age and One century is but the
birth of another, each giving birth to its own peculiar cycle of events.
The lessons moulded in mighty streams of innocent bloodshed, will
remain indelibly engraven on the mind of the people, and thus they
become guides to future and unborn generations to cultivate bravery and
moral ascendancy. It is the cultivation of this very growth and disposi-
tion which tends more than anything else to mark the tone, degree and
type of a noble mind. If the body in early life lacks an abundant and
regular supply of moral food or Christian training—the essential elements
to its future healthy growth and expansion—the mind then naturally, on
immature or improper nourishment, in proportion as the supply be large
or small, above or below the proper healthy normal standard, it will un-
doubtedly ever afterwards assume the same weak and stinted form, or
else become noble healthy and sti’ong. To a certain extent, it is the
proper moral training of youth in early life which may account for the
vast difference that is observable in the power and character of the
mental faculties existing in the human family. Take, for instance, the
Negro—an ill-fed, illiterate, and nomadic race—thus, also, a neglected
and most barbarous class, until the mind becomes first refined by educa-
tion and religion. This is a clear proof of the utility and value of
inculcating education and religious instructions as early as possible, that
mind may predominate over matter. An irreligious, uneducated mind
can possess but faint notions of the existence of a future state beyond
the grave. The Australian aborigines say “blackfellow tumble down to
jump up white man .” This is their idea of death and eternity. Mind,
then, is the great seat and centre of all utility, present or future.
While the eye and the ear continue, however, to be tutored in place of
mind, intellect then must grow up in a defective, attenuated, deformed
condition. In short, Nature here only, then, it may be said, works in
adversity to God’s laws. We cannot see God, at least His works, simply
with our eyes, nor yet can we hear His mysterious movements with our


ears. No! These feelings (were this the case) are only conveyed to
our inward senses through those outward subordinate organs, viz., the
eye and the ear: for if the mind be dead, dull, or uneducated, the eye
and ear to us, be they ever so acute, are but of little use in themselves.
Without the aid of mind and inward reflection these organs but merely
fill us with simple self-gratification, in place of aiding in developing
spiritual strength and moral advancement. In short, the eye and ear are
but mere monitors to the mind, helps, as it were, to enable man to hear
and see more clearly inwardly as well as intellectually. The great
mirrors, in fact, implanted within us by divine wisdom so that we may
be able the more readily to hold sacred communion with God (by viewing
and adoring His goodness and endless creation), and thus discern Him
clearly with our mind, which looks for the real images the eye and ear
collects or paints by its outward monitors or sentinels on the brain,
which is the seat of reason, intellect and power. We are enabled then
to see with moral as well as physical distinctness; if not so, mind, then,
is void, and in utter darkness, and God, in reality, is not within or near
us. As the world progresses, the great mass of people become moved
seemingly more and more every day by the eye and ear rather than by
mind. Leading men may and often do comport themselves in elegant
language simply with the view of captivating the ear or empty fancy of
the listener, and thus they succeed oftentimes in exalting themselves at
the sacrifice of truth and all principle. Fashion, again, is another thing
that is laid wide to ensnare and allure the unguarded eye of the
simpleton who seeks to exhibit a few fine showy dazzling qualities out-
wardly for others to admire and gaze at. Thus ignorant and unguarded
people come to be deluded by a set of worthless, unscrupulous persons,
worse than villains or devils, and who are ever on the alert to exercise a
morbid influence (cunning it might more properly be termed) to waylay
with delusive hollow wares the sensual outwardly-thinking dwarfs of
creation, who would sooner be led by what pleases the eye and ear than
take the trouble to study the real wants and requirements of a healthy,
well-balanced mind. No ! Mind is a thing uncared for by thousands
and tens of thousands ; consequently it is left in an unprotected state to
be ruined and misled by a class of vile sensual schemers, in order to
satiate and exalt a degraded, ambitious, greedy, worldly selfishness. The
Scriptures say, “ exalt yourself not before men , hut before God yet it is
almost a truism that the tendency of our present age and our fallen
nature is to deify the former, or mammon-worshipping, and to ignore
the latter, or God, and God-worshipping—the creature more than the
Creator. Money is a thing that is too often worshipped—yes, and
large wealthy owners thereof. Until mind becomes more cultivated
and valued, deception, misery and corruption is a thing that must con-
tinue to prevail, I fear, in every department of life. Teach this as the
supreme power or fundamental principle of life—the only way by which
man can ever expect to arrive at a state of true happiness, and to
recognise the full force of an omniscient God, then the eye and ear soon
become secondary aids in place of remaining as at present the leading
and ruling faculties and functions of life. Mind is the true substance of


Nature’s laws. All other organs simply obey its call, and are, in fact,
the mind’s real attendants or servants. When mind, therefore, is
uncouth and defective, a priori, eye and ear, be they ever so refined,
must also be defective. God, we are told in Scripture, made man in His
own image, i.e., I presume, he was inwardly created strong and perfect
in mind, so as to be able to judge between right and wrong, good and evil,
and not be led by mere outward senses. When man continued in this
state, the state in which he was first created, then he in every sense fully
represented the image of God ; but the moment he fell, it was because he
choose to depart from God’s unerring laws, viz. : by using the outward
senses, the eye in place of the mind, for Eve in looking on the apple or
forbidden fruit, exclaimed, that it looked fair to the sight, and was good,
consequently by this reasoning she was tempted to partake thereof, and
thus came the transgression of God’s first moral law or covenant, “ that
mind shall ever rule matter .” Lo, this only have I found, that God hath
made man upright ; but they have sought out many inventions, Eccles vii. 29.
Mind is invisible, but matter is every where visible, thus by the fall or
transgression, placing in this world the precedence of the visible for the
invisible, the outward senses for the inward, or what more correctly may
be termed “ temporal for eternal life, ” for the eye dies, but mind or
spirit is for ever and ever. It is the breath of life which was breathed
into the nostrils of man, in other words a resuscitation of life which was
entrusted to his keeping and care by an allwise Omnipotent God at the
Creation of the world, but which by man's transgression he has forfeited
God’s good pleasure, simply by giving way to outwards senses in place of
being ruled as was originally intended by the inward or upright faculties
of the mind. Had Eve reasoned by the mind instead of being guided by
the eye and the fairness of the fruit, she would at once have been able to
recognise the bond or covenant she had entered into with God, not to
touch the tree of knowledge of good and evil ; as the penalty thereof was
surely death. It was the placing of mind (the sole image of God) under
the dominion of the eye and ear, which caused our first parents, Adam
and Eve, to forfeit God’s pleasure. The ejectment from Paradise was but
the penalty or fruits of the transgression. We cannot discern errors till
we first appeal and reason with a clear and undefiled mind, in place of
being ruled and directed by outward senses. It is by this means, I
believe, that the world shall ever again come to be thoroughly re-deemed,
or that man shall ever again come to inherit everlasting life, or enjoy
true communion with God and fellowship with him hereafter. Keligion
no doubt, is a very good thing in its place, but until it is made to act
more effectually inwardly, in place of pandering so much to outward
show, dry, formal, artificial lifeless ceremonies, then I fear it is all in
vain trying to seek to bring back the immortal image of God lost by
man’s original transgression or fall. The mind must first be moved,
not gay churches, fine ceremonies, routine dead prayers, and a host of
other useless, senseless, and superfluous dry theological creeds, delusions,
dogmas, and doctrines which may all conveniently enough tend to please
the outward dumb senses (like Eve and the sight of the apple), but
which can never really bring back the fallen or lost spirit to the original


image in which it was first created, unless first moved by the inward
vitalizing quickening spirit or mind. Until man dofts all such nonsensical
mimicry and outward ceremonial phantastic routine shows, and equips
himself with the only genuine armour of God, viz. : mind or spirit. It
is to be feared the world must for ever remain a sink of corruption and
ungodliness. Without such spiritual quickening few can expect to
inherit the riches of eternity, or yet to wear the everlasting crown of
glory or image of God in which he was first created. Suffer little children
to come unto me for their’s the Kingdom of heaven. And why is this 1
Simply for a reason that their outward senses as yet remain in a latent
undeveloped state, and thus their little innocent mind or spirit is not
sufficiently aged or ripe to enable them to reason far less transgress any
of the moral laws of God. Not so in the adult man, for the body reaches
maturity the animal propensities in a vast majority of instances are
allowed to rule and sway the inward senses. Not so in infancy, for all
is yet pure, innocence and undefiled, and therefore mind or soul
however so little reigns over body or matter and certain to enjoy
eternal life. Is it possible to offer any better or more feasible
explanation of this passage than in the manner herein described 1 The
knowledge of good and evil which Adam was required to conform to was
simply a well-governed rational mind—mind the spirit of God, the
great Omnipotent ruler and light of the world. All good it seems must
be concentrated in this one single element. No matter what man may
learn, it is this knowledge or light alone whereby man is enabled to view
and conform to the laws of this noble creation. Unless inwardly viewed
in this manner in the spirit man, I believe must be perpetually falling
away from the tree of knowledge of good and evil, so long as he continues
to exercise like Eve the outward deceiving senses of mind. This is the
demon and only demon or devil in this world. Simply God’s displeasure
at us following our own ways instead of being governed by His. Thus
the sure penalty of the law, not only physical but even moral death,
because we are dead to partake of his everlasting spirit, and continue
rather to follow our own outward ways and evil thoughts than be guided
inwardly by a rational mind or immortal spirit. Let mind once fairly
rule the body and the evil spirit or devil, as it is termed, is then
completely thwarted and overcome— i.e., we place reason, mind, or
faculties as they were given to us by God at Creation, viz. : that
“mind shall rule matter,” for if we allow outward senses to rule
and lead us, then we but fall into terrible destruction. No matter what
amount of knowledge man may possess, so long as it is in the order in
which it was created by God, then devil’s cannot overthrow man’s
work’s or peace of mind and thus salvation will follow.
It is strife, ambition, malignity, filthy lucre, envy, hatred, greed,
and all outward senses, show, and worldiness which seers and corrupts
the heart. Once apply mind fairly and sincerely in the direction of
God, and such temptations as these will soon crumble into nothing.
Christ I interpret is made to represent nothing more or less than the
second tree of knowledge of good and evil—the first having been lost
through the transgressions of our first parents in the Garden of Eden, In


other words it may figuratively be taken to represent mind or spirit
that was lost by the fall of Adam, and therefore a second tree of
knowledge is required to bring mankind, as it were, back from their
fallen sinful state, by again fixing his mind on Christ crucified in place
of on Adam. Christ seems the only beacon now offered by God in
order to attract and bring fallen man back to the right path of duty.
Without Christ as an emblem of purity, and Adam gone and the tree
of life gone, it would be difficult to conceive in what other way lost
sheep are now to be gathered into the sheepfold unless it is by this new
Mediator or living source of life and attraction that is to bring us back
to God, The sole object of Christ’s death is to win fallen man back to
the path of an upright duty, soul or mind, in place of leaving mind to
dwell in sin, the world, the flesh, and the following of outwai-d senses.
This I believe to be the true meaning of the word of God, and it is our
duty to resist every other philosophy but Christ crucified, Christ
having become the great Mediator between man and God. It is in this
way alone whereby God’s universal love and nature becomes known to
us. As we strive to approach to this end, so am we, I believe, on the
right road to secure immortality through Christ at least a spirit akin to
God’s, and which was lost by our first parents We can see God, I
believe, in no other way, but by the perfection and purity of our own
mind, and the absolute denial of all outward corrupting senses and
temptations. This is the only way in which moral strength and light is
to be obtained so as to diminish our darkness or unbelief of God and his
mysterious ways. This may, too, explain the passage in Scripture in
reference to Solomon, which says —“ The wise man’s eyes are in his
head (i.e., mind), but the fool walketh in darkness,” i.e., outwardly.
Upright thought then is an essential thing to man in seeking after
eternal life. The mind, in fact, is to the body what the sun is to the
heavens. It is the real centre of all life and heat. It illuminates
every thing on earth with its brightness, and so, too, with man, the
possessor of a pure and uncorrupted mind. Unless the mind is free
from every form of earthly clouds then God is not at hand, but the
clearer and more untrammelled the mind is with perishable things the
nearer it is to God and the nearer also to true happiness. Deny the
world and follow me. What other meaning can be attached to this
paragraph than that the world—the outward senses are to be denied—and
follow me, i.e., follow Christ, mind or God’s everlasting spirit. Religion
can never be considered natural, true, or yet perfect until men strictly
deny the world or devil, (evil thoughts) so that mind Christ and moral
spirit may soar above the flesh. Professing Christians, ministers of
religion must be like Luther, John Knox, and other great reformers.
Their whole heart and soul must ever be in their work and not mere
pomp and outward show, confined to ritualistic dry formal routine
prayers and deceiving life less ceremonials. No, they must be true,
faithful, and firm workers in God’s vineyard ere the lost spirit can ever
be regained. St. Paul, in speaking to the Romans, chapter viii., says :
“ For they that are after the flesh do mind the things of the flesh ; but
they that are after the spii'it the things of the spirit. For to be


carnally minded is death; but to be spiritually minded is life and peace.
Because the carnal mind is enmity against God ; for it is not (i.e.,
flesh) subject to the laws of God, neither indeed can be. Now, if any
have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And if Christ be not
in you (says St. Paul) the body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit
is life because of righteousness. But if the spirit of him that raised up
Jesus from the dead dwell in you then he that raised up Christ from the
dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit that dwelleth
in you. For if we live after the flesh ye shall die; but if he, through
the spirit, do mortify the deeds of the body (like Chi'ist, Noah,
Israelites, covenanters, reformers, and martyrs, &c., ye shall live.) For
as many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of God.
This is what Paul commands us to do —verse 24. For we are saved by
hope, but hope that is not seen is not hope; for what a man seeth, why
doeth he yet hope for ] But if we hope for that we see not, then do
we with patience wait for it. Chapter xi., verse 8. God has given
Israel the spirit of slumber, eyes that they should not see, and ears
that they should not hear unto this day. Yerse 32, For God hath
concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have mercy upon all. O
the depth of the riches, both of wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways are past finding out. For
who knoweth the “ mind” of the Lord] or who hath been his
counsellor ] For of him and through him, and to him are all things to
whom be glory for ever and ever. (Isaiah xxvi, verse 1.) Thus saith
the Lord, the heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool ;
where is the house ye built unto me ] and where is the place of my
rest ] For of all things have mine hands made and all those things
have been saith the Lord.”
Christ is risen from the dead, and is now at the right hand of God
making intercession for us. If Christ is translated (soul and body)
from this earth to some other planet or sphere of life in this unbounded
immensity of space, may we not, as justly and naturally, suppose on
the other hand that the first creation or birth of Adam and Eve were
not also specimens or types of the same kind of translations or resurrec-
tions ] Brought from some other inhabited planet to our earth as
Christ the first fruits of the terrestial resurrection may be said to have
been taken or translated by divine power from this earth to some other
planet, and there has become in a sense to the planet and first creation
what Adam originally was to this earth ] God made and is the Author
and Creator of all things, so that even admitting our first parents to
have been translated from one sphere of life to another (a thing not at
all improbable or yet irreconcilable with the creation) he is none the
less a creature or being made and created by God.
If Christ is risen from the dead then is it not as probable to
suppose that Adam originally must have been a somewhat similar kind
of rising or resurrection, i.e., a translation from one planet or sphere to
another] No doubt, many will doubt or refuse to accept the force or
feasibility of such a supposition, vague and bewildering as it may at
first sight appear to the senses. God we are told made Adam, but the


interpretation making, surely don’t imply that he was there and then
made out of the dust of the ground, for is it not as feasible to suppose
that the making or creation happened by way of translation after the
method of Christ rising from the dead 1 We are not to know God’s
inscrutable works, but surely there is nothing at variance with creation
and the supposition of such an event to have occurred in this particular
way. To suppose any other sort of creation but one would appear
to be contrary, to both law and nature, for Adam ere he assumed the
shape, functions, and office of manhood, must have had to undergo the
same kind of physical childhood, growth, or maturity, and this stage
’tis feasible to suppose happened ere his appearance, birth or figurative
creation was recorded or announced on this earth—an earth which must
have been in existence some thousands of years before. I contend,
therefore, that Adam’s creation was of the type of Christ’s resurrection,
not in the exact sense of the word a creation or birth, but rather a
translation or resurrection of his body from one part of space probably
to another, or from one planet to another. Adam’s creation I hold, is
only intended to be figurative and not real. The supposition is one,
however, that is purely imaginary, and on this account I ask no one to
believe it, unless it happens to coincide in any way with their own views
or feelings in the matter. I allow every person the same perfect freedom
of thought, and the fullest exercise of an untrammelled and unbiassed
judgment as myself. Why should free-born man be regarded as a slave,
or yet be asked or compelled to follow in the same deep routine habits,
drudgeries, formalities, traditions, dogmas and pomps of other nations,
or any special class of thinkers or believers 1 If man is a free being, let
him have free exercise of thought. We have surely had enough these
last 50 or 100 years of dumb lifeless repetitions and imitations of our
forefathers. It is time that some one struck out into new and
fresh paths, even should a mind untrammelled give rise to some original
ideas that may for the time being, be more of a repulsive than of an
attractive or edifying a character. It is time new thoughts and new
sympathies and impulses were awaked in this so-called enlightened
age of imitator’s of the 19th century, who, by sheer laziness, wanton
usuage, keep perpetually harping on the one same old dry threadbare
theological dogmas and doctrine, afraid to think for themselves, or yet
allow others to do so with impunity.
‘ ‘ Slave to no sect, who takes no private road.
But looks, through nature, up to nature’s God.”
All religion lacks strength and nourishment, that is not founded on
a truly pious mind. The healthy growth of religion must advance
beyond something more than ritualistic ceremonial shows, bowing to
wood, stone, brass, or man worshippers. Religion must take root in the
heart (or pure mind) the place of its natural growth—in other words, as
we advance in natural religion or godliness, we but forsake the World,
but the more religion of the kind that is now growing up, the more
seemingly does worldiness and larrikinism grow with it, and the more
widely spread too, the very senses or sin which caused the fall of Adam.


This is merely religion in a homoeopathic sense, or the substituting of
delusions and dogmas for the real. Instead of denying the world,
religion of the present day, seems rather to afford to some, at least, a
more ready cloak, to hide and perpetuate the transgressions of mind or
spiritual laws, viz., by aiding in the dissemination of the outward, rather
than the inward or pure quickening senses —the very essence of true
religion, the bulwarks of Christianity, the strength of Christ, the power
of God, or of “ mind and spirit over matter .” Indeed, the present state
of religion, is obviously growing more unsuited to the increasing progress
and requirements of the present age —intelligence, enlightenment, or this
great event of everlasting life.
Its truths ought to be spoken more to the heart of man, and not
pandering to dumb outward senses. It ought also to show more ripe,
fruit and less of glittering foliage, tinsel, and barrenness. The Church in
fact, has not that control over the mind of society that its widely-
spreading growth in its numerous richly-endowed church edifices ought to
have effected in this age. It ought, in fact, never to wink at crime, for
crime of the deepest dye is painfully too rife and rampant amongst us, and
that, too, in high places where money buyeth forgiveness of sins. This
is probably because more attention is paid to outward senses than the
study of mind or real affections of the human heart. Preaching to dead
senses and not to the quickening spirit or mind. (Romans x. and xv.)
How shall they preach except they be sent? But they have not all
obeyed the Gospel : for Esaias saith, “ Lord who hath believed our
report.” Until a minister has first become a true and thoroughly con-
verted man his labour will avail but little to any congregation. His
own soul’s mind or spirit must first have imbibed God’s sacred and
blessed truths. He must have felt the want of the tree of knowledge of
good and evil, before he can either successfully teach or yet appreciate
the real value of Christ crucified. An unconverted minister is with the
senses worldly, and has never yet drank at the pure fountain that
supplies the mind with truths fitted to preach the Gospel so as to bring
forth good fruit. Such, therefore, can only feed a flock with useless
homoeopathic globules, as it were, of loose religion, knowing no better
until he has perfectly discarded the mock kind of zeal which only appears
outwax-dly, but which has never yet been felt or quickened inwardly, for
it is the gift of God, or the bent of his mind being re-born by following
the new tree of life and knowledge, viz. : Jesus Christ. It is not the
Church that needs to be reformed, it is the moral over-worldly senses.
If ministers have not tasted the utility of mind or spirit over this—the
spirit over the physical body or senses, then their labour is all in vain—
their Church n mockery and delusion, and the people deluded, while the
mind remains as corrupt and hardened as ever.
Lay preaching, such as we too frequently find prevailing throughout
the interior of the Colony, is one of those abominable blots and slurs
upon the sanctity of religion that the system ought to be condemned from
one end of the land to the other. Are not such but vain mockers of
God and scoffers of true religion—worse, in fact, than the teachers of
larrikinism in the temple of God. Opening church doors on a Sunday


for the purpose of allowing all manner of illiterate tinkers, cobblers, and
other hypocrites and scapegoats to mount the pulpit and read timbrel-
sounding prayers in the absence of the ordinary clergyman is the worst
kind of all xeligious mockery and quackery—an odious insult upon
religion, man, God, and intelligence. Preaching under such circum-
stances is all vain show, a useless ceremony, a snare of the devil, or
rather a wicked device to please the morbid senses that surely leadeth to
destruction, while the mind is allowed to remain unchanged and in utter
darkness of what constitutes either truth, Chi-ist, mind, or God. Only
worshipping and following perishable things that must all die and decay
when the starved and neglected spirit at death comes to leave the deluded
body. Is it possible that such beings ever can earnestly expect to live
with God hereafter 1 A heart without a mind or spirit—full only of
outward senses lying and corrupting in the grave. Is such ever fit to
enjoy far less think to inherit heaven or eternal life 1 They may regu-
larly enough have worshipped their bodies and senses, but neglected the
mind, the only real living essence of matter. The vitality given us by
God in the breath of life which is so woefully neglected for mere fleeting
sensual pleasures, empty ostentation and worldliness. A bubble that
soon bursts at the touch of God when He comes to feel for the substance
contained within the mind. Nothing—nothing there—all in emptyness,
in darkness, and lost. Enjoyed every kind of imaginable pleasure here,
but the substance of eternity is lost for ever hereafter. Only look
around at the wonderful changes and mighty revolutions that are taking
place of late years even in our system of education, and assuredly the
time will arrive when similar gigantic upheavings will also occur in our
now so-called veritable systems of religion and Church government. As
Nature continues to expand in wonderful discoveries and revelations ’tis
folly for any one to think that the human mind will either remain
stationary or that it has arrived at anything like an ultimate state of
perfection in the one sense or the other. By the very laws of nature
everything is destined to move onwards to perfection, and why, therefore,
should religion stand still or be nailed down to one endless never-varying
grove—a grove which may truly enough be cropping up here and there
in new Church formalities or dogmas, but seldom or ever in new truths.
Do you believe God will reject us because we are of the high Church,
or of the low 1 or because we are of the English, the Irish, the Scotch, or
the Jewish nation, &c. 1 or do you believe it will avail us anything in that
heavenly temple not made by hands, whether we have belonged to the
Church of England, the Church of Home, the Presbyterian, the Wesleyan,
the Unitarians, Baptists, Glassites, Socialists, Nihilists, Communists, or
of any other sect, church, or creed ? or that the paltry perishing
distinctions, honors, and high insignias bestowed on man here, be they of
Kings, Queens, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Lords, Doctors of Law-divinity,
or of medicine, will ensure us eternal happiness if we have neglected
God and our own mind or spirit here, and which is to live with Him
hereafter ? No. It is said to whom much is given much shall be
required. The great and chief thing in life is not whether we are of that
denomination or of another, or of this rank or of that; but rather are


we sti’iving to live and become true and faithful Christians, the only
indispensable badge and recognised title which is to admit us to the
blessings of the world to come. Nay, further, we are commanded to cast
aside all bigotted dissentions here, for if there be no peace, unity,
brotherly love, charity and good will here, is it not in vain to expect it
hereafter, for assuredly as the scriptures tell us “as we now sow so shall
we again reap. ” But do we find Ministers exchanging Churches with
each other! No, for they are generally rather to be found at variance,
and even different grave yards are made the scenes of idle bickerings and
strife, of different sects and creeds. This topic may be reviewed in
an other light, by asking the question.” How the difference in the
intellectual power in man is to be accounted for or explained ” ! Some
may attribute it to genius, and say it is the gift of God. But again, is it
not probable that many acquire acute far seeing faculties from early
training, learning, and by a reasoning and reflecting mind, and thus they
come to appear to stand more prominently forwards in the front
view of life in proportion to the amount of zeal and labour they have
bestowed on their work no matter in what it may consist of. By this
it in other words means that while they have the full use of their eyes and
ears, they have not neglected to call also into requisition the higher and
grander faculties of the mind. They have in short never trusted alone
to the outward senses until they have also appealed to the inward
reasoning faculties which is the true centre and ruling guide to every
healthy well-balanced mind. Thus one evident reason why their works
are recognised by others, because they are clothed in reasonable language
attested by the inward faculties. If the mind on the other hand is to
be made a subservient organ to the eye and ear, the mere sentinels of
the mind, then no advancement can ever arise beyond mistrust and
deception. The eye itself cannot see into eternity, neither can the ear
hear sounds arising therefrom; but the mind can do both, for it is by its
nature when properly and correctly trained, ever on the guard to avoid
the approach of sinful sights and sounds, which may tend to divert its
attention from the right path of duty. As it unremittingly strives to
resist evil encroachments, so it increases in strength, multiplies its own
splendour, and has no need to fear when the time draweth nigh to
separate this vile corruptable body from mind or soul which again
ascends to heaven (undefiled), whence it originally sprang, and only lent
ns for a short time here below. Mind alone is in our own keeping, and
it will shine in lustre at the latter day the more diligently it has been
nourished here with proper moral food, so as to fortify it against all
worldly perishable cares. Think of the paragraph which says, “it will
be easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle than for a rich
man to enter the Kingdom of heaven. ” And why! Because such men
set their mind not on eternity, but on the perishable things of this earth.
They hord up wealth and satiate their outward senses and animal
propensities with all manner of luxuries, covetous show, gaiety, &c., and
neglect, probably, all the while to feed or care anything about the future
welfare of an immortal soul. They are content to leave mind in utter
darkness, and when their eyes become dim looking on the filthy lucre of


this earth, and their ears dull to all kinds of alluring earthly charms and
enchantment, their stinted, dwarfish, neglected mind, now affords them
but little or no solace or real true happiness. Thus, they come to die in
absolute darkness, with a mind little prepared for the things of a better
world, or to enjoy immortality. Looking on this world, they have
pandered, wholly to the outward senses, which availeth them nothing in
eternity. St. Paul in 2 Corinthians, chapter 5 and 7 verse, says : “We
walk by faith , not by sight.” Faith is like a telescope, it brings God
nearer and nearer to us, the more pure and powerful it is. Only look
at one solitary instance of the wide spreading miseries attending in-
temperance. Is it not an awful thing for a human being to die in a
state of intoxication ! To leave this world and to appear in eternity
with a mind clouded, besotted, or drowned in accursed grog. Think of
the state of the drunkard when he comes to leave this world, and to rise
again in this pitiful state at the sound of God’s trumpet, at the great day
of judgment. Is is not enough to cause every one to foi’sake this hell-fire
liquor, for assuredly every sin shall again appear in judgment against us.
This is a solemn subject friends, and one more gigantic than I am able
to deal with in a satisfactory manner , but I shall be fully satisfied if my
faint, yet sincere efforts and labours on this occasion, may have the
happy effect of only quickening the attention of others possessing more
capacity and enlightenment to study and drive more deeply into this
most grave and solemn matter.
Wealthy men may leave very tangible marks behind them on this
earth for a time, but what I ask, is to be found recorded of them or
their charity in heaven, is a solemn and an awful question 1 All their
life-time, they may pi'obably have been ever busily engaged in gathering
together and piling up, the few fleeting perishable things of this world,
and mind throughout life, continually ruled by the outward senses. Is
any place to be found for such in heaven, with mind so sterile, uncared
for and barren, for, is it not contrary to the word of truth, which says
“ lay up that which doth not rust or moths corrupt , or which mice break
through and steal.” But is it not, just what many have all along been
doing, viz. : hording up the corruptible and not the eternal. The lesson
is one so obvious, that the least of the uninitiated may, I think, readily
understand and comprehend its import and meaning. Great minds
never die. They still live in our midst in thousands, and are by their
works (mental) continually infusing new life and light into our daily
thoughts, so as to expand the mind. Poets, statesmen, historians,
theologians, reformers, and scientific discoverers, &c. Though many
bright minds are dead, yet are their works still living amongst us,
as light of instruction, and are they not to be found in our libraries, daily
instilling new life and action into our minds. Though their physical
bodies may long since have returned to its mother earth, the truth in
their many noble acts and works, still live in remembrance of man, and
are cherished as welcome beacons and stimulants for others to follow and
copy. Good trees of life, and through the grand discovery of the aid of
science and printing, their good fruit, labour and works, are now to be
found preserved in our libraries. Like the first tree, it brings


forth its fruit, and goes on reproducing and multiplying its number.
So it is the same with mind. Year after year is adding to its
momentous force, and revealing to us, new and more starting
discoveries and rich useful inventions every day, which would probably
have remained in chaotic obscurity but for the care, growth,
and expansion of mind. Evidently showing the mighty progi’ess and
power of mind over matter. Its never dying influence and magic-like
extension. Mind must progress to keep pace with the rapid strides and
changes of the world, otherwise man would be nothing better than
living in a state of brute existence, careless of the future or even of
eternal happiness. The brighter and more original the mind the
greater the light and attraction it scatters around its spectators. This
brightness does not necessarily consist of one solitary thing only, for
there are hundreds and thousands of ways of making its moral force
and labour useful, valuable, and apparent. It is from these various
sources that fresh good arises, and by its expansion new forms of life
and living are fostered and perpetuated. A mind that has never during
life been devoted to things eternal, how is it possible for such to expect
to exist in any shape hereafter 1 Mind, under such circumstances, can
only be a perfect blank, when the body, at death, is taken away. It
cannot now enjoy eternity for there’s nothing of it left, all has been
devoted to and swallowed up by worldiness, care, and corruptible things.
Its state then must be one of pain and misery since it is now rendered
totally incapable of communion with God or further improvement or
expression in His presence. Mind denying all opportunities when
coupled with the body here the lost opportunity can never afterwards
be required or again recovered. All is lost through the want of proper
mental spiritual culture here so as to insure immortality and communion
with God and his angels hereafter. The nearer we live, according to the
moral or divine law, (not man’s base kaleidescopic treacherous laws) the
nearer do we approach to the laws of immortality, or, as the Scripture
say, “ the just made perfect.”
In speaking of placing Adam in the garden of Eden this literally
might be taken to mean the earth - as the earth is only one of the
many heavenly planets that we see at night illuminating the firmament
with their dazzling brightness, and which may, too, be inhabited with
other kind of living beings, and under, perhaps, bonds of somewhat a
similar kind or nature to what Adam was. We have no proof that
there are not other worlds, either better or worse, than our own.
Neither can we believe that this earth of ours is the only perfect work
of creation, or that God has intended or destined it to be the only or
sole place of Paradise. We know we are here only as probationers to
another and better or spiritual world, and which rapidly approaches us
every day. If this world of ours were the only real place of happiness
then it would be folly for us to expect or yet hope for any better or
future state of blessfulness. Eternal happiness then would be but a
mere delusion, but it is not so for the spirit still reigns when separated
from this corruptible state and becomes pure and far above any kind of
earthy mode of existence. How, then, are we to obtain any clearer


insight into this “ life beyond the grave 1” Simply, I believe, by
strengthening our mind or moral faculties, or by estranging ourselves as
much as within us lays from this transitory perishable world of bitter
tears and sorrow. By the aid of the Bible and revealed truth we are
enabled also, I believe, to trace the future phase of life beyond the
grave. Faith, it is said, is given for inspiration, for doctrine, for
reproof, for instruction, and righteousness, &c. We must cast aside
then all outward senses and perishing zeal, and try to quicken the
inward mind in order to be able to interpret and clearly understand
God and His mysterious ways so as to secure future happiness. This is
no random statement or imaginary dream, for we have Christ’s resurrec-
tion and the Scriptures and inspired word of God to bear witness to
perfect bliss hereafter.
That eminent man, “ Hugh Miller ” says, —in “ The ages beyond
death ” : “It is surely a good thing to be enabled to look forward
through the clouds and darkness of our present state of being to the
calm sunny fields of the future; to be assured that the life which com-
menced as but yesterday, and whose events seem huddled together, as if
they were the occurrences of but one short day, shall never, never
terminate, but continue to go on, and on, through the unreckoned and
ever succeeding periods of eternity whose further edge of boundary God
himself cannot perceive. And is it not well that, as creatures possessed
of so quenchless a vitality, our affections should be fixed on each other,
and on him who occupies all the future and all the past? If we fix
them on objects less enduring than themselves, a day of final separation
must come, and when they depart to their far country, they must go
forth wounded and widowed —still, still looking track and halting by the
way, wishing and weeping, and longing in vain. How different must
that journey prove to those whose hearts have been prepared to love
their God, and whose affections have met and mingled with those of
their fellows ! They will go onwards assured of meeting with Him—
finding the stream of his brightness increasing the nearer they approach
Him; and reckoning the amount of their succession of happiness by
other periods of duration than those by which in the lower world we
measure our days of langour and suffering—they shall say ‘ our God is
with us, and we shall be joined by our friends early in the morrow.’ ”
These are the sentiments expressed by “Hugh Miller,” one of Scot-
land’s greatest minds on this solemn question.
It is said when God created the earth, it was void and in darkness,
yet where God is present there is always light. This passage might be
taken to imply “ the creation of intellect of man or mind which was to
enable him to see with the eye what was then in existence. Without
eyes all things of course would be in a state of utter darkness, and this
darkness must be still greater without reason, mind or intellectual light
to guide us. Light and eyes then were indispensable to man’s intellect
and reason, for without them all would have remained in a state of
absolute darkness. His first birth, and not the first birth of light, for
by geology, the world seems to have been in existence before that period.
Light then was the first creation, for God was now present, and when


God is present there is always light, though the sun is now made the
centre of this system. Though the earth was in existence, Adam
apparently was the first inhabitant, and here it seems he was placed
without physical restraint only moral —which was to be death —physical
death (for the spirit or mind is immortal) for eating of the tree of know-
ledge. In other words decay and corruption of flesh and body, for the
moral spirit returns again to God—the body to the grave to lay their to
be refined and purified from corruption—decay of course or a return to
its original elements of purity. In fact it may be said that there are
still many things yet uncreated, or as it were undiscovered and unre-
vealed to us, so that they must remain in darkness (like Adam and the
earth) until the new matter comes to be reflected on the mind or intel-
lectual faculties. This then in a sense might be taken to represent
another new creation. What cannot as yet be seen or understood by the
mind must necessarily remain as a thing in a state of absolute dai’kness.
As soon as the discovery is made known to the mind (like Columbus
with the egg and the discovery of America), light then shines as it did
to our first parents.
Man morally since the fall may be improving—so it may also be
with new discoveries. Discoveries are daily improving and becoming
more and more useful to man every day. When death takes place,
unless the mind is enlightened man is just in the same state as before
creation, viz. : surrounded by darkness, doubt, and faithless. Not so if
he has diligently guarded and tended the spiritual light which was given to
him by God. It will burn the brighter the greater the faith in
immortality, and the nearer we approach the grave the more vigorous
and brilliant the light (moral) shines, because it was originally lent us
by God, and now at the grave or death we are asked again to return it
in all its purity, to embrace eternal happiness and communion with
saints in heaven, where nothing but those who in this life have kept
their lights well-trimmed with oil shall ever enter or dwell therein.
Some may ask to show them heaven, and then they will believe in it.
Are such sceptic people not in utter darkness 1 The brightness of His
noble works and majestic glory are ever constantly staring them in the
face, but it so dazzles their outward senses (with their faint conceptions
of what kind of place heaven really is), that they cannot see it before
their naked eyes Before we can see into eternity man must first
become not worldly but spiritually minded, then God and his eternal
mansion is ever visible before our eyes. Those dimly burning mental
lamps whose strength of light won’t admit us to see clearly into heaven,
must follow that passage in scripture which tells us that by “Jaith are
ye saved. ” St. Paul says ; “we see by jaith ; not by sight. ” Here is a
guide to unbelievers by clinging to which it will assuredly at last bring
us to everlasting light; and as this faith increases light also most
inevitably will increase. But alas many of our devoted and most pious
men make faith like a horse in a whim on the diggings. They go round
and round regularly enough, attending Church service and weekly public
worship; but all the while probably making but little progress in faith, god-
liness, or true religion. They journey in their worship, in fact, in a small


circumscribed circle, like the dumb animal which is trained to obey its
masters bid and call. This my friends is surely not the way to teach
this eternal light. No, it is by moving onwards and forwards (and not
in circles) that the everlasting light and life we are in search of is to be
obtained. Not waiting for it to come to us, but we must ever diligently
keep moving forwards to receive it. Some may think because they are
regular in their attendance at church and weekly divine worship, that
they do all that is required of them to obtain this everlasting light and
life. Were this the case they would be nothing better than the horse in
the whim, moving in the same one endless circle, constantly moving but
making no progress. This is merely worldly faith in worldly show and
ceremonies, the mere halo of religion, while true religion itself is left
untouched and uncared for, and stands looming off in yonder distance
without the slightest effort ever being made to near ic in the least. The
habit of Church going may be pleasing enough to the eye in all this
outward formality and routine show and dry drill service, like soldiers
discipline \ but unless the inward man or mind also keeps moving
forwards to the church service, it can then X fear avail but little in
enabling us to reach or perceive any clearer this eternal light beyond the
grave. God it is said must be worshipped in “ spirit and in truth, ”
other kinds of worship and dumb ceremonial shows are but mere
delusions which at death vanish and perish with the body.
A truly converted man is one who sees God not with his open eyes,
but with his inward mind, spirit, or soul. As St. Paul said to the
Corinthians <( we see by faith ; and not by sight. Those who want to
see heaven to be converted are blind, and have not this faith in them,
for God is too glorious and bright for human eyes ever to be able to look
on, far less to behold Him. Were our eyes greater and ten times more
powerful than the best microscope or telescope ever yet invented, even
then His dazzling light and lustre would be far too great for us to see,
or yet withstand the radiant brightness of His majestic glory and
heavenly mansion. Thus clearly showing that to be able to see God we
must first bring our mind to His spiritual state of mind, and not be led
astray, thinking that there is no God and no such place as heaven 01
eternity because it cannot be seen with the naked eyes. We might as
well say the same thing of the electric telegraph, because we don’t see it
moving or feel the message passing along to and fro through the wires
with the rapidity of lightning, that the electric fluid don’t exist; and yet
with accuracy and rapidity the various messages are communicated and
read with exactness in a few minutes on the opposite sides of the earth.
Ignorant people fail to readily understand its action and wonderful
operation and mechanism, and yet they believe it to be an existing fact.
Is it not the same with religion 1 Many things are awfully deep for. our
understanding and comprehension, but faith and perseverance is as
necessary to bring us at last to the truth in the one case as much as it is
in the other. But to let faith stop here is entirely wrong, for fresh dis-
coveries and inventions are yearly, nay, daily taking place around us of
far greater astonishment and progress. And so it ought to be the case
with religion and the real Christian and his mind. Yes! mind ought
O


also to be improving and discovering fresh truths and stronger light of
God and eternal happiness. We have no right to sit down and believe
that because we have been to church and prayers that we have done all
that is required of us. No, friends. We may just as well say that there
is no need for any further discoveries and fresh inventions; and yet, as
the world progresses and enlightenment advances, the clearer does it
enable us to see the wonderful and mysterious works of creation and the
depth of study, care and perseverance it requires of man to bring them
to such a useful state of perfection. And so, too, must it be with the
mind of the sincere Christian. The more he drinks of the living waters
at the true fountain of religion and studies his Bible, the stronger his
mind becomes and the clearer can he discern the road to eternal happiness.
The torments of hell may be nothing more or less than the desire of a
neglected mind to hold communion with and enjoy Him when it is too
late. The dwarfish neglected mind probably burns in spiritual fire.
Having neglected to cultivate mind here, then probably mind is in torment
to see others rewarded for having faithfully nursed mind here for here-
after. Job says—chapter xxiii., verse 18—the price of wisdom is above
rubies—verse 28—what is wisdom 1 The fear of the Lord is wisdom ;
and to depart from evil is understanding. Wisdom is an excellent gift
of God. Without this mental culture or wisdom it is impossible to be
able to see God, far less to enter the kingdom of heaven. We should be
always improving in spirit and fervently serving the Lord. Ever ready
to receive the bridegroom when He comes, but alas ! how many of us
have this stronghold of faith 1 ? The sensual thoughts of the worldly-minded
are eaten up with the fleeting cares of the world—their wealth is a gnawing
cancer to the heart, and which the Heavenly Father, or Physician,
cannot cure, for they will not forsake or yield up its earthly lusts. The
deadly sins they see with their naked eyes they believe in—their wealth
they can see and handle, and hear with their ears the sound of the gold and
silver as it jingles in their coffers, and at their command can whet their
morbid appetites with every sort of pleasure this world can afford.
But in all this gay whirling life there is, perhaps, no thought and no
belief in the existence of such a place as heaven, because they cannot
see it. The faith they possess is only what they can see, and which is
fixed on the dark and perishable things of the world. And such
live, enjoy pleasure, grow, and at last drop into the grave, in what other
state if not but in absolute moral or spiritual darkness Can any person
under such circumstances ever possibly expect to see God, or even
heaven 1 ? The accumulated wealth and riches of earth is not the kind
of riches needed or demanded to become partakers of God’s everlasting
bountiful mercies, for it is clearly enforced on us “ that they only who
are spiritually minded shall see God.” And yet, with all the mighty
pretensions to religion of the 19 th century, is it not deplorable to see so
many forsake the true path of glory as the time draweth nigh for the
separation of soul from body, loathful to leave friends behind —children,
father mother, sister, brother, husband, wife, &c. Our earthly nature
seems to cling to us to the very depth of the grave. No doubt it is
natural, but all things belong to God, and when “ he takes he only takes


hut what he gave , and only lent us for a time.” The separation of the
clear, dearest tie of friendship and friends burn in bitter agonising tears
more at the loss of the body that is laid to lie and rot in the grave in a
state of corruption, than the salvation of that happy soul which is
unchained from its clayey tabernacle, and now departed to enjoy eternal
peace and happiness—which has conquered death and swallowed sin up
in victory. The death of the body is but the birth of the soul.
Through death the soul becomes free and immortal. O faith, the glorious
emblem and attribute of God ! It is not simply to believe it, but we
must also cheerfully love and obey it ; then our burdens are made light
unto us. You may tell me, friends, it is human nature, but was it not
this very irrational human nature in our first parents which brought on
us this vile agonising penalty, and which we are now striving to redeem
that lost spirit by offering our bodies as a sacrifice unto the Lord,
death, as Christ did on the Cross, so that spirit shall again rule matter,
Christ’s noble mind ruled both body and matter \ so also must ours if
we expect to win salvation. But, until mind rules supreme, many
would rather imperil their souls than sacrifice their body, their pleasure
or their wealth. Such is the bent of human nature —firm believers in
what they have seen, but faithless in what they have not seen. Their
mind is either too narrow or engrossed with the things and cares of this
world for them to think it worth while to take the trouble to look into
eternity—thus the bitter pangs and tears when the body comes to
separate from soul, our temporal life for eternal, the visible for the
invisible. The deeper this body has drank of worldly pleasures, and
neglected mind in this life, the more painful the separation, and deeper,
assuredly, the sorrow will be. The calm death of Christ on the Cross was
unmoved amidst all its sad and painful tortui’es. And why 1 Because
Christ was prepared for death (like many of our noble heroic martyrs), and
to lose this vile body, rather than the soul or spirit should suffer eternal
punishment. In Christ’s dying moments he was scoffed at, some spat in his
face, and other’s offered him wormwood to drink. Constrast this kind of
death—death on a cross, with the many comforts and advantages offered us
in death-beds of sickness, and is the victory, viz., death, not great for
spirit then is made to rule matter. But, flow many of us are trying to
secure this stronghold of unquenchable faith 1 Religion, friends, is a
“ solemn duty ” much more so, I am afraid, than it is our nature to
earnestly stop to consider or to enquire into. We are all too much in
the habit, I fear, of taking the outward show or shadow for true natural
religion or worship. Content seemingly, to continue in the one same
never-varying routine tract, like the horse in the whim, as I have already
pointed out. We regulate our feast-days, our habits and customs of
worship, but are we as regularly striving to feed and advance the mind
in spiritual matters 1 Can we say at the end of the day, the week, or
the year, that we have laid up a sufficient supply of spiritual truths till
the next harvest 1 Or, can we say that our present stock of religion on
hand is enough, and of that quality calculated to enable us to meet and
live with God lor that we are prepared for death 1 Friends, these are
solemn—these are awful questions, yet, the day is coming when an


answer must be made, and assuredly, no one but ourselves will have to
answer them ! What is neglected now, can never be regained hereafter,
therefore, it is our solemn duty to take warning, and “ he ever diligent
in spirit, faithfully serving the Lord." The more we strive to do this,
and the further we move from the world, the nearer, I believe we
approach to a state of perfect happiness and life beyond the grave. As
the magnetic needle points to the north, so it is by and through Jesus
Christ that we are now directed thitherward to heaven.
This is the “ great key ” aided by a right spirit and the influence of
the Bible, whereby we shall ever be able to enter the great mansion of
mansions. Christ is now become the bond or tree of life of good and
evil, planted not in the garden of Eden but on Mount Calvary, where
he poured out his precious blood for the salvation of our souls, as a
ransom for our sins, and as a guidance to us in this now miserable
fallen world. Jesus tells us in his own words—“ lam the way, the
truth and the life ;no man cometh unto the Father hut by me.” If we are
faithful then to our trust and the cross, our election and everlasting
crown is sure. This is the only and sole rock, upon which we are to
build our foundation of future life and happiness. If we are doing this,
we have no need to lament the loss of any pleasures that we may be now
enjoying, in order to save a soul from perpetual torments. By sin
death came into the world; but by the atonement of Christ offering up
his physical body on the cross as a propitiation for our sins, he has thus
become our Great Redeemer and Mediator, He has, with his own life
on the cross, paid the ransom for our original sin. He has conquered
sin, that is to say, by renouncing everthing, the devil, the world and the
flesh—that mind, truth, moral and spiritual endowment, shall again
guide man as it did before the fall. He in short died for us in body,
to save our souls from condemnation, and has now become the way, the
truth and light unto the Father. By this chivalrous, noble self-sacrific-
ing, heroic act, he has raised mind or spirit to the standard of God,
rather than dwell in the tents of sin or the temporary perishable passions
of this world. Abraham too, we read of in Scripture, offered up his
first-born as a living sacrifice unto the Lord, which was accounted to him
as righteousness. This is another instance of belief that spiritual
mindness shall at the latter day rule matter, and thus allow a peaceful
separation of soul from body : but not so if the body and matter is allowed
to continue to rule mind. Where body rules the outward senses all
future then to such believers must be in utter darkness. Our Saviour
abolished death, not my friends death of the body for we must all die,
but death of the soul. But for the want of this mind or spiritual light
(and now is the time to cultivate), it means some shall die in death or
spiritual darkness, and others shall die in the Lord, i.e., in light, and
shall rise again in the newness of spirit, having while on this earth
offered as Christ died Abraham did, “ spiritual sacrifice unto the Lord. ”
It is to those who in this way endure the Cross shall wear the Crown,
those who endure spiritual works and sacrifice shall see everlasting life.
The quick and the dead— i.e., mind or world, believers or unbelievers,
heaven or earth, or those who have cultivated eternal light, or those who


have been content to live and walk in worldly darkness. Believe in the
present life, but pay no heed and care for the future. As the whole
world is laid under the penalties of sin, Christ or Christianity has now
been made the means of focussing or collecting the lost sheep, until the
tree of life ( i.e ., mind or spirit) through Christ is again brought back
and made to take root in every end and corner of the earth. Leavening
until the whole as it were becomes leavened and again brought back to
God. In proceeding with our subject, I shall not attempt to offer any
other exposition of that abstnise and difficult disquisition having
reference to “ life beyond the grave. ” Suffice it to say, it is surely
enough for our present purpose to know and to confine our thoughts
simply to the moral and spiritual aspect of the question; for if the
spiritual life here below be kept as pure and undetiled as possible,
then no one, I think, need fear but what the physical state (whatever
it may be, or shall consist of), will afterwards be properly provided
for and taken care of without us making any unnecessary inquisition
on that score. It is not because Christ crucified is now preached
unto us that we are to be saved. Plenty of pretending Chris-
tians are regular enough worshippers at Church, and though they
hear the gospel preached yet many are driven before and living
in the world and in utter darkness of what Christ really is or
what constitutes sound religion or Christianity. It consists of some-
thing else besides a mere empty bare name. It consists in daily
improving our every outward act so as to give strength to the heart,
soul, or mind to resist the many temptations hereby thrown in our way
by worldly minded persons. The Church simply tells us what is right
in theory; our own mind or conscience must afterwards put such
principles into practice. Once break these principles and neither
religion nor church attendance, be it ever so outwardly strict and
punctual, will ever save us. Here we are only alive in body, but
utterly dead in spirit. The mere body, outward senses or attendance
at church ruling the mind. Like Eve eating of what she saw and what
was good to the sight, but faithless in unseen things. The horse in the
whim moving but always in the one same circle and direction in place
of onwards and forwards. The more true principles are cultivated and
followed, like feeding the body on sound healthy nourishment, the
stronger it will become. The same too, with mind, the nearer Christ
is approached the better it is prepared to meet death and eternity.
But let me ask did any of us ever seriously stop to consider what
kind of place eternity really is, or if even the wisest, best, or
most piously lived person is actually fit to associate with God
in his happy eternal heavenly mansion 1 Supposing our amiable
Queen were at this present moment to send one or all of us an
invitation to spend a month with her at Buckingham Palace. The first
thing that would naturally strike us is —“ are we prepared or in a fit
state to accept the offer of such a high honor” 1 ? If not prepared to
accept an invitation from the Queen, how much less then are we prepared
to meet God in eternity. If any man really knows and loves God and
his Bible is he not then always prepared to meet the Queen or any other


person in the highest paths and ranks of this life 1 Sin or mental spiri-
tual darkness is only between us and the Queen, and between the Queen
again and the Almighty King and Ruler, for God is strong as a lion to
meet all. So ought we were God’s invincible spirit within us. Probably
the first thing complained of in this invitation would be the state of our
wardrobe, our slender pockets, want of finery or jewellery, and a hundred
other little things; but do we in all this exciting fluster for one moment
ever think of God or the Holy Bible, the living words of truth and
strength 1 ? No !we but think in this invitation of our want of worldly
things and not heavenly. Again, were God to call some of us away, say
at the plough in the fields, in drunkenness, with unclean faces, or in
tattered garments, &c., are we content to die in this state, or must we
first wish to wait to get sober, to dress, and clean ourselves before we
appear before Him in heaven ? No, friends ! No matter where we are
or how we may be clothed, if we are ready and clothed in spiritual
armour we are always fit to go at God’s summons. It is not our occu-
pation, our unclean faces or tattered garments that God will look at, it
is the state of our spirit or mind. If our mind is right we have God on
our side, and good clothes are not needed to make us look any better.
Was St. Paul not a tent maker, yet see the precious truths he has
bequeathed us in his Epistles, far greater than empires. Yes—deeds
are more to be honoured and praised than conquering wars and
carsed battlefield laurels and glory. Our very earth is baptised in
streams of innocent bloodshed, from Cain down to the butchering in the
last Franco-Prussian war. Think of the thousands of innocent spirits
that are now through this bloody war or iniquitous instruments of the
devil slaughter down to eternity. Not offering their bodies a living
sacrifice unto the Lord like Christ, or Abraham and his first born, but
disciplined and paid to fight to raise the renown of a few ambitious petty
spiritless despotic kings or rulers, who if they think they can conquer a
nation are to be worshipped, and considered as the only gods of the
world. But ’tis not so for tho’ flesh may govern flesh, yet spirit is ruled
by spirit, and the God above can at any moment take from us what he
gave, without the necessity of the horrible massacres attending a battle-
field. But if God is not in us and we tremble before the Queen and her
grandeur, how much more must not this fear and trembling be when we
come to stand before God and his great judgment seat! If our heart is weak
here ;is it not also weaker hereafter 1 The wicked may fear and tremble,
but the heart of the righteous man will rejoice and be glad. If we have
cultivated true communion with God and his Bible here, our brightness
then can never be disturbed or discomfited in presence of royalty or any
other kind of worldly grandeur. We must shine in spirit, charity, and
religion, the only gem and badge of honour belonging to Heaven. Our
earthy stars and stripes and other empty titles will all pass away as
cracklin" reeds before His invincible name and glory. The one an
show and device of man, the other clothed inwardly in the
sterling image of God which the glitter of the world can neither
extinguish or destroy. The one nursed in the lap and luxury of ease
and comfort, the other enduring countless forms of hardship and persecu-


tion to win salvation ; the one dressed in the gay gems and diadems of the
world, the other clothed in the quickening wide-spreading light of
heaven. The one feeding and craving for the preservation of the body,
the other hastening the corruptible from the incorruptible. The one
dreading death ; the other longing for eternity. The one honouring man,
the other loving and obeying God, till at last the time comes when we
must all perish or be changed, and yield up our bodies to the grave. As
we have lived in body, so do we die in body, but as we have lived in
spirit, so we also live unto God and eternity. When body and mind is
separated, they can never again be rejoined, the one is of the earth
earthy, the other is of God godly. If we cannot discern God in this
flesh, the same flesh never can make us discern Him in the next As
we see him here, so shall we see him hereafter, as the scriptures hath
said “in my flesh only shall I see God.” We cannot look on Him until
our mind or moral darkness, is first illuminated with His glory. We
must see him with our mind, spirit, or moral perfection, as He sees us.
We must be true to Him, like Christ and the cross, then we see with
the eye of moral and spiritual light which, as it increases, shines more
andmore unto the perfect day. As we increase in this light, we increase
also in strength, charity, benevolence, faith, Jove, &c., to resist the
world, the devil, and the flesh. As the mind becomes refined, it would be
folly to suppose that Church government should stand still. No, as the age
advances, so too, I believe, must the Church advance, and the difference
between religion or the forms of religion now, and a hundred years
hence will be as great as during the past few centuries. Only compare
our churches now to what they were 300 years back, and what will they
not be in another 50 or 100 years to come. Only compare the rapid
strides science has made of late years, and assuredly the time will come
when the present style of religion and worship will have to change its
tone and shape in order to keep pace with the mental growth of this
enlightened age. We must become thinkers, and not mere dumb
O o 7
worshippers and actors. It won’t do for us to contentedly sit down.
No, we must rise and advance as the real true motto of religion. If
worldliness is growing, intellectual reason through better and sounder
systems of education is also growing. It is folly then to think ourselves
perfect in religious knowledge any more than in secular knowledge or
in science. As the one progresses so must the other, and what now
seems to us in a state of darkness only awaits the expansion and growth
of mind to reveal many hidden latent and useful truths, yes, and even
more marvellous discoveries than either electricity, steam power,
railways, printing, spinning, telegraphs, astronomy, fine churches and
cathedrals, or routine ritualistic dry formal ceremonies of worship, <kc.
The mind as it is cultivated whether in science or in religion only helps
us to see things clearer and to advance them a stage further forwards to
perfection. Science and religion are inseparably connected, especially
religion, for it is the great vitalizer of the faculties of the human mind
which through faith enables man to humbly work and approach God
through scientific revelations. Religion is the faith, science is the art
to draw us nearer and nearer to Truth and God. Without such aids mind


would remain stationary, or in a state of absolute immovable darkness,
science in fact makes life useful, religion makes death happy. If such
were not the case neither mind nor man would improve. Life would be
but a simple myth, and the imagination chained down to the one
endless never varying monotonous grave. In fact mind or intellect to
man un'ler such circumstances would be as useless as to the dumb
brute, as it shows neither right from wrong, and science therefore would
come to a standstill. But divine Providence in his wisdom hath wisely
provided otherwise, and countless thousands now earn their bread
through the very aid of scientific discoveries and divine revelations.
Science then, in the strict sense, is in no way inimical to the cause or
spread of natural religious truths apart from dogmas, on the contrary it
is its best hand maid or promoter of good, for while the mind is
growing stronger in religion the body also must be cared for by science
and scientific discoveries. As science grows so also must religion grow
in a similar ratio. The perfections of printing proves this, as it has
been the means of scattering the Bible over every corner of the globe
and in every language and tongue on earth. Science is daily passing
from mere speculation into more stern and vigorous life. It is hourly
and yearly expanding into a more mighty power, by which nature is
not only flung widely open to our thoughts but made subject also
more readily to our wants. Through the influence of steam shipping
we can now travel round the globe in the unprecedented short space of
three or four months, as witnessed by the Orient, of the Orient Steam-
ship Company. Is the progress of science then not giving us dominion
over sea, air, earth, and water. All these patent and rapid strides
of science tend to benefit the many and not the few. Science in fact is yet
in its infancy and inexhaustible; and by her mines, forges, steam
engines, printing presses, &c , it is bestowing on millions not only com-
fort but even luxuries, that a few years back were unknown or perhaps
only the distinction of a few. Meteors oft pass along the heaven, the
scientific discoverer, the philosopher, poet, historian, and theologian, &c.,
all do the same thing—pass along the horizon of life. Thousands have
gone and passed along before us in this onward progressive panoramic
age to common life, from which we originally sprang. Can any one
conscientiously say then that science is doing wrong, or that religion is
not considerably improved and strengthed by her efforts ? Tis folly to
talk when science is tending more and more every day to confirm the
practical value of religion. When truth is revealed by science, religion,
and reverence for an all-wise Almighty being, spreads in power and
influence, for neither the one nor the other has yet ceased to grow or
•come to an ultimate state of perfection. What would we have done in
this colony only for science, shipping, compass, steam-printing, and
hundred of other useful things! Australia would probably have been
almost unknown now ; the word of God is beginning to resound and echo
throughout the length and breath of our vast forest and mighty wider-
ness in place of the howl of the dingo and the wild native animals of the
desert. The hand of man and science is turning deserts into fruitful
fields and happy homes, while steam wafts away our rich inexhaustible


treasures and gold to foreign shores so as to afford comfort, plenty,
and abundance to others. Fresh branches are springing up around us
almost every day, and will continue to expand as the age advances under
the influence of better education, and I may say better Government
and less disgraceful political chicanery, corruption, and peddling states-
manship and diplomacy. In many things we are wiser and farther in
advance than our forefathers were, and generations to come will yet far
surpass us in learning and in scientific discoveries. Mind will never
cease to grow should evexything else stand still. Thousands of useful,
able, and intellectual men and women, have passed away, but through
the aid of printing, their toil and mental works still live and are
remembered and cherished amongst us, and are to be found in our
libraries, instilling new life and inspiration into others, like the art of
photography, which preserves most faithful likenesses of oxxr friends in
memory of tlxe past, hope in the future, and which stimulates us to
fresh and greater energy. Only take the writings of Herschel, Byron,
Shakespeare, Walter Scott, Burns, Newton, Pope, Luther, Knox,
Carlyle, and hundreds of other celebrated thinkers, and do the reading
of their writings not tend to inspire new life and vigour into us every
day, and as fresh as if the authors were still living in our midst. Or
need I point to the wonderful writings of Bunyan, the tinker, and who
suffered long imprisonment in gaol. Is there another work or manual of
theology extant equal to or yet half so valuable as “ Bunyan's Pilgrim's
Progress,” or his “ Holy War,” and which caused one leaxmed divine
and Archbishop of Canterbury to commit suicide, because he failed to
turn out a better work than poor Bunyan the tinker and prisoner in gaol.
Will these works not be read with as much pleasure and instruction
a hundred years hence as they are now ? The noble legacy contained
in the writings of John Bunyan, is as great if not far greater
than the immense amount (over half a million) of riches left to the
people by that charitable-hearted millionnaire Peabody. Science then,
you perceive, will ever continue to shine and bring forth its numeroxxs
frxxits (even thoxxgh surrounded by an immensity of pseudo-professors
of science and weeds that soon passeth away into oblivion) in new and
useful forms in the progress of the world. It is by looking steadfastly
at the past that we can improve the future. We may blot out the name
of an inventor, but the invention lives until displaced by some better
contrivance. And so one mind lives in memory until a better springs
up to cause it to disappear. The one is but a stimulant to the other,
which goes on reproducing its mental fruit as it becomes nourished and
fed on matter of a similar nature. Were it not so the mind of many
good men would be completely lost at death, but though the body dies
their spiritual mind in printed works and invexxtions still live to
inspire new and fresh energies to grow up in the living. I am not a
believer in “ spiritualism,” but this I believe to be the only way the
living can hold intercourse with departed spirits. Their good or bad
name cx’eates an inspiration in others to copy or follow their example.
I speak, of course, more particxxlarly of the works of good men, for I
don’t suppose any honest person would ever dream far less think of


trying to copy the acts of criminals, however heroic their daring deeds
may seem to be to minds of a degraded and distorted nature. The best
minds to follow are those who have faithfully and fearlessly done their
duty to God and man, and never swerved from truth or the execution
of a right duty. There are plenty, however, who strive to cloak offences
and errors, but such only bear witness against themselves, for the mind
is subject alike to the laws of contagion, as well as the body. Is
it not a delusion for such believers ever to think to enter heaven.
If they have done concealed wrongs here, the punishment only awaits
them hereafter. It is not on death-beds that souls are saved ;it is during
early infancy, that the innocent mind should be guarded and carefully
trained. The young tree, not the old. Wrongs are like the persons
invited to visit the Queen, ever in fear for some evil or mistake to be
seen or discovered. The humble or lowliness of man’s present position,
is no barrier to his future greatness. Some of the most eminent men
that the world has ever produced, have risen, not so much by the force
of any extra or extraordinary talent, as by perseverence and the cultiva-
tion of their mind or rational thinking faculties, thus, they have risen to
the highest eminence of fame. Shakespeare was of humble birth; so
was Carlyle, Cardinal Wolsey, and Kitto, the author of the celebrated
woik “ Illustrations of the Bible,” but shameful and lamentable to say,
such a noble man and mind, died of sheer want and poverty in the city
of London. Burns the poet, was a ploughman, and Cook, the navigator
and discoverer of these southern continents, were ordinary labourers,
Allan Cunningham, the sculpture, Hugh Miller, the geologist (already
quoted) and Ben. Johnson, were masons; Hunter, the physiologist,
Romney, the painter, and Professor Lee of London (the most eminent
Oriental scholar) began life as carpenters ; Sir Richard Arkwright, the
cotton manufacturer, Jeremy Taylor, the great Anglican divine, Lord
Tenterfield, the Lord Chief Justice of England, were barbers ; Living-
stone, the great African explorer, was the son of a weaver in Blantyre,
Scotland ; the late President of the United States, viz., Johnson, was a
tailor ; and President Lincoln, was a timber cutter in the back woods of
the west; and hundreds of other illustrious names and men, have risen
solely through their own energy.
The examples of these men are surely healthy stimulants to others,
and furnish abundance of proof to show what amount of intellectual and
material wealth they have bequeathed to posterity in the progress and
prosperity of the world. One design unites all, viz., religion—the Bible
and God. ’Tis folly to say that science and religion are inimical, as the
former (science) but helps man back to his original state. When mind
fell with Adam, Cod then said, “ let man eat bread by the sweat of his
brow.” Was this not a punishment on man for ignoring the moral law
in place of giving physical laws the precedence ? As we gain strength
in religion and strict gospel truths, we but strive to regain our fallen
nature, and thus mind is made to rule matter. As we progress in
divine law, God then lightens our burdens by sending scientific dis-
coveries, and as our faith, truth, love and charity increases so does science
keep increasing and expanding in more usefulness. It is false, however,


to accuse science of trying to usurp or ignore religion. As science grows
so will religion grow, and we have no greater proof of the spread of
religion than the spreading of science. It is merely God in other words
speaking to us, and endeavouring to lighten our burdens by its aid as
our faith and truth keep increasing. It is not the improvement of the
physical but spiritual or moral mind that enables us to withstand the
many temptations of the world. Our mental improvement and perfec-
tions demand it. There is no doubt, a great amount cf sin exists in the
world, but there also must be a vast amount of good, to cause God to
bestow on us so many wonderfully valuable and useful scientific dis-
coveries. In fact without the advent of science the immensity of popula-
tion on the face of the earth would be allowed to starve. In the battle
field, thousands and tens of thousands have fallen, led in fact like sheep
to the slaughter.
If the same amount of care had been bestowed in training the mind
and inculcating lessons of moral philosophy that was spent in dry military
discipline these men probably would have become good soldiers in Christ,
in place of making slaves and prisoners of their bodies, or becoming food
for the cannon, powder, bullet, rifle, needle-guns, or tyrannical kings and
statecraft stratagem. Put on Christ’s armour and fight for angel’s glory
in place of perishing battle-field bravery. Not to run at the sotmd of
the bugle or trumpet calling them to slaughter, but at the sound of the
Gospel which protects and preserves them from eternal punishment.
Conquer the enemy sin and win God’s banner of life and immortality.
This is the Christian’s duty. Protestants, so-called, are oft loud enough
in their declamation against Popery and the Church of Rome, holy water,
convents, crucifixes, confessions, and so forth, but let such first see that
their own tabernacle is clean ere they find fault or complain of their
neighbours. Only think how many rich church livings and cures are
annually being bought and sold in the Church, and the thousands that
are now living in ease and fattening on the Gospel and fruits of religion.
Persecutions, blood shed, burning at the stake, imprisonment, nay, death
was the price paid or fees received for spreading and teaching religion
in former years, but now our standard of worship is reckoned by fine
churches, fine clothing, and high salaries. Nay, we see church-doors
opened every week, a fine peal of bells rung, and regular attendance to
chant the same dumb prayers, hear dry sermons, preached or perhaps
read from books, &c. But where is the religion or godliness in all this
outward ceremonial formal routine worship 1 And is this not just as
culpable idolatry as ever sprang from Rome, or is it not the sort of
orthodox divine worship that is to draw us nearer to God and prepare
and fit us to enjoy everlasting happiness that is awaiting us in that
mansion not made by hand 1 Oh ! friends, let us be sincere and see that
our hearts are at worship, and not merely the mocking aping sounds of
our lips. No, friends. It is said that only through much tribulation
shall we ever enter heaven. It is further said, 11 God must he worshipped
in spirit and in truth , and whatever ye do do all to the glory of God'.'
But the golden calf, I fear, is as much in existence now-a-days as it was
in olden or Mosaic times. Look around and don’t we perceive abundance


of proof of the mighty strides made by the untrammelled free-thinking
mind of man, from the earliest days down to this present moment.
Only think of the thousands who have faithfully fought God’s battles,
and have suffered all manner of hardship, persecution, and even death
rather than surrender their faith and free-thinking liberties. It is not
religion in the individual, but it is religion and faith in the aggregatel
or multitude which forms the ebbing and flowing of this mighty powerfu
mind or mental wave. It is the thousands of good and true believers
in the written Word of God which forms the increasing strength of this
great endless claim—eternity. We can trace the growth of its life-giving
roots far back into the deep dark early struggling ages, and there we
discern its birth and growth ever rolling onwards from age to age until
the influence of the Bible is now becoming everywhere a power and
a necessity. See the many ripe and bright minds who have shuffled
off this mortal coil clinging to the Holy Bible, and what an immense
amount of vital force and mental energy is now concentrated in
promulgating its valuable sacred truths. Its power is growing
mightier and mightier every day, until time shall be no more.
But, on the the other hand, waves of another and counteracting
character and influence are also daily cropping up in our midst in the
shape of obscene publications and lewd, vile, worthless novels, and a
wholesale trafficking in lying worthless quack nostrums, homoeopathic
and patent medicines, the outpourings of worse than degraded minds
(weak in, if not void of, all truth), put into circulation to contaminate
and poison both body and mind of thousands of simple innocent
unguarded people with their delusive deceptive trash. Can people,
pretending to real Christianity or the spread of religious truths, be
sincere in their devoted affections and love for godliness, who can con-
descend to read and feed their mind on such miserable fictitious catch-
penny trash—founded not only on mere idle imagination, but the
transgression of the very first law or edict of God, to abstain from lies
or writing lies. Is the idle abominable habit of novel-reading not an
awful pit for innocent simple minds to fall into 1 Feeding the mind on
painted shadows, gilded attractive images or idolatory, to the shameful
neglect of more useful pastime and enduring avocations. What a
dreadful pastime, what on accursed amusement, what an immense
amount of moral force annually wasted in composing and pondering
over such idle dissipated trash as novels, as if truth—solemn truth—
must give way to accursed falsehood. The novel has been the first
sad downfall of the mind of many a truly amiable and promising
young man and woman. Some have satiated their innocent mind
with such alluring deceptive traps and trash, and untruthful inkled
in fact from the path of rectitude and virtue, that their very soul’s
mind or faculties in time become the restless toy and prey of others,
wait, waiting for the issue of the next fresh edition or new novel (and
sham nostrums,), unable to distinguish the true from the false, the
genuine from the spurious or the good from evil. Thus they become in
time disbelievers of the very word of God, and treat it as an inferior
pleasure to that of reading a tissue of plots and lies artfully compiled


within the covers of a yellow-backed shilling novel. Can the fangs of
the fiery serpent lay any stronger hold of the physical body than the
influence novel reading has on weak and unprotected minds 1
Christians may preach, pray, and try to disseminate truth, but how
futile and inert such work in influencing such whose hearts are the
devoted worshippers of the Novelists hero and heroines, rather than
striving to love and adore the tragic heroic act of our blessed Saviour on
the Cross, and who poured out his precious blood as a ransom for our
sins, and seeks by such noble acts to bring us back to God. But no, we
love rather to dwell in the tents of sin, sinful ways, lying, &c. Mind is
weakened, prostrated, and degraded, by reading novels and fictitious
trash, but vastly strengthened and expanded on the other hand by the
reading of solid enduring truths. Education now-a-days, however,
without religious instruction, is I fully believe enmity against God and
his laws, what can be more degrading to the soul of man than
lying, reading lies, or disseminating deceitful lies, wilful and corrupt
perjury 1 Will God admit man into His eternal mansion on the oath of
a vile perjurer 1 ? What greater sin is there on this earth equal
to the oath of a false swearer 1 What a horrid state of society
to live in composed of such debased men who prostitute solemn
sacred truth honesty and uprightness for filthy, petty, earthly lucre,
a temporary gain and victory, a little applause, a fleeting pleasure.
Is hell fire not too good for such wicked mortals, who fatten on and
follow vice, and forsake the true path of truth, virtue and holiness, for
sordid, perishable, petty gain ? Can any such call themselves true
Christians, or can they fervently expect, or yet believe in an eternity, a
God, or eternal punishments 1 Their opinion of a hereafter must
indeed be the merest of flimsey delusions—a perfect pretense or
mockery of religion. The distribution of what is not really true,
must indeed, be enmity against God, whose very throne of mercy is
founded on truth, love, charity, uprightness and glory. It is not the
body, but the soul or mind of man that must be cared for, it is not
dyspeptic stomachs, but the brain that is to be properly fed and nourished.
Sin, it’s said, is the parent of crime, wars, suffering, persecution, disease,
famine, hatred, (lie., but what is worse in man, than prostituting mind
or principle, for filthy lucre, or to gain and to hold, the high offices of
place and power in church or state 1 Debasing the physical body, is bad
enough, but, is the man who prostitutes mind and forsakes all principles,
whether in religion or in politics, not the most degraded of all human
beings. Man hypocrites, the chrysalis of infidelity, deceiving and
making a toy of his eternal soul ! Is this pure or natural religion 1
No, for it lack the noble, sterling, independent truth, the very bulwarks
of Christianity, and essence of natural religion. Man must first have
faith in himself, before he can have faith in God. Premiums are now-
a-days, seemingly, offered in order to tempt people to commit acts of
hypocrisy, rather than in olden times, coveting death at the stake, than
forsaking the true and faithful principles one possesses.
For uttering a few rash sentiments, a man the other day was subject
to two years’ imprisonment and a penalty of £IOO besides ; but the man


who swallows and changes his principles—plays in fact the religious and
political hypocrite—is worshipped, adored, and admired as a statesman,
a patriot, a philanthrophist, and shall I say a Christian of the 19th
century ! Is this the way to popularize and spread the valuable life
giving glorious truths of religion and privileges of Christianity 1 or is it
the way to bring fallen man back to God—back to the paths of virtue,
faith, truth, love, and eternity?—Deut. xxx., 15 and 17. Making as it
were the pit wider and deeper to swallow the evil-minded but never
assuredly the good, for truth is the real basis of all goodness and excel-
lence, and mind is and ever will remain the standard of man. Truth,
truth—the everlasting never dying essence of the soul of God, eternity
of life and happiness beyond the grave.
“ Were I so tall to reach the pole,
Or mete the ocean with my span,
I must be measured by my soul;
The minds the standard of the man.
Dr. Watts.
THE DREAM.
In a dream of the night I was wafted away
To the muirlands of mist where the martyrs lay ;
There, Cameron’s sword and his Bible are seen,
Engraved on the stone where the heather grows green.
’Twas a dream of those ages of darkness and blood,
Where the minister’s home was the mountain and wood;
When in Wellwood’s* dark muirlands the standard of Zion,
All bloody and torn ’mong the heather was lying ;
’Twas morning, and summer’s young sun from the east,
Lay in lovely repose on the green mountain’s breast;
On Wardlaw and Cairn table (in Muirkirk) the clear shining dew,
Glistened sheen ’mong the heath bells and mountain flowers blue ;
And far up in heaven near the white sunny cloud,
The song of the lark was melodious and loud ;
And in Glenmore’s wild solitudes, lengthened and deep,
Was the whistling of plovers and bleeting of sheep ;
And Wellwood’s sweet valley breathed music and gladness,
And its fresh meadow blooms in beauty and redness ;
Its daughters were happy to hail the returning,
And drink the delights of a sweet July morning,
But there were hearts cherished for other feelings,
Illumed by the light of prophetic revealings, .
Who drank from the scenery of beauty but sorrow,
For they knew that their blood would bedew it to-morrow,
* The late Andrew Kerr, J.P., of Wellwood, near Orange, and father of the present Andrew T.
Kerr, Esq., J.P., and one of the members for Orange ) called his homestead “ Wellwood," it being
the spot where Covenanter Cameron fell under the bloodthirsty rod of the tyrant’s persecution and
this native or birthplace. Airds Moss is about three miles from Muirkirk, where the early days of
the late Mr. Kerr were spent. The railway now passes within sight of Cameron’s monument.


’Twas the few faithful ones who with Cameron were lying,
Concealed ’mong the mist, where the heath fowl were crying;
For the horsemen of Earl shall around them were hovering,
And the bridle reins rung through the thin misty covering.
Their faces grew pale and their sword were unsheathed,
But the vengeance that darkened their brow was unbreathed ;
With eyes raised to heaven in calm resignation.
They sung their last song to the God of salvation :
The hills with the deep mournful music were ringing,
The curlew and plover in concert were singing—
But the melody died ’midst derision and laughter,
As the host of the ungodly rushed on to this slaughter,
Though in mist and in darkness and in fire they were shrouded,
The souls of the righteous were calm and unclouded.
Their dark eyes flashed lightning as firm and unbending,
He stood like the rock which the thunder is rending ;
The muskets were flashing, the blue swords were gleaming
The helmets were cleft and the red blood was streaming,
The heavens were dark and the thunder was rolling,
When in Well wood’s dark muirlands the mighty Were falling.
When the righteous had fallen and the combat was ended,
A chariot of fire through the dark clouds descended;
The drivers were angels on horses of whitness,
And its burning wheels turned upon axles of brightness ;
A seraph unfolded its doors bright and shining,
All dazzling like gold of the seventh refining ;
And the souls by that came forth out of great tribulation,
Have mounted the chariots and steeds of salvation;
On the arch of the rainbow the chariot is gliding
Through the paths of the thunder the horsemen are riding—
Glide swiftly, bright spirits ! the prize is before ye,
A crown never falling, a kingdom of glory !


APPENDIX.
The following letter on education (reprinted from the Dubbo
Dispatch of April sth 1872) was written as a kind of reply to
a speech delivered by Dr. Badham at the Annual Commemoration
of the University of Sydney on the 21st May, 1870. (Vide
Sydney Morniny Herald) :
EDUCATION.
(To the Editor of the Duhho Dispatch.)
SiR, —Permit me to solicit the necessary space for the insertion of
the following letter in your valuable columns.
A University, like everything else in creation, is subject at times,
apparently, to its own particular kind of paroxysmal ebullitions—other-
wise a commemoration is seemingly but another name for a tournament
of empty display, or the better way, perhaps, of enabling some crusty
individual a favourable opportunity of blowing off a little surplus
accumulation of gas on some fancied apathy (or ignorance) of the value
of the living waters of learning distilled at high-toned colleges, and
which make the glittering gods, or dispensers of intellect, so high and
bright that ordinary folks cannot get near enough to examine, far less
to comprehend the nature of their artistic works. They become so
surcharged by usage with one kind of learning (I won’t call it conceit)
that if any other person should dare attempt to speak out of the pale of
their ordinary rule of thinking, it is almost sure, I suppose, to be
attended by a rapid succession of disagreeable shocks, as sparks emitted
from a fully charged Leyden jar. Such is the deep rolling thunder oft
heard arising from and against the University of Sydney.
The laws of flesh seem to be endowed there with properties much
akin to that of the electric fluid that attracts or repels bodies in
accordance as tbeir conducting qualities are positively or negatively
charged. The late elite gathering of our University is not an excep-
tional case to this rule, for no sooner the august assembly has dispersed
than a deep murmuring sound is heard to arise, and perhaps justly,
too—for if it is necessary to padlock its portals with “ white and blue ”
tickets, then, thank God, the infinite brain of finite man is not
encumbered by any such arrogant appendages to shackle its onward
growth and expansion in this mighty age of innovation and scientific
discoveries
I commend Mr. Gordon’s letter on “ Primary and Superior
Schools,” which appeared in the Herald of the 21st April last to the
readers’ notice.


On reading Dr. Badham’s speech at the annual commemoration of
the University of Sydney on the 2lst of May, 1870, it makes one’s
senses run ghastly cold and bewildered on the unsheltered plains of
ignorance at hearing the sonorous sound of literary thunderclaps pro-
ceeding from the more refined tongue of one a little further advanced in
the distant view, and more erect in the imaginary tower of human fame,
immersed and surrounded by the emitted flickering god-like lights of
physically inapproachable bygone ages, as if the author at his leisure had
lulled by some magic influence his body to repose while his spirit is per-
mitted to safely venture abroad in search of and hold secret communion
with kindred though departed spirits, now, alas, enwrapped in invisible
shrouds, where no one is near but the closeted person and the few col-
lected scattered relics of some of their yet apparently animate hieroglyphics
palpable and refreshing to those only who possess some peculiarly inde-
scribable innate virtue, power, passion, courage, or taste to enchant
nature into unlimited reveries, which their 'restless, undaunting,
researching spirit roams in the regions of the lurid light of dismal
mediaeval ages in search of long-lost classical legacies of enlightenment,
awaiting to be perfect and be transfused into degenerate man of the
nineteenth century. Alack a day, that hundreds of years should have
benignly rolled onwards over our heads in untiring efforts to arrest the
extinction of the glimmering laws of ethics, philology, metaphysics, and
philosophy, and in thwarting their transmutation into the most bar-
barous and hideous orders of superstition and idolatry.
God, we are taught, created man in his own image, but in the
freedom of his will and fallen covetous vanity he is now, as formerly,
seemingly ever yet busily employed grappling to lay hold of some
Platonic Deity of his own conceited imaginary construction in the
endless alluring images of perfection, worked up in the ever-bubling
crucible of his reason, heated by the action of a thousand fantastic
thoughts, while more genuine and faultless images lie naked and uncared
for at his feet in the undeceiving elements of simplicity and truth, like
the richest gems in the midst of the dross of the earth—often trodden on
but seldom known or acknowledged when actually visible to the casual
observer.
And, albeit, Dr. Badham inherits, by long and toilsome training,
this dazzling lustre and mental encrustation of medioeval ages, and
familiarized himself in the uprooting exercise in search of the refined
eloquence of the language, which constitutes the fundamental basis or
root of many of our more simple vernacular words, and which has, too,
given birth to a more useful and startling order of things utterly
unknown to the poetical refinement of the ancients, whose minds were
more accustomed to theorise in a vacuo of jejune rhythm, while ours is
yet increasing in strength and fructifying in untold valuable discoveries
and inventions, affording support and well-being to millions of our fellow-
creatures.
Latin and Greek, again, to those whose thoughts have been
constantly directed and dedicated for years to the study of assimilating
the language, is like the looking-glass which but reflects the nature of


the object placed before it, while we remain in ignorance of the real
object itself. It is not the reflected shadow, it is the original without
refractor that is be observed, which borrows no reflected lights but its
own inherent qualities. Are we to suppose that because we see the
reflections of classical eloquence in Dr. Badham’s high-toned sentiments,
that we discern the exact similitudes themselves ? No; we only see the
reflected borrowed light of one of ourselves clothed in the assimilated
mental garments of the deep oblivious past.
The glass merely exhibits the image in conformity to the nature of
the observer, but does not reveal either the nature or composition of the
reflector—for as each fresh object appears before the deep or shallow
gilded glass, the image is still renewed according to the observer. It is
impossible, then, for all to afford the same flattering opinion as Dr.
Badham of the intrinsic value of classical education, and it is equally as
unnatural to believe that all can become the same good reflector of
refracted mental light without at least being furnished with the same
gilding disposition, means, leisure, application, opportunities, and other
favourable circumstances in life. A dead language, nevertheless, cannot
be of much use to a living age, transformed as it is by the ever-revolving,
wondeiiully changing phases of society, accelerated, too, by the
advancing aid of science, diversified in a thousand and more different
ramifications, rendering the acquisition of such a study an encumbrance,
if not an actual loss, in the limited outlets for its application in fields
now-a-days deserted, or uncongenial to its growth. And it is the height
of folly or bombast to assert that refinement does not unfit a man for
endurance or drudgery, as if the vital molecules of life were not as
rapidly consumed in mental as in physical labour. Thus hard study
and laborious manual work are irreconcilable and incomplete; analagous
in fact to burning the candle at both ends—it may burn more brightly,
but it evidently becomes of shorter duration. Therefore, as to the
rising generation seeking to cultivate a taste for the yclept meridian
classics, it must arise more from novelty, or the pure love of fancy, than
with the view of gaining any vast ulterior prospect or utility therefrom.
Its uses in the present progress of the world will assuredly sink it
deeper into disfavour. Except, perhaps, to the few possessed of the
means, leisure, taste and disposition, to urge their children to learn to
swim in the forgotten obscure regions of antiquity ; or more probably to
the select few who, perchance, happen to be born late and out of
their age. The study truly may improve their mental power to coin
new dissyllables, trissyllables, or polyroofed words ; but will it produce
another or more suitable language to supersede our mother tongue ?
One man may design and invent and another may improve ; but is the
use of the classics such a progressive study? No. Then it must be
inapplicable to our progressive age, where beauty, taste, or judgment,
must ever in our present circumstance remain subordinate to the ruling
wants of toiling multitudes of people, whose endless care and struggle
in this life is slaving to provide scanty raiment and food for the body,
and not rich mental food for the mind.
If it is the province of the State to endow high salaried automaton


professorships to furnish richly flavoured mental diet to the sons of the
aristocracy, then it becomes a much more important duty of the State to
clothe and feed the naked and hungry bodies of our poor, and even to
teach them elementary sciences, industries, natural laws, agriculture,
manufactures, and wherewith to live. Classics, any more than religion,
should be voluntary and not compulsory. That is, those who choose to
devote time to the specific study should directly pay for it, not indirectly
fostered through the aid of State funds. Its market value, like everything
else, should rise and fall according to the demand. A University
education is a luxury, in fact, beyond the reach of seven-eighths of the
mass of people, who, on the compulsory principle, have nevertheless to
contribute nolens volens to its support, whether reaping direct or indirect
benefits therefrom. Thus literally confining literary “ honours and
learning” to the few at the expense of the many. There is no moral
graduated scale of knowledge. Literature is all on one side, except for
“moral rectitude,” the only honor the poor man'can attain, which is
more to be valued and coveted than all perishing insignias from the
lowest and most easily obtained order, viz., J.P., to the highest ranks in
our Universities.
Should we not, therefore, travel the same road as Dr. Badham, or
look with the same mental eye, or feel with the same heart, or think
with the same brain, or feed on the same hieroglyphic mental food, or
even roam in the same oblivious regions of antiquity, is the sincerity of
our conclusions and knowledge of mankind any the less genuine because
it lacks the strength and depth of his elaborate conclusions? No. Is
man outside a certain divine classical test to be disparaged for assuming
mental garments in keeping with his circumstances and the age in which
he lives, because Dr. Badham should chance to have commingled with
the invisible spirits of other worlds, and to have surcharged his taste or
convictions with elaborate draughts of eloquence drawn on his own vivid
imagination after long patient perusal and concentrated thought on
Greek and Latin writings? No, Then one would imagine from the
high-toned nature of his expressions that it was utterly impossible, in
the present age, for man to live, think, act, or even reason, until first he
had been made to devour endless doses of those fairy, fanciful, god-like
images concealed in the bosom of the writings of his pet authors, as if
the present garments of our own simple tongue were not enough mental
food and covering to enable us to hold sacred communion with God and
honest fellowship with our fellow-beings. And after he has led us, will-
o’-the-wisp fashion, through a rhetorical eulogium on the transcendental
advantages of classical studies, in the same remarkable breath he assures
us, as if to conceal or steady his own tottering thoughts, that “no one
would pitch on the subject of education as one to make an occasion of
intellectual display.” Then, what on earth does the study of dead
languages possess, unless it is to teach refinement of judgment, taste,
and eloquence. For at the same time, mark, Sir, the very “ appeal is
made to parents to reconsider the ground of their dislike to inculcating
classical studies ” —as if the aid of science, agriculture, industries,
manufactories, &c., were not as indispensable requirements to teach man


how to live as to think 1 “If it cannot be denied that clearness
of thought is attained by reflection on the force of words, or that
the knowledge of one’s own tongue is very much promoted by a know-
ledge of the languages from which it is derived.” Then, can it, on the
other hand, be any the less denied that the spread of scientific knowledge
of what we eat and drink is not as essential to the maintenance of
strength and health of body as the classics is in affording strength, taste,
and judgment of mind ; or, can it be denied that the moral and healthful
tone of society would not be benefitted by the inculcation and dissemina-
tion of such useful information to enable man to readily detect
unmitigated sophisticated articles of food which he is daily compelled to
consume ; or, can it be denied that a healthful body, defiled and poisoned
in this way, does not often engender sickness, distorted and a debased
state of mind ; or, can it be denied that leisure would not be better and
more profitably employed both to individual interests and the general
welfare of the State, if industries, trades, and manufactories were more
frequently taught in elementary education; or, lastly, can Dr. Badham
deny that the brain of the poor man is not so capable of attaining as
high a mental cultivation and development as the intellect of the rich 1 ?
If so, then, why are all these useful and befitting sources of education
allowed to lie latent or reserved chiefly for particular or special classes ?
Or why need I ask, —are they excluded from the ordinary rudiments of
a sound, useful and practical education, why ? Simply, because, I
suppose it is thought of more salutary consequence to garland with
mental culture the minds of a few for “ butterfly fashion,” “ nobility
sharks,” or “ hero worship” than it is studying the great ruling interests
and wants of mankind, or the general popular enlightenment of the age.
Making, I presume, philanthropists of the few that the devil the more
easily may consume the many. But it is an ill metaphor in assuming
with belaboured ingenuity to assign to Sydney the inelegant position
of being considered the best refuse of old clothes while strange and
comical enough to say, the author himself is similarly attired in
unique fustian mental garments of old Gaul. Talk of taste in choice
of weapons in defence. Ye who have received the blow, tell me what
kind of weapon is this ? Or, is it the lion’s strength aimed at slaughter-
ing an innocent mouse ; or merely the spider’s harmless playful kind of
lullaby to the fly 1 The desert bird called the “ Ibis ” from its rare visits
teaches us, to our painful experience, the perils of an approaching
drought. So, I suppose on the same parallel, yet eccentric reasoning,
the appearance of a rare solitary, unanswered Latin epistle in the public
press prognosticates similar like ill omens of an approaching dearth of
classical studies in our social atmosphere ? But the long frozen fields of
endowment, salaries, &c., are already begun to show symptoms of breaking
up in disendow and disestablishment, &c., reform movements, and as the
social atmosphere becomes clear of all “ patronage breakers ” then
“ Voluntarism ” will take its stand in the new and approaching dynasty
of the world. But I should be sorry to be one of those to think with
Dr. Badham, that “ the new and visible encroachments coming on us
will be one of barbarism !” No. But irrespective of the future, let us


deal with the present and the past, and endeavour to make new converts
by sound, honest, straightforward reason, and not mere speculative
theories on things to happen. I ask whether the study of classics or the
discovery of gold, has been the greatest source of advantage to this
colony 1 Or, whether classics or the discovery of steam power, electricity,
spinning, printing, gas, &c., has bequeathed the largest legacy, or greatest
amount of benefaction to mankind ? These are the moving questions to
place in fair jux aposition with the study of dead languages. Following
up the thread of his speech, the report goes on further to state “ It
resents all novel ornament; it affords no field for originality, except to
such as have a mind to theorise in vacuo—in a pure region unincumbered
with facts. But I do not aspire to the originality of ignorance.''
What a repulsive melancholy spectacle for a classical. scholar who
has assimilated the elegance and beauty of ancient languages and
which he now seeks to inculcate into others, to point out the value of
education. To recommend its use—then immediately afterwards
elsewhere it has no field for originality. Stultifying the very end of its
object, for, if it possesses no originality, then the student but acquires
the knowledge but to become a grotesque mimic of the ancients (or
wearer, as he terms it, of old clothes) in place of imbibing learning to
fit him, to become a designer or inventor of good for himself and his
fellow creatures—the very essence or essential objects one would
naturally imagine of a sound education. If it lacks this endurable
ingredient to help to expand the mind in grasping at fresh ideas, then
it’s like attempting to nourish the human frame on the simple elements
extracted from the atmosphere. If dead languages be void of all such
vitalizing influence, then God’s laboratory of nature is a field very
replete (tho’ is said there is nothing new under the sun) with the most
sublime aid to originality and education, and superior equipage indeed
with which to adorn the mental faculties than all dismal dreary
ploddings into crevices of deep buried antiquity—who if raised from their
sepulctural rest, would now strike at the improved and many wonderful
metamorphoses that have lately taken place in the world. Ah ! and
would probably, too, exclaim in the language of the old woman the
first time she ever travelled, some thirty years ago, in a railway train,
when she said “ she was quite sure it was the devil’s tricks, and the devil
that was pulling it."
He goes on further to say “ educate the taste, which he calls leisure,
and you educate humanity.” Then provide the world with leisure, and
taste will probably follow. Taste, however, is but a mere fragmentary
portion of this humanity—and is inseparable with the other, if not more
ruling passions of nature —therefore, to develop the one, it must naturally
entail a corresponding counteracting influence for good or evil over the
others. But, in the abstract, it is a meaningless sentiment unless
coupled with the special taste alluded to —as it may mean a taste for
horse racing, gambling, or even Tom Sayers’ art of fisticuffs. Taste is as
variable in man as the race is itself, and, therefore, can never, by any
law, whether of Latin or Greek, be subject to the same uniform degree
of development. What extra taste need I ask, does Dr. Badham possess


any more than he is merely an instrument of communicating an amount
classics, at a certain standard, to a certain few, at a certain fixed salary
per annum? And perhaps, he may too, bespatter you with similar like
epithets as Sydney inr her old clothes, for exhibiting such bad taste, by
defiling your columns in publishing these remarks. His profession, and
that of the mechanic, digger, labourer, designer, or the merchant, &c.,
have all their own peculiar characteristic usefulness and influence, in a
paramount degree in the functions and formation of society, and
although the latter may not be as skilled in classical knowledge yet,
nevertheless, they may be possessed of an equal share or degree of
candour, gentleness, benevolence, compassion, and even refinement of
taste itself, in keeping with their occupation, and the times, though it
may probably be diametrically opposed to his views or alien perhaps, to
ancient habits and studies.
It is absurd, however, to presume to think to inculcate this
freemasonry taste—or that the ideas of the beautiful must all necessarily
spring from one source, or years spent in storing the mind with more
borrowed knowledge extracted from dead languages, and abjuring the
laws of nature, more prolific in universal knowledge, and even taste,
than all the refined classical writings in the world !
If every individual inherited this special taste in a uniform degree,
the condition of life would probably assume a much more odd and
eccentric aspect then ever. Each person must only be content to fill the
allotted space assigned him in the business of this world, and in what-
ever capacity. Taste, and usefulness must ever remain blended and
disseminated for man’s good, and God’s wise designs. Yes. As life is
but an ocean in fact commingling with the vast ever-changing scenes
(to man chaotic) in the elements, and though we may be entreated to
equip ourselves with those ancient oars to enable us to steer more firmly
our onward course, they are but as useless little glittering reeds in life’s
rugged seas of the present century, —where man, from the mighty,
surging, never ceasing, rivers of corruption and competition, has to toil,
labour, and sweat at a very early age to maintain, erect, and untainted
his humble position against the many raging billows and social storming
gales of his fellow creatures, awaiting, if not in many instances, con-
juring up deep laid stratagems and foul fabrications to hasten the more
rapidly one’s downfall and another’s uprise. The wily tricks of the
world in varied garbs are as a moving and ever increasing panorama of
fickle life’s battle before our eyes—and our daily care far less to
cultivate the sublime is wasted in striving to learn to avoid becoming
engulphed in man’s fiendish quicksands of baselessness, hypocrisy, and
tyranny. The struggle in the world is not hunting after the develop-
ment of the evangelical, divine taste or the beautiful. It is striving to
adorn this clayed tabernacle by eagerly grasping at the perishable things
of the earth, rocked to and fro in the cradle of self-conceited god-like
vanity and ambition, making earthy gods of men that man, in his
countless ills, poverty, ignorance, struggles and adversity, should
worship, obey his behests, and bow the knee to beg leave of him to live,
sweat, and toil! Will refined classics ever teach man to discard


avaricious wasteful greed, and share the few fleeting pleasures of this
world with his needy, helpless, careworn, toiling, fellow brother who,
though not blessed and decorated outwardly with superb perishing
houours of a University is, nevertheless, it is to be hoped, stamped
inwardly with the everlasting Royal seal of his God and eternity.
Another is just added to the huge string of commemorations, —another
flower has burst forth into ephemeral bloom to waste its fragrance on the
desert air—another stella, redolent with its alluring brightness, has but
for a moment made its appearance in its periodic transit through the
literary heavens for the illiterate multitude to wonder and gaze at, and
yet deplorable and disgraceful to say while all this kind of mimicry is
annually being displayed before our eyes —a show without a substance,
an artificial outward pulsation without a heart, a spirit, a soul to cause
any outward movement. Where are the so called favourite trees, the
exquisite literary foliage, the variegated immaculate blossoms, the boasted
and matured fruit to be found rooting itself .anew or deriving its
wide-spreading vitality from this would-be mighty avenue, or living
stream of unpolluted learning! Is it to be found in the pulpit, the bar,
physic, or the senate, &c. ; or, is it merely a phantom existing in some
wild, rapidly expanding, dazzling, imagination—a myth! If our
University is able to throw off her annual batch of a score or more of
ripened graduates, and can fortify the minds of so many with the double-
distilled eloquence and refinement of Greek, the durability and strength
of Latin, then, in the name of sense, reason, learning, and progression,
how is that out of half a million of inhabitants, we can only find so small
a number as “one or two solitary men,” (or sets of men) possessing
capacity enough of intellect or brain to rule this shamefully mis-governed
colony! Lei our University answer this question ere it attempts to offer
enticement within its walls as the surest and best road to the acquisition
of fame, wealth, or high places ! Of what value is all the fine tall
talking in the face of such stubborn palpable facts as these ; or what is
the use of burning out youth’s juvenile days storing the mind with every
kind of savoury learning within the cloisters of a dreary dull University,
when every week, day, and hour in our lives we see men far our inferiors
suddenly and unexpectedly raised to high offices and emoluments who,
in many instances, cannot probably even lay claim to a common school
certificate, far less the oft hard fought for high or low degree of a
U niversity!
Talk of University education, is such not a pitiful disgraceful fact,
in the construction of the Commission of the Peace, the Civil Service, &c.,
where a little despicable jobbery, poetical influence, venial sordidness,
and money will buy and command far more power and learning than all
the University degrees on the face of the universe! If learning is ever
really intended to be recognised as the only one ruling fixed standard
of merit in the nation, then why are uncouth illiterate uneducated men
ever and anon openly and barefacedly foisted into false positions simply
on the strength of their bank books, or the number of their sheep and
bullocks! Surely this is never the way to promulgate or popularize
education! If man is ever to rise or to rule, or if literature is ever


to sway a people, then, surely, its time such iniquitous side doors or
near cuts to learning (where money or elastic pelf is always ready
enough to buy the empty title) were for ever shut up, and thus compel
all to travel the same long dreary hours in passing through the sanctuary
of learning. Until then, genuine education must ever continue, more
or less unfruitful, and be despised by the rich, the vulgar, and the gay,
while they retain in their own hands the power and option to enter
either by the long or short cut to learning, and the acquisition of titles,
as they think proper at their own price. It takes years of toil and
expense to acquire the title of D.D.,LL.D.,M.A.. 8.A.,M.D., 0rM.8.,'&c.,
but what real difficulty is there in the way of any ambitious monied
numbskull to obtain the title of J.P., Esquire, a would-be-called colonial
gentlemen, who is empowered by law to trifle (with brazen-faced empty
conceited ignorance and impunity) with the lives and liberties of his oft
more often upright, honest, educated, fellow creature ? Talk of refine-
ment, taste, and order, these thoughts are enough to cause every honest
graduate to abhor the name of a University, and to look on commemora-
tions, as nothing better than a vain formality or idle piece of pastime,
when such titles as these are so easily obtained, and every day becoming
more and more a farce, from Knighthood down to C.M.G, and J.P.-ship !
Our whole social fabric truly wants some kind of special sweeping,
utilitarian reform, in order to deal thoroughly with these all-important
vital matters; but its not University bred men, but it’s the mass of
thinking people that must put their shoulder to the wheel to bring about
the gigantic and radical changes that are absolutely needed.
If anything I have written appears harsh, the sincerity by which it
is dictated must be my apology ; and also for the liberal indulgence of
your valuable columns on this occasion. I am, (fee.,
ANDREW ROSS.
Molong, 28th March, 1872.


The following letter appeared in the Bathurst Western Independent in
October, 1879 :
PASTORALS, SECULARISM AND TRUTH.
(To the Editor of the Western Independent.)
Sir, —The pendulum of public opinion now swings to and fro on
the education question—the great and all absorbing topic of the day,
and the only sine qua non seemingly where with to make man happy,
perfect, proficient, and angelic. Nihilism, socialism, communism,
spiritism, and every other kind of ism must make way for secularism —
pure unsophisticated secularism, the latest discovery and infallible
panacea of the age—that is to make the lion lie down with the lamb,
and to turn the wickedness and iniquity of the world into an elysium of
peace, plenty, and prosperity, without the aid on, intervention of Mille-
niums. Yes, all kind of ills, fallacies, and hobgoblins, even deism,
atheism, pantheism, and Buddism, are to be swallowed up and re-cast,
so as to fit the new divinity to worship at the holy, undefiled shrine of
secularism; the grand pole star that is to annihilate all kinds of mock
dogmas and slavish creeds, and so to make man fit to live in peace and
good will with all men, and to inherit paradise. We have had innumer-
able lessons on reformation, abolition of slavery, Catholic emancipation,
church disestablishment, &c., and now, in this new order of reformation,
events, churches, denominational schools, even Christianity itself, is
threatened with a similar fate and complete destruction; systems that
have been almost adored, venerated, and worshipped in the past are now
in the future, this startling and wonderful 19 th century, to be treated
with the most imbittered contempt and obstacles in the way of future
and further progress—yes, progress in what is the query. Once pass a
secular Education Act and then down goes the whole fabric of Canon
law-church, government-religion, and Christianity ; away goes our
boasted privileges of dark reforms. The passing of such an Act is but
the thin end of the wedge that will not only drive all religion off the
face of the earth, but, in time, also entirely supersede Christianity, God,
and his creation. Man, every day, is evidently becoming more selfishly
inclined, vain, and conceited in his own narrow-minded imagination,
puerile innovations to believe in the utility or existence of either a God
or yet devil. Men and measure worshippers, in place of God and divine
worshippers. Public school “idolatory ”in place of denominational school
—purgatory. Secular gods and worship in place of intolerant—bigoted.
Popes, archbishops, bishops, priests and prelacy worship the laws and
statutes of man in place of the inspired moral precepts of the Almighty
Ruler and Governor of the universe, to whom every knee, class, creed and
combination of creeds, beliefs and unbeliefs, must humbly bow. State
government, in place of being a blessing to mankind, is hourly and
daily actually drifting man more and more (with nonsensical, abstruse
law-making and outrageous vagaries) headlong into the quick-sands of
unbelief, infidelity, degradation and destruction. State craft exists
seemingly for no better purpose than to completely overthrow every


other kind of institution, religion and belief in the world but politics;
the rankest of sham vacillating unprincipled politics that makes men
turn their religion and political (T) principles as the wind turns a
weather-cock ; sowing broadcast the bitter seed of enmity and discord ;
setting one man against another ; one creed and class against another;
Nature against Nature to the sacrifice of human life, and the shedding,
probably, of much innocent and precious blood. Political scavengers,
and a parcel of worse than mountebanks and political intriguers, are to
take the place of canons, parsons, priests, bishops, archbishops, popes,
churches, in fact, turn our old into a new world. The hue and
cry is the State shall rule and not God and His divine laws. The
Senate house is to be made man’s whole and sole place and tabernacle of
worship, and in future made in fact to assume the supreme prerogatives
and functions of God and man. This is the liberal idea put forth
by secularists in trying to extinguish denominational schools. The only
power and voice the people and political slaves are to have in the
matter is simply through the voice of their representatives, who may be
as prejudiced as they are, perhaps oft incompetent for the position they
fill and hold, because they happen to have a very elastic conscience, and
command the wire-pulling machines intrigues and corruption concomitant
to electors, Biassed-minded persons are rash enough to saddle popes,
bishops, archbishops, priests and parsons with every kind of mischief:
but no mischief, no of course not, ever happens to the senate house,
composed often of the most ignorant, vacillating, and unprincipled of
men in creation. Men may change their political principles fifty times,
over and often admired and called able and clever men for so doing.
Are these men heretics'? No; they are the men whom secularists
boast of and worship, men without conscience, fear shame, or godliness
—only the catch penny. The mouth-piece and idol who represents the
clap-trap and mobocracy of the day. It has been said by our Gracious
Queen that the cause of England’s greatness is attributable to the
Bible. In the face of such an outspoken assertion, and coming to from
so high and respected a source, the loyalty of secularists cannot be
either very great or yet sincere in a virtue (mock virtue, I suppose, like
politics) they raise up with the one hand and then try to knock it down
with the other. It is indeed a sad and pitiful state of public ;affairs when the
Bible has to make way for the veriest of man’s statecraft, and many
of the worst phases of political peddling, jobbery, and toadyism, making
God and his prerogatives and inspired word of truth subordinate to
man, in place of man being made subservient to God and his unerring laws.
It pains one to think in this horrid transition of things that is about to
happen that educated men and preachers of the gospel are the first to turn
against themselves and the doctrines and principles they have been
preaching for ages. But like politics it is nothing seemingly new or
startling to change, for if pious men can exhibit and pretend loyalty to
the Queen and the Bible greatness of England. Is it not as easy for
them to play false to God and His inspired word which they now, in so
liberal and charitable a spirit try, to supersede and relegate, or a delusion
and encumbrance off the face of the earth. Secularists and their


lukewarm supporters ought first to put their own house in order before they
attempt to deal with their neighbours. If lam to suffer punishment
for error, then I’d sooner err on the side of religion and its so-called
dogmas than be a supporter of all manner of despicable state craft and
political jobbery and chicanery of the most hideous and base description.
The Church of Home is painted by some of our charitable Protestants as
composed of a sink of iniquity and a mass of blackness and filthy
abominations ; but these abominations, as they are called, are not a whit
worse than state-craft abominations, deceptions and intriguiugs which
are more to be dreaded and despised than religious ones. Man, we are
told, was created a responsible and free being, but it seems he has no
right apparently either to think or yet act for himself without incurring
the ill-will and displeasure of other portions of the community whose
opinions happen to differ with their own. In this position the Church of
England and the Church of Rome has lately done so in this very educa-
tion fracas and ebulition, and consequently have greatly offended the gods
of secularism. For daring to exercise the same rights and privileges and
their own free will they are to be despised, seemingly, and treated with all
manner of uncharitableness, vulgar abuse and vile vituperation. I don’t
belong to either of these denominations, but I am nevertheless ready to
admit that they have quite as much right to be permitted the privilege
of exercising their own opinion and judgment in these public matters
as I have to exercise mine. It is absurd and irrational to think other-
wise. Secularists are selfish and vindictive enough to believe that no
one has a right to speak or yet offer a contrary opinion but themselves.
In their mock Christian charity all are a parcel of priest-ridden, illiterate
slaves and fools outside the pale of their reasoning and holy alliance.
They might, perforce, be considered the only true source of light and
wisdom : the genuine brotherhood and salt of the earth. All must do
as they dictate and wish, as they are our brother’s keeper. That is
exactly the position in which we find the two combating parties. Right
is on the side of the secularists, wrong on the denominationalists; one tries
to usurp the inherent rights and functions of the other, and thus the
wordy warfare and feud of is to be left to the decision of state Govern-
ment, composed entirely of laymen, as is state authority was a superior
and more infallible tribunal for dealing with or eliciting an unbiassed,
unprejudiced decision on a question of such vital importance, than reli-
gious or church government. I hold that the former is more likely to
err in these matters than the latter, and in the sequel I hope to be able
to substantiate my position by fair illustrations and arguments. Pretty
state of religion, indeed, that men in the 19th century are to be educated,
forsooth, to worship tory or whig, liberal, radical, or conservative Par-
liament statute-law and our law-givers. Lord Beaconsfield, Gladstone,
Sir John Robertson or Sir Henry Parkes’ chamelion-like rule regime, in
place of God and His divine moral laws and everlasting, unerring truths.
Is this to be the bulwarks and outcome of the great “Australian Nation”
that has been recently prophesied, in the Melbourne Review, a nation of
infidels in place of God’s worshippers, which, on high authority, we are
told has been the means of making England revered and to become the


brightest gem in the constellation of nations—a model for others to copy
and admire. I say, down with the world and all such unallowed trash,
allurements, and despicable machinations, and mockery, more like the
hollow concatenations and fabrications of demon or devil than the
imaginations of educated, rational, God-fearing men. Notwithstanding
traditions there is but one heaven and one hell—yes, but it must be
remembered “there are many paths to both.” By secularism it seems
as if there was only one road to each, viz., one by secularism—the other
by denorainationalism; secularism being the road to heaven, denomina-
tionalism, of course, the way to hell. Place secularists on that all-
purifying place the raging sea, and bring him out of the way of
temptation and far away from the sight of land, place his foot on deck
of the largest ships afloat, and in this position say the ship is attacked
by the roarings of a raging sea and tempestuous storm, and tossed to
and fro as scores have been, ask him then the value of his secular or
State trust compared with denominationalism or godliness, and I’ll
warrant he’ll not only cling with avidity, but adopt the latter to the
fomer, God-ruling in place of man-worshipping. The conscience—the
soul of man—then, is no more safe from the billows on the stormy ocean
of secularism, than say that the mariner is safe on the troubled sea
without the will and the help of the great Ruler and Architect of the
world. Under man’s ever-changing fickle government, man is God ; but
under divine law God is God. Man may be prodigal; but God’s laws
are inexorable. Man in authority may be powerful, but God is all-wise
and all-powerful. From these premises I argue that the first duty is to
teach youth the fundamental principles of education—not secularism or
man-worshipping—but man’s duty and subservience to the God upon
whom he lives, moves, and has his being, and has had implanted within
him an upright moral soul; to whom he must give an account of himself
(not at election platforms, the bar of public opinion, or to secularists),
but at the great Day of Judgment. On the question at issue, lam pre-
pared, on the present occasion, to cast in my lot with the denomina-
tionalists—because, if we are to have education at all, then I believe
that the school is as much the place for instilling religious instruction
into the youthful mind as it is that of pure, unalloyed secularism.
A child ought first to be taught to look up with some dawning conscience
and reverence to the Great Father and Teacher of all, in place of being
stuffed with parrot learning and made stereotyped man-worshippers and
a parcel of toadying slaves to fickle-minded rulers and Quixotic, unprin-
cipled Governments.
Conscience, ’tis said, makes cowards of us all, especially when
unarmed with sound scriptural truths, and brought face to face with
some appalling event or catastrophe such as shipwrecks—The Dunbar,
Lock Ard, The London which foundered in the Bay of Biscay, and in
which G. V. Brooks, Professor Woolley of the Sydney University, and
scores of others perished, or the fearful havoc arising from droughts,
such as we have too often witnessed and experienced. But what
principle of conscience are children taught in public schools; taught that
public schools are Government schools, and maintained out of public


funds, over which parents have little or no direct control, and therefore
Government schools, education councils, and Ministers of Education are
all powerful and almighty. Denominational schools, which teaches
Godliness, and is more self-supporting and self-reliant, is no where.
Great men and great rulers can make popular names for themselves
when lavishing and doleing out the public money, but ask them for
private support for such an institution, and their miserable hearts will
direct you to go begging for state assistance. Public schools and build-
ings may well look grand, seeing that private enterprise has to compete
with public extravagance. Public school champions are often found
more free with public funds than they are with their own, and this
probably is one of, if not the grand ruling secret of the success of the one
school method compared with the other. The power to rule, to hold
state office and official influence, and the almighty dollar, has a wonderful
influence in altering circumstances and cases. Public schools is but a
transition or shifting of idolatory from parsons and churches to Ministers,
rulers, and Council Boards, who desire the power of dispensing patronage
and the purse strings. What amount of conscience is developed in
public schools, or how can secular, pure secular instruction (barring
scientific), ever tend to develop the thinking faculties of the pupil 1 Nay,
by receiving Government subsidy does it not rather tend to destroy and
dwarf the spirit (in parents as well as children) of self-reliance and self-
dependence. Who can already doubt it 1 None, because is the principle
not already established in the working of our Municipality Act which
seeks to inculcate into the minds of the people a desire for self-govern-
ment, and to control their own business in place of relying on
Government for every little need and help. Men who can attempt
to deny this fact would be base enough then to deny almost
anything—their own existence, I suppose, if it was possible for
them by so doing to serve some base, selfish, petty purpose, or
to enable them, perhaps, to pocket public or other peoples’ money.
Modern novelties and startling innovations, especially the thirst and
love for state, influence, office, and power, is fast superseding the revered
traditions of the past particular the advancement of the approching
grand Australian federation of Australia that we read of. Our very
railroads, public works, everything almost, in fact, smells of, and is
controlled, by redtapeism. We certainly live under the benign influence
of a most parental Government, which brings man’s self-reliance and
dependence on his own energies down to a minimum. A glorious
cause, certainly for secular advocates to champion, making free beings
state slaves. Discard religious instruction, and you at once discounte-
nance and discard the great fountain of our being and existence which
is to create a conscientiousness that God is as infinitely superior to man
and our mundane rulers as rulers are one to another, or light to
darkness. To deny Denominationalism is simply in other words to
deny the truth and inspiration of the Bible. If the Protestant, or say,
a revised Bible, is not the work of truth and a fit book for the instruc-
tion of children in public schools, neither is it a priori a fit or suitable
book to be read and upheld in our churches, chapels, and places of


worship. ’Tis horrible to say that children are to be prohibited in week
days from storing their mind with religious knowledge and truth
which adults only are permitted to partake of in churches every
Sunday. If religion is so good and proper to be taught in church
on Sundays, why not also teach the same truths to our children
attending school 1 What is good for the goose is surely good for the
gander. All religion, surely, is not dogmatic, and because some portions
of the Bible or Bibles may happen to be viewed differently and by
different minds and sects, is that any valid reason why the whole should
be discarded and ignored as worthless. It is paying a high compliment,
indeed, to the God of revelation that that Book, we are told, that has
made England so great is now to be rejected as an unsuitable text book
for the young, and for conveying knowledge and instruction in our
public schools. This is, indeed, a sweeping charge to be laid at the feet
of Christianity and religion, that it is so dogmatic and untrustworthy, and
therefore, not a fit book to be introduced into schools. Could anything
be more degrading to man and his religious tenets 1 In other words,
are we to be ruled by God or man—divine or statute law ? The question
is one of magnitude, and its solution one of no little moment to our
future welfare. I observe by the Press that very few laymen have
entered the field in this education controversy. Protestant clergymen
seem to be the chief leaders, if not the sole fighting party. We need
not so rashly accuse and talk of Catholics being a priest-ridden class with
a fact so palpable as this staring us in the face. lam a layman and a
Protestant, but I detest that kind of Protestantism which interferes with
me in the exercise of my conscience and free will, or that I am to become
an out and out secular slave and embittered hater of Catholics or
Church of England, forsooth, simply because a few equally bigotted and
religious fanatics tell us that by adopting denominationalism that it is
only playing into the hands of an alien and dogmatic kind of worship,
creed, sect, and religion. Will any man tell me that his religion is better
than his neighbours, or that he has the right or universal privilege of
snubbing and throwing filthy epithets at or to usurp the functions of
another. It is still more despicable to think that our would be con-
sidered leading and infallible religious lights, rulers, and moral guides
are generally the greatest of bigots and most uncompromising enemies.
As a free-thinker, I claim the right of exercising my own judgment, but
in so doing I don’t wish to arrogate to myself the sole or inherent right
to say that other creeds and dogmas are fabulous and wrong because they
don’t happen to chime in or clash with my own. It is hard to tell whose
religion is right and whose wrong. Each has a perfect right to his own
peculiar kind of belief, and should it happen to be wrong, then it is a
certainty that no one else but himself will have to suffer for the error and
the consequences. Many writers and religious carpers argue as if they and
their sects were the only true orthodox faith, aud that all others must
of necessity be a fallacy and delusion. Like the Pharisees thanking
God in their own vain, glorious, conceited notions of right and wrong,
good and evil, that they are not as other men are. By the fruit
ye shall know the tree, but Protestantism would lead us to believe


that they are the only true judges and inheritors of eternal life
and that all other creeds and believers shall be blotted out of
existence and condemned as erring sheep from the true sheep-fold.
And yet, how is the fact to be explained, the innumerable subdivisions
of beliefs and dogmas existing in the so-called Protestant faith and shield.
Why should Protestantism show so many different sections in the colour
of their religious banner 1 They protest against other churches, but we
hear little about the wide difference and inward diversities existing
amongst themselves in their own camp. All are united it seems, with
the view of overthrowing Rome and Romish propensities, and when this
has been accomplished ( 1 ) then, I suppose, and not till then, will they
ever undertake to rectify the delusions and vagaries belonging to their
own household. ’ The Protestant mission is not a salve simple to protect
and prevent the souls of their own followers foundering wrong, but as
an instrument evidently to wage war and enmity against Rome, and her
sink of heresies. Loving his erring neighbour as himself. He is no
genuine Protestant, then, who insists on Denominational education.in
preference to secularism, because by upholding Denominational schools
is playing into the hands of upholding the dogmas of the Church of
Rome. All the out-pouring of wrath—inflammatoiy, unbridled language,
and vulgar abuse which eminates from stump orators, writers, platforms,
lectures, and pulpits availeth seemingly but little in suppressing the
horrors, heresies, and dogmas of popery ; and thus, indirectly, Protestants
now, if possible, desire to clip the wings of priest-craft and Popedom by
making an attack on Denominational schools, so as to bring them under
the dominion of secularism or statecraft government. Actually denying
their own conscience and religious ordinances in order to spite, if possible,
Episcopalians and the Catholic sect of our co-religionists, which consti-
tutes at least nearly three-fourths of the entire population.
ANDREW ROSS, M.D.
Molong, 15th Oct., 1879.
F.'Cunninghame & Co., Printers, 146 Pitt-street, Sydney.


bl&LlO
pt sod 3


JUST PUBLISHED.
To he had from the Author on receipt of Stamps- Only a few copies left.
The Power of Mind over Matter;
OR,
Thoughts Suggested on Reading Nichols’s Confession
of the Parramatta River Murders.
By Dr. ROSS, Molong.
Price is
By the same Author,
JOTTINGS ON VITALITY;
Or, The Physical Basis of Life.
Price is. 6d.
Also , by the same Author ,
TYPHOID FEVER.
Its Pathology and Treatment, with Practical Hints on
the Preservation of Health in Tropical Countries.
Price 2S. 6d.
Also, by the same Author,
GUIDING PRINCIPLES IN THE PRODUCTION OF
WOOL AND MUTTON:
With Hints on Cattle Breeding and Disease.
Price 2S.


