

r-u.s-Rs ip
! : 1
9 P \
(LEkiiatOOS PA HP,
Box ■ 3
A LETTER
FROM
JOHN SMITH t„ JOHN JONES
ABOUT
A CHUKCH.
a bad for a blessing—too good for a curse,
I wish from my soul thou wer’t better, or worse.’’
HOBART TOWN:
WILLIAM PRATT AND SON, PRINTERS, ELIZABETH-STREET.
Sold by all Booksellers—Price Sixpence*
1852*




SECOND EDITION
JOHN SMITH’S LETTER TO JOHN JONES.
TO W, T. NOYES, ESQ., A.P.M.
‘ If you will take the first step towards making them ridiculous, 1 can
Only promise you that I shall nail each had shilling to the counter, and
expose the hollow mouthing of these empty professors of Dr. Fry’s new
creed.”—John Smith’s Letter to John Jones, p. 23.
“ I for one no longer shall recognize yon as the head, or as
belonging to the Church of England.’’—W. T. Noyes, to the
Bishop of Tasmania.
Sir,
No fresh exhibition of intolerance haying ema*
nated from Dr. Fry and his associates, I purposed in
this Second Edition merely to acknowledge the favor
bestowed upon “John Smith's Letter," leaving the
founders of a New Church in the silent obscurity into
which they had fallen : I had no idea of writing more
than a “ neat" dedication to some well-known character,
and thus usher into the world a Second Edition under
a happy star. Unfortunately you have, by venturing
out of your depth, frustrated my peaceful intentions,
and, in a manner, condemn me to immortalize a name
hitherto unknown, by connecting it with the well-known
“Letter to John Jones!" You say that you do


not intend to recognize the Bishop of Tasmania u as
belonging to the Church of England 5” and has it come
to this? Alas ! for unfortunate Prelacy, W. T. Noyes,
Esquire not only repudiates the authority of a Bishop,
but, in his wisdom, and in the exercise of his very pro-
found 11 private judgment/ 7 stoutly avows his intention
of making His Lordship a Dissenter! I shall not say
that you are past hope—past cure—or past ridicule ;
but that the apt repeater of the school-boy quotation
O tempora, O moves well deserves to be received into
the bosom of Dr. Fry's Moral Infirmary is placed be-
yond the shadow of a doubt : you are, in fact, on the
high road to distinction ; you must, however, remember
that there is an honourable as well as an unenviable
distinction: the latter can be easily obtained, and if
that is your ambition, you have but to follow in the
steps of the gentleman who wrote the dead-born book
on Prison Discipline, and the “ Objectionable Work,
eight years ago I”
When the Bishop’s Charge was sent to you, you
u innocently conceived” that your sentiments were
asked for : believe me, Sir, your published letters un-
fortunately bear testimony to the fact that, for your
own sake, you have u innocently conceived” once too
often. The next appearance you put in as a champion
in the cause of Protestantism ought, like the writings
of the Lay Delegates, to pass through the hands of the
clerical agitator for correction, or, if he is not at leisure
to revise your profound lucubrations, you might apply
to the late Secretary of the Protestant Association,


whose indiscretion never carried him to the extreme and
unguarded lengths you have so lately attained. Should
you again favor the world with the views and intentions
of the Protestant Defence Association, u neatly ex-
pressed’ 7 or u innocently conceived,” do not forget the
fate of Epimetiieus.
The spell of silence that has so lately fallen upon the
victims of the sad delusion not unkindly treated of in
the following pages ought to have taught you that
when a man works hard to u make a name,” it is some-
times requisite that he should deserve it; and, at the
same time, it is well to remember that there is such a
thing as a radical cure for blatant vanity, and this
Letter is a living proof that there exists an antidote
sufficiently powerful to contend with ignorance, impu-
dence, and presumption. The publication of the letter
from which I have copied the heading of this Address
indicates your forgetfulness of these facts : I regret
your ill-advised proceeding, and can account for it only
by supposing that time hangs heavily on hand at your
world’s-end retreat at Swansea ; and yet, surely, you
might have beguiled it more becomingly than by
actually stripping yourself calmly and deliberately of all
consideration and respect ?
Really, my dear Sir, your letters, so far from being
worthy of a dignified Police Magistrate, are actually
unworthy of what, in common parlance, we call a
u little great man you understand the expression ?
Your first is an originally bad imitation badly reset, and


not intend to recognize the Bishop of Tasmania u as
belonging to the Church of England;" and has it come
to this? Alas ! for unfortunate Prelacy, W. T. Noyes,
Esquire not only repudiates the authority of a Bishop,
but, in his wisdom, and in the exercise of his very pro-
found u private judgment/ 7 stoutly avows his intention
of making His Lordship a Dissenter! I shall not say
that you are past hope—past cure—or past ridicule ;
but that the apt repeater of the school-boy quotation
O tempora , O mores well deserves to be received into
the bosom of Dr. Fry's Moral Infirmary is placed be-
yond the shadow of a doubt: you are, in fact, on the
high road to distinction ; you must, however, remember
that there is an honourable as well as an unenviable
distinction: the latter can be easily obtained, and if
that is your ambition, you have but to follow in the
steps of the gentleman who wrote the dead-born book
on Prison Discipline, and the “ Objectionable Work,
eight years ago 1"
When the Bishop's Charge was sent to you, you
“ innocently conceived" that your sentiments were
asked for : believe me, Sir, your published letters un-
fortunately bear testimony to the fact that, for your
own sake, you have u innocently conceived" once too
often. The next appearance you put in as a champion
in the cause of Protestantism ought, like the writings
of the Lay Delegates, to pass through the hands of the
clerical agitator for correction, or, if he is not at leisure
to revise your profound lucubrations, you might apply
to the late Secretary of the Protestant Association,


whose indiscretion never carried him to the extreme and
unguarded lengths you have so lately attained. Should
you again favor the world with the views and intentions
of the Protestant Defence Association, “neatly ex-
pressed 7 7 or u innocently conceived, 77 do not forget the
fate of Epimetheus.
The spell of silence that has so lately fallen upon the
victims of the sad delusion not unkindly treated of in
the following pages ought to have taught you that
when a man works hard to “ make a name, 77 it is some-
times requisite that he should deserve it; and, at the
same time, it is well to remember that there is such a
thing as a radical cure for blatant vanity, and this
Letter is a living proof that there exists an antidote
sufficiently powerful to contend with ignorance, impu-
dence, and presumption. The publication of the letter
from which I have copied the heading of this Address
indicates your forgetfulness of these facts : I regret
your ill-advised proceeding, and can account for it only
by supposing that time hangs heavily on hand at your
world 7 s-end retreat at Swansea ; and yet, surely, you
might have beguiled it more becomingly than by
actually stripping yourself calmly and deliberately of all
consideration and respect ?
Really, my dear Sir, your letters, so far from being
worthy of a dignified Police Magistrate, are actually
unworthy of what, in common parlance, we call a
u little great man : 77 —you understand the expression ?
Your first is an originally bad imitation badly reset, and


your second is a piece of vulgar flippancy: these are
hard words ; hut truth is plain of speech.
I can well understand, that, when wandering on the
shingle at Swansea, or sauntering over its inland sands,
a brilliant imagination and a vivid fancy may lift you
into the vacant throne of my old friend John Jones.
Take my advice : avoid the assumption; or, like his,
your tumble may be inglorious, ignoble, and, —worse
than all,—^ridiculous.
You have not, to use your own peculiar and appro-
priate expression, u neatly” set forth either your ac-
quired knowledge or your natural talents, although you
have pretty plainly proved the truth of the familiar say-
ing ex nihilo nihil fit*
In conclusion, I have much pleasure in dedicating
this little Book to you: read it carefully—it has
already done some good—-and, if it does not fully in-
struct you on the many points where instruction appears
so requisite, it may at all events teach you that a silent
man may sometimes be mistaken for a wise one. I
spare you any further remarks on the contents of your
unfortunate letters to the Bishop, because, for your own
sake, I do not desire the censorious world to remember
what all sensible men (I wish I could include you
amongst the number) must wish to forget.
Your well-wisher,
JOHN SMITH,
Late of London,


TO THE RBADEB.
u Quoth he, I see you have more tricks
Than all our doting politics,
They are grown old, and out of fashion.
Compar’d with your new Reformation.”
When Ministers of the Church of England, or, indeed,
of any religious fraternity calling itself by that com-
prehensive and ill-used title, become factious leaders of
men of simple minds and shallow attainments, they
naturally forfeit all respect, and, just as naturally, invite
hostile criticism : and when, in addition to a colourable
opposition to those whom they are sworn to obey, they
are notoriously actuated by reckless vanity and personal
ambition, it becomes a positive duty to expose their
weak pretensions, and to gibbet the melancholy spec-
tacle, on the high road, as a warning to others.
A Pastor can never step down from his pulpit into
the columns of a newspaper without becoming a gladia-
tor, and resigning all pretension to the higher office of
a teacher: if, however, his craving after notoriety pre-
fers the fall, he must take the consequences ; and for


preaching and teaching the Message of Peace and Good-
will, he may substitute the cunning trick of the ready
writer, and the special pleading of 44 our own corres-
pondent !”
These are truisms beyond cavil; and it is most un-
feignedly to be deplored that any Clergyman of the
Church should have allowed an unfortunate restlessness
of disposition to place him in so degrading a position :
it is enough to make 44 men and angels weep,” and call
down upon our Church the contempt of her ever-watch-
ful enemies. But if, unlike that ancient and most quiet
watchman Dogberry, our Militant Parson will 44 babble
and talk,” it is rather too much to expect us all to swal-
low the Protestant bait, and disregard the personal
hook. Notwithstanding that our Lay Delegates are
permanently sitting, we are not yet quite denuded of
common sense and common decency.
It will be seen, in the following pages, that I have
but lightly touched on many subjects I might fairly
have dragged into the light of day, and stripped of
all their miserable covering of hypocrisy and simu-
lated zeal: I trust my charity may be appreciated ;
and I do not think I overstep the bounds of modesty
when I express my belief that all the Clergymen
who signed the solemn Declaration are very deeply


indebted to me for my forbearance : and yet it is a
most tempting theme, —those solemn tools !—those
hood-winked Parsons!—how very difficult to avoid
the strong temptation of consigning them to u ever-
lasting fame;” and the Laymen who have been so
easily persuaded into notoriety,—what a field for honest
truth to graze in! But, as I said before, the milk
of human kindness being strong within me, I am
most charitable and forbearing 1 .
I have no doubt but that this letter will fulfil its
object, and open the public understanding to the true
intent and meaning of the present outcry in the
Church ; I am also not without some hope that it
may tend to put down the silly bleating of some pre-
suming men who, in reality, are more fools than knaves;
and that our Don Quixote Parson may teach more and
write less, or, if the cacoethes scrihendi has too firm a
hold upon him, perhaps he may turn his attention to
that wide missionary field where the harvest is abun-
dant and the labourers are few.—New Caledonia is
not so far off.
“ Tra ly 1 would not harfg a dog by my will; much more a
man who hath any honesty in him.”




TO JOHN JONES, LAY DELEGATE, &&
Dear Jones,
I am not Moses coming down from the Mountain
with the unalterable Law: Ido not even pretend to utter a
decided judgment on those matters now stirring up the
passions and the prejudices of some of the people in
this immaculate Island; but, for your edification, lam
about to throw my straw into the rushing current that is
hastening towards the wide ocean of doubts and diffi-
culties, bearing in its muddy course the impudence of
ignorance and the undiluted bitterness of little minds.
The most prominent men of the present movement
are so completely and so thoroughly known that their
;principles are disregarded—ignored—laughed at, and
never spoken of without a sneer. No matter how
solemn the declaration may be, or how prosy the ora-
tions and newspaper letters, the contest now taking
place is not between a Right and a Wrong—not even
between the purple and fine linen on one side, and the mis-
called Evangelical Protestants on the other side; nor is it a
war between the worshippers of lawn sleeves and those


shouting supporters and asserters of that glorious free-
dom of opinion, whose disciples throw up their caps in
blissful ignorance, and insist upon sitting in judgment
(both in private and in public) on the teaching of those
men of old who thought before they spoke, and whose
wisdom was not extracted from a newspaper, or
learned in a Mechanics 7 Institute. I tell you what
it is Jones, I hesitate about writing upon this subject,,
because I cannot do so with the tact, talent, and sophistry
of the clerical leader of the ambitious war : his writing
would shed a lustre over the office of any special pleader
between this and Paper Buildings, London ; my poor
effort is but that of an unlearned man, who says what
he means, and is content to be an humble follower —not
a leader. I remember, and so do you old boy, some
few years back, when you and I lived in the narrow end
of Tooley-street: in that confined locality I did my duty
in that station of life to which I was called, and sold
pens, penknives, and pencils, with honesty of purpose,
and a rather dim notion of the difference between High
Church and Low Church: you, too, my friend—now
arrayed in the respectability of black —toiled at your
laborious work, and printed hand-bills and ballads of a
doubtful morality, without once dreaming that you were
destined to become a gentleman: circumstances make men.
Do you think that it ever entered the head of that
careful Matron Mrs. Jones, when lending a hand to


strike off the last fifty copies of the u Humorous Song-
ster,” or the u Last-dying Speech and Confession” of
Jerry Ahershaw, that that day would ever come when
her own John should sit amongst the Magnates of the
land—even this land—and take his place high up at
festival or funeral, with gold ring on hand, and Esquire
added to his name, and something else too ! I repeat
it with gladness, I murmur out the words on my pillow,
I mutter them over my glass of generous sherry: who
could have dreamed, in his wildest dream, that Fortune's
wheel would ever turn up John Jones as a Lay Dele-
gate, and one of the most famous champions of a great
cause ?
Truly the old days are passing away : Toryism is
snuffed out, and the people are at length acknowledged as
the true source of all legitimate power in civil matters,
Church matters, doctrine, discipline, and medicine. It
is an accomplished fact: are you not a Lay Delegate ?
and am not I another ? From thinking our own thoughts
we have arrived at the pleasure of expressing them: I
have burst into print from the counter ; and, as I am
petted and made much of by the Minister of my Parish,
soft-sawdered as a man and a protesting Briton, why I
must have my say as well as others, and John Smith's
ideas are entitled to just as much consideration as a
polite world is disposed to lavish on a D.D. or an LL.D.
Besides, if other unknown individuals and pious news-


paper editors write and print letters to the Secretary of
State for the Colonies, why may I not write to John
Jones ? We are, in fact, u the people”—ours is the vox
populi ; and although our own exertions have placed us
in a good social position, yet we are still true to our
early instincts, and view events, and the men of the
movement, and the flashing kaleidescope of life, with
practical eyes, and with just that bias towards theore-
tical democracy becoming to a man who has a trifle to
lose : the truth is, my dear Jones, the people are inter-
ested in the vital questions now agitating the bosoms of
our betters 5 we are invited to try our hands at Church
Constitution-making,—we are pathetically informed that
the principles of the Protestant Reformation are in dan-
ger, and we are invited to the rescue : many of the sons
of the Church Militant go to the fight, like the stone
figure of Justice, with bandaged eyes ; yet, happily, all
are not in this miserable condition. I much fear, how-
ever, that you are not quite clear as to the points in
dispute—you never did thoroughly comprehend theo-
logical questions. I remember well one Fifth-of-Novem-
ber-day you laughed at a poor old Guy whose legs
turned round the wrong way, and whose wretched old
head fell over his left shoulder ; and on that very occa-
sion, when the stuffed figure called to mind the events
he was then celebrating with such a solemn mockery of
fun, you thought those events were somehow connected


with the loss of the Spanish Armada and Queen Eliza-
beth’s visit to Tilbury Fort: recollecting this not very
enlightened idea of yours, I am anxious that you should
form something like an accurate notion of the meaning of
the present outcry, as regards the Tasmanian Church,
and not run headlong into a wrong path.
You once went—in 1843—from St. George’s towards
Rome : pray avoid the other extreme in 1852 ; and do
not charge, with flags flying, drums beating, and trum-
pets blowing, from sober Truth into the realms of
Delusion.
Innocent old women, guileless maidens, men of small
capacities, but great activity, have been flattered into
the belief that the u Principles of true Protestantism”
are endangered : I have seen more than one Mrs. Yarden
and her Protestant Manual. Now, let me, as an humble
Layman, state the real circumstances of the case in a
plain and simple manner, and at once put an end to the
howl over the supposed Romeward march. The whole
question lies in a nutshell: there is no mistaking the
meaning of those ardent worshippers of freedom of
opinion and private judgment; the “ Romanizing ten-
dency” is merely a silly device—a peg whereon to hang
the restless craving after notoriety of one clerical agi-
tator—of that man who is the Alpha and Omega of the
present uproar—the father of the u Solemn Declaration”
Tract, —the troubled spirit of Tasmania, —the clever


special pleader of the newspaper, —the lighted match
amongst the straw, —in a word, —the author of dead-
born book on Prison Discipline, the Rev.
Incumbent of St. George's, Hobart Town. I have
nothing to say about the private life or character of any
man ; but public men are public property,—their acts
court investigation, and their honour, faith, and truth
are revealed in their own words and actions. We see
the poor despised grub expand into the fluttering and
noticeable butterfly; we admire the dazzling and fragile
texture of its bright and gaudy wings, as it courts our
admiration ; but if we handle it too roughly, the bril-
liant colours rub off, —in fact, we take the shine out of
it; thus it is with many an admired popular leader and
bright light in these latter days of sham fervour, and
canting pretension. That it should be so is indeed a
melancholy proof of the nose-led condition of the people,
and the hollowness and bitter mockery of those men
who presume to stand forward as champions of a great
cause: they breed an imaginary grievance, and suckle
it into a pretended wrong !
In the year 1843 Mr. Fry wrote a book of consider-
able merit: not a little time was bestowed upon it;
perhaps some appeal was made to the Giver of all Good
for direction, counsel, and a teachable spirit in the
writing of that grave and thoughtful book; well, the
work was duly printed and published, and read by some


men of learning in the Colony, and no doubt commended
as it deserved; a newspaper—-the Colonial Times —called
it Tractarian, Puseyite, and Romish; and there the
matter ended. No outcry was raised against the teach-
ing of the rev. author, no controversy, no agitation, no
excitement: no excuse had the learned writer for rush-
ing into print to defend his work ; —the public indiffer-
ence or the public acquiescence was a heavy blow and
great discouragement to a man who loves to dabble in
troubled waters. No opposition having been got up
against this orthodox divine, the whole affair became
u flat, stale, and unprofitable”—even the Altar super-
seding the Table in St. George’s Church—the Cross on
the top of the Macquarie-street Chapel—the refusal of
Mr, Stackhouse to sign his testimonials, on the plea of
Mr. Fry’s u Romanizing tendencies,” —all failed to fan
a breeze sufficiently strong to start a party, under Mr.
Fry’s leadership, against any body, or any doctrine, or
any set of opinions. This restless gentleman must be
a leader, —it is necessary to his very existence. His
happy day has at length dawned, and having found the
necessary tools, his work goes bravely on—the raw has
been established—and he heads an attack against those
very principles—or the holders of them—he advocated
in 1843! When accused of inconsistency, he has no
answer to give ; but he whimpers forth a poor excuse,
u I did write an objectionable book eight years ago, but


I have changed my opinions.” Eight years ago !
His opponents lack charity. “Eight years ago I”
Why, if he has only changed his opinions once in that
long period, Dr. Fry is not so very inconsistent after
all. What a striking lesson, however, on the danger
of believing his thoughtfully-recorded sentiments.
After this failure in creating an agitation on the score
of religious doctrines and observances, our principal
correspondent (see every second number of the Colonial
Times) bethought himself of another attempt to compel
the public to notice him: he deprived the stagnant
Colony of the right arm of controversy, and betook him-
self to England, where he published a very imposing
volume on what subject do you think, my dear lay
delegate, John Jones ?—why, on Prison Discipline ! —not,
mind you, on the religious and moral aspect of that very
intricate subject, but on the pot, pannican, food, and
clothing side thereof; he ornamented his work with an
elaborately drawn plan of a mess-room and dormitory,
shewing how beds ought to be folded up, and tables
spread out, and dedicated the whole affair to the
then Honorable Secretary of State for the Colonies.
Dr. Fry, no doubt, remembered that the present
Euler of Whites and Maories in New Zealand
became a Governor because he wrote a Book. He had
not forgotten that Mr. Eyre's Travels in Australasia
procured him a Lieutenant-Governorship. He could


not have lost sight of the pleasant fact that clever books
sometimes produce profitable fruit; and, if Sir George
Grey, Mr. Eyre, and others became “men in authority”
in consequence of their literary labour, why should not
Henry Phibbs Fry grasp the mitre of a Departmental
Bishop, and find himself, say, Inspector-General of
Convict Chaplains and Spiritual Overseer of Prisons
and Prisoners in Tasmania ? Alas I his secular book
blossomed, but bore no fruit; it did not command either
public or official attention of any moment, and it went
to its inevitable hades —the trunk-maker’s. I believe
there are not half-a-dozen persons in the Colony aware
that the founder of the Protestant Association ever did
come out on Prison Discipline. This second failure
having damped the restless spirit of the Archbishop
of Canterbury’s correspondent, and having already
found it impossible to make a name as a Pligh Church-
man, or even as a writer on Convictism, our volatile
Doctor turned round altogether, and determined to earn
his laurel in some fresher field. The Bishop of Tas-
mania was allowed to remain as the head of all true
Churchmen, and the Convicts were left in the quiet
possession of Mr. Hampton. One course only now
lay open to this Doctor of strife; his restless vanity,
insatiable craving after notoriety, questionable ambition,
and peculiarity of temperament, had but one outlet, and
this he seized upon with avidity, casting to the winds


all his deliberately written opinions and firm convictions.
Behold now, 0 Jones, the publisher of a strong belief
repudiating his own words, and calling his own Book
an “ objectionable one.” As to the prison affair, its
own heaviness sunk it into the tomb of the Capulets;
and many well-meaning men are now looking on in
shame and sorrow at this fresh endeavour to make a
name and create a party* A Church’s doctrines are
disputed, and her Bishop insulted, to minister to the
reckless ambition of one man. This state of our Church
would be, indeed most dangerous, as it is most lament-
able ; but, knowing that the new Luther must fail, I
think we may before very long look for another change
of opinion—a fresh recantation, and a new faith :
however, until we have witnessed a fresh mass of con-
tradictions and absurdities, with a further display of
polemical tight-rope dancing.
All the talking hitherto has been on one side of the
question. Let not the reverend expounder of private
judgment take silence for acquiescence There are many
members of the one Catholic and Apostolic Church in
Tasmania who are disposed to censure the Bishop for
misplaced leniency—who question his clemency in
allowing the brawlers to disturb the peace of society,
and who may yet be urged to request him, as their Chief
Pastor, to silence the man who repudiates the
teaching, and sets at defiance those whose authority he


is bound to respect and obey. lam not writing in
defence of the Bishop of Tasmania; I know him only in
his public capacity, but I never can forget the first
occasion on which I met his tyrannical Lordship,—it
Was standing outside his own Cathedral Church, when
the door was so piously locked against an anxious con-
gregation and their Bishop. I shall not further refer
to that memorable occasion; but may I ask the signers
of the “ Solemn Declaration” if there was no forbear-
ance shown on that extraordinary exhibition of clerical
obedience? Forbearance, indeed I It is well known
that the charity, the longsuffering, and the forbearance
of Bishop Nixon towards more than one of his Clergy
borders on weakness. Perhaps those whose names are
appended to the new article of faith would wish for
further particulars ? Perhaps a Deacon or two in this
Diocese would wish for further proof of their Bishop's
forbearance? Would a farming Parson like a more
detailed account ? Bead over the names of those who
have committed themselves by becoming the tools of
Dr. Fry, and let me mark the names of those who have
not experienced the Bishop’s forbearance, and then count
them! How many of them do you imagine there are ?
But in charity I shall turn from this part of my letter;
and, for the present, leave the clerical men of the moun-
tain, and say a word or two about the lay reformers who
have been dragged into the melancholy exhibition.


And now about these poor fellows: some of them am
actuated by wbat in their simplicity they really believe
to be good, pious,, and proper motives ; others are the
veriest dupes in all creation, and when they speak the
speeches prepared for them they fondly fancy they are
serving the cause of Protestantism and the British Lion,
and making no contemptible figure in the world : bless
their innocent hearts ! there is not a man or woman in
Tasmania, out of the immediate circle of their own
amiable families, who ever thinks about them at all.
You have seen the names of Mr. Knight and a Mr.
Barnard as Secretaries to Dr. Fry's first Association;
and perhaps you have suffered half-an-hour’s weariness
in listening to a speech or two from these innocent indi-
viduals ; it was as lay puppets only they were required—■
Dr. Fry supplies the brains. There are others also,
my dear Jones, whose defence of a Protestant Church
is the only circumstance likely to damage that Church.
I shall not bring their names forward just now, because
I wish to refer to a man of more importance, and for
whose benefit this letter is written—need I say to whom
I refer ? I think your own sense will at once point out
the happy man on whom I have conferred a colonial
fame at a small expense of time and trouble—that man
is John Jones, the representative of a large family.
Now in solemn seriousness, I would ask you, what do
you really know about the doctrines of the Church to


which you belong ? To what extent have you read and
studied the early or the later writers either on Church
matters ? Do you know anything at all about “ primi-
tive antiquity ?”—Absolutely nothing ; don’t deny it,
and don’t be ashamed of yourself, for there are hundreds
of Browns, Jones and Robinsons, daily crying out at the
bidding of popular leaders, vowing frantic vows on
behalf of principles they never understood, and ready
on the shortest notice to drape themselves in woe and
become martyrs to the cause; and yet they are just
as ignorant as you, my friend—only more zealous. This
sort of thing arises from the well-known fact, that men
of an inferior stamp always desire to have u a finger in
the piehence the spread of feathery dissent, and
hence the threatened advent of Dr. Fry’s new Anti-
Episcopal Free Church. I write in a vulgar style : I
regret that I have not practised the classic and polished
peroration of a Gibbon or a Macauly, but you know the
old saying relative to the manufacture of a silk purse,
and if I speak truth I hope you will take that , even
dressed as it is in my limping periods. But to resume,
If you believe in Dr. Fry you are not a Churchman—
you become in effect a Dissenter. I have no objection
to your joining any sect you fancy ; you may have u a
call” that way, but be honest, and openly renounce, and
denounce too, if it suits your taste, a Church you do not
believe in—whose teaching is opposed to your private


and most wise judgment, but do not take its loaves and
fishes and controvert its faith. There can be no com-
promise—there are no such things as “ open questions”
in the Church. Only imagine the very independent
State we should soon arrive at in this wavering year
1852, if doctrines were all “ open questions !” Sup-
posing these were “ open questions,” and allowing un-
limited “ private judgment,” at what point should we
stop ? Who is to judge and determine how far we may
go ? It is asserted that the Scriptures are the only
guide. Pray, how many different interpretations may
be assigned to any one passage therein ? You may say
that Baptismal Regeneration is an “ open question;”
Brown insists that the one final judgment day is never
to arrive, but that the day of a man’s death is his day
of judgment; and, in his private judgment, this is
proved from the parable of the rich man and Lazarus,
and from our Saviour’s words to the thief on the cross :
this is therefore an “open question.” Robinson having
read Tom Paine, stoutly maintains that the doctrine of
the Holy Trinity is an “open question.” How much
further may we go ?—where are we to pull up ? —who
is to draw the line ? Your private judgment pronounces
one doctrine an “ open question,” mine , another. Dick,
Tom, and Harry each fasten on a separate point, and
they exercise their very profound and well-weighed
private judgments, and make “ open questions” at their


pleasure, and discuss and applaud each other's teaching,
and call these jarring elements u a Church!” To an
infidel the good of the Church at all is an open question
—to the world at large, perhaps, our doctrines are all
Li open questions but in the Church there is but one
faith—a unity of belief—one doctrine. Should it be
otherwise, (of course, I mean in essentials), our Church
is not that Church founded upon the rock, and must
have disappeared long ere this, under the assaults of
open foes and insidious friends more powerful than Dr.
Fry, and his unfledged Deacons, aided by Mr. Knight,
the lawyer, and Mr. Barnard, the Government Printer.
But it is folly to argue on these points, because they are
only dragged into the present strife on false pretences.
The contest, disgraceful in its continuance, disastrous in
its result, is not one of principle; it is purely personal,
and heavy indeed will be the reckoning—“for it must
needs be that offences come ; but woe to that man by
whom the offence cometh.”
Romanizing teaching is one of the charges brought
in to serve the cause of Evangelical Speechmaking; and
with characteristic charity Dr. Fry asserts that the
Bishop is leading his Clergy and Congregation post-
haste towards Rome, but that he does not believe the
Bishop himself is bound thither ! Surely the logical
Doctor made a blunder in getting up this portion of his
case: he ought to have been a little nearer possibility


than this; but it generally happens that made-up evi-
dence does not hang together well, and nothing but a
truthful statement can bear a cross-examination. The
Papal Aggression caused a considerable sensation in
England, and brought the Protestant feeling of all
classes into a ferment: when that same aggression was
practised in Tasmania the Bishop was vilified by the
friends of freedom for opposing it, and when, night after
night, he lectured on the evils, errors, and superstitions
of Rome, what Episcopal Church pulpit echoed the
warnings of the head of the Church in this Colony ?
Not one I Where were your Protestant Associations
when they might have done good service ?—where was
your love for the “ Principles of the Reformation” then ?
—was there any demonstration,of Protestant feeling on
that occasion ? No! Silence and apathy disgraced
you then , as noise, empty vows, and brawling does now .
The fact is, Henry Phibbs Fry, D.D., had not come
forth as a party leader at the time I speak of. Now,
the case is altered, and you are ready to see with his
eyes, and hear with his ears, and suddenly find out all
sorts of danger, and array yourselves under his torn
banner, with a “ Hurrah” for principles not in danger,
and a positive leaning towards dupery.
What, in the name of all that's sensible, do you pro-
pose to do ? Amongst other things, I hope that you
will, at all events, keep the lay dummies in the back


ground: it would be a painfuul task, though a necessary
one, to criticize their pretennsions and their wisdom:
still, if you will take the first te step towards making them
ridiculous, I can only promisee you that I shall nail each
bad shilling to the counter,, and expose the shallow
mouthing of these empty prcofessors of Dr. Fry’s new
creed.
In conclusion, I have one of advice to bestow
on you, my sapient John Jones, —it is this : avoid what
you do not understand; let no fancied importance of
social position induce you to make an ass of yourself;
don’t serve any man’s private designs on the plea of public
necessity ; beware of all ambitious agitators—especially
of the gown and white neckcloth school; remember
that no Doctor can found u a Church,” —he may
establish a Moral Infirmary, (but not a Church. And,
finally, John Jones, say yourr prayers and repeat your
creed with a believing heart, amd do not forget — u From
all sedition, privy conspiracy:, and rebellion; from all
false doctrine, heresy, and scchism; from hardness of
heart, and contempt of thy Word and Commandment.
Good Lord deliver us.”
Your’s truly,
JOHN SMITH,
Late of London.


