

w m y
% Setter from a in Australia to a'brother
in (Bnjgtaiul *
My Dear Brother, —
You are probably meditating, or are actually engaged in a
breach of the law. Ido not know your circumstances, nor the influences
to which you are exposed. But I know that you are in danger, and I
therefore take up my pen to set before you the future which is almost
certainly in store for you, if you persist in your present course. Law-
breaking is not your profession, it is not with you a line of trading to
which you have bound yourself with all its dangers, as worth the risk ;
but you have got into a current which may carry you on shoals and
quicksands which you know not how to avoid ; and though you are
conscious of its dangers, and are from time to time thrown into the most
dreadful alarm, you still, unwillingly yet desperately, hold on. You
could escape—partially escape at least—but it would need an amount
of energy and decision which you, perhaps, do not possess : still, you
can scarcely be ranked among the incurables, and what I say may not
be without its effect: in any case it may be of use to lessen your suffering,
if not to ward it off. *
Let me begin your story. I will commence with your arrest. This
will most probably happen just when you are doubting whether you
should not fly. You will have been warned —warned, perhaps, by some-
thing very trifling—nothing more than something odd in the manner of
your employer, or in the looks or movements of those about you; but
■warned you will have been. This seems to be a universal law. And
you will have felt the warning, and been uneasy, but you will not have
had decision enough, or have made sufficient preparation, to fly instantly,
and you are taken. I know your nature, and the whole history of your
difficulty. You are not a deliberate plunderer, who has made up his
mind to enrich himself by one grand coup and retire —if you were,
you would be in little'; danger; you have allowed yourself in embezzle-
ments or forgeries to meet some pressing emergency, hoping to replace
what you have taken before you are found out. You are a poor pottering,
bungling amateur, and are unprepared what to do at the moment of
decisive action, and will be taken. And now you learn for the first
time how society deals with those who offend against her. You are
* [lt may he unnecessary to state that this Letter is really the production of a
convict, now in Australia. We, of course, s hold ourselves responsible neither for its
statements nor its sentiments.] — Ed.
vol. xm.— no. 76. 24.
kf /V jI A l\ v • L-^V


A LETTER FROM A CONVICT IN AUSTRALIA
arrested, carried away between two silent men —solemn as undertakers
—to a police-station. If in London, Avhere we will suppose your arrest
to take place, you are “ removed” in the old familiar cab. It is a dismal
ride. As you ride through the streets, you cannot help feeling that the
world is passing away from you.
Arrived at the police-station (we will suppose the station to be Bow
Street and the time night), you are searched and depraved of your knife
or anything you may have about you with which you can do yourself or
others bodily injury, and led into one of a set of rooms with a fixed bench
on three sides of it, and a door on the fourth. These rooms or cells, almost
dark by day, are quite so by night. Whether you will be-al<me depends
on the number and kind of those waiting for examination. But, as you
are a “ respectable ” man, the policeman in charge of you, belonging, as
he will probably do, to the upper grades of the service, will no doubt
have the good taste to “ treat you as a gentleman,” and you will not be
thrust in among the roughs. I myself, on each of the days I was at Bow
Street, had one, and only one, companion. The first time it was a fast
man who was taken up because he was drunk and incapable, and who
insisted on taking off everything but his shirt, and lying down on the
hard boards. The second was a gentleman who had been so unlucky
as to upset “ a case of things that looked like glass, and which he after-
wards understood to be diamonds ; ” and the third was a postman —a
handsome young fellow, who tried in vain to cheer himself by the hope
of a moderate sentence and a life in the backwoods of America when it
< 1
was finished. But whoever may be your immediate companions, these
are terrible hours. Without, drunken women dragged along the passage
to the cells like sacks of potatoes —mothers, entreating that a message
may be sent to their home in some intricate alley where their little
children are Avaiting for them ; girls from the streets using their
/ - noAv restricted poAvers of blandishment to get “ Sir Robert ” to do this or
• that for them, or telling Tom or Bill in’the next cell “to cheer up, for
she will pay his fine for him; ” and within, an indescribable mixture of
feelings arising at once from dread of the scene in Avhich you are about
to appear, the thought of the misery of those that love you, and your
almost complete isolation from your friends at the moment when so much
has to be said and done. The first feAV hours of your incarceration are, of
' course, the worst during this phase of your story. You fear almost—so
long is he in ooming—that you may not have the assistance of your
solicitor ; but he comes at last, and so does the hearing before the court.
It is a quiet little court—it is so at least at Bow Street —and on coming
into it you feel momentarily relieved. And now Mr, Smallfry, of the
firm of Smallfry and Hunter, or the representative of some other firm of
prosecuting celebrity, draAvs a detailed and most umvarrantable account of
your delinquency. You stand aghast at the picture of your guilt as they
paint it. Plowever, no one else present seems to be dismayed. You
reserve your defence, and you find yourself remanded or committed.


Your first examination before the magistrate over, you are now taken
to prison. If in London, you will be taken most probably in the first
instance, and while you are under remand, to Clerkenwell, and afterwards,
when fully committed, to Newgate, though it is possible you may be at
Newgate all along.
And now begin to dawn on you the humiliations and restrictions of
prison life. Taken away from the police-station, no longer in the old
familiar cab, but in a small dark compartment of a long hearse-like
vehicle, much resembling the Post-Office vans, you are received at the
prison, not indeed as a convicted man, but quite as a guilty one. Look-
ing back to my first introduction to Clerkenwell, I have some difficulty,
regarding sUch things as I now do, in recognizing it as'accompanied by
any hardship or even humiliation worth caring about, nor can I at all
realize the terrible suffering which it occasioned me. I remember I found
myself ranked up in line with a strange medley of men, chiefly from the
lowest ranks, and that I was bid to “ right face,” and had to march with
them as one of themselves, and had my clothes and carpet-bag searched,
and was finally locked up in a cell which was certainly a very different
place to the comfortable rooms to which I had been all my life accus-
tomed. But what was there in all this ? Nothing, as far as I can noAV
see, to cause me anything more than a feeling of annoyance at having got
into a mess. The warder of my cell was, I well remember, ready to
make me as comfortable as he could, took my orders for dinner, and even
found me books for amusement. Then, if my cell was not equal to my
own library, it was at least clean and quiet, and had a good jet of gas in
it, and a roomy hammock, and I could sleep, or read or write. Truly,
I have never been in such good, or at least in as easy, quarters since,
though I have been now some time at my liberty.
But the world has soon to lose its power, and the prison cell its terrors.
You will indeed never suffer in this way but twice afterwards, viz. once
when you first find yourself in Newgate, and again, when you are con-
victed. You may suffer a good deal on changing your prisons, and also
on seeing your friends for the first time after conviction, but only on the
two occasions I have mentioned will you suffer as on the first night in
prison.
You should make arrangements for your defence while under remand,
and, if arrested in London, do so while you are at Clerkenwell, This I
advise because you will never again have such facilities for making them.
The restrictions imposed on you even at Clerkenwell are not such as
should be imposed on one who is in the eye of the law regarded
innocent, and whose whole future welfare may depend on the arrange-
ments he may make for his defence. He ought to be able to see his
friends at any reasonable- hour, arid to have his correspondence secure
from official or other supervision. This, I regret to say, is not the case.
He can indeed see his solicitor at any time, but other friends he can only
see from half-past eleven to one o’clock in the day, and his correspond-
24—2


-
but in prison
. ; and vehicle in which you are
taken to and from the police-courtyfcposit.Tyou at that place of terrible
association Sj-
-Newffdfe This wiljlfepne of the very painful epochs in
your in^jigjs
which forms part of the
old building
Vm^HP^th e dungfioir styTe of bygone days, with massive
bars and hug*
doors, causes a very unpleasant
sensation ,wjjl
introduced to it. The interior of the prison
i; fldHjPPWry style, but the complete silence — the very
■word “ siffiia
SES»rten in large characters in the centre of the spiral
stair* a?('^R|o
w||j§TOxea oPBpsed doors, tier above tier — fall perhaps more
heavily jtjBt!.
HHp’tdhan 4vro the dungeon entrance. It seems as if your
prison' w&mjf
closing around you. I have seen no prison which
pressed ojPmi
n i.''J '
vso painfully at first sight as Newgate, Here, after bathing,
_ /» il j i • j
ence is all read by one of the principal officers of the prison : mean-
while, the prosecutor is left unimpeded to rake up or suppress evidence,
and place himself in the best possible position. Still, Clerkemvell presents
facilities for arranging your affairs which you will not possess after leaving
it. Your friends can talk with you through a perforated plate in your
door, and your conversation is private. You can moreover see them every
day for half an hour. Besides this, you can obtain from the prison
authorities a list of the attornies practising in the criminal court, and any
information about them you may require. And of this, let me tell you,
you will do well to avail yourself if you have not (as you ought to have
done) determined on your man long before your arrest.
Having engaged the legal adviser most to your liking, press on the
immediate preparation of your case. At Clerkemvell, and while you are
still under remand and can see your friends, you can force forward your
solicitor with much less difficulty than when you come to be under
stricter regulations, as at Newgate ; and your trial, moreover, should,
under ordinary circumstances, be brought on as quickly as possible. The
prosecution has less opportunity to rake up evidence, and, for yourself,
the sooner the thing is settled the better. At Clerkemvell too, sup-
posing that you are sure to be committed for trial, transfer your
property. In short, complete your arrangements while you are still
under remand. "•
The prosecution, having brought up all the evidence they believe
themselves able to find, no
finally committed, and are said to be no"4(Jnger merely under detention,
pressed bn*mt^ so painfully at first sight as Newgate. Here, after bathing,
you find yourself taken, not to any of the compartments opening out on
the light iron galleries above you, but to a cell under ground. And now
you realize that you are in Newgate. How terrible that underground cell
“ipras to me in the multitudinous miserable thoughts it brought into my
•t mind I cannot tell you. But it is only for a night; the next day you
ascend, and are put into a light cell, just such as you have seen in model
prisons—a cell about 10 feet by G feet, with a black floor, white walls,
a small table, a corner washstand, a window of corrugated glass, a ham-


mock and bedclothes, plate, spoon, &c. This is comfortable enough,
except that in consequence of the window having a very small opening,
one’s feelings for some time after being shut up is that of being suffocated.
I well remember that the greatest luxury that could have been afforded
me would have been to have had my door open. 1 seemed to want room
to breathe. The same feeling follows one in every part of this prison.
I used quite to long for chapel time, because I generally sat near an
open window.
Another objectionable feature in the discipline of Newgate is the
obliging a prisoner—who is yet, observe, regarded as an innocent man
—to polish his floor, keep up the lustre of his brass basin, scrub the
table, and fold up his hammock and bedclothes, and arrange the smallest
articles of his cell furniture in one precise way. It is no great hardship
indeed, when you get used to it, but if you have never done such work,
and have, besides, a sore heart —and if, above all, you are busy preparing
for your trial—it will seem very hard, especially as nothing short of the
most absolute precision will sulfice. Another most objectionable thing at
this prison, and one which on many accounts should be altered, is the place
in which prisoners are alone allowed to see their friends. Except in some
special cases, Visitors are placed ‘ en masse ’ literally in an iron cage, with
a double row of bars, so that, being at*a distance of some two feet from the
prisoner, and all talking together, it is positively most difficult for them to
make themselves heard. It is a perfect Babel—an arrangement altogether
most painful and unseemly. There is, moreover, no excuse for it, as it
would be just as easy for visitors to see a prisoner through the wire-covered
aperture in his cell door here, as it was for them to do so in Clerkenwell ;
nor are there any objections in the one case which would not hold good
in the other.
It seems rather hard, moreover, in the case of a man whom the law
still regards as innocent, to restrict the visits of friends to three days
in the week, as is the present practice. But, with the exception of
the above painful and rather unwarrantable arrangements, Newgate is an
admirably ordered prison—a model prison of its kind. The food—supposing
the necessities of those at home require you to throw yourself on prison
diet—is clean, good, and well cooked, and, except for hungry countrymen,
sufficient in quantity. It consists of stirabout morning and night—the only
skilfully made stirabout you will meet with in your prison course—and
soup and meat on alternate days, the soup, again, being the best concocted
of prison soups. I should say that at Newgate the art of cooking skilfully
and economically is understood as it is scarcely understood in any prison
we have. The other hygienic arrangements, for
equally creditable. In the way of exercise, medical attendance, religious
advice, every effort is made to meet the wants of the prisoner in his nt«v
and painful condition, and made with judgment. Strict in cari’ying oiux
all the rules of one of the strictest prisons in England, the warders yet \
behave thoroughly well to the real sufferers with whom they come in


contact. You will meet with no body of warders who can be compared
to them, except at Pentonville. It is now some years since I left Newgate,
and I have passed through several prisons in which I enjoyed more light
and air, and general comfort, but I still remember the officers of Newgate
with respect and gratitude.
So much for,Newgate. The next thing is the trial. You will not
find this so terrible an affair as you perhaps anticipate. The position
in which you will be placed, and which it now seems to you must be so
exquisitely painful, will at the time be almost lost sight of in the importance
of the issue. But, on the other hand, you will find much to cause you
very great anxiety, over and above the merits of the case. If the court,
for instance, is pressed for time, either on account of the number of
prisoners to be tried, or because the judges have to be off almost imme-
diately to the Assizes, you will have the satisfaction of learning that,
unless you choose to have your case put off to the next sessions, it may
not be possible to obtain a fair trial ; or should you be lucky enough
to stand for trial when the court has no such pressure on it, you may
learn that the judge who will try you is extremely “ testy,” or “ pre-
judiced,” or is a “special pleader,” or is fond of “cutting down ” cases,
or is “ fearfully severe,” &c. But it cannot be helped, and the best thing
is to press on.
Except it be to avoid a notoriously severe judge, do not allow your
trial to be put off a single session after your case is or can be prepared.
What will be the leading features of your trial, when it is called on for
hearing, I cannot tell. All I can foretell is that the perjuries of witnesses,
the exaggerations of counsel, the exclusion of evidence which ought to
be admitted, the admission of evidence which ought to be excluded, the
misconstruction of acts the most innocent, the omission of things you
dreaded, the singular conclusions of individual jurymen, will be such
as to make you feel how helpless you are, and cause you to resign
yourself to your fate—thankful that you have an able counsel, cool,
collected, and experienced, to fight your battle. The trial itself will not
torture you much ; it will bring little to light that is not known—for
you have been already torn to pieces in your examination before the
magistrate. But you will suffer in the terrible half-hour of suspense
while the jury are consulting —and when they pronounce you “ Guilty.”
The fatal blow has fallen, and what else is said or done you feel to be
immaterial. But your state of unconsciousness lasts not long ; you revive,
and that quickly; and terrible indeed are the first hours afterwards.
In the journey from Newgate to Millbank you will probably for the
first time find yourself in uninterrupted intercourse with those who are
suffering with you. As the mode of conveyance will most likely be an
omnibus, you will probably form part of a line of prisoners connected by
a chain —a type of the close companionship you are presently to hold
with them. You shudder at them now; but when you actually meet
them during the time the handcuffs are being fitted on previous to your


removal, and when, linked hand in hand with them, you ride that strange
ride through London, you will merely feel towards them as men more
or less good-natured, who are in the same condition as yourself. In other
respects that ride to Millbank is not unpleasant. Momentary as it is, the
passing out of the gloomy prison into the great stream of human life
and the bread light of day, and the being able to talk freely with other
creatures of one’s kind, has more of pleasure than of pain. The chain and
the handcuffs grate harshly on you at first, but by this time you will have
got pretty philosophical.
Arrived at Millbank, you will be for a few hours placed with some
four or five others in a cell to wait the examination of the warders and
surgeon. The examination by the latter is well enough, but that by the
warders, which takes place when you are stripped for bathing, is of the
most disgusting description. It need not be so, nor is it perhaps intended
by the authorities to be what it is ; but the subordinate officers of Mill-
bank seem, unlike those of Newgate, to have been chosen for their
roughness and bearishness. They are unquestionably among the lowest,
if they are not the very lowest, of those of any prison through which I have
passed. But Millbank is altogether a rough style of prison, both in the
way of carrying out prison discipline and in that of prison arrangements.
All is loud, indecent, rough.* In other respects you will find the change
to Millbank grateful to you. The cells —infinitely the best of any I have
seen (or even heard of, with the exception of those at Woking, an invalid
station) are welcome beyond conception for their windows alone. These
are a good size, with clear glass, and open wide, so that you can see the
real light of day, and freely breathe and feel the fresh air. How delight-
ful to me was the first sensation afforded by these wide-opening, clear
glass windows, I cannot describe. As the light streamed down on me, and
the air blew fresh into the cell, I revelled in them.
At Millbank the silent system is enforced, but not very perfectly,
and you will get quite as much conversation as you are likely to desire.
Then the day is broken by chapel and exercise, and the week by a
day at school, and perhaps by a visit from a scripture-reader or one
of the chaplains. Your food is, in the morning, cocoa, with beef (very
hard) for dinner, and very badly made gruel for supper. The materials
are good, but the cooking bad. The bread is excellent, the best you will
get in prison. The hammocks, which are original in structure, with a
division in the centre, do not appear to be intended to sleep in so much
as to exercise your powers as an acrobat, but with care you may get into
them and sleep in one of their two divisions. The chapel is large, the
chaplains popular, and the singing tolerably good. Your exercise consists
of a walk in one of the yards, —officers in centre, men walking round at
intervals of five or six yards, —and a turn at a many-handled pump by
which water is raised to the cells. Beyond this I have nothing to remark
* It must be remembered that all this relates to an experience of several years ago.


of Millbauk, except that the subordinate officers, an unusual number of
whom appear to be tailors, are especially fond of 'affecting a military
demeanour, and making an ostentatious display of their staves. How long
you will stay at Millbank is quite uncertain. You may stay there three
weeks, or you may remain nine months, but probably after a few weeks
you will be removed to Pentonville.
The journey from Millbank to Pentonville, like that from Newgate to
Millbank, will most likely be performed in an omnibus. You will rather
enjoy the ride. It is pleasanter than the first prison ride; you are getting
used to the situation. You will, moreover, have heard a good report of
the place to which you are going. The first sight of Pentonville is,
notwithstanding, far from encouraging. You see that you have lost your
light and air-giving window. But the report is correct on the whole.
Except as regards the window, your condition is in every respect improved.
The cells, though not so large as those of Millbank, are carefully arranged
for decency and cleanliness, and the pervading spirit of the prison is that
of quietness, regularity, and good sense. It is a strict prison, but all is
done kindly, sensibly, and well; and (which is no little matter to a prisoner)
you have easily accessible counsel and assistance, and such as you feel you
can rely on as coming from persons experienced and well-judging, and
ready to consider your difficulties carefully. At Pentonville }’ou have the
same high grade of officers and warders as at Newgate, with a longer
period in which to make their kindness felt. As regards the dietary
arrangements, these are conducted with a care only equalled, as I have
heard, in one Government prison—that of Portland. The contractors
are obliged to faithfully fulfil their contracts, and all is well cooked. I
remember on one occasion, •when some of the mutton was rather yellow,
and suspected of not being what it should be, a prisoner who was by
trade a butcher w r as brought down to examine it. He pronounced it of
excellent quality throughout. This incident show's the care used. The
prison itself is built with a view to easy management, and to accustom
the prisoners to the value of cleanliness and propriety. Pentonville is
recarded as the representative of the model prison on the separate system,
and it represents the system as faithfully and favourably as could be
desired.
After having been from nine to twelve months in separate confine-
ment, you leave Pentonville for the “public w r orks,” as they are called,
and are attached to Chatham, Portsmouth, Portland, or Dartmoor prison;
or, if a confirmed invalid, you are sent to Woking. Of their relative merits I
confess myself unable to speak positively, for I have no means of judging,
except by comparing statements almost all more or less at variance with
each other. But, as far as I can judge, all the first four stations are pretty
much on a par—all about equally disagreeable, and possessing, if not the
same, equivalent advantages and disadvantages. I shall therefore speak
only of Portsmouth, the station to which I was myself sent. The journey
from Pentonville is performed by omnibus to the South Western ter-


minus, and thence by rail. Like the other journeys of the kind in
which you have taken part, it is on the whole pleasant. There is one dis-
agreeable feature in it, no doubt. You find yourself standing chained on
the railway platform in the midst of those unchained ones with whom you
have no part; but you will have ceased to care much about such little
collisions by this time, and if the weather is fine, or indeed if it is not,
you will be fully sensible of the pleasure of breathing the fresh country
air, and looking over green fields. You are kept in a carriage devoted
exclusively to the conveyance of your party, but you are otherwise little
constrained in this transfer of yourself. You left the separate system
behind you in passing out of Pentonville, and the officers who accompany
you treat you as men passed into a comparative state of freedom.
Arrived at the “public works” prison.at Portsmouth, you see that you
have come under a system, not only different from that to which you have
been hitherto subjected, but directly opposed to it. Everything you have
seen in “separates” you now find completely reversed. No two systems
could be more strikingly antagonistic. In “separates,” you have cells
sufficiently roomy, and have light and air, and are encouraged and assisted
to form habits of cleanliness and decency ; at the same time you are
carefully kept from the evil influence of other prisoners, and are brought
into frequent contact with persons whose influence must be good,—as that
of the chaplain and scripture-readers. At the “public works,” the opposite
system is tried. The cells consist of tiers of iron boxes (I can give them
no other name), 7 feet by 4 feet, and rather more than 6 feet high, or as
nearly as possible the size of one compartment of a railway carriage. As
for windows, many of the cells have none, except in the door, and the
best have only a darkened pane of glass about 12 inches by 4 inches,
and their corrugated iron sides are painted a dark dismal drab or iron
colour.
Anything more dreadful than these places when you are first enclosed
in them cannot be conceived. Many a man when first shut up in
them feels as if he must go out of his mind. Cheerful-looking places
to the visitor who sees them through their open doors Avhen the light
streams into them from the hall, they are simply horrible to the man
who is shut up in them. These constitute the first evil of “ public
•works.” The next is, that even in these, bad as they are, you are
not allowed a moment’s rest or security. In “separates” it was thought
well to allow time for reading, thought, prayer. Here not a moment is
allowed for anything but noise and work. Matters are so arranged that
from the ringing of the first bell in the morning till you go out to work,
all is hurry, noise, dirt, bustle. In a cell in which you can barely turn,
and in which you have everything to do in almost perfect darkness, and
which is so ill provided with vessels and other means of cleanliness that
to get through your cell-cleaning at all is like working a Chinese puzzle,
and requires the most adroit management, you have to work rapidly and
ceaselessly (swallowing your cup of cocoa in sweat and dirt) till you go to
497
TO A BROTHER IN ENGLAND.


chapel. Then comes a few minutes’ rest; then—l shudder while I write
it—the grand scramble for the closets. It is impossible to describe this
scene—it is too shocking. Chapel and the grand scramble over, you
go to work in the dockyard, and you will find it really hard work.
You do little or no good. All the prisoners together—let them be six
hundred —do no more than fifty regular workmen, who knew their busi-
ness and had proper appliances, would do with ease. Then, again, a
great part of the work done does not want doing. Blocks of iron and
pieces of timber are moved backwards and forwards for the mere purpose
of giving something to do. Those who have to point out the day’s work
have often quite a difficulty in devising a job. But this is all one to you.
Your only care will be, after you have been on the works a few weeks, to
get into one of the easier parties and with one of the better class of
officers. The subordinate officers at Portsmouth are, or were, at least, in
my time, a very inferior class of men as a body, but there Avere good men
among them. The prisoners injure each other greatly, for all intercourse
between them is a communication of vicious reminiscences and designs,
but with you they will not interfere. They will eA r en respect you, if you
deserve it; and some will gain your respect in return. After dragging
about wood or iron, cleaning the sides of vessels, cleaning out docks,
coaling, or expending your unskilled labour, and running hairbreadth
escapes of losing a finger, or leg, or arm—for fe\v escape maiming sooner
or later—you return to dinner. This consists of plain boiled beef or
mutton, Avith some kind of vegetable, and, though mixed up together in
very dirty tins, is sufficient for health. You have now an hour’s rest —
your one quiet hour in the day. This ended, comes a feAV minutes’
freedom in the yard, where the scramble of the morning is re-acted in a
less violent form ; then parade, and the searching of the person, and the
filing off to Avork.
The afternoon’s Avork ended, you are again marched to the prison, and
after another searching of the person are discharged to your cell, to change
your smock and bools for a jacket and shoes before going to chapel.
Then comes another grand parade before the cell doors, then filing off'
to chapel, then a Aveary service, in Avhich a weary chaplain prays and
preaches before Aveary men, with inward growliugs and unquiet slumbers
for the result. Men Avho have been hard at work during the day are in
no condition, mental or physical, for joining in a holy service.
After chapel you go to your cell and your supper of gruel, but
not to rest. The half hour allotted for supper ended, there arises such
a Babel of sounds —of Avarders shouting and SAvearing, and feet rushing,
and brushes scrubbing —that you begin to think yourself in a North-
country Aveaving factory. You may not take part in the Avork every
night, but you will find your turn come pretty often, and may have
to Avork on in sAveat and noise till ten minutes to bed-time. Then at
length you are hurried to bed, Avith scarce time to put up your hammock
(Avhich must not be touched before), and are left through the noises of
498
A LETTER FROM A CONVICT IN AUSTRALIA


ihe night to seek a fitful sleep. It requires long use to sleep soundly.
All through the great tier of iron boxes which serve as cells, you hear
everything that is done by your neighbours; and what with the noise
of the warders, and rows in one or other part of the resonant building,
your sleep will be broken for many weeks; while you grow gradually
sensible, as the morning draws on, that you are in the midst of a great
cesspool, I speak strongly, but with truth.
Such is the system of “ public works ” in England : in the day it is
endless parade, and keeping step, and misapplied labour ; and at night
broken rest in a most foul atmosphere. A more irritating discipline
I have never seen put in practice, and it was astonishing to see how
thoroughly reckless it made the prisoners subjected to it : I never saw
any discipline affect men more unfavourably. The officers might not see
it; the authorities might know little or nothing of it, except as it gave
rise occasionally to partial outbreaks ; but I, who lived in the under-
current, saw it clearly. To make things worse, just as I left, the men
were deprived of their Sunday. The relaxation of parade on this one day
had hitherto been a saving point in this most wretched system. Hitherto
the prisoners, though Surrounded by officers and kept in a small circle like
people at a fair, could select their companions and even sit down on the
ground by the prison side and rest. But a few Sundays before I left the
prison even this one comfort was taken away, and the “ day of rest ”
was divided between parading for chapel, sitting in chapel, and being
marched round and round the yard. You must look forward to a trying
time at public works. And yet, so pleasant is it to be out of doors
and drink the fresh air, that you would not willingly go back to the
“ separate-system” prison.
I have spoken of the “ public-works ” system as it will appear to you
or any who have occupied a respectable position. But, mistake me not, by
the mass of prisoners many of the evils of the system are hardly perceived,
even though insensibly irritated by them. The one great thing with these
is to have free intercourse with each other, and so long as they have
this, and can get enough to eat and obtain an occasional chew of tobacco,
other annoyances, even Avhile they irritate, do not trouble them greatly.
Again, you yourself will suffer less after a while. Things will become
more and more tolerable every day. The Chinese puzzle of the cell
will be solved, and you will actually be able to get a little time to
yourself; and to the noise and scolding, and darkened light, and nightly
odour, you will become almost indifferent. You will deteriorate. I my-
self was satisfied that if I stayed at Portsmouth, I should lose all power of
abstraction, together with all mental habits of any use to me, and that I
should become as completely brutalized as it was possible for an educated,
temperate man to be. One thing I ought to add. There is every dis-
position on the part of the governor and principal assistants in the prison
to act fairly and kindly, nor are they responsible for the evils of the place.
They are there to carry out a system clearly defined, without power to
499
TO A BROTHER IN ENGLAND.


modify it. The evils I have pointed out belong in part to the form of
building adopted for the prison, in part to the system itself.
And now one more stage —Western Australia —and I have done. The
time you will have to serve in England has, I understand, been greatly
and very injudiciously extended, but if (as I suppose to be the case) you
are a long-sentence man, and Australia is a penal settlement in your time,
to Australia you will eventually come. Be thankful that it is so. The
passage may look alarming, the idea of being cooped up between decks for
three months with the worst of the class you see before you, may be abhorrent
to you; but the very voyage itself which seems so dreadful will be better
than public works. To be cooped up with the characters you see before you
—even though you are so only at night—is indeed bad ; worse, far -worse in
some ways than you can have any idea of. In those hours daring which
you are shut down below—hours in which no officer dare show his face—
the atmosphere is for foul conversation a little hell. You then see human
nature, not in its highest form of development, -wholly unrestrained in
word or thought. What the heart suggests is spoken out without shame
or hesitation. There is no savageness or brutality —nothing of the kind ;
but filthiness beyond belief. The god of the professional thief is not
Satan, but Beelzebub ; not the god of hate and pride, but of lewdness
and dirt.
In the ship in which I came out, the scene on Christmas night, a
night of supreme uproariousness, gave me a more fearful idea of hell than
any I could have ever conceived, and yet all was good-humour and jollity.
It was a display of unrestrained thought exhibited in unrestrained lan-
guage. It was horrible. I remember a first-class thief of the French
school saying to me that could he have ever realized being present at
such a scene it would have cured him of thieving. A hardened profes-
sional, and by no means nice, even he felt it to be “horrible.” But
your life on board the convict ship is, with this one drawback, a step for-
ward. While on board you are practically free. You are shut down at
night, but in the day you are your own master in the forepart of the
ship, and even at night are undisturbed by officers. A convict ship, from
the moment she is out of sight of land, is practically in the hands of the
three hundred men she is transporting. There is a guard of pensioners,
it is true, and precautions are taken to meet any outbreak, but the power
is with the three hundred young able desperates, and there are so many
occasions when the guard might be taken unprepared that the safety of
the vessel really depends on the temper of the men. It is therefore an
object of primary importance to avoid anything calculated to give un-
necessary irritation. The great thing is to keep the men contented and
careless, and this is best effected by leaving them to themselves. So left,
allowed to lounge about and read and talk and smoke (above deck) as
they please, and obliged only to keep their part of the ship clean,
and do what itj necessary for health and cleanliness—they give no
trouble. Easily, very easily irritated, they yet desire a safe, quiet voyage,


Most of them men who have seen a great deal of life and well able to
calculate consequences, they see no good to be gained even by a successful
seizure of the vessel, and if left to do pretty much as they please, will be
as orderly as ordinary passengers. The surgeon who has charge of them
either knows this from his own experience, or is carefully warned of it,
and leaves the men to themselves accordingly. How far the knowledge
that they are to receive no conditional pardons may operate on long-
sentence men in future voyages it is impossible to say. But I apprehend
it will make little difference, as most would think it best to wait till they
get to Australia, and escape thence in some quiet way. But, in any case,
it must always be the policy of those in charge to allow all reasonable
liberty on board ship. This you will find very grateful. The order of
things will vary in many details every successive trip, but the leading
features will be much the same in all. You will be new-clothed for the
voyage, will have a double suit of under-clothing, will have an idle day
or two of preparation, will undergo sundry surgical examinations, and a
sermon at chapel specially adapted to the occasion, and will be addressed
by a director on the improvement you may expect in your condition, by
your transportation to a colony where there is plenty of employment and
high wages, and on the special advantages which will accrue to you as
prisoners if you are well conducted during the voyage. At any rate such an
address used to be made, and then it was to a certain extent true; for though
only a very few prisoners, those, namely, who held billets in the ship or who
acted as informers, received any remission of their sentence in consequence
of their good conduct on board, they did receive something considerable,
six, twelve, and even eighteen months being struck from a probation ; but
now this is all done away with. Let the surgeon who takes the men out
do his best to obtain remission for deserving men, he can only obtain three
weeks or a month.
The address over, you march to the waterside, whence you are
conveyed by boat or steamer to the transport, your late companions on
shore cheering heartily, and your own fellows cheering back. Told off
on board ship, the first thing your companions do is to rush and
clamber over the bunks, seeking associates from whom they have been
temporarily separated, and the first hour is taken up in greetings and
questions. All are jolly ; singing breaks out from all sides. This lasts
the first day. Next day the singing continues, but in knots just as you
hear it in a fair. After a few days a centralization principle prevails, and
the singing becomes limited to public performances in the hatchway in the
evening. This, alternating with step-dancing, an exhibition which gives
great delight, continues for some weeks. Then it partially loses its inte-
rest, and dies out, and cards take possession of the ship, maintaining their
ascendancy to the close of the voyage. By day there are faint attempts
on the part of the scripture-reader to carry on a school, but they come
to nothing. The greater part of the day is divided between cleaning the
berths and decks, washing and cooking, smoking and reading. There
501
TO A BROTHER IN ENGLAND.


•will be a few fights. These begin shortly after the men arc put on
salt rations, and continue at intervals throughout the voyage. They
are seldom interfered with, it being thought best to let the men settle
their quarrels among themselves in their own way. The rations are sound
and good—good pork, good pease-soup, good “ plum-dough ; ” but you will
do well to have yourself provided with money (which can be sent to you
after you are embarked and before you sail), and should keep a servant.
You will find plenty able and willing to cater and cook for you, and do
all the pushing and rough work, and take care of your clothes, for the
sake of the better table your service Avill afford them. Money and a
man will be the greatest comfort to you —do not forget this. It will
take away the chief discomforts peculiar to a voyage of the sort, and
leave you little to do but take your ease. Avoid accepting any office or
“ billet.” A billet is very harassing, attended with some responsibility
and not a few annoyances connected with the men, without any adequate
compensation. It was all very well when it was rewarded with twelve
months’ remission, but the three or four weeks now given are really
not worth thinking about in Australia to a long-sentence man, and what-
ever the surgeon-superintendent may tell you, he can get you no more
now. You should also get a berth amidships. If you are not allotted
one, you can exchange into one for a few shillings at the commencement
of the voyage. You will find this part of the ship better for sleeping and
for your meals. There is more air, more room, more quiet than in the
other parts of the vessel. You have every prospect of arriving at your
destination safely and even quickly. The vessels taken up for this service
are all first-class boats of 900 or 1,000 tons, and are selected carefully.
On the other hand, as the object of the surgeon in charge is not so much
a swift voyage as a safe one, you will escape the wet berths and critical
situations of crack liners on other stations.
The first you see of the land of your exile is a rather low coast-line,
broken by two rocky islands, which rise out of a long low reef of sand
and rock, and assist in forming a moderately safe x'oadstead. As you
round the northernmost of these, and approach the land more closely, you
see it to be covered with a wild heathery scrub, out of which rise here
and there wild-looking trees, scantily leaved and of no great beauty. The
town of Freemantle, before which you will anchor, is not unlike some of
the small sea-side watering-places in England, and looks pretty and
cheerful. The stone of which the houses are built is very white, and the
place looks new and substantial. Conspicuous above all rises the prison,
or, as it is here called, the “ establishment.” To this you will be conveyed
in detachments in the course of a day or two after anchoring, merely
accompanied by a couple of officers, and without parade or ostentation.
Your first impression, on finding yourself within the gates, is a mixed
one. The courtyard is Very quiet—not unlike that of a large deserted
country inn, and the inspection you undergo before going to the baths is
a quiet affair, conducted without fuss or nonsense, and only carried just


as far as is necessary. So far so good. Bat the windows of the great
building before you, being ail of a thick grey glass, impress you most
unpleasantly. You will, however, find them all right —just what they
should be. They are semi-transparent; but the light does not come in
deformed, and their opacity is not more than is necessary for the strong
light of the climate. After inspection on entrance you go to the baths,
and now is the time for you to secure any money you may have
with you. But if you will be advised by me, you will either get
some one of the warders whom you have made a friend of during
the voyage to take charge of it, or else intrust it to your ship-ser-
vant or other professional whom you can trust. From the baths, which
are sensibly and conveniently contrived, you pass into a great yard
to be shaved and have your hair cut, both which operations, let me tell
you, will be performed most effectually. Every particle of whisker, every
hair of your head which can be made to pass through a fiat comb, is taken
off unsparingly. They cut the hair pretty close in England, but what
they leave on there is a “ luxuriant growth ” compared with what they
leave on in Australia. It will, however, be a matter of little moment to
you, and you will see that your position in all substantial points is im-
proved immensely. Acquainted only with the English prisons where you
must march in closely-defined lines and have an officer looking sharply
after you at every corner, and have doors here and bars there, and where
there are ringing voices of command on every side of you, you seem not
to be in prison at all. You find yourself confined, indeed, to the yard,
but you see no officer, except perhaps one at the door, and find that
you can w r alk about and talk with your friends as you please. So long
as there is no disturbance there is no interference. The officer on
duty is to the prisoners in their exercise-yards what the policeman is to
the public at a fair or flower-show. He is there for the preservation of
order, or to hold the entrance to some forbidden avenue. The Austra-
lian system aims at being as far as possible self-acting. Order is sought
to be obtained, not by an incessant display of force, and by making the
presence and power of authority felt every minute of the day, but by
an appeal to the good sense of the men themselves, and by calling on a
certain portion of them to assist in all those duties where a paid officer is
not actually necessary. These men are denominated constables, and have a
certain remission for their services, and are probably really more useful
in keeping the men contented and orderly than any officers could be.. At
all events the system, as far as the preservation of order and regularity
is concerned, is perfectly successful. No English prison is half as safe
from emeutes, no, nor as orderly, as the establishment at Freeman tie.
The men, who know their being left in a great measure to carry out the
discipline of the prison themselves depends on there being no call for
a more stringent system, fall into their duties quietly and regularly,
and, of three or four hundred men within or about the prison, it is rare
that any one is not in his place. This offers a pleasing contrast to


the English public-works prisons, where the men, Avhen not actually at
work, are in a constant state of drill and irritation, and where, with
an officer at every corner, there is no security against an emeute at any
moment. This Australian plan of keeping the red rag out of sight will
afford you a relief you cannot now estimate. Passing from the yard
tq your cell, you find fresh cause fur satisfaction. In size, the cells here
are little larger than the iron cages at Portsmouth ; but they are built
of stone, have a good window, are of good height, and are plastered and
whitewashed, have a firm table and sufficient conveniences, and are
really cheerful, airy little dens. What is more, you are not shut up in
them. You have, when not at work, full liberty of entry and egress.
For about ten minutes at breakfast-time, and the same at dinner and
tea, you must be in them ; but even then the doors are left open. All
the rest of the day out of -working hours you can go down to the yard or
stay in your cell—as you please. The doors are closed only at night.
This, again, is good.
Should you be retained at the establishment at Freemantle, it will
be the greatest comfort to you. Its humanizing and quieting effect
on the minds of the prisoners is most marked. It is possible, how-
ever, that you may have to go up the country, or into the bush, as
it is called. Should you be sent to a road-party, you may perhaps,
have reason to regret this ; but I myself regard the being attached to
a road-party, even as a simple labourer, as better than anything inside
the walls of a prison. You may have to live in a hut, but a hut is
by no means an uncomfortable lodging. You associate with it Avet and
dirt and the assaults of not a few of the most annoying varieties of the
insect tribe. But if you suffer from any of these, it will be your oavii
fault. A hut is, in this country, one of the cleanest and most pleasant
habitations you can have. The roof, formed of the rush of the blackboy
(grass-tree), keeps it cool'in summer and dry in winter, while, if it is
at all cold, you can always have a glorious fire. Your bed, made of the
same rushes, is springy and clean, and, by a little care, may be kept
free from insects during every part of the year. In two-thirds of the
houses of the country you are for many months of the year devoured
with insects and cannot get rid of them, but in a hut you need have none.
And then you are only required to do a fair day’s work in proportion
to your strength; while out of working hours you are left to your-
self entirely, being desired only to keep within certain limits defined by
the officer in charge of the party. Some other little advantages there
are in road-parties which you will find out for yourself. But I should
add that what I have said of these road-parties does not apply so fully
to those close to Freemantle and Perth. These being mere suburban
affairs, and close under the eye of the colonial public, are displays of
prison vigilance and severity. The hot sand and want of shade, moreover,
make the work very oppressive. It is certainly better to he in the
“ establishment ” than at one of these parties.


But, although I have thought it well to notice the road-parties so far,
you will probably be made a clerk in the chief establishment. The system
being one which aims at being as far as possible self-acting, it is the
custom to put every prisoner to the work at which he is likely to be most
useful. If he is able as a clerk to do work for which Government must
otherwise pay from 801. to 100 Z. a year, he is not employed, as in
England, on some physical labour of which he understands nothing,
but he is placed at a desk amongst books and accounts. And such
will almost certainly be your own lot. The establishment at Free-
mantle being the centre from which all the convict stations or depots
scattered throughout the colony receive instructions and supplies,
and through which almost everything connected with the service
ultimately passes, affords occupation for a large staff, which is with
difficulty kept up to the necessary strength. This causes every educated
prisoner to be pounced on by one or other department as soon as he
arrives. There is occasionally a struggle for his service between different
departments. Again, you may be sent as clerk to one of the country
establishments. This will be still better. The clerkships at these “depots,”
as they are called, are the best positions in the service, sufficiently good
to compensate for their one drawback—the loss of society. This is a
great loss, as the society obtainable in the Freemantle prison, where there
are some of the best informed and most agreeable men of the day, is really
most enjoyable. Btft the greater freedom and superior accommodation
you will enjoy at the depot is to most men more than an equivalent. You
can scarcely, however, hope for one of these posts till you have been at
the establishment some time, as they are generally applied for some months
before they fall due. Again, if you make yourself really useful, you will
never be sent to them, for it is a rule at the chief establishment never
to send away its best men. You get no reward there for usefulness—
none. You might think that at least you would get some extra remission,
or that the authorities might interest themselves to find you a situation on
your discharge. Nothing of the kind, I believe Ido injustice to no one
when I say that there is not a head of any department in the establishment
who would interest himself to find you a situation on your discharge. As
for remission, you just get your ordinary stages as you would if you were
nearly useless. It is otherwise at the country depots, but this is the rule
at the establishment. Beware, therefore, of being too useful. Just do
what is required and nothing beyond. It is, perhaps, the true theory of
comfort everywhere. Placed at work for which you are fitted, your time
will now pass quickly, and, on the whole, pleasantly. You rise early,
have regular employment, good society, a diet plain and somewhat hard,
but wholesome and substantial, have tea in place of gruel, andjreasonable
time for exercise and self-improvement. The library is miserably chosen
and badly managed, but you can find some readable books in it.
In Australia a quieting, self-acting, improving system is substituted
for one whose only real result, and whose seeming object (if one did


not know the better spirit by which Government is really actuated) is,
to use a rather vulgar but very expressive phrase, to “ establish a raw.”
The Australian system has to deal with men who must speedily form part
of a large and formidable class in the country’s population, and seeks to
prepare them gradually to act sensibly and temperately. There the
officering, keeping down, parading, drilling, grinding system will not do.
There, the bond class stand in the proportion of fully five-sevenths of
the entire grown male population, and are perfectly conscious of their
power, and only quiet and orderly because they see there is nothing
to be gained by a contrary course. To keep up the irritation-principle,
therefore, is out of the question. An (imeute at Portsmouth or Portland
is a mere trifle—an affair of a few hours—and ends where it began.
But were a serious outbreak to occur at Freemantle, no one could tell
where it would end.
The Australian prison and its stations have their defects, of course, as
have other prisons. The system is not perfect, and suffers, as do all
systems, by imperfect working. It has amongst its officials childish old
men, who are kept on because there is no excuse for getting rid of them,
other than there has been for years ; and there are low blackguards
amongst its subordinate officers who are kept on because they are smart
men, and see that the pots and pans are kept up to the required brightness.
But the management is, on the whole, judicious, and has good results.
One experiment is being now carried out in Australia with regard to one
particular class of prisoners—principally those recommitted for attempting
to escape—which stands in most unhappy contrast with that part of the
system which I have been describing. It is called the “chain gang.”
It was determined to stop attempts to escape by terrific punishment—
namely, heavy irons in a separate and dark cell for from fifty to a
hundred days, with a diet of water and one pound of bread. The irons,
weighing, some of them, twenty-eight pounds, were not to be removed
day or night. Now this -punishment is really tremendous. The unfor-
tunate runaways come out of their fifty or seventy days’ confinement
weak, sickly, famine-stricken men, looking much as persons do who
are in a consumption. In this state they are made to work in heavy irons
on the roads, and are kept very strictly to very hard work. If it be
summer they have the no slight additional torture of working, heavily
ironed as they are, under a burning sun. But this punishment is really
ineffective. Nine-tenths of the attempts to escape are now from this very
chain gang. Flogging, the "necessity lor which this punishment was in-
tended to obviate, has been added to it, and added in vain. The heavy
irons never off for a moment —with them in the bath, with them in bed,
with them painfully at every turn of the body, sleeping or waking—make
the men so desperate that the poor fellows break, in some marvellous way,
the very heaviest irons, and try continually to get away, at any risk. The
men who form this gang are by no means the worst in the prison; but
they are under a mania for running away, and the more heavily they are


ironed, fhe more will they try to get free. In the meantime, the effect
on the poor fellows is ruinous ; every day does something towards making
them hard, fierce, savage. Break them down you never can. And when
they come to their liberty, it will be found that they have been made
very dangerous men, and society may one day think that so natural and
harmless a thing as an attempt to get out of prison called for a punish-
ment somewhat less severe than one to which death itself were leniency.
The experiment was not, I believe, unkindly meant; it was thought that
a very little of such a punishment would produce the desired effect, and
that attempts to escape would be stopped at once; but this did not prove
to be the case, and successive links were added to the ponderous chain
till it became the terrific punishment it is. Bad in principle, bad
in its results, its continuance is the more to be regretted as it is the
one great blot in an administration that has been, on the whole, sensible
and manly.
Such is the Australian system inside the prison. I wish I could speak
as favourably of the system outside —the system i.e. to which a man
becomes subject on his obtaining his ticket-of-leave. It is as bad as it can
be. Professedly aiming at making the released man an energetic, respect-
able, successful member of the community, and attaching him to the colony,
its every rule seems formed with a view of either disabling or disgusting him.
It is a system of disabilities. Its first act on his going out is to dictate the
field in which he is to labour, and to depreciate the value of his services.
Before he is released he must find a master ! Occasionally, indeed, a man
is allowed to set up on his own account, but he must previously satisfy
the resident magistrate that he is likely to be successful; and this
functionary, whose standing orders are to give as few independent tickets
as possible, and who is seldom the man fitted to be a censor of trades, most
commonly refuses. As a consequence, many of the best disposed and most
useful men give up all thought of doing anything in the colony, or even
sink into dissipation and recklessness. Two instances to the point have
come under my own notice. Two men, one a moulder and the other a
glass-blower, believed there was a good opening for their respective trades,
and some merchants thought so too, and offered to assist them with plant
and orders. The men, having sufficient capital to start, applied for tickets
on their own hands. The one was refused because the magistrate could
not see how such a trade could succeed, the other was refused without
reason given. In both cases the men went and spent their money in
disgust. And so it is again and again. Men come out intending to be
sober and live respectably, but are so disgusted with the discouragements
and obstructions that meet them just when they expect a helping hand,
that they fling away all their good resolutions in despair, throw down
their money on the first public-house table, and spend it in a <! glorious
rouse” with their friends. The next disability is the confining each ticket-
man to a particular district, out of which he must not pass without the
authorities being satisfied that the transfer applied for will not derange


the balance of labour, and that it is otherwise desirable. Even where a
man has received a positive engagement from an employer in another
district, he cannot enter on it until an order for his transfer has
been obtained, and this seldom costs less than ten days or a fortnight,
and where the applicant is at a great distance from head-quarters, very
much more. Attached to this regulation requiring prisoners at large to
find masters-is another highly injurious. All do not find masters, or, at
all events', do not succeed in the two or three days allowed them for the
purpose; or after they have found a service they do not always stay in it;
in either case they are sent on public works at one of the Government depots.
These depots are branch convict establishments in different parts of the
colony, through which are sent supplies to the various road-parties. They
are commissariat or engineer depots, and are in the charge of one of the
higher subordinate officers of the service. They have hospitals attached to
them for the reception of patients from the road-parties, a resident magistrate
sits at them on cases of breach of discipline, and they have a radius of some
twenty miles. All this is very well, and the arrangements are perhaps as
good as any that could be made. They answer all necessary purposes,
and work well. But to force men on these depots, as is done at present,
because they are for the moment out of employment, is radically bad.
The road-parties to which unemployed ticket-holders are attached are in
all respects under the same regulations as the convict road-parties,
except that the men are not required to work so hard, and that they
occasionally receive passes to seek for employment. To oblige a man,
therefore, directly he is discharged from service to go straight to the
depot, and if he cannot by a two days’ pass which he receives after being
there a day" find a fresh employer, to send him on the roads, is really to
send him back to prison. This cannot be right. Without going into the
question as to whether it is well for able-bodied men to have a workhouse
to retire to in a country where, employed or unemployed, no one need
starve, it cannot be well to force them into one. The effect often is to
quench any little desire they may still have to be independent. The fact
that they are mere prisoners at large without power of independent action
is so pressed on them that too many of them resign themselves to their
condition, and prefer degradation and a life without care or trouble (o
freedom and difficulties. Once sent on depot, there are many hundreds
who, except for a month or two in the year, never leave it. The road-
party, be it understood, offers some advantages to a working man which
are not afforded by private service. The latter is a state of freedom, but
there is hard work, irregular meals, contemptuous treatment. Iheie aie
few places under colonial masters where the ticket-of-leave workman is
not made to feel his position. At the road-party, on the contrary, all is
regular, cleanly, decent ; the work moderate, the officer conciliating,
and, above all, there is the pleasant party of old friends sitting roimd the
great wood fire in the evening, and talking over old times. I know men
who have been on these parties for years, and would not leave them for


any service in tlie colony. They get a pass occasionally to look for work,
but it is only used to enable them to be present at some spree of which
they have had intelligence. There are many who never intend to leave
permanently till they are due for their conditional pardon. And yet,
almost all these are men who surrendered their freedom at first reluc-
tantly, and who could find for themselves a comfortable subsistence.
There is such an abundance of small edible wild game, and it is so easily
snared or caught, that a man need never be at a loss for food.- With
a dog and gun he can always keep himself well. There is sale for
the flesh of some, and for the skins or furs of everything that runs.
Again, the wild products of the forest, as manna, gum, palm cotton,
and bark, afford another means by which a man free to move about
and seek them may get a living. Again, if a ticket-man is ever hard
up, the hand of every one of his class is open to him. Starvation
in a country like this is impossible, except to the man who has his
hands tied.
Another great mistake of our disability system is the not allowing
the released prisoner the protection of the law. From the time of his
leaving prison to that of his receiving his conditional pardon he is under
arbitrary power, and for an offence of the most trivial nature may, at the
discretion of the sitting magistrate, Be sentenced to several years’ impri-
sonment, Two men were recently condemned, the one to five years’
imprisonment for being suspected of dropping some tobacco at a road-
party, and the other to three years’ imprisonment for being suspected
of leaving some spirits at a road-party. I say suspected , for the whole
evidence in the latter case was that of a gentleman who saw the prisoner
11 walking in the neighbourhood of the party.” On this last point I can
speak most positively, as an intimate friend of my own was present during
the so-called trial, and related the particulars to me immediately after-
wards. I do not say that such judgments are given frequently, or that the
magistrates as a body are either cruel or unjust. But such judgments
do occur, and this creates in the mind of the ticket-of-leave holder a
feeling of insecurity. Unfortunately, too, it seems rather a point with
the authorities to press on the ticket-holder this fact of Ids want of
security in the most offensive way. So particular are they in asserting
their irresponsibility and absolutism that one reads notices in the public
prints that such and such a ticket-of-leave holder has been “ sent back
to the establishment (prison) at the recommendation of the resident
magistrate,” without mention of any offence.
Again: you cannot move without reporting yourself here and report-
ing yourself there, and obtaining passes, getting passes visaed, passes
extended, &c. You have a journey of five miles to take, and you must
go perhaps twenty to obtain a pass, and again go twenty miles to report
yourself on your return; —or you want to leave a town on urgent busi-
ness, and you must wait till next day because it is now past noon, and
the magistrate has done sitting. In any case you must lose half a day
509
TO A BROTHER IN ENGLAND.


hanging about the court. We may be in a wilderness and escape many
of what Humboldt terms “ the errors of a long civilization,” but we have
red tape enough for the oldest government in the world. The discourage-
ment which such a system offers to the ticket-holder must be evident.
But there is one circumstance which may not occur to you in England
which makes this system specially injurious here. There is in Australia,
side by side with the great bond class, a small free class. This class, far
inferior in numbers to the class beside it, as far as the adult population
is concerned, is inferior also in energy and intelligence. Hence arises
between the two classes the bitterest hatred. The free class, jealous of the
superiority of the bondsmen in all essentials, yet affects to look down on
it, and withdraws within itself, only striking some side-blow at it through
the press when it has an opportunity. The bond class, on the other
hand, hate the free, whom they regard really and unaffectedly as almost
beneath their contempt, for their greater privileges. No outbreak ever
will take place—no general one, at least—for the simple reason that there
is nothing to make it worth while; but they none the less sincerely or
deeply both hate the colonial and despise him. It is unfortunate, but
the Government, in legislating for the prisoner, have forgot they were
legislating for a colony. They saw before them only dangerous men
to be guarded, not men to be encouraged to embrace a new life and
form a new state. , The attaching excessive punishments to slight faults,
as if discharged prisoners were more perfect than other men ; the judg-
ments of private tribunals; the surveillance of the police, are things which
can nowhere work well. But to form an idea of the effect of the dis-
ability system here, you must suppose all London under ticket-of-leave
law with the exception, say, of the freemen of the City.
Still you may greatly modify the evils natural to the position, by
taking a judicious line. Live in the bush, and the evils of the system
will press lightly on you. Take up a grant of land far back in a fine
hunting country, build a comfortable hut on it, try to get a pleasant
companion and a couple of good dogs, get permission to carry a gun,
visit the town only when necessary for obtaining supplies, have a useful
horse and a good spring-cart, and keep away from every one, and you
will be practically as free in your Australian forest-home as if you were
on the untrodden shores of the Oronoco, and much more comfortable.
You will of course choose a fine country, I should advise you to be near
a good lake. You will have no difficulty in finding a spot to suit yon, as
you only want a small plot of land for a station, and this may be rented, if
not bought, for a nominal sum anywhere. I should not advise you to
farm, but you must have some land, as the possession of what is called a
“ station ” will obtain you a freedom and immunities which you -would
not otherwise have. Having once got what you want, keep out of sight
and out of mind. You must, of course, have money, but that I suppose
you to have—enough, at least, to do what I have advised. Much is not
necessary. The forest will supply you with meat. Kangaroo, exactly
510
A LETTER FROM A CONVICT IN AUSTRALIA


\
TO A BROTHER IN ENGLAND. 511
like fine beef; opossum, like rabbit; kangaroo-rat, like chicken ; bandi-
coote, like partridge; these, with pigeons, parrots, emu, wild turkey,
and other of your feathered neighbours, will leave little to be desired
in the way of animal food, though you may add tame fowl if you wish.
Your lake will supply you abundantly with the finest fish, and your
garden with almost every kind of vegetable you can desire, and of fruit,
too, if you could wait for it. As it is, it will yield you grapes in two
years, and some other fruits in one. To be supplied with milk and
butter, you have only to keep three or four goats, and if you keep a small
piggery you can even indulge in pork. With a good selection of books,
and, if you are a smoker, a supply of good tobacco, what can you want
more? Society, say you? No doubt; and many of the other good
things that belong to older countries; but you have here a life which is
not only practically free, but with which you may be well content for a
few years.
Such is our present prison system, and such are the opportunities and -
position of the ticket-holder in Australia, as they have presented them-
selves to me. The prison system now in operation in England seems to
be part good, part very bad. The separate system I regard as most
useful—as useful as any prison system could be. The effect of being
almost always alone, and brought in contact only with good books and
good men, leads to reflection and regret, if not to penitence. I remember,
as probably does every one else, being greatly amused at the scene in
David Copperjield., where the two arch-scoundrels Littimer and Ileep, are
represented as describing the happy effect of the discipline of the separate
system on themselves. The description is somewhat highly-coloured, but
I can quite conceive that such scenes have not only really taken place,
but that the penitents who may have figured in them may have spoken in
good faith. The frame of mind into which a man is brought by the
separate system (as carried on at Pentonville—the only prison of the kind
of which I have had any lengthened experience) is, to say the least, one
of serious thought and good resolves. I should not think it would be
sufficiently powerful to support a professional thief against the allurements
of his old trade, even if he were kept under this discipline during the
whole term of his sentence. But the effect of this discipline on the mind
is undoubtedly good. For that portion of the prisoners which does not
consist of professional thieves, and which comes not from the dangerous
but from the working classes, it is all that is required, and the only part
of our system to which they should be subjected.
We have no right to throw these men into a mass of crime and corrup-
tion, whatever right we may have to punish them physically. This is recog-
nized in the American system, which does not allow them to be even seen
by those who might subsequently prove an annoyance and injury, much
less subject them to a close communication with men of the foulest conver-
sation. This is an act of justice and economy which may be well copied.
The thief who has plundered society systematically all his life, and is her


512 A LETTER FROM A COEVICT IN AUSTRALIA.
natural open enemy, is indulged by being associated with bis old’friends
and men of bis own tastes and babits. The working man who has been
led into some one crime, is made to live with others who, considerate as
they- may be to bis personal feelings when addressing or speaking close
to him, are constantly filling bis mind with images of which be may ■
never rid himself all bis life. Besides, it is absurd to talk about reform-
i , x
ing criminals when you ruthlessly corrupt those with whom lies your
only chance. For charity’s sake these men, at least, should be kep»t “in
separates,” or only associate with each other. For professional thieves
I conceive the best system would be the separate .for a short sentence,
transportation for a long one. I see.no use in applying two systems to
any one sentence. If it is a first offence, the separate plan might, and
I think should, be followed for the whole term of imprisonment. In the
case of a second offence, or a long sentence, I w r ould transport the offender
at once. There is no reformation (proper) to be expected from trans-
portation, nor perhaps from any other system, but it gives a to
a man to take up a respectable life and to keep within the law. But it
is quite useless to make men in separates and then‘“bad” by
bringing them together. As to the best mode of carrying out trans-
portation, or the best place to transport criminals to in future, it is
not for me to say; but the shorter the time the men are together,
and the sooner the transported criminal merges into the exile, the
better. The men should, moreover, be sent to some country where
they can make themselves a home, and which they may hope eventually
to make prosperous. Western Australia would have been an excellent
, . place, had it not been for the strange fancy of making a system of prison
regulations* the law of a people, and transforming a whole country
a convict establishment, anc| virtually working the finest part of the
population in irons. * t
K-;
A-:i ‘ ' •'
. , „ , - - ♦. *l. .
. - ■ * * jr.
* , ** .
/• • *
, '■ . ♦
■
