

A League
of Nations.
FOUR LECTURES
Delivered under the auspices of the
Adelaide Diocesan Social Union,
August, 1918,
PRICE SIXPENCE.
Published by
The Adelaide Diocesan Social Union, conjointly with the Committee of the
International Peace Society, Adelaide Branch,
(President—Rev. A. E. Gifford)




A
LEAGUE OF NATIONS
FOUR LECTURES
Delivered under the auspices of the
Adelaide Diocesan Social Union,
August, 1918,
By
Mr. President W. JETHRO BROWN, LL.D.,
Industrial Court of South Australia ;
Prof. MEREDITH ATKINSON, M.A.,
Melbourne University ;
Mr. HERBERT HEATON, M.A., M.Com.,
Adelaide University.




FOREWORD.
.Is this war going to end war? That depends upon the
hearts of men. But it depends also upon the means we take
to secure the end for which we hope and pray. One means,
and; a most hopeful means, is the formation of a League of
Nations. With different aspects of this proposal the four
lectures in this little volume deal. They were arranged by
the Adelaide Diocesan Social Union, in the belief that the
proposal is a Christian proposal, and merits the most earnest
consideration. The names of the lecturers are a sufficient
.guarantee of thoughtfulness, thoroughness, and sincerity.
A. NUTTER ADELAIDE.
(Editor’s Note.—The lectures here published were de-
livered three months before the signing of the Armistice, at
a time when few people expected such an early conclusion of
hostilities. In spite of the changed circumstances of to-day
it has been thought best to leave the subject matter un-
touched. H.H.)




A LEAGUE OF NATIONS.
The Need.
((Delivered August 5, 1918, by Mr. Herbert Heaton, M.A.,
'M.Com., University of Adelaide).
| N the far-away days before the war man 3/ languid discus-
-1 sions were carried on concerning the preservation of peace
and the erection of machinery for the peaceful settlement
-of international disputes. Peace societies met to listen to
eloquent lectures. Socialist ,congresses passed strong reso-
lutions affirming the international solidarity of the proletarian
and urging the of all lands to use their
organised strength to prevent the outbreak of war. The
churches of the world gave mild support to the doctrine of
human brotherhood. But no one really bothered much. We
were all too busily concerned with questions of internal
economic or political reform. Besides/ Norman Angell had
convinced us that war was financially impossible, or at least
that was what we thought he had said. War was un-
imaginable. It was an anachronism. Why, therefore, worry
about the prevention of an impossible thing? Hence during
those days we did nothing. That is the way of mankind.
We never muster enough energy to deal with the known
dangers of .mining work until some big colliery accident de-
scends upon us. We need ,a “Titanic” disaster to make us
tackle the question of unsmkable ships and of adequate
supplies of life-boats. In ,the same way we made no real effort
to guarantee the maintenance of peace until peace had been
snatched from us.
Then came the explosion, and we realised on what un-
stable foundations our peaceful life rested. As the war de-
veloped the population of the belligerent countries became
divided into two sections. The first section comprised the
bloodthirsty and the bitter-enders, to whom the only aim
of the war was the complete destruction of the enemy. The
war *was an end in itself; provided we won, nothing else
mattered. Of a vision of anything beyond victory there was
none, except perhaps further national aggrandisement. From
the speeches of fhis section one would gather that the de-
struction of Prussian militarism was the only task confront-
ing the world.
The second section, probably by far the larger, was
composed of people whose constitution contained some strain
of idealism. To them this war was a horrible thing, a ne-
cessary but unpleasant means to a desirable end. But they


never allowed /the means to submerge the end. That end:
was not the destruction of an enemy, but the destruction of
a system which ,made wars possible. The crushing of Prussian
militarism was only the end of the beginning, the removal
of one obstacle from the path. It was a negative achieve-
ment. Beyond,it lay the much bigger and more difficult task
of ensuring peace by curbing militarism wherever it might
seek to raise its head, and ,by enthroning the rule of public
right. Hence the present struggle was regarded not so much
as a war against the Central Powers, but as “a war to end
war”, and it was realized that the only satisfactory settle-
ment was one which would' devise means to prevent the re-
currence, or at least minimise the possibility, of war in
future. This ideal found expression m many varied quarters.
Labor manifestoes declared-that on the conclusion of the war
the working classes of all the industrial countries must unite
to establish some international authority to settle points of
difference amongst nations by compulsory conciliation and
arbitration. Sir Oliver Lodge talked of a “federation of the
European nations—a federation for all purposes, both peace
and war”, and hundreds of voices on both sides of the
Atlantic uttered similar sentiments.
These sentiments were not those of arm-chair philo-
sophers, or of pacifists. They were the ideals for which
thousands went out to fight, willingly facing death in the hope
that by their sacrifice a better world might be created.
Probably never m the world's- history has there been such a
willing, sacrifice by the youth of the world—not for national
gain, not for colony-snatching, not for destruction of an
enemy nation, but for a spiritual ideal. Let me quote an
extract from a soldier's letter, a letter which was only to be-
opened after the death of the writer:—“We go to battle for
freedom and justice, and our struggle is for a lasting peace
... If this lasting peace is really attained, then I shall not
have yielded up my young, life in vain. My spur to endurance
was the thought of the world peace which is to follow on this
world war. I .left the world unwillingly. Do not forget what
I lived for—what m the end' I died for —the building up of a
better order, which shall create happier men.” These lines
were written, not by your brothers or mine, though tens of
thousands of young men in the allied armies would say
“Amen” to them: they were penned by a young Austrian
officer in 1915, and show that there are idealists on both
sides of No Man’s Land.
This crusading fervor „received a check in 1916. The
“Mittel-Europa” project of the Central' Powers, the reply
given by the Paris Economic Conference, and the secret
treaties, seemed to indicate that the war had lost its


spirituality, and was descending into a mercenary struggle
for territory and trade. But the Russian Revolution and the
entry of America came as a The former
sent a wave of hope .over every land, whilst the latter meant
that the war-aims of ,the Allies must be dominated by the
ideals of President Wilson. Cynics in high places still pooh-
poohed the “dreams” of “cranks and faddists”, but when
the American President stated in January, 1918, that one of
America’s aims was the formation of “a general association
of nations under specific covenants for the purpose of afford-
ing mutual guarantees of political independence and territorial
integrity to great and small states alike”, the idea of a
League"of Nations was nailed at the top of the Allied! mast.
To many .people the phrase “A League of Nations” is
still an empty one: to others its meaning is nebulous. Its
opponents have no difficulty in pointing out obvious objections
and some of its supporters weaken their case by refusing
to recognise them, or to think them out in detail.
Yet if there is to be any hope of a better world, those who
hold that hope must sit down, think hard, thrash out the diffi-
culties, and then act. The study of the subject can be taken
under four headings. Firstly, we must consider why we need
something better than the old order, and what we need.
Secondly, we must see to what extent international laws and
agreements have been built up, and ascertain the strength
and limitations of such laws. Thirdly, we must consider what
sort of international machinery is necessary to secure peace-
ful and satisfactory settlement of disputes between nations.
Finally, we must realize that all such machinery is useless
unless there is in the minds and hearts of people of all nations
an international spirit, a will to peace, a willingness to con-
sider the well-being of all mankind rather than one’s own
selfish advantage. In this lecture we are concerned only with
the need for a league of nations, or for some other safeguard
which will prevent jthe world from being plunged into another
bath of blood.
The need can be summed up 111 two questions. Is pos-
terity to be condemned to .an enlarged repetition of this war?
Are we to fall back into the old order, with an armed peace,
with rival alliances maintaining a precarious balance of power,
with nations groaning under the burden of mighty arma-
ments, and with suspicion and ill-will between the nations,
so that it needed pnly a squalid murder in an unknown town
to set the world ablaze? Or are we to go forward to an ideal
of' public right, to a real world partnership, based on the
recognition of equal rights, and enforced by the common
will:? With every fibre of our being we say “Go forward.”
Why? A host of answers leap to one’s lips, and we can only
examine a few of them.


The most potent factor at work to-day m favor of the
prevention of war is the war itself. The whole world has
realized the horribleness, the dull aching misery of war under
modern conditions. No struggle since the I,7th century has
taken toll so heavily of the life and resources of humanity,
for the first time in history we see whole nations involved for
twelve months a year on every acre of land, in every factory,
on every railway, in every ship and mine. In place of the
old fashioned type of war, in which small armies contended
on some small area, and the issue was decided by a few
pitched battles, we now have wars of attrition, in which
victory depends on killing off or beating down the whole re-
sources of a nation. Wars in their new form may be almost
as costly to the victor as to the vanquished, and huge losses
on each side may leave tne situation unchanged. Science
has come to the aid of destruction in ways which have added
a hundredfold to war’s horrors, and make one shudder to
think of the possibilities of warfare after another forty or
fifty years of scientific research. In all this there is not even
the cynical consolation that the fittest survive; the old and
unfit cannot bear the strain and are therefore exempt, whilst
the young and fit are taken. Hence wars of attrition leave
behind nations of women, aged, crippled, and unfit. No
wonder therefore that men, whilst perfectly convinced that
their nation could not in honor - escape the war, and whilst
fully determined to .fight on till they secure an honorable
peace, are equally determined to write across the pages of
history—“ Never again.”
To revulsion against a horrible experience we must add
the fear of the .consequences of a repetition of such a struggle
as that in which the white races are engaged. The exhaustion
resulting from this war may not be fatal to our whole civiliza-
tion, though some acute observers do not hesitate to say that
the white races are to-day cutting their own throats. No
man has expressed the fear more lucidly or forcibly than Vis-
count (formerly Sir Edward) Grey in a recent pamphlet.
“There is more at stake in, this war,” he says, “than the
existence of individual ,states or empires, or the fate of a
continent. The whole of modern civilization is at stake, and
whether it will perish and be submerged, as has happened to
previous civilizations of older types, or whether it will live
and progress, depends upon whether the nations engaged in
this war,, and even those which are onlookers, learn the
lessons that the .experience of the war may teach them.”
The only possible endings of modern large-scale war are not
merely victory or defeat: beyond them rears up the spectre
of the destruction of civilization, and the passage of the in-
tellectual and jnaterial leadership of the world into the hands


of other peoples. This is a possibility which makes us
shudder, for in spite of all its vices of commercialism, ma-
terialism, and hypocrisy, our white culture has its good
points, and we cannot afford to lose it. But we shall, unless
we make a supreme effort to ensure that the national sec-
tions of the white race can live in peace and quiet together.
They must learn to live together, or perish.
The danger to civilization and to social progress is not,,
however, limited to questions of fiuman and financial exhaus-
tion. It comes also from the opportunities provided by war
lor anti-popular, anti-progressive forces to get the upper
hand. Of these forces the chief is militarism, which reached
its most highly developed form m Germany. Militarism thrives
on war and rumors or war; war is its job. In times of peace
we may be able to keep it in subjection,' but it always gams
full freedom when war creaks out. At once it jumps into the
saddle, and by allying ltseir with kindred spirits, is able to
ride down all democratic rights and political liberties. the
freedom won by decades of peaceful effort and agitation is.
broken by the mailed fist at one blow, and when peace comes
the light for .freedom has to be begun all over again, against
an enemy more strongly entrenched than ever. Militarism
feeds on the fear of war, on the plea that the nation may be
suddenly attacked, or on the hope of national aggrandisement
by force. If we can remove that fear, prove that plea to be
unfounded, and show nations that they can no longer hope
to extend their boundaries by the use of the sword, we cut
the ground! from under the feet of militarism, destroy its
power, and give the civilian and the democrat an opportunity
to go ahead in safety.
To some people the above reasons would be strong
enough to win their support for the idea of a league of na-
tions. But we must go deeper, and ask, “What are the
causes of war? Are these causes such as could be removed
or minimized by any international organisation? Let us look,
therefore, at some of the chief forces which work for war
and make wars possible in the modern world.
First comes the problem of nationality. Mankind ge-
nerally has a desire for seif-government, and when therefore
you find people of one nationality being ruled by an alien
monarch or race, you may be sure that sooner or later the
oppressed people will strike for freedom and home rule. Now
the old wars of the past frequently resulted in the forcible
subjection of the defeated peoples. The Balkan races passed
under the sway of the .Turks, the Italians under that of the
Austrians, the Poles under that of Austria, Prussia, and
Russia, the French in Alsace-Lorraine under the heel of Ger-
many. But no amount of alien rule, however good it may be,


ever destroys the native passion for independence. Until that
independence is regained, war is always possible, for no ruling
race will ever willingly; relinquish its hold of captured terri-
tory. Yet such matters should be settled on the grounds of
right, not by might. If therefore we had a League of Na-
tions, with power to deal with such problems, and able to
ensure that the rights and wishes of oppressed peoples should
be respected, one fruitful cause of war might be eliminated.
Secondly, war is always possible so long as there is fear
and distrust amongst nations. International, relations before
the war were often based on two principles—the need for
advancing your own country’s interests, and a suspicion that
every other country was planning your downfall. You never
knew what schemes were brewing, behind the smiling face
of the foreign diplomatists, but you were sure that they were
not concerned .with your well-being. This distrust was shared
by large sections of the population. Some Englishmen were
convinced that Germany was secretly planning their over-
throw, and millions of Germans were equally convinced! that
France and Russia hao. plans for smashing the German
Empire and its trade. The secrecy which shrouded diplo-
matic methods gave added color to this belief. Few people
outside the foreign offices knew what was .going on: a score
of men worked behind closed doors, making plans and agree-
ments which committed the millions outside. There was no
“above boardness,” and nations went their ways, ignorant
of /the schemes of their rulers, but entertaining an unhealthy
suspicion and fear of all peoples but themselves.
On this fear and distrust those who had interests to serve
played with great skill. It was easy for the press to lash a
nation to fury against some foreign power; but who was
behind the press? The control of newspaper policy might be
as secret as secret diplomacy itself, and as harmful. An
independent newspaper can scarcely hope to live, since with-
out big capital and plenty of advertisements it cannot make
ends meet. But those who provide the capital and pay) for
the advertisements demand control over its policy, and such
control may therefore be in fbe interests of armaments firms
or of men-who wish to secure; some financial or commercial
interest abroad. A; league of nations, by protecting small
nations from attack, by curbing the ambitions of aggressive
powers, and by bringing the discussion of international dis-
putes out into the light of day, would do much to dispel the
all-pervading distrust, and help to set man’s minds at rest.
Finally, economic factors play a very great part in
causing war. An impartial and complete analysis of the
Tistory of the last two or three centuries will show that
practically all the wars of that 1 - period have been partly or


wholly concerned! with some economic issue. It may be a
question of finding, homes for surplus population, securing! a
good safe source from which to draw raw materials, gaming
entry into, or monopoly over a rich market, getting access
to a held for profitable investment of capital, or some similar
matter. In their search for such advantages, manufacturers,
merchants, ,and financiers may encounter opposition from the
government of the land to which they are going: or they may
meet rival hunters from other countries, out on the same
quest. They therefore attempt, either directly or indirectly,
through the press or the party funds, to enlist the support
of their foreign office. The matter becomes a subject for
diplomacy, and may lead to friction" and war. International
rivalry is often economic at bottom: it is based on the false
notion that one nation can fully prosper only at the expense
of others. A League of Nations, by laying down general
principles to control international economic relations, by pre-
venting any one country from monopolising vast areas of rich
country to the exclusion of others, and by settling disputes
which arise out of economic rivalries, would help to remove
another cause of war.
The problem is a big one, and the difficulties are great.
But it is better to face the obstacles than to lapse back into
the old ways, and trust to luck that things will go right. The
world is a small place, and every improvement in the means
of transit makes it smaller. If we care to leave international
relations ,as they are, we must recognise the horrors to which
we .are consigning posterity, though those horrors may come
again even within our time. When the war is over, mankind
will be so exhausted and weary that it will be more ready
than in 1914 to listen to reason, and those who have the
future welfare of the world, at heart must preach and act
■whilst the situation is favorable.. Their task will not be easy,
for even though; international bitterness quickly dies down,
they will be met by inherent difficulties of detail in the con-
stitution of the League, by the apathy of big sections of the
people, and by the vigorous opposition of those whosp power
for aggrandisement and for evil would be weakened. They
must not expect immediate success, for even having devised
effective machinery, and having laid down splendid general
guiding principles, they will still Have to train men to think
internationally. But we must not shirk the task on that
account. It is the biggest, the most vita] work confronting
Humanity to-day; and unless we can accomplish it, the war
will have been fought in vain.


international Law.
(Delivered August 12, 1918, by W. Jethro. Brown, LL.D.,,
President Arbitration Court of South Australia).
NOTE. —Some mouths ago 1 was asked by the Ven. Archdeacon
Hntnabrook to give a lecture on International Law before the Adelaide
Diocesan Social Union. As the time seemed remote I fell into the
(trap, and evenituallv had to “face 'the music.” I am now informed
jthalt it is desired to publish the lecture, and I can only reflect upon
(the saying of Job“ Would that mine enemy might write a book.”
X gave my address from brief notes, and have not at present time
to write out in full the substance of wSatt, so far as I can remember,
I said. Fortunately there was an excellent report of mv lecture in
“The Daily Herald.” I adopt, this report with merely verbal altera-
tions. W. J. B.)
IN the years preceding 1914 the formulation of rules of inter-
national law was proceeding at a rapid rate, and since the
outbreak of war many new questions have come to. the
front which need to be dealt with. Let us begin by consider-
ing the law as it stood before the war broke out, and first
perhaps I might give vou a definition of International Law
which is brief but informative. “International Law may be
defined as the aggregate of the rules ;which determine the
conduct of the general body of civilized states m their deal-
ings with each other and with each others’ subjects. You
will note the three important points of this definition. Inter-
national Law is made up of a collection of rules. fhese
o-uide the conduct of relations between one state and another
state, and also between any one government and those indi-
viduals who are subjects of another power.
We might debate at length whether the collection of
rules which existed before 1914 was really law. But this
question is now of little more than academic interest, and
the answer depends upon our definition of the word “Law”.
A much more important question is, “Was. that International
Law binding on the nations?” Whether it was law or not.
does not matter if the rules were accepted and were binding.
We cannot answer this question m the negative simply be-
cause there was no legislature, judicature, or administration
to deal with international rules. Tribal law is generally
observed without these things, and violation of that law is
almost inconceivable amongst the tribes affected. It re-
quires a good deal of supervision to keep civilized people on


the track, .but the Hindu tribal law is sacred in a way not
approached in civilized lands. At times we heard of Inter-
national Law being violated before 1914, and hence might be
tempted to conclude that that law possessed no binding force.
The man in the street fastened his mind too exclusively on
what he read in the newspapers, and when he heard of, or
-read of, this and that violation, he tended to think that Inter-
national Law was useless. That does not at all follow.
Divine law is .binding, and regarded as such, even though it
is often violated. Laws fixing the speed limit for traffic are
binding, even though they are frequently broken. Perhaps
the infringements may show, that there are arguments m
favor of amending the law, but the law nevertheless is there.
Strikes are prohibited by law, and that law is observed by
the vast majority of workers. For every strike of which we
read in the newspapers there are fifty possible strikes which
might, but do not, occur. The workers as a general rule
-observe the law against strikes, often at a sacrifice. During
the last four years many unions could have obtained more
by striking than by going to the Arbitration Court, but they
were long-sighted enough to see that in the long run their
interests were to keep the law and not break it. In the
same way for every violation of international law there are
scores of instances where the law might with advantage be
broken, but was nevertheless faithfully observed.
I have defined international law as an aggregate of rules.
These rules are divided into three compartments, relating to
peace, war, and neutrality. It is also necessary to distinguish
between international law and international etiquette. Many
regulations in 1914 hovered between rule and law, and were
m the process of becoming law, though they* were not yet
observed generally. These I put under the heading of inter-
national etiquette. Whilst before 1914 there was no such
thing as an international parliament, there were, approxima-
tions of one. There were various organs to express interna-
tional opinion—defective, but still there, although they had
not yet taken a definite shape. There was an approach to
an international judicature in the Hague Tribunal; and there
were penalties for the violation of the rules of international
law.
What were these penalties? One of the most obvious
punishments was ill-repute. A nation’s honor was not to be
trifled' with, for it meant spiritual and. material suffering. A
nation which trifled with international law was gambling with
its own honor. Hence where there was one violation of that
law, the student of the subject can poinf to a hundred in-
stances where nations were restrained from breaking it be-
cause of the fear of gaining a bad reputation. Then there was


the punishment imposed by diplomacy. This has been active
m many ways. International law permits a state which has.
been wronged to commit acts which otherwise it would not be
entitled to do. it has the right to make reprisals, and the
possibility of reprisals has always to be reckoned with.
Finally, breaches of international law might be punished by
war, for that law regards war as a means of redress for a
state which has been wronged. If we examine carefully the.
history of our subject up to 1914, we are forced to admit that
many rules had acquired such authority that no state could
afford constantly to ignore them. They were violated some-
times, but far more often were observed, and it was slowly
.becoming realised that it did not pay any country to ignore
international law.
Now let us turn to events since 1914. I have frequently
been taunted during recent years because I ventured to speak:
of international law, and I willingly admit that the conduct of
the Central Powers during the last four years has been of
such a character as to justify scepticism concerning the
value of international law m controlling the conduct of per-
sons or states. There was a law which forbade the use of
gas in war. It has been; broken. The most fundamental
principle of international law m time of war is that non-com-
batants shall be immune from attack or molestation. That
principle has been scoffed at by Germany. The law declares
that an unfortified town shall not be bombarded; but that
rule has been Broken. Some people have thought that inter-
national law demanded that enemy goods could be captured
only on enemy ships, and if' those ships were, towed into port.
This is not quite true; the provision is that the goods can be
taken, and the ships sunk if it is not possible safely to tow
them to port, but they are not to be sunk without first making
provision to save the lives of the passengers and crew. This
rule has been ignored by Germany, and I could give other
instances of similar violations.
In view of this most people would declare that Germany
had shown no respect whatever for international law. Ido
not think this is quite correct, and I believe that Germany
has been constrained constantly by the rules laid down before
1914. The use of the submarine is a great example, and here
international law was abandoned by Germany only bit by bit.
The body of international rules is very great, and because
Germany has broken some of them, we cannot urge that she
has been callous to all.
The reasons for Germany’s inadequate regard for inter-
national law, and for her violations of some important rules,
are many. In the first place she had been taught to believe
in war as the greatest of all glories a nation can seek. She


had won several victories, on which she had built up a great
empire, strongly organised and possessing vast resources.
Seeing this, and realising that her empire might never have
been brought into existence by peaceful means, Germany
came to glorify war. In the second place the highly technical
constitution of the German Empire gave predominance and
power to the militant Prussians. The people of Southern
Germany, the land from which had come many great thinkers
and musicians, was overwhelmned, and Germany became in-
fected with the militarist over-bearing virus of Prussia. Out
of this glorification off war came the doctrine that military
necessity will excuse the violation of any rule or international
law. Laws and rules are very inconvenient in time of war to
'the militarists. Germany therefore overcame the difficulty
by declaring that military necessity justified the breaking of
the law; the end justified the means, but in addition Lo
accepting such a formula, all questions as to the righteous-
ness of the means, or the righteousness of the end were left
out of consideration. The instructions given to German army
officers said that the intellectual and material resources, and
even the spiritual experiences of the enemy, must be des-
troyed. Its body must be broken, its soul must be ruined.
If we keep this in mind we realise that it was probably part
of the deliberate policy of the, Germans to defile the hearths
and bombard the churches of Belgium, since such action was
calculated to break people spiritually, morally, and materially.
In short, the policy Daid.
But has it paid Geimany to pursue such methods? It
may be a little early to discuss this question, but Germany
apparently imagined that her tactics would compel Belgium
to submit. Belgium did not subm.it; her bod)/ was wracked,
but she did not lose her soul. The action of Belgium in
going into the war has meant much to the world. England
at once came into the field, as a direct result of the violation
of international law in invading Belgium, and we are just be-
ginning to realise what England, having taken that step, has
sacrificed and performed. By driving England into the war
Germany has had to pay a heavy price for her violation of
international law concerning neutrality. Again Germany
used gas, probably with the justification of military necessity,
but now the British are using gas too, and it is twice as
deadly. We are told that it is not even visible; it creeps
along the ground and means almost instant death to the per-
son who breathes it. It is horrible to relate this, but it is
merelv a case of reprisal brought upon Germany by her own
breach of international law on that point. German air-craft
have raided London, an unfortified town, and now the cities
of Western Germany are living in a condition of unsafety and


terror. We do not know what is really happening, but re-
prisals—horrible but necessary—have fallen upon Germany.
Again her violation of international law has not paid. What
was it that brought Italy into the war? It was the flagrant
breach of international law when the Lusitania was sunk,
that act brought a desire for revenge on the part of Italy, a
desire so strong that it pushed the government into the war.
With the United States it is the same story. There were mil-
lions of Germans m America, there were dollar-hunters,
peace-at-any-pricers. and Monroe-doctrine-believers, but as
one violation followed another the nation, with all its mixture
of nationalities and: ideas, was driven to take its part in a
truly religious crusade. It is impossible to estimate the
power which America is to-day, with all its vast resources,
intense activity, and boundless courage. For a little gam by
the violation of international rules, Germany is paying a heavy
price.
' When we look at all these instances we realise that
international law is a big factor in the world, and its power
and appeal have been demonstrated beyond question. I do
not claim that it is as perfect or as binding as it should be,
or that there are adequate means for its enforcement. Hence
the need for a League of Nations is great. Wo do not want
our children to have to pay again the price which we are
paying for the vindication of that law, but if the}/ are to
escape another struggle more hideous than this one in the
future, there must be a League of Nations which can with
authority formulate rules of international law, with a judica-
ture to decide disputes under that law, and with a body of
force to provide that nations who disobey shall be punished.
A League of Nations must have at its call an international
police. But no machineiy. However complete, will be sufficient
unless at the same time the spirit of humanity is educated to
believe in and support the rule of right and law.


The Machinery of a League of
Nations.
-(Delivered' on igth August by Prof. Meredith Atkinson, M.A.,
University of Melbourne).
MANY months ago Lord Bryce pointed out that all nations
have more ,to Jose than to gain by war.. He declared
that the victor in any struggle would suffer heavily
along with the vanquished, and therefore asserted that the
most important duty of our time is to do all that we can to
prevent ,a repetition of .the present war. In this statement
we have the justification for, and the true objective of, the
League ,of Nations. But ,the League will not come of its own
accord. It will not pome unless we determine to have it, and
strain every nerve to get it —get it at once. The world has
been aroused as it never was before. The end of the war
will give us a .magnificent opportunity to take steps to prevent
a recurrence of such a struggle. If we miss the chance, it
may never return, and the world will be worse off than ever.
If we are Jo seize the opportunity when it comes, we
must have .clearly m our minds some of the causes of war,
and some of the dangers to peace which dwelt in our old
political, economic, and international -order. Of those, one
of the chief was undoubtedly the secrecy which shrouded
diplomatic negotiations, ,and ..which was all the more danger-
ous because the telephone and telegraph had made possible
such ,a rapid interchange pf messages that the fate of nations
might be decided in a few hours or a few days. A century
ago diplomatic negotiations might take weeks, to transact,
and during that time the men in authority had time to think
and let their blood cool. In July, IQI4, the negotiations were
carried on almost as quickly as the wires could flash mes ■
sages from one capital to another; the whole discussion was
a whirl, .in which hasty .decisions were doubtless given, and
in which the big body of outside opinion had no time to inform
itself or make any demonstration in the interest of peace.
The lesson of that period is, therefore, that we must demand
the abolition of secrecy, especially in vital diplomatic trans-
actions. We must also insist upon such a period for discussion
and conciliation as will allow temper to subside from fever
heat.


Secret diplomacy is not the only cause of war. The race
m the building pf armaments, and the construction of large
armies and navies helped to stress the idea of a possible war,
and tempted rulers to make use of the weapons which were
in their hands to secure some end they desired. Those who
wished for war were helped by the political ignorance of the
people, especally concerning foreign affairs; they found sup-
port in the political power and jobbery of financiers, con-
cession-hunters, and armament interests; they were able to
play on racial and national ambition; they were assisted by
the existence pf an autocratic form of government, and by
an educational system, and ideals which preached national
aggrandisement and jingoism; they found in war a useful
device for distracting attention from the bad social conditions
which prevailed in their own land. All these things have to-
be faced. Disarmament, open diplomacy, education, demo-
cratic government, and better social conditions, all are as ne-
cessary as a perfect machinery for .a League of Nations.
Having administered this caution we can now turn 1 e
consider what are the essential features in the structure of
the League. Three things stand out. The first is provision
for a moratorium; we should have the best prospect of pre-
venting wars if we could make sure that there should be a
period of delay for conciliation. The second is the produc-
tion pf adequate machinery for the investigation of any dis-
pute which may have arisen. This court of investigation
would make a thorough inquiry into the whole issue, and
would place all the available information, along with its own
verdict, before'the.nations directly concerned and the outside
world. If we can guarantee these ,two things alone we should
have made a great advance. If, for instance, in July, 1914,
the dispute between Serbia and Austria could have been held
in a state of discussion for a month or two, with an interna-
tional -court investigating the whole matter, there would pro-
bably have been no- war, and, generally speaking, I think it
is safe to say that world opinion .would range itself .behind
the verdict given by the court of investigation. The third re-
quirement is provision for ,enforcing the League's decrees.
On these three points most peoole are agreed; but when
we turn to the various proposals which have been made for
converting the principles into practice, we find considerable
diversity of opinion. A .question arises as to the membership
of the League, and the more vigorous exponents of the idea
urge the admission of practically all the sovereign states of
the world. I think this is too ambitious. The inclusion of
states like those of Central and South America, and some
parts of Asia and Africa, would probably over-weight the
scheme and consequently throw the .movement back. I cannot


therefore advocate a federation of the world, or even a United!
States of Europe at the present time. I think we should
gm with the seven powers who alone are sufficiently large or
strong to cause a world war. _ We could provide for a gradual
extension of membership until all the sovereign states in the
world were included. But whatever the membership, all who
loin the League .would; have to pledge themselves to refer all
disputes to arbitration, and to take defensive or penal action
m concert. Howl fhat concerted action should De tanen I
will discuss in a few minutes.
The first difficulty would not be to drag in petty back-
ward states, but to persuade the seven great powers to agree
to the formation of the League. The present alliance might,
be used as the basis for the initial effort. The Allied powers
properly maintain that a true League of Nations is impossible
if some of the members are autocratic governments. Peace
can only be made firm and solid where democracy rules, but
even democracies must be willing to abandon some of their
complete freedom of action. We have seen instances during
the present war, where nations have been willing to place
their armies or navies under the control of an Allied Council
or a generalissimo. The .Allies have been willing to abandon
some of their undiluted sovereignity in the interests of effec-
tive effort, and a League of Nations would need to extend
that principle in times of peace. We must not go. too quickly
along this line; but it would be a great triumph if the peace
conference would accept a considerable measure or .disarma-
ment for each nation. The willingness of a sovereign state
to limit or reduce its armaments is an index of that nation’s,
belief in peace and a League of Nations.
During the last four years many men in different lands'
have displayed considerable ingenuity in planning the ma-
chinery for a League. American, British, Lrench, and Italian
societies have been formed, all of which have formulated
detailed and comprehensive schemes. There is some
diversity in detail, but on fundamentals there is a large mea-
sure of agreement. All are based on the ultimate voluntary
union of all the civilized states of the world. All emphasise-
the need for gaming time for public discussion and informed
impartial judgement. All agree that there must be an inter-
national court and an international parliament, the lattei
drafting and passing laws, the former interpreting them. All
admit that some form of coercion must be provided.
Perhaps the best scheme so far formulated is that pro-
•duced by the British Society, which contains the following
suggestions. A League is to be formed by treaty as soon as
possible, comprising all the nations who are willing to accept
international arbitration. All disputes on international law


■or interpretations of treaties are to be referred to the Hague
or some other court. Other disputes are to be reported upon
by a Council of the League. The states m the League shall
■combine to bring force to bear upon any of their number
which goes to war without submittng its case to arbitration.
The states in the ..League are to make provision for general
defence against those which refuse to join, but the outsiders
are to be given the right of entering; at any time. To these
proposals President Wilson has added the principle of self-
determination, and the demand that small states shall have
the same rights as big ones, national aggression be abandoned,
and the sea be a common highway for the ships of all lands.
The most important body under this scheme is the Inter-
national Council, which must not be confused with the Hague
Tribunal. The Court at the Hague was too limited in its
scope and functions. The Council will be a much more power-
ful body, for it will have authority over all nations and will
legislate for all. One ingenious gentleman has suggested
that parliament in each country shall appoint its quota to the
International Council on the principle of proportional repre-
sentation, thus securing the fairest distribution of interests
amongst the various shades of opinion. This proposal is
excellent if it is practicable, for it would be unfair for say a
Liberal government in England, which represented just over
half the people of that country, to send none but Liberals to
the International Council, thus ignoring the opinions of the
Conservatives and Laborites m the country. Election by
proportional representation might mean that four Liberals,
one Conservative, and two Laborites would be sent, thus
giving ,a much more accurate reflection of British opinion on
foreign policy. If this plan .were adopted similar schools of
opinion in various countries would tend to draw together, and
would so cross the dangerous boundaries of an exclusive na-
tionalism. There are, however, some objections to a delega-
tion chosen by this method. It is questionable whether men
accustomed to the thought and methods of party politics in
their own countries are best fitted to conduct such delicate
negotiations as ,a.n International Council would have to under-
take. There is also the danger that the solidarity of parties
on an International basis might result merely in broadening
and perpetuating the party system in a sphere where its
faults could do infinitely more damage. The real virtue of
such a scheme of representation, namely, that of public dis-
cussion of international affairs, can, I think, be gained with-
out its accompanying dangers. It is far more important to
send the - right type of man, than merely to send party re-
presentatives. The kind of man required for the work is not
■a politician but a highly trained publicist—a man of the


calibre of Lord Bryce and President Wilson. I have in mind,
a kind of public international commissioner, who contains in
the highest degree the qualities of the judge, the diplomat,,
and the publicist. Such men are uncommon, but each nation,
has produced some of them, and many more would emerge
if such careers /were opened before them. Apart from the
International Council, an increasing number of commissioners
of that type will be needed to administer those lands whose
disputed possession or geograpnical situation caused them to
be constituted neutral or international territory. These com-
missioners could still be elected in that parliament would have
the right of ratifying their selection, and would have the
right to add to them a .proportion of each party in the House.,
But it is highly desirable that they should be appointed for
a term of years, m order to make the Council permanent,
give the members adequate experience, and avoid .any sus-
picion that they were elected to further any particular
scheme. They would need to be both supported and kept m
check by the appointment of a foreign affairs committee in
each parliament. This committee would] be elected on the
plan of proportional representation, and its business would be
to discuss international affairs and keep in close touch with
the International Council. The Committee and the members
of the Council would .need to report to parliament at regular
intervals, and by means of) the debates and the press dis-
cussion a very desirable publicity would be achieved.
Beyond the question of international discussion rises «
larger one. What, executive power should the Council possess?'
At first I doubt if it would possess any. No government
would be bound by its decisions. It would give its verdict on
the problems presented to it, and that verdict would be made
public to the world. This would provide the greatest possible-
assurance that any action taken by a government would be
in accordance with instructed public opinion, and this at least
would be more favorable of peace than secret diplomacy has
been.
The informed aiscusson of foreign policy is part of the
policy for making foreign policy more open and democratic..
We all know that proper discussion of international affairs!
has been prevented by the unhealthy secrecy which has.
guarded the doors of the foreign offices' of Europe. We have
left things to the diplomat, and yet the diplomat of to-day
is completely unfitted for his task. He is lacking in demo-
cratic sympathies, his education has been on narrow class
lines, and usually he regards the mass of the population as
mere pawns in the game. He has not been subjected to cri-
ticism in parliament or the press, and has gone his own sweet
way, completely out of toucn with the nation whose destinies


he is, deciding. This must be changed. Publicity is essen-
tial, and in future the lives of millions cannot be subjected
to little parties of supposed super-men. The dangers of open-
ness are nothing when compared with those of secrecy. We
must have full discussions m parliament, parliamentary rati-
fication of all treaties, and the periodical revision of those
.treaties.
The critic replies that the people are too ignorant to con-
duct foreign policy. But their ignorance is engendered by
.secrecy. He declares that mob psychology would quickly lead
us to disaster. But the passions of the mob are largely pro-
duced by, and stimulated by yellow journalism, or the corrupt
influence of armament and other interests in press and public
life. Again, he urges that people m the mass are less peace-
able than their governments. There is no force in the argu-
ment that foreign policy is a thing apart and is not amenable
to the same influence and forms of control as domestic mat-
ters. I admit that people in the mass can be worked up into
a state of great hostility, but I; think that nations to-day are
much less responsive to jingoism and scaremongering than
they were a century ago. Experience in conducting their
own foreign affairs would soon lead them to see that there
is a true community of interest between nations, and would
help them to fight class interests, corruption, and financial
domination. Some would urge that democratic control must
be preceded by education. There is plenty of room for edu-
cation in foreign affairs, but that is no reason for postponing
democratic control. Democracy is self-educative, as the
franchise has proved, and people would quickly learn more
about other lands by controlling their foreign policy.
Now I come to the most crucial part of my discussion.
.How is a League of Nations to enforce its decisions and
coerce the nation which does wrong or defies it? If the League
:.sees one nation preparing- to attack another, it must take
action; but how? There seems to be no way of meeting the
difficulty except by providing, for public discussion and by
bringing moral force to bear. But what is an attack on
another nation? A country may pursue a policy which on the
surface is purely commercial, but which is really military in
purpose. Much has been said of the possibility of using the
economic boycott as a weapon to prevent war. There can
be no doubt , that this weapon is a powerful one, and its
exercise in modern times might have far-reaching results. But
there is always the danger that it will rebound upon those
who use it. If for instance the Allies boycott Germany, it
would mean that Holland, Denmark, Scandinavia, and other
countries near to Germany would suffer much more than the
country we wished to hurt. Russia and America could


probably snap their fingers at a boycott, since they could
.supply most of: their own requirements. Switzerland on the
other hand: could be quickly starved into submission. Britain
would suffer severely from a blockade, since it draws much
of its supplies from other lands. Obviously, therefore, the
use of this weapon is limited by considerations of justice and
practicability. Another suggestion is that all nations in the
League should deposit a large sum of money, which should
be forfeited if they went to war; but the scale of war to-day
is such that the loss of even a large sum would have very
little effect. We must admit then that the task of punishing
the offender is a most difficult one. We must rely rather
upon the growth of an enlightened public opinion, and upon
Lie willingness of each nation to admit that it may be wrong,
Meanwhile a drastic reduction of armaments would lessen
the ability of nations to wage war effectively, and experience
might show the League how to draw upon the forces of the
world in order to punish the wrongdoer.
One of the greatest obstacles to the League is the strong
.sense of national independence which prevails in every land.
£ach nation believes it is in the right, and would, I suppose,
resent being called into court to justify its actions before the
bar of world opinion. For instance, the British Empire con-
tains certain conditions which are the product of history and
force rather than of anyf discussion as to what is right or
wrong. Our national pride would: make us very unwilling to
face an international! discussion of such matters as a Wnite
Australia, the freedom of the seas, and that simplest of all
problems, the Irish question. Of course we all think that we
are entirely in the right on these matters; our dignity would
receive a nasty shock if an international Council declared that
we were in the wrong, and we should, probably be willing to
fight in defiance of that decision. Each nation has similar
problems, and it will probably be a long time before we have
developed that impartial belief in right which would allow us
to submit discussion of such matters to an international
body. Hence it will be best to keep these delicate matters
■out of the ken of the League during the early stages of its
growth. There will be plenty to do after the war to keep
the League busy.- The world will probably be in a. state of
semi-starvation, to cope with which international action will
be necessary. Some international machinery will have to be
set up to work out the details and ensure the observance of
the peace treaty. The development of air-craft will compel
us soon to formulate an international code for the air. The
'handling of backward countries and raw materials, and the
use of ocean ports, will all call for early attention. Thus it
is probable that the League, if it emerges with peace, will find


plenty of work immediately at hand. The present grouping
of powers may act as a stepping-stone towards a larger
League. The spirit of war weariness, and the desire for per-
manent peace otter a basis upon which we can build. But
internal harmony is essential to international unity. So long;
as forces inside nations are struggling for freedom, whether
as down-trodden peoples, an ill-conditioned working class, or
an unfranchised section, international peace is menaced. In
fact the supreme 'difficulty of the international problem lies in
the fact that it involves the whole universe, from forms of
government to ideals of family life, from the marriages of
potentates to the wages of Indian coolies. According to the-
immensity of range so must be the complexity of the solution.
Every new approach to human justice, every victory over in-
tolerance, every broadening of ideas and; deepening of ideals,
means an advance towards the brotherhood of nations. Love
of family, loyalty to- country and empire, and faith in religion
should be but the expression m miniature of that deeper love,
that larger loyalty, that higner tadh, which we owe to all our
kind. The man who says wars will never cease is a blas-
phemer, and condemns mankind tc Hell. He is an enem)/ of
the race, fop he cultivates despair and cripples the will to
reform. We need faith, tempered by caution and a right
pessimism. We must keep ever in mind that the essentials
of perfect peace are rooted in just conditions of life for the
people,' and an enlightened democracy building and guiding
its own institutions.


The international Spirit.
(Delivered Monday, August 26, 1918, by Prof. Atkinson).
PERHAPS it would have been better if I had given as the
title of this lecture, “The World Safe for Democracy”,
for I intend to deal with, the international spirit, es-
pecially as it affects and is affected by democracy. I shall
also try to show to what extent the international spirit has
developed, describe what I think to be the ideal of such a
spirit, show how and why it has failed to express itself in the
past, and finally indicate some of those features which win
move us to optimism and pessimism when we face the tasks
to be accomplished after the war. Ido not intend to run
away from difficult points, as many advocates of a League of
Nations do. Mankind throughout the ages has been inspired
by some progressive instinct 111 him to struggle against the
wrongs of his day, whether those wrongs are the product of
his own time or are the debris left behind by previous genera-
tions, systems, and ideas. After the war we shall find our-
selves confronted by such wrongs, some of them the product
of to-day, some of them survivals from the past.
We are all agreed that the immediate responsibility for
the present war rests upon the shoulders of Germany. But
this is not a complete explanation of the present calamity.
The present war is, like every other war, the culmination of a
long process of development caused by fundamental defects
found not merely in Germany, but running like broad streaks
throughout the length and breadth of our whole civilization.
Trouble and strife between nations are part, perhaps an in-
evitable part, of the trouble and strife which mark oui-
whole social fabric. The belief in might, and in the value
of force to .gain some material end, held by nations, probably
finds its origin in a similar belief held by individuals -in-
side each nation. If our national society is based upon a
selfish scramble for individual wealth, and is marked by
strife between the different classes, it is impossible to expect
that the nation's .outlook should be of a more noble character.
We have heard much of man’s conquest of nature, but that
conquest has not been nearly so complete as many comfort-
able people suppose. Man has not conquered nature to such
an extent as to .ensure to all a minimum of the necessaries
of life, and right is still hard at work fighting wrong in many
places. Slowly man has developed a sense of fellowship with
those who live around him and form the nation of which he is


a member. From a sense of national fellowship he has crept
towards one of international fellowship. Modern economic
developments have helped to give him a greater sense of
social well-being, and have enabled him to conquer nature
m many ways. Hence human effort in modern times, has
been more and more;' directed to securing greater enlighten-
ment and happiness for all. There was in fact something
of a social conscience, and a little bit of an international con-
science long before 1914. But in spite of much good work,
mankind was still faced with a large accumulation of wrongs,
some of them of old standing, and many of them producing
evil conditions such as made the present war possible. Let
me mention a few.
With the advent of settled life communism gave place to
individual freedom, of action and private property, and the
latter has been responsible for the growth of most of the
social evils of to-day. Every form of wealth, except the air
and the sea, has been enclosed, fenced round, and become
the property of some individual.. The rights which this private
ownership has given have meant the appropriation of wealth
and power by the owner, and have brought oppression,
poverty, and misery to the unpropertied. The lust for pro-
perty has inspired autocracies, hierarchies, and oligarchies,
and those who have held wealth and power have used the
common people as pawns and slaves in the interests of feudal-
ism, militarism, nationalism, capitalism, and imperialism
in turn. Hence any real sense of national brotherhood has
been unattainable, for the few have regarded the many
simply as tools for the furtherance of their own material ad-
vancement. _ The 19th century was as great a sinner in this
respect as any century which preceded it. It was an age of
ruthless competition, of unbridled wealth-seeking, and it paid
very little attention to the human qualities of the indivdusl.
Consequently it produced conditions of life utterly degrading
and cruel to the great ‘mass of the people, it gave a few
domination over the life and labor of the many, and inevitably
therefore roused hostility between the two chief social classes.
Science has been called to the aid of production, but has
been used in a heartless way, which made the sufferings of
the unpropertied worker probably greater than those of his
ancestor in the middle ages. Can you wonder therefore if
each big nation has been torn by social schism? Can you.
expect any decent national spirit or national unity under such
conditions ? The first essential of a happy peaceful world is
that we should bend all the strength of our idealism to ensure
that no worthy citizen shah live below the plane of content-
ment. There were some signs, even before the war, that
this was being realised, and that men were becoming willing


to recognise the claim of the many for decent humane condi-
tions of life and labor. But ' the idealist must not under-
estimate the strength of the opposition before him. That
opposition springs largely from the selfishness which runs,
throughout human nature. Unless our national spirit is such
as will produce a happy contented nation, it is useless as a
foundation for an international spirit. Our whole commercial,
morality is of such a character as to breed dis-unity and
foster revolution. A morality which declares that business is
business, and that a certain proposal is worthless be-
cause it does not pay, is a low morality and one which asks
for trouble. True, not every business man recognises the
dictates of this commercial code, but the business world
generally does not consider itself bound by any higher type
of ethic's. Wealth is not an essential foundation for human
happiness, and yet everywhere we have it preached that
wealth is the only thing which matters. Inequality of wealth:
is bad, especially since it prevents us from comprehending;
our one-ness as a human race*
Economic conditions, then, react strongly on humanity,,
and create a conflict between money and morality. They-
set .men in antagonism both nationally and internationally.
Wealth which should be a means to social welfare has become
instead the cause of social schism. The trouble arises not:
so much from; the fact that property is privately owned, as
that property is generally used for a selfish end. The pro-
ductivity of mankind is enormous, and if it were used defi-
nitely for social, instead of individual ends, it would be a
powerful influence in creating a true nationalism and interna-
tionalism. The foundations of. for the world are to
be found largely at home. Every state which is weak or
unhappy within is a. menace to the; world, for its spirit or
discontent soon spreads to other nations or influences its:
relations with .other nations. Unity, like charity, must begin
at. home, and the nation which wishes to create a happy
family of nations must first remove the strains and stresses
which disturb its own life.
Having said this, we can now turn to consider the inter-
national spirit m its relation to the causes of war. Those
causes are many and mixed. Questions of nationalism, re-
ligion, economic conditions, and forms of government all play
their pad. The desire to secure some national advantage-
or to further some national self-interest, the fear or the
other fellow, these have been the dominating factors. Our
own foreign policy can with justification claim to be cleaner
than that of any other European power, yet with us, as with
other countries, national self-interest has been a force always:
at work. But the word, national has generally been Hans-


latedl by the foreign offices of the world m a way which did
not express the wishes or seek the .good of the people as a
whole. This has been possible because of the profound
ignorance on the part of the people concerning foreign affairs;
it has been due to political jobbery, and to the domination of
politics by the forces of national commercialism. Further,
the ideal of national greatness has often been a wrong one.
It has been thought that a nation can only be great by having
large colonies, big armies and navies, and an abundant
foreign trade. Autocracies, ambitious to extend their power,
or nervous of the designs of some rival autocracy, have made
big military preparations, and plunged the world into arma-
ment panics, which have accentuated international suspicion,
and maae war possible, perhaps inevitable.
These facts must be faced by all of us who wish to see
a League of Nations established and made effective. Iff is
not sufficient merely to establish excellent machinery; we
must also face the underlying) motives of rivalry, ambition,
and fear. Much of the rivalry between nations has its roots
deep in racial characteristics and human nature, but the
rivalry flourishes most under the influence of economic fac-
tors. The powerful pressure of these factors is often opposed
to the growth of an international spirit, and this pressure
must be relieved if war is to be abolished. . The establish-
ment of democracy may do something to eliminate rivalry,
ambition, and fear, but unless democracy can master the
spirit of conquest and the desire for economic gain by mili-
tary means, the trouble will be as acute as ever. This implies
the giving of much greater attention on the part of ordinary
citizens to foreign affairs and the causes of international
problems. Very few people realise yet that the scramble
of the great powers for commercial concessions in different
parts of the world has helped more than anything else to
breed international hatred. Once democracy realises this, it
will, I believe, take steps to remove the most serious danger
to international brotherhood. Let us by all means exploit the
treasures of the globe and bring its resources to the service
of mankind, but let that work be done for the benefit ot
humanity as a whole, and not for the selfish advancement of
any one nation or section of a nation.
A _ real powerful international spirit depends upon the
recognition of a sense of unity. This unity goes by steps from
the unity in one’s own individuality to the unity of the human
race. The extreme internationalist will tell you that the only
unity which should exist is that of the world, and he decries
any idea of a national unity. I cannot agree with this. A
good healthy national spirit is an invaluable support to a
good international spirit, and the fact that a man is loyal to


his home and his nation does not necessarily prevent him.
from being loyal to his race. But note I use the words,
“good” and “healthy”. The great danger which we have
to light is a bad nationalism, one marked by aggressiveness,,
antipathy, and jealousy. Unity means the recognition o.f.
common purposes, and these purposes we apply to the social,
the national, and the international field alike. But they
depend ultimately upon right individual conduct. The true
man acts in his citizenship as he does in his family life, and
will take the same motives and ideals into his international
relations. As we act in small affairs so we shall m big ones.
The cyme would describe all this as moonshine, and cer-
tainly the spirit which had dominated some nations and some
empires is one which would be fatal to the growth of a real
international unity. Imperialism like nationalism is justified
only if it helps towards internationalism, and we must con-
fess that there is a wrong nationalism, a wrong imperialism,
and a wrong internationalism abroad to-day. Still, in spite
of this we must not forget that in the course of history men
have moved towards a recognition of wider common purposes,
and have felt their way towards some big human ideal. The
growth of nations in the later middle ages was due to the
realisation of the value of unity, both for purposes of defence,,
offence, and social progress. Legal ideas such as those
embodied in Roman law have helped to give men a common
outlook on some points, whilst at the same time literature,
art,'music,, philosophy, sculpture, etc., have helped to unite
men and give them common ideals, no matter how great the
differences of opinion and interest might be on other lines.
The spread of education helps to destroy some of those tra-
ditions and superstitions which keep nations apart, and noth-
ing is more necessary than that the people of one country
should know more and understand more about the conditions,
outlook,.! and aspirations of those who dwell in other lands..
Again, in diplomatic relations some sense of unity of pur-
pose was realised during the last 60 or 70 years, out of whicn
has come a large body of international law and agreements,
and we shall probably find that this work will increase in
quantity, and improve in quality after the war.
But the strongest and the most hopeful feature of inter-
nationalism in modern times has been the growth of the labor
movement, which has definitely preached the brotherhood of
the wage-earners and the wickedness of war. The labor and
socialist parties of the world have been almost consistently
anti-militarist; them ideal has been, if not a brotherhood of
man, at any rate a brotherhood of the workers. International
congresses, whether of trade unionists or socialists, have me?
frequently since 1890, and have gathered together represen-


datives from nearly all the big countries. True, international
labor proved unable at the critical moment to avert the out-
break of hostilities, but labor has learnt its weakness and its
.strength during the last four years, and the time will come
when it is strong enough to prevent a conflict of arms. The
.growth of international unity amongst labor, and the spread
of democratic government, are perhaps the two most hopeful
features of the present time, and will do much to foster an
international spirit such as will make wars almost impossible.
Whilst labor is thus feeling towards a sense of interna-
tional unity, the development of the world’s industry and
commerce is working in the same direction. The Industrial
Revolution has broken up the spirit of intense economic na-
tionalism, and is drawing nations steadily into closer contact
with each other. Improved means of communication, mter-
.national trade, and the distribution of raw materials are
helping to make the world realise that no country can live
-or work alone. The world’s system of credit is its nervous
.system, and spreads for good and evil to the farthest point
of the globe. Finally, we find a; sense of unity growing in
the wide-spread demand for social reform. The evils of our
.social system are common to all countries, and the methods
of dealing with them are becoming common to all.
The creation of the spirit of international unity is a work
which lies upon the shoulders of all of us. We may at times
■be inclined to think that our own puny efforts can have little
effect upon the big problems which confront humanity; but
we must remember that the smallest achievement in the work
•of betterment has its value. Every effort is ai stone in the
temple of unity. By careful thought and diligent work we can
hasten the coming of the day of the perfect state. But in
•all things wc must place truth, beauty, and love highest in
•our scale of values. So long as there is an evil nation in the
world, so long we must arm ourselves to defend what we have
won and prize. We must not rely upon mechanical expe-
dients, but rather upon the spirit of the poet and the idealist.
The purely practical man has had his way for decades, and
'has made a horrible mess of the world. The time has come
to give the practical idealist an opportunity to try his hand
at mending things. The League of Nations, with its well
constructed machinery, and imbued with the true spirit of an
international unity and purpose, will help to bring the King-
dom of God to earth, and realise the brotherhood of man.


NOTE ON BOOKS.
The literature on the League of Nations has grown
'rapidly in bulk during the last two years. The following are
a few out of many excellent works:—Brailsford, ‘‘League of
.Nations”, also “War of Steel and Gold”; Wells, H. G.,
“In the Fourth Year”; Lowes Dickinson, “The Choice Before
Us”; Hobhouse, “Questions of War and Peace”; Hobson, J.
A., “Towards International Government”; Grant, Greenwood,
and others, “Introduction to the Study of International Re-
lations.”






