

A LECTURE
VILLAGE SETTLEMENTS,
WITH
SOME DISCUSSION OF THE QUESTIONS
OF THE
UNEMPLOYED. THE LAND AND CT)-(ITERATION,
DELIVERED IN THE
TOWN HALL, SYDNEY, on APRIL 16th, 1894,
REV. THOMAS ROSEBY, M.A., LL.D.,
Hod. Secretary of the Board of Control of Pitt Town Co-operative
Settlement, N.S.W.
Mr. JUSTICE STEPHEN IN THE CHAIR.
The Co-operative Printing Company,
97.] Bathurst Street.
1894.




A LECTURE
VILLAGE SETTLEMENTS,
WITH
SOME DISCUSSION OE THE QUESTIONS
OF THE
TJX EMPLOYED, THE LAND AND CO-OPERATION,
DELIVERED IN THE.
TOWN HALL, SYDNEY, on APRIL 16th, 1894,
REV. THOMAS ROSEBY, M.A., LL.D.,
Hon. Secretary of the Board of Control of Pitt Town Co-operative
Settlement, N.S.W.
Ma. JUSTICE STEPHEN IN THE CHAIR.
jSB&UjCB :
The Co-operative Printing Company,
971 Bathurst Street.
1894.


PREFACE.
The lecturer has found that the treatment by ministers of
religion of some of the subjects, dealt with in the following dis-
course, is sometimes repudiated by ministers themselves as lying
beyond their province, and more often censured by politicians on
the ground of their incompetence and of inadequate knowledge.
The lecturer quite agrees with those who counsel ministers of
religion not to speak on such subjects (as politicians often do)
without previous study; but lie is not willing to allow himself
to be treated as ignorant of these subjects simply because he
happens to be a minister. Since these subjects formed part of
his earlier University studies, the lecturer has sought to keep
himself well abreast of what the leaders of thought in various
countries have had to say on these problems —problems which,
in their deepest relations, are quite as much moral and religious
as they are political. But—what he has found equally necessary
in this region—the lecturer has tried to keep his eyes open to the
facts of society around him, which furnish perpetual concrete illu-
strations of those principles which it is the function of political
philosophy to ascertain and verify. Nor has the lecturer been
satisfied to take either facts or principles at second hand. He
claims to have some acquaintance with the great Teachers of
political philosophy from Plato and Justinian to Herbert Spencer
and— Karl Marx. He trusts, therefore, that his readers will do
him the justice of treating his lecture as a serious contribution
to the solution of these problems by one who has enjoyed some
opportunities of studying them in the writings of original authori-
ties, and who has given himself some trouble to study them also
in the living facts and phenomena of society itself.
Marrickville,
April, 24th, 1894.


LECTURE
fvibyoo / yi<sosu
The great industrial problem of to-day is what to do with the
vast army of the unemployed. Society is finding itself face to
face with a new difficulty —a difficulty created, in a sense, by its
own progress. In less advanced conditions of society, the labor
of the community was fairly well absorbed. The great historical
experts—men like Hallam and IToude and Thorold Rogers—tell
us that the laborer in the days of the Edwards and Henrys was
in some respects better off than he is to-day. His position was
more secure than that of the wage-earner of to-day. He had not
before him the prospect which, Mr. Joseph Chamberlain tells us,
lies before two out of every three of the laboring classes of to-day,
of ending his days in the dismal atmosphere of the workhouse.
Nor is the reason of this far to seek. Now that machinery
enables one man to do the work of ten men, or fifty, or a hundred,
it is coming to pass that “ the one thing not needful ” in our
present advanced civilisation is man himself. *
* I have now before me a statistical diagram showing the amount of
the displacement of manual labor by machinery in twenty-four different
industries, wherein the number of men displaced out of every hundred varies
from ninety-nine in wall paper making to twenty-five in machinery making.
It is a vulgar misrepresentation to treat the citation of facts like these as
being on a level with the conduct of the ignorant displaced artisans who fifty
years ago handed themselves together to destroy the new machines as “ in-
ventions of the devil.” Surely, it is well understood that the purpose of
their citation is to show how a Divine gift, intended by God to take the
strain off the back of labor, to liberate man for something nobler than the
object indicated in Ecclesiastes VI. 7, has been perverted by a false political
economy into a means of enriching the few while leaving the masses of the
people just where they where. (Comp. Min’s Political Economy, Bk. 1Y.ch.6.)
It seems a strange thing—one can hardly call it anything hut an
hallucination—that we should have it suggested as a cure for our industrial
depression, when thousands of our fellow colonists can find nothing to do,
that those in employment should set to, and work harder and longer ! Yet
the mistake is easily accounted for. It is the same as that commonly made
about Thrift. These suggestions all point to the advantage which an indi-
vidual thus gains as against the community. For Ato work harder and to
appropriate more of the scanty work available, will, no doubt, be a good
thing for A, but it will be only intensifying the agony for all the rest con-
cerned, from B to Z. How can A’s harder work possibly benefit the com-
munity at large when the source of of Society’s difficulties is want of em-
ployment? The mistake largely arises from a foolish but confirmed super-
stition that labor “for the mouth ”is itself a virtue. The world has yet to
outgrow this pernicious superstition that work for daily bread is the be all
and the end-all of the average human life. We have yet to learn that all
that liberates us from such labor for bare existence is opening up before us
and our children other and nobler forms of labor—of such sort as Shakespeare
speaks of when he says : “The labor we delight in physics pain.” This is
the purpose of the Divine gift of labor-saving machinery which we
frustrate. If that Divine purpose had, in any reasonable measure, been
realised, instead of Society being told that it needs “ more elbow-grease ”
to save it, we should rather have to be seeking new and nobler occupation for
the ampler leisure enjoyed by every class of the community.


Yet the same forces which are causing- congestion in the
labor market are causing also that other portent of our industrial
system —which we call over-production. The Manchester manu-
facturer is forcing his goods everywhere on an already glutted
market. The American farmer is at a loss to know where to sell
his bread-stuffs. The squatter on the Darling is obliged to boil
down 4he superabundant produce of his flocks. But along with
all this abundance there are millions in want. While the Ameri-
can farmer is thinking how much better a price he would have
got for his wheat had the bounty of the Creator been less gener-
ous, there are people without bread. Too many oxen, sheep and
swine, and too many people hardly able to live. Too much food,
and yet women toil till midnight without being able to get it.
Too much clothing, and too many people unclad. Too many
millionaires, and too many paupers. Too many palaces, and too
many aim-houses. Too many clothed in purple, and too many
in rags. *
These, ladies and gentlemen, are the public mischiefs which
imperil our country’s safety, which “ eat as doth a canker,”
which poison the life-blood of a people like the virus of smallpox.
There is a school of political economy which views these
evils, not indeed with indifference ; that is impossible ; but with
the feeling that they are inevitable. They have been brought
up, as I myself was, in implicit faith in the theory that out of
the struggle of a number of competing atoms there will emerge
the general good. They have been taught, as I myself was, “that
this self-seeking passion is the ultimate law of all industrial life ;
that the Law of Demand and Supply, for example, is no more
capable of modification than the law of gravitation : that, as
* I do not know that one has any reason to speak of it as remarkable
(for history is full of illustrations of the same thing) that, at the very time
that the unrest and discontent of the masses of the people are exciting the
gravest apprehensions of thoughtful men, there area number of “ready
writers” like Mr. Mallock who eagerly assure us that the only
people who are really deserving of sympathy are the very wealthy,
because their wealth is diminishing, while the wealth of the middle
classes and of the working classes is enormously increasing. Pauperism,
according to these writers, is becoming rapidly extinguished at the
very time that we are allowing ourselves to get into a state of alarm
about its fearful prevalence. Such writers are great at statistics—statistics,
however, wherein half the really important and decisive elements are left
out. They overlook, for example, the fact that the strenuous efforts that are
being made by the modern worl 1, aroused to the gravity of the peril, to relieve
distresswill naturally tend to diminish the amount of “ official ’’ pauperism.
And who, that has any knowledge of the poorer classes of the community, and
the painful straits to which respectable artisans are reduced— as we ministers
of religion know —would ever dream of making the records of pauper
relief a measure of the real amount of distress ? It is such men as General
Booth who are really in a position t > form an estimate. And his propor-
tion has made a household word of “ The Submerged Tenth ” ! But how
futile is such discussion. Instead of having any question raised about the
condition of the workman being better or worse than it was four centuries
ago, that condition ought long since to have been transfigured beyond
historical recognition.


machinery renders labor less and less necessary ; as the spinning
jenny displaces the hand loom weaver; as the locomotive dispenses
with a whole army of carriers ; as the reaper and binder reduces
the number of farm laborers; as the type-setter will make print-
ing less and less dependent on compositors ; as machinery thus
renders labor less and less necessary, the labor market is hound
to be glutted with the unemployed, and then, a glutted market
inevitably means, under ‘ Freedom of Contract,’ a reduced
wage, and so a lower standard of living for the average wage-
earner ; and thus the wide disparities of our social life, under
these necessary laws of human association, are such as Gfod and
Nature intended.”*
I am not so unjust to the disciples of this school of Laissez
faire , in which I was myself brought up, as to say that they are
destitute of humane feeling. The very contrary is the ease.
But, unhappily their imagined “helplessness ” in any interference
with “economic laws” compels them to confine their thought
and care to the endeavor to rescue the unfortunate victims of our
existing industrial system, instead of endeavoring —which they
censure as impracticable, and sometimes more gravely condemn
as revolutionary—to prevent the infliction of this cruelty and
wrong.
For such economists, it is clear, there is, and can be, no
social question. If, for example, the Law of Demand and
Supply is as much a Divine Law, as that of gravitation, to raise
any question about a fair wage, or a living wage, is manifestly
an impertinence. In the face of a Law of Nature it is no use
raising any question of Justice. Hence this older political
economy frankly recognises that it is a science which seeks
simply to explain the principle on which things aie, and not the
ethic on which they should be. It is a remarkable confession of
the non-moral (I do not say, of course, zwmoral) character of the
science that the Institute of France some years ago, recognising
this defect, offered prizes for competitive essays on the Relation
of Political Economy to Ethics. The only ethic which Herbert
Spencer can find in this science—and I speak with adequate
* If ever there was a luccns a non luccendo in this world, it is this delu-
sive phrase, “ Freedom of Contract.” By the very principles of the Laissez-
faire school, the relations between employer and employe are determined by
necessary laws, laws with which it is no more possible to interfere than with
the law that keeps the planets in their courses. How can there be “ Freedom
of Contract” under a law which, with labor in excess, necessarily forces down
wages to a minimum : and which — with increased competition among
capitalists —forces them also to buy their material and their labor “in the
cheapest market,” and thus, in spite of better impulses of justice and
humanity which they would gladly gratify, compels them to offer, a minimum
wage to the producers of the material they use, and to the workmen whose
labor they directly employ ? There is no Freedom on either side. The em-
ployer is compelled to offer the lowest price for labor, or the competition of
other employers would ruin him. The laborer is similarly compelled to sell his
labor at the lowest figure, or he will be outbidden—by “the free laborer.”
What chance has labor between these upper and nether mill-stones ? And
this is “ Freedom of Contract ! ”


knowledge of his philosophy—practically amounts to this : that
social justice consists in removing all restrictions on the play of
the above-named Economic Laws, and in letting these laws have
full swing, so as to let the strongest and craftiest gain a maxi-
mum of the world’s wealth, and to let the “less efficient” take
the residuum ; only he is careful to insist that this residuum shall
not include education for the children of the poor, nor books to
read for their parents in the work-house.
But there are some of us not so easily satisfied with this
idea of Justice. That profound sentence of our Lord’s, “ Seek
first the Kingdom of Grod, and His Justice,” seems to us to
reveal the possibility of a nobler political economy than this.
And, indeed, to some of us it seems one of the most extraordinary
things in the history of the human mind, that, while having in
our hands, in the teaching of Jesus Christ, the purest and
loftiest ideal of social relations that evet entered the heart of
man, we professedly Christian men should have allowed ourselves
to be persuaded to cast it aside, to take up in its place a pohieia
—a science of social and industrial relations —rooted in absolute
selfishness, in the vain expectation that somehow, out of the
witches’ cauldron of competitive strife, there would be distilled an
elixir of social well-being ; and that universal selfishness, socially
intensified, would be found to do the work of Love. That it nevet
will.*
* By “ Justice” is here meant the old definition—which the writer was
pleased to recognise as quoted on one of the frescoes of Raphael in the
Vatican at Rome. Justinian’s definition (Instit., Book 1., which is
almost a translation of Plato’s Respublica, Book I.), ‘‘The steadfast and
unremitting determination of rendering suum euique, to every one his own.”
It is this principle of suum euique which, with ever-increasing insistence, is
demanding at the hands of modern legislators : —(1) That the Land, which is
the material source, and the indispensible condition, not only of all wealth,
but of life itself, shall belong to the people—to all the people. (2) That the
present system of social chaos, of anarchy, and of injustice, shall give place
to one wherein there shall be a serious endeavor made to give to every man
his own. No one pretends that the American millionaire has earned his
millions. If he has not earned them he must (no doubt in a legal form) have
stolen them. Some revision of the existing order is necessary to prevent such
theft, and to recover the stolen property. (3) That there shall be a fuller
recognition of the just and Christian principle that every man should be
allowed in our social system to count for one. At present, it is possible for a
man, by violence, or by fraud, or by the mere accident of an accident, to
acquire inordinate wealth, without earning it, whilst another, by reason
of the very same economic system (or rather, e"onomic anarchy) is doomed to
live the life of a slave, and to die the death of a pauper. The principle of
suum euique forbids both. It is a principle which forbids any prescriptive
right, or any pretended superiority of one man over another, which will
entitle one to appropriate to himself the fruits of the labor of another.
Suum euique. Not one man counting for a thousand men, while another
counts for but the thousandth part of a man : but every one counting at
least for one.


There are two great questions on which the solution of our
modern industrial problem really depends—-the question of The
Land, and the question of Co-operation.
1. On all sides we have been congratulating one another
that the discovery of gold at Ooolgardie and at Wyalong, not to
speak of the issue of railway passes to gold fossickers elsewhere,
has found an outlet for a large part of our surplus labor; though
the depletion of a community by loss of population, like the now
discarded method of bleeding in medicine, is a vain and ineffec-
tual means of restoring life and vigor to the body politic. But
just consider for a moment how foolish it is for us to be depend-
ing on mere accidents of this nature to help us out of our
economic difficulties. Trusting to Fortune in this way reminds
us that “ the chapter of accidents is the Bible of the fool.”
No, ladies and gentlemen, we have something better to trust
to than these things, if we only knew it. We have the Land.
I am sorry myself that the state ever parted with a single acre
of it. Vast areas of the land of Australia are cultivated under
lease by those who do not own it. I wish that none of them
had any other landlord than the State itself. Then all the
increments of value perpetually arising upon the land as popu-
lation increases would belong to those who have given it this
increased value—the people. And we should then have Aus-
tralia indeed—not for some locally-resident citizens, and for some
great land-owners who live 12,000 miles away; but Australia for
the Australians, for all the Australians. And if the State owned
all the land, as it now owns part of it; if it were the sole pro-
prietor of the coal-mines at Newcastle, the silver-mines at
Broken Hill, the gold-mines at Mount Morgan ; the State would
be rich enough to allow all its citizens to use the State railways
with no more thought of imposing a tribute on their use than we
should now think of reviving the old turn-pike tolls. A day
will come when a more enlightened age will wonder at the
“sound commercial principles” on which we now administer the
use of this new State coach. We own the coach, but we never
allow ourselves to use it without paying as much for its use as if
somebody else owned it. And when we cannot afford to do so,
we fall back, as some of our settlers are doing out west, on the
old bullock dray, as a means of communication with the metro-
polis. It will cost the archeologist of some centuries hence some
labor and trouble to understand, and it will take all the acumen
of a Supreme Court judge to explain, so remarkable an illustra-
tion of our “business capacity.”
However, as the case now stands, one of the best means of
solving the problem of the unemployed is to find work for as
many of them as possible as State tenants, under a system of
perpetual leasing, on the land. With my own strong convictions
on the subject of the State ownership of land—convictions to
which I was led, long before I saw Henry ,George’s book, by a
study of the real significance of the Ricardian Doctrine of Rent—


especially as lucidly expounded in He Quincey’s Logic of Political
Economy with these convictions, I say, I should feel little
interest in the creation of a whole army of little landlords whose
power might be just as tyrannously exercised as ever the power
of great landlords has been ; and my interest in village settlement
on perpetual leasehold areas under the State as landlord largely
arises from the fact that it is a sort of miniature representation
of an ideal. The ideal is one wherein the cultivator of the soil
will never have to submit to the tyranny of an oppressive
proprietor, which many a tenant now has to do ; wherein he will
have absolute security of tenure, which at present he has not;
and wherein he will own absolutely all the improvements which
his industry creates upon the land, which at present are the pro-
perty of his lord. The ideal is one wherein (as a protection to
the cultivator from all outside interference, and as asserting the
just rights of the people as a whole to what originally belonged
to them, and to what owes all its value to them) the State shall
retain in its own hands the full ownership of the soil.*
I am aware, of course, that there are those who are as deeply
interested in Village Settlement as myself, but who favor the
idea of personal ownership. But, for the reasons just alleged,
my own strong preferences lie in the direction of State ownership—
with full usufruct, security of tenure, ownership of all the fruits
of one’s own labor, and absolute protection from any alien inter-
ference or oppression—under a system of perpetual leasing.
And this is practically what we have in the settlement at Pitt
Town. The lease for fifty-six years means —unless I greatly
misread the signs of the times—a lease for ever.
2. —And with this is closely sssociated the idea of Co-opera-
tion. Opinions may perhaps differ as to what the present leader
of the House of Commons (Sir AVilliam Harcourt) meant by his
famous dictum, “We are all socialists now,” but the whole trend
of modern economic teacning, and of modern legislation, enables
* It is very generally assumed that the object of those who are seeking
to nationalise the land, and so to restore to the people at large their unjustly
alienated patrimony —is to dispossess the present legal owners of
their just rights. But that is not the case. The principle of “ the unearned
increment ” is one that is universally recognised by political economists.
And as this unearned increment in the value of land belongs to the com-
munity, having been created by the community, the injustice lies in refusing
to return it, in the shape of a land tax, to the community to which alone it
justly belongs. A recognition of the soundness of the Ricardian doctrine of
rent, and therefore of the justice of Land Nationalisation, does not, of course,
necessitate our acceptance of any particular method of re-acquiring the
national estate. Various methods of doing this have been proposed, of which
one of the best is that suggested by Alfred Russell Wallace, which has the
great merit of leaving the proprietary rights of existing owners, and of their
heirs, if in being, absolutely untouched ; but which provides that this right
shall determine absolutely on the decease of such heirs—no claim being
allowed on behalf of the unborn. The particular remedy for the existing
wrong is a question for the statesman, but the jurist, in the meantime, con-
curs with the philosopher in asserting that “ there is no wrong without some
remedy.”


us easily to understand him. In a charming volume of letters
published by M. Laveleyevery shortly before his lamented death,
he tells us that nearly all the University professors in Germany
are Katheder Socialisten , that is to say, Socialists “of the Chair.”
The distinction is a deeply important one. There are socialists
whose Utopian theories, whose ignorance of facts, and ignorance
of history, whose class hatreds, whose methods of violence and
dynamite mean one thing : and there are socialists whose ideal
and whose methods are the very opposite of theirs; whose
methods are constructive , who seek not to pull down but to build
up. They are reformers who seek to rear a nobler civilisation on
such basis as is already afforded by the better elements of our
existing civilisation. They are men who work by the patient
researches of science and take love of justice and humanity as
their guide, but who have not read history in vain, nor have
learned in vain the modern scientific teaching that the con-
dition of all stability is continuity. They recognise the fact that
when God would make a new thing under the sun He always
grows it. And they maintain that the germ of the noblest
thoughts of to-day, the promise and potency of our sublimest
ideals for to-morrow, already exist in the teaching, the life, the
ministry, the example of Jesus Christ.
* The blindness of political hatred has seldom found more fatuous
expression than in the manner in which one sometimes sees, in political
speeches, the words “Socialist” and “Anarchist” used almost as
synonymous terms. One is reminded of the Ecclesiastical Synod which, in
Scotland in the eighteenth century, once denounced “ the Atheistical
principles of the Deists,” overlooking the fact that the adjective and the
noun are contradictories. An Anarchist (Sophocles, Antigone 672) seeks to
destroy the cohesiveness of human society, to subvert all law and all author-
ity, to reduce society to a mere heap of atoms. A Socialist, on the
contrary (as understood by all who know how to use names otherwise than afi
missiles wherewith to pelt an opponent) is one who regards the present con-
dition of society as one of virtual anarchy—that is to say, a state of social
chaos. “ The trampling, crushing, elbowing and treading on each other’s
heels which form the existing type of social life ” phrase is John Stuart
Mill’s) seems to the Christian Socialist the very antithesis of that ‘ ‘ Kingdom
of God ” which is the ideal of the Christian Gospel. And the true Socialist
is he who seeks to increase and strengthen the social bonds by which men are
united in society. His ideal is that of a true Res Puhlica or Commonwealth ,
wherein “all men’s good shall be each man’s rule,” wherein all shall have
access to the common gifts of Nature, and wherein the distribution of the
products of human labor shall not be settled, as it now is, by force, or guile,
or accident, but on principles of justice and humanity. This is not a new
definition of a State. It is virtually Aristotle’s :—“ A society of those
united in a life of mutual helpfulness and happiness, united by their families
and children, in order to enjoy a full and perfect life , and one of true inde-
pendence.''—(Polit. iii., 6.) We sometimes hear to-day, as in the Ancien
Regime which preceded the French revolution, of the “ dangerous classes.”
But as the Noblesse of that time, by their stubborn resistance to the claims of
justice and humanity, by their haughty insistance on all the “ rights and
privileges ” which they inherited from their ancestors, were themselves
really the most dangerous of all classes, so to-day. The really dangerous
elements in the civilisation of to-day are those who, fortified by wealth or
social standing, or “ culture,” refuse to listen to that cry of the people which
nevertheless enters into the ears of the “ Lord of Multitudes.”—(St. James,
YI. 4.)


I will confess to you, ladies and gentlemen, that my interest
in the Co-operative Settlement at Pitt Town mainly arises from
the fact that it is a step in the direction of this ideal.
But I am bound to say at the same time that these tentative
movements in the direction of State ownership and of co-operative
labor are at present generally made under the least promising
conditions. There is a sentence in one of John Stuart Mill’s
chapters on Political Economy wherein he makes what I have
always considered the very profound remark—l quote from
memory, for it is many years since I read the passage —that
slight, and, as it were, inchoate movements in the direction of
improvement are far more often abortive than successful. They
are—so I would interpret his observation—like the vast multi-
tude of individual variations that occur in the realm of Biolog}’:
they are swallow r ed up in the ocean of what is established. They
perish, and leave no trace behind. lam afraid that is the fate
in store for a large number of those social experiments of ours,
attempted on too small a scale, or with unsuitable material, or
amid an unfavorable environment. One looks with far more
hopefulness on such movements as these undertaken by the pre-
sent County Council of London, or those instalments of State
ownership which occur in our own AustraTian colonies, or those
new departures, of a still more pronounced character, which have
been made in the sister colony of New Zealand. The path of
progress in that direction is quite clearly defined. It will decree
the abolition of such monopolies as those which have created the
American millionaire. It will mean the State ownership of rail-
ways, telegraphs, tramways and—why not also the means of
ocean transit ? If the State can own vessels under the name of
“ men of war,” why not own merchant men, for national transit,
under the flag of peace ? It will mean the municipalising of
water supply, of gas supply, and of electric installation. It will
mean that the State should undertake, in the public interest and
for the public profit that which is now undertaken by “private
enterprise ” under such conditions that the interest and profit of
one is secured by levying tribute upon the many. It is only thus
that the principle of collectivism can be said to have a fair chance.
But the use of such experiments as that in which a number of us
are now interested is that they help to keep alive the ideal—even
though only by very feeble and imperfect embodiments of it.
But it should be well understood that it is no true test, after all,
of this principle of Co-operation to bring together a miscellaneous
collection of men, many of whom belonged to the very lowest
stratum of the unemployed (not alw’ays certainly for reasons dis-
creditable to themselves) men, all of whom were absolutely with-
out means, who were placed on the land with no previous experi-
ence, and who had to start, as it were, from the very zero point of
industrial production, alike in respect of personal capacity, of
means, of material, of social coherence, and of surrounding con-
ditions.


And now let us advance to a somewhat more detailed view of
various schemes—Co-operative and other —which have been set on
foot, for village settlement, in our own, and in other colonies.
I received a few months ago a long and very interesting
letter from the Hon. John McKenzie, the Minister of Lands in
New Zealand, wherein he states, as to the working of the Milage
Homestead Special Settlement system in that colony, that the
system has now been in operation for a period of over six years
and works satisfactorily. Experience proves (continues the
Minister) that there are three essential requisites in the formation
of these settlements to make them a success.
1. The right locality to form the settlement; that is to say,
near a centre of population, or in a district where work can be
found in the neighborhood.
2. The right class of land. This is very important, as it is
impossible to make the settlement successful unless the settlers
are placed on good land.
3. The right class of people. Experience here proves that
it is not absolutely necessary that the settler should be accustomed
to farming. Rut he requires the will and the determination to
get on, and then he invariably succeeds.
Mr. McKenzie continues; The financial res ults of the
system are encouraging. The following are a few of the figures
taken from the last annual report;
Number of Tillage Homestead Settlements in the colony, 85.
Number of settlers representing over 3000 souls, 900.
Amount of land held, 22,700 acres.
Amount advanced by "way of loan, £24,600.
Total amount paid to the Treasury for rent and interest,
£10,500.
Value of improvements now on the land, £61,700.
In other words, the value of the improvements exceeds the
amount of the Government loan grant by £37,000.
To this statement by the Hon. Mr. McKenzie, I should add,
from Lord Onslow’s interesting and sympathetic account of
“ State Socialism and Labor Government in New Zealand.” that
the amount advanced, gradually, and according to the improve-
ments, by the New Zealand Government amounts, in all, to £7O
for each settler ; which, of course, is to be repaid; and which,
in many cases, has been partly repaid. In New South Wales
the amount granted as yet hardly exceeds £2O for each settler
—a sum wholly insufficient to give the scheme a fair trial.
Of what are known as the Tucker Settlements in Victoria, I
regret to be unable to give so favorable an account. The scheme,
unfortunately, from the very start was far too heavily burdened
with liabilities. At the principal settlement at Wondondah, for
example, the land —an area of about 1700 acres—had to be pur-


chased at the rate of £3 an acre. At Jiudivick and at Red Hill
the cost of the land was £lO an acre. At Croydon the cost
reaches £2O an acre. It is impossible, it seems to me, that any
movement which professes to deal with persons who have no means,
can possibly succeed on a settlement where every acre means
a burdensome liability of from £3 to £lO an acre. On our
Pitt Town Settlement, for example, that would mean an initial
of from £7OOO to £22,000.
The scheme might seem more promising in the case of settlers
of some means, who were called upon to deposit from £3O to £4O
according to the size of their families towards their maintenance
for one year ; but in the ease of such a settlement as that at Pitt
Town even that would only mean a contribution of from £3OOO
to £4OOO. And what is that when Ihe land itself was to cost from
£7OOO to £20,000?
I have not yet heard what the later fortunes of the Tucker
settlements in Victoria have been. They have done a world of
good. They have drawn pointed attention to the necessity of
getting people settled —and settled near to one another, so as to
form centres of social life—on the land. They elicited an extra-
ordinary amount of interest among those who were philanthropic-
ally disposed in the sister colony. They'reflect infinite credit on
the gentlemen—notably Mr. Tucker and Dr. Strong—by whom
this noble and courageous scheme was undertaken. And even
if they do not succeed in doing what they attempted, they are
not to be reckoned as a failure if —only for the last two years—
they have found honorable occupation for more than a hundred
families —who would otherwise have felt the keen pinch of the
fearful depression that now prevails in Victoria, and would pro-
bably have had to live on charity in the lowest dens of Melbourne.
To have kept these people going for two years on the land—accu-
mulating improvements equal at least to the value of whatever
has been advanced to them— this is no failure ; whether the
settlements are still able to be carried on on their former basis
or not. But, I confess, when I saw in Mr. Tucker’s prospectus
that it was proposed to purchase land—though on terms extend-
ing over six or ten years—at a figure varying from £3 to £lO an
acre, my heart sank within me. I saw at once that such a
scheme was a predestined failure. Reliance had after all to be
placed on the sale of timber growing on the settlement. Our
own experience of such sales shows that when the charges for
carriage are deducted they yield barely a return of one shilling
a ton. Under very favorable conditions it might amount to twice
as much. In the present depressed state of the labor market in
Victoria I can quite understand that the returns will be even less
remunerative. To think of paying £lO an acre for land to be
used in this unproductive way is out of the question. And I am,
therefore, prepared to hear at any moment that the Tucker Settle-
ments have had to be reconstructed. If it be so, they will only
be sharing the fate of some other institutions whose stability was
supposed to be proverbial. And in any case, the idea which gave


them birth—and which is bearing- fruit, and is destined to bear
still more fruit, in all these colonies —will live, and will do last-
ing honor to those who have done their best under the most un-
promising conditions to make it a success.
And now I come to the settlement about which I am able to
speak with the confidence of full knowledge and prolonged and
intimate experience.
I propose to speak —
1. Of the land ;
2. Of the principles on wdiich the settlement is founded, and
3. Of how the scheme works out
1 .—As to the character of the soil. Though the agricultural
experts have reported most favorably on the suitability of the
soil to grow a large variety of garden and field and orchard pro-
duce, there is no pretence that the soil is exceptionally rich, nor
do the experts themselves classify it as first class soil. It is like
a good deal more land in the Windsor 'District, on which scores
of families have made a decent, and some a really good, living.
The improvements on the land, which, on a moderate estimate,
reach the value of about £4OOO, while the Government loan
grant has amounted to less than £3OOO may be summarized thus :
Ten substantial dams for water conservation have been construc-
ted which will bring the supply within easy reach of every part
of the settlement. Road clearing and fencing, with bridges and
culverts, two miles. Eighty acres have been cleared, besides the
residential allotments, and the partial clearances bi'ing the total
up to about tw-o hundred acres. Of the land thus cleared four
acres have been laid down in sorghum, four in maize, four in oats,
three in potatoes, four in Sw r ede turnips, six in barley, two in
peas, three in wheat. Besides these there is a garden of four
acres of miscellaneous produce. The amount of fencing reaches
a length of about nine miles. The land enclosed is about 300
acres, intended to be used as grazing paddocks for the Dairy.
One hundred huts, affording primitive but sufficient accommoda-
tion, have been erected. And (at the expense of the Department,
of course) there is now' a substantial and handsome school house.
So much for the land.
2. —In regard to the principles on which the settlement is
founded, one may perhaps summarise these by saying that it is
a scheme by which a number of the unemployed —unclassified —
without means, and therefore, for the most part, belonging to
the most helpless section of the unemployed labor of the metro-
polis, are to be assisted, partly by Government loans, partly by
private subscriptions, and partly by the gratuitous and voluntary
help of a number of philanthropic and earnest men, to earn for
themselves and their families—on Government leasehold land—
at least a bare maintenance, and as much more as their labor may
ultimately produce. The land is held under a lease from the
State, with provision for further lease, but no provision for ulti-
mate purchase. No rent is to be paid for the first four years, so


that the scheme, unlike that of the Tucker settlements in Victoria,
starts the settlers with no initial liability. Each settler is placed
on a small holding, just large enough to find occupation for his
leisure. But the settlement is started on a strictly co-operative
basis—a basis on which Mr. Tucker says he regrets he did not
more fully start his own. Every settler is expected to give eight
hours work per day to the settlement itself. They are now expected
to grow, and many of them are growing, sufficient vegetables on
their own ground to maintain their families : so that that item of
maintenance will presently be saved. The settlers receive no
money. And the scale of rations gives to each family of five per-
sons what is eequivalent to about 10s. 6d. a week.
Of course, no settlement on this basis could be established
without incurring considerable initial expenses. Tools, horses,
bullocks, carts, ploughs, harrows, several labor saving machines
and seed had to be found. One of the earliest and gravest anxie-
ties of the Board of Control was to secure the settlement against
sudden collapse for want of water. Then every family needed
to have some sort of a house over their heads. And, if only to
conserve the grass of the settlement for our own stock, as well as
to comply with the terms of the Act, it became necessary to do a
great deal of fencing. People have said a good deal about the in-
fertility of the soil even for grazing. But the fact is there are
something like a thousand head of cattle, belonging to outside
residents, grazing on the unenclosed area.
3.—Let us then consider what the situation really is. About
430 souls have to be fed and housed and clothed. They had to
be supplied with wholesome water, and provided with stock, tools
and material to start and maintain a large co-operative farm.
The total amount at the disposal of the Board when the scheme
was started was about £2200. It would have been absolute in-
sanity to dream of carrying any settlement to the point of self-
support on resources so meagre as these. Neither the Minister
who introduced the Act nor we who accepted the responsibility of
administering it, had any idea of attempting such a thing. In
Victoria the only thing that enabled the Tucker settlements to start
was public subscriptions to the amount of several thousand pounds.
Even in Victoria, however, these public subscriptions came to a
speedy end. In our own colony, I regret to say, this part of the
scheme can hardly be said to have had a beginning. “It breathed
but to expire.” The result of the appeal for public subscriptions
in aid of village settlement in New South Wales has hardly
exceeded £lOO.
It would have seemed, therefore, a very natural thing for
us to have abandoned the enterprise shortly after its inception
on its becoming evident that our capital was only to amount to
about one-third what was originally contemplated. But, ladies
and gentlemen, it is one thing to take up an enterprise, and
another thing to lay it down. We found ourselves in the midst
of something that took deep hold of our hearts, that rooted itself


in our human sympathy. We had taken the case of these poor
fellows in hand, and somehow now must, if possible, see it through.
“Let us go on,” we said. “The men cannot fail surely, when
they are receiving only their rations, to accumulate more value
upon the land than we are expending out of the Government
Loan Grant. And when the money is all spent, we shall be able
to go to Parliament and say : ‘ Your land is worth more, by per-
haps a thousand pounds, than the money spent on the salvation
of these poor settlers. You hold all the assets on the land as
security for any further grant. To drag these people back into
the misery of the unemployed in the metropolis is out of the
question. Keep the settlement going.’ ” And lam glad to say
that in taking this course our action has commended itself on
the whole to the favorable judgment of the Minister. And he
has determined to do his utmost to keep the settlers where
they are.
I need not say that the scheme itself, as well as its adminis-
tration, has come in for a great deal of criticism.
Of the scheme itself, it has been said that it gives no
sufficient room for the principle of Individualism. “You elim-
inate,” it is said, “every form of competition. You do not
allow one man —at least on the Common Estate—by his extra
skill, or intelligence, or bodily strength, to earn more than
another. Your scheme is one under which the weak are aided
by the strong, and the less gifted by the more gifted. Your
scheme is one under which ‘ lie that gathers much has nothing
over, and he that gathers little has no lack.’ Your scheme is not
in harmony with the spirit of the age. The spirit of the age
favors inequality. It makes it possible for Baron Ilirsch to
entertain in London sixty millionaires, while it makes one
Englishman out of every ten a virtual pauper. Your scheme
does not admit of that kind of thing. It is too Socialistic.”
Yes, it is quite true. The scheme is a feeble sort of
attempt at showing that Christianity—as set forth in the sen-
tences from the New Testament, which I have quoted—still has
some meaning, and that some people still think its ideal of
social life the best.
But it is not true that it reduces all men to a level. Ido not
measure the elevation, the higher or lower level of a man, by
“ the abundance of the things that he possesseth,” and my com-
plaint of the existing order of things is that that is practically the
only element that enters into our estimate of “ levels.”
A man like our Superintendent, George Waite, though he
generously refuses to receive anything but what he shares with
the least capable man on the Settlement, stands morally and
manfully on a level with the best man in this hall.
“ What though on homely fare we dine,
Wear hodden gray, and a' that,
The honest man, though e’er sae poor,
Is King o’ men, for a’ that.”


That is a “masonic test” which makes a very considerable
alteration in our estimate of levels.
But let me put it to you in another way. The 100 settlers
now at Pitt Town, with their families, are like the rest of us,
social products. And whatever the principle of competitive strife
may have done for others, it left them, anyhow, at the very
bottom of our social stratification. Surely, we might be per-
mitted to try some other method, at least with these. If society
has had to give up their case as hopeless, it may not be out of
place to try a change of treatment.
In regard to the criticisms of the administration of the settle-
ment, which, if vaguej have not been on that account the less
severe, I may point out that these criticisms nearly all rest on an
inadequate realisation of what the situation really is. I was
reading, for example, some time ago, a two-column notice of the
settlement in a suburban journal under the heading “A Cruel
Farce,” wherein the writer says that “he is informed that mid-
dling land could have been found on the banks of Cattai Creek
within the area of Pitt Town Common,” and asks, “Why in the
name of all that is sane should the millions of acres of good land
lying idle be overlooked and those dry and forbidding ridges be
allotted to those unfortunate settlers.” I answer, there are not
millions of acres on the banks of Cattai Creek, nor unappropriated ,
on the banks of any other creek that I know of. And if there
were, we do not want them. For agricultural experts tell us that
our land is fairly good land ; we have grown cabbages and maize
and grass upon it, and we know that it is good. And where does
the “sanity” come in of speaking of those people as “unfor-
tunate ” who are living yonder in Arcadian simplicity, planted
out in the open, removed from the misery and demoralisation of
the city, receiving good food and plenty of it, and with the feel-
ing that they may justly entertain that their hands are breaking
no bread which they have not earned. To be earning one’s bread
instead of sleeping in the Domain is not a farce. To be sure of
a roof over one’s head without having to meet the landlord every
Monday morning—is not a cruel farce !
But this is very much the character of these criticisms. They
lose sight of the condition out of which these settlers were, many
of them, in the first instance lifted. And they fail to recognise
the circumstances under which they are brought together. I
confess that, considering the fact that they were selected from the
most helpless class of the unemployed, being absolutely without
means, that they were without social cohesion, being strangers to
each other, that the experiment of co-operative labor was so new
to them, and so little in favor with some newspapers which seemed
eager to publish their complaints—the real wonder is that the
settlement should have kept so well together. There is one thing :
the men work well. And one can afford to be tolerant of a little
grumbling when plenty of hard work goes with it. And another
thing : their labor is well directed. We are availing ourselves


of the best expert advice from the neighboring' Agricultural
College, and we are more than pleased with the capacity, the
resource and the temper of our superintendent, Mr. G. Waite.
But my time is exhausted, and 1 must hasten to a conclusion
It has been my endeavour to show that the solution of our
social difficulties does not lie along the line of the social system
that has produced them ; that unrestrained ownership of land is
threatening Australia with some of the worst evils from which
older civilisations are suffering ; that the doctrine of laissez-faire ,
with its law of supply and demand, its iron law of wages, (what
Walters Besant calls, “ the law of the eleven pence ha’penny ”),
and its so called “ Freedom of Contract, ” needs seriously revising
in the light of the new era that has been introduced by machinery.
I have endeavored to explain the significance of this new feature
—this portent—in our social condition, wherein we often seem to
be suffering at once from two things which seem diametrically
opposite —from Over-production and Want; wherein we seem to
be producing too much, while yet millions remain unsupplied.
I have endeavored to show that the drift, the trend, of modern
thought and feeling on this subject is towards the realisation of
an ideal set forth 1800 years ago in the life and teaching of Jesus
Christ. “ Seek first ” that kingdom of justice and brotherhood
which is indeed “the kingdom of God, and His Righteousness.’’
Passing on to discuss the two great factors of the problem
awaiting solution, (l)the material on which labor if? bestowed
—the land, and (2) the best means of utilising that labor—co-
operation, we have seen good reason to appreciate the use and
value of the system of Tillage Settlement: (1) In its provisions
for perpetual leasing—the State retaining the proprietorship of
the soil. (2) In its provisions for co-operative labor. On this
second point I have endeavored to detect the ambiguity of the
word “Socialist,” with the view of showing that the word may
yet be redeemed to cover the case of those who aspire to a loftier
ideal of human association than that of the strife of competing
egoisms ; who take justice and humanity for their guide; but
whose methods are evolutionary and constructive, and not revo-
lutionary and destructive.
I need not recall to your memory what I have just said in
my review of the various schemes in the direction of Tillage
Settlement which have been attempted with more or less success
in New Zealand and Tictoria, nor what I have had to say con-
cerning the principles and administration of our own settlement
at Pitt Town.
I have only in conclusion to express to you my deep conviction
that the principles embodied in these settlements—the principle
of perpetual leasing under State ownership, and the principle of
full co-operation, are principles which, however now inadequately
expressed and realised, are principles which have come—to stay.
The trend of the movement of society lies, there is no question,


TA?r
P 16020
N/ C 43
_ O
x ¥pr
THE CO-OPERATIVE PRINTING COMPANY BATHURST STREET, SYDNEY




