

A LETT Ell
TO THE
RIGHT REV. NICHOLAS WISEMAN, D.D.,
BT THE
BISHOP OF SYDNEY,
METROPOLITAN OF AUSTRALASIA,
TOGETHER WITH
THE BISHOP’S PROTEST, MARCH THE 25TH, 1843,
AND THE
RESOLUTIONS OF A SPECIAL MEETING
OF THE
Stanbing ©ommittpp of tt)P Spbnep Siotesan ©ommittee of tfje Somtirs
for promoting ©ijristian Unotolfbgr anb tfje Propagation of tfje
©oapfl tn jFomgn sarta,
HELD ON THE 15th DAY OF MARCH, 1851.
LONDON:
F. & J. RIVINGTON, ST. PAUL’S CHURCHYARD.
BIRMINGHAM :
W. HODGETTS, CANNON STREET.
1852.


Fltf IS
BIRMINGHAM.
WILLIAM HODQETTB, PRINTER, CANNON STREET,


Sydney, 2nd December, 1850.
Right Reverend Sir, —
1 write to you as a Bishop to a Bishop; in charity
you may be assured : and, if I deceive not myself, in the love
of truth, and in anxiety for the peace and welfare of the
Church. The occasion of my addressing you is this. A
friend in this city, who has generally the best intelligence in
such matters, and takes a strong and honest interest in the
welfare of the Church of England, has informed me of the
notice which you, in a sermon recently preached and pub-
lished, have been pleased to bestow upon my ecclesiatical
position as effected by the terms of the Queen’s Letters
Patent, by and under which the Metropolitan See, of which
lam the occupant, is constituted. I have not been able to
meet with the discourse itself; but in a Roman Catholic
journal printed in this place, there is an extract from it, con-
taining, I suppose, the whole of your observations upon the
Ecclesiastical Supremacy of the Crown, as exemplified in its
bearing upon the past and present state of the episcopate
here ; of the Diocese, first of Australia, now of Sydney. This
is your chosen topic; the Supremacy of the Crown of England
as it affects the independence of the episcopal office, and
assumes (so you think) a prerogative of dictating the condi-
tions according to which the functions, even the spiritual
functions, of the episcopate shall be exercised. It is a well
chosen topic at the present moment. Of this you are un-
doubtedly aware. I may allow you credit for candour in


your polemical character. Yet there is no reason why 1
should seek to detract from your no less acknowledged
dexterity in choosing out for attack that point in your
enemy’s line which seems for the moment to be most closely
beset. Not that I should complain of you, as a contro-
versialist, for thus taking up the position most advantageous
for you according to your own view. I could have no right
to do so, even if your argument galled me more than it does.
But you will do me the justice to believe that it cannot be
new to me, after having held, during more than twenty years,
a very extended ecclesiastical jurisdiction under the license
of Letters Patent from the Crown of England, during the
reigns of three successive Sovereigns. As claiming the
exercise of a spiritual function in the Church, I could hardly
fail to commune carefully with my own thoughts upon the
position in which I was placed by this assumption, on the
part of the State, of a legal power to prescribe the conditions
according to which, and the territorial limits within which,
the authority pertaining to my office should be exercised. I
am also the better qualified to speak with decision upon this
point, because it does happen that the period, during which
it has been God’s pleasure to call me to the exercise of
government in his Church, has been precisely that which has
been bringing into more direct question, year after year, the
nature and extent of the privileges rightfully belonging to,
and mutually claimed by, the Church and State, in the con-
cernment of each with the other’s appropriate scope of
action. It is not necessary for me to mention in detail the
circumstances which rendered the year 1829 a season of
anxious foreboding to all who desired the real welfare and
permanent security of the Church of England. It was at this
precise moment that I received, under sanction of the Supre-
macy of the Crown, my first appointment to a station of
dignity in the Church. Accept with candour, Right Reverend
Sir, the assurance offered with sincerity, that I entered upon
this charge not without a clear perception of the altered
position in which (so far as regarded the Supremacy) the


Sovereign of the Realm of England must henceforth stand
towards the established Church. The events of the next
succeeding seven years were not of such a character as to lull
my vigilance to rest, or to abate my solicitude as to the prin-
ciples upon which in 1836 the Letters Patent for my elevation
to the See of Australia were to be constructed. It is against
this instrument that the arrows of your wrath are discharged.
Professedly your aim is at the individual who was the subject
of those Letters. But it is in reality directed towards a
higher quarry. Your evident intention is to thrust, through
me, an additional javelin into the already too much stricken
side of the Church of England. Let us proceed, if you
please, to notice the terms of these Letters Patent, which you
represent as so objectionable; as binding the Church to
nothing short of an Erastian surrender of her inherent spiritual
privileges into the hands of the Crown. As the entire ques-
tion turns upon the Supremacy, I will offer first of all a few
observations upon that subject. Without professing approval
of every part of the course pursued by our ancestors in
transferring bodily as it were, to the Crown, almost the entire
weight of the supremacy in ecclesiastical affairs which had
been previously vested in the Pope, I must say that the
principle upon which they acted was a right and noble prin-
ciple, They had been gradually led to see how shameful an
invasion it was of their national independence, and how into-
lerable an encroachment upon their Christian privileges, that
a foreign prelate, under colour of a divine title the proof of
which was altogether defective, should assume to himself the
right of absolute sway in all matters ecclesiastical; and so,
a degree of control approaching to absolute over the temporal
affairs of an independent monarchy. I say again, it may be
questioned whether in the excitement of the moment, and
subject as they were to a yet unrestricted royal preroga-
tive, the legislators of that day (ecclesiatical or civil) did
sufficiently consider, or were even in a position sufficiently
to consider, the extent to which the prerogatives heretofore
vested in the Pope might now he beneficially vested in the


Crown. In fixing that limit, or rather in neglecting to fix it,
they may have erred; but the thing itself which they did
was right. They felt, and we still feel, that the subjects of
every independent Christian State form collectively a national
Church, qualified and entitled to manage and direct its own
spiritual concerns without interference on the part of any
Foreign power, whether Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate.
In their wisdom and right-mindedness the men of the English
Reformation felt from the first an assurance of that which in
explicit terms they afterwards expressed, that “ the Bishop
of Rome hath no jurisdiction in this Realm of England.”
Words certainly to be ranked among the gravest and most
sententious expressions of the truth that have ever been put
upon record. Well, then, when they made this declaration,
they w r ere not in love with anarchy. Jurisdiction, or power
to direct and regulate the internal affairs of the Church, must
be lodged somewhere. If not to the Pope to whom, then, did
it appertain ? My reply is to the National Church of Eng-
land, to the Church as comprehending the two great classes
of clergy and laity; each having its proper duties and its
proper powers. It is in the combined will and consent of
these orders that, under God, the jurisdiction of the Church
is lodged. It is to the Sovereign as to the exponent of that
will, and as the organ of its practical exercise, that the chief
government of all estates of this Realm of England, whether
they be ecclesiastical or civil, is assigned by law. By law,
that is to say, by the assent of all the estates of the Realm;
by authority of the King’s Majesty, with the consent of his
faithful loving subject#, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and the Commons, in Parliament assembled. It was not, let
me assure you, Right Reverend Sir, as those on your side
vainly and yet no less obstinately maintain, an Act of Par-
liament, assuming authority to create the Church of England,
which made this settlement. The Church of England had
existed long before Parliaments; and all the power which at
the time of its reformation they exercised, was by declaratory
Acts to re-affirm the long forgotten truth; that the right of


jurisdiction within the national Church was vested in the
nation itself; and that the exercise of it should be in the
King, as, by “ the prerogative given always in Holy Scrip-
ture by God himself,” the representative of, or agent for, the
national Church in that respect. Such was the theory of the
Royal Supremacy ; and as a theory it was just and good. I
might say it was even perfect. For no constitution could be
devised more entirely what it ought to be than that of a
Church in which the word of God should be preached, and
the Sacraments be duly administered, and within which the
nation itself should be comprehended. The nation and the
Church, being convertible terms, had an inherent right of
self-government, under no other condition than that its ruling
will should be comformable to the will of that God, who had
never conferred upon any foreign power a right to interfere,
to interrupt, or dissolve this blessed union. If I say that this
theory was good and just, I am prepared to hear you reply
that, as events have shown, it was but too just and good for
those to whom it was to be applied. And I admit the justice
of the reproach if you should cast it in our teeth. We have
shown ourselves unworthy of such mercy. We are enduring
the penalty of that wilful spirit which has divided the nation
and cast out unity from the Church; and so has dug away
from under us the ground upon which alone the Royal
Supremacy could firmly stand; and might and would have
continued to stand as a tower of strength had things been
otherwise than the nation has determined that they shall be.
But lest this exposition of our state should awaken in you
hopes and expectations more sanguine than experience will
be found to justify, let me whisper to you that, perplexing
and injurious as a state of wide-spread dissention may be, we
yet feel sensible that deliverance from it might be purchased
at too dear a rate. Conscious as we are of the vast evil of
so many disagreements about Truth, still the thoughtful and
prudent among us can discern that it would be any thing but
a deliverance to exchange this, as you invite us to do, for a
state of universal agreement in error.


But to return to the immediate subject, and to approach it
more closely, let me observe that the Letters Patent of 1836
were drawn up in accordance with the preconceived theory
of the relations subsisting between the Church and the
Sovereign, or rather, the nation represented by the Sovereign.
Two ruling principles prevailed with me in examining the
character and effect of that instrument.—First, it w T as my
conviction, that the ancient relation between the Church and
the Sovereign—as having, under Christ, the chief govern-
ment thereof, although it might have been impaired, as all
systems must be by the admission of contravening enact*
ments, had yet a sufficient remnant of truth and reality to
justify the Church in continuing a party to such engagements
with the Crown. Secondly, I entertained a confidence which
nothing personal to myself has since arisen to shake, that
there was no disposition on the part of the Crown to use its
supremacy for the purpose of thwarting, oppressing, or hir
juring the Colonial Church.
And now let us enquire what were the terms of the compact
entered into with the Crown, as the condition of its sanction
to the establishment of an Episcopal See, and the nomination
of a Bishop to exercise jurisdiction within the limits of it. The
first observation which I find quoted from your sermon is little
better than a truism —asserting that “ if one act of supremacy
can be imagined more real than another, it must certainly
be that which establishes Bishoprics, names Bishops, and
bestows upon them their spiritual privileges.” You will not
be surprised, assuredly, to learn that I admit this as readily
as yourself. Such acts as these must be the acts of one in
authority;—that is not the question ; but to whom does that
authority rightfully belong ? To the Pope, as you maintain,
or —as I still continue to hold—to the Church, repre-
sented by the Sovereign ? This very colony, as you may be
aware, exhibits an example of each of these modes of estab-
lishment and nomination; and you have heard, perhaps, that
by a solemn and imperishable act, I have protested publicly
against the application, here, of that theory by which you


abide. In this act lam conscious of having occupied, on
behalf of my successors, a stronghold from which they can
never be dislodged; although, from gathering symptoms, I
am forewarned of the approach of that combined assault upon
our Episcopal position, in which it is believed that you, Right
Reverend Sir, unless diverted by higher objects, may be ap-
pointed to take the lead. But I may well ask, what is there in
the law of Christ, or in the rules which it lays down for the
guidance of its followers in their intercourse with the powers
of the world, which can be pleaded in defeasance of this
authority of a Christian Sovereign within his own dominions ?
He is understood, I say, to be acting as the organ and repre
sentative of the Church of the nation, as defender of the faith.
He is acting in compliance with the desire of that part of the
nation which is principally interested in this matter. And he
is the minister of God to it for good so long as the Church can
be, through the guardianship of the Civil power, secured in
the enjoyment of its just rights, and in possession of spiritual
benefits. I trust that through the Divine blessing upon the
endeavour which is now to be made by the Bishops of this
Province, for the conversion of the natives of the Islands of
the South Sea, we may, at no distant period, be witnesses of
this theory carried into practical operation. They, lam per-
suaded, will not so far forget the rule of Christian equity, as
to attempt to assume permanently, into their own hands, or
into the hands of any foreign prelate, state, or potentate, the
prerogative of erecting Bishopricks, and naming Bishops,
within those territories; upon the plea of having first
Christianized the inhabitants. Temporarily they may and
must do so, on account of the incompetency of an uncivilized
and illiterate people to fulfil their proper duty. But the
working of the system established by Anglican Bishops
will be, I am sure, in the direction of conferring upon those
Churches the power of internal self-government, free from
foreign interference and jurisdiction, under a settled form of
apostolical belief, and with a lawful succession of the ministry
from the very outset. And if circumstances shall so tend as


to invest the heads of the civil government there, as the
exponents of the determinations of the Church, with control
over all causes ecclesiastical, excepting those concerning
doctrine, we shall rejoice in such carrying out of the right
system. This case, if should occur, will present a parallel
to what ought to have been the sequel of St. Augustine’s
mission for the conversion of the Saxons. The enactments
which, at the time of the Reformation, confirmed the supre-
macy in the Crown, did but re-establish, so far as the prin-
ciple concerned, the order which would have sprung
into existence, and would always have prevailed in England
among the successors of Ethelbert and Augustine, but for the
iintrusions and usurpations of Popery. Whether they who
possessed authority, either by prerogative or by law, to carry
into effect that just principle, did in all points follow the
line of as exact a discretion irr deciding what were the things
which should be rendered unto Cesar, I am not now calling
in question. Neither am I preparing to discuss whether
under the now much altered circumstances, the Crown can
advantageously continue (and, if not, whether it should at all
continue) to exercise over the Church of England that power
of control which the law recognizes, and we (the Bishops and
clergy) by our subscriptions, have for ourselves, I believe,
acknowledged it to possess. Briefly, my persuasion is that
the two titles of “ Defender of the Faith,” and “ Chief Ruler
of the Church upon earth,” have so intimate and necessary
an alliance, that when the one ceases to be applicable the
other can no longer be supported. All which I contend for
is, that under what is the natural state of the Church in its
relations with the State, there would not be (and in 1836
was not) any proof of Erastianism in admitting that the
Crown, acting ahvays in correspondence with the Church,
and representatively on behalf of its lay members, should
possess and exercise the power of establishing Bishopricks,
and naming Bishops. You appear, Right Reverend Sir,
to aim invidiously, though latently, at the latter pre-
rogative, as if it involved an intrusion by the civil


power into a province purely spiritual. My suspicion is raised
by observing how conveniently for such a purpose you stop
short when notice was required of a most important point
which was plainly set forth in the Letters Patent then lying
before you. There could hardly be any purpose for such
omission to finish the sentence, unless it were that of leading
your audience to suppose that the Kings of England assumed
to make men Bishops, as well as to nominate them to par-
ticular Sees. Would it not have been worth while, Sir, if only
to avoid the risk of misleading your congregation upon a
point of so much importance, that you should have let them
more fully and fairly into the entire purport of the instrument
you were quoting from ? Why this reserve ? Why this partial
exhibition of facts ? Why not have stated, as you might, that
all this exercise of the authority of the Crown in naming a
Bishop, was left dependent, as is categorically stated, upon
the attainment first of all, by the individual so named, of the
office of a Bishop; to which office it is said, in so many words,
he is to be admitted not by any act of the Crown but by con-
secration of the Church. The extent to which the Crown
allows itself to go, is only to require and command the Arch-
bishop, by the faith and love whereby he is bound to the
Sovereign, that he will consecrate the Bishop designate in
the manner accustomed. Nothing conclusive would follow
from my observing (although it be true) that the
person who really did nominate the Bishop was the late
most reverend and venerated Archbishop of Canterbury;
and that the Crown did but confirm the selection of the
Primate. This you might set aside, perhaps, by stating that
you were not aware of it. But you were informed (for it is
an inference to be drawn from the instrument itself) that in
case the nomination of an objectionable person had been
made by the Crown, it was in the power of the Archbishop,
by declining to consecrate that person, to prevent his obtrusion
upon the Church. If the intention had been to place before
your hearers on so solemn an occasion, a fair not an
unfair representation of the state of the Church of England,


would it not have been more becoming, Right Reverend
Sir, not to express yourself as if the Crown claimed, or
could exercise, an absolutepporerw r er to name the Bishop, when
you knew that in reality it had but a power which another
authority might nullify, if it were, or were believed to be,
improperly exercised ? It is with regret that I impute
unfairness of dealing to a person of your station. But there
are other instances of it besides that which I have just
pointed out. “ The power to ordain, wdiich is a purely
spiritual power, is granted by the Queen (you ought
rather to have said the King) to this Bishopthat is
to say, the King confers upon him episcopal power.
If the King had assumed, or could have been supposed to
have meant to assert, any such claim of conferring epis-
copal power, to what intent then, it must be asked, and
with what consistency, could he have remitted to the Arch-
bishop for consecration the person who was to possess and
exercise that power ?—more especially how could the King
design to confer power to ordain, that is, episcopal power,
when the ritual of the Church of England, which the King
had sworn to conform to and maintain, declares “no man
shall be accounted or taken to be a lawful Bishop in the
United Church of England and Ireland,unless he be admitted
thereunto according to the form following, or hath had for-
merly episcopal consecration ?” But, not satisfied with this,
you quote the following words, “ and we thereby further give
and grant to the said William Grant Broughton and his
successors, Bishops of Australia, full power and authority to
confirm those that are baptized and come to years of discre-
tion.” “ Surely,” you adjoin, “ confirmation at least is a
purely spiritual act; one which has no bearing whatever”
(as you imagine holy orders may have) “ upon civil law, or
civil rights and privileges in any way whatever.” Thus you
reason, and thus you triumph, as if you had quoted fairly the
words of the Letters Patent, and had drawn from them an un-
impeachable conclusion, to the great shame and scandal of the
recreant Church of England. But I have to object that you


have not quoted fairly, but quite the reverse. You stop short
in the middle of a sentence, disjoining the words which refer
to confirmation from those which immediately follow. Hereby
you give to the sentence a meaning which was never meant;
as would at once have been seen if you had quoted it com-
plete ; or had given in one unbroken series the words in
which the King’s license is conveyed. This will be clear
to any one who reads them. They are these. “ And
we do hereby further give and grant to the said William
Grant Broughton, and his successors, Bishops of Australia,
full power and authority to confirm those who are baptized
and come to years of discretion, and to perform all other
functions peculiar and appropriate to the office of Bishop
within tlie limits of the said See of Australia , hut not
elseivhere; such Bishop and his successors having been first
duly ordained or consecrated Bishop, according to the form
prescribed by the Liturgy of the Church of England.”
Wherefore, then, did you, Bight Beverend Sir, stop short in
your quotation in the middle of a sentence ? You may assign
twenty reasons for this proceeding, but you can assign none
which will prove that the effect of it was not to leave your
congregation under an entirely false impression as to the power
which the King designed to convey to the Bishop of Australia.
Will you maintain it to have been, as you say, the spiritual
power to ordain and to confirm ? Is it not evident that the
only authority in contemplation, which it could be intended
or pretended to confer upon the Bishop, was liberty to exer-
cise, within a particular district called the Diocese of Aus-
tralia, a faculty which, in virtue of his episcopal consecra-
tion, he already possessed ? The license to confirm stands
on the same footing with “ all other functions peculiar and
appropriate to the office of a Bishop,” and you can scarcely
intend seriously to assert that the Crown assumed a right to
confer those functions, when you note what follows, that even
the degree of license which the Letters Patent do profess to
grant, is made dependent on the express condition that all
they who are to act under this license shall first have been


duly consecrated Bishops according to the form prescribed
by the Liturgy of the Church of England. Having these
words before you, you could not possibly have thought that
the intention of the King was to bestow upon the Bishop
power to ordain; but you must have seen the plain force of
the sentence to be, that he, being already a Bishop,
and thereby qualified to ordain, might exercise that
office within a particular part of the King’s dominions,
which is a totally different thing. It suited your purpose,
however, to mistake the meaning of the words, and you
have without scruple done so. You do not hold, of course,
that in the Church of Christ there should be Bishops
without restraint. You will admit that every Bishop should
exercise his mission and jurisdiction within limits appointed
to him; or be tied, as Hooker says, to a particular portion
of the flock of Christ ? Who then is to tie him, who is to
fix the limit of his otherwise general and indefinite chai'ge ?
I protest that after the most careful consideration I can dis-
tinguish no arrangement, in regard to this purely temporal
consideration of “where” and “how far,” which can be more
appropriate in itself, or less chargeable with encroachment
upon the just rights of the Church, than that the power should
be by legislative consent, recognized as belonging to the
office of the Sovereign as “ the prerogative which we see to
have been given always to all godly princes by God himself.”
What blame do you attach to the Church of England for its
acquiescence in that arrangement, so long at least as the
Sovereign can without manifest fiction be represented as
personifying by his decision the will of those who ought to
possess a voice in all such arrangements ? lam quite sensible
that a time may arrive when other influences than those of
the Church, influences even hostile to the Church, may so
operate upon the purposes of the Sovereign, that the Crown
can no longer be said fairly to be an embodiment of the lay
or secular element of the Church, and therefore can no longer
exercise with security to the Church a supremacy which
confers a right of interfering in its concerns, and seriously


operating upon its interests. I see most plainly how this may
arise, especially in the Colonial portion of the Church, where
the Crown, even now, does not strive, or even profess, to
exercise any influence in support of the Church, or to retain
any peculiar concern for its well-being. But what of this ?
If it should so happen that the Crown were to be by any
concurrent causes rendered incapable of its proper pre-
rogative, or of acting on behalf of that lay element which
I have now spoken of, that element must then find means
of exerting itself through some other channel, or under
some other conventional form. I look back, I must
acknowledge, with much regret, upon those changes
in our English constitution which, I foresaw from the
first, must have the effect of loosening the old hereditary
attachment and alliance between the Church and King.
Nothing has ever shaken my reliance on the truth of the
maxim,
Nusquam libertas gratior extat,
Quam sub rege pio.
If by our fondness for schisms we render inevitable the abo-
lition of that long-subsisting compact, we must pay the penalty
of our sin ; —which, moreover, a little experience of suffering
may have some effect in checking. But there is yet no ground
for despondency. Receive my assurance, Bight Reverend Sir,
we shall yet find a resource. At any rate, believe me, we
shall not be driven to that point to which it is so clear you
are striving to compel us, that is to say, we shall not, if the
supremacy of the Crown should fail us, be induced to take
up with the supremacy of the Pope, in default or despair
of a better substitute. Be persuaded that there is still too
much substance of good sense and serious belief remaining
in the Church of England to suffer this.
Yet I have one word to add on the subject of your
incorrect representation of facts. In the progress of your
sermon you observe “ in this compilation which I hold in my
hand” (Parliamentary Papers, 174 J “there comes another


singular document dated a few years later, by which the
Queen makes that Bishop resign , in other words deposes him.
then divides his diocese into several.” Really I hardly know
what to say to this. We have before us the spectacle of a
Bishop making from the pulpit, in the face of the congregation,
a declaration professedly derived from papers which he then
holds in his hand, a declaration which he believes to be, and
intends should be, to the disparagement of another communion
of Christians. And yet, will it be believed, these very papers
present the most direct contradiction of the assertion which
you profess to ground upon their authority. “ The Queen,”
you say “ makes that Bishop resign, in other words deposes
him; then divides his diocese into several.” After this, I
beg to call your attention to the following paragraph con-
tained in the paper which you held in your hand, in the very
same page, and in the sentence next following that which
you professed to be reading from, at the time of making the
above assertion; “ And whereas by virtue of the powers of
revocation mentioned in the said Letters Patent, We did, with
the concurrence of the said Bishop of Australia , wholly
separate, divide, and exempt the city of Hobart Town and all
our island of Van Dieman’s Land, and did declare that the
said city and colony should thenceforth be wholly separated
and exempted from the jurisdiction, authority, and diocese of
the said Bishop of Australia, and his successors; And
whereas it has been represented to us by the Most
Reverend William Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England and Metropolitan, that con-
sidering the present great extent of the said Diocese of
Australia, (notwithstanding the severance therefrom of the
said Diocese of Tasmania), and also the inconvenience and
detriment arising therefrom, as well to the Bishop of the
said See as to the members of the united Church of England
and Ireland resident within the same, he is desirous, with the
concurrence of the said Bishop of A ustralia , that the extent
of the said Diocese should be still further reduced, We
having taken the premises into our Royal consideration, and


having been certified of the concurrence therein of the said
Bishop of Australia, and being persuaded that by complying
with such the request of the said Archbishop we shall, under
the blessing of Almighty God, greatly advance the well-being
of the said united Church within the said colonies, have
resolved to grant the same accordingly, &c., &c.” If there
can be any question raised as to the import of these para-
graphs, if there be in the language of them any such ambi-
guity as could lead you to think that the reduction of the
See of Australia was effected by the mere will of the Crowm,
the Bishop not being a consenting party, then, I will admit,
Right Reverend Sir, that it was fair, honest, and justifiable in
you to say “ the Queen makes the Bishop resign, deposes
him, divides his diocese.” But as the contrary declaration is
tot idem verbis contained in the paper which you had then
before your eyes, you have laid yourself open to the charge
of affirming from the pulpit that which you must have been
aware was not true. It is a very painful accusation for me to
bring, but a sense of duty will not suffer me to withhold it.
All which I desire to add is this : —that the extracts which I
have given, although they make it abundantly clear that the
concurrence of the Bishop of Australia had been obtained,
yet even they do not declare the truth to the full extent,
inasmuch as they omit to state that the arrangement was
from its very origin , entirely of his devising. It was his own
proposal; his own suggestion; the fruit of his own unbiassed
reflection upon the state and prospects of his Church ; the
decision of his own judgment as to what measures would
most probably tend to strengthen and support it. you have
assumed a right publicly to traduce this portion of the Church
of England, as having submitted to an exertion of lay
control in the direction of its affairs which w r ould prove it to
be in a state of servile dependence on the mere will of the
secular authority; such as would render questionable its
claim to any true spiritual character. For its sake, therefore,
and in its defence rather than in my own, I am compelled to
offer these statements. The first movement proceeded from


myself. It was in the year 1845, My proposals were addres-
sed at the same time to the late Archbishop Howley, with a
humble and earnest request for his sanction and co-operation j
and to the then Governor of this colony, the late Sir George
Gipps, through whom was conveyed my petition to Her
Majesty that the powers of revocation conveyed by the
Letters Patent of 1836 might be taken advantage of for
the accomplishment of the design which I traced out.
Not only was the proposal mine; but so also were all the
attendant details, the limits of the several Dioceses (as
projected), the arrangement of income, and in truth the
minutest particulars of the scheme, as it was afterwards
carried out, were carefully traced by the Bishop of the
existing diocese which was to be effected by them. Although
therefore the Letters Patent, establishing and conferring
the See of Sydney, are correct enough in expressing that
Her Majesty had been certified of the concurrence of the
Bishop of Australia, before the proposed alterations were
introduced, they would still more accurately have represented
the course of proceeding had their language been, that Her
Majesty had concurred in a suggestion of the Bishop, sub-
mitted to her by his desire through the Primate of all England.*
* The following extract from a long letter addressed by the late Archbishop
to the Bishop of Australia, (Lambeth, March 30, 1847,) while it explains the
Venerable writer’s sense of the origin of the measure, affords a most pleasing
view of the deep interest which, to the very close of his honoured life, His
Grace continued to take in every proposal which he thought likely to
strengthen the Church and to promote the growth of true religion in the
colonies. “ Beginning as I do to feel the infirmities of age, I am the
more sensible of the benefit which I derive from Archdeacon Harrison’s
ability and judgement in the transaction of business relating to the ecclesias-
tical affairs of Australia, which are daily increasing in importance. The
Archdeacon has communicated with Your Lordship on most, if not all, of
the points which require attention. What is left to mo is to inform you of
the arrangement which has been made for the appointment of Bishops to the
several new Sees. I begin with the two for the erection of which the colony
is indebted to Your Lordship’s zealous and judicious exertions I
cannot conclude without expressing my deep sense of the benefits which
have been secured to your Diocese by your disinterested zeal.
I trust that, through the blessing of Almighty God, the fruits of your pious


You perceive therefore that you have fallen into a series of
mistakes. There is all the difference in the world, as 1 have
pointed out to you, between the assumption of power to make
a man a Bishop by the fiat of the Crown, and of power to
determine the place where, and the limit within which, the
functions peculiar and appropriate to the office of a Bishop
shall be exercised by a man, who must first have been duly
consecrated to the office according to the form prescribed by
the Liturgy of the Church of England. The first is a power
to which the Crown never laid claim; but of which it is
expressly divested by a just interpetration of the terms
(Art 37,) in which the chief power, or Supremacy, in this
realm is acknowledged to belong to the Civil Magistrate.
The second, which is the power really claimed and
exercised, is one which could not, 1 believe, be more safely
or suitably lodged than in the Crown; so long at least
as the political position of the Sovereign shall be such
as to ensure to the Church that its earthly head can and
will so act on its behalf as to represent fairly the sentiments
of the body; especially of that which I have termed the
lay element. I think, also, there was enough within
your notice to enable you to understand (if you had been
willing and desirous) the intent and effect of the provision
made, that if the Crown shall think fit to revoke the
Commission by the issue of other Letters Patent, then every
such bishop shall to all intents and purposes cease'to be
bishop of Australia. This you invidiously represent as the
reservation of a power to the Crown “ to remove him when it
pleases.” Now, I must repeat, there was enough before you
to show that this was not, and could not be, the intended effect
of the words. In another place you say, “ the Queen makes
labours will appear in due season ; that you may have the satisfaction of
witnessing the progressive religious and moral improvement of the Church
over which you have long presided with such happy effect ; and that you
may enjoy in their fulness all the comforts, as a Ruler of the Church and as
an individual, which consciousness of the fulfilment of duty, and confidence
in the protection of the Great Ruler of the Church, can bestow upon you.”


the Bishop to resign.” You will permit me to point out to
you that the Bishop never did resign; and therefore it
involves an impossibility that he should have been made to do
so. And if you examine, with the accuracy which a regard
for your own reputation for candour and fairness would
prescribe, the terms of the instrument you were commenting
upon, you will not fail to perceive that the true and only
design of introducing this clause of revocation, is to avoid the
inconvenience which must have attended the necessity of an
absolute resignation (which some civilians at that time thought
must occur) as often as the good of the Church should
require the erection of new Sees within the original limits of
the Diocese of Australia. No person endowed with the
least foresight could entertain an expectation that the first
arrangement would continue in perpetuity, or that one
bishoprick should for ever include a territory not much inferior
in extent to the continent of Europe. The true intent of the
words which you so much object to, is apparent from an
instance which actually did occur, in the erection of the See
of Tasmania, in 1842. “Whereas our late royal uncle did
declare that if he, his heirs, or successors, should think fit to
recall or revoke the appointment of the said Bishop of Austra-
lia, and should declare such his pleasure by Letters Patent
under the Great Seal of the United Kingdom, then every
such bishop should, from and after the notification thereof to
him, to all intents and purposes cease to be Bishop of Austra-
lia: and whereas by virtue of the powers of revocation
mentioned in the said Letters Patent, We did, with concur-
rence of the said Bishop of Australia , wholly separate,
divide and exempt the city of Hobart Town, &c., and did
declare that the said city and colony should be wholly
separated and exempted from the jurisdiction, authority, and
diocese of the said Bishop of Australia, and his successors,
&c., &c” You must be sensible now what was the real
meaning of that which you have so seriously misrepresented.
The power of revocation reserved in the Letters Patent of
1836, is shown, by this application of it, to consist in removing


and separating from the jurisdiction of the Bishop of Australia,
with his consent, any portion of his diocese which it might be
deemed expedient to erect into a distinct diocese; and without
imposing upon the Bishop of Australia the necessity of an
absolute resignation of his See before the new arrangement
could be carried into effect. It may be said that the revoca-
tion might be entire, or might remove the whole diocese horn
the jurisdiction of the Bishop; who would thereupon cease,
to all intents and purposes, not indeed to be a Bishop, but to
be the Bishop of any Diocese. Such might have been the
literal interpretation of the words; but whether it were
(which I very much doubt) their true legal import is a ques-
tion which lam not prepared to enter upon. lam strongly
attached to the maxim that the Queen can do no wrong; and
feel an instinctive assurance that the Queen, intentionally, will
do no wrong. If, however, contrary to this expectation, the
Queen had been advised, under colour of this expression, to
do any wanton injury to the Bishop of Australia, it would
have been time to look for a remedy, and a remedy would
unquestionably have been found. This, however, is manifest
that you, Right Reverend Sir, have misrepresented the
meaning of the words; and have put upon them an interpre-
tation in which, experience might have shown you, they were
not meant to be understood. But I must hasten to a con-
clusion ; noticing first of all your allusion to what you term
“ a singular creation in the Church —a Bishop metropolitan,
with jurisdiction over other Bishops, and yet he himself subject
to the Archbishop of Canterbury. In other words the Bishop
of Sydney is a Bishop metropolitan, having Bishops under
him, from whom there is right of appeal to him. And yet he
is only himself a suffragan of Canterbury, to the Archbishop of
which an appeal lies against his judgment.” In assuming this
to be “ a singular creation,” I must take the liberty of saying
that you are mistaken. The three great divisions of the
Church (Antioch, Rome, and Alexandria) as they were
gradually broken up into Provinces, each subject to its own
proper metropolitan, continued nevertheless under the general


superintendence of the Bishops of the prime Sees; who, until
the time of the Council of Nice, (and probably much later), had
themselves, no higher title than that of metropolitan. After-
wards indeed they began to be called Archbishops, Primates,
and Patriarchs; that the offices might be distinct in name
which had long been distinct in reality. Ido not speak of
those mere honorary metropolitans who had the title without
jurisdiction: but of metropolitans having suffragans under
them, and yet (as in the corresponding case of Sydney in the
present day) “ subject,” as you say, to their Archbishops.
The ground of this is very well ascertained; because their
provinces were taken out of, or separated from, the greater
Diocese as originally founded; just as the Province of Aus-
tralasia is assumed to have been taken from that of Canter-
bury. Whether this assumption be so correctly established
as to create a perfect parallel between the cases, and to justify
the continued ascription of a superiority to the See of Can-
terbury, is not the question. If there be a mistake in this, it
may be corrected. But in the bare circumstance of one
metropolitan being made subject, or if you will suffragan, to
one who is himself no more than a metropolitan, there is
nothing which need excite alarm. It is no “ singular crea-
tion but the old and primitive order of the Church. The
metropolitan of Alexandria, and the metropolitan of Carthage
also, while known only under that title (before the one was
called Archbishop and the other Primate) both exercised a
power which was essentially patriarchal, without being
patriarchs. This may put an end to the fond apprehension
which you express that “the See of Canterbury has been
made metropolitan over a metropolitan; in other words a
patriarchate in the ancient sense.” With submission, it
cannot be in the ancient sense, relatively speaking; inas-
much as the very title of patriarch is of comparatively
recent introduction into the Church. The first example that
I find recorded of its use is A.D. 451, in the second Session
of the Council of Chalcedon. And there is a circumstance
attending this primary adoption of the term which I cannot


help pointing out to you : namely, that it was not of eccle-
siastical origin, but the offspring of decidedly lay parentage.
The sitting of that Council was attended by the Emperor and
Empress, Marcian and Pulcheria, in person; and by some
sixteen or eighteen high officers of state, Ex-consuls, Prefects,
Lords of the Bedchamber, and the like, evidently in their
official capacities; representing, I presume, the imperial
Supremacy of those days. They did not summon the Bishops
to sit with them, as assessors, in a judgment to be pronounced
by them as to whether the theological opinions of Eutyches
did or did not disqualify him from continuing to officiate in
the ministry of the Church. The lay authority was in
attendance at the solicitation of the Prelates, to discharge its
proper office of protecting the deliberations of the Council
from interruption, and to provide that the judgment of the
Church, upon an Article of the Creed, should not be over-
borne by tumultuous proceeding, or artful management,
transferring the office of pronouncing sentence to any other
than the rightful judges upon such a question. The lay
Supremacy was here in its proper position; and it is in its
address, in the address of pure laymen, that the title of patri-
arch is for the first time in history (so far as I know and
believe) attributed to Christian bishops. This might alleviate
your apprehension, Right Reverend Sir, were it even true
(which it is not) that the Queen had conferred the same title
on the Archbishop of Canterbury. It might, I say, have this
effect, even if what you urge, as to “ this being the first
instance of the creation of a patriarch (ate) by the Crown,”
were not contradicted by the erection of Constantinople to
that rank and title, which, although it passed under the name
and sanction of a Council, is well known to have been really
effected through the influence, if not the coercion, exercised
by the Emperor.
We may be (and it appears to me probable that we are)
entering into the furnace and into the crucible, in the burning
heat of which it is possible the Royal Supremacy (which I
mention again is but the supremacy of the lay portion of the


Church) may melt away. But it must re-appear —not,
perhaps under the same form, but the same essentially—the
same in substance. You, Right Reverend Sir, apparently,
possess a marvellous faculty of persuading yourself that what
you set your heart upon will certainly come to pass. It
would be a faculty no less enviable than marvellous, this,
if the effect of it were not also to blind your judgment, and
to expose you to the danger of sadly miscalculating conse-
quences. You look before you, and you feast in anticipation
upon the approaching overthrow of the supremacy of the
Crown over the Church of England: and you indulge the
pleasing delusion that, when this shall come to pass, there
will be no alternative but for this Church to fall back upon a
rule which you (most inaccurately) term “catholic and
divine,” —that is to say the supremacy of the See of Rome.
But let me undeceive you. Our freedom of election is by
no means confined within these narrow limits. The Church
Catholic, to which we belong, has its own inherent Supremacy,
and this it will not fail to exercise; neither admitting the
secular element to assume to itself an influence, by the weight
of which it is enabled to paralyze the spiritual, and to appro-
priate to itself the sole direction of the movements of the
Church, (as is the case in England at this time,) nor yet, (as
has been the case in Rome during many centuries,) suffering
the ecclesiastical authority to extrude the secular from all
right of interference in the regulation of Church affairs; the
due ordering of which affects the laity as deeply as the clergy.
We must, by the help of God, surmount that which is our
prevailing disease, the halting between two opinions. One is
true, the other false. Therefore, making always due allow-
ance for the infirmity of human perception which now sees
through a glass darkly, we must have resolution to embrace
and ever to hold fast that which the Church, as the witness of
holy writ, has commended to us from the beginning. Rely
on it, Right Reverend Sir, the Church of England has in it
that which you are not yet aware of; and when, in the spirit
of true godliness, overcoming the spirit of self-will, her clergy


and laity are brought to act together in carrying out the true
Supremacy of the Church, which I fear the Crown is ready to
abandon, you will find that she will take from you many of
those who now form your hope and crown of rejoicing. How
we are to trace and identify this Supremacy, except by the
testimony of Holy Writ first, and secondly, of the Church (which
St. Augustine appeals to,) I cannot tell, nor can you, Right
Reverend Sir, instruct us. I humbly hope, that the recent
conference of the Bishops of this Province may lead us, and
may even lead the world, to a right apprehension of how
the Word of Christ is to be made to dwell in us; of how
“ unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places
may be made known, by the Church, the manifold wisdom
of God,” In our deliberations, we have been fully, even
painfully, conscious of the restraints imposed upon our free
declaration of the true doctrine of the Church, by the Supre-
macy of the Crown. Had the Crown continued to represent
the faith and religious will of the nation, or had the nation
continued to be the Church, we should have felt no such
difficulty. Nevertheless, we have laid down, (though for the
present, only in an opinionative form), the true principle
that the supremacy is in the Church itself, that
it is in the Sovereign only as the Church is the Nation,
and the Sovereign is the representative of both. I am,
as you may not believe, but as others, who know me
better, will believe —a true, earnest, and deliberate adherent
to the principle of the Supremacy of the Crown, in matters
ecclesiastical. I wish with all my heart that the Crown were
as well instructed in its duty towards the Church, as it
seems to be tenacious of its privileges in it; or that it had
advisers who would venture to tell it, as I would firmly
and respectfully, that its true interests are inseparably
bound up with those of the Church of England. But if it
cannot be so, if the Crown be professedly, in the colonies at
least, indifferent to differences of belief, and therefore no
longer animated by “ its own religious zeal to conserve and
maintain the Church, committed to its charge, in unity of


true Religion and in the bond of peace,” it is scarcely to be
conceived that the Crown itself can think it equitable to
retain over the Colonial Church a Supremacy which seems
invidiously restrictive; as it confers upon us no benefit, while
it prohibits our assuming that character in which, as Church-
men, we might really be doing the work which is proper unto
us. The privilege which we require (and you may with some
reason exult over us while it is withheld) is only this : that the
Bishops and Clergy should be allowed freely to meet in
Provincial and Diocesan Synods, for the discussion and
decision of all questions pertaining to the doctrinal and
spiritual condition of the Church; and that the laity, being
communicants, duly elected, and impowered by their re-
spective congregations, should simultaneously sit in Conven-
tions of their own, for the settlement of all the temporalities ;
and to express their assent to, or dissent from, any change of
constitution affecting the whole body of the Church,
which might be from time to time proposed by their spiritual
fathers, the members of the ecclesiastical Synod. I tell you
this, Right Reverend Sir, that you may be aware we are not
devoted to an Erastian policy. We have proposed to ourselves
a form of Church judicature which is not the creature of the
State; but is rational, practicable, scriptural, and Catholic. It
may be true that this would leave to the Crown but the shadow
of a Supremacy over the Church in the colonies. It would
however secure, that which the Crown is no longer able
to sustain, the true Supremacy of the Church over itself;
vested in fit proportions in the clergy and people. And lam
firm in the conviction that finally it would, though it may be
through much suffering, acquire a victory over the false
Supremacy of the Papal See; which, by absorbing within itself
the just and natural privileges of clergy and people, enslaves
both. I have now concluded what I had to say ; excepting
upon one point, which is a very painful one ; for indeed it is
always painful to express dissatisfaction and reproof to those
who ought, from their station, to be superior to either. But
in fulfilment of my duty to the Church which you have


wrongfully assailed, I must not omit observing that you have
overstept the line of fair and honourable controversy. Your
position with regard to the Church of England was one of
a very peculiar character, considering what you must, in your
moments of sober reflection, acknowledge the Church of
England to be. If upon no higher principle than that of the
delicacy which an honourable mind would always maintain,
in dealing with an antagonist entitled to its respect, you
ought to have been most scrupulously observant of accuracy
in all the assertions which you felt it necessary to make in
maintenance of your own side of the controversy. This
you have not been. You have not scrupled to descend to
seek an advantage, by statements which you had at the same
time means of knowing were not correct. Not, indeed, that
I would be understood as attributing what you have done
to personal obliquity of disposition. It is but an effect of
the system under which you have been trained. It is but a
manifestation of that overweening, intolerant, unforgiving
spirit, which is inherent in the Church of Rome itself. It is
the spirit which in centuries past broke out and exhibited itself
in Brooks and Bonner, your predecessors, when they began
to think that there was some chance of their having their
adversaries within their power. It is a spirit which persuades
the members of your communion, that you may lawfully and
commendably dispense with the rules of humanity and fair-
ness towards those whom you term heretics, whensoever any
gleam or hopeful prospect arises of your acquiring ability to
“go up to Judah, and rouse it up, and draw it away to you,
and make the son of Tabeel king in the midst thereof.”
By some such imagined prospect, it is plain, you are now
elated; and hence it has arisen that you, having no
object in view but to gather more blind and inveterate par-
tizans to help you in “making the son of Tabeel king,”
have been led to admit a convenient relaxation of the rule
which would lead all honest controversialists, Bishops in
particular, and in the pulpit especially, to abstain from
uttering anything which was not scrupulously conformed


to truth. This however the genius of your religion would not
suffer you to do when an opportunity seemed to be afforded
you of gaining an advantage over the Church of England. And
yet, pardon my saying, there were grounds and motives, if you
could have allowed yourself to attend to them, which might
have satisfied you that she had properties entitling her to more
generous more Christian usage at your hands. Unless you
had established another test of orthodoxy and Church-
membership than that which was from the beginning, you could
not, even to your own satisfaction, justify your determination
to affix upon her the brand of heresy. She holds the Catholic
faith; and has been, and is, one of its most determined and
able vindicators among all the Churches. She worships One
God in Trinity and Trinity in Unity; and also believes rightly
the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ. You could say
nothing in derogation of her claim to be, at least equally with
yourselves, a member of the Holy Catholic Church, the Com-
munion of Saints, had you not established another test or rule
of faith than that which prevailed from the beginning. You
have a law according to which the acknowledgment of the
Bishop of Rome’s supremacy over the Church is as indispen-
sable to make a Catholic Christian and to admit him to a state
of salvation, as belief in the God who is worshipped by the
Church, and in the Saviour who redeemed it with his blood.
If I impute to you a want of the true Catholic spirit in this
respect, I must no less charge you with ingratitude in another.
You are not duly sensible of the services rendered even to
your own communion by the influence of the Church of
England. It is that influence which saves you from your-
selves, wheresoever it can be exerted through the juxta-
position of the two Churches; and where it cannot be so
exerted, it is you who suffer from the want of such a correc-
tive. Will you, Right Reverend Sir, compare the state of
religion, and of the public mind upon the subject of religion,
in Italy, in Spain, in the remote parts of Belgium, in South
America, and in other places where the Roman Catholic
system has undisputed sway, with the working of the same


system in countries where, by the immediate contiguity oi the
English Church, it is shamed into the observance of something
like moderation in iis demands upon the mental submission of
its followers. Trace the contrast between the state of your
Church in the countries I have named, and in England, or
in these Colonies, or even in Ireland, and in other places
where our Church is in a position to exercise, by prepon-
derance of example and, I must say, by the power truth, a
restraining influence upon your proceedings. Let it be made
known, then, whence arises the marked difference which is
invariably found to exist, unless it be from the cause which
I have stated ?—the vicinity of the Church of England. To
the indisputably Catholic, and at the same time more sciip-
tural, character of that Church, your people cannot be
blinded : and, seeing, cannot fail to be improved by it. To
this cause, it can hardly be questioned, you are indebted for
the comparatively improved aspect of your system in certain
parts of the world. You are indebted to us; whose name,
at the very same moment, you endeavour to cast out as evil.
Revolving very attentively, the course of events now passing
in the world, I am well nigh ready to believe that this
restraining operation on the part of the Church of England,
is that which really “ withholdeth,” and that if, through your
exertions, it could be (t taken out of the way, there might
be, forthwith, a revelation of that spirit of evil,
for the coming of which, in the latter days of the Church,
the Scripture has prepared us. Receive my admonition in
that temper which will enable you to profit by it. Look
attentively, look impartially, into the state of your own
Church as it is, and as you would have it. Look also with
equal attention and impartiality upon the condition of ours.
This is asking much of you; it is asking you, I fear, to do
what you cannot. Otherwise I should follow up this by
another request, that when you again address your congrega-
tion you would come with your Bible in hand instead of Parlia-
mentary Papers 5 and would fairly bring the question to an
issue, whether there may not be on the part of the Church a


wider deviation from the faith delivered to the Saints, than in
yielding (if it really have yielded) to the Crown, too large a
Supremacy in matters ecclesiastical; whether more monstrous
errors in doctrine, and delusions more dangerous to salvation,
may not be upheld and enforced under a Supremacy of a
different character, than even that of thinking that a Metro-
politan Bishop may have a Metropolitan for his Suffragan.
I am, Right Reverend Sir,
Your obedient humble Servant,
W. G. SYDNEY.


POSTSCRIPT.
WmLif a polemical spirit might be gratified, other and better
feelings must be pained, by observing that the foregoing is
neither the first nor the worst instance in which Dr. Wiseman
has attempted to convey a false impression by means of
unfaithful quotations from the pulpit. In the 13th of his
Lectures (On the Principal Doctrines and Practices of the
Catholic Church delivered in 1836, vol. 2, p. 107) he intro-
duces the following passage as the testimony of Origen in the
second century in support of “ Invocation of Saints.” “He
(Origen) thus writes on the Lamentations, ‘ I will fall down
on my knees, and, not presuming, on account of my crimes,
to present my prayer to God, I will invoke all the saints to my
assistance. Oye saints of heaven, I beseech you, with a
sorrow full of sighs and tears, fall at the feet of the Lord of
mercies for me a miserable sinner.’ ” He refers also in the
margin to “ lib. 11. de Job” as to another of the writings of
Origen in support of the same doctrine. Giving Dr. Wiseman
credit for the most ordinary measure of scholarship and
research, we cannot form any conclusion but that, when he
quoted the above as the words of Origen, he must have been
well aware that they are none of his; neither indeed is any
portion of the treatise in which they occur. The Com-
mentaries on Job, attributed to him, are also spurious. If
Dr. Wiseman questioned this, he was bound in quoting these
passages, to state his reasons for so differing from the judg-
ment of all scholars and critics, especially those of his
own communion, by which they have long and unanimously


been pronounced forgeries. It is impossible to explain why
Dr. Wiseman should speak of the former of the treatises here
mentioned as “ written on the Lamentations j” as if it were a
Commentary on Jeremiah : whereas the learned Benedictine
Ceillier speaks of it as “ un ecrit, ou plutot un libelle diffa-
matoire, compose par quelque ennemi d’Origene, et intitule,
Les lamentations cTOrigene. C’est une piece fort meprisable.
Le pape Gelase l’a mise au rang des apocryphes.” (Hist.
Gen. des Auteurs Sac. Tom. 11., p. 653). Thus Huet
speaks of the same work, “Ad finem librorum vrefi dfx,uv
attexi solet libellus qui Lamentum Origenis inscrifutur.—
Erasmus, Lamentum hoc , inquit, nec ah Origene scriptum
est nec ah Hieronymo versum, sed Jigmentum est alien jus
indocti qui studuerit kujusmodi colore Origenem infamare
Mirum itaque sine falsitatis nota a Theologis quihus-
dam lihrum hunc nonnunquam in testimonium citari."
(Origenian , lib. 111. App. § viii.^
Next, as to the Second Book of the Commentaries on Job,
the following, I presume, must be the passage intended: for,
after the most careful research, it is not in my power to
discover any other so applicable. “ O beate Job, vivens in
perpetuum apud Deum, et victor permanens in conspectu
Regis Domini, ora pro nobis miseris, ut etiam nos terribilis
Dei misericordia protegat in omnibus tribulationibus,” &c.
(Origen. Opp., tom. 11. p. 894. A. Bened. Ed.J It is
impossible but that, when Dr, Wiseman referred to this
passage as conveying the testimony of Origen in support of
the “ Invocation of Saints,” he must have known perfectly
that Origen had no more been the writer of it than I
am. If Dr. Wiseman had never inspected the work itself, his
inattention was very inexcusable: if he had, he must have
found internal evidence to satisfy him that it was not the
work of Origen, nor a work of his age. Gottfrid Lumper
(another Benedictine) says of it, “ Certum est ,primo, non esse
Origenis : nam et stilus Origeni plane dissimilis est dein
discrepat etiam in sententiis : constat, secundo , auctoris
esse Origenis temporibus multo recentioris, et post Arianse


haereseos ortum, ab homine item Ariano scriptum ; mentio
occurrit Manichaeorum, quorum secta Origenis aetate incognita
fu.it.” ( Hist or. Theolog. Crit. de Vita, Scrip tis , tyc., SS.
Pair. Pars. ix. p. 255.) Ceillier and Huet entirely concur
in this judgment; of which facts it is perfectly incredible
that Dr. Wiseman could be ignorant. Yet he resorts to such
confessedly spurious writings as these, and is not ashamed
to refer to them from the pulpit, for the purpose of creating
an impression that the Invocation of Saints departed had the
sanction of Origen in the second century. If any circum-
stance could add to the flagrancy of the deception, it would
be this:—that the writer of this Commentary on Job is not
only a false pretender to the name he assumes, but is a pro-
fane heretical person wdio jests (as Lumper remarks) upon
the holy names Trinity and Consubstantial, and speaks of the
Catholic Church as that trionymous sect represented by the
three horns of Satan, with other blasphemies of the like kind,
which I forbear to extract, referring only to p. 870, vol. 11.
Ed. Bened.
Even this, however, is not all. In the same lecture (p.
108), we have a passage quoted by Dr. Wiseman as from St.
Athanasius, wdio is described as “ enthusiastically” addressing
the ever-blessed Mother of our Lord, thus: “ Hear now', O
daughter of David, incline thine ear to our prayers. We
raise our cry to thee. Remember us, O most holy Virgin,
and for the feeble eulogiums we give thee, grant us great gifts
from the treasures of thy graces; thou who art full of grace.
Hail Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with thee. Queen and
Mother of God, intercede for us.” The reference given to
the works of St. Athanasius is “ Semi, in Annun. T. 11. p.
401,” Athanasius, I venture to say, neither thought nor
spoke in the sense thus forced upon him by Dr. Wiseman.
In examining the Discourse on the Annunciation, I cannot
discover, in their exact form and order, the words above
quoted, although there may be words to the same effect. But
the Discourse itself from which they are taken is a gross
forgery; and the testimony confirming this shall be brought
E


from Roman Catholic authorities. Ceillier, in the sth vol. of
the work already quoted, (p. 285-6,) observes “ On a suppose
a St. Athanase plusieurs homelies —La seconde est sur
I’Annonciation de la Vierge —on ne peut douter que TOrateur
n’ait vecu apres les Conciles d’Ephese et de Calcedoine, dont
quelquefois il emprunte les tennes.” But to omit all other
authorities, it is supposable that Dr. Wiseman, when, he
placed before his congregation this apparently decisive pas-
sage conveying the testimony of St. Athanasius in support of
the Adoration of the Virgin Mary, can have been ignorant
that Cardinal Baronins, in 1592, had addressed a long epistle
to Stapleton (the author of Propugnaculnm Primitives
Any I ovum Fidei ,) conveying an unanswerable confutation of
the vulgar belief that the Discourse on the Annunciation was
the genuine production of St. Athanasius ? a judgment in
which the Benedictine Editors of his works unhesitatingly
concur. To pass to one only who was not a Roman Catholic,
Cave, I may add, includes the sermon on the Annunciation
among the spurious works of Athanasius; and pronounces
it to have been written subsequently to the rise of the Mono-
thelite heresy, nearly 300 years after the death of Athanasius.
CScriptor. Ecclesiat. Histor. p. 123 J
It need therefore be no cause of surprise that Dr. Wiseman
should deal hypocritically with an instrument bearing the
stamp only of secular authority, or that he should so deal
with it from the pulpit. In the exercise of his most solemn
offices, he is capable of tampering with the obligation of
faithfulness owing by him to that evidence of tradition which,
in the view of those whom he was addressing, and, according
to the rule of faith established by the Church of Rome, is
entitled to a degree of veneration scarcely, if at all, inferior
to that which may be claimed by the Holy Scripture itself.
It could not therefore be reasonably expected that he would
testify more unimpeached fidelity in reading from the pulpit,
and commenting upon, a document propounded by an
authority to which he may be satisfied he owes no more than
a divided allegiance.


PROTEST OF THE BISHOP OF AUSTRALIA.
“ Sydney, the Festival of the Annunciation,
25th March, 1843.
Reverend Brother,
An occasion of no ordinary importance, and of no less
difficulty, constrains me to summon you to the support of the Church
entrusted to our keeping; and to claim your assistance, unitedly
with that of the whole body of the Clergy, to guard it from harm
and loss.
Subjoined to this communication you will find a Declaratory
Protest, which, in fulfilment of my part of the common obligation,
I have promulgated in resistance to recent acts of the See of Rome ;
such acts being in breach and contravention of the canonical laws,
usages, and common order of the household of faith.
In calling your attention to this defensive measure, I am not
studious of your instruction only ; but it is my desire, that in com-
municating to the flock under your charge the decision which I have
formed in this matter, you will explain at the same time the
necessity to which I have been reduced. You will, therefore, take
care to read in the hearing of your congregation, during the celebra-
tion of Divine Service, and at the close of the Nicene Creed, on some
Sunday or other Festival which may be most convenient after the
receipt hereof, all that Protestation which is hereunto subjoined.
I recommend also, that you take occasion to notify to your
parishioners the just grounds upon which that instrument has been
drawn up; and after full deliberation, executed, published, and
placed upon record, in the Registry of this Diocese, as a perpetual
testimony against the attempted invasion of the See of Rome.
To aid you in the execution of this necessary duty, I proceed to
point out to you in what respect, and to what extent, the act against
which I have thus solemnly protested, does by immediate and
necessary consequence infringe on our undoubted ecclesiastical rights
and independence, according to the principles of that Catholic
Church, to which we have never ceased to belong.


The inference from the establishment of an Archbishopric with
metropolitan privileges within the limits of the Province of Canter-
bury must unavoidably be, that it is intended thereby to deny the
Primate of all England any rightful possession of metropolitan
jurisdiction within the limits of the new or assumed Archbishopric.
Moreover, the erection of the city of Sydney, within this already
existing diocese, into an Episcopal See, amounts to a denial that
there is a lawful Bishop of Australia according to the canons and
usages of the Church. These are consequences which I could not
witness in silence. They may not be universally perceived or at
once admitted ; but there will be no dispute concerning them among
such as are conversant with the system of the Church. According
to its general rule, there can neither be two Metropolitans of one
province nor two Bishops in the same diocese. The one of these
proceedings would invoHe a reversal of the canons of the Church,
the other a contradiction of the ordinance of the Lord. The heads
of the Roman Catholic Church are perfectly aware of the truth of
these assertions. Their present proceeding is, therefore, an act of
direct and purposed hostility towards us; since it could not have
been adventured upon by them, except they had held, and had
meant hereby to proclaim their persuasion, that we have no canonical
Bishop, no Catholic Church, no such administration of the Holy
Sacraments among us, as shall be effectual to everlasting salvation.
The favourite and governing impression with the many you will
find to be, that the matters in controversy might be adjusted by a
tacit compact, or mutual connivance, according to which each should
pursue its own measures without interference on the other part. It
will, therefore, be proper for me to explain to you that we, at least,
could neither propose nor accept such a compromise; which would
makes us parties in fact to the establishment of a permanent schism
in the body of Christ’s Church.
It is not necessary that I should enter very deeply into a state-
ment of the grounds upon which we constantly protest against the
right of the Bishop of Rome to exercise jurisdiction within or over
any portion of the Church beyond his own proper, actual, and
immediate diocese and province; the range of which was determined
by usage and canonical authority many centuries ago. But although
such our denial of his supremacy be sufficiently known, yet in order
that advantage may not be hereafter taken of our silence, under
pretext that the present unfounded pretension to establish a metropo-
litan jurisdiction here by the sole authority of the Bishop of Rome,
was suffered to pass without contradiction or remonstrance, I have
held it my duty thus publicly to declare, in express terms, in the
face of the Church, that, beyond its own limits, the See of Rome
possesses no right to establish bishoprics, or other offices of ecclesias-
tical order, in provinces of the Church where they already subsist.
No such prerogative or privilege can be proved to belong to the


Bishop of Rome, or to his see, either by virtue of any supposed
succession or derivation from St. Peter, the first of the Apostles ; or
of the authority, direct or indirect, of Holy Scripture; or of the
testimony of the early Fathers; or by the decree of any General
Council lawfully assembled; or through the mission of Augustin
into Britain ; or by the laws and statutes of this realm ; or in any
other manner, or by any plea of what nature soever.
Whatever widening of the unhappy separation which prevails,
may be apprehended from the act to which, after full and mature
deliberation, I have subscribed, such a consequence, however deplo-
rable in itself, is not to be weighed in the balance against an
apprehension of God’s anger, which must fall upon us if we should,
through fear of man, engage in a weak and ineffectual attempt to
maintain outward peace by surrendering the fundamental principle
of Christian unity. .
In my own name, therefore, as Bishop and Ordinary lastor of
the Diocese of Australia, and for my successors canonically entering,
and in behalf of the clergy and all the faithful within the same
Church and Diocese of Australia, and also in the name and on behalf
of my proper lawful superior, William, by Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England and Metropolitan,
and on behalf of his successors, I have entered my protest against
the establishment of any archiepiscopal or episcopal see within this
diocese, except it be with the consent first obtained of the Church of
England at large in convocation assembled.
In this entire proceeding I have confined myself most strictly to
the principles of ecclesiastical antiquity, by which it is clearly to
our advantage to abide ; and on behalf of the Church of in
Australia, I advance explicitly a claim to be considered the genuine
representative of the early British Church. It is my desire that
nothing be done by us of strife or vain glory ; nothing with the
design of wantonly provoking controversy, or for the mere purpose
of magnifying our own pretensions. Let me hope that it will be
found possible to shun both these improprieties ; and the probability
of it will be greater, if, while we express without disguise our views
of Christian faith, we prove ourselves more sincere, more earnest,
more uncorrupt, more humble minded ; exactly in proportion as we
believe that God has vouchsafed to commit an ampler measure of it
to our stewardship.
I earnestly desire the benefit of your prayers for my support
under the present difficulties; and relying with perfect confidence
on your fulfilment of this and every act, of deference to your Diocesan
and of duty toward the Church.
I remain, Reverend Brother,
Your very faithful Servant,
W. G. AUSTRALIA.


Ktt tl)f Name of (SoD. HtUfU. By this public Instrument be
it declared and made known to all, that in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and forty-three, according to the course and
reckoning of the Church of England, on Saturday, the twenty-fifth
of March, being the festival of the Annunciation of the Blessed
Virgin Mary, at or near the hour of eleven in the forenoon, before
the commencement of the morning service for the day, in the Vestry
adjoining and pertaining to the Church of St. James the Apostle, in
the city of Sydney, and colony of New South Wales, in the presence
of me, James Norton, Notary Public, and Registrar of the Diocese of
Australia, lawfully constituted according to Letters Patent of his late
Majesty King William the Fourth, and in presence also of the
witnesses whose names are hereinafter recited, the Right Reverend
Father in God, William Grant, by divine permission Bishop of
Australia, did personally put in and exhibit a certain written
Protest, and did then and there openly and publicly protest, and
otherwise also did profess and do in such manner and according as
was more fully contained in a certain parchment schedule which he
held in his hand, and publicly read : of which schedule the purport
is here inserted, and is as follows without any addition or omission
whatever.
“ flame Of (Sob. Slnum. We, William Grant, by Divine
"permission Bishop and Pastor of Australia, do Protest publicly and
“ explicitly, on behalf of ourselves and our successors Bishops of A us-
" tralia, and on behalf of the clergy and all the faithful of the same
“ Church and Diocese, and also on behalf of William by Divine providence
" Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England and Metro-
“ politan, and his successors, that the Bishop of Rome has not any right or
" authority according to the laws of God, and the canonical Order of the
“ Church, to institute any episcopal or archiepiscopal See or Sees within
“ the limits of the Diocese of A ustralia and Province of Canterbury
“ aforesaid. And We do hereby publicly, explicitly and deliberately
" protest against, dissent from, and contradict, any and every act of
“ episcopal or metropolitan authority done or to be done, at any time, or
“ by any person whatever, by virtue of any right or title derived from
“ any assumed jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence or authority
“ of the said Bishop of Rome enabling him to institute any episcopal
" See or Sees within the Diocese and Province hereinbefore named.”
All and singular the foregoing acts and declarations were had and
done as they are above written and recited in the year, month, day,
hour, and place aforesaid; there being then and there present,
(having been specially invited and summoned as witnesses in the
premises,) the Rev. Robert Allwood, the Rev. Henry Hodgkinson
Bobart, the Rev. William Branwhite Clarke, the Rev, Thomas Steele,
the Rev, Henry Tarlton Stiles, and the Rev. William Horatio
Walsh.
[l, s.] (Signed) James Norton, Registrar, and Notary Public.


We, the undersigned, Presbyters, duly licensed within the Diocese
and jurisdiction of Australia, being present in the Church of St.
James the Apostle, at Sydney, in the Diocese of Australia and
Colony of New South Wales, on the festival of the Annunciation of
the Blessed Virgin Mary, in the year of our Lord one thousand eight
hundred and forty-three, do hereby testify, that the Right Reverend
Father in God, William Grant, Bishop of Australia, personally
attending and assisting at the celebration of divine service on the
festival aforesaid, at the conclusion of the Nicene Creed, standing at
the North side of the altar or communion table of the said Church,
holding in his hands a certain parchment schedule, did read there-
from, in our presence, and in the sight and hearing of the congregation,
all that Protest herein before set forth, without any addition or
diminution whatsoever.
In witness whereof, in the year and on the day aforesaid, in
presence of each other, and before the said Right Reverend Bishop
of Australia, we have hereunto set our hands and seals.
ROBERT ALL WOOD, B.A.
Minister of St. James's, Sydney.—Commissary. [l.s.]
H. H. 808 ART, M.A.
Minister of St. Johns, Parramatta. [ l.S.]
W, B. CLARKE, M.A.
Minister of St. Simon's, Castle Hill. [L.s.]
THOMAS STEELE, LL.D.
Minister of St. Peter's, Cook's River. [L.S.]
HENRY T. STILES,
Minister of S t. Matthew's, Windsor. [l.s.]
WILLIAM H. WALSH,
Minister of St. Lawrence, Sydney. [l.s.]
At a Special Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Sydney
Diocesan Committee of the Societies for Promoting Christian
Knowledge and the Propagation of the Gospel in Foreign Parts,
held on the 12th day of March, 1851,
THE RIGHT REVEREND THE LORD BISHOP OF SYDNEY IN THE CHAIR,
The following resolutions were put and carried:—
1. Moved by Charles Lowe, Esq.; seconded by Captain P. P. King,
R.N., M.C.
“ That adhering to the principles by which, at the period of
“ the Reformation, the British nation was impelled to cast off the
“ usurped jurisdiction of the See of Rome; and steadfastly adopting


'sTaf f .
* 6l\ o
tt-P* the conviction that no foreign person, prince, prelate, state, or
potentate, hath by right, or ought to have in fact, any jurisdiction,
j*‘ ecclesiastical or spiritual, within Her Majesty’s dominions, we have
- “ heard with alarm and indignation of the recent assumption by the
“ Pope, of authority to divide the territory of England into ecclesias-
“ tical sees; and at his sole discretion to nominate bishops and
“ archbishops to exercise spiritual jurisdiction within the same.”
2. Moved by the Rev. Thomas D.hcitt ; seconded by the Rev. John
Vincent:—
“ That we regard such proceeding on the part of a foreign
“ prelate, as an invasion of the rights of the United Church of
“ England and Ireland; and of Her Majesty’s undoubted constitu-
“ tional sovereign prerogative, as well as an unjustifiable inroad upon
“ the independence of the British nation.”
3. Moved by Robert Campbell, Esq.; seconded by the Rev.
Thomas W. Bodenham :
“ That we abide by the principles affirmed by the Lord Bishop
“of Australia in his public instrument (dated March 25, 1843.)”
4, Moved by Charles Nathan, Esq, ; seconded by the Rev. B. L.
Watson, M.A.; —
“ That a copy of these resolutions be transmitted by the Right
“ Rev. President to His Excellency the Governor, with a request
“ that His Excellency will transmit them to the Secretary of State,
“and that his Lordship be also requested to forward a copy to His
“Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury, for the information of the
“ Church at large.”
5. Moved by the Rev. G. F. M’Arthur ; seconded by the Rev. F.
Cameron, M.A. :
“ That a copy of the foregoing Resolutions be published twice
“ in the Sydney Morning Herald
(Signed)
W. G. SYDNEY,
President and Chairman.
WM. HODGKrTS, VKI'-'lSr CANNON STMiKT, BIRMINGHAM.
