

y J '''
< //-
<r>Q
2 OJa
00
Lauqhter
AND
Lire
FOR
THE YOUNG
Rcd-Gurrj Blossonrj,
A LITTLE BIT


. ) Jf ) .
( i /A/
JAMES DALLY
OLD AND RARE BOOKS
oo W'tlkeri’illfi Terrace
W"lberville, Sth. Aus.
Telephone 65 7909






'


(AIR* TAM'S


f\ LITTLE BIT OF
Laughter apd Life
FOR THE YOUNG
“Red-Gurp Blo;ssorp.”
Adelaide :
Hussey & Gillingham Limited, Printers and Publishers,
106 and 108, Currie Street.


■


“ The Heart of Youth, and the House of Dream,
Ate here, once more, while the Spring Stars gleam.”


.


DEDICATION.
To my dear Nieces and Nephews, now so widely
scattered throughout the Australian States. Some of you,
dear children, are growing so big, perhaps too big to care
to read this little book. But to all the boys and girls who
do read it, I would say, try to keep u The Heart of Youth.”
Just how to do so is to be ever —
Sowing the seeds of kindness
All along the way,
Bright’ning the lives of others,
Thus making your own path gay.
Gay zvith the flowers that fade not,
That old Time zinil never decay.
Then your days zvill be full of gladness.
Songs of Laughter and Life and of Loz’e,
That angels zvill echo in Heaven,
In the realms of the Light high Above.
Accept this, also, as a wrinkle-filler, with love.
From your affectionate
Adelaide, Aunt Sissie.
April 10, 1912




CONTENTS.
Chapter.
i. Major MacAllistee thinks “there is no Place like Home” . . 9
11. How? When? and Where? .. .. .. ..13
in. Mrs MacAllistee gets her own Way .. . . 16
iv. Lassie's Judgment of Character .. . . . . 19
v “Bridget said” . . . . . . . . .. 23
vi. “Life is not all Beer and Skittles” . . . . . . 28
vie The Day of Departure . . . . . . . . • • 3 2
viii. Paulina’s Face and her Fortune . . .. . . 35
ix. Lassie’s Escape .. . . . . . . .. 37
x. Paulina’s Surprise . . .. . . . . . . 40
xi. An Important Letter . . . . . . . . 43
xii. Dream Music . . . . . . . . . . • • 45
xm. Lassie learns the Secrets of the Deep . . . . . . 48
xiv. On Board the “Nautilus” . . . . . . .. 56
xv. Paulina’s Journey .. .. . . . . . . 60
xvi. “Wise Men do not know Everything” .. .. . . 69
xvii. A Bolt from the Blue . . . . . . . . 76
xviii. Coming Events now cast their Shadows . . . . * • 79
xix. Tanglefoot . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
xx. Puddles and Muddles . . . . . . . . .. 89
xxi. The Cold-water Cure . . . . . . . . • • 95
xxii. Good News at Last . . . . .. . . • • 99




A Little Bit of Laughter and Life
for the Young.
CHAPTER I.
Major MacAllister thinks “there is no Place liKe Home.
“What a fearful noise! Really, Alick, you are exciting the child too much.
How can you expect her to sleep? It is nearly her bedtime. Come, Lassie,
pick up the cushions, and say ‘Good-night.’ ”
Mrs. MacAllister was a tall, graceful, young, and beautiful woman. Her
beauty was made more striking at this moment by her evening dress. Her opal-
tinted silk rustled and shimmered as she moved, and her tunic of soft, cloudy
chiffon sparkled and glittered with sequins like stars condensed from the Milky
Way. She had just entered the dining-room, where her little daughter had
been enjoying an after-dinner game of lions with her father, who was still on
all-fours on the floor.
Peals of merry laughter had followed each ravenous roar as the infuriated
animal had leapt towards the excited child. The noise had echoed through the
house and caused Mrs. MacAllister to hasten over her toilet. Her entrance
had been the signal for instant silence. Lassie’s excitement at once subsided,
while she stood staring, as if dazed for a moment, by the radiant vision her
mother represented. The wild beast as suddenly ceased his deafening roar.
He stood up on his hind legs and assumed the normal appearance and manner of
Lassie’s own dear Daddy, of whom she was never in the least afraid.
“What a first-rate lion tamer you would make, Eva,” laughed the husband.
“I must get you a job when the next circus comes along. See what a state
of subjection you’ve brought me into!”
“Oh, Daddy,” cried the child, dancing about and clapping her hands, “that
would be fine! Then I could go and see Mower in the Lion’s Den.”


The Major was now fixing his tie before the large
mirror, which revealed a tine, fair, clean-shaven face, with
honest grey eyes that were twinkling with quiet, sarcastic
“Yes, Eva,” he continued, “the fair sex are now so
ready to act the role formerly allotted to men only, that,
go on as you’re going, and I'll soon be able to announce
you as an ‘Up-to-date Daniel.' ”
“Instead of standing there talking such nonsense, Alick,
I wish you would make haste and get ready, or we shall
miss our train. I don’t want to be late. 1 iiey say Oscar
Asche as Othello is simply thrilling.”
“Hang Othello!” was the Major’s mental comment.
He would very much rather have stayed at home. But he
meekly took his hat and gloves, and, assisting his wife on
with her light cloak, they were soon ready to start. With
a farewell kiss from her mother, who told her to ring for
Paulina, and a warm embrace from her father, who
whispered that there was something nice under her pillow,
little Lassie was left alone. Now the temptation under the
pillow was not strong enough to draw her at once upstairs.
She began roving round the room, seeking what she could
devour. She cut herself a large slice of pretty pink
watermelon and ate that. Then she got some almonds and
found the nut-crackers, which she often liked to play with
at dessert. They represented, in carved wood, the head and
features of a well-known statesman. Little Lassie placed the
almonds one by one between his jaws, which opened by


pressure from the back. By dint of great exertion and using all her force
with silent determination, at last each one went “crack! crack! crack! Then
she sat up to the table with pencil, paper, and book, not to read, because she
couldn’t, but to mark and learn and inwardly digest both the almonds and the
pictures, while she munched and munched and munched. bully an hour later
footsteps resounded through the hall, and Paulina’s quick, sharp voice was
heard calling, “Where are you? Come to bed!” And that did not admit any
further delay of duty.
The scene is now in the bedroom.
“I'm sure I’m not goin’ to brush your air for a quarter of an hour to-night,
grumbled Paulina, “though you needn’t say as I said so; and she began roughl)
combing out the mass of Lassie’s long golden curls.
“Mower often asks me if 1 had it brushed properly,’ said the child with a
good deal of hesitation.
“Well, it’s your own fault for not coming to bed sooner.’
“Oh, don’t pull so hard, Paulina!’’
“I’m not pullin’, but I’m in a ’urry.”
“Let me come down to the kitchen with you, Paulina, and you can brush my
hair there. I’m not a bit sleepy.”
“I don’t know,” said Paulina, with a brush, brush, “as ’ow some people
will let their kid’s ’air grow so long (brush, brush, brush); just for all the
world like bloomin’ Angoras. (Brush, brush, brush.)
“When we was young (brush) ours was kept cut, cropped short orf like
boys (brush, brush), or there’d ’ave been a pretty ’ow d’yer do. (Brush,
brush, brush.)
“Come into the kitchen, indeed! (brush, brush.) Lor, no! (brush.) Some
people may be very fond of air soup (brush), which I m not (brush), nor rabbits
either (brush) in any shape or form (brush), boiled or roast (brush, brush),


lookin’ like monkeys or cats (brush, brush, brush). At one place I was in I
'eard the boss tell (brush, brush) ’as ’ow he could always know (brush) when
there was a new cook in the kitchen (brush, brush, brush) by the colour of the
’air in his soup. (Brush). Now, that’s done, and well done, too, mind!”
“May I come downstairs now?” pleaded Lassie.
“No, you get into bed quick, because Martha’s aunt is coming to tell me my
fortune. She’s a bonzer at cutting the cards.”
“What’s that?”
“Oh, I’ll tell you another time;” and Paulina blew out the candle and hurried
away, slamming the door after her.
Lassie now derived considerable comfort from the Tobler’s chocolate she
found under her pillow. As she popped each sweet morsel into her mouth she
began to chew, as it were, the cud of reflection. She thought of her dear
Daddy—how much she loved him. She wished her mother had a real crown —she
looked so like a queen. She thought what a cross-patch Paulina was. Then
she wondered about the witch that was telling her fortune. Only witches could
tell fortunes. Did this one ride in on a broomstick, or did she come in a little
coach drawn by rats and mice?
Lassie began to wonder how many stomachs a camel has? Was it 3, or 7,
or 9? She thought it must be nine, because camels have to drink such a lot
of water. Enough to last them for days and days and days, while they travel
over hot and sandy deserts.
Lassie began to feel very, very hot and tired herself, and she tossed and
tossed about. Then she saw such a number of camels—a real string of them —
going past, and faster and faster they went. Some little boys and girls were
riding on their humps, and they went along bumpity-bump, bumpity-bump. It
looked so funny that she wanted to have a ride too, but something, so heavy,
seemed to be holding her down. She began to feel so stiff and wooden. Then
she felt just like a little water butt with a great, big elephant sitting on top of
“it,” and at last little Lassie was in the Land of Nod.


CHAPTER 11.
How? When? and Where ?
When this story begins the MacAllisters were living at Largs Bay, in South
Australia. Not quite a year before they had come from England, the Major
having received an important military appointment under the Commonwealth
Government. Its duration was expected to be about eighteen months, and it was
necessary for them to spend a few months in each State. Thus, Mrs. MacAllister
had not remained long enough in any one State to make many friends. She was
always an ornament to society, for she was a talented, as well as a beautiful,
woman. Those ladies who had called upon her had no young children, therefore
poor little Lassie, being an only child, was deprived of the joy of all youthful
companionship. Her mother had suggested leaving her in England with her
grandparents, but the Major was not always submissive, and here he was
adamant.
“No,” he had said; “if we were going out to India, where the climate would
endanger the health of our darling, the case would be different. As it is, Eva,
that of South Australia, where we shall probably spend the greater part of our
time, is one of the most perfect in the world. You may rest assured that I have
made every enquiry about it.”
“All your information, Alick, will not alter my opinion that travelling is not
good for young children. And we shall have a great deal of travelling.
“Oh. that won’t hurt our Lassie. Thank Goodness, she’s strong enough.
“Then I’m to go to Peter Robinson’s and order her outfit also. Alick?”
“Certainly, my dear."
Mrs. MacAllister delighted in shopping, and she laid in a stock of no end of
pretty frocks. Soon after there was a constant ring at their door-bell, and so


many parcels and packages were delivered that with unpacking and packing Mrs.
MacAllister was kept busy. One day the Major found her at work marking
heaps of pocket handkerchiefs. He remarked, “We’re not going on an
expedition to the South Pole, you know, Eva. There will be plenty of shops
in Adelaide, and very good shops, too.”
“Well, dear, I have heard we must take both thick and thin dresses, for on
the voyage we will pass through the tropics, and we shall have heat as well as
cold to guard against.”
“Lassie, my dear,” said the Major, “can you guess why your Dad’s like a
stork?”
“Because you’ve got long legs.”
“No.”
“Because you’ve got a very long neck?”
“No,” laughed he, “I didn’t know that before.”
“Because you are up a tree?”
“No, I’m not.”
"Because you’ve got a nest-egg?”
“No.”
“Because you are a lucky bird?”
“No, I’m not.”
“Give it up, little girl? It’s because I have got a long bill.”
Lassie looked hard at him with a puzzled expression, and her mother said,
“Don't peck, Alick.” With his hands in his pockets Major MacAllister stalked
out of the room, whistling the tune of “Pay, Pay, Pay.” To himself he said, “We
had better get away as soon as possible.” He settled his accounts, and booked
their passages in the “Orsova.”
Farewells were soon said to Lassie's dear grandparents in Devonshire. The
sadness on each side was alleviated by the prospect of regular letters and the


thought of a speedy re-union. In these days of rapid voyages and wireless
communications, time and place are not such serious considerations during an
absence as they used to be. On board the up-to-date Ocean Liner our three
travellers enjoyed the novelty of life at sea to the full. At each port of call they
went ashore and rejoiced in the fresh scenes, bright sunshine, bluer skies, and
brighter colours of the flowers. At Marseilles Mrs. MacAllister could not resist
buying some lovely shawls, and at Suez she added yards of lace to her list of
souvenirs. When they reached the Island of Ceylon they went ashore at Colombo
and visited Kandy, one of the most beautiful places in the world. On his way back
to the ship the Major gradually assumed the appearance of a beast of burden.
He was laden with bamboo umbrellas, canes, fans, and baskets in his arms and
hands, and his pockets bulged like panniers with ebony and ivory elephants and
parcels of shells and moon-stones and cats-eyes.
Mrs. MacAllister began to realise the advantages of travel. She declared that
until then Ceylon had only been associated in her mind as the place on earth
“Where every prospect pleases
And only man is vile.”
Now she had but to look at her beautiful moonstone necklace and she knew
that there was nothing “vile” about it at all, and that while in Ceylon her husband
had never been kinder or nicer. By the time they reached South Australia they
had considerably more luggage than when they left London. Instead of taking
it all to Adelaide the Major was glad to settle down, bag and baggage, in the
roomy house at Largs Bay, where we first made their acquaintance.


CHAPTER 111.
Mrs. Mac A. 11 is ter gets Her own "Way.
The morning after the theatre Mrs. MacAllister, pleading a headache, stayed
in bed to breakfast. Lassie was sleeping later than usual, so the Major sat down
at the breakfast-table alone.
He was reading the paper, which did not appear to have much interest for
him. In fact he was in a moody frame of mind. “Whew,” he whistled, as he
looked at his watch, “I 11 catch the next train.” First, however, he stepped quietly
upstairs and wished his wife “Goodbye,” adding, “Eva, I hope your head will soon
be better. I’ll lunch at the Club to-day.”
“Oh, come in, Alick. My head is very much better. I’ve taken a wafer.
I’ll be up soon.”
“You had better get out of doors with the child, it’s a glorious morning.
“What have you to do in town, dear?”
“I’m going in for a lesson in Esperanto. After lunch I’ll run over to the Oval
and have a look at the cricket. . . ‘Esperanto estas tre facilio lingvo: la
plej on facilio lingvo en la tuta monde: Kae tutaj nacioj devus lerni gin’! which,
being interpreted, reads: ‘Esperanto is a very easy language, the easiest language
in the whole world, and all nations ought to learn it.’ I wish you would help me
by studying it, too, Eva; later on it will be absolutely necessary in my work. It
will save our little Lass hours of fag, by-and-by, over foreign languages.”
Mrs. MacAllister made a wry face, but she also made a very pretty picture
lying there among her dainty white surroundings. In rather a plaintive tone she
said, “Alick, I’ve been making up a riddle for you.”
“What is it?”
“It’s a bit Biblical.”


“Well, I’ll forgive that for once, though, you know, I always maintain that
Biblical jokes are not in good taste. It’s written in my Scotch blood.”
“I must say that you are very inconsistent, Alick, for you have taken to calling
me by that hateful name ‘Dan.’ It doesn't sound at all nice, especially
when you look so out of temper as you did at the theatre last night.”
“Well, I was bored. You know how I hate tragedy. Give me something
more cheerful for enjoyment.’’ Then with a glance of evident admiration at her
he added, “Besides, I’d rather stay at home any day. By jove, Eva, you’re far
prettier, in my opinion, than Desdemona !”
“Am I really, dear? After all, lam glad that you are fair. I will not admire
dark men any more. They seem often to be so passionate and jealous in
temperament. But, sometimes —just lately, Alick—l have been a little depressed,
and I feel just a little bit—just a very little bit—afraid that, that,” and her voice
broke almost into a sob, as she put her handkerchief to her face and continued,
“that you don’t love me as much as you used to, but you, you never would smother
me, would you, Alick?”
“Only with kisses, dearest” (k-iss, k-iss, kiss, kiss, kiss, kiss, kiss, kiss,
k-iss).
After this short interval for refreshments Mrs. MacAllister, in a greatly
revived tone of voice, said, “You are making me forget all about that riddle, dear,
but, on second consideration, I won’t ask it now.”
“Do, dear; what is it?”
“Well, why are you a modern Moses, Alick?”
“I’ll give it up.”
“Because you have issued a set of new commandments.”
“Ho, Ho! That’s it, is it?”
The lady sat up, and gaining more courage and determination, shook her fore-
finger at him, and, smiling archly, said, “But remember, I’m not going to obey one
of them, and I am going to accept the Bartly-Boodlum’s invitation.”


1^
“Oh, well, do as you please. Goodbye, Daniel.”
The Major had suffered a defeat, and beat a hasty retreat. Mrs. MacAllister
arose and dressed with the greatest alacrity. She went downstairs, and, seating
herself at her desk, she wrote: —
“Dear Lady Bartly-Boodlum,
“Thank you very much for so kindly asking us. It will give my husband
and me the greatest pleasure to join you in your yachting cruise. We are
delighted at the prospect of seeing Port Lincoln, the islands, and the coast,
under such ideal conditions. Besides, the congenial society of yourself and
Sir Bartly is just the sort of tonic we both need. May I remind you that my
husband’s leave expires at the end of the month. But T l3elieye you
promised we should be absent only ten days or a fortnight. My imagination
does not yet grasp the idea of the distances in this immense country.
“With very kindest regards,
“I am,
“Gratefully yours,
“Eva MacAllister.
“Largs Bay,
“January, 1911.”
This note was addressed and sent at once to the post. Lassie had been for
her dip in the briny, and had now finished her breakfast. Her mother came in.
tying her large, shady hat on firmly with her veil, and said. “Come, my dear;
we’ll spend the rest of the morning on the beach.”


CHAPTER TV.
Lassie's Judgment of Character.
The sky is as blue as blue can be, flecked with little white clouds that look
to Lassie’s eyes like distant baby angels floating in the air. They arc drifting,
hurrying inland on the western sky, carrying to a dry and dusty city the hopeful
message of a cool to-morrow.
Yesterday the sun had been so very, very hot. The sea had been so smooth
and still, reflecting as in a looking-glass the azure above.
To-day little white-crested waves ruffle the surface of its deep, deep blue. As
they chase each other, ever so gaily, the happy child feels they are running so fast
to play with her.
She dances to and fro to meet each one as it dashes and splashes
on the shore, wetting her little bare feet and her face with its salt
spray, when it turns sweeping and swirling back again to its ocean
home. But each wave brings her fresh treasures, new playthings,
which she welcomes with eager joy. How delightful for both mother
and child is
“The gathering of the beauteous weeds,
Bright outcasts of the sea,
Flung forth in scorn to bid us dream
How fair its flowers must be!
To tell us in its scornful pride
What wondrous things its waters hide!’’
Seabirds are flying, sailing boats swaying, and everythings seems
Alive! Alive! Alive!


Little Lassie trots along by her mother’s side, singing
“Oh, the be-au-ti-ful, beauti-ful sea!”
Mrs. MacAllister, walking briskly in the breeze, seems to catch something of
the magic of the morn. She runs, races on the firm, hard sand with the little
one, till, out of breath, she reaches a heap of brown seaweed and throws herself
down on the soft bed to rest. She watches Lassie, who is soon busy building
castles with moats and men. After awhile she says —
“How I wish, dear, you could always stay a little girl, not any bigger than
you are now! But,” with a sigh, “Time never stands still.”
“Why,” says Lassie, “I’m always wishing I was grown up. If I stayed little,
though, I could go and live in Tiny Town and ride one of those dear little, tiny,
weeny ponies.”
“I wouldn’t like that,” said her mother.
“I would. Mower, why am I like Time?”
“Because you never stand still, dear.”
“Right guess. Mower,” she calls, “do look at my man. lam going to call
him Sandy. He’s got cockles for eyes and yellow sea-weed for hair.”
“How very lovely!”
“I say, Mower, we are all made out of dust, aren’t we ?”
“Who told you so ?”
“Paulina, but are we?”
“Yes, I suppose so.” (Mrs. MacAllister does not appear to care much about
admitting such a common and lowly origin).
“But we are not all made of the same sort of dust, are we?”
“I really don’t know, dear.”


“Well, Paulina says we are, but I contradicted her. I know there are
different-coloured people, and they must be made out of different-coloured dust.
There’s black dust for black men, and red dust for red Indians, and yellow dust
for Chinamen, and brown dust for Japs. Now, isn t there?
“Really, Lassie,” said Mrs. MacAllister, smiling, “you are getting a very wise
little girl.”
“Yes,” said Lassie, with childish pomposity, “I’m the one to tell what stuff
people are made of.”
“Since you are so clever can you tell me what I m made of ?
“Plaster of Paris, of course, like the Venus on our drawing-room mantel-
piece.”
“Oh, Lassie, that’s not plaster , it’s real marble.”
“Is it? Well, Paulina told me it was not.”
“And what’s your father?”
“Oh, Daddy’s a brick.”
“So he is. And Paulina?”
Lassie continues her work, and with a pat here, and a pat there, she answers
more slowly—
“Paulina’s made of a little bit of mud, mixed with very dirty water and
baked very hard and tough.”
“Why?”
“Well, you know, dust never will stick without water, and Paulina told me
herself she was born on the flats, where there was never any rain, not foi ever
so long. She says the first time she ever saw rain she was three years old, and
when hailstones fell they frightened their little puppy dog like anything, and he ran
indoors and hid.”
“Dear me! Whatever did they do for a bath in such a place ?”


“Paulina said they had to take a dry rub and a roll instead.”
“Well, she’s clean enough now.”
“Oh, yes. That was ages and ages ago before the Hood. They have had
plenty of water there ever since, she says.”
“You haven’t told me yet, Lassie, what you are made of?”
“Oh, I’m made of sand. Sand never will stick very easily, and I think I’ll
soon go to pieces.”
“My dear child,” in a protesting tone, “whatever makes you think such a
thing?”
“Well,” Lassie went on very seriously, “when I take off my shoes at night
they often have a lot of sand in them. It runs out of a little hole in my sock like
the sawdust does out of my old doll. And I know I am mixed with sea water
because my tears are quite salt. I’ve tasted them.”
“You are a funny little girl.”
“I haven’t any little girls and boys to play with now, but some will come
along and play with me when I’m a little heap of sand, like Sandy. I won’t be
able to cry any more then because my tears will be just little drops of water for
the fishes to drink.”
“Oh. Lassie,” exclaimed her mother, jumping hastily up and shaking her
skirts, “you are making me feel all creepy and crawly. Let’s come home to lunch.”
“Wait a minute, I’ll find a stick to put in poor Sandy’s mouth for a cigar.
Then he won’t notice it so much when the tide comes in to wash him away. There
you are, Sandy. Tat-ta,” waving her hand, as she runs after her mother. “Say
tat-ta to poor Sandy, Mower!” And home they went, leaving Sandy to his sad
fate.


to me now
CHAPTER V.
“ Bridget said.**
Lassie is sitting on the swing, on the shady side of the
verandah. The Major comes ro
Esperanto in hand. He seats him
chair and lights his pipe saying—
The Major comes round the corner, Guide to
hand. He seats himself in a comfortable cane
I m sorry, Lassie, that we won’t be at home on your
birthday; but we want you to be happy all the same. What
would you like for a birthday present?”
Oh, Daddy, dear, do give me a little baby sister. I
promise you to take great care of her while you’re away.”
“Ahem!” he coughs, "I’ll think about it. Isn’t there
anything else you would like?”
“Oh. yes, lots of things. A little cot and a little peram.
and a a 111 think about it, too. Daddv. You know I’m
always longing and longing for a little sister.”
“Are you, dear; but you have plenty of nice dolls.”
“Dolls!” in disgust. “Dolls can’t talk, and I’ve got to
do all the talking myself.”
“That’s easy work for you, Lass. Come, chatter away
“Well!” and Lassie put on her considering cap for a
few moments and then started at full speed.
“Well, when Bridget was here she said once
she lived in a place where they had twelve
children, nine boys and three girls.”


“Good gracious!”
“Bridget said she used to have such fun. She taught me all their names;
now you count. There was Willie—and Luther —and Sissie and Henry—and
Francis—and Alfred—and Frederick and Charlie —and Ernest and Emmie and
Florrie—and Stanley and—”
“Whoa! Twelve; ding, dong dell.”
“Bridget said their faver and their mower wanted them to grow up to be
good to each other and kind to all dumb animals. So Bridget said they let them
keep plenty of pets and they had to attend and feed them themselves, as well as
learn their lessons and everything else. Bridget said they had a big dog named
‘Bevis,’ a Newfoundland, and a little dog named ‘Pepper,’ a Scotch terrier, that
could sit up and beg. Bridget says she could tell me lots of tales about Pepper.
And they had a white cat, and bunnies both lop-eared and short, and guinea pigs
that if you held them up by the tail their eyes would drop out. None of their
eyes did drop out, because, Bridget said, they wouldn’t be so cruel to them. They
had a ’possum and parrots, pigeons and bantams, and white mice, and a monkey
and canaries and goldfish and —and — bees that make honey, and —Oh. a magpie
and a cocky! Maggie could say, ‘Who are you ?’ and cocky could say lots of things,
‘Cocky wants his breakfast,’ ” and the little girl imitated the bird’s cracked voice.
“Bridget said they had two horses and two little ponies, besides a big ‘wocking
horse named Tommy,’ and—and—and I can’t tell you what all.” She paused for
breath.
“Well, I never! and where did they live?” asks the Major in lively interest.
“Bridget said they lived in a house in a big garden. And they had such lots
of grapes and oranges —and mandarins —and almonds and figs—and apricots
and peaches—and apples and pears —quinces—and nectarines and melons and
medlars and—and—lady’s fingers—and—”


“What are they?”
“Oh, Bridget said they were lovely, long, pale pink grapes, so sweet and nice
“Well, what next?”
“And Bridget said the little girl named Sissie —oh! Ido like her so —I seem
to know her quite well—had such a beautiful dolls’ house. It had four rooms in
it, two upstairs and two down, and Bridget said her mower dressed all the little
dolls in it, and made such pretty little armchairs and sofas for them to sit on. out
of cards cut and covered with velvet and silk. Bridget said her eldest brother,
Willie, carved her a little dolls’ table and cot, and made her a tiny dolls’ set of
croquet and tiny bats and wickets for cricket. Bridget said all the tiny balls were
made of painted peas. Bridget said one doll was in pink and one was a little
gentleman in a red smoking cap and dressing gown and another —”
“Yes, yes, my dear. Where is Bridget now?”
“I don’t know.” Then assuringly, “It’s all true, you know, Daddie. every
word of it.”
“No doubt of it, my dear,” and her Daddy puffed away at his pipe
meditatively.
“I know stories out of books, too. Daddy!
“Do vou, dear?”
“Yes, Bridget said she was reading all about a little girl and boy named
Florence and Paul Dombey. They went to stay with a greedy old woman at the
seaside. Her name was Mrs. Pipchin. Poor little Paul was ill, he used to lie out
on the beach and listen to the sound of the sea. Pie used to say, ‘The sea, the sea,
I want to know what it is saying?’ It makes me wonder, too. Oh. and Bridget
said that Sissie’s youngest little sister was named after the Florence in that book.”


‘■Just fancy, just as if it was a relation,” said Daddy.
“Daddy, dear, I did cry so when Bridget went away!”
“Did you, dear? Never mind, come and I’ll give you a swing.” While he
was swinging her up and down, up and down, the father said:—
“You’ll soon learn your ABC, and when you can read I’ll bring you such nice
books, and the little children in the pictures will all talk to you.”
Later on, when the parents were alone, the Major said;—
“That good old soul, Bridget, seems to have won Lassie’s affection. Why
did she go, Eva, and where ?”
“She went to her sister’s at Happy Valley, wherever that may be. She was a
good, honest old thing. I remember when engaging her she said to me, “You
mustn’t judge a book by its binding, Ma’am.”
“And why did she leave?”
“Oh, she was slow. I really only engaged her till I could get someone
younger.”
“And why is Martha leaving us now?”
“She gave me notice because she does not get on well with Paulina.”
After five or ten minutes he said:—
“I’ve been thinking, Eva, that we have not seen enough of the hills around
Adelaide. At Happy Valley there is a large reservoir that supplies the southern


suburbs with water. The drive there is said to be beautiful. The view from
Belair can hardly be surpassed in beauty and extent. In this clear atmosphere it
is marvellous how far one can see. The loveliness of our own land is so often
obscured, or, perhaps, occasionally enhanced by fogs and clouds. I tell you what,
dear, we’ll motor to Happy Valley to-morrow afternoon and see if we can get
the good woman to stay here with Lassie while we are away with the Boodlums.”
“I’m sure I don’t know how Paulina will like that.’’
“Hang Paulina!”
“As Martha’s leaving to-morrow I have already told Paulina that she could
write for her sister to come and keep her company during our absence.’’
“Let her come, but we will carry out my suggestion all the same.”
“Alick, you know I have complete confidence in Paulina. She brought such
excellent references.”
“That may be.”


CHAPTER VI.
** Life is not all Beer and SKittles.*’
That night in her dreams, Lassie found herself standing close to Bridget. She
watched her pouring out the tea at the end of a long table surrounded by children.
None of them could see Lassie because she was only a little dream maiden. There
were no flowers upon the table and it looked to her like a desert without an oasis,
and there upon it stood two high pyramids. Lassie knew even in her dreams, that
the real pyramids were near the River Nile and they were built by the Egyptians
in the Dark Ages. So she stared at them. These turned out to be of much more
recent construction. They were built of thick slices of bread and butter and jam,
and they were being threatened with immediate destruction.
On looking round at the children Lassie saw a little girl of about seven years
old. She was busy eating the bread and butter, and between each slice she would
sing out as loud as she could to make herself heard —
Z Y X and
W V
U T S and
R 0 P
O N M and
L K J
I H G
LED
C B A
At the same time two of her brothers were saying the same thing and appeared
to be having a race to see which of them could first get to an end of the alphabet
backwards. The children had bright little tin plates in front of them, which some


of them used as tambourines. Lassie looked round the large nursery. In one
corner, on a cupboard near the fire-place, stood Sissie’s dolls’ house. Lassie saw
a dear little doll beckoning to her from the window. She ran at once and said,
' Oh, may I look over your house, please?”
“Certainly,” said the little lady in pink, “but it is not our own, it is Sissie’s.
We have so many come to look over it, that any one would think it was to let.”
Lassie admired it to her heart’s content, and then said, “You need never
mind anyone seeing it, it is so beautifully kept.”
“Yes, indeed,” said the little Lady Pink, “how I do dread Saturday mornings.
It’s as bad as an earthquake. Sissie comes and regularly turns the place inside
out. It’s bad enough for me, but you know men can’t stand spring cleaning, and
my husband gets frightfully upset. When its done, we are all made to sit up so
straight that on account of my backache I am positively obliged to lie down on the
sofa all day on Sundays instead of going to church. As for my husband he gets so
nervous, when Sissie even looks at him, that he topples off his chair and lies
on the floor with his legs in the air, really for all the world as if he had been
drinking. And I assure you he never touches a drop. But perhaps lam tiring
you with my chatter?”
“Not at all,” answered Lassie. ‘“Do go on. None of my dolls can talk to
me like you do.”
“Well, you know, dolls differ, like people, and some of them are very
wooden-headed."
“May I see your baby?” asked Lassie.
“Yes, with pleasure. But won’t you look at the album first?”
There it lay, on the little round table. It was about the size of Lassie’s big
toe-nail. It had tiny gold clasps on it, and when Lassie opened it she saw all the
photographs of the Royal Family. Lady Pink explained that it had been handed
down to her by her great grandmother, for the pictures were those of our dear
old good Queen Victoria, the beautiful Prince Consort, and their children.


Then Lassie was shown upstairs into the bedroom. The baby in long clothes
was asleep in the cradle. It’s head was no bigger than that of an ordinary
pm, and its length no longer. Lassie was quite charmed with the little thing,
and said it was a very fine child. Two other little dollies were in bed peeping
out from under the tiny counterpane.
Lady Pink said, “A very tiresome thing happened the other day. Some of
Sissies brothers had made a boat. They came, without her leave, and took two
of my children out for a sail on the fish-pond. A sudden squall arose, and the
boat turned turtle. My little ones did not come home all night, and you may
imagine I got no sleep. The next afternoon I guessed something had happened
as soon as I saw Sissie, because she looked as if she had been crying. She did
not wish to alarm me, but she said how thankful I ought to be that my children
w ere spai ed to me. It seems she was feeding the goldfish with some biscuit
crumbs, when, to her great astonishment, she saw my two darlings, in the last
stage of exhaustion, clinging to a water-lily leaf. They caught a bad cold, and
their clothes were completely spoilt, and they will have to stay in bed till they
get new ones, and till they have got rid of their bad coughs. But you are young,
perhaps you are not interested in my family troubles.”
Lassie assured Lady Pink of her great sympathy, and said she did not know
before that dolls had so much feeling. The little lady replied, “Ah, that’s why
it is we often get so roughly handled. Our constitutions break up much more
quickly than they ought, because we are not treated with tenderness. lam
fortunate myself in being in kind hands, but some of my friends get their heads
smashed and their legs and arms pulled off in a most unmerciful manner.
Sissie brought a dear little thing here one day to stay with me to cheer me up.
I am kept indoors so much with my children that I was getting pale for want of
fiesh aii. This new friend was named Miss Pretty. She dressed very well
indeed. In her coming-out dress of white satin, veiled in soft silk lace, she
looked really lovely, indeed she was the belle of the ball. Soon afterwards Sissie
came and told us that one of her brothers, who was fond of trying experiments,


said he could cover that dress with diamonds and it wouldn’t cost her a penny.
Miss Pretty naturally jumped at the chance, and they went away together. O,
dear! To-day I got such a shock! Sissie brought her home, but she could
hardly be called Miss ‘ Pretty ’ any longer.”
“Whatever had happened?” Lassie cried.
“Well, Sissie said that her brother’s experiment had not been what he called
a complete success, and he very much regretted the unfortunate result. I had the
details of it from poor little Miss Pretty herself. In a faint voice she was able to
tell me all. She said the boy had tied a piece of string round her neck. He had
then put her in a jam-jar and hung her to a stick placed across the top of it.
She was left for twenty-four hours up to her neck in cold, cold water that
contained some horrid chemical stuff. Then the boy had taken her out and shaken
her well, and had stuck her on one of the pickets of a white fence in the hot
sun to dry. There Sissie had found her with her dress so dirty that one would
have thought she had been picked up out of the gutter. She thought at first
she was frozen, she was so stiff, and there were things like icicles clinging to her
dress. We found they were dry, hard lumps of alum, and they were intended
for artificial diamonds. Needless to say, Sissie was far from pleased, and she
took her poor little Miss Pretty away at once to the hospital. She knew I had
enough to do with the children in bed. I don’t know when I shall see her again!”
Poor little Lady Pink wiped away a tear, and added—
“But my husband tells me ‘Life is not all beer and skittles.’ ”
Lassie heard a scampering and pattering of feet. She looked round and
found the children had all done tea; the pyramids had disappeared, leaving only
empty plates on the table; the seats were all empty, and Sissie and the boys had
run away into the garden. The door banged, and Lassie awoke.


CHAPTER VII.
The Day of Departure.
The "Albatross” was moored near the pier, and lonely little Lassie was
kneeling, watching it from her bedroom window. Her parents’ luggage had
already been sent on board. They were going to attend a garden party at
Government House during the afternoon, and had arranged to meet the Bartly-
Hoodlums there and to go on board with them afterwards. They were to start
at six in the evening, but had deemed it unwise to let their little girl know the
exact hour of their final departure.
I aulina was the only member of the household who seemed in high spirits.
She was unusually elated, as she received the many parting instructions. Her
sister had not yet arrived. She said she expected her to-morrow. And what
about Bridget? Our friends had enjoyed a delightful drive. On Saturday
afternoon they motored from Adelaide up the Mitcham Road to Belair. From
Belair Hill they had admired the extensive and exquisite view. They had also
been through the beautiful National Park, and wound their way up hill and down
dale till they reached the fine lake at Happy Valley. In their object, however,
they had been doomed to disappointment. To be sure, they had found Bridget
easily. But it was impossible for her to come to them. She was in bed with a
broken leg. Their unexpected visit gave the poor woman great pleasure, and for
her, as well as for Lassie, the time was all too short. After kindly inquiries and
a little chat Lassie had to follow her mother reluctantly out of the cottage door.
Her father lingered a moment behind them, shaking hands with her old friend.
He pressed a golden coin into the wrinkled palm, and was in the motor, with the
rest of theny spinning away out of sight before Bridget had had time to say a
“Thank you.” “Ah, Major MacAllister was a gentleman, he was!” to the end
of her dying days. And so say all of us!


Thus it had come about that Paulina was left in full charge of Lassie and
the house. Her first words were overheard by the parents when they had said
“Good-bye” to their little girl. She said, “We’ll have a real good time! You
can come into the pantry with me and help me clean the silver, and I’ll give you
lumps of sugar instead of wages.” Lassie soon dried her tearful eyes and took
the place of a new little maid, for the plan was an alluring one. In this
combination of work and play the rest of the day passed pleasantly enough. In
the evening they both sat down at the kitchen table to tea together. The child
was still enjoying the novelty of her new situation. As the clock struck six a
close observer would have noticed a subtle change come over the expression of
Paulina’s face. Lassie went on eating her bread and honey, and there was a
long, irksome silence. It was broken by Paulina, who snapped out, in quite a
different tone, “Look sharp over yer tea. Pm going upstairs to dress.”
“May I come with you ?”
“No, you can stop down here with the cat.”
“Can you play ‘Puss in the corner,' Paulina?”
“I’ll puss in the corner you, my young lady, if you pester me with your
questions while your Ma and Dad’s away. It’s everlastin’ what’s this, what’s
that, and why’s the other, till I get sick to death of it!”
This rough and unkind speech, with its reference to her dear parents’ absence,
reduced Lassie from astonishment to tears, and she gave a repressed sob.
“There, dry up!”
“How can I dry up till you’ve washed the cups and saucers?” asked the
child, making an effort to overcome her wounded feelings.
“Oh. you know what I mean, right enough, and if yer don’t I’ll soon learn
yer. T’m the king of this castle and you’re the dirty rascal,’ now; so just you
behave, and no more blubber!” With these words Paulina went out of the room.


Lassie was nursing the cat, but she felt very, very miserable, and she sat
thinking. To her tender, sensitive, little soul it seemed as if suddenly in her own
home she had got lost in a wood, and had become the helpless little victim of
some fierce and terrible ogre. She looked about the kitchen to reassure herself
that it was really the same place. Then she remembered the witch who had
been there to tell Paulina’s fortune. What if that witch should come in again
now! In her nervous dread she clutched hold of pussy so tight that the cat
gave her a scratch, and with a loud “Mi-o-ow!” it sprang from her arms and bolted
out of the door, just as Paulina came in.
“You cruel, wicked little thing you, to pull the cat’s tail! Puss, puss, puss,
poor pussy.”
“I didn’t do any such thing!”
“Don’t contradict me; I won’t stand any of your cheek, or else you’ll get
something that’ll make you grin on the wrong side of your mouth, and turn your
eyebrows upside down and set your nose above your chin in a flash of thunder
and lightning.”
Paulina cleared the table, lit the gas, and taking some fancy work out of the
dresser drawer sat down on one chair with her legs stretched out and resting on
another, and began to crochet.


CHAPTER VIII.
Paulina’s Face and Her Fortune.
\\ hen “dressing" Paulina had taken oft her nice white apron, cap, collars, and
cuffs. She had put on a necklace of turquoise blue beads and long dangling
earrings to match. This was the only alteration in her usual attire, yet she had
completely lost her usual neat appearance.
Little Lassie sat on the opposite side of the table, leaning her elbows upon it,
and with her hands supporting her chin. Through her wide blue eyes she stared
steadily at Paulina, trying to solve the mystery of this extraordinary change.
Let us examine Paulina from Lassie’s point of view. What cold, hard eyes,
like galvanized iron. Her nose, how long! A real poker for poking into other
people's business, and rather red at the tip, too. And, oh! what a mouth, as
Paulina opened it to its fullest extent to pick her hollow back tooth with her
crochet-needle. And on her chin there was a pimple that seemed to be growing
fast under the warmth of the child’s earnest gaze till it attained the size of a
half-ripe gooseberry.
Paulina was of medium height, thin and wiry. Her bare neck was like a
cormorant’s, so long and skinny, and her bare wrists and hands were like claws, as
with bony fingers she crocheted ceaselessly on and on and on.
At last she glanced up at the unusually quiet child, and said. “Of course, ‘a
cat may look at a Queen,’ but Td like to know what you’re staring at me for?”
“I was wondering what the witch told you. Paulina?”
“What witch?” to herself. “I’m blessed if the kid’s not going balmy.”
“Why, the witch that told you your fortune, of course!”
“Eaow. Stoopid! That wasn’t a witch, that was Martha’s Aunt!”
Now. this was an agreeable subject to Paulina, for since that very exciting
occasion she had been able to think of nothing else.


“You told me you would tell me about it," said Lassie.
“Well, she said as 1 wouldn’t be ’ere long.”
“Oh, do go on.’’ cried Lassie, her interest thoroughly awakened.
“Well, ‘can you keep a secret, I don’t suppose you can.’ But you needn’t
go tellin’ it at the table, when I’m a-waiting, or down ’ll go the dishes and hout I’ll
walk, straight, d’y’re hear?”
“Alright,” said the child.
“Well,” with a smile of satisfaction, “I’m goin’ to meet my fate next year—
that’s Leap Year.”
“What’s that? Alovver said ‘Time never stands still; and I know it can fly,
but I never heard it could jump before.”
“Oh!’’ said Paulina, impatiently, “what’s the good of talkin’ to you, you little
double-barrelled duffer.” And Paulina went on talking a lot of rubbish that the
child did not in the least understand.
As she was drawing to the close of her long narration she added —
“And when the card was cut that showed I was goin’ on a journey, I s’posed
as it was to be my weddin' tower, and I wanted to know who with. So lup
an’ asked as to if ’twas likely that Tom Standorf w’d want me to be his ownest
own. She took a long time to consider it, and then she said, ‘That just at that
point the future was somewhat confused. It was a knotty question—a tangled
skein!’ Botheration! Now there’s a knot in my cotton! That’s talkin’!”
The knot absorbed Paulina’s attention, and there was another long silence.
Lassie yawned, and said—
“Where’s Daddy and Mower now, I wonder?”
“Oh, I expect they are swellin’ it at Government House.”
“Government House!” exclaimed the child in surprise. “I thought they had
gone a long, long way away over the sea.”
“So they are going there, hut first they was goin’ to a party up in town. ’Ere,
you come up to bed. ’Ow can I count my stitches in this new pattern while you’re
gassm ?
Paulina bit off her thread and told Lassie to light the candle.


I j jj^
CHAPTER IX.
Lassie’s Escape.
This time, upstairs, Paulina begins tugging and pulling so
remorselessly at the child’s hair with the comb, that the poor little
thing began to cry, and said, “Oh, you do hurt so.’’
“Pride must bear a pinch,” was the consoling reply.
“Pm not proud,” Lassie stammered.
“What’s all this but pride? Oh, ’ow Ido ’ate tangles. If
yer don’t stand still I’ll pull every ’air out of yer ’ead like as I’d
pluck a goose, till there’s not a feather left and yer 'ead’s as bald
as an ostrich hegg; and what ’ud yer Dad say to you then?”
Lassie made a flying leap into bed and said, half frightened
out of her wits, “That’ll do for to-night, thank you, Paulina.”
Paulina blew out the candle, and leaving the door open, went
down and sat in the dining room with her crochet, according to
Mrs. MacAllister’s instructions. Poor little Lassie’s pillow was
soon wet with tears. She dared not cry aloud, but every now and
then gave vent to a sob or a sigh. Then Paulina would shout,
“What’s the matter with you?” Lassie could nof go to sleep. The bright
moonlight was streaming into her room, making it nearly as light as day. A_
long time afterwards she was awake when Paulina came upstairs. Later on she
could hear her snoring, as if she were driving pigs, both big and little, to market.
The big pigs said, “Grunt! grunt!” and the little ones went “Squeak, squeak!”
Then Lassie crept out of bed and leant out of her open window. How lovely it
was outside —so calm and bright! Lassie could see a boat near the end of the
pier, just where it was in the morning.


"Why, ’ she thought, “Mower and Dad can't have gone yet. 1 must eo to
them. Oh, if I could fly like a bird!”
She opened hei wardrobe chawer, and drew from it a frock she had worn a
few months before at a children’s fancy-dress ball.
She slipped off her nightdress, and put on some of her clothes and drew over
them the soft white dress with its attachments on the shoulders of golden, gauze-
ike wings. She stood on a chair and got down a brown-holland bag that was
hanging behind the door. Into this she pushed her shoes and socks, her brush
and comb, and the dress and pinafore she had worn that day. She took a sweet
white rose out of a glass on the dressing table. Her father had given it to her
that morning, and now she placed it in her sash at her waist.
I aulina was snoring loudly when Lassie got out of the window. At the end
o the balcony she found a ladder, left there by a plumber who had been working
on the roof. Dropping her bag on the ground beneath she soon stood beside it
/ lckln S 11 U P she ran swiftly and lightly to the pier. She ran and ran down the
long jetty, but, alas, half-way she stumbled and fell. She had hurt her foot so
that she could only limp till she reached a railway truck that was laden with bass
o potatoes and pumpkins and big baskets called crates.
Lassie managed to clamber up, and, seated there, on a high heap of pumpkins,
sie looked exactly like a real fairy. The silver moonlight fell on her white
dress and her fair hair. Her golden wings glittered and glimmered with each
trembling, panting breath. The clock struck twelve. Lassie listened. Then
she heard slow shuffling footsteps coming nearer and nearer. If she felt
nghtened she was not half as much so as was the boy who now appeared
before her. His hair stood on end, his mouth was wide open, and his knees shook
under him.
Low, this boy had often bragged he was brave. He didn’t believe in fairies,
or anything he couldn’t see. It was all “tommy-rot.” He always said, “Seeing’s
e levm g- Here was a real live fairy. Forgetting all about her own wings


Lassie felt glad he had stopped. It gave her courage to speak, and in a sweet,
timid little voice she said—
“Who are you?”
“Billy Doolittle.”
“Will you please do something for me? It is not very much. Please carry
this bag and this flower on board that boat. Give them to a lady and gentleman
and tell my Daddy to come here for me. lam waiting for him.”
Bill held out his shaking hand and took the bag and went on. He was a
lazy boy, and if he had thought Lassie was only a little girl he would not have
taken it at all, but he was afraid of offending a fairy. When he got alongside
the boat he gave a low “Coo-ee.”
“Is that you, Bill ?” was the answer.
“Yes. I say, King, is there any lydy or gent on board our boatS
“No,” was the reply; and then another voice said —
“Oh, Bill, you scally-wag. You’re late ag’in. Been to the pictures and
walked ’ome as usual.”
Billy Doolittle looked back. He could no longer see the little fairy figure
perched on her high seat. Pie cried, “I thought as much!" And, holding the
bag by its long string he swung it three times round his head and then flung it
right away off the end of the jetty into the sea. The white rose was sent the
same way as he muttered —
“I don't want no fairy’s muck about me!”
Poor little Lassie, very lightly clad, had felt so cold that she crawled into
one of the empty crates and covered herself over with some old sacks. She felt
sure that her dear Daddy would come to her soon, and she would wait and watch
for him.
Waiting and watching, worn out with fear and fatigue, poor, lonely little
Lassie fell sound asleep.


CHAPTER X.
Paulina’s Surprise.
It was nearly 9 o’clock the next morning when Paulina came downstairs.
She opened the doors and swept the verandah, and then got the breakfast ready.
She ate her own porridge and left Lassie’s to get cold. Then there was the
postman’s knock. He had brought her two letters. She sat down to read them.
The first was from her sister, as follows:
“Heimruhr,
“Lobethal, January 9th.
Dear Paulina,
“I hope as ’ow you and your Missus will not break your ’earts over it,
because I can’t come. The facktis, I’ve got better fish to fry. I’m very
much obliged to you, I’m sure, for bein’ so kind as to advise me to break
it off with Bob. But, facktis, our weddin’s fixed for Wednesday fortnight.
You say there’s as good fish in the sea as ever came out of it. I say you’re
a jolly long time hooking one of ’em yourself. Mum says, as you’re not
cornin’ ’ome to the wedding, you’d better post up one of your old shoes for
luck. I say, it would be better luck if you sent me up a new pair instead.
All the family, ’cept Bob, send you their fondest love, and
“I remain, for the last time,
“Your afifeeshant Sister,
“Amelia Storenfried.
“P.S.—The next time I write I’ll be A. Schnapper. ‘Hooray!’ ”
After reading this letter Paulina looked as if she had a very sour taste in
her mouth. She sniffed, as she glanced over the lines again, and said, “I call


that a very fishy letter.” Then, with growing indignation m the eldest sister,
what do they mean by leavin’ me out of it all? If they had let me know soonei
1 could have given notice and gone, instead of bein’ stuck down ere alone to mi
the kid. New shoes, indeed! Don't she wish she may get them.
Then she took up the other letter and examined the outside of it. Her
anger suddenly melted, a pleased expression stole over her face, and she looked
as if she were sucking a sugar-plum. She pressed a kiss on the stamp, and on
the spot where the envelope had been sealed. Smiling softly, she broke it open
with eager anticipation, and read —
“Mr. Thomas Standorf informs Miss Paulina Storenfried that he is
unable to accept her invitation to an oyster supper next Saturday evening.
He also gives her to clearly understand that he cannot meet her next Sunday
afternoon, because he is otherwise and permanently engaged.
“Port Adelaide, January, 1911.”
This polite epistle had an extraordinary effect on Paulina She sat bo
upright for a few moments, then she darted into the middle of the room, kieke
aside the cat, as if to clear the ring, and with teeth set and fists clenched s
bounded backwards and forwards, rounding up and hitting out haul at some
invisible foe. She then played football with the colander, till she made some
more holes in it. She also had a game of bowls with the cups and the basins
and nlaved quoits with the dinner plates. Afterwards she went slowly and
calmly upstairs She made her bed and threw herself down upon .t to rest
after her violent and vigorous athletic exeicise.
Some time later she remembered that Lassie was not up, and not hearing
any movement in the next room, she went in to awaken her The «
sien of the child, and no answer, either, when Paulina called her. She thre
back the bedclothes and looked under the bed, but saw no sign of ass e.
Seeing that her clothes and shoes and socks were missing she snarled, bone *


her bathe without me, I bet! I’ll soon cure her of her tricks, now I’ve got her
in ’and.”
So Paulina went on with the housework, expecting Lassie in every minute.
But the child did not come. It was nearly dinner time and Paulina prepared
a nice hot curry for her.
Before dishing it up she went to the balcony, which commanded a good view
of the jetty and the beach. There were not many people about at that hour,
and there was no sign of Lassie. Paulina went down and had dinner by herself.
Curry was one of her favourite dishes, and the hotter it was the better she liked
it. She was puzzled, but thought, “I suppose she’s gone to the grocer’s store.
She’s got a new half-crown her Dad gave her, and I know she wants to buy a
baby. I told her they had two there. She’s stopped there playin’ with the other
children, and I say, ‘Let ’er stop. It’ll do her good, and I don’t want her
botherin’ round me !’ ”
Towards teatime she put on her hat and went to the said store for some eggs
and butter. She expected the grocer to say “Major MacAllister’s little girl is
here,” but he did not say so. When she had paid for her purchases she asked.
“Have you seen anything of the MacAllister’s little girl? She’s just dodged
me. I thought she had run on ’ere first, as she wanted me to ask if she could
see the twins.”
But “No,” they had seen nothing of her. With inquiries after the health
of the new arrivals Paulina departed and had tea alone. She then went for a
walk along the beach, and anxiously scanned the many children who were
sporting in the water. But there was no sign of Lassie. She described the
child to the mothers who were attending to their children and minding their clothes
and towels on the sand. No one had seen her. She went home again and
shouted her name through the hitherto silent house, and hunted in every possible
corner. But there was no sign of Lassie, so Paulina locked up and went to bed.


CHAPTER XL
An Important Letter.
During the night two maiden ladies who had just taken the house next door
were nearly frightened to death by a very alarming noise. It was a terrible
squealing and yelling, and it came from Paulina, who had the nightmare. \\ hen
she came down in the morning the house seemed dull; she did not trouble to
draw up the blinds, for she felt very dull herself.
However, after a good breakfast of cold pork and pickles she felt more like
herself. She cleared the table, and putting some irons on the fire, was soon busy
ironing all her own clothes. She also pressed out her best embroidered muslin,
then counted out some money from a large purse, and divided it into two little
piles, which she wrapped in separate papers. This done, she got out her writing
materials. Paulina had a great deal of correspondence. Many of her evenings
were spent in letter-writing. Although her spelling was bad and her grammar
worse, her writing was good, clear, and distinct. brorn a distance we can see
quite plainly what she is writing now.
“Largs Bay,
“January, Tuesday, 1911
“Dear Madam,
“As I am leavin’ your place somewhat suddin and you are not ere to
pay me my two week’s wages what’s owin’, I’ve took my 35 shillings out of
the money you left with me for ’ousekeepin and mergencies. It was 5
pounds, and you’ll find the change, 3 pounds 2 and 6 pence, wrapped up in
the grocer’s bill under the right-hand top corner of your mattress. So you
can see what I’ve spent, and that it’s O.K. You’ll see lam quite homiest.
I may as well menshun that the reason I’m leavin is that there s not emit for


me to do. You see, I’m hactive, and I like to be kep’ goin’. Now, you’ll
want to know hall about your dear little Hangel. She was as ’appy, as
’appy as a child could be. with me after you and her Dad left, tho’, to be
sure, I ’ad my work cut hout, a-chatterin’, and a-chatterin’, to keep her mind
orf you and him’s agoin’ away. She went to bed as good as gold at eight
o’clock, and honner bright, that’s the last time I set my heyes on ’er! She
had a grate idea of swimmin’ for ’er hage, so I s’pose she’s tried to foller you
to Port Lincoln. She asked me which way you was goin’. Hoping to ’ear
as she’s got there safe,
“I remain,
“Your faithful servant,
“Paulina Storenfried.”
“P-S. —You will find the front door key under the back door mat.”
This letter Paulina put in an envelope and addressed to Mrs. MacAllister.
She took it upstairs and pinned it securely on to the pretty blue pincushion just
in front of the looking-glass, where it was not likely to escape attention. She
packed up all her own belongings, and was seen early the next morning getting
into the first train with a big portmanteau. Paulina’s depression of spirits went
off with the first shrill whistle of the engine, and as the train moved on with its
first “puff-puff” she said to herself with a sigh of relief—
“I’m off on my journey ! Vm off to the wedding!”


CHAPTER XII.
Dream M\*sic.
The warmth of the old bags soon made little Lassie lose all sense
of the weariness of her body, as well as the weight of her woes. In
the whispering of the wind she seemed to hear gentle voices calling
“Come, little Lassie,
Up to the sky;
Flutter your wings,
And fly, fly, fly!”
She tried to flutter her fairy wings, and then, with a spring, mounted high
into the air! First like a lark, higher and higher, and then like thistledown she
was wafted lighter and lighter. From each star came first one beautiful little
child, and then another to meet her. Some sleepless people on earth were wide
awake, and they looked up and saw them. They thought it was but a cloud
passing over the silver moon. They never knew it was Lassie and her fairy friends
flying hand in hand, among the bright moonbeams and the twinkling stars.
At last the lesser lights began to fade in the western sky, while in the east
the curtains of the dawn became tinged with rosy red. Lassie flew down to look
at some rare and lovely shells that had been left at the water s edge by the outgoing
tide. The very moment she touched the solid earth she felt footsore, and all the
little fairies flew away. She sat down in an exquisite shell, shaped like a tiny
cradle and lined with blue. Lassie was rocked to and fro while she listened to
the murmur of the sea. She had often heard its echo in the sound of a shell.
Suddenly she found that each shell had a separate voice-together they made a
sweet magic melody, and together they sang her a soft lullaby


“Sweet and low, sweet and low,
Wind of the western sea;
Low, low, breathe and blow,
Wind of the western sea.
Over the rolling waters go,
Come from the dying moon and blow;
Blow him again to me,
While my little one,
While my pretty one,
Sleeps.
“Sleep and rest, sleep and rest,
Father will come to thee soon;
Rest, rest, on Mother’s breast,
Father will come to thee, soon.
Father will come to his babe in the nest
Silver sails all out of the west,
Under the silver moon.
Sleep my little one,
Sleep my pretty one,
Sleep.”
— Tennyson.
Lassie was lulled into a sweet slumber, and she knew no more till a rumbling,
rolling noise made her sit up. One of the shells near had a wide mouth and looked
as if he were laughing at her. She clapped her hands and laughed aloud, for
merrily, merrily, the soft voices were joining in a lively, rollicksome roundelay!
One after the other took up the music in these words; —


“Here they come!
Here they come!
Out of the sea.
Three little horses
Are coming for me
“Come, little horses,
Out of the sea!
Come little horses,
Hasten to me!
Here they come!
Here they come!
Swimming so fast,
Here they come!
Here they come!
For Lassie at last!
'Why are they coming?’
Cries Lassie to them.
They want little Lassie
Because she wants them.
“Whatever we wish for
In earth, sea, or sky,
Will be ours in the future,
In the sweet by and by.”
Three little horses came splashing through the water. Lassie hastily seized
hold of their gossamer reins, and as she sat still in the little floating shell, they
swam away with her, down, down, down, to the bottom of the deep blue sea!


CHAPTER XIII.
Lassie learns the Secrets of the Deep.
When Lassie went under the water she lost her wings. The loss did not
trouble her at all for she had no use for them there. She had such delight in
driving the fairy sea-horses. They had no legs, but with their fishy tails and their
wingy fins they went, oh! so fast! through the clear cool water.
Suddenly the gossamer reins gave way, the three frisky little sea ponies
vanished, and their poor little driver was thrown out of her chariot shell.
“Now these three little fishes
Were Lassie’s own wishes,
Named Lreedom. and Lrolic, and Lun,
We see where they took her,
And how they forsook her,
As soon as her journey was done.”
Deserted and lonely poor little Lassie lay at
the bottom of the sea. There it was all gloomy
and still, for a fierce tempest raged overhead,
where the billows rose and fell as if fighting each
other, while the angry sea roared and frothed and
foamed. Lassie lay chivering and chilly. When
the storm had passed over she turned the colour
of pale blue violets, for she found that instead
of her own two legs she had got a fish’s tail.
She was wondering sadly of what use it would be to her, when she heard a
sweet voice calling, “Oh, my dear little sister! I’m so glad I have found you!”
She looked up and saw a pretty mermaid sitting near and holding out her arms
towards her.


Lassie cried, “Oh come to me, come to me!”
They embraced each other, for they loved each other at first sight. Lassie’s
newly-found friend taught her the use of her scaly tail, and soon she conld swim
like a fish. They met many other mermaids, hut little Merrie became Lassie’s
guide, because she loved her best of all. Through fields and fields of bright
seaweed they went. In one place they saw a row of milk-buckets as big as
water-tanks.
“I did not expect.” said Lassie, “to find any milk down here, because there is
a law against putting water into milk.”
“Things are different down here.” replied little Merrie, “there is_ no law
against putting milk into water, or, where would the poor whales be with their
young calves?” And dipping a shell cup into a golden milkcan, she handed it to
Lassie, who gratefully drank the thick creamy fluid.
“Oh, how delicious!” she cried. “Why, it is just like milk emulsion. Please
give me some more out of that pretty gold bucket!” The roses soon bloomed in
her cheeks again, and everything she saw became more and more fascinating.
There were hundreds and thousands of beautiful houses, not built by hands, but
inhabited by myriads of marvellous living beings.
Lassie learnt there were stars in the sea. as well as stars in the sky. When
night comes each tiny traveller carries his own little lamp, a spark of glittering
phosphorescent fire, which shines on his path through the deep waters and turns
the darkness into day. Their lamps never go out, but the more brightly burn the
deeper and darker it is in the trackless waste.
Lassie and Merrie came to a pretty arbour, made of red and white coral.
Gaily coloured water-plants climbed over it, and tiny flying fish were going in and
out of its open windows. The two little mermaids entered and sat down on
chairs made of mother-of-pearl. Then Merrie went and brought some beautiful
pearls which she had taken very quietly and carefully from the oysters while they
were in bed. She said she had heard one of them reciting these lines from
Cowper—


“Ah. hapless wretch, condemn’d to dwell
For ever in my native shell;
Ordain’d to move when others please,
Not for my own content or ease,
But tossed and buffeted about.
Now in the water and now out.
’T were better to be born a stone,
Of ruder shape and feeling' none.
Than with tenderness like mine
And sensibilities so fine.”
Lassie told Merrie that she was sure that Sir Oyster could have had no pearl
inside of him or he would not have been so sad and melancholy.
Merrie answered: “Ah, poor fellow, perhaps he has one coming. Don’t you
know how it hurts when you get a speck of sand in your eye? It shuts all the light
out. Well, a grain of sand gets into an oyster’s mouth very easily. He can’t get
rid of it It hurts him so much at first that he has to wrap it round and round with
different layers, and each soft creamy layer gives it a more rainbow coloured hue.
It takes a long time to do. but at last it doesn’t hurt a bit. The groundwork of a
pearl is just a grain of sand. It has thus become so beautiful that gems of the
earth are sought after with less difficulty and danger than that of the diver who
goes after these treasures in the deep.”
The little friends were soon busy making a long necklace. Tn threading the
pearls they did it together, each beginning at either end of the string.
“Do you know any riddles ?” asked Lassie.
“Yes, but they are mostly sea riddles, and you may have heard them before.”
“Try me.”
“What sort of noise annoys an oyster most?” asked Merrie,
“I give it up.”


5
<« ~ ~
Lassie learns the Secrets of the Deep.
“A noisy noise annoys an oyster most.”
“Then my mother’s like an oyster, because she never likes a noisy noise.”
“Why is an oyster a very strange bedfellow?”
“Tell me.”
“Because you take him out of bed to tuck him in.”
“More please,” said Lassie.
“Two little fish got married, tell me their names.
“John Dory and An Chovy (anchovy).
“What did An Chovy’s father say when John interviewed him beforehand?
“He said, ‘Snap her’ (schnapper).
“Who was their best man?
“Tommy Rough.
“Who was the bridesmaid ?
“Miss Whiting.
“Who performed the ceremony?
“Sardine.
“Who heralded the approach of the bridal pair?
“The Trumpeter.
“Who played the wedding march?
“The Fiddler.
“What did John give the bride at the altar?
“Her ring (herring).
“What was the bridal bouquet made of?
“Periwinkles.
“What refreshments did they partake of at the wedding feast:
“Turtle soup, oyster patties, salmon cutlets, lobster salad, jelly (fish), and
sponge cake.


“What did they have to drink?
“They had hock (haddock).
“Where did they go for the wedding trip?
“To Wales (whales).
“Now, after a lapse of time John proved to be very lazy. When he would
not get up in the morning what did his wife say to him?
“Stir, John (sturgeon).
“He also became peevish and selfish, and his conversation was nothing but a
constant carp.
“To his wife’s surprise he went out without asking her to go with him. When
he returned she asked nervously, ‘What did you do to-day, dear?’ He merely
replied, ‘Skate.’
“Then he went for a rest into the pretty
which they had built together, and he said,
smoke.' So Ann went for a swim by herself
seal John had promised her, but she did not
little grotto of shells and seaweed
‘You needn’t come; I’m going to
She remembered the lovely real
see it coming. She remembered
there were torpcdos among the fish, and she began to fancy that her husband, John
Dory, was one in disguise.
“What did she give him for breakfast?
“Sea-eggs. She gave him sea-eggs so often that at last he got tired of them.
He began to grumble. One day he would say his egg was too soft, and another
day he would say it was too hard. Another day he said it was stale, and the
next he said it was completely addled. One morning he declared there was a
chicken in it. Just as his poor unhappy little wife was going to explain that there
could not possibly be a chicken in a sea-egg, John threw it at her!
It hit her right in the mouth and stuck there, so that she couldn’t
say a word. I hen he swam right away, and never came back any
more. When his fishy friends asked him why he left his home, he
said. ‘Because I couldn’t stand Anchovy Sauce!’ ”


“Well,” said Lassie, “he was a very bad fish, and I hope he got caught on a
hook at last/’ Lassie still begged for more riddles, so Merrie asked —
“What is it that works while it plays, and plays while it works?
“A fountain.
“Why does a sailor know there is a man in the moon?
“Because he has been to see (sea).
“When may a man be called an odd fish?
“When his mother is a good old sole and his father a little common plaice."
Lassie asked her little triend if she had a father and mother.
“Yes, both.”
“Which do you like the best?”
“That’s not a fair question, and it’s very difficult to answer
“What’s your Mower’s name?”
‘Dame Nature.”
"Is she young and rich and beautiful?”
“Some people call her ‘Old Mother Nature,’ but though she is well up in years
1 don’t like to hear her called ‘old.’ She is not a bit worn-out. Besides, if you
had seen ‘The Blue Bird you would know that.
“ ‘All mothers are rich when they love their children. There are no poor
mothers, no ugly ones, no old ones. Their love is the most beautiful of the joys.
And when they seem most sad it needs but a kiss which they receive or give to
turn all their tears into stars in the depths of their eyes.’ ”
“What does your Mower do all day long?”
“Oh, she’s never idle. She keeps such wonderful things in her pockets, she
is always giving us some delightful surprise. Her lace work, and indeed all
her work, is something lovely. The closer we look at it the more fascinating it


becomes. She is always sowing seeds and making clothes for her children. She
changes their beautiful dresses at all times and seasons.”
“My Mower buys my things ready made,” remarked Lassie in a superior
tone. “Is your Mower always kind to you?”
“Very kind, indeed. Yet, if I don’t do what I’m told, or if I try to bluff her
in any way I soon have to suffer for it.”
“So do I,” said Lassie, and then hurriedly changing the subject, she said,
“And what about your favver?”
“My father is always loving and giving. I try hard to be good, because it
grieves him so when lam naughty. He never interferes when our mother
punishes us. He says we will know better next time. He assures us that our
smiles are like sunshine, but without the rain of our tears and our troubles the
flowers would not grow. We must love him, and trust him always.”
Thus little Merrie chattered on. She told Lassie about the wicked sirens in
the sea. They sang enchanted songs to beguile the poor sailors out of the right
track. Thus they had caused the wreck of many a fine ship on the cruel rocks.
Lassie also listened with great interest to a story of the Girdle of Venus. This
antique adornment was composed of precious stones and contained a pearl of
great price. It was useful as well as ornamental. It possessed the magic power
of endowing its wearer with the magnetic properties of all goodness, amiability,
and love. So that all the highest and best qualities in others were attracted to its
magic circle. Without this virtue, beauty and riches were worthless to a woman or
a mermaid. It was Merrie’s great wish to possess such a treasure, but she said:—
“In the sea there are many imitations of the real thing.”
Tired out with talking the little friends curled themselves up near a sponge
bed and dropped off to sleep.


“Two little mermaids
Slept in a shell,
‘Sleep, little ladies,’
And they slept well.
Pink was the shell within,
Silver without,
Sounds of the great sea,
Wandered about.’’
—Tennyson.
When they awoke Lassie remembered little Paul’s question, and said to her
companion :—“Merrie, can you tell me what it is that the sea is always saying?”
“Yes, some people do not like it, they talk about ‘the sod
sea waves.’ It is always moaning and sighing, and saying:—
‘Away-Away-Away!’ ”
“Why,” said Lassie, “how strange! Time is always flying
and saying the same thing, ‘Away—Away—Away !’ ” Here she
nearly began to cry, and added impatiently, “And I’m quite tired
of it. I’ve had enough of this wishy-washy sort of talk and feel
right down sea-sick. I’m going away, too.”
Merrie had vanished completely away. Lassie looked anxiously around her.
She saw an anchor hanging by a rusty chain all overgrown with seaweed. She
caught hold of it. That very moment she found she was on her own feet again.
She climbed up the chain, using each link like rungs of a ladder. Each step
became easier. At last Lassie felt she was out of the water crawling into the
crate again, and covering herself up with the old bags to keep herself warm.


CHAPTER XIV.
On board the ** Nautilus.
When Lassie had looked out of her bedroom window in
the moonlight the “Albatross,” with her parents on board, had
gone out of sight several hours before. The boat, which she
had mistaken for it, was a trading schooner bound for Kangaroo
Island. While the little fairy was sound asleep in the crate
two men had come along and pushed the truck to the end of the pier and trans-
ferred all the goods from it to the deck of their vessel. Lassie was not heavy,
and she was so well hidden that no one knew she was there. Thus, it happened
that she was carried on board without knowing it herself. A stiff breeze was
blowing, and when the little girl awoke she found herself far out to sea, miles
away from the shore.
So Lassie was really being “rocked in the cradle of the deep,” and she felt
giddy and confused when she sat up. In fact, she hardly knew whether she was
awake or asleep. She stood up and balanced herself against the edge of the
crate. Although her gauze-like wings were now somewhat crumpled, they still
gave her the appearance of a little fairy, and a very white, pale, little fairy she
seemed to be. Billy Doolittle now got another fright, and turned very white, too.
As soon as Lassie popped her head up, he saw her again. He dropped the raw
potatoes he was carrying as if they had been red-hot, and ran away like mad, while
they rolled one after the other into the scuppers. Then a black man passed by
with a basin of flour. When he caught sight of poor little Lassie he dropped it
and stopped short. He stared, rubbed his eyes and scratched his frizzy head,
and turning suddenly round he bolted as fast as ever he could and jumped—not
overboard—-but down into the hold.
“Bow, wow, wow, wow!. Bow-ow, wow, wow!” barked a little dog that
was tied up by a short string near the newcomer. From the moment of Lassie’s


appearance this little dog was the only one who had seemed anxious to get nearer
to her instead of running away. He had kept on barking, “Bow-wow, wow!”
and wagging his tail, and jumping and struggling to reach her.
Lassie heard a man shouting, “Bill, hurry up with the spuds.” Bill’s
ominous silence and the dog’s increased bark, brought a little man, named Mr.
John Ouickam. up from below to see what was the matter. At the same moment
the Captain appeared on the scene. The two men stood looking at little Lassie
in evident astonishment.
“Halloa!” cried Captain Candy, who was a real old British tar, “What have
we here? Has the sweet little angel that sits up aloft flown down? My pretty
little dear, where did you come from?”
“I came from the bottom of the sea,” answered Lassie.
“And how did you get here?”
“I caught hold of the anchor and climbed up the chain, then I crawled into
this basket and went to sleep.”
“Well, well, well!” Both the Captain and Mr. Ouickam were kind-hearted
men. and after a few words in a whisper the latter said he would soon get the
child something to eat. and then see if they could get anv sense out of her. Lassie
said in a weak voice, “I want my faver and my mower.”
“Of course you do, my dear; where are they?” said the Captain.
“They are here, on board this boat; that’s why T came on board to find them.”
“They haven’t arrived yet.” replied the Captain; “but we will take good care
of you till they do come.” Then with a wink at Mr. Ouickam he added. “The
‘Nautilus’ seems a bit out of her usual course to-day. if we’re to go on picking up
passengers like this.”
The poor, lost little girl looked as if she were going to cry, and hung her
head as she said, “I’m not a naughty lass, sir.”
“Ah, ah, ah!” laughed the Captain; “of course she’s not a naughty lass, she’s
a real good girl, that she is. But, sure enough, the fairies are about to-day.”


And hoisting her up on his shoulder the strong man carried her into a little saloon
and sat her down at the dinner table. Mr. Ouickam placed a plate of steaming
hot pea soup before her. It was full of tiny bits of fried bread. The soup had
a most savoury, inviting scent of fresh mint. As Lassie sipped it, and crackled
the crisp chips with her little white teeth, she thought she had never eaten
anything so nice in her life before. When dinner was over it was discovered that
the fairy was lame. The Captain took a big wooden splinter out of her toe. He
also clipped off her wings, which by this time had lost all their prettiness. He
wrapped her in one of his own coats, made her sit on some sails that were hung
on the deck, and sat down by her side to mend some that had been torn by the
wind. He wore a curious sort of thimble on his thumb. He told Lassie all
thimbles used to be called thumb-bells. Language is always changing, and the
spelling and meaning of words is often different from what it was in very early
days. They could hear Mr. Ouickam talking and talking, and at last he came
up and spoke to the Captain. He was a funny little man—
“Not very old, and not very young.
With very short legs, and a very long tongue.”
He said, “Captain, all I can say won’t bring Bill and King up out of that
hold. I’ve been talking and talking till my throat’s sore. There’s the work to
be done, and both those rascals are hiding in the darkest corner, because they
are scared out of their wits by Fairy. King’s shivering and shuddering, and
can say nothing but ‘Debbie, debble.’ ”
The Captain stood up. and taking a stick of tobacco from his pocket threw
it into Lassie’s lap, saying, “Give that to old King Coal, and when he finds you are
good to him he will soon be your friend.”
Then he went and pulled first one and then the other forcibly out of their
hiding-places, and dragged them along the deck in front of little Lassie. King
Coal was trembling from head to foot, and mumbling—
“Bookee burra burnt ta ma,
Burnt de die ee la ma,”


The Captain tried to make him shake hands, but he said, “No, Boss, no. Me
um belly good black fellar, ole King Coalee urn belly good black fellar. Um no
drinkee, um belly good fellar.” But when he caught sight of Lassie again, and
saw her without wings, looking like a pretty little bit of ordinary humanity, he
came quickly forward, and with a nod took the baccy from her little fair hand.
After that whenever he passed her a broad grin suddenly lit up his dusky
countenance.
As for Billy Doolittle, he continued to be very shy. His own conscience
made a coward of him, for he was afraid Lassie would ask him what he had
done with her bag.
Our little stowaway learnt that the schooner was named the “Nautilus,” after
a beautiful shell, that was used by its little navigator as a ship. With its own little
fibrous wing unfurled it could sail over the sea. After stormy weather many of
such lovely paper nautilus shells are washed ashore on the coast of Kangaroo
Island, and the Captain promised to find her one. They were going. Lassie
learnt, first to Hog Bay on Kangaroo Island, and then round the Western Coast
to Captain Candy’s own home. He told her he knew lots of children, and he
had one little girl of her own age. named Dulcie, whom they often called “Sugar.”
At last the sky and the sea became all crimson and gold. Lassie watched the
bright sun going down. When it had quite disappeared everything soon turned
grey, and it got dark and cold. The good Captain brought a warm rug and
wrapped it well over little Fairy, as he called her, and the little girl soon found
herself in a place called “Blanket Town.” There she was watching a lot of pigs
and kangaroos dancing the highland fling. The pigs did not keep step in very
good time to the music. At first little Lassie fancied that the music was the
bagpipes, then it sounded more like Paulina snoring.
One of the couples dancing bumped up against the little girl named “Sugar
Candy” and knocked her off the island into the water. When Lassie ran to the
fescue she found “Sugar” had melted all away, and the sea was not salt any more.


CHAPTER XV.
Paulina’s Journey.
When Paulina arrived in Adelaide she got out of the train, and calling a cab
she drove with her luggage to the East-End Market. To save any further
travelling expense she had determined to ask some of her neighbours for a drive
home. She found many fruitgrowers and market gardeners busy preparing for
their homeward journey. She soon fell in with Mr. and Mrs. Richards, who
were, with two of their children, Eliza and Jimmy, just ready to start. There
was plenty of room in their waggon, and when Paulina said what she wanted she
was at once invited to go with them. Mrs. Richards was a simple-hearted,
kind woman. She enjoyed having “a smart young Towney,” as she said
Paulina had become, to entertain her on the journey. Round the corner,
past the beautiful Botanic Gardens, they rattled, their tongues keeping pace
with the noisy wheels. With chatter, laughter, and jest they soon passed
Ihe Maid and Magpie,” while electric cars whizzed to and fro past them.
Lip a long road lined with villas and gardens they went to the World’s End, at
Magill. Here they stopped for a rest, in anticipation of the ascent that lay
before them. Paulina had told Mrs. Richards that she was going home to
Amelia s wedding, but she said nothing about how and why she had left her place.
The road became steeper as they went on, and the road seemed heavier. It was
“a long, long pull, and a strong, strong pull” for the two well-fed horses, Doctor
and Jess.
. S°, slowly they went up the winding road through the valley, where the
Ti s got highei and higher on either side. To Eliza and Jimfny the horses and
S r^ zln S on the steep hillsides seemed like little toy animals out of Noah’s
Arlc It was hard to believe that the green trees up there were the same size
as those immense ones growing by the creek below. The children laughed at the


Willy-wagtails, flying on to the backs of some sheep. The cheeky little birds
would pull off a bit of wool and fly off with it to line their own little nests,
chirping as if they thought it such a joke. \\ henever Eliza saw a black sheep she
would sing out —
“ ‘Ba. ba, black sheep,
Have you any wool?’
‘Yes, sir, yes, sir,
Three bags full.
One for the master,
One for the dame,
And one for the little boy
That lives down the lane.’ ”
The blackbirds sang sweetly, and the magpies carolled so gaily as they flew
from tree to tree. The children counted them, and whenever they saw three
magpies they would call out excitedly to their elders, Look, look, that s three foi
a wedding.”
“One for sorrow, two for mirth,
Three for a wedding, four for a birth.
The very birds of the air appeared to predict so many marriages that 1 aulina
felt encouraged. She began to hear, in imagination, the sound of her own
wedding bells. In Mrs. Richards she had a more interested listener to the tale
of the fortune-teller than she had found in poor little Lassie.
Now and then a motor-car came whizzing down the road, its horn hooting
and tooting as it passed, and leaving its cloud of dust and tainted bieath on the
clear summer air. Doctor and Jess were country-bred horses, and accustomed to
the fragrance of the sweet briar, the dewy grass, and the new-mown hay.
disliked to see these new-fashioned carriages running so fast without the aid of
their four-footed friends. Impatiently they switched then long tails to keep the


flies off their backs as they jogged leisurely onwards. Let us listen to their
“horse” whisper as they exchange a few remarks on this vexing subject—
“Our labour will soon be of very little value to mankind,” said Doctor, who
was a fine old dappled grey.
“Yes,” said Jess, who was a young bay; “it is, indeed, a sad lookout for us.
We have served our masters well, and given them what motors can never give
them, and that is affection. But what do they care for that ? All they think
about is getting on in the world.”
. n °t a g’ood thing,” said Doctor, “for a man to go too fast. They will
find it out sooner or later, most likely later—too late.”
They certainly are getting very flighty,” replied Jess; “I hear they are
actually learning to fly now.”
In olden times there was a horse, named Pegasus, who could fly, so men
are not the first in that field,” remarked Doctor.
Oh, dear, said Jess, “I am so out of breath! One cannot work and talk
too.”
Slow and sure,’ is my motto, said the older horse, and they both came to a
full stop as another motor whirled by. Doctor heard his own sentiments echoed
by his master, for Mr. Richards now said—
, Slow and sure is what T say, and I s’pose you say so, too, Miss Polly, as
you re so slow strikin’ a match.”
Paulina was talking to Mrs. Richards about her recent visit to the Zoo. She
did not stop or take the least notice of this unwelcome interruption. Fixing her
steely eyes on the man’s face, she continued—
, . P on my word, there is such an extra -hordinary likeness in them there
airy apes to some men as I see, that, rather than be tied up to one of them, Pd
sooner be single all my days.”


“Ah,” replied Mrs. Richards in a warning tone, “ ' ’Andsome is as andsome
does.’”
“You're right. It might be handy and a very payin’ game to be able to wrap
your old man in a red blanket, and shove him into a cage full of straw, with a
cocoanut in his hst. You could advertise as bw you’d found the missm link.
No, Mrs. Richards, I’d never want a ’usband that was too good lookm, that icl
have to keep under lock and key.”
Jimmy now distributed some refreshments among the party- Vvhde Mr.
Richards was eating a large bunch of grapes he gazed up the hill to the right,
where there was a great rock with a frowning, beetling brow. This overhanging
crag looked as if a shake would bring it crashing down on top of them. Mr.
Richards wished it would fall and smash Paulina. Paulina was looking in the
other direction to the left. She saw an ideal little homestead nestling among
foliage and flowers. At the foot of the hill there trickled a little stream where
watercresses and mint grew under the shade of weeping willows. 1 aulma began
to sing an old troubadour’s song—
“I’ll hang my harp on a willow tree,
I’m off to the wars again;
This peaceful land has no charm for me
And the battlefield no pain.”
“My eye. Ain't she a bounder!” thought Mr. Richards, and he felt glad his
wife was a more gentle creature. “Gee, Doc.; Gee, Jess; and, cracking his whip,
he urged his tired horses on, and on they went. Mrs. Richards was describing
her own first visit to the Zoological Gardens. She had got as far as the hons,
when the king of the desert let out such a roar that she had fled in terror, as it he
had been running after her, till she got out of the gate and safely into the waggon.
No one could ever induce her to visit the wild animals again. Some people,
she added, “call them our poor relations, but I don t want no relations with them
whatever.”


\ aulina told them a stoiy about an old lady who was going over the Zoo and
who, after some time, went to a keeper, and tapped him on the shoulder with
her umbrella.
"Well, mum,” said the keeper.
1 want to ask you, explained the old lady, "which of the animals in the Zoo
you consider the most remarkable?" The keeper scratched his head for a while
then— ’
\\ ell, mum," he replied, "after careful consideration, as you might say, I’ve
come to the conclusion as the biscuit goes to the laughing hyena."
"Indeed,” said the old lady in surprise, "and why do you consider the laughing-
hyena so remarkable?" & &
Well, mum, answered the zoological expert, "he only has a sleep once a
week he only has a meal once a month, and he only has a drink once a year. So
what he has got to laugh about is a bloomin' mystery to me.”
"It doesn’t take much to make some people laugh," said Mrs. Richards
solemnly.
"You heard what the boa-constrictor did one cold night, I suppose,” said
I aulina. \ou know he swallowed his blanket."
“I wouldn’t care to have visitors that did that sort of thing,” remarked Mrs
Richards; but I suppose became from a tropical climate, and he must have felt
cold in the pit of the stommick."
"Unless he was asleep," suggested Paulina, "and was dreaming he had got
hold of a real live sheep. Ihe Lobethal blankets are pure wool.”
A previously-deceased elephant came under discussion. Paulina said that
sometimes great monstrous animals that had lived ages before were dug up
having been turned into stone. They were called "fossils,” and are relics of the
past. bhe said it took a long time for an elephant to become a fossil. She


maintained that as the doctors had found a large stone inside this particular
elephant, that he must have been in the early stage of fossilization.
Mrs. Richards shook her head, and said she had read in the paper that
naughty boys were a great nuisance at the Zoo, that they often pelted the poor
helpless animals with stones, and it was her opinion that that poor dead elephant
had mistaken one of the stones for a bun and had died of indigestion in
consequence
Paulina said, “Possibly so; there are some people like the boa-
zr- constrictors, they’ll swallow anything.”
Jimmy said he wished so much that there was a giraffe in the Adelaide
Zoo. Paulina said they were the most expensive of all the animals to buy,
but not at all expensive to feed, because with a giraffe a little \v ent a long
$ way. They were getting scarce in Africa now, besides they were not good
sailors, and having to come such a long voyage over the water, they
suffered a good deal from sea-sickness and sore throat.
For Doctor and Jess it was now a very stiff pull to Norton s Summit. But
when they got there they had a good rest, a drink of water, and a feed of chaff
from their nosebags. The view from this height was truly magnificent. bair
\delaide lay on the plains beneath, and the plains themselves stretched to the
north and south, bounded on three sides by a semi-circle of hills. Away to the
west on the horizon the sky caressed the sea in a tender and melting embrace io
our travellers it was a familiar scene, and their attention was occupied by things
near at hand. To-day the place presented an unusually festi\e appeal ance.
There were numbers of children about, dressed as if for a picnic. They weie
all from the various State schools in the neighbourhood. They were going to the
vice-regal residence at Marble Hill to spend the afternoon m the grounds there
bv the kind permission of the Governor and his lady. Every arrangement had
been made for their enjoyment and comfort. Motors were provided to take the
three hundred there, and back to their own homes in the evening. Ihus, Jimmy


and Eliza had plenty to interest them. While the horses were resting Mr.
Richards took the 1 iser from his pocket. The following paragraph struck his
attention, and he sat quietly reading it.
“An Interesting Hotey.
(Jur Nortons Summit correspondent writes:—‘Gold fossicking is a
hobby often followed in the hills. Saturday afternoon and other leisure
hours employed in this way often prove remunerative. In the Cherryville
district Air. Henry Smith has for the last ten years been found fossicking
for gold m the bed of the Sixth Creek. Every Saturday afternoon when
the weather permits he sallies forth with a miner’s pick and shovel and pan,
and the likely places are thoroughly explored by him with considerable
success. Rarely he spends an afternoon in vain, while gold in the size of
grains of wheat, and occasionally larger grains, reward him. Last Saturday
he obtained a good wash, and got a few pieces the size of wheat and 30
specks. Having followed the hobby for ten years he has, of course, become
\ ery obsei vant, and can find gold where others would fail. He places the
gold in a little bottle till enough is procured to make it worth while to sell.
He then disposes of it to the bank. In a straight line the old Forest Range
goldfields are not a great distance from the creek, and it is asserted that the
quartz reef running from there to the Sixth Creek had also some connection
with the payable alluvial patches which were found in years past.’ ”
I he old I 01 est Ranges weie not far fiom his own property, and when the
waggon rattled off again the driver was quiet and thoughtful. To himself he was
thinking, “Jimmy and me will have a try at that game. I’m on Tom Tiddler’s
ground, picking up gold and silver.” Mrs. Richards and Paulina had somewhat
exhausted theii topic of mutual interest and had become more silent.
“Bother the flies, they do tease!” exclaimed Eliza.
“Look,” said Jimmy, “how they are swarming round Polly’s parcel. I guess
she’s got some lollies in it.”


“Or else a wedding cake for her sister,’’ suggested Fdiza.
“I tried to see what is in it, but under the shawl I found it was wrapped up in
paper,” whispered Jimmy.
“Perhaps it is a big doll for Bertha.” said his sister. The youngsters began
kicking it about.
“You mustn’t touch that!” cried Paulina sharply.
“Eliza wants to know if that’s a doll in there,” said Jimmy; ‘but I say its
lollies.”
“ ’Tisn’t neither,” said Paulina sharply, adding crossly, “little boys and girls
should mind their own business. Things wouldn’t be wrapped up at all if we
wanted everyone to know what we was carrying.”
This answer excited Mrs. Richards’ curiosity. She did not ask any questions
or say anything, but she sniffed now and then during the rest of the journey, as if
she resented Paulina being so close.
On the other side of the Mount Lofty Range the road became less hilly.
Doctor and Jess trotted along a splendid stretch of road, past Oakbank near the
Onkaparinga Racecourse. They began to talk of their friends who were in
training for the coming race. They knew many secrets of the turf, but they would
not betray them to man. They conversed also about a meeting they had attended
when in town at the market. One and all had agreed that men should be reminded
of their obligations; there was not a single “neigh” to the following advice that
was then drawn up. to appear in the Adelaide newspapers later on, the week before
the Easter holidays.
* “Hints by a Horse.
“Have my shoes seen to. They have been on some time, and that road
is worse than ever. It is enough to trip up a mountain goat. Start at 8
o’clock. T have 25 miles to go (50 there and back), and you want to see the
first race. It is a mistake to hurry. Let me have a day or two for rest before
* From ‘The Advertiser,” Adelaide, South Australia.


Monday, and no work on Tuesday, please. And don’t, in the hurry of starting,
forget to take bran and chaff and oats —oats will do for an Easter egg. And
if it is cold a nice warm rug. or I may jib on starting for home. Give me a
rub down when I get to the course. It makes such a difference (last year
one of the S.P.C.A. men saw me looking pretty miserable, and did it for
you). Try and persuade some of the family to go by train. It will be
Black Monday for me if they all sit in the trap and let me pull them up those
hills. Leave that starved-looking ginger stable-mate of mine at home, with
a feed to cheer him up. One has to be in good condition for a journey of
that sort. He will work all the better for it. See that my collar fits. Be
very careful driving down from Mount Lofty on the way home. It will
be dark, and there are holes in that road deep enough to bury a dog in. Don’t
thrash me because I can’t trot all the way from Adelaide to Oakbank. It’s
hard work dragging a load up the hills. Beware of the police and the
inspectors. There are to be lots of them out this year. It would be
unpleasant for us both to have to appear in the Police Court. You are all
out for a holiday and enjoyment. Be true sportsmen, and let me have as
good a time as yourselves. Remember, that without near relatives of mine
there would be no races at all. lam a good pal to you. therefore treat me
fairly and well.”
Having passed through Woodside and Lobethal Mr. Richards pulled up at the
slip-panels of a large paddock. Here they parted from Paulina. She said in a
charitable tone, that was calculated to cover a multitude of transgressions—
“Good-bye, Mr. Richards. Never you mind, Jimmy and Eliza, before very
long I’ll be sending you a bit of my own cake with a fine lump of almond icing
on it.” And to Mrs. Richards she gave a kiss of consolation. The noise of the
wheels drowned Mr. Richards’ remarks as he drove on. Lie was evidently not
feeling very well, for he ended by saying. “That girl gives me the pip.”


CHAPTER XVI.
“Wise Men do not Know Everything
Paulina dragged all her luggage a little way
into the paddock and put it down in a thick grove
of young wattles. She then opened the
portmanteau and took from it a ready-made
costume of bright red linen, and chocolate
soldier hat, with a red feather in it. She took off
her old dress and hat, saying to herself, “They
were quite good enough for old Richards s
ramshackle waggon!” and put on her new ones
saying, “I may as well let them all see me in my
new togs, besides I like a little bit of style
myself.”
She put her discarded things into the
portmanteau and left it to be called for by hei
brothers later on. She carried her parcel with
her and walked, at first with a feeling of pride,
over a field of dried rough stubble. Her red
dress was in the height of fashion, and the skii t
was so tight that she had to take very short steps.
When she came to a fence that had no stile at all.
she found it a very difficult matter to get over.
The way now led through undulating, park-likc
country. Two men were coming towards her.
Paulina saw they were strangers and, as she
thought, recently arrived immigrants, for she
overheard their remarks as they passed.


My! What sort of a bird do you call that, Mick! Ain’t she a high flyer?”
“Yes, what a pity we ain’t got a gun.”
Brilliant parrots flew screaming away as she pased under the shade of the
green gum trees, and now and then a laughing jack burst into a merry peal. The
long grass was dry at this season and its spear-like seeds stuck into her stockings
and pricked her ankles. She would willingly have walked faster but she could not.
She began to observe that the cows from all quarters were coming towards her.
Leaving the shade and the pasture they all followed her. lowing as they went.
Looking over her shoulder Paulina soon found she was marching like a Captain at
the head of his regiment. When she had succeeded in getting safely through the
next fence she had a struggle to regain hold of her parcel, for some of the cows
were snatching viciously at it, and they were noisy and restless when she wrenched
it away.
Paulina suddenly remembered having read about the bull fights in Spain. In
that cruel sport the men called toreadors wave a red flag to enrage the poor beasts.
She felt scared for she did not want her new dress to be worn out so soon as it
would be if McNab had the mangling of it. And where was McNab? Tt was a
great relief to Paulina when she reached the farmyard gate and had nothing worse
to face than the old ganders and the gobbling turkey cocks. She went in by the
back door of her home and found the kitchen empty. PTearing voices in the front
room she tip-toed to the door and first put her eye and then her ear to the key-hole.
She saw her mother and her three younger sisters sitting sewing round the table,
putting the last touches to Amelia’s trousseau which lay in white heaps scattered
about the room. Paulina listened. Her mother was telling a tale in her broken
English. Tt was about the christening of a baby Princess. All the fairies had been
invited to the feast but one. The absent one did not send her gift. The loss of it
had a very serious result in the child’s future. All the other beautiful gifts did not
please or bless without it, for the one thing that was missing was the most
important of all. Tt was the spirit of content.


“Well mother,” said Amelia, “this isn’t a christening, and 1 m not a child, and
Paulina’s no fairy. You know, T am much more contented without her than with
her. She was always trying to upset my applecart. Bob doesn t care for hei and
if we did ask her now, it’s too late, she couldn’t come.”
Paulina now banged open the door and bounced into the room with a loud
“Bo.” This gave them all a fearful fright and took away their breath completely.
Amelia’s face grew as red as Paulina’s dress, while her mother was the first to
recover from the confusion of the moment. Jumping up she ran to embrace her
saying: —
“Ach my dear, dear Paulina (kiss, kiss, kiss), vas I not just vishmg you vas
here to de vedding?” Hedwig and Bertha also threw down their work and jumped
up talking and laughing. They at once noticed the parcel in their sister s arms and
said: —
“What’s this?”
“It’s a present for Amelia,” replied Paulina, and she threw it down on her
sister’s lap. Amelia unwound the shawl and placed the big brown paper pared
on the table and Hedwig passed her the scissors. Soon the string was cut, several
wrappings unfolded, and its contents discovered. Paulina picked up a somewhat
crumpled floral toque and a large polony, about three feet long, and said.
“That’s for you, Mother, and the rest is for Amelia. I thought as she s
so fond of fish I’d bring her another.” It was an immense butterfish An
obnoxious odour began to permeate the room, and Amelia and her sisters held t e
noses with an expression of disappointment and disgust, while the old lady ran
away in delight to try on her new bonnet. Then Amelia said;
“Thanks, but mine is not a very useful present.”
“Not useful, indeed, you boil it with parsley sauce; the others will like it. if
you don’t.”
“I’d rather have had something to wear,” said Amelia.


“Well T never!” answered Paulina, “It’s like stone-breakin’ to please some
people. Some people would starve their insides to put everything on their backs,
but that’s not me. Yer know yer can’t ’ave yer cake and eat it too. Perhaps you’d
have liked it better if I’d kept it for you till your wedding day, but it wouldn’t
smell so nice by then.”
Less than two hours later the butterfish formed the chief dish at their evening
meal. Paulina sat on the right hand side of her kind old father as he served the
large family of four sons and four daughters gathered round the table.
“Tt vas sehr gut (very good) of mine leetle Paulina to provide us mit (with)
so rare a dreat,” said he. Paulina explained that she had bought it in the market.
A bone got stuck in Amelia’s throat and she went outside coughing. She was
really choking with vexation because she had not got her new pair of shoes.
In relating at length the incidents of her journey Paulina told them about the
cows having come to meet her. Her father said he would “eggsplain” the reason
of that when their supper was over. Afterwards he placed the big family Bible on
the table, put on his glasses, found the place, and calling his two youngest children,
Bertha and Hermann, to his side, he bade them read aloud verse by verse
alternately the story of the Creation. He next turned to the 14th Psalm and made
them all learn “Vat the vool has said in his heart.”
Then the old man, slowly and thoughtfully, gave them an address in German,
of which the following is but a rough translation :
I ask you all to listen earnestly to my words. We will do well to remember
that we are all children under the care of our Heavenly Father, who knows what is
best for each one of us. Among the old Greeks and Romans fire was kept burning
on little altars in each home, in honour of their heathen gods and goddesses.
Our God is a household God, as well as a heavenly one, and let us pray that our
hearts may be like altars where the fires of truth, love, and devotion may never go
out. Tt is not by the gifts of God that we should try to gauge His love. The
happiest people are not always those who are able to enjoy most of the blessings


of this life. I once knew a brave blind man, who felt the Divine Hand leading him
through the darkness. The bright, clear flame of faith in his heait became like a
beacon to many. Happiness seems to come mostly to those who do not seek
it at all for themselves. If we look up cheerfully and do the best we can, asking
God to guide and bless us in all our ways, we will be kept from the evil. The most
important thing for a boy or girl to have is a keen hunger and thirst for knowledge
of all that is good and pure. ‘Blessed, that is happy, are they that hungei and
thirst after righteousness —for they shall be filled.’ Learned philosopheis mean
the same thing when they say ‘that our wishes are but the foiebc lings of out
capacities.’ We should look upon this life as a preparation for a higher and more
perfect existence.
“ ‘Let every thought and every deed
Bear within itself the seed
Of future good and future need.’
“Look around at the works of nature! The constant discoveries of science
prove that many hidden wonders yet remain to be revealed to those who seek foi
them. What can the poor grub imagine of the joy for which it is destined ?_ That
of its future life in the air among the flowers as the beautiful butteifly. Wh} the
English do not call it a ‘flutterfly instead of a butterfly, Ido not know. But there
are many things that are hard to understand.
‘ ‘We who trace our lineage high,
Far above the starry sky,
Are upon the other side;
To earth and earthly near allied.’
“JGke the trees we have both branches and roots. My childien, 1 have tiled
lo account for the strange liking that the cattle and the cats have for the fish.
They are very fond of fish, but have no means of catching them, and cats even
dislike the water very much indeed. It seems a cruel contradiction of the
benevolence of the Ruler of the Universe that an appetite should be implanted in


these creatures that they have not the power to gratify. So the fool says in his
heart ‘There is no God.’ But the little fish know better. I have thought very deeply
on this subject. In the story of Creation we read that the waters covered the
earth, and that there was life in the waters before the dry land disappeared. You
all have observed that a cat has a remarkable faculty for finding her way back. If
you put pussy in a bag and take her a long way from home, pussy will come back.
So it is my belief that the cattle and the cats must have some instinctive feeling
of regard for the finny friends of their forefathers, who lived under water in the
very early history of the world’s progress. Ach! But who can tell what is in the
mind of a man, yet alone what is in the mind of a cat! We have been told what
the owl thinks about as he sits all day long in a dark corner and blinks at the sun.
He wonders and wonders which came first into the world—the egg or the owl. or
the owl or the egg. This has been the great puzzle to the owl family, so famous
for wisdom, from one generation to another. The wise men are like the owls.
They cannot make it out at all—at all. Ach! Wise men do not know
everything!”
The old man had now ended his long and learned discourse and he looked
around the room. Paulina was yawning her head ofif and when her father now
asked her why she had now left her good place, she took good care not to tell him
everything. She merely said that the MacAllisters had all gone away at the last
moment, so that she could come home for the wedding.
Then they all retired for the night. But in her dreams Paulina’s journey
was continued. She found herself riding away very fast on McNab’s broad
back. He carried her down to the beach and Europa-like she rode into the sea.
There they came to some boats. In them sat some pussy-cats patiently and
pensively fishing. Some of them had rods with lines and some had cast out a net.
McNab stopped short and turning round he pushed one of the boats ashore with
his strong head. A large fishing net, so full that it was nearly bursting, lay in the
shallow water. All the pussy-cats jumped quickly out of the boat. They had
goloshes on their hind feet and they danced with delight around their landed prey.


• I « I I
The fish in the net wriggled and splashed about, it looked so big that at first
Paulina thought it must be a shark. She slipped off McXab. and was standing at a
little distance watching. Suddenly the net broke, the shark rose on end and
Paulina rushed with open arms towards him, for it was Tom Standorf. The cat?
began to cry and ran away. All at once McXab rushed at her from behind and
tossed her high into the air. As she fell into the sea she ga\e a wild >ell and
Amelia was shaking her and saying. "Paulina. Paulina, do wake up. You are
making such a horrible row; just like a lot of cats !


1 \
CHAPTER XVII.
A Bolt from the Blue.
It was nearly dawn when the “Nautilus” came to the end of her
voyage. Ihe captain carried little Lassie in his arms ashore, and into his
- own cottage. His wife was a very kind motherly woman who took the
little stranger at once to her heart. She put her into a nice comfortable bed
in the same room where little Dulcie lay sleeping. To Lassie it seemed
such a long time since she had been to bed. and it was lovely for her to
know she was so near this dear sweet little girl. When it was time to get up
Mrs. Sandy gave her a nice warm bath and dressed her in some of
"Sugar s” clothes. The children looked, and soon felt, just like little sisters.
Everybody called Lassie “Fairy,” and with this change of name, and
everything so different around her. she hardly realised she was the same little lass
at all. They all loved this bright little Fairy, who seemed to have travelled so
far both under and over the water, and who had come on board the “Nautilus” in
such a mysterious way.
Lassie told them she had come from England in a big steamer, and that her
parents had gone away in a steamer, she could not say where, because she had
never heard the name of Port Lincoln. The newspapers reached that lonely spot
only once a week, but the Captain determined to keep a good lookout in them for
any notice of the lost child. If he saw nothing he intended to make the fact of her
discovery known on his next visit to Adelaide. Meanwhile little Lassie was as
happy as the days were long, playing with other little children for the first time
m her She made many new little friends. The names of them were Vena and
Ronny. Violet and Maudie, Annesley and Keith, Gwen and Ethelwyn. Rupert.
George and Sydney, Nettie, Alf. and Robert. Sometimes the Captain would take


her and “Sugar” and as many other children as his boat would hold, and row
about with them round the reef. Sometimes they would all go driving for a picnic
thiough the rough wild roads of the scrub to American River. There they would
often see men cutting down the boughs from the gum trees, and wagon loads
wending their way to the Eucalyptus Oil Works. The oil distilled from this
wonderful tree may be considered as an emblem of the new country in which it
grows, inasmuch as it contains so many qualities and properties that are yet to
be discovered. There are many varieties of the tree, and when the magic hand
of the alchemist has reduced them to their elements, the beneficent spirit flows from
their leaves for the health and wealth of all nations. Ah, take ofif your hats, dear
children, in respect to the Australian gum tree!
At other times Mrs. Candy and her neighbours would take a large party of
children inland for a picnic. Never-to-be-forgotten was the honied scent of the
gum blossom, the humming of the busy bees, and the sweet notes of the wild birds
on those sunny summer days. In the bush whenever the kookaburra burst into
laughter that of the merry children would cease for a moment and then they would
all mingle in a hearty attempt at imitation of the “who-who-ha-ha; who-who-
ha-ha-a-a-a; who-who-ha-ha” of the happy birds. In the rocky dells they found
maiden-hair fern growing, and together the children gathered bunches of
everlasting flowers which made garlands of perpetual gladness, at any rate in little
Lassie’s memory. At the close of each happy day Lassie learnt to kneel down by
her bedside with “Sugar” and say a simple prayer, in which she said. “God bless
my dear father and mother.”
Meanwhile Major and Mrs. MacAllister were having a very pleasant time
during their cruise round the coast in the “Albatross.” When they landed at Port
Lincoln their stay becamed prolonged by many social engagements. The place was
full of Adelaide visitors, and the P>artly-Boodlums also had friends among the
residents there. With golf by day and bridge by night they all had a gay time. A
glance through Mrs. MacAllister’s sketch book will show how she passed much of
her lime. She was a clever artist, and her water-colours portray, better than pen


and ink can describe, the beauty of the scenery surrounding her. To her it was
almost a regret when at last they were homeward bound. The Major had sent a
telegram to inform Paulina of the day and the hour of their expected return. It
was a lovely fresh morning when the ‘‘Albatross" drew near the pier. The parents
were on the deck eager for a glimpse of the familiar form of their little daughter.
But no one was there to greet them. Our friends bade farewell to their kind host
and hostess whose motor was in waiting for them, and then wended their way to
their own home. They found it silent and deserted. They naturally imagined
that Lassie and Paulina had gone out. Mrs. MacAllister, seeing one of the ladies
on the verandah next door, stepped nearer and said, “Can you tell me, please, at
what time the maid and our little girl went out. and in which direction they have
gone ?”
Miss Green's answer was that they had been occupying the house only a
fortnight, that the people next door had left a day or two after they came, and the
house had remained empty ever since. Immediately the Major smashed the dining
room window, unlocked it and got in and opened the front door for his wife.
There, on the floor lay the unopened telegram. Mrs. MacAllister went upstairs
with her heart full of forebodings. Her glass reflected a very pale face, full of
anxiety and fear. She at once caught sight of Paulina’s letter on the blue pin
cushion and called “Alick \” Together they read that cold and careless letter, with
what increasing consternation we can well imagine. The shock of such
confounding news was too great and too sudden for them to hear at once with
fortitude. Therefore let us drop the curtain on the scene of so much sadness.


CHAPTER XVIII.
Coming Events now cast tHeir Shadows.
The Major had taken private apartments at the Largs Bay Hotel. Poor Mrs.
MacAllister's nerves are quite shattered and she is in bed in a state of utter
collapse. Martha, who had taken a place as parlor maid at the hotel, has been told
off to wait upon her former mistress. The cause of their grief soon become'
known, and they have great sympathy from all around. The dear Major is very
sad. but he is calm, quiet, and collected. He has not lost hope, and he keep- on
assuring himself that his darling must be in safe-keeping somewhere. It seems
impossible—and then he dares not think any more. He never thinks much about
himself. Having attended to ever}- arrangement for the comfort of hE poor wife
he rings up the police. A stalwart young policeman is soon announced. We have
'een him before, somewhere, or was it in a dream ? His name is Thomas Standorf.
Major MacAllister places the facts of the case before him and say' that no time
or expense must be spared in the search for his child. He hands him Paulina’s
letter.
"I know something of the writer, sir. says Tom.
"What do you know?"
“I’ve never had her under suspicion before, but 1 happen to know a good deal
not altogether in her favour. lam engaged to be married to Martha Sage, who
was lately living in service with her at your own house.
‘’Then you can easily trace this fiend incarnate?"
"Yes, sir, and if you will kindly get permission at the head office for me to
have the entire handling of this case. I’ll lose no time in running her in.


So the Major "rang up and the thing was arranged there and then to Tom’s
satis taction. There was nothing that Tom Standorf felt he would then enjoy
bettei than tracking 1 aulma and bringing her to justice. Of this young man it
could not be truly said:— J 6
Suspicion lurks not in his gentle breast,
The worst suggested, he believes the best,”
tor it was just the very reverse. Besides, he saw in his probable success the
prospect of his speedy promotion and—and—but now at once to business.
Tom first made a careful search through the MacAllister’s lonely house. He
• e k l t I ch ? n oor strewn w dh bits of broken china, the fragments of the frav
hollowing 1 aulma s own written instructions he turned over the mattress and
tound the money wrapped man old bill. But it was not a grocer’s bill, it was a
draper s account for a costume and a hat. The money it contained was shillings.
1. aulma had made a mistake and packed the wrong bill with Mrs. MacAllister’s
3 pounds 2 shillings and 6 pence away in her own trunk. It told against her In
the child s bedroom Tom observed that none of the shoes or clothes had been
much or recently worn, so he concluded she must have been taken away in her
everyday dress. He called upon the ladies next door, and heard of the
blood-curdling screams that had disturbed them during the first night of their
arrival. That also told against her. At the grocer’s he picked up some more
important evidence against her. He found her statement, “that she had hist
missed sight of her little charge, did not agree with that in her letter This
told very much against her.
During the evening Tom was "oft duty. He called to see Martha, feeling
he was, by so doing, combining business with pleasure. Martha was free to go
for a walk with her young man, for Mrs. MacAllister was able to be up, and was
sitting with her sorrowful husband. As Martha and Tom walked slowly along
arm in arm, the girl shuddered and said—
“Oh, Tom, what an awful thing this is?”


“It is, indeed, dear,” and he pressed her right hand in his left as he
continued, “In confidence I can tell you that things are looking very black against
Paulina. She’ll swing for it, right enough.”
“Oh, dear; oh, dear! How can Igo back to that dear lady and tell her
that.”
“You’re not to tell anything. Mind, Martha! ‘A still tongue makes a wise
head!’ ” And then Tom went on talking. He told her every little incident that
had occurred during the day, and how he had found everything out. When he
had ended his long story he added. “And I want your help, Martha. You know,
‘two heads are better than one,’ especially when one’s a nice little nut like yours.”
“I have heard,” replied Martha, “that women would make better detectives
than men.”
“Why so?”
“Because they have a quicker faculty of perception.”
“Deception ?”
“No. no. Men were deceivers ever. Perception means being able to see
through things. A woman is more cute and can solve mysteries and motives
better than a man.”
“That’s right.”
Martha continued, “Just as photography can fix a man’s outward appearance
on paper in an instant, so the X-rays from a good woman’s eye can fathom the
inward depth of a man’s mind.”
“Well, I’m very glad you’re not cross-eyed, Martha,” said Tom.
“Oh, Tom. don’t be silly.”
“I’m not; it’s quite true. What’s your idea about Paulina?”
“I can hardly believe it possible,” said she, “that Paulina or anyone else could
be wicked enough to hurt that dear, darling of a little Miss Lassie. She was


the sweetest, prettiest little pet I've ever seen. This fearful suspense will soon
break the hearts of her poor parents. It’s something cruel. I’ve been trying
all day to cheer up the poor mother. I tell her she’s bound to be found sooner
or later, and I am so very glad, Tom, dear, that you are trying to find her.”
“So’m I.”
The couple now sat down on a secluded seat on the Esplanade, talking
earnestly in a low tone.
“Can you give me any clue, Martha, and what’s Paulina’s address?”
“Her home is named ‘Heimruhr,’ near Lobethal. She told me the meaning
of these German names. ‘Heimruhr” means ‘Home Rest,’ and Lobethal means
the ‘Valley of Praise,' but I guess there’s no f much rest or praise while she’s
there. I’ve got an idea, Tom. that Paulina’s gone and cut off the child’s beautiful
hair, she hated brushing it so. Then she’s got frightened, and she's gone away
and hidden the poor little thing somewhere or boarded her out till her hair grows
again. Then she’ll send her back right enough. That’s what I’ve told Mrs.
MacAllister.”
“It’s quite possible.”
“She used to talk about the value of good heads of hair—she’s hardly any
herself. She told me a long yarn about what her father said the French
pheasants’ do. The girls in one part of France have wonderfully long, thick
hair. They never have it cut till they are going to be married. Then they are
driven like sheep to the market-place, and stand there in a row with their golden
fleeces hanging down their backs. Men who are buyers and experts come and
examine the length and the quality of their tresses, and each one sells to the highest
bidder, and are shorn like sheep there and then. The money they gain in this way
comes in very useful.”
“That reminds me, Martha, you’ve not given me a lock of yours. I think
there is a lot in what you say. You're a brainy woman, no doubt about it. and
what’s better, a good cook too. Most brainy women can’t even cook a ‘pertater.'


“ ‘Man may live without music,
Without culture or books ;
But civilised man
Cannot live without cooks.’ ”
“Paulina wasn’t much of a cook,” replied Martha. “She was always crocheting
mats and table centres and things for her ‘glory box,’ as she called it. I used
to tell her to catch her hare before she cooked him.” Then in a hesitating manner
Martha added, “I’m sure she tried hard to catch you, Tom.”
“Did she? Well, I want to catch her now.”
Martha became so silent that Tom asked. “What are you thinking of?”
She said, “You came from Sydney in New South Wales, didn’t you, Tom?”
“Yes, dear. Why?”
‘Because —you won’t mind, will you, Tom?”
“What?”
“I’ve just been thinking that you are my Welsh rabbit now just for my own
lips and no one else’s, and I am so glad you can’t run away.”
During this timid, hesitating little speech Tom shifted further away along the
seat, and then said stiffly:
“I wasn’t aware that there was any difference between the rabbits in the
different States. It’s anything but a compliment, Martha, to call a man a rabbit.”
He stood up with an air of offended dignity, and continued: —
“In Australia they are too much of a nuisance. If that’s your opinion of me,
that I’m a Welsh rabbit, a rheumatic rabbit that can’t run, indeed. I’ll show you
pretty quick that I can run, and I’ll wish you ‘good evening.’ ” Turning on his
heel Tom walked quickly away.
“Oh, Tom. Tom! Stop, stop.” cried Martha hastening after him and holding
him by the arm. and in a conciliating tone she said, “Don’t you know what a Welsh
rabbit is, Tom? Why, it’s something to eat.”
“What?”


“Why, it’s the most delicious thing for supper on a cold night.”
“What is it?”
“Why, it’s a rare bit; it’s toasted cheese, of course.”
~ s^ they use to catch rats with,” Tom replied in still greater
disgust So you look upon me, do you, Martha, as fit for rat poison?” Martha
let go of his arm, and with little short gasps between her words, she said. “Well.
lorn, since you will take the huff and'seem bent on making a misunderstanding
between us, 111 tell you this much, you arc being set like a trap to catch a rat, for
fine of the rattiest, nattiest girls I know is Paulina Storenfried. Catch her if you
c an j r , ee P ier i nstea d of me, and T’ll wish you ‘good evening and goodbye •’ ”
And Martha ran away indoors.
, 7 > T Lat J: r , on tha J evening the Major and Mrs. MacAllister noticed that the blue
ot Marthas usually bright eyes was looking a bit washed out, and they took it as
a proof of her sympathy with them. Such devotion touched and consoled them
not a little.
A fellow-feeling makes us wondrous kind.”
Who was it said,
Perhaps the Poet would have changed his mind
Had he. when in a crowd, but chanced to find
A fellow feeling in his coat behind.”
Th r e , f^ re th e MacAllisters might have missed that little bit of consolation
it they had been able, just then, to peep behind the scenes.


CHAPTER XIX.
Tanglefoot.
The next morning Tom Standorf felt somewhat depressed, but he soon shook
that off and became greatly interested in his work. He dressed in his private
serge suit instead of his usual uniform. He traced Paulina s movements by train
and cab to the market. He was looking at the names on the waggons for people
who lived near Lobethal, when he fell into conservation with Mr. Richards. He
asked him if he knew the Storenfrieds.
“Yes/ replied the man, “we give their girl a lift up last time we was down.”
Tom continued to pump and he learnt that Paulina s parents were very well-to-do
Germans. They were much respected and were most industrious people. Their
sons and daughters were always hard at work, and when work was slack in theii
home they got employment in the tweed factory.
“How comes it then that one of their daughters was in domestic service?”
asked Tom.
“Ah!” said Mr. Richards, “you know Paulina, do you? She’s a porous
plaster, Paulina is.” (Mr. Richards had just recovered from an attack of
lumbago.) “A more cantankerous hussy never rode in my waggon. When she
quarrels with her sisters at home she takes a place at the seaside for a change of
air, and I guess whenever she falls out with the people theie she turns up again
like a bad penny. 'Pon my word I was nearly chuckin hei out on the road,
baggage and all.”
Tom soon got the fact of Paulina’s evident wish for some concealment, and
Mr. Richards ended up by saying: “You can take my civy for it, there’s something
rum about that lot.”


id was ea S er or dle pursuit. Pie took out the necessary warrant for
] aulma s arrest, and caught the express train to the hills. There he got out and
went by coach to Lobethal. This country township is one of the many German
settlements in South Australia. The names and callings of the owners are printed
m German over the shop doors. As Tom was climbing down from the top of the
coach he saw what was to him an unusual and comical sight. Two old men were
alter a friendly chat, bidding each other farewell in the street, and they shook
hands and kissed each other. The one then got up in a two-wheeled gig and drove
s owly away while the other stood watching the passengers dismount from the
coach. As lorn looked smilingly at him, he said :
“Guten Tag.” (good day).
~ J,om then asked > “Can you tell me, please, where Heinrich Storenfried
lives ?
“Ya. ya Dat ist mein old vriend. Here, dere. Hi, hi,” shouted the old
man, excitedly waving his stick. The man, who was just driving away, heard
looked round and pulled up. Tom went forward towards him.
Tow Mr. Storen fried at once jumped to the conclusion that this stranger was
Bob s cousin who was expected up from town to act as groomsman at the wedding
which was to take place on the morrow. So he said:
“Do you vant to come to ‘Heimruhr’ ?”
“Yes,” said Tom.
“Ach, den shump up. You are de best man.”
Tom knew nothing whatever about the wedding and he thought the old man
was paying him a compliment in his broken English, and he was very glad to
jump up. As the horse jogged slowly along, the driver jogged the reins and looked
sideways at Tom. Tom Standorf may be here described as a well-set-up young
man. He was tall, and had strong, square shoulders, and his clothes, especially


when he wore his uniform, fitted so tightly that he looked as if he had eaten
plenty of plum pudding in his youth. He had a pale, putty-coloured complexion,
and altogether he had the expression of a somewhat animated, dandified, apple
dumpling. His arms and legs bore a certain resemblance to lengthened and
magnified roly-poly puddings.
“And vot may I ask is your pusiness in town?” asked the old man.
“I am in the Government service,” replied Tom.
“Veil, veil, my boy, you ought to do better dan dat. To sit all day and to
scratch, scratch mit de pen is not de right ding for a vine strong young shap like
you. Vy do you not go on to de land? Dis gountree is de Land of Promise.
It is de land running mit de milk and de honey. Ven I come vrom de \ aterland
J vas more old dan you. I vas dirty and mine vife was dirty, too. Ve had den
kein kinder (no children) und kein geld (no money). To-day I haf blenty, blenty
of both, but to-morrow I vill lose mine leetle Amelia. Bob Schnapper is a sens’ble
young man. He vill haf 20 bushels to de acre on his block and to-morrow he vill
haf vat is best of all, a goot vife.”
Tom feels it necessary for him to break the silence that follows this long
speech, so he says:
“How is your daughter, Miss Paulina?”
“Ach, ach. So, den you are not such a stranger to mine Paulina as to her
vader?”
“No, sir. Indeed I may tell you that your daughter is rather fond of me.”
“Ah, ah. Dat is it, is it; mine sly little Paulina!” and he nods his head as if
he had cleared up a difficult question. “Ach, mine Paulina, she is not veil. De
doctors do first alvays look at the tongue. Ido not haf to look at de tongue at all,
at all. Ven mine vife and my daughters vill not vag de tongue all de day, den I
can tell dere is someding serious de matter. Paulina vakes us all up in de night
mit a vearvul noise and she vill not talk in de day. I did vear she vood take de


mumps or cle measles, but,” shaking his head, “now 1 do tink it may be de heart.
Ach, the old man continues in an accent of warning, while whipping his slow old
horse somewhat irritably. “Ach, I vill not any drones haf in mine vamily. Mine
‘Heimruhr ist mine hive and all mine schildren do verk like de bees to bring in de
honey. Mine Paulina makes de sausages and bakes de bread and makes de butter
and milks de cows all de time. Ven she vas in de town she liked not de
leedlee-venking verk. gleaning de vinders and viping de dust off de tables and de
schairs. Ach! Mine leetle Paulina vill make a goot vife for a varmer.”
They were now quite near the farmhouse, having approached it by a nearer
road that led to the front. It stood on a small hill, and its thatched roof with its
barns and haystacks beyond and green vineyard in the foreground made
“Heimruhr” look peaceful and picturesque in the glow of the setting sun. There
were large gum trees stretching their white arms over a creek just inside the gate.
The creek was crossed by a roughly-made bridge of stringy-bark planks and a
rustic handrail on either side. The horse stopped of his own accord, and when
Tom jumped down to open the gate the old man seemed to recover his good
humour. With a nod and a wink he pointed with his whip and said:
“Ah! Here is de magic gate! Here is de bridge of sighs, and yonder is de
lover’s seat!”
Tom said; “I’ll wait here, please sir, and will you tell Paulina that I want to
speak to her alone.”


CHAPTER XX.
Puddles and Muddles.
In Germany, the evening before a wedding is called the Polter-Abend. It is
kept up by dancing and fun of all sorts. Amelia’s wedding was the first in the
Storenfried’s family, and their neighbours had all been invited to spend the evening
with them. They were ready dressed for the expected party and sitting down to
an early tea when the father appeared in the doorway. He beckoned slyly to
Paulina and she stepped outside to hear what he wished to say. Jerking with his
thumb over his shoulder he whispered: “Down dere is a vine young man vaiting
for you.”
“Who is it?” she asked.
“Go and see. He has been telling me he is very vond of you.”
“Oh, do tell me who it is, father?”
“Veil, it is de best man. Ah, ah. ah!” he chuckles. “Dis old man tinks ve
vill haf anodder vedding soon.”
He went in and took his seat at the table without saying a word to the others.
Paulina had never seen Bob’s cousin. She knew he was expected from Adelaide
to act as best man. As she was to be his bridesmaid she naturally felt full of
curiosity to see him. As she tripped lightly down the hill she was humming “Ever
of thee I’m fondly dreaming,” when, all at once, she found herself face to face
with Tom Standorf, the very object of her dreams.
She stood on the bridge as if transfixed with astonishment. Now at this
moment Tom was in a terrible funk. Although he had read many stories of
Sherlock Holmes, this was his first actual experience of detective work. He


suddenly felt so nervous that he could hardly stand. He leant his back for support
against the side of the bridge, extending his arms along the slender rail and
clasping it tightly with his trembling hands. He did not move or speak. Paulina
put her hand to her heart, which was now beating fast, and said reproachfully;
“Lor, Tom! Who would ’ave thought of seeing you?”
In a deep and husky voice Tom replied, “I wanted to take you by surprise.”
Paulina shook her head and said: “I wouldn’t ’ave come out at all if I’d a
known it was you. I’d a run the other way quick.”
“Then I should have had to run after you,” said he.
“Oh!” exclaimed the girl, recovering from her embarrassment. “You ’ave
changed your tune, Mr. Thomas Standorf. Who gave me the cold shoulder, I’d
like to know ?”
In the most serious manner, that contrasted strangely with her rallying,
bantering tone, Tom cleared his throat and said: “Paulina Storenfried, I have
come now to lead you to the halter.” Paulina staggered back for support against
the opposite side of the bridge and held on to it in a similar position to his own,
and said: “Oh, Tom, this is so suddin!”
Tom continued, as if he were going to explain:
“There has been some foul play, and”—
“And when did you find it out?” interrupted the girl faintly.
“Two days ago, and then I came after you, straight.”
“I have been so miserable ever since,” sighed Paulina.
“It will save me a lot of trouble if you will tell me all about it,” said Tom.
“I will confess everything to you. ‘Open confession is good for the soul,’ they
say, and now you’ve come things all seem different.” In a whisper she added,
“Tom, nobody up ’ere really knows why I come ’ome.”
Tom shuddered. He supposed he was going to hear the confession of some
terrible crime. To his excited imagination Paulina’s stiff upstanding curls looked
like two horns coming out of her forehead. He said;


J. hf
yf m
“Why did you come?”
“Well, the morning I got your note" —
(“Yes, that was the exact date,” interrupted
Tom) —“it made me feel so mad that I—”
“What did you do?”
“I just up and I blackened her blue
eyes for her, I did,” Paulina spoke quickly,
“I fetched her one in the nose like this,” and
suiting the action to the word she darted
suddenly forward towards him. Tom as
suddenly shrank backwards and the extra
weight of his solid frame against the rustic,
rotten old rail, eaten as it was by white ants,
made it give way altogether. Over he fell,
backwards, with a sounding splash into the
water, and Paulina, who could not pull
herself up, went in with a shriek headfirst
after. A number of crows going to roost
in the trees overhead flew noisily away.
Crows never make a noise without caws
(cause). At this moment some of the
visitors arrived and came in through the
gate. The children, Bertha, Hermann, and
Hans, had finished their tea. and ran down
to meet them with Fritz barking loudly at
their heels.
“Why,” they cried in surprise, “the
bridge is broken!”


On looking down below what did they see but Paulina clinging to Tom
Standorf in the water. The creek during the winter often ran bank high, but in
the summer it became a mere succession of water holes, and it was into one of
these that lom and Paulina were so suddenly immersed. They would have been
sticking in the mud still had it not been for the timely aid at hand. When dragged
out they looked very funny figures, both dripping wet and covered with black mud
from head to foot. They were led in triumph up the bank to the house by the
merry crowd, who considered the disaster as but an addition to their enjoyment.
There was a great deal of laughter and noise, the chattering was both in English
and Deutsch. As the drenched couple stood side by side on the verandah, the old
father came out and introduced the stranger Tom Standorf to his family and
friends as, Paulina’s young man, a cousin of the morrow’s bridegroom, and soon
to be a “brautigam” himself. The kind country people wrung him by his wet.
cozy hand and poured their congratulations into his unwilling ears. In greeting
their host and hostess some of the guests exclaimed: “Ach, Herr Storenfried, we
wonder that you approve of mixed bathing.” Others declared that Paulina must
be a second “Undine” (a German water-nymph), for she seemed so much better
for her ducking. She was in excellent spirits on account of the success of her
impromptu fishing excursion. When her sisters and friends joked her about
springing such a surprise upon them, no one was more pleased or surprised than
herself. As for Tom he felt decidedly damped in every respect, and he was
relieved when the old man showed him into a bedroom and told him to go to bed,
and that they would talk together on the morrow. Tom’s room adjoined the long
parlor which was turned out in readiness for the dance. Paulina also repaired to
her own room. As soon as possible two large tubs were filled with cold sparkling
water from the well, and carried by the boys and girls to the respective rooms.
Paulina was not left alone. Her mother, sisters, and their young friends crowded
round her wanting to know how it had all happened.
Her explanation was that she and Tom had been fond of each other for some
time, that he had proposed to her this evening, and just at the moment she was


about to accept him the bridge broke and they both fell in. Little Bertha now
came to the door and called Amelia. She said, “Bob’s here, and he won t come in
till he sees you.” Amelia ran out in the garden to meet her sweetheart and they
sought the quiet seat in a summer-house covered with a trellis work of vines.
They felt very tender and dear to each other, and so happy and glad that after
to-morrow they would not have to say so many goodbyes to one another. We will
not listen to the sweet words they whispered. Words are very wonderful things
always. They never die. But the sweet words whispered by lovers never will
bear being repeated. They only lose their essence as they go along from mouth
to mouth. Whereas if they are locked up at once in the heart they are preserved
and will keep their freshness and sweetness for ever. Amelia’s heart was very
full of this wonderful happiness, but after a few minutes she said: “We must go
in. I’ve got such a lot to tell you, but it’s about other people and can be said just
as well indoors.’’
The young man replied: “I wanted to be here quite early this evening, but
I had to ride over to ask Gustave Schmidt to be our best man. for I got a wire
to-day from my cousin to say he couldn't possibly come.”
“What? He must be playing some joke on you!’’ answered Amelia, "because
he is here already.” Then she related all that had taken place since tea-time and
told him of Paulina’s sudden engagement to the newcomer, whom she supposed
was a cousin of Bob’s, though not the one she had expected. It had perplexed her
a good deal. At once Bob Schnapper declared that he was no cousin of his, that
he had never heard the name before. Amelia explained that everyone seemed
to be under the false impression. Therefore Bob decided not to let any
unpleasantnesss spoil the evening’s enjoyment. He said: “We’ll keep up the
game and I’ll bowl him out.”
The betrothed couple entered the room, exchanged greetings with their friends
and then waltzed round among the other dancers. Ah! It was indeed “Love’s
Dreamland,” every step of it. There was a row of wallflowers on one side of the


room, and leaving Amelia among them Bob now walked without ceremony into the
next room, where Tom was already in the German feather bed. Coming out again
with his hands full of the muddy wet clothes he said in the hearing of all before
he shut the door:
“Well, good-night, cousin. Schlafen sie wohl (sleep well). I’ll get your
things dry in time for you to wear to-morrow.”
Amelia, carrying a candle, followed her sweetheart into the kitchen. There
Bob searched the pockets of the mysterious imposter. He carefully unfolded a
wet paper. It was an official looking document. With horror they both saw it
was an order for Paulina’s arrest. Amelia snatched it out of Bob’s hands and
tore it into little bits. She said: “I can’t make it out at all, Paulina seems jolly
enough now, and I’m not going to let her get this to-morrow, or any other day
either, if I can help it. So we won’t say a word about it.”
“I’m with you there,” said Bob; and sealing their compact with a kiss they
returned to their guests. They stood for awhile watching Paulina, who was
joining the youngsters in the game “We’ll push the business on.”


CHAPTER XXL
The Cold-Water Core.
Tom’s bed was ot feathers, but his heart was as heavy as lead. His head
ached as he lay listening to the sound of the phonograph and the gaiety' that
continued in the next room till nearly midnight. He felt he was in a terrible tangle
and did not know how to get out of it. On thinking over his short interview with
Paulina, he could see now that every time he had opened his mouth he had put his
foot in it. He began to experience a new and unpleasant sensation, that of a loss
of confidence in himself. He also began to think that he had mistaken his vocation
and that a policeman’s life is not a happy one. He remembered the old farmer s
advice and it appeared in vivid and blissful contrast to his present calling which
had plunged him into such mire. He pictured in his imagination the fresh-faced
little Martha and thought what a dear “crumby little girl she was. So amiable
and sweet-tempered that he had thought to bend her will to all his humours. The
idea never occurred to him that she had really intended her last angry farewell to
be a final one. While his affections were still engaged by another he found himself
accepted as the future husband of Paulina, who was as hard in disposition as the
other was soft. He could not bear to think of the terrible confession she had been
about to make him. He felt sure that Paulina had been guilty of some great
cruelty towards the MacAllisters’ dear little child. “I’ll be hanged if Ell many'
Paulina.” he went on thinking. There was only just one little loop-hole of escape
and that was if she were hanged herself! Oh. horrible! Oh. how he wished that
the strange man who had called him “cousin (they were all so very kind to him)
had not taken away his wet clothes. Then he would have jumped from the window
and gone, but now he had nothing to wear, not even his boots. He passed a
fearful night.


The next morning his host appeared at his bedside with a cup of hot milk.
He felt Tom's burning head and he said, “Ach, you vill de best man be not to-day,
mine son, or dine leetle Paulina vill mourning vear for you de next day. You
must here stop and I vill do for you vat I can.”
The Germans in country places often have a taste and a talent for the art of
healing, and Paulina's father now undertook the treatment of the case before him.
If we ever watch a flight of wild ducks we will generally find them going with a
“quack, quack, quack,” towards the water. After a short meditation this old
quack evidently turned his thoughts in the same direction, for he said: “De cold
vorter it vas, vat did make you so bad, zo de cold vorter it vas vat vill make you
veil." And he proceeded to prepare a cold water pack. Some blankets were
spread on a stretcher on which there was a mattress. On top of them was spread
a sheet wrung out of cold water and well sprinkled with Eucalyptus Oil. Tom had
to turn out of his warm feather bed and he on his back on this cold, wet sheet.
The old man folded the sides of it well over him, and then the pair of blankets
were folded and rolled over him and tucked in like an apple turnover. Thus Tom
lay like a mummy, perfectly helpless. With his arms firmly bandaged to his sides
he could neither move hand nor foot. He was the only person in the house who
was not astir, for they were all getting ready for the wedding. The ceremony
was to take place at noon in the Lutheran Church at Lobethal, and they were all
to come back to dinner afterwards. The table was being laid by the daughters of
the house in the room where they had danced the night before. It was decorated
with flowers and ribbon and seemed to groan under the weight of sucking pig and
sauerkraut, ham and turkey, and cakes of all description. The door was left open
for Tom’s edification. No one forgot him. The father and the mother would step
in and give him a drink of warm water and put a fresh cool cloth on his forehead
every half hour. They looked affectionately at him and spoke in German together.
Once little Bertha came shyly in and stood by his bedside. She said: “I am going
to have two new brothers, and their names are Bob and Tom, so I can call you
Tom now, can’t I.”


Tom pretended to be asleep and did not answer. He soon got boiling hot and
not having had any sleep during the night he sank off into a gentle doze. He had
been feeling very much cut up and he was just dreaming he was a veal hash with
suet dumplings in it. simmering in its own gravy, when the flies woke him again.
How they did tease him to be sure in his defenceless position ! 1 hen Paulina came
in and imprinted her first kiss on the tip of his nose. She was dressed
ready to be a bridesmaid in her white embroidered muslin. She said: “I cant
persuade Amelia to come in, but her dress is just the same as mine only for the
veil, and next time I’ll wear that too, Tom, my dear.
Just before they all started Mr. Storenfried brought in Tom s clothes and then
unpacked his patient. He gave Tom strict instructions to stay in bed for an hour
longer and to get up in time for dinner. As soon as the sound of the departing
'wheels had ceased Tom jumped up and dressed as quickly as possible. He felt in
his pocket for the summons and he found it had gone. He could not carry out his
orders without it. and he felt glad of an excuse to get rid of the awkward job. In
pencil he wrote the following note and left it on the table:—
“Dear Sir, —
“I thank you very much for your kind attention to me, a stranger, under
the most trying circumstances, f feel much softened by the warm reception
accorded to me by one and all of your family and friends, to whom I am but
a stranger still. My breeches are so tight and so short, having got shrunk in
the wash, so that I really can’t stay any longer to appear as such a scare-crow.
I will carefully consider your good advice about going on the land. You wish
all your daughters to marry a farmer. Tell Paulina she will hear more from
me before she’s very much older. Excuse my going in such haste, and
“I am, dear sir,
“Yours truly,
“Thomas Standorf.”


Then he hurried across country and found his way to a railway station where
he soon caught a train into town. He did not ring up or report his progress to
the Police Department, but went straight home to his lodgings. After his tea he
sat reading The Register, and in large letters he saw:
Mysterious Disappearance of a Little Girl, the Child
of Well-known Residents at Largs Bay,
UNDER
Suspicious Circumstances.
Foul Play,
or Possible Case of Kidnapping ;
Expected Speedy Arrest.
Names not yet Made Known to the Public.
lorn went to bed, and he said to himself: “Pm full up of the whole thing.
But I feel better than I did this time last night. No thanks to the cold water curel
It’s the hot toddy!”
‘Pure water is the best of gifts
That man to man can bring,
But what am I that I should want
The best of anything?
Let princes revel at the pump,
Let peers with ponds make free;
But whisky, wine, or even beer,
Is good enough for me!”


CHAPTER XXII.
Good News at Last.
On the same Wednesday, the day of Amelia’s wedding, Captain Candy
happened to be in Hog Bay when the steamer Karatta came in with the mail.
He bought a newspaper, and the very same announcement that had caught Tom’s
attention met his eye. He at once telegraphed to the Adelaide Police Office —
“The little girl to whom reference is made in to-day’s Register is safe and
sound under my own roof in Stokes Bay. Inform her parents of the fact.
Awaiting their instructions, —Captain Candy, Hog Bay, Kangaroo Island.
Wednesday, 3.30 p.m., January, 1912.
It is impossible to express the heartfelt joy and gladness with which the
Major and Mrs. MacAllister received this good news. Their reply to the Captain
was wired immediately—
“We are coming at the earliest opportunity for our child. God bless
her and you.”
The good news soon spread, and everyone rejoiced with the happy parents.
The Major lost no time in “ringing up” all those who had felt a great deal of
anxiety about dear little Lassie’s fate. As soon as Sir and Lady Bartly-Boodlum
were informed of her whereabouts they kindly placed their steam yacht at their
friends’ disposal. Both husband and wife were then genuinely pleased to accept
this kind offer. Otherwise there would have been no other means of going to
Kangaroo Island for another three days.
Early on Thursday morning they were again steaming away in the
“Albatross.” At that very time Tom Standorf was busy putting away eggs and


bacon for breakfast. He had just taken a mouthful of very hot coffee, when he
overheard his landlady remark to her son —
“So I see that little girl who was missing has been found.”
Tom went very red in the face. He seized the paper and read this
paragraph—
Reference was made in our columns yesterday to the mysterious
disappearance of a little girl, the daughter, it now transpires, of Major and
Mrs. MacAllister, of Largs Bay. Owing to the indefatigable efforts of
members of the Adelaide Police Force the mystery has been quickly and
simply solved. We are glad to announce that the child has been discovered
safe and sound. She is staying with her relatives on Kangaroo Island. We
congratulate the police on the facility and speed with which they have
unravelled a case that promised a good deal of difficulty, and we also
congratulate the parents on the happy restoration of their child.”
When Tom had read this he hastened to his office and sat down and wrote:
“Adelaide,
“Thursday, January 1911.
Hear Martha, —
“After a great deal of consideration I am writing to say that I accept
your decision of last Monday week as final. It has turned out that we were
mistaken in thinking an innocent girl to be guilty. Like a brave man I am
willing to take the consequence of the mistake, however bitter it may be.
Like the Roman soldier, who stood till death at his duty while Mount Vesuvius
spouted forth its fire and brimstone, dust and ashes, so shall I face the future.
Do not weep for me. We must remember that there are compensations in
every that we can only see one step at a time and not always that, or
I wouldn t be writing this now. Trusting, dear Martha, that we may sail
over a Pacific Ocean to our separate United States, I wish you goodbye for
ever and remain regretfully yours,
“Thomas Standoff.”


The next day he received this reply:
“Dear Mr. Standorf, —
“Since you have written to tell me that you are going to live near
Mount Vesuvius, lam writing to wish you bon voyage. lam surprised that
you do not prefer to go to the Isthmus of Panama. There the volcano is said
to be asleep and in case it broke out you could get away in a boat on the canal.
But there’s no accounting for taste, and I really don’t care a tuppenny tart
where you go. Any man who prefers tongue-pie to Welsh rabbit is not the
man for me. lam glad I found it out in time. Hoping that the future will
bring you all that you so richly deserve. I am, cheerfully yours,
“Martha Sage."
At the end of that week Tom Standorf received his dismissal from the
Government service for absentmindedness and inattention to duty.
When the “Albatross" arrived at Hog Bay, Captain Candy went on board.
He told the happy parents how their little girl had become a stow-a-way in the
“Nautilus.” He also acted as their pilot round the reefy coast to his remote corner
of the island. The MacAllisters found their lost darling so bonny and bright that
they saw she had not suffered from the separation as they had done. Little
Lassie was overjoyed to be so suddenly in the arms of her dear father and
mother again, and she told them all about her new friends. She had been very
kindly treated and was too young to realise all the anxiety and sorrow that her
absence from home had caused. Wherever this dear little girl went she was loved
by both old and young, and the news that she was going away from Kangaroo
Island was greeted with real regret. The Candys themselves were such kind,
honest-hearted people—some of the very salt of the earth. 1 hey declined any
reward for the great service they had rendered the MacAllisters in taking charge


of their child. On his return to town, however, the Major opened an account at
the Savings Bank in the name of little “Sugar” Candy and posted the book back
to her parents.
There are many, many liberal-hearted Scotch men, and he was one of them.
The Major used to measure his generosity by the worth of the object and the depth
of his pocket, and he always remembered that “The Lord loveth a cheerful giver."
When the “Albatross” arrived this time at the pier there were several friends
waiting to welcome the MacAllisters, and how different on this occasion was a
return to their home. Martha had re-entered their service and had everything so
nice and comfortable. She rejoiced so truly in the happiness of the re-united
family, and was always so busy and bright, that if she had any regret at having
lost her admirer, Tom, she kept all trace of it cheerfully hidden. When a piece of
good fortune fell to her lot a few weeks later Mrs. and Major MacAllister were
the first to whom she told the good news. In fact she took the letter in at once
for them to read. Here it is:
“5180 Fortieth Street,
“Los Angeles,
“California, U.S.A.,
“December, 1910.
“To Miss Martha Sage,—
“Under instructions from the executors of the will of your late uncle
Jabez Potter Sage, who died last month, we beg to inform you that the sum
of 25,000 dollars (5,000 pounds) has been bequeathed to you by his will.


We hope to be in a position to remit this money to you within three months
from date.
“We are, dear Madam.
“Yours truly,
“Jones & Robinson/"
Mrs. MacAUister was all the more sincere in her congratulations because
Martha declared that nothing would induce her to leave them while they remained
in South Australia. A double surprise was in store for her, for when she hastened
to see her aunt that evening, she found the old lady had received a similar letter
and a similar legacy. (Her pleasure was somewhat marred by one fact, that there
had been no intimation of this by the cards). Her late brother had been practically
unknown to them, excepting by name, having left Wales in his youth for the
Golden Gates, while his sister and Martha’s father had come to Australia.
Martha often wondered how Tom was getting on and what he would have
thought about her having such an unexpected legacy. One day she read the
following notice:
“Standorf—Storenfried. —On the Ist of April, at the Lutheran Church,
Lobethal, Thomas Standorf. late of Port Adelaide, to Paulina Storenfried,
eldest daughter of Heinrich Storenfried, Heimruhr. At home. \\ illigobung.
from the 7th to the 10th. No cards, no cake. Friends pleace accept this
intimation/’
Tom had settled on the land and become a farmer, in accordance with his
German father-in-law’s advice. One evening he was very tired, for he had been
ploughing all day. Unaccustomed as he was to such work he found it irksome, and
a most difficult job it was for him to keep the furrows straight. He took up the
newspaper. There was never time for him to look at it in the morning, for his
wife made him get off to work so early. He sat reading to himself about


“An Unexpected Legacy.
“The friends of Miss Mary Ann Sage and her niece, Miss Martha Sage,
will be pleased to hear that they are the recipients of a fortune of £lO,OOO
under the will of their late relative, Jabez Potter Sage, of Los Angeles,
California. These ladies are receiving the congratulations of their many
friends, for one and all agree that this good fortune could not have fallen into
better hands.”
Silently and sullenly Tom sat smoking and thinking about “what might have
been,” always a dangerous pastime to indulge in, for it never conduces to
happiness.
Lassie is going home from another walk on the beach with her mother when
they saw in the distance the Major coming to meet them. Lassie was running to
greet him, when she stopped at a group of little children who were examining some
treasure that had been washed up by the waves. Why, it was her very own bag
that she had given to Billy Doolittle! The other children had scattered its contents
and as Lassie saw them throw her little shoes about on the sand she knew they
were of no use to anybody, they had been so soaked in the salt water. When she
set her eyes on her own silver-backed brush it was in the hands of a little boy.
He was looking at her initials, “L.M.,” intertwined upon it, and he sang out,
“Little mermaid —Hooray! I’ve got a mermaid’s brush.” Lassie ran towards
him, and had a “tug-of-war” to regain possession of her property, calling out. “It’s
mine, it’s mine, I tell you.” when her parents came up. The boy showed it to
them, and little guessed the interest they felt in his discovery. “Let him have it.


dear,” said the Major, and her mother added, “It would be no use to you, Lassie,
dear, since the little mermaids have been using it for so long.”
As they left the juvenile party and went on their way Mrs. MacAllister said —
“Ah, Alick; if that had been found while we were in such suspense I really
think it would have killed me.”
“It would, indeed, have been a cruel blow then, Eva, for we would have
looked upon it as the sure proof that our darling had been drowned. It is a
mercy we can now look back and smile.”
“You know, Alick, while I was in such agony of mind I used to remember
all the funny little things that Lassie used to say, and I fancied I could read in
them the prophecy of a great grief.”
“Doesn’t that show us, Eva, that there are other states of mind besides that
disturbed by jealousy in which ‘Trifles light as air’ become confirmations strong
as proof from Holy Writ?”
“Ah, Alick, that makes me think of ‘Othello’ and how horrid I was to you
then. I was thinking a lot more of my own pleasure than I did of yours.”
Pressing her hand, that was now resting on his arm, the husband replied,
“Let us each try to remember, dearest, that to those we truly love, a separate
pleasure is always the beginning of pain.”
For some time past the piano had been silent and neglected, but that evening
Eva MacAllister opened it. As she played a sweet, spiritual grace seemed
perceptibly to add to her attractiveness. With her long, lingering touches
all the thrilling tenderness of the notes rang through the room, and her
music carried the hearers into an enchanted atmosphere. Then the Major
lifted his dear little daughter from his knee, and rising, placed her in his
own armchair while he turned over the leaves of some music. Soon the rich
and sweet voices of the happy couple united in singing the old-fashioned duet.
Martha heard the magic music, and drew near and listened as they sang—


“Hearts and homes, sweet words of pleasure
Music breathing as ye fall,
Making each the other’s treasure,
Once divided, losing all.
Homes ye may be high or lowly,
Hearts alone can make you holy,
Be the dwelling ere so small,
Having love it boasteth all.
Hearts and homes, sweet words revealing,
All most good and fair to see;
Fitting shrine for purest feeling.
Temples meet to bend the knee.
Infant hands bright garlands wreathing,
Happy voices incense breathing.
Emblems fair of realms above,
For love is Heaven and Heaven is love.
Hearts and homes, sweet words of pleasure,
Music breathing as ye fall,
Making each the other’s treasure,
Once divided, losing all—
Hearts and homes—Hearts and homes.”
With them we will now kiss dear little Lassie “Good-night.”
THE END.
A2774o—Hussey & Gillingham Limited, Printers and Publishers, Currie Street, Adelaide,Soutl
Australia


.


■
t
.
.<
r


1(5' CANBERRA J »)j
ZJ.3
fie
3 1508 02074056


■
‘
«
'? ■
■ \
1
:
*- r .
