

A LIST
OF THE
INSECTIVOROUS BIRDS
NEW SOUTH WALES;
ALFRED J. NORTH, C.M.Z.S.,
ORNITHOLOGIST OF THE AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM.
SYDNEY : CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1896.
116 17—96




A LIST
OF THE
INSECTIVOROUS BIRDS
NEW SOUTH WALES;
ALFRED J. NORTH, C.M.Z.S.,
ORNITHOLOGIST OF THE AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM.
SYDNEY : CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1896.
115 17—96




I < K A2~
A List of tlje Insectivorous Birds of New
South Wales.
By ALFRED J. NORTH, C.M.Z.S.,
Ornithologist to the Australian Museum.
In the following list of the insectivorous birds of New South Wales a refer-
ence is given to where an accurate figure of each species may be found ; also
to a more detailed description of its nest or a figure of its egg. The
vernacular name of each bird is given, and, by request, as far as possible, its
local appellation. Care, however, must be taken in the use of the latter
class of nomenclature, for a local name is often more apt to mislead and con-
fuse than to assist one in recognising the particular species on which it is
bestowed. This is chiefly duo to the same local name being applied to
two or more species. Tor instance, Corcorax melanorhamphus , Xerophila
Jeucopsis, and Myzantha garrula are all locally known in different parts of
the Colony by the name of “ Squeaker.”
A brief description of the nidification of each species is also given to
enable those who are unacquainted with the economy of our avi-fauna to
recognise the nests and eggs of insectivorous birds beneficial or harmful to the
pursuits of man.
Several useful papers on the subject have appeared in the official magazine
of the Department of Agriculture. One by the Honorable Dr. James
Norton, M.L.C., entitled “Australian Birds; Useful and Noxious,”* in
which sixty-seven species are specially referred to, besides many others in
general terms. This paper, the result of many years’ observation and
practical experience, in addition to containing other valuable information,
deals principally with the good and bad qualities of birds so far as they affect
the agriculturist and horticulturist, and the particular kind of food each
species subsists upon. In the same journal (Appendix F, p. 210), Dr. E. P.
Bamsay, F.L.S., F.8.5.E., also contributes a paper on “Birds Useful to
Agriculturists, Fruit-growers, and Farmers,” and enumerates eighty-nine
insectivorous birds usually found in and about the farms, gardens, and
orchards of the Colony. The food of many species is given, also a reference
number to his “ Tabular List of Australian Birds,” which shows the further
range of each species over the continent. A third paper also appears in
the same number, p. 151, by Mr. A. Gr. Hamilton, of Mount Kembla,
entitled, “ Birds which are Enemies or Friends of Fruit-growers.” In this
list the writer divides the 108 insectivorous or partially insectivorous birds
enumerated into three groups, giving their distribution east or west of the
Note. — Contributions from the Australian Museum, by permission of the Trustees.
* Department of Agriculture, N.S.W.; Bull. No. 1, App. Q-., p. 215 (1890).


Dividing Range, and notes as to their food. A fourth group, consisting
entirely of the parrots found in the Colony, is included under the heading
of “ Birds living on Grain and Fruit, very destructive.”
I have adopted a similar plan as regards the insectivorous birds included
in this list, dividing the different species into three groups, as follows :
Ist. Those exclusively insectivorous, and, unless otherwise stated,
beneficial.
2nd. Those partially insectivorous; also beneficial.
3rd. Those both insectivorous and frugivorous —more or less harmful.
Although I have termed many species migratory, for they make their
appearance in New South Wales chiefly during the spring and summer
months, with the exception of Chcetura caudacuta, Ggpselus pacifcus, Merops
ornatus, Hurystomus pacificus , and Petrochelidon nigricans , they are truly
only nomads, and do not leave the Australian continent. It is well known
that immense flocks of the three latter species arrive at and take their
departure from Cape York every year, but it is not improbable that large
numbers remain to winter in Australia.
The normal food of the birds included in the first group consisting
entirely of insects of various kinds, no further reference will be made to it.
I.—Birds Exclusively Insectivorous.
1. 2Egotheles KOViE-HOLLAKDiiE, Vig. and Horsf. “ Owlet Nightjar.”
JEgotTieles novce-hollandice, Grould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. 11, pi. I
(1848) ; North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 26, pi. xiv, fig. 11
(1889).
A resident and nocturnal species, resorting to the hollow limbs of trees
during the daytime, also for the purpose of breeding. Although widely
dispersed, it is seldom met with. Eggs pure white, length ITS x 087 inch.
2. Eueostopus albigulaeis, Vig. and Horsf. “ White-throated Nightjar.”
Eurostopodus alhigularis , Grould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed.,Yol. ir, pi. 7 (1848) ;
North, Nests aud Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 28., pi. xi, fig. 3 (1889).
A nocturnal species, generally met with about dusk, and more especially
in the neighbourhood of tanks and waterholes. This bird is possessed of
rapid powers of flight, and captures a large number of insects while on the
wing. It breeds upon the ground, depositing a single egg, usually upon
the side of some gravelly ridge or near a stone or fallen log. The egg is of
a cream ground colour, sparingly spotted with black, or blackish-brown
markings; length 15 xIT inch.
3. Etjeostopus guttatus, Vig. and Horsf. “ Spotted Nightjar,”
Hurostopodus guttatus , Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. u, pi. 8
(1848) ; North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 27, pi. xi, fig. 2 (1889).
The habits of this species are similar to those of the White-throated Night-
ar, sleeping or resting upon the ground during the day, and procuring its
jood while on the wing at dusk or in the twilight. Although widely
distributed, both are comparatively rare species. Egg dull greenish-white,
sparingly spotted with black ; length, F3B x 1 inch.


>
ol
(D
£
01
£
Ch
O
QJ
+J
Q)
p
3
a
•rH
OO
<
in
or
U]
□
£
J —i
hJ


I


4. Ghjetuea caudacuta, Latham “ Spine-tailed Swift.”
Acanthylis caudacuta, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. ir, pi. 10 (1848).
A migratory species, flocks of which arrive in New South Wales during
the hottest months of the year. Like the following species, it passes the
whole of the day on the wing. Breeds in northern China.
5. Cypselus pacificus, Latham. “ White-rumped Swift.”
Cypselus australis, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. n, pi. 11 (1848).
A summer visitant to Australia, arriving about the same time and fre-
quently seen in company with the above species, It breeds in southern
Siberia. Large numbers of these birds appeared in the neighboui’hood of
Sydney during the unusually hot weather of January, 1896.
6. Hieuxdo xeoxexa, Gould. “ Common House Swallow,” “ Welcome
Swallow.”
Jlirundo neoxena, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. ir, pi. 13 (1848);
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 30 (1889),
This common and well-known species arrives in large numbers in New
South Wales during the month of July, and takes its departure again about
the end of May. A few straggling pairs, however, remain in the localities
they once were plentiful throughout the winter. When frequenting our
cities and towns the nest of this Swallow is placed upon any narrow ledge of
woodwork or masonry, but usually a site is chosen that is protected by a
verandah. In the country districts it is more often built about stables and
outbuildings, while on the rocky portions of our coast its nestis placed upon
the cliffs. Eggs, four or five in number, white, sprinkled with yellowish and
reddish brown markings, and underlying freckles of bluish-grey; length,
0 74 x o'sB inch.
7. Lagenoplastes aeiel, Gould. “ Eairy Martin,” “ Bottle Swallow.”
Collocalia arid, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed , Yol. n, pi. 15 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 32 (1889).
A migratory species arriving in New South Wales in July. It breeds
in communities, building retort-shaped nests of mud under the eaves of
houses, the shelter of an overhanging rock or river-bank, and occasionally in
the hollow trunk of some large tree. Hundreds of the nests of this
species may be seen underneath the capping of the stone piers of the railway
bridge that crosses the Nepean River at Penrith. With but few exceptions,
these birds take their departure at the end of April. Eggs usually five in
number for a sitting, some being pure white, others marked with yellowish-
brown spots on the larger end; length, 073 x 048 inch.
8. Peteocheltdon nigeicans, Vieillot. “Tree Swallow.”
Collocalia arhorea, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. ir, pi. 14 (1848).
Letrochelidon nigricans, North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds, p. 32, pi. xm,
fig. 14 (1889).
Although migratory, a few stragglers remain throughout the year. Breeds
in September and October, depositing its eggs, three or four in number, on
the decaying wood or dust in the hollow branch of a free ; they are fleshy-
white with a zone of minute freckles of light rusty-brown and greyish-lilac
on the larger end, others are uniformly marked over the entire surface of
the shell; length, 0'73 x 0*55 inch. Blocks of these birds seen at Ashfield,
June 21st, 1896.


9. Cheraxkeca leecosterxem, Gould. “ White-breasted Swallow,”
“Black and White Swallow.”
Aiticora leucosternon , Gould, Birds of Austr., fob ed., Yol. ir, pi. 12 (1848).
Gheramoeca leucosternum, North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., pp. 33, 383,
pi. xin, fig. 14 (1889).
A resident species, generally met with in small flocks, from five to seven
n number, but only in the interior and western districts of the Colony. It
breeds in small communities during October and November, boring a tunnel
inches to 2 feet in the side of a dry creek or dam, and frequently in
the sides of the enti’ances to the burrows of the common Babbit-like Bandi-
coot, Peragale lagotis, at the extremity of which it deposits from four to six
pure wßite eggs; length, 068 x o's inch. The greater portion of the day is
passed by this Swallow on the wing, and in common with all the members of
the family IlirundiniJce , it is a destroyer of large numbers of insects.
10. Merops orxates, Latham. “ Australian Bee-eater.”
Merops ornatus, Gould, Birds of Austr,, fob ed., Yob ir, pb 16 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 34 (1889).
This attractive bird is strictly migratory, arriving in New South Wales
early in October, and departing again at the end of March. Like the pre-
ceding species, for the purposes of breeding, it tunnels a hole in the soft
sandy soil, generally in a sloping bank, at the extremity of which a chamber
is hollowed out, and five or six pure white eggs deposited therein. The
eggs measure 087 inch in length by 0‘72 inch in breadth. This species
does not find favour with apiarists, for, amongst other insects destroyed by
it, bees, as its vernacular name implies, when obtainable, constitute no small
portion of its food.
11. Eerystomes pacieicus, Latham. “ The Australian Boiler,” or “ Dollar
Bird.”
Lurysiomus australis , Gould., Birds of Austr.,fob ed., Yob n, pb 17 (1848).
Eurystomus pacificus, North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 35, pb xiv,
fig. 7 (1889).
A migratory species arriving in New South Wales, usually during the
month of October, and departing again at the end of March. I have seen
young birds, however, that were taken from the nesting-place in the hollow r
bough of a eucalyptus near Newcastle on the 2nd of October, 1892, but this
was an exceptional instance. This bird nests in the hollow limbs of trees,
and lays three or four pearly-white eggs for a sitting ; length, L 45 x LOS
inch. Its food consists chiefly of beetles.
12. Artamus sordides, Lath. “ Sombre AYood-Swallow,Dusky Wood-
Swallow,” “ Tree Martin.”
Artamus sordidus, Gould, Birds of Austr., fob ed., Yob n, pb 27 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs Austr. Bds., p. 42, pb vm, fig. 14 (1889).
A familiar and well-known species to agriculturists and orchardists; it
arrives in large flocks during September, and departs again at the end of
March, a few straggling pairs remaining throughout the year. The nest of
this species is a shallow cup-shaped structure, outwardly composed of thin
twigs, and lined inside with fibrous roots or fine grasses, and is placed usually
between the forked limbs of some rough-barked tree, or held in position by


Agricultural Gagette
of N. S.Wales, Vol Vli
MbROPS QRNATUS, Latin
Australian Bee-eater.
ArTAMUS SORDIDUS, Lath
Sombre Wood Swallow
u


■
v -i & £*** •■> $, ?
*; ,V-«
'\ a )< "4
■ ,v -V» „ , /
c A V ? -
•" %
-V
V V\
' '-V- ---T


a projecting piece of bark from the trunk of a tree. The eggs are three in
number for a sitting, of a dull white, spotted with dark brown or brownish-
black markings, particularly at the larger end; length, 088 x O'G7 inch.
Upon their arrival, and before separating into pairs, and again when flocking,
immediately before taking their departure, these birds have the peculiar
habit, when roosting at night, of clinging to each other in large clusters
similar to swarms of bees. Like all the members of the genus, the food of
this species consists exclusively of insects and their larvae. It is very destruc-
tive to bees. In the Colo Yale District, several apiarists have lost almost
their entire stock by the wholesale depredations of this Wood-Swallow.
Three specimens shot by Mr. E. Etheridge, the Curator of the Australian
Museum, in that locality on the Bth of September, 1891, were found to be
perfectly gorged with these industrious and valuable insects.
13. Artamus superciliosus, Gould. “ White-eyebrowed Wood-Swallow.”
Artamus superciliosus , Gould, Birds of Austr., fob ed., Yol. ir, pi. 32
(1818) ; North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 47 (1889).
A migratory species abundantly distributed in the western portions of New
South Wales, and which seldom visits the districts near the coast. During
the excessively dry season of 1895, these birds made their appearance in the
neighbourhood of Sydney, and where they had not been seen for twenty
years. It is also destructive to bees, but compensates for this mischief by
the immense amount of good it does in destroying large quantities of noxious
insects. The same remark applies to all the species of this genus.
14. Artamus personatus, Gould. “ Masked Wood-Swallow.”
Artamus personatus, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., pi, 31 (1848) ; North,
Nests and Eggs Austr. Bds., p. 44 (1889).
A spring visitant to the inland portions of the Colony, arriving about the
end of September in company with A. superciliosus , the two species
frequently associating together in flocks, and breeding near each other. The
nest is an exceedingly frail structure formed of a few thin twigs and grasses,
and is placed in the fork of a low tree, or in the cavity at the top of a hollow
stump. It lays two or three eggs, usually the former number, of a greyish-
white ground colour, spotted and blotched all over with light brown markings,
and a few underlying spots of grey ; length, o'B4 x 067 inch. In the mode
of nidification, and the number and colour of its eggs, A. personatus closely
resembles the preceding species.
15. Artamus leucogasteb, Valenc. “ White-rumped Wood-Swallow.”
Artamus leucopygialis , Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. n, pi.
33 (1848).
Artamus leucogaster , North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 43 (I8S9).
A resident species in the interior of New South Wales, seldom found fan
away from the vicinity of water. This bird rarely constructs a nest like the'
other species of 'Wood-Swallows, but relines the deserted mud nest of
Grallina picata, wherein to deposit its eggs, which are three in number for
a sitting, of a dull white spotted and blotched with faint markings of
yellowish-brown, reddish-brown, and underlying spots of bluish-g- ey;
length, 092 x 0 - 63 inch. Although widely distributed over the Australian
Continent, it is by no means a common species.


16. Aetamus melanges, Gould. “ Black-faced Wood-Swallow.”
Artamus melanops , Gould, Suppl. to Bds. of Austr., fol. ed., pi. 7 (1869) ;
North, Nests and Eggs Austr. Bds., p. 46, pi. Yin, fig. 13 (1889).
This is a resident species in the western districts and the interior of New
South Wales. It breeds during September, and the three following months,
constructing a round open nest of dried stems of herbaceous plants or
fibrous roots, and lined inside with fine wiry grasses, and which is usually
placed in some low tree or shrub, and occasionally in top of a hollow stump.
Eggs, four in number for a sitting, of a fleshy-white ground colour, spotted
and blotched all over with bright red or reddish-brown markings; length,
o‘B7 x 0'67 inch. The Black-faced Wood-Swallow is never seen in the coastal
districts of New South Wales,
17. Aetamus albiventeis, Gould. “ White-vented Wood-Swallow.”
Artamus albiventris, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. n, pi. 30 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds.
Inhabits the northern and north-western portions of the Colony. Com-
paratively rare in New South Wales, as is also the following species.
18. Aetamus minoe, Gould. “ Little Wood-Swallow.”
Artamus minor , Gould, Bds. of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. u, pi. 28 (1848) ; North,
Nests and Eggs Austr. Bds., p. 47 (1889).
Confined to the northern portions of New South Wales.
19. Paedalotus punctatus, Temm. “ Spotted Diamond-bird.”
Pardalotus puncfatus, Grould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. n, pi. 35 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 48 (1889).
A familiar and resident species found over most parts of New South
Wales, and more particularly in our heavily timber-clad ranges, and open
forest country near the coast. It is a fearless and active little bird, and
may be often seen diligently searching for insects among the leafy twigs of
some low tree in our parks or gardens. Eor the purposes of breeding, it
tunnels a hole in a bank, or in the side of some slight depression in the
ground, at the extremity of which it constructs a beautifully woven nest of
strips of bark, and deposits therein four pure white eggs ; length, 06 x 05
inch.
20. Paedalotus melanocepiialus, Gould. “ Black-headed Diamond-
bird.”
Pardalotus melanocephalus, Gould, Bds. of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. ir, pi. 40
(1848) ; North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 52 (1889).
In New South Wales the range of the Black-headed Pardalote is confined
to the northern coastal districts. It is freely dispersed throughout the
scrubs of the Clarence, Richmond, and Tweed Rivers, and usually breeds
during August and the five following months. Nests, however, with eggs
have been obtained in May and June. Eggs white; length, 067 x 054 inch.


0
Q)
i —*
>
CO
OJ
-p
0)
NQ
cd
CD
i
e
0)
h aj
. k
n
g .
h Tj
6 g
£ §
p ®
a. q
g -d
P 0)
td H
si
<j fP
P
P
CO Pj
£ g
| |
n cd
P rn
□ O
CD 'P
P CD
P .P
cd
3 S
gen
Pi






Grallina pieata, Lath.
“ Pied Grallina
(lib 17 -96)
Gymnorhina tibieen, Lath.
“ Black-backed Crow Shrike.”
Plate IV.


21. Pardalotus afflnts, Gould. “ Allied Diamond-bird.”
Fardalotus affinis, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol, ed., Yol. n., pi. 39 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p, 51 (1889).
Common in the tall Eucalypti of south-eastern New South Wales. It
differs from either of the preceding species by constructing a nest of bark and
grasses in the hollow limb of a tree. Eggs white; length, 072 x 055 inch.
22. Pardalotus ornatus, Temm. “ Striated Diamond-bird.”
Fardalotus striatus, Gould, Bds. Austr., fol. ed., Yol. ii,, pi. 38 (1848).
Pardalotus ornatus, North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 50 (1889).
A resident species freely dispersed throughout the inland portions of New
South Wales, It is an indefatigable destroyer of insects, searching all day
among the leafy foliage of the tall Eucalypti and other trees for small
insects and their larvse, which constitute its food The usual nesting place of
species is in the hollow limb of a tree, but frequently it takes possession
of the deserted nest of the Fairy Martin (Layenoplastes arid'), or about farm
houses and outbuildings constructs its dome-shaped nest of bark and
grasses, and feathered between the ceiling and roof, or in any situation
under cover. It also resorts to the bank of a creek, forming a nest at the
extremity of a tunnel like P. punctatus and F. melanocephalus , and about
Louth and Bourke is often found breeding in company with the White-
breasted Swallow (Gheramceca leucosternum). Eggs pure white; length,
0-72 x 0-56 inch.
23. Pardalotus eubricattjs, Gould. “ Fawn-eyebrowed Diamond-bird.”
Pardalotus rubricatus, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. n., pi. 36
(1848) ; North, Nests and Eggs Austr. Bds., p. 54 (1889).
A species rarely met with in New South Wales, inhabiting the north-
western portions of the Colony. It breeds at the end of a tunnel it forms
in the bank of a creek. Eggs pure white ; length, o'B x o‘6 inch.
24. Pardalotus xaxthopygius, McCoy. “ Golden-rumped Diamond-bird.”
Fardalotus xanthopygius, Gould, Suppl. to the Birds of Austr., fol. ed., pi.
8 (1869) ; North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 50 (1889).
This bird is sometimes obtained in the Blue Mountains, but it is a rare
species in New South Wales. Breeding habits similar to F. punctatus ,
which it greatly resembles except in the colour of the rump. Eggs white ;
length, 0‘63 x 0 - 51 inch.
25. Gymnorhixa tibicen, Latham. “Black-backed Crow-shrike,” “Black-
backed Magpie.”
Gymnorhina tibicen, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. ii, pi. 46,
(1848) ; North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 58, pi. yii, figs. 4, 5
and 6 (1889).
One of the most useful of all Australian birds to the pastoralist and agricul-
turist, devouring immense quantities of grasshoppers, caterpillars, and grubs
every year. Both this, and the following species, whose habits are similar,
are well known to all residents of Australia as “Magpies.” It is distributed
over the greater portion of New South Wales, which may be considered
the stronghold of the species.


Complaints are sometimes made that the Magpie delights in pulling or
digging up the freshly-germinating seeds of grain crops, but when an
examination has been made it has been proved in nearly every instance that
the bird was only in search of the grub that was attacking the seed at its
base. When there is a paucity of insect life this bird may be driven to eat
grain for a subsistence, but never from choice. Even admitting that a small
quantity of grain is consumed or destroyed every year by this species, it
fully compensates for this mischief, by ridding the land of countless numbers
of injurious insect pests.
26. Gymxoehina eeucoxota, Gould. i 1 White-backed Crow-shrike,” “ White-
backed Magpie.”
Gymnorhina leuconota , Gould, Birds of Austr., fob ed., Yol. n, pi. 47
(1848) ; North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 59 (1889).
This species replaces G. tibicen in the southern districts of the Colony,
and is particularly plentiful in the neighbourhood of Cooma, Tumut, and the
Manaro Ranges. Like the preceding species, it constructs a large bowl-
shaped nest of sticks and twigs, lined with hair, and lays three eggs, which are
subject to great variation in their colour and markings.
27. Geallixa picata, Latham. “ Pied Grallina,” “ Magpie-lark,” “ Mud-
lark,” “ Peewit.”
Grallina australis , Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. n, pi. 54 (1848).
Grallina picata , North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., page 79, pi. Yin,
fig. 12 (1889).
A well-known resident species, found all over Australia. Breeds during
September and the three following months, building a cup-shaped nest of
mud lined with grasses, which is usually placed on the bare horizontal branch
of a tree, but not unfrequently selecting one where a few green leafy twigs
are growing out of it, and which partially hide the structure. During the
autumn months it assembles in large flocks, passing most of its time on the
ground in search of insects. Eggs four or five in number for a sitting, white
or reddish-white with purplish-red spots and blotches, usually forming a
zone on the larger end ; length, ITB x o'B inch. Dr. N. A. Cobb, Patholo--
gist to the Department of Agriculture, has recently discovered that this bird
is most useful in destroying large numbers of a species of land mollusc, an
intermediate host of fluke. The figure represents a male.
28. Pteeopodocts phasiaxella, Gould. “ Ground Graucalus.”
JPteropodocys phasianella, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. n, pi. 59
(1848) ; North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 76, pi. ix, fig, 2 (1889).
Widely distributed throughout the inland portions of the Colony, but not
numerous anywhere.
29. Edoliisoma tenuieosxee, Jardine. “ Jardine’s Campephaga.”
C ampephaga jardinii, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., pi. 60 (1848).
Edoliisoma tenuirostre, North, Records, Austr. Mus., Yol. n, p. 13 (1892).
Seldom met with in New South Wales, except in the scrubs and brushes
of the coast.




jagette
S.Wales, Vol Vll
FRQNTATLTS, Lath
■estecl nhnKß
T AT,A GUTTURAL!S, Lath
as te d Thl chin. e


30. Lalage leucomeljena, Vig. and Horsf. “ Rufous-vented Lalage.”
Campephaga leucomela , Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. n, pi. 62 (1848).
Lalage leucomelcena, North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 77 (1889).
A common species in the brushes of the Clarence, Richmond, and Tweed
Rivers, its range in the Colony being confined to the northern coastal
districts. Nest similar to that of the next species* L. tricolor, its lesser
congener, but, strange to say, smaller, and barely sufficient to hold the
young bird when hatched. Only one egg is laid for a sitting, of an apple-
green ground colour, thickly freckled, dotted aud ; spotted with reddish-
yellowish-brown, in some specimens forming a zone ; length, 1 x 0 72 inch.
31. Lalage tricolor, Swainson. “White-shouldered Lalage,” “Little
Magpie Lark.”
Gampephagahumeralis , Gould, Birds of Austr., fob, Yol. n, pi. 63 (1848).
Lalage tricolor , North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 78 (1889).
A migratory species, arriving in New South Wales about the middle of
September, and departing again at the end of February. From the con-
spicuous black and white plumage of the male, it is locally known in some
districts as the “ Little Magpie Lark.” It has a pleasing song, which can be
heard some distance away. The nest of this species is a scanty structure
formed of grasses loosely interwoven and held together with cobwebs, and is
usually placed at the junction of a forked horizontal branch of a Eucalyptus
or Syncarpia, the rim and outside of the nest having small pieces of bark
attached so as to resemble the branch on which it is placed. The eggs are
two or three in number for a sitting, of a light-green ground colour, blotched
all over with reddish-brown markings ; length, o’B2 x O'Go inch.
32. Pachtcephala gutturalis, Latham. “ Yellow-breasted Thick head.”
Pachycephala gutturalis, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. n, pi. 64
(1848) ; North, Nests and Eggs, of Austr. Bds., p. 64 (1889).
A resident species frequenting the open forest country and lightly-
timbered scrubs of eastern New South Wales. The nest is an open cup-
shaped structure, composed of thin twigs, fibrous roots, or the wiry thread-
like leaves of the Casuarina, and is usually placed in the upright fork of a
tree, within 6 or 7 feet from the ground. The eggs are two or three in
number for a sitting, of a yellowish or brownish buff, thickly marked with
freckles of dark amber aud blackish-brown, particularly towards the thicker
end, where, intermingled with underlying spots of violet-grey, they become
confluent and form a zone ; length, 095 x 068 inch. From its habit of
starting to sing immediately after a clap of thunder, the report of a gun, or
any other loud and sudden noise, it is known to many residents of New South
Wales as the “ Thunder-bird.” The specimen figured is a male.
33. Pachycephala rhfiyentris, Latham. “ Rufous-breasted Thickhead.”
j Pachycephala pect oralis, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. n, pi. 67 (1848).
Pachycephala rufiventris , North, Nests and Eggs Austr. Bds., p. 67, pi. m,
fig. 11 (1889).
A resident species, but more frequently met with during the spring and
summer months. It builds a scanty nest of rootlets or twigs, and lays three
eggs of an olive ground colour, spotted and blotched with dark umber-brown


or sepia markings ; length, o'B7 x 0 68 inch. The breeding season in New
South Wales commences early in October, and continues until the end of
January. Also known as the Thunder-bird.
34. Pachycephala oliyacea, Vig. and Horsf “ Olivaceous Thickhead.”
Pachycephala olivacea, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Vol. 11, pi. 73 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 68, pi. Tin, fig. 11 (1889).
A comparatively rare species in New South Wales, frequenting the under-
growth of our mountain ranges, and more particularly those of the New
England district. Eggs buffy-white, spotted and dotted on the thicker end
with reddish and blackish-brown markings and underlying spots of dark
lilac ; length, TOB x 0 78 inch.
35. Pachycephala gilbertt, Gould. “ Gilbert’s Thickhead.”
Pachycephala gilierti , Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Vol. n, pi. 71 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 67, pi. Yin, fig. 10 (1889).
A species seldom met with in New South Wales ; inhabiting the central
and western districts of the Colony. Eggs, three in number for a sitting, of
a yellowish-buff ground colour, spotted with blackish-brown and underlying
spots of bluish-grey; length, 093 x 0‘72 inch.
36. Collyriocincla HARMONICA, Latham. “ Harmonious Thrush,” “ Grey
Thrush.”
odlluricincla harmonica , Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Vol. n, pi. 74 (1848).
odllyriocincla harmonica , North, Nests and Eggs of Austr, Bds., p. 80,
pi. yiii, figs. 2,3, and 4 (1889).
A familiar and well-known resident species, distributed over the greater
portion of New South Wales. It frequents scrubs,-partially-cleared lands
and open forest country, our mountain ranges, and the timbered portions of
the sides and banks of inland rivers and water-courses, but is never mot with
in the clumps or belts of trees growing out on the plains. The nest, which
is formed of strips of bark and lined with fibrous roots, is usually placed in
the hollow top of a stump, the fork of a tree, or on a narrow ledge of rock.
The eggs are three in number for a sitting, rarely four, and are subject to
considerable variation ; the most usual variety found are pearly-white with
spots and blotches of brownish-black, and underlying markings of deep slaty-
grey ; length, P 2 x o’9 inch. The breeding season commences in August, and
continues until the end of December. While searching for insects, which
constitute its food, the Harmonious Thrush progresses over the limbs and
branches of the trees in a series of short hops.
37. Collyriocincla rueigaster, Gould. “ Rufous-breasted Thrush.”
Odlluricincla rufogaster , Gould, Proc. Zool. Soc., 1845, p. 80.
Collyriocincla ruiiqaster , North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 83
(1889).
In New South Wales this species is found only in the scrubs and brushes
of the northern coastal districts. It breeds during October and the three
following months, constructing a deep cup-shaped nest of leaves and the
pliant-stems of climbing plants, neatly lined inside with wiry rootlets, and is
usually built in the fork of a vine or in a tangled mass of creepers. The
eggs are two or three in number for a sitting, and resemble those of the
preceding species, O. harmonica , but are much smaller; length, I'os x 0*73
inch.


Agricultural Qagette of N. S.Wales. Vbl Vll
3INCLA. HARMONICA, Latl
.or
Coli
OREOICA CRISTATA, Lewi
Ci'esled Bell BrpcL.




38, Palcukculus feontatus, Vieillot. “ Crested Shrike-Tit.”
Falcunculus frontatus, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. it, pi. 79 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 69, pl.yin, fig. 9 (1889).
A resident species widely distributed over the greater portion of New
South Wales. It usually frequents the tall Eucalypti , and while engaged in
its search for insects among their leafy tops, utters a low plaintive note.
The nest is a beautiful inverted cone-shaped structure outwardly composed
of shreds of fibrous bark bound round, and held together with spider’s webs,
the inside being lined with very fine wiry grasses and thin strips of bark, and
is always placed in the thin topmost leafy twigs of a tree, usually a lofty
Eucalyptus, but sometimes in a gum sapling. The eggs are white, minutely
dotted, and spotted with slaty-black markings ; length, 092 x 0 - G4 inch. The
figure represents a male.
39. Oeeoica ceistata, lewin. “ Crested Oreoica,” “ Bell-bird.”
Oreoica gutturalis , Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol, u, pi. 81 (1848).
Oreoica crisfata, North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 70, pi. Tin, fig G
(1889).
A resident species common in the inland portions of the Colony. It
possesses the powers of ventriloquism, and from some of its notes uttered,
usually when perched upon the branch of some lofty tree, and which resemble
the solemn tolling of a bell, it is known to the residents of the interior and
western portions of New South Wales by the local name of “ Bell-bird.”
This bird, however, must not be confounded with the Bell-bird ( Myzantha
melanophrys), found near the coast, whose ceaseless and somewhat monotonous
note sounds like a sheep-bell. The nest which is built of strips of bark and
leaves, and lined with fibrous roots and grasses is usually placed in the
hollow top of a stump, or in the three pronged fork of a low tree. The
eggs are two or three in number for a sitting, o£ a faint bluish-white
minutely spotted, and blotched with irregular-shaped black markings ; length,
TO5 x 083 inch. August and the three following months constitutes the
normal breeding season of this species. The figure represents a male.
40. Spheteostoma ceistata, Gould. “ Crested Wedge-bill.”
Sphenostoma crisfatum, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. in, pi. 17 (1848).
Sphenostoma cristata, North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 71, pi. tut,
fig. 5 (1889).
A species seldom met with except in the scrubby undergrowth of the
central and western districts of New South Wales. It builds an open cup-
shaped nest of thin twigs and grasses, usually placed in some low bush, and
lajs two eggs of a bluish-green ground colour, spotted and dotted with
black or purplish-brown markings; length, 0'92 x o’7 inch.
41. Psopiiodes crepitates, Fig. and Ilorsf “ Whip-bird.”
Fsophodes crepitans , Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. nr, pi. 15 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 72, pi. Tin, fig. 7 (1889).
A shy and retiring species, widely distributed over the eastern portion of
New South Wales. It frequents the scrubs and brushes near the coast, as
well as the fern-clad gullies of our mountain ranges, although the loud note
of the male, resembling the cracking of a stockman’s whip, is more often
heard than the bird is seen. This species forms an open cup-shaped nest,
rather irregularly formed on the exterior with long thin twigs and fibrous


roots, the inside being neatly lined with finer rootlets. It is usually placed
in a low bush in the thick undergrowth, or in a mass of climbing plants, or
in the dead leafy top of a fallen gum sapling. Near Sydney the shrub
usually selected by this bird for a nesting site is the Blackthorn (Bursaria
spinosa). The eggs are two, rarely three, in number for a sitting, of a
beautiful bluish or greenish-white ground colour sparingly spotted and
blotched with irregular-shaped black markings ; length, TO7 x 082 inch.
Although the Whip-bird is frequently heard in the vicinity of orchards and
gardens, it seldom ventures into them in search of insects which constitutes
its sole food.
42, Sphexuba beachtpteea, Latham. “ Bristle-bird.”
Dasyornis australis, Gould, Birds of Austr., fob ed. Yob in, pi. 32 (1848).
Sphenura hrachyptera , North, Nest and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 125, pi. Yin,
fig. 16 (1889).
An inhabitant chiefly of the coastal scrubs of the Colony, over which it is
sparingly dispersed. It is usually a shy and cautious species, but sometimes
it may lie observed during spring, in the neighbourhood of Eandwick, perched
on the top of a low bush, pouring forth its rich and varied notes, resembling
those of the acclimatised Skylark (Alauda arvensis), and which it probably
mimics, as they are plentiful in that locality. The nest of this species is
usually built at the bottom of a stunted bush; it is oval in form, with an
entrance in the side) and is constructed of dried wiry grasses. The eggs are
three in number for a sitting, of a dull white ground colour thickly freckled
and dotted with reddish-brown and blackish-brown markings.
43. Rhipiduea albiscapa, Gould. “White-shafted Fantail,” “Land Wag-
tail,” “ Devil-bird.”
Hhipidura alhiscapa, Gould, Birds of Austr., fob ed., Yob ir, pb 83 (1818) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 84 (1889).
A well-known and useful little bird of active and lively habits freely dis-
tributed over the greater portion of New South Wales. It evinces a decided
preference for open forest country with a light undergrowth, and is also
frequently met with in gardens or orchards in newly-settled districts. The
White-shafted Eantail, which lives exclusively on insects, principally flies and
gnats, may be often seen darting suddenly forth at passing insects, or
flitting from tree to tree, seldom remaining long in one position, and fre-
quently expanding its fan-shaped tail. The nest of this species is an
exceedingly neat and peculiar structure ; it is shaped like a wine-glass with
the base or stand broken off, and is composed of very fine strips of bark
securely held and bound together on the outside with spider’s web, and
neatly lined inside with fibrous roots or wiry grasses. The eggs are two or
three in number for a sitting, of a creamy-white ground colour, spotted and
blotched with brown markings and a few obsolete spots of bluish-grey ;
length, 064 x o's inch. The nest is usually placed on the thin dead branch
of a gum sapling or Melaleuca.
41. Eiiipiduea bufipeoxs, Latham. “ Eufous-rumped Eantail.”
Bhipidura rufifrons, Gould, Birds of Austr., fob ed., Yob it, pb 84 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 87 (1889).
This species inhabits the coastal scrubs of the Colony ; it visits the contigu-
ous open forest lands during winter, and retires again to the secluded gullies


N Q.I6 s, Vol






(//* 17-96)
Sauloproeta motaeilloides, Vig. & Horsf.
“ Black and White Fantail.”
Seisura inquieta, Lath.
“ Restless Flycatcher.”
Plate VIII.


and dense brushes of the coast to breed early in October. It resembles the
preceding species in its habits, but is far less frequently met with. Eggs
creamy-white, with a zone of dull blackish-brown and violet-grey markings°on
the thicker end ; length, 0'72 x 053 inch.
45. Saijloprocta motacilloides, Viq. and Ilorsf. “Black and White
Eantail,” “ Water Wagtail.”
Rhipidura motacilloides , Gould, Birds of Austr., fob ed., Yol. n, pi. 86 (1848).
Sauloprocfa motacilloides , North, Nests and Eggs Austr. Bds., p. 88 (1889).
A resident and well-known species found over most parts of New South
Wales. It frequents the vicinity of farms, outbuildings, gardens, and
orchards, and may bo often seen perched on the backs of cows, or securing
the insects disturbed by them while feeding. Erom this bird’s habit of
constantly swaying its lengthened tail feathers from side to side it is locally
known in many districts as the “Willy Wagtail.” It breeds in September
and the three following months, constructing a remarkably neat cup-shaped
nest of thin strips of bark and dried grasses beautifully held together and
woven round with cobwebs, and lined inside with thin wiry grasses or
fibrous roots. The eggs are three or four in number for a sitting, of a pale
yellowush or creamy-white ground colour, spotted and dotted with yellowish-
brown and ashy-grey, principally at the thicker end, where the markings
frequently assume the form of a zone ; length, 08x 0 6 inch. The nest of
this species is usually built on the branch of a tree overhanging water, but
may be sometimes found a considerable distance from any stream. Its call
note resembles the sound of the words, “ Sweet Pretty Creature.”
46. Seisuea istquieta, Latham. “ Eestless Elycatcher.” “Eazor-grinder.”
Seisura inquieta, Gould, Birds of Austr., fob ed., Yob ir, pi. 87 (IS48) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 89.
A resident species ; although widely distributed, it is not so frequently met
with as the Black and White Eantail, which bird it somewhat resembles.
Its curious note, however, which is uttered generally when hovering a few
feet above the ground, and the pure white throat as well as the remainder
of the under surface of the body, will at once serve to distinguish it from
the preceding species. The nest of this bird is usually built at the end of
a dead bough, and is outwardly composed of strips of bark, grasses, and
cobwebs ; the inside being neatly lined with rootlets, grasses, and hair. The
eggs are three in number for a sitting, of a dull white ground colour blotched
and spotted with dull chestnut-brown, principally towards the larger end,
where, intermingled with underlying markings of pale slaty-grey, they
frequently form a well-defined zone; length, 075 xO6 inch. The breeding
season commences in September, and continues until the end of December.
47. Myiagea eubecula, Latham. “ Lead-coloured Elycatcher.” “ Frog-
bird.”
Myiagra plumbea, Gould, Birds of Austr., fob, Yob ir, pb 89 (1848).
Myiagra ruhecula, North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 92 (1889).
A migratory and by no means common species arriving in New South
Wales during September, and leaving again about the end of March. It is
usually met with in pairs in the secluded gullies of the coastal districts of
the Colony. The nest is a very beautiful structure, composed of small


pieces of bark and wiry rootlets held together with cobwebs, and ornamented
on the outside with pale green lichens ; usually it is placed on the top of an
horizontal bough, and frequently at a great height from the ground. The
eggs are three in number for a sitting, dull bluish-white in ground colour,
with a zone of dark, slaty-blue spots around the centre or towards the
larger end of the egg; length, 074 x 0'55 inch. Although far less common
than the preceding species it is an active and assiduous destroyer of insects.
48. Mtiagba kited a, Gould. “ Shining Flycatcher,”
Myiagra nitida, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. n, pi. 91 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs, Austr. Bds,, p. 94 (1889).
This comparatively rare species in New South Wales resembles the pre-
ceding one, but is larger, and the male has the feathers of the head, throat,
and upper surface glossy steel-black, instead of leaden-grey, as in M. ruhecula.
Its habits and mode of nidification are similar to those of the Leaden-coloured
Flycatcher,
49. Miceasca eascikaks, Latham. Brown Flycatcher. “ Jacky Winter.”
Micrcsca macroptera, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed,, Yol. 11, pi. 93 (1848).
Micrceca fascinans, North, Nests and Eggs, Austr. Bds., p. 95 (1889).
A resident and well-known species as freely distributed inland as it is near
the coast, where it may be found frequenting alike the tall Eucalypti and
the low undergrowth, and is equally common in the parks and gardens of
Sydney. This sombre little bird with its conspicuous white lateral tail
feathers, which shows to advantage when flying, is an indefatigable des-
troyer of insects, and being of a fearless and sociable disposition, is a
general favourite with orchardists and agriculturists. It usually commences
to breed in September, and continues the three following months, but nests
have been found in August and as late as the end of January. The nest is
very small and shallow, and is composed of grasses built in the fork of a
horizontal bough, a dead branch being usually the site selected, the rim of
the nest, which is level with the top of the forked branch, being ornamented
with pieces of bark and lichen. The eggs are two or three in number for a
sitting, of a bluish-green ground colour, spotted and blotched with purplish-
brown and underlying blotches of deep bluish-grey; length, 0 - 72 x 0 55 inch.
50. Mokaecha melakopsis, Vieillot. “ Black-faced Flycatcher.”
Monarcha carinata, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. Yol. ir, pi. 95 (1848).
Monarcha melanopsis , North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Birds, p. 96 (1889).
A migratory species arriving in New South Wales during the month of
September, and departing again at the end of March. It frequents the
dense coastal brushes and the secluded gullies of our mouatain ranges. The
nest of this species is generally built in a low tree, and is a most beautiful
structure, outwardly composed of fine green mosses, and neatly lined inside
with fine black hair-like rootlets on the wiry leaves of the Gasuarina. The
eggs are two in number for a sitting, varying in ground colour from pure
white to pinkish-white, with numerous spots and dots of bright red scattered
over the surface of the shell; length, o'9 xO7 inch. When these birds first
arrive they may be frequently observed in pairs in the open forest lands,
assiduously searching for insects among the branches of the Eucalypti.


Agricultural Qagette of N. S Wales, Vol Vll
MONARCHA MBLANOPSIS, Viei
Black-faced Five atelier.
PL. y
MiCR/ECA FASCINATES, Latt
Brown Five at oh. er.




51. Piezoehtnchus GOULDi, Gray. Gould’s “ Flycatcher,” “ Black-fronted
Ely catcher.”
Monarcha frivirgafa, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. n, pi. 96 (1848).
PiezorJiynchus gouldii , North, Nests and Eggs, Austr. Birds, p. 90 (1889).
A rarer species allied to the above, and frequenting the same situations.
The nest of this Elycatcher is usually built between the stems of the lawyer
vine, Calamus australis , and is outwardly composed of shreds of bark fibre,
grasses, and dried skeletons of leaves, ornamented and held together with
spiders’webs and egg bags, the inside being neatly lined with fine, black hair-
like roots. The eggs are two in number fora sitting ; pure white, with dots
and spots of bright reddish-brown, thickly distributed over the surface of
the shell; length, o‘B x o‘sB inch. This bird is more frequently met with in
the tropical brushes of north eastern Queensland.
52, Geetgoee albigulaeis, Gould. “ White-throated Gerygone,” “ Native
Canary.”
Gerygone albogularis, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. n, pi. 97 (1848).
Gerygone albigularis, North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Birds, p. 97 (1889).
This migratory and well-known species arrives in New South Wales
during the month of September, and takes its departure again about the
end of March or April. Erora its yellow breast and sweet and pleasing
notes, it is known in many parts of the Colony as the “Native Canary,”
When not engaged in the duties of incubation, this little bird may be fre-
quently seen in the neighbourhood of Sydney, diligently searching in the
leafy recesses of the Turpentine tree ( Syncarpia laurifolia), or gum saplings,
for minute insects, which constitute its sole food. The nest of this species,
which is suspended from the leafy twig of a bushy tree, is oblong-oval in
shape, with a narrow entrance in the side, which is almost concealed by a
small protecting hood; and the bottom of the nest terminates in a small
beard or tail several inches in length. It is outwardly constructed of strips
of bark, grasses, and cobwebs matted up and interwoven together; the
inside being warmly lined with hair, opossum fur, or the silky-white down of
the Cotton Plant ( Gomphocarpus fruticosus). The eggs are three in number
for a sitting, elongate in form, and of a pure white, thickly freckled, and
spotted with dull red markings ; length, 0’75 xO5 inch. The White-throated
Gerygone is frequently the foster-parent of the Narrow-billed Bronze Cuckoo,
Lamprococcyx basalts, and the Barred-breasted Bronze Cuckoo, L. plagosus.
53. Geetgone eusca, Gould. “ Brown Gerygone.”
Gerygone fusca, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. n, pi. 98 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Birds, p. 99 (1889).
This species is not so frequently met with as the preceding one, and is far
less attractive, both in plumage and song. It inhabits the dense brushes
near the coast, out of which it is seldom observed. During September and
the three following months it may be found breeding in the neighbourhood
of Gosford and Ourimbah, and in similar localities on all the northern
rivers. The nest, which is nearly spherical in shape, with a small entrance
in the side, is attached at the top to the end of a thin twig or branch, and
frequently to the prickly stem of the lawyer vine, Calamus australis.
It is constructed of very fine black wiry rootlets and thin shreds of bark,
matted up together, and having an exterior covering of green mosses orna-
mented here and there with mouse-eared lichen, the inside being lined with


fine grasses, and the white down of the Cotton Plant. The eggs are two or
three in numoer for a sitting, and resemble those of the preceding species,
but are smaller ■ length, 003 x 045 inch,
54. Smiceoenis ebeyieosteis, Gould. “ Short-billed Smicrornis,” “ Scrub
Tit.”
Smicrornis irevirosfsis, Gould, Birds of Austr., fob ed., Yol. it., pi. 103 ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Birds, p. 100. (1889).
A resident species more freely distributed over the inland portions of the
Colony than near the coast. It is a very useful bird, although the most
diminutive member of our New South Wales avi-fauna, and may be
constantly seen prying into the leafy recesses of Acacias and the tall
Eucalypti , in search of insects which constitute its food. The nest of this
species is usually built in the leafy twigs near the top of a gum sapling or
in a il lelalenca ; it is of a domed or swollen pear-shaped form, with a narrow
entrance near the top, and is outwardly constructed of mosses, grasses, and
spiders cocoons matted up together, and scantily lined inside with feathers.
The eggs are two or three in number for a sitting, of a dull buffy-white,
minutely freckled, and passing into a buffy-brown on the larger end of the
egg; length, 002 x 043 inch.
55. Erttiieodetas eosea, Gould. “ Eose-breasted Eobin
Erythrodryas rosea , Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. in, pi. 2. (1818) ;
North, Yict., Nat. vol. xn., Eeb. (1890.)
During the winter months this species may be seen in pairs in open forest
lands, contiguous to the rich brushes and coastal scrubs; retiring again to the
latter localities for the purposes of breeding early in the spring, and remaining
there throughout the hot summer months. The nest of this species has
been found in the secluded valleys of the Illawarra district, and is one of
the most beautiful belonging to any of our Australian birds. It is placed
on the top of a horizontal branch of a low tree, and is a small deep cup-
shaped structure composed of very fine mosses, the exterior and rim being
ornamented and thickly covered with mouse-eared lichen, and the inside
lined with the downy covering of the newly-budded fronds of the tree-
fern. All the Eobias are indefatigable destroyers of insects.
60. Petikeca leqgit, Sharpe. “ Scarlet-breasted Eobin,”
Fetroxca mtdticolor, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. in, pi. 3. (1818).
Eetroeca leggii, North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Birds, p. 102. (1889).
A well-known and familiar species frequenting open forest lands during
winter, but returning in the spring to breed in the mountain ranges.
The nest of this species is usually built in the hollow trunk of a large tree,
or on a piece of projecting bark within 0 or 7 feet from the ground, on the
top of a horizontal branch of a Melaleuca, or placed against its stem, and
supported by a small twig. It is cup-shaped and composed of strips of bark
apd grasses, held together with cobwebs, and ornamented on the outside and
rim of the nest, which is very thick, with pieces of lichen, rendering it diffi-
cult of detection, and closely resembling the branch on which it is placed ;
the inside is neatly and warmly lined with hair or opossum fur. Eggs, three
in number for a sitting, of a greenish-white ground colour, freckled and
spotted all over the surface of the shell, with purplish-brown, wood-brown,
and bluish-grey markings ; length, C'72 x o’o inch. September and the three
following months constitutes the usual breeding season of this species.


57. Petrceca pikenicea, Gould. “ Flame-breasted Eobin.”
Petroica pboenica, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. nr, pi. G (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Birds, p. 104 (1889).
Frequents the same situations, and is similar in habits to the preceding
species. Nests in old tree stumps and on the sides of steep banks.
58. Petrceca goouejtotit, Vigors and Horsjleld. “ Eed-capped Eobin.
Petroica goodenovii, Gould, Birds of Austr., fob ed., vol. m, pi. 5 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Birds, p. 103 (1889).
This species is only found in the inland districts of the Colony. It is
freely dispersed throughout the western portions of New South Wales
wherever there is any light timber or scrub. The nest of this Eobin is a
beautiful cup-shaped structure, composed externally of bark fibre, held
together with fur or fragments of wool, and lined inside with hair or opposum
fur. The edge of the nest is thick and rounded, and the whole exterior is
ornamented with pieces of mouse-eared lichen, so as to resemble the branch
on which it is placed. The eggs are two or three in number for a sitting, of
a greyish-green ground colour, thickly freckled with purplish-brown markings,
which become confluent towards the larger end, and form a well-defined
zone ; length, 063 x o‘s inch. The Eed-capped Eobin is not unfrequently
the foster parent of the Narrow-billed Bronze Cuckoo, another insectivorous
species.
59. Melanodryas bicolor, Vig. and Horsf “ Hooded Eobin,”
“ Black and White Eobin.”
Petroica bicolor, Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ed , Yol. nr, pi. 7 (1848).
Melanodryas bicolor, North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 105 (1889).
With the exception of the districts immediately contiguous to the coast,
this species is found all over New South Wales. It may be met with on the
wooded flats and open forest country between Blacktown and Penrith, and
on the Blue Mountains, but is far more freely distributed in the low pine
scrubs on the western side of the range. The nest of this species is a neat,
open, shallow structure, composed of strips of soft bark, held together with
cobwebs, and lined inside with fine wiry grasses. It is usually placed in the
fork of a low tree, within a few feet of the ground. Eggs, two or three in
number for a sitting, of an olive or apple-green colour, but frequently
washed or spotted with reddish-brown on the larger end ; length, 0 - 83 x 0 - 65
inch. Beetles and their larvae constitute the principal portion of this bird’s
food. The figure represents a male.
60. Melanodryas picata, Gould. “Pied Eobin.”
Melanodryas picafa, Gould, Handbk. Bds., Austr., Yol. t, sp. IG9, p. 285
(1865) ; North, Nests and Eggs of Austr. Bds., p. 105 (1889).
A smaller race of the above species, inhabiting north-western Australia,
and only on one occasion recorded from New South AY ales, when it was
found breeding near Bourke.
61. Drtmodes brunneopyqia, Gould. “ Brown Scrub Eobin.”
Drymodes brunneopygia, Gould, Bds of Austr., fol. ed., Yol. in, pi. 10
(1848).
A very rare species in New South Wales, and confined to the thick mallee
scrubs in the south-western portions of the Colony. It breeds on the


ground in these localities, constructing a nest among the dead leaves at the
foot of a small tree. The food of this species consists of insects and their
larvse.
G 2. Eopsaltria australis, Latham. “ Yellow-breasted Eobin.”
Eopsaltria australis , Gould, Birds of Austr., fol. ecf, Yol. m, pi. 11 (1848) ;
North, Nests and Eggs, Austr. Bds., p. 108 (1889).
This resident and well-known species is freely distributed over the greater
portion of eastern New South Wales. It is very common in the scrubs near
the coast, and is equally plentiful in the damp and humid gullies of our
heavily-timbered mountain ranges inland. Probably there is no more
familiar or useful bird to the orchardist and viticulturist, for being of a
tame and fearless disposition, it readily enters into orchards and vineyards in
search of insects and their larvse, which constitute its food. Near Sydney
this species is one of the first to breed, commencing early in July and con-
tinuing until the end of December, during which time two or more broods
are reared. The nest, which is usually placed in the fork of a low tree, is a
round cup-shaped structure, composed of strips of bark and fibrous roots,
bound round and held together with cobwebs, the outside and rim being
beautifully ornamented with lichen and pieces of bark attached by means of
cobweb, and which hang perpendicularly around the nest. It is lined inside
with wiry grasses, and generally has a few dried Eucalyptus leaves at the
bottom. Eggs, two or three in number for a sitting, of a bright apple or
bluish-green ground colour, freckled and spotted all over with different
shades of reddish and chestnut-brown. In some instances these markings
predominate towards the thicker end, and becoming confluent, form a well-
defined zone ; length, 083 x 0 62 inch.
68. Poecilodrtas capito, Gould. “ Large-headed Eobin,” “ White-lored
Eobin.”
Eopsaltria capito , Gould, Birds of Austr. Supph, pi. 17 (1869) ; North,
Nests and Eggs, Austr. Bds., p. 109 (1889).
This species frequents the rich brushes that clothe the sides of the northern
coastal rivers, its range extending as far south as the neighbourhood of the
Bellinger Eiver. Although by no means au uncommon bird in this portion
of the Colony, it is never met with elsewhere in New South Wales. The
nest, which is usually built in a low tree, is a deep cup-shaped structure,
composed of the dead leaves of the “ lawyer-vine” ( Calamus australis ), held
together with a few wiry grass-stems, the exterior being covered with mosses
and a few pieces of lichen. Eggs, two in number for a sitting, of a dull
greenish-white ground colour, indistinctly marked with yellowish and reddish
brown, particularly towards the larger end; length, 0 - 8 x o'6 inch.
SyJney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lB96.


ncullural Gazette of
Wales Vol V
Meianqdry
treast
Striorsf.
ack & Vv


gtguo
KR osmu
3 1508 00010002




