

THE GOLD REGIONS
A MAGICAL TRIP
(Reprinted from the Leisure Hour.)
.♦ —
“ Will ye take a trip wi’ me to the digging tonight?” saida
worthy Scotch friend of ours whom we encountered the other
• evening when strolling down Regent-street. He accompanied his
query with a hearty slap on the back, to awake us, perhaps, to a
lively sense of the importance of his question, and to the necessity
of an immediate decision; for before we had time to suggest the
desirability of a little time to consider the matter, he importuned
ns earnestly to accompany him. “ To-night ?” we mildly inquired.
‘ ‘ Fes, to-night! ” was the only reply. It was verging close upon
eight o’clock; and we asked, with surprise, what could bo the
vehicle which started on such a voyage at an hour so unseasonable ?
But our friend vouchsafed no explanation—he was “going by
magic,” and would “ bring us back to supper.” Now we had
hoard of breakfasting in London and supping at Paris; we had
also listened to serial machinists, as to their visionary projects for
taking a trip through cloudland to America, India, or China in a
few days, and round the ball we live on in a few weeks; but “to the
digging and back in a couple bf hours ” exceeded our limited com-
prehension; and as our stalwart friend persisted, seriously, as to the
reality of his magical trip, we considered him somewhat “daft,”
to borrow a term from his own quaint vocabulary; but ultimately
consented to go, as the only means of satisfying his impqrtunity. '
We turned as the neighbouring clock struck eight into a large
building, out of which, he said, the magical vehicle started; and lie
silently guided us into a large, dark, mysterious room, like the
cabin of a ship, where we felt our way to a seat in a long narrow
box. Two little jets of gas flickered dimly in the distance, one on
each side of the opposite end of the room;
“ Yetfrom those flames,
No light, but rather darkness visible,
Served only to discover”
the indistinct outlines of a number of individuals who were, with us,
to embark on this mysterious voyage. Companionship alleviates
apprehension ; but here all was silent as the sepulchre; save now
and then the gentle rustling of silks and satins, as some of the fair
sex seemed to enter. “ We’re off,” said our friend, as a gentle hand
brought forth some “fairy-like music,” from what, had we been
quite sure we were still on terra Jirma, we should have designated
an “ instrument,” A moment more of mystery, and a dark figure


309, Regent Street. Open at 12, 3, and 8 o’clock.
into the delightful valley of the Goulburn, where innumerable
flocks of shoep were spreading themselves abroad, and grazing
peacefully amidst the rich herbage of these natural and boundless
parks. There we saw the “Snowy Mountains,” and afterwards
Geelong the future rival of the city of Melbourne, and the Barrubool
Hills, where there is some of the finest land in the colony.
But it was time to go to the diggings, and we passed on forty
miles, to Ballarat; but the “ diggers” had left for the more produc-
tive fields of Mount Alexander, whither we at once hastened. The
scenes in our rapid transportation over the road to the diggings
were very amusing—men, women, and children, masters and ser-
vants, on horseback, in bullock-drays, and on foot. When night
approaches, the forest tracks are not traceable, and the diggers
encamp, the bullocks and horses are tethered, fires are lighted, tea
and damper are partaken of under the shady trees. “ Damper” is
a mixture of flour and water baked under the wood ashes, and,
when well made, is said to be a very tolerable substitute for bread.
So they say; and bush travelling, no doubt, removes many little
fancies with regard to delicacies for the stomach, which ore cherished
and attended to in cities. The scene was striking. Here they sat
round a great fire, blazing and crackling. Then they roll them-
selves up in their possum rugs, with a saddle, or the softest stone
they can procure, for a pillow ; and thus they gently glide into
the arms of Morpheus I With the morning light they are up to
their tea and damper, and then proceed on their journey.
Arriving at Mount Alexander, the scene outstrips our limited
powers of description. Men of all ages and every clime were dig-
ging, or washing the earth already dug, in the “ cradles” so often
described—a busy, quiet, and motley crew. A little group of
aborigines listlessly looking on, with their short pipes in their
mouths, gives rise to a feeling of wonder that this singular people,
with all their love.of glare and glittering finery, had turned to no
account the “nuggets” of gold which, at first, might sometimes
almost be kicked up as you walked along ! Yet such is the fact.
We speedily came within forty miles of Sydney, the capital,
having arrived at the Illawarra district, surrounded by mountains,
and possessing some of the richest soil in the colony. As we
seemed to fly along, we saw the aborigines spearing the ’kanga-
roos among the palm trees, round the trunks of which beautiful
parasitical plants were twining and hanging in luxuriant fest otrns
from the branches. In a sheet of water close by, called Tom
Thumb’s Lagoon, the natives were spearing fish; while on the
margin of the lake a number of pelicans, cormorants, and black
swans, were also doing a little fishing on tl>eir own account.


/ r / jl/ *7 / ct
309, Eegent Street. Open at IS, 3, and 8 o’clock.
But tlie wild imaginings of tlio “Ancient Mariner” found
little sympathy with the matter-of-fact people who were bound for
the auriferous mountains. They feared not the curious bird, which
“In mist or cloud, son mast or shroud,
Did perch for vespers nine ;
While, all the night, through fog-smoke white.
Glimmers the white moonshine.”
P nfortunately for the poor Albatross, they take such imaginings for
“ moonshine,” and act accordingly. They have not the fear which
the “ mariner” had; but bait a hook fastened in apiece of wood
and attached to a line floating after the stern of the ship, and the
voracious bird gulps down the fat meat, the hook sticks in Ids
crooked beak, and he is drawn up on the deck, the length
of his pinions incapacitating him from soaring aloft therefrom.
The storm abated with that magical unnaturalness which had
characterised the whole voyage, and we entered upon the great
whaling waters of the south. Here we had the good fortune to
witness the capture of one of these leviathans of the great deep, which
was knocking up quite a little tempest in his locality by furiously
rolling his great body about. He went down for the purpose (if
feeding in the deep waters,where he lay with his gigantic mouth open,
.like a huge cave, with his comparatively disproportionate lower jaw
for a little door thereof. Ho kept this great cavity open, till a sufficient
number of small fish had been allured by the glistening whiteliesft
•of his tongue to enter it; and then he suddenly closed his lerflfid
trap, and gulped them down into his capacious stomach without n
single gasp! Having presently come again to the surface, he was
harpooned from a whaler’s boat on the look-out for him. This was'
mot the whalefrom which the “whalebone” is taken,[but the sperm
whale, from which spermaceti is obtained ; the other variety is
chiefly found in the northern seas, and this chiefly in slie southern.
But we have no lime for disquisition on many curibtti#
for the land of promise is visible in the horizon, like # atrip .tv
cloud fringing the outermost edge of the waters. The capsiifttl
tins was Cape Otway, and the curtain dropped til! wo o-ot tlidse ;:
vr if " entered the Port Phillip Heads, and passed up tfp
Melbourne. The climate was clear and dry, and the coun(rv,a«-
we had so often been told, presented a “park-like” appearance*.
Here were handsome stone buildings, with shops selling.—or nU
least professing to sell—“at loss than prime cost,” and living by
the loss, ns they do, or’profess to do, here at home. Churches'and
chapels of every kind were there, with literary institutes, and
hotels, and all the accompaniments of civilisation. It looked
rather curious, however, to see the farts or “drnvs” drawn bv


Panorama of the Australian Gold Fields,
Luge bullocks, instead of horses; and the shrill hallooing of the
drivers was extremely singular. But while these observations were
being taken, we had slipped on three miles, to Brighton where
the colonial aristocracy and merchants retire in the evening from
the dust and business of the city. The trees were singular, too,
being principally gum and she-oak trees.
We passed the “Mooney Ponds” to Mount Macedon, which
rose abruptly in the distance. This was the beginning of the
auriferous districts, and was forty miles from Melbourne. On our
way we passed a group of the aborigines, ingeniously catching the
wild turkeys which abound here. The she-oak trees were very
striking; and as the wind whistled softly through their wiry, fibrous
foliage, a low moaning music was heard, notunlike the sound of the
iEolian harp. Here were lots of contradictory sights to be seen;
it was their summer, whereas it was our winter; and while with
us it was close to Christmas, here they were regaling themselves
with roast duck and green peas I They have cherries, but the stone
grows outside. They have pears, but they are as hard as leather,
and the stalk grows out of the thick end; their hedges are often of
geraniums; parrots of gorgeous hues fly about as plentiful as
sparrows at home; prawns of the finest kind are caught in the
lagoons, or little lakes of the interior. The principal animal in these
untrodden wilds is the kangaroo, which has a long tail and long
hind legs, with very short fore legs. At the approach of danger, it
thrusts the end of its tail into the ground, stands upon its hind
legs, deposits its little ones in a pocket formed by nature in its
bosom, and takes frightful leaps into its native thickets. Fine
cod and other fish, the former weighing from 40 lbs. to 50 lbs,;
also crayfish, mussels, cockles, and the usual productions of the
sea, are found in the Goulburn, a fresh-water river, which runs
1,200 miles before it reaches the ocean at Adelaide; their swans
are black, and the Australian jackass is a bird!
While musing over this land of contrai-ies, we came upon an
encampment of the aborigines with their gins (women) and gunyahs
(huts), in the lovely valley of Heidelberg, through which are seen the
windings of the Yarra Yarra river. These natives, who occupy a
very low place in the scale of humanity, feed on the kangaroo, wal-
laby, opossum, and other wild animals which they hunt in the bush,
while they leave their gins at home in their gunyahs of bark to do
the work I Having killed their animals, they roast them, a piece
at a lime, which they bite off as it gets black, gallantly leaving the
odds and ends for their wives, who are not permitted to eat with
those “lords of the creation.”
The curtain dropped, and we saw nothing more till we came


Panorama of the Australian Oold Fields,
in the distance jumped up. “ That’s the captain,” said our friend; %
“ he’ll tell us all about it, as we go along. He is going to draw
the curtain, and let us look out of the window in a moment.”
This was grateful tidings; for a little light,.began to be desirable.
“Ladies and gentlemen,” said the captain, springing up in the
darkness, “among the various topics which interest the public
mind in the present day, there is, perhaps, not one so thoroughly
engrossing, and so deeply important, as the subject of our Austra-
lian colonies and their gold-fields. The places to which I shall
now conduct you, 1 have visited already myself, during a residence
of eight years in the colony.” The course usually taken by vessels,
he told us, Avas 16,000 miles, and occupied something less than
four months; however, ho promised to take us there and bring us
back in a much shorter time than that—an announcement we were
very glad to hear, especially that we were to come back in safety!
While he said he was taking us down to Plymouth, to avoid
the annoyance of the “upper channel passage,” all the signs of
motion we could distinguish were a slight rustling outside the
curtains of what appeared to be the window of the ship’s cabin we
had so suddenly and mysteriously entered; these curtains soon
drew up, and there was before us Plymouth Sound 1 The sea was
calm, and the waves appealed to roll with a delightful gentleness;
it seemed like a dream; but the sudden burst of smoke from the
port-hole of a ship of war, in the distance, followed instantaneously
by the report of a cannon—this was a fact so palpable, that wo
could not resist the undeniable evidence of our senses. We seemed
to be rushing on the surface of the water at a fearfully rapid rate;
but the continuous gazing on the waves soon had an unpleasant
influence on our nerves; so we turned our eyes, for a moment’s
relief, on the dark mass of individuals whose undefined forms were
scarcely perceptible in the gloom by which we were surrounded.
The captain now told us that all visitors had left the ship, and that
wo were fairly under weigh; so it seemed, for the majestic Break-
water began to be visible out of our cabin window. Night came
on, and we still skimmed across the surface of the water with
a fearful velocity; the captain presently pointed out that mighty
monument of architectural ingenuity, Eddystone Lighthouse, with
its bright lanterns casting forth their intense light, just as when we
last gazed upon them from the poop of a “ homeward bound.”
The moon rose majestically, and as she cut her silvery path across the
bosom of the ocean, cast additional beauty on all around us.
Everything transpired, on this magical voyage, with the most
alarming velocity. While we turned our head, for an instant or
two, reflecting on the mysteries round about us, a further rustling


309, Regent Street. Open at 12, 3, and 8 o’clock:
noise led ns to look again out of the cabin-window, where we
beheld the cause of the “sensation” —a powerful sailor had fallen
overboard, and was manfully combating with the waves. Two or
three deep sighs were drawn near us, but who they came from we
could not see. However, a boat was approaching him, and it is to
be hoped the poor fellow was rescued from a watery grave; but we
went at such a rate that we could not see whether he was or was
not, nor did the captain tell us. In less time than we have occupied
in writing these words we found ourselves in the Bay of Biscay.
There was a great commotion amongst the waves, but the captain
coolly said it was only what they called “a half gale of wind,” a
statement which could not fail to give rise to apprehensions as
to the other “ half;” which, if forthcoming then, would have
made a somewhat serious matter of it. Flocks of stormy petrels,
or “ mother Carey’s chickens,” as the sailors call them, were hover-
ing about. The captain said they followed us because of the scraps
of victuals which the passengers threw overboard ; but this remark
must have referred to the sailors on deck; for nothing was thrown
out of the window of our magical cabin. The “ Propontis” from
the Cape came steaming up; but it was only to “ mock at our
calamity;” for before we had time to speak, much less to write a
word to our friends, concerning the wonderful events which had
befallen us since leaving Regent-street, the “ Propontis” was non
est, and the sun broke forth into his tropical brilliancy, and the
fruitful hills of sunny Madeira burst beautifully upon our astonished
vision. We did not go into Funchal, but the captain expatiated in
a very touching manner, and with much gusto, on the luscious
fruits to be had there, and on the fine wines which, he said, would
be very acceptable in the tropics we were now fast approaching.
Funchal fled from us, or else we fled from it; and after looking
for a moment on a group of porpoises as they were playfully darting
arond the stern of our vessel, we turned to divest ourselves of the
outermost paletot, by way of preparation for the “ tropics,” about
which we had heard so much. While this was going on, the cap-
tain told ns that on deck there was an awning erected under which
the ladies sat with their knitting, netting, and crochet; but there
was none of that in our cabin; indeed it was so dark, that after
carefully depositing our coat on a vacant seat, we turned round and
unconsciously sat upon our hat! A few minutes saw the hat again
approximating to its proper shape; meanwhile, shoals of flying
fish were passing the window, their silvery scales sparkling in the
sunbeams; they were persecuted on every hand, poor things ; the
dolphins were after them behind, and the sea-gulls ready to pounce
upon them from above : in this dilemma, they often become entan-


gled in the rigging of the ship, and are taken by the passengers ; v
the dolphins are harpooned and sliced up for a breakfast relish.
Plunging along, we presently came to the Peak of Tenerifte,
which has thrust its cloud-capped'head 13,000 feet above the level of
the sea. It was visible at a distance of sixty miles. A few moments
sufficed to approach and pass it, and by the interposition of (he
captain, the barbarous farce of king Neptune’s visit at “ the Line”
was spared us. All was quiet—not a word was uttered, save by the
captain, at the window; and his mysterious majesty, the monarch
of the waves, so far as we were concerned, was non est. Vessels,
we were told, on approaching this region, are often becalmed: —
“ Day after day, day after day
They stick—nor breath, nor motion—
As idle as a painted ship
Upon a painted ocean I”
.But in this, as in every other respect, our “events” Iran spired
with a magical lleetness. Wo hod a little becalming, which gave
us space to regard the celestial bodies; and the sight told us plainly
we had left Britannia’s shores. The “Great Bear” had walked
away, but the “Southern Cross” and its stellar companions had
taken its place, and presented a novel and beautiful appearance.
The trade-winds springing up, we were carried to the
Brazilian coast, and had a peep at liio Janeiro, with its
picturesque harbour and its sugar-loaf mountain. But this was
getting far out of our way, as every young geographer at once
perceives. So the captain dropped the curtain, and in a few
moments of mysterious solitude and darkness, we made a desperate
dash right across the South Atlantic Ocean ! When the curtain
again rose, we looked out on the “ half-way house,” as emigrants
facetiously designate the Cape of Good Hope, The great table
mountain, behind Capetown, was speedily covered with a cloth of
murky clouds. This was an indication of an approaching gale.
The vessels in the bay at once stood out to sea, and so did we. The
thunders rolled, the lightnings flashed with fearful forkedness,
while the rain streamed down in drenching torrents, The waves
went up in horrible hills, and the ships rolled down into dreadful
dales; but our magical craft went calmly on.
“ And now the storm-blast came, and lie
Was tyrannous and strong;
He struck us with his o’ertaking wings,
And chased us south along.
"And a good south wind sprung up behind,
The albatross did follow;
And every day, for food or play.
He came to the mariners’ hollo.”


Panorama of the Australian Gold Fields,
Then we came to Woolongong, Botany Bay, and Sydney Head*?,
and thus entered Port Jackson, and had a fine view of the city of
Sydney, which is indeed “ beautiful for situation.” The waters of
Port Jackson are studded with numerous picturesque little islands,
which glisten on their glassy bosom like so many mighty emeralds
set in silver. The city has 70,000 inhabitants, and handsome
shops fitted up quite in the London style. But it was not per-
mitted us to tarry here, so we hastened on to the Paramatta river
and the Bathurst country. On our way we witnessed another
phase of colonial life—a stockman engaged in driving cattle. These
hardy and enterprising fellows arc considered the best horsemen in
the world. We saw also a flock of emus, which are very interesting
birds, but space forbids details We paid a flying visit totbe diggings
at Summerhill creek, where the first discovery of gold was-madc;
and at length arrived at the Ophir diggings, where the captain
told us many interesting anecdotes of an experimental character,
and showed us two of the native mounted police. It is very
apparent that all the diggings do not succeed; but he informed ns
of a party who lent some young men £3O, on condition that he
should have a certain per ccntage on their profits. Eight weeks
passed and none of them earned a pound; but their fortunes changed
one day, and in a week or two they sent their patron £5O as his
share of the spoils ! It ia evidently a pursuit full of risks.
In the midst of these narrations, night drew on apace; no
twilight lent an excuse to an half hour’s gossip; the moon rose
most magically and majestically from the end of the beautiful valley *
which was the scene of these gold-seeking operations, and, as she
mounted higher and higher in the azure arch which covered us, she
tipped the rugged summits of the neighbouring hills with silver;
at their bases," ns the clouds, removing from her face, ever and
anon let her light shine down upon us, we beheld the diggers
grouped round their blazing fires, with tea and damper, and
var.ous accompaniments* We were entranced with the interest of
the scene, when, lo! there was a sudden rush of the mysterious
beings who occupied our cabin—the curtain fell—our friend led
us away-with the crowd, and we emerged into the visible world
out of the next door to the Polytechnic at 10 o’clock, having been
al sent a couple of hours, delighted and instructed by the trip, and
anxious to visit half or all the world on the same terms, to see and
hear what manner of men, fruits, flowers, and animals flourish in
regions yet to us unknown. Our magical trip had been, our readers
will have anticipated, through the medium of a Panorama, , 'V;i',
FETTER, DUFF, AXD CO. PLAYHOUSE-VARI), BI.ACKFEIAKS. K t,JO
f (T
