

PRINCIPLES;
WITH A LETTER DEDICATORY
THE VERY REV. THE MODERATOR.
REV, WAZIR BEG, M.D , LL.D.,
PRESBVrjEK OF THE Ci-IFRCH OK NEW SoDTH WALES, AND
Minister of Chatmf.rs’ Church, Sydney,




rb vf, y
A MANUAL
PRESBYTERIAN]
PRINCIPLES;
WITH A LETTER DEDICATORY
THE VERY REV. THE MODERATOR.
REV. WAZIR BEG, M.D., LL.D.,
Presbyter of the Church of New South Wales, and
Minister of Chalmers’ Church, Sydney.
SYDNEY:
JOHN L. SHERRIE F, PUBLISHER,
18 Wynyard Square,


♦


INDEX.
Page.
Ambrose on Presbytery ... .. 24
Angel—The Apocalytio 44
Aphorisms—Presbyterian 55
Apostle—different meanings of ... 31
Hebrew and Arabic for ... 32
Apostles as Presbyters 5, 32
Preaching their chief work 32
Ruling not their chief work 9
Apostolic Succession explained and
refuted 41 43
Augustine on Presbyters 25
Bancroft, Dr
Bible—The the religion of Pro-
testants .. ... ... yiii.
right interpretation of ... ix.
Bishop, different meanings of ... 20
mistranslated and meaning
perverted 1,21
pci VCI ICU ... ... ...±J Zi.
and Presbyter identical 1, 8,22
Bishops—Ancient African ... ’26
Ancient Irish 26
-cxjuuiciiu Aiisii ... ...
Scriptural and Primitive ... 22
Bishoprick ..." 21
Burnet’s—-Bishop, testimony in favour
of Presbyterian Ordination 31
Caliphs called Presbyters 20
Calvin ... 28
Chrysostom on Presbyters and Bishops 24
Church—The Bohemian ... ... 27
—— Danish ... 28
Dutch 28
Protestant French .. 28
Norwegian 28
Sweedish 28
Classes, Continental 51
Clemens Romanus ... ... ... 22
Clergy, meaning of ." g
Confessions of Faith, Foreign—their
testimony in favour of Presbytery 27,28
Congregationalists, why so-called ‘ 18, 49
imitate Presby-
terians ... 52
Consistory, Continental 61
Council vide Courts of Presbyters ...
Courts of Presbyters
Cramner’s—Archbishop, testimony in
favour of Presbytery ... ... 29
Cyprian on Presbyters 24
Data, Historical ... ... ... 22
Deacon, definition of 13 40
definition of 13, 40
Arch-deacon 41
Sub-deacon ... 41
Sub-deacon ... 41
Deaconness 41
JJeaconness ... ... ... 44
Diocesan, the ..." 5
Doctors, the 39
Douay’s Mistranslations ... 5, 6, 11
Elders .. ... 19
Christian ... 20
——Jewish "19, 20
Election—popular 49J 5]
English Reformers, Archbishops,
Bishops and Divines in favour
of Presbytery 29, 30
Episcopacy vide Prelacy
Episcopalian Inconsistency viii.
Evangelists 34
Fathers, The—their testimony in
favour of Presbytery. 22, 24
Foreign Reformers, Professors and
Divines in favour of Presbytery ... 27
General Assembly of Independents... 52
Governments n
Helps vide Deacons
Hermas on Presbyters 23
Huss and Jerome of Prague on
Presbytery ... 27
Ignatius ... 23
Independents vide Congregationalists
Irenoeus on Presbytery 23
Jerome’s testimony in favour of
Presbytery 24,25
John, the Apostle, a Presbyter ... 5
a Sum-presbyter... 5
Justin Martyr 23


Kirk Session 51
Laying on of hands 11, 13, 14
Luther—a Presbyter, “ conscecrates”
a Bishop 28
Melancthon 28
Moderator —the term defined ... 53
Mosheim’s testimony in favour of
Presbytery ... .. 27
Nabee ... 33
Meander’s testimony in favour of
Presbytery ... 26
Orders—The 41
one 27,48
two 29
three 41, 43, 48
Ordination 12, 14
confounded -with popular
election or call 49
errors of 50
Greek terms for 48
by whom performed 8,12,13,18
Lawful 31,49
Prelatic 14
Presbyterian ... i., 14, 49
Timothy’s 15
Paley’s—Archdeacon, testimony ... 31
Pastors, different meanings of ... 32
■ Hebrew and Arabic for .. 33
Invalid .. 21
Polycarp’s testimony 23
Preaching more important than
Ruling 9
Prelacy, its haughty exclusiveness... iv.
its past good services .. iv.
its past cruelties vii.
its gradual rise ... 27, 53
Presbyter, definition of 1,17
his duties 4,8, 9,17
his qualifications... 4, 7,17
Title to whom given ... 1
Hebrew and Arabic terms
for ... 20
Presbyteress 41
Presbyters and Bishops identical
proved from Scripture 1,8, 20
■ from the Fathers 22
from Foreign Reformers and
Divines 27
from English Prelates, Re-
formers and Divines 29, 30
Presbyters, divided into two classes 20
Ruling in time of Queen
Elizabeth 20
Presbyterian Aphorisms 55
Church “unchurched ”
by Prelatists ... iv.
Ordination not recog-
nized by Prelatists... iv.
—— Ordination recognised
by the Early Prela-
tes, Reformers, and
Divines of England
v. vi., 31
Denomination, the larg-
est in Protestant
Christendom 54
—— Motto viii.
Parents and Guardians
exhorted viii.
Youth commended vii., viii.
Presbyterianism imitated by Con-
gregationalists and Prelatists ... 52
Presbyterianism essential to the ex-
istence of Society 52
Presbytery or Presbuterion its
ancient renderings
Puritans 54
Rabbi or Eabban .. 39
Reformers, English, their testimony
in favour of Presbytery 29
Foreign, their testimony-
in favour of Presbytery- 28
Ruling, inferior work 7,11
different Greek terms for ...9,10
Statistics of Presbyterianism 53
Stilling-fleet’s, Bishop, testimony 23, 24
Succession, vide Apostolic
Synod vide Courts of Presbyters ... 61
Synod of Dort 29
Tradition, not the religion of Pro-
testants ... ... ... viii, ix.
Teachers, definitions of, in Scottish
Standards ; 13, 37
Timothy an Evangelist 35
a Presbyter 16, 19
Titus an Evangelist 36
Timothy and Titus, not “ Arch-
bishops ” 38
Usher, Archbishop, in favour of
Presbytery 30
Vulgate, its mistranslations 5
the... ... 26
Whitby’s—Dr.—testimony ... 38, 42, 44
Wickliffe ’ 29


THE VERY REVEREND
THE MODERATOR OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
ERRATA.
For “ Waldences,” line 49, column second, Index, page iv., read Waldenses.
“to” line 2, page vii. read “into.”
“to” —6, —8, “into.”
“to” —6, —8, “into.”
“invested” 31, —8, “vested.”
“Judah.” 34, 20, “ Judges.”
“lettake” —7, 21, “ let another take”
—• “on” —9, 21, “ in.”
“Presbyters” 17, 22, “ Presbyter.”
“peurile” 37, 22, “puerile.”
“party” 32,
“his” 17,
“paces” 40,
“clergy—all Prelates” —9,
“imposters” 40,
“ Presbyteries ” 36.
“excellant” 26,
“of it” 46,
29, “parity.”
42, “ this.”
42, “places.”
43, “ clergy —they were all Prelates
46, “ impostors.”
53, “ Presbyterians.”
54, “ excellent.”
54, “ thereof.”
Hatimef, JLeignton,
7 ’jLiixocson,'
Butler, and many others must ever remain sweetly and
sacredly enshrined in the hearts of us all. Whatever
may be our views regarding “Ecclesiastical Polity,” we
revere and love the memory of those Champions, who were


Kirk Session 81
Laying on of hands 11, 13, 14
Luther —a Presbyter, “ conscecrates”
a Bishop 28
Melancthon 28
Moderator—the term defined ... 53
Mosheim’s testimony in favour of
Presbytery 27
Presbyterian Aphorisms 55
Church “unchurched ”
by Prelatists ... iv.
Ordination not recog-
nized by Prelatists... iv.
Ordination recognised
by the Early Prela-
tes, Keformers, and
Divines of England
v. vi., 31
Denomination, Me larg-
est in Protestant
Christendom 54
mmg HTtrtLie U 1 oiioun I wmtby's—DrT—testimony ... 38, 42, 44
Elizabeth 20 1 Wickliffe 29


THE VERY REVEREND
THE MODERATOR OF THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Very Reverend Sir, —
The Great Head of the Church has “called” you to
be our Primus inter Pares ; hence, with your permission, I
dedicate to you the following “ Manual of Presbyterian
Principles.”
It is but just to say that you, Very Rev. Sir, and my
Co-Presbyters over whom you preside, entertain no
unkind feelings towards those who differ from us in their
Schemes of “Church Polity,” be they Episcopalians or Con-
gregationalists. We regard them as “Friends” and
“Brethren,” knit together in the bonds of our “common
Protestantism.” “Beloved, let us love one another : for love
is of God.” As Protestants—whether Episcopalians, Congre-
gationalists, or Presbyterians—we trust we have learnt
to realize :
“ Love never fails: though knowledge cease,
Though Prophecies decay,
Love, Christian Love, shall still increase,
Shall still extend her sway.”
And it is a matter of deep heartfelt gratitude to God that
Protestants have generally felt it to be their duty in all
ages, when the interests of their “common Protestantism”
were concerned, “to agree to differ.”
You, Very Rev. Sir, and my Co-Presbyters, can never
forget the great services rendered to the Cause of Truth by
Prelacy; and therefore the noble names of Cranmer,
Latimer, Leighton, Barrow, Taylor, Tillotson, Hooker,
Butler, and many others must ever remain sweetly and
sacredly enshrined in the hearts of us all. Whatever
may be our views regarding “Ecclesiastical Polity,” we
revere and love the memory of those Champions, who were


in the thickest of the fight on the Battlefield of the Refor-
mation, where Light and Darkness, Truth and Error,
Liberty and Despotism, the Son of God, and the Prince of
Darkness, fought with one another. Theirs are
“ The immortal names
That were not horn to die.”
They, however, did not seek fame or their ‘‘own things”
but they sought “the things of Jesus Christ.” They were
not like “the World’s Poet,”* who
“Drank every cup of joy, heard every trump
Of fame; drank early, deeply drank ; drank draughts
That common millions might have quenched—then died
Of thirst, because there was no more to drink.”
To them we owe a debt —the debt of Lovef, which we feel
we cannot, and do not, sufficiently repay and therefore
you, Yery Eev. Sir, and “I believe in the Holy Catholic
Church, and the Communion of Saints.”
But Episcopacy or Prelacy, Puseyism or Ritualism,
has been known now and again to advance unholy claims,
and to make arrogant assumptions, whereby all “non-
episcopal denominations” are unchurched. With over-
bearing intolerance Prelacy or “Churchism” has too often
considered “the non-episcopal” Ministry to be invalid
Ministry, and the non-episcopal “Ordinances” to be
invalid ordinances. Hence we are told by the so-called
“Churchmen” that “Dissenters,” among whom they are
pleased to class even Presbyterians, have “a. religion
without a Church ,” because what they call their Church is
not governed by “bishops ” or “ prelates,” and hence also
that non-episcopal Ministers are not admitted into the pulpits
of Episcopal or Prelatic churches.§ This fact is stated—
* Byron
t Rom. xiii. 8.
} Cranmer, Latimer, and Ridley, were Martyrs for the Protestant Truth.
§ Even a colonial bishop—the Bishop of Melbourne—has come to the decision that
a Presbyterian Minister cannot officiate in “English pulpits.”—Fide “ Australasian
Churchman ,” February 22, 1868, p. 166. Vide also Bishop of Tasmania’s Speech,
“ Australasian Churchman ,” February 22, 1868. These colonial “Prelates” ought
to remember that Archbishop Grindal considered Presbyterian ordination valid ;
for the Archbishop in 1582 appointed Morison, ordained by the Church of Scotland,
to pastoral duties within the diocese of Canterbury. The following is the quotation
from “ the License” granted by the Archbishop to'the Rev. Mr. Morrison. It bears
the date “6th April, 1582’” The Arehbishop says—“ You were admitted and
ordained to sacred orders, and the holy ministry, by the imposition of hands,


not that non-episcopal Presbyterian Ministers are
desirous of Episcopalian pulpits, but as
“a sign of the times,” which indicates a sentiment or
“dogma” that non-episcopal Ministers are considered as
unauthorized —having no right to preach. The non-episcopal
Ministers might be admitted to the Platform , but not to
the Pulpit, and so the Ministers of the Episcopal Church
do not condescend to ask the Ministers of Non-Episcopal
or li Non-accredited” Churches to their “accredited” and
orthodox Pulpits !
I speak the language of Candour and of Friendship
when I speak so plainly, though some of my Episcopalian
Friends might exclaim, in the words of Canning—
“ Save, save, oh, save me from the candid friend!”
But you, Very Rev. Sir, and I deeply regret that such a
superciliously intolerant sentiment or dogma should be
entertained by any section of Protestants in these times,
according to the laudable form and rite of the Reformed Church of Scotland ;
We, therefore, as much as lies in us, and as by right we may, approving and
ratifying the form of your ordination, grant unto you a license —that in such orders
by you taken, you may and have power, in any convenient places, in and throughout
the whole province of Canterbury, to celebrate divine offices, and to minister the
Sacraments .”
Moreover, the following indisputable facts from Bede are worthy of the conside-
ration of the self-satisiied prelates above alluded to : —“ We are informed by many
ancient historians, and very expressly by Bede, in his famous Ecclesiastical History,
‘ that at the request of Oswald, king of Northumberland, certain presbyters came
{in the seventh century) from Scdtland into England, and ordained bishops; that
the abbot and other presbyters of the island of Hy sent Aydan for this express
purpose, declaring him to be worthy for the office of bishop, and that he ought to be
sent to instruct the unbelieving and the unlearned.’ He informs us that ‘ those
presbyters ordained him and sent him to England on this errand; and that Finan,
sent from the same monastery in the same island, succeeded him in the Episcopal
office, after having been ordained by the Scottish presbyters.’ ”
Upon the testimony of Bede, Baxter remarks—“ You will find, that the English
had a succession of bishops by the Scottish presbyter's ordination : and there is no
mention in Bede, of any dislike or scruple of the lawfulness of the course.” The
learned Dr. Doddridge refers us to Bede and Jones to substantiate the fact that
‘ The ordination of English bishops cannot be traced up to the Church of Rome as
its original; that in the year 668, the successors of Austin, the monk, (who came
over A.D. 599) being almost extinct, by far the greater part of the bishops were of
Scottish ordination, by Aydan and Finan, who came out of the Culdee Monastery
of Columbanus, and were no more than presbyters.'
‘And is it verily so, that the Episcopal blood was thus early and extensively
contaminated in England ? Is it verily so, that when the effects of pious Austin’s
labours had beesme almost imperceptible, the sinking Church was revived again by
sending to Scotland for presbyters to come and ordain a multitude of bishops ?
Then it is verily a fact, that Presbyterian ordination is one of the sturdiest pillars
that support the vast fabric of the Church of England. No matter if only ten
bishops were thus ordained, the contamination (if it be one) having been imparted
more than eleven hundred years ago, has had a long time to diffuse itself; and
doubtless has diffused itself so extensively from bishop to bishop, that not a single
Prelate can prove that he has escaped the infection. For what one of them can tell,


when the bonds of our common Protestantism ought to
knit us closer and closer. It is sad that such priestly air»
should be given, and that attempts should be made to put
on big looks and to lay down the law.
It is true, you are a Protestant; but you are also a
Presbyterian. It is true, the Church in which you,
Very Rev. Sir, are appointed “a Ruler,” is Protestant, but
that Church is also Presbyterian, i.e., the best type of
Protestant. It is true, the Presbyterian Church in all lands
reveres the memory of Cranmer, Leighton, Tillotson, and
Hooker; but that Church also reveres the memory of
John Knox, Rutherford, Chalmers, and Cook. Therefore,
speaking in the interests of our common Christianity and
our common Protestantism, a very great wrong has been
done to the Presbyterian Church by “ Churchianic ”
assumptions, and the Protestant- Presbyterian Church will
be wronging herself by appearing to agree with the
if he were not consecrated by bishops, who were themselves consecrated by bishops,
and they by other bishops, to whom all the ordaining power they ever had was
transmitted from the presbyters of Scotland ? But this is not the whole of the evil.
As no one bishop can trace his Episcopal pedigree farther back, perhaps, than two
or three centuries, so he cannot certainly know, that any presbyter, on whose head
he has imposed hands, has received from him anything more than Presbyterian
ordination Nor is this all the evil. The Protestant Episcopal bishops and pres-
byters in America are in the same plight; for all their authority came from England.
But as the English bishops, who gave it to them, could not then and cannot now
certainly tell whence it came, so who knows but all the Episcopal clergy in the
United States of America are originally indebted to the hands of Elder Aydan
and Elder Finan for all their ministerial powers ? I tremble for all Protestant
Episcopal churches on both continents, if Presbyterian ordination be not valid
and Scriptural.’ ”
And the Prelates of Melbourne and Tasmania, who seem to sneer at Presbyterian
ordination, may be reminded, on the authority of the Venerable Bede, that their
ordination, after all, is the ordination which has descended, in “ apostolic succession ”
(if they please) from Scottish Presbyters and their Church, i.e., the Church of
England, which forms but a minority of Protestant Chr stendom in comparison with
Presbyterians, who constitute the vast majority (Vide Appendix, Art; 15,
Statistics) is put by them and by similar Advocates of “ Churchianity,” into a
strange position, for can such an unchurching Church be a Church of Christ 1 Can
such a Church, which has innovated —not on the authority of Scripture—the office
of Prelate—mangled, contrary to Scripture, the office of Presbyter, and perverted—
in opposition to the New Testament —the office of, deacon (Vide Appendix, Art. 1.
Presbyter; Art. 2, Bishop; Art. 10. Helps or Deacons) be “ a Church of Christ V’
And these Colonial Prelates will also do well to ponder over the words of
“judicious” Hooker, and learn what they seem to lack in that they have
injudiciously attacked Presbyterian ordination, for even Hooker concedes the point
that there may be a lawful ordination without “a Prelate,” for he says :—“Now
whereas hereupon some do infer that no ordination can stand, but only such as is
made by bishops, which have had their ordination likewise by other bishops before
them, till we come to the very Apostles of Christ themselves ; in which respect it
was demanded by Beza at Poissie, by what authority he could administer the holy
sacraments, &c.—to this we answer that there may be sometimes very just and
sufficient reason to allow ordination made without a bishop.”


Protestant Episcopal Church, when in reality, under the
circumstances, there can be no agreement, though it is
too true —
“ Whore they do agree on the stage, their unanimity is wonderful.”
In the name, then, of our common Christianity and our
common Protestantism, Presbyters feel constrained by
Christian Duty to administer the language of Argument,
and, if necessary, of Christian Rebuke to the strange
Arrogance, the mysterious Assumption, and the unmeaning
Exclusiveness of Prelacy, Puseyism, or “Churchianity.” *
Moreover, Very Rev. Sir, the Youth of our Beloved
Church, generally, are growing up without the knowledge
of the distinctive Principles of the Church of their Fathers.
They are not, however, to be blamed, for I have found
many of them thoughtful, who feel the force of the words v
The charms of Youth at once are seen and past;
And Nature says, * They are too sweet to last,’
So blooms the Rose, and so the blushing Maid,
Be wise-, too soon the flowers of Spring will fade.”
Consequently, though they have felt that “to be young
was very heaven,”f yet they have not suffered themselves
to be cax-ried away by
* Youth on the prow, and pleasure at the helm.’
Though the blossoms of their years are brightest, they
have not youthfully wandered in a flowery maze; though
their youthful heart is bounding lightest, and though their
youthful hand is holding the ephemeral wreath, they have
not forgotten the violent and murderous struggle between
Prelacy and Presbytery in the days of their Fathers, who
in consequence of their adherence to Presbytery were
subjected to severe sufferings and deaths. They have not
forgotten that they are the sons of those Worthy Sires —
the Venerable Veterans of ‘ Caledonia stern and wild,’
who, alas! in their troublous times found Prelacy to be
“ That cruel god, whose eyes
Delight in blood and human sacrifice.”
* The following Manual is, therefore, chiefly advocatory of Presbyterian Polity
as opposed to Prelatic Polity. The Congregational or Independent Polity is
consequently briefly alluded to.
t Wordsworth.


They have consequently not forgotten to fix their eyes on
the time-honored and suggestive Motto of the Church of
their Fathers—“ Nec Tamen Constjmebatitb.” * They,
however, like young trees, require care and protection,
that they may not be twisted at the very starting of
their growth for the want of them. “ What youth learns,
age does not forget.”f Let them, therefore, be trained
up in the way they should go: and when they are old
they will not depart from it.J They will thus never fail
to become “ the joy and the crown ” of the Church of their
fathers. §
“The Bible, and the Bible alone,” Very Rev. Sir—
said Chilliugworth—the Scholar and the Divine—“is
the Religion of Protestants.” Indeed, nothing is or
should be an Article of Faith with Protestants, which
is not delivered in the Bible either in "express terms
or drawn by necessary consequence ; and the moment
Protestants deviate from this Protestant principle, and
admit anything upon the authority of Tradition, they
begin to build not on Scriptural, but Popish foundation.
Episcopalian or Prelatic Friends, therefore, would do well
and have done well in protesting, in controversy with Roman
Catholics, against Tradition, and in not allowing them to
argue from Tradition in favor of Romish Usages and
Dogmas; but is it not passing strange ? is it not incon-
sistently strange, that in order to establish the claims of
Prelacy, Episcopalian Friends have had and they do have
recourse to Tradition—the very kind of Argument against
which they protest when reasoning with Roman Catholics ?
They claim “the Fathers,” as Papacy claims them. They
try to establish the claims of Prelacy on the authority of
Tradition, as Roman Catholics try to establish the claims
of Papacy on the self-same authority. They thus depart
*“ It was not consumed.” The motto of “ the Church of Scotland.” “ The Burning
Bush ” of Moses was not consumed, and though “the Church of Scotland” had
often to pass through fiery persecutions, heaped upon her not only by Papacy, hut
by Prelacy, she was not consumed. Por though the reign of Prelacy in Scotland
was marked by cruelty and murder, yet it was publicly and solemnly renounced at
the renewal of the National Covenant, and afterwards in the Solemn League and
Covenant of The Three kingdoms, and was finally abolished at the Revolution.'
t Det Ung nemmer, gammel ei glemmer.
t Proverbs xxii. 6.
t Presbyters or Parents and Guardians would do well to have special Classes on
4 ‘ Presbyterian Principles. ’ ’


from the Protestant Principle ; they thus shift the Protestant
ground to serve a particular purpose ! Therefore, to “ the
Bible, and the Bible alone * “the religion of Protestants,”
the attention of Episcopalian Protestants is respectfully
solicited in the following “Manual” by,
Very Reverend Sir,
Your faithful and humble Presbyter,
WAZIR BEG.
Sydney , January , 1870.
* The following rule is a very valuable one: —“The right way of interpreting
Scripture is to take it as we find it; without any attempt to force it into any particular
Sy “Thold it for a most infallible rule in the exposition of Scripture, that when a
literal construction will stand, the farthest from the literal is commonly the worst.
— Hooker.




PRESBYTERIANISM;
PRESBYTERIAN PRINCIPLES
The terms Presbyterian and Presbyterianism are derived
from the Greek word (presbuteros) which signi-
fies “Elder” or “Senior.”*
The distinctive Principles of Presbyterianism are the
following;—
That there is no Order in the Church superior to that of
Presbyters.
This Proposition is maintained by the following Argu-
ments :
1. That the two Names or Titles, Presbyters f and
Bishopsj, are used promiscuously by the Apostles in the
New Testament.
This promiscuous employment of the two Names or Titles
is found in the following Scriptures :
(a) Acts 20: 28. “ Take heed unto yourselves and to
all the flock over the which the Holy Ghost hath made you
overseers 'Gr. episcopous—bishops) to feed the Church of
God.”
Here the Ephesian Presbyters or Elders mentioned in v.
17, are called by the Apostle “ Bishops ” —very improperly
and incorrectly translated, however, in the Authorised
English Version “overseers.” Wickliffe, however, in 1380,
rendered—“bischops,” i.e. bishops, but perhaps prejudice
or party zeal dictated the mis-translation “ overseers,” and
* Vide Appendix, Art. I—Presbyter,
f Vide Appendix, Art. I—Presbyter,
i Vide Appendix, Art. 2 —Bishop.


therefore, to Presbyterians it is a matter of regret that
the English Translators should have rendered the term
episcopoi “overseers,” and not “bishops,” for they have
invariably translated the term episcopos in all the places
where it occurs “bishop,” with the exception of the
passage under discussion.*
Besides the term translated “hath made” is eQero (etheto)
which is elsewhere translated and applied thus:—
1 Cor. xii. 28—And God hath set some in the Church.
2 Cor. y. 19— Hath committed unto us the word of
reconciliation.
1 Tim. i. 12— Putting me into the ministry,
ii. 7—Whereunto I am ordained a preacher.
The Ephesian Presbyters were “put,” like the Apostle,
into the Ministry of the Church in Ephesus ; they were
“ordained” Presbyters as the Apostle was; they were
set in the Church in Ephesus as the Apostles were in
the Church General, and to the Presbyters of Ephesus, as to
the Apostles was “committed” the Word of reconciliation.
Besides the term (poimaino) rendered “feed”
also means “ to rule.” |
The passage, however, is correctly rendered by the Vulgate
and the Douay, for in the Vulgate, ema-Kovrovs is rendered
episcopos, ’ but presbuteros in v. 17, is rendered
“majores.” The Douay respectively translates “ ancients ”
and “bishops.”
It is evident from the passage that in the city of Ephesus
there were several ox many presbyters or bishops, i.e., Minis-
ters of equal authority, who had no “ Superior pastor ” or
“ Diocesan bishop ” over them ; for the Apostle speaks to
them all and gives them all equal power over the whole
flock. They were either 11 joint-pastors” occupying “colle-
giate charges,” or “ the pastors ” or “ Ministers ” of differ-
ent congregations in one city. They were “Presbyter-
bishops” or “Presbyterian ministers.”
It has, however, been observed by the Defenders of
Prelacy, that the Elders or Presbyters whom Paul called
to Miletus, were “ the bishops of Asia,” and that he sent
* Vide Appendix, Art 2, (aj— Bishop.
Vide Appendix, Art. 5, Pastors.


for them to Ephesus because that city was the Metropolis
of this province. This statement may be refuted thus :
(1.) If the Elders or Presbyters were the “Diocesan
bishops of Asia,” why should they be called “ the Elders
or Presbyters of the Church of Ephesus ” ?
(2.) Should they not have been called the Bishops of
“ the Church in general ? ”
(3.) Or should they not have been called the Bishops of
the Churches in Asia ?
(4.) If the Elders had been “the Diocesan bishops” of
all the cities of Asia, would not the Apostles require several
months to call together or summon the Diocesan bishops of
all the cities of Asia ? But do we not learn from the Nar-
rative, that the Apostle being bent on his journey to Jeru-
salem, was pressed for time, and could not spare several
months ?
(5.) If the Apostle summoned “ the bishops of Asia” to
Ephesus, the Metropolis, would not the Apostle have gone
to Ephesus in less time to meet them, than get the Diocesan
bishops, after travelling from their various dioceses, to
Ephesus, to come from Ephesus to meet him at Miletus?
(6.) If Timothy, as alleged by Episcopalians, was “the
Diocesan Bishop ” of Ephesus, then is it not strange that
the Apostle should devolve the whole Episcopal power upon
the Presbyters, before the face of their Diocesan ? And is
it not strange indeed that the Apostle should not say a
word by way of pointing out the duty of the Diocesan
Timothy to his Diocese, or the duty of the Presbyters to
their Diocesan ? Since “ canonical obedience ” to their
Diocesan is a principal part of the duty of Presbyters,
then could the apostle in truth say that “he had not
shunned to declare unto them all the counsel of Giod?”
Consequently “the charge” given by Paul to the
Presbyters proves that Timothy was not there, and proves
further that the Presbyters, at that time, had no “Prelate”
or “ Diocesan,” or “ Bishop,” but that they themselves
were “bishops.”
If Timothy had been the Prelate of Ephesus, then the
Apostle’s not making mention of him was an act of
discourtesy, such as we should not expect the Apostle Paul
to be guilty of; and if Timothy had been the Prelate of
Ephesus, and was then “ absent,” it is remarkable that no


allusion should be made to the absent “Prelate” or
“ Bishop.”
(b) Titus 1; 5,6, 7. —“ For this cause left I thee in
Crete, that thou shouldest set in order the things that are
wanting, and ordain elders [npea^vrepovs —Presbuteros) in
every city, as I had appointed thee. If any be blameless
the husband of one wife, having faithful children, not
accused of riot or unruly. For a bishop (emv kokov) must
be blameless as the steward of God,” &c.
In these verses the Names or Titles—Presbyters and
Bishops—are used as convertible terms, for the Apostle
wanted Titus to ordain as Presbyters persons, who possessed
certain qualifications; and the qualifications which Pres-
byters were to possess he specifies thus as in verse 7
“For a Bishop must be blameless, &c.” Inasmuch as to
say—the Presbyter must be blameless, for the bishop must
be blameless. There would be no force in the conclusion,
if a bishop and a presbyter were different persons. Hence
also the reason why the Apostle in his First Epistle to
Timothy makes no mention of presbyters, but speaks only
of bishops and deacons.
Consequently the qualifications of the Bishop were
identical with the qualifications of the Presbyter.
The Vulgate renders v. 5, “ presbyteros ”
and not “ majores,” as in Acts xx. 28, and enianoTrov,
“ episcopum,” but the Douay very perversely makes
presbyters “priests,” and not “ancients,” as in Acts
xx. 28.
(c) Phil. 1 : 1— “ Paul and Timotheus, the servants of
Jesus Christ, to all the saints in Christ Jesus, who are at
Philippi with the Bishops” (fmcrKojrois) and “ deacons.”
In this verse there are only two classes of office-bearers
mentioned, viz. : bishops and deacons.
Compare with this Acts xx. 28, where it is said to
Presbyters—“ over which the Holy Ghost hath made you
bishops .” Consequently the Bishops of Phillippi were
Presbyters.
Had there been an intermediate officer, i.e., Presbyter,
distinguished both from the bishop and the deacons, the
Apostle should have made mention of that officer.
Those bishops and deacons then who were at Philippi,


were the bishops and deacons of the saints, i.e., the Chris-
tians of that City. In the City of Philippi, there were
bishops —not what are called “ diocesan bishops,” * for how
can there be a plurality of “ diocesan bishops” in one city ? f
To have more “ Diocesans” than one in a city, according
to Prelacy, appears as monstrous as to have more heads
than one upon a human body!
Consequently “the bishops” who were in the town of
Philippi were Presbyters or “ Presbyter-bishops.”
As in Titus i. 5,7, Presbyters and Bishops are used
as convertible terms, so in the passage under consideration,
the term “bishops” is used for “ presbyters.
The Advocates for “ Diocesan Episcopacy” may therefore
be reminded that the Apostle does not address three orders
—“Bishops, Elders and Deacons,” but “Bishops and
Deacons,” and that in the Church in Philippi there were
several bishops, and not a single bishop presiding over
them.
(<7.) 2 John i. : “ The Elder (6 npea^vrepos —ho presiuteros
—the Presbyter) unto the Elect Lady and her children,
-whom I love in the truth,” &c.
(«) 3 John, i.: “The Elder (oTrpeafivrepos—ho presiuteros
—the Presbyter) unto the well-beloved Gains, whom I
love in the truth.”
The Yulgate renders ho presiuteros (the Presbyter) in
both passages “Senior,” and the Douay “Ancient.” In
these passages the Apostle John calls himself the
“ Presbyter,” for though he was an Apostle, yet he was a
Presbyter or Bishop, or Presbyter-Bishop.
The mistranslations of the Vulgate and the Douay are too
gross to be rectified.
(/) 1 Peter 5 : 1,2, 3, and 4: “The Elders (7 Tpea-jSvTfpovs
—presbyters) which are among you I exhort, -who am also
an Elder (6 crvyupea^vrepos — ho sumpresluteros — the co-pres-
byter), and a witness.”
* Diocese means “the circuit or extent of a bishop’s jurisdiction,” who is in con-
sequence called “ Diocesan.” In Prelatic England there are two Provinces, Cante; -
bury and York. Canterbury contains twenty-one dioceses and York three, beside*
the Isle of Man. A diocese is divided into Arch-Deaconries, and Arch-Deacon: y
into rural Deaneries, and a Deanery into parishes.
+ Vide Appendix, Art. 2, —Bishops.
t Vide Appendix, Art 1, [d). Presbyter.


“ Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the
oversight thereof ( ema-KOTrowTes — episkopountes —acting the
bishop). . . . “Neither as being lords (KaraKvpLevovres
katakurieountes lording down or over) God’s heritage (ic\r]po)v
—kleeroun —clergy), but being ensamples to the flock.”
“And when the Chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall re-
ceive a crown of glory that fadeth not away.”
Vulgate —“Seniores” for Presbyters, and “consenior”
for sum-presbyter or co-presbyter ; “ providentes ” for
episcopountes ; u princeps pastorurn ” for ap-^nroipevo^ — A.rchi-
poimenos or “ Chief Shepherd.”
TheDouay—“Ancients” for Presbyters —“taking care”
(episcopountes) ; verse 3 : “ Neither as lording it over the
clergy.”
In this passage, the Apostle addresses the office-bearers,
called “Presbyters,” and he calls himself their “ sum-
presbyter ?” i.e., their co-presbyter, or and
exhorts them — the Presbyters, to take the “ oversight’ 1 ' 1 or act the
hishop f not over “God’s Clergy” (Vulgate and Douay), but
over “ God’s heritage,” the Church—His people. The
Presbyter Apostle exhorts his co-preshyters not “to lord
down or over” God’s heritage ; for he tells them that they
(the Presbyters) had to look for their reward from “ the
Chief-Shepherd” or “ Chief-Pastor.”
It is evident, Peter though an Apostle, did not call him-
self or consider himself as “ Chief- Pastor,” for he calls
himself a simple “ Sum-Presbyter” or “ Co-Presbyter.”
He and his fellow-presbyters or co-presbyters wmre “ to act
as bishops ,” —act as “overseers” over God’s heritage, and
not “ to lord over,” and they were answ r erable not to any
“diocesan bishop,” but to “the Chief Shepherd and
Bishop” —even the Great Head of the Church.
As a Presbyter on perfect equality with his co-presbyters,
he exhorts and not commands or enjoins, as a Prelate would
do.
(g) 1 Thess. v. 12, 13. “And we beseech you, brethren,
to know them, w r ho labour among you and are ever you
6


TTpoiara^fPovs* —proistameenous ) in the Lord and admonish
vovdevras f —(■ noothentas ) you. And to esteem them very
highly in love for their Work’s Sake, and be at peace
among yourselves.”
On comparing these verses with 1 Tim. hi. 4,5, 12, we
gather that “the Eulers” were “ Bishops,” and with
1 Tim. v. 17, that “the Rulers” were “Presbyters.”
Consequently “ the Laborers” and “ the Rulers” among
the Thessalonians were “ Presbyter-bishops.”
But can the Advocates of Prelacy give any reason why
the Apostle, when he exhorts the Thessalonians to submit
to the plurality of Rulers who were among them, makes
no mention of the Prelate , whether present or absent ?
Consequently from the above Passages, it is clear that
there is no distinction known in the New Testament
between emaKonoL (episcopop i.e ., bishops and
(presbuteroi) i.e., presbyters, as if they stood for different
Classes or Orders of Office-bearers.
The Titles or Names of “Presbyter” and “Bishop” are
therefore used interchangeably in the New Testament for the
same per son.\
2. That not only the two Names or Titles, Presbyters
and Bishops are identical, but the qualifications of Presbyters
and Bishops are identical.
Vide Titus i. 5,6, 7. 1 Tim. hi. I—7.
“The Bishop” and “the Presbyter” must be the same
Officer.
For the Apostle says—“ For this cause left I thee in
Crete, that thou shouldst set in order the things that
are wanting, and ordain Presbyters in every city as I had
appointed thee. If any be blameless .... For a
Ji/i mn nf L a n nl Aoo
bishop must be blameless
* npoia'Trjp.L —proisteem signfies “to cause to stand before” —“to stand bJrore.”
The term occurs eight times in the New Testament, and in the following places
it is thus I’endered
Rom. xii. 8 —“ He that ruleth with diligence.”
1 Tim. iii. 4 —“ One that ruleth well his own house.”
~ s—“ If any man know not how to rule."
„ 12—“ Ruling their children.”
„ v. 17—“ Let the Elders that rule well.”
t vcvdereu). —Noutheteo is rendered “warn,” in Acts xx. 31. 1 Cor. iv. 14.
Col. i. 28. 1 Thess. y. 14 ; and “ admonish ” in Romans xv. 14. Col. iii 16.
1 Thess. v. 12. 2 Thess, hi. 15.
f Vide Appendix, Art. 3. —Historical Data.


Titus was to ordain Presbyters, whose qualifications were
the qualifications of Bishops. Those Presbyters then were
Bishops.
But if “the Bishop” and “the Presbyter” be different
Officers, it is difficult to see the connection of the verses.
The Prelatists w 7 ould make the Apostle say—“ For this
cause .... that thou shouldst ordain Presbyters.
The Presbyters must be blameless for a Bishop, i.e., a
Prelate, who has the superintendence of Presbyters, ought
to be blameless.
If the term JEpiscopos, however, in the passage had been
rendered “ overseer,” as in Acts xx. 28, the meaning of the
Apostle would have appeared very clearly. “ The Pres-
byter must be blameless for ‘the overseer’ (Episcopos)
must be blameless.”
3. That not only are the qualifications of Presbyters and
Bishops identical, but their duties are also identical.
Presbyters 'who are “ bishops” (Acts xx. 28) are “ to take
heed to the flock,” “to feed or rule the Church of God”
(j voimaind),* “to feed the flock of God,” “to act the
bishop” over the flock. (Gr. 1 Pet. v.), “to be ensamples
to the flock” and to look for their reward to “the Chief
Shepherd.” (1 Pet. v.)
Consequently the Presbyters are not only to labour in
Word by “ teaching and preaching,” but like Bishops are
to “rule” by “warning and admonishing.” (1 Thess. v. 12
and 13. Hein xiii. 7, 17.)
The Presbyters, like Bishops, are also to “ordain,” (1
Tim. iv. 14.)
That the Government of the Church in the New Testament
is in Presbyters or Presbyteries , i.e., “ Associations ”
or “ Courts of Presbyters ” f who are all Possessed of equal
power, without any superiority among them, either in Office
or Order.
From the passages already cited under I. 1, it is clear that
Presbyters governed the Church. Under I. 3, the duties of
Presbyters are not only “ to feed the flock of God,” but
* Vide Appendix, Art. s— (b). Pastors,
t Vide Appendix, Art. 13. Courts of Presbyters.


to take heed to the flock” —“to rule the flock, —“to act
the bishop over the flock,” (Gr. 1 Pet. v.); not only “to
labour in word” by “teaching and preaching” but “to
rule” by “warning and admonishing.” (1 Thess. v.
12 and 13.)
Further :—( a ) 1 Tim. v. 17. Let the Elders (rr pea-ftvrepoi —
presbyters) that rule (tt poeo-rcores —proestotees) well, be
counted worthy of double honor, especially they, who labour
in the word and doctrine.
The Yulgate renders “ presbyteri,” and the Douay—
“ Let the priests (presbyters) that rule well.”
They that “ rule” then are Presbyters. Compare 1 Thess.
v. 12, 13. I. 1. O).
To Presbyter-lliilevs, the Thessalonians and others ai'e
enjoined to submit. The Christians were to put themselves
under “ the jurisdiction ” not of a prelate or the prelate,
but of a plurality of Presbyters, i.e., an Association or
Court of Presbyters—a Presbytery.
Besides, this passage points out the superiority of
Preaching to Ruling —of “the Preacher” to “the Ruler.”
The PreSbyter- Rulers —who are Presbyter- Preachers, should
be counted worthy of “double honor,” i.e., high honor.
Moreover, from other passages we learn that Preaching is
more important than Ruling:—
(1) Preaching was the first active business of our
Lord Himself Luke iv. 18 ; Isaiah Ixi. 1.
(2) Preaching was the first active business of the
Apostles (Mark iii 14). “And He ordained Twelve that
they should be with Him and that He might send them
forth to preachP Matt. x. 6,7 —“Go to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel; and as ye go, preachP
(3) Preaching was the first active business of the
Seventy. Luke x. 8, 8.
(4) Preaching was the first active business of the Great
Apostle of the Gentiles —“ Christ sent me not to baptise,
but to preach the Gospel.” “I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ ” —Rom. i. 16. “When it pleased God
. . that I might preach Him among the heathen.”
Gal. i. 15.
Preaching, consequently, was the most important business
of a minister, compared with which evei’y other is of a


subordinate nature. Therefore Preaching Presbyters are-
superior to Ruling Prelates.
Farther, it may be observed that “ Puling ” is mentioned
but six times in the New Testament, and without a hint of
its possessing any superior consequence.
(5) Rom. xii. 8. “He that ruletk , i.e., Presbyter
( TTpoia-Tq/u —proesteemi) with diligence.”
( c ) 1 Tim. iii. 4,5, 12. “ One that ruleth (proesteemi)
well his own house” ; “if a man know not how to rule his
house” ; “ Ruling their children.”
(cQ 1 Thess. v. 12. “And are over you (jrpotcrTripi —pi’oes-
teemi) in the Lord.”
On comparing Pom. xii. 8, with 1 Tim. iii. 4,5, 12, and
v. 17, “He that ruleth” means -“ the Presbyter or Bishop,.
i.e., Presbyter-bishop that ruleth.”
The passage 1 Thess. v. 12 indicates, “that Presbyters
are’ over “the flock,” i.e., to rule the flock and to nrle
with diligence.
(e) Heb. xiii. 7, 17, 24. “Remember them who have
the rule over you;” “Obey them that have the rule over
you ; ” “ fealute all them that have the rule over youP
The Greek term is pyeopai (heegeomai), which is trans-
lated—“ have the rule over.”
bytpccv (heegemon) is rendered “ ruler ” in (Mark xxiii. 9,
Luke xxi. 12), and “governor” in (Matth. xxvii. 11, 14,,
&c.) Yulgate—-“ prepositos.” Douay—“ prelates ”(!! !)
“ The Rulers ” or “ Governors ” specified in the verses,
on comparison with 1 Tim. v. 17, are “ Presbyters.”
“The Rulers ” were not “Diocesan Bishops,” because
suppose the Epistle was sent to a single church or to the
churches of a single city, then in that church or in the
churches of that city, there were several “Rulers” or
“Governors” over these Churches, but could these several
Rulers be the “Prelates” of extensive dioceses ?
It is evident then that the Rulers were ordinary Ministers
or Presbyters, or Presbyter-Bishops.
(/) John xxi 16—“ He saith unto him, feed froLpcuvio—
poimaino) my sheep.”
Acts xx. 28 : “ to feed (poimaino) the Church of God.”
1 Pet. v. 2. Feed (poimaino) the flock of God.


Now poimaino means “to rule ” as well as “to feed,”
and is rendered “ rule ” in the following places :
Eev. ii. 27. He shall rule (poimaino—Yulg. reget; D.
rule) them as with a rod of iron. xxii. 5 rule (Y. recturus
erat; D. rule) all nations, &c., &c.
Consequently the address by Paul to "the Presbyters of
Ephesus might mean—“ Rule the Church of God” Acts
xx. 28 ; by Peter, who was “a Presbyter,” to other Preshy-
ters—“Rule the flock of God” (1 Pet. y. 2); and by the
Great Master to his Servant Peter—“ Rule my sheep.”
The Ephesian Presbyters, then, were “ Eulers.” The
Presbyters whom Peter addressed were “Eulers,” and so
was Peter the Apostle.
The Heb. njn rendered by poimaino, and the Arabic
Ea a, also mean “to rule.”*
(y) 1 Cor. xii. : 28. And God hath set some in the Church,
first, apostles ; secondarily, prophets ; thirdly, teachers ;
after that, miracles, then gifts of healings, helps, governments,
diversities of tongues.”
Kv/3 epvrja-is —kuberneesis means—“ a governing , direction
for cone., governor, director .”
Ki /fiepvr)TTjs (Kuberneetees) translated “ Master ” (Acts 27:
11) and ship-master (Eev. 18 : 17) means literally governor
of a ship.
Consequently KvpepvrjcreLs (Kuberneeseis) are the Govern-
ments or “ Governors” or “ Masters,” who hold the helm
in the Church.
These Governors, on comparison with the passages cited
above, are “ Presbyters.”
{hi) 1 Tim. iv. 14. Neglect not the gift which is in thee,
which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of
the hands of the presbytery .” (Yulg., presbyterii; Douay,
priesthood).
The Presbytery, or “Association,” or “Court of presby-
ters ” with Paul, as their President or Moderator, ordained
Timothy. 2 Tim. i. 6. Vide Acts xiii. I—3.
(7) The Apostolic Presbyters sat as “rulers” in a
Council. Acts xv. 23.
* Vide Appendix, Art. 6—Pastors, and Art. -t—Apostles.


In this Council, however, there was no “ Prelate .” For
the letter was not sent in the name of any one Prelate, but
the letter was sent in the names of all the Rulers of that
deliberative Council or Assembly or Court * which was in
reality a large Presbytery,
It is impossible, therefore, that any person possessed of
“ Modern Episcopal Authority,” an Archbishop or Pope
should have been present at this meeting of Presbyters ;
and since there were no “ Prelates” in the Church in or of
Jerusalem, which was 11 the mother Church,” it is difficult
to conceive how “the Prelate,” or “Prelatic government,”
is a necessary part of the Christian Economy. If “ the
mother Church” of Jerusalem could do without Prelates,
why could not the other Churches ?
Hence it follows that Presbyterianism is that form of
Ecclesiastical Polity, according to which the chief power is
vested in a Presbytery, i.e.. Association or Court of Presby-
ters; and, therefore, “the Presbyterate ” f is the highest
standing office or order in the Church.
That the Official Authority of “ Presbyters ” or “ Bishops ,”
or 11 Presbyter-Bishops” to feed the flock of Christ , or to
preach the Gospel, to dispense the Sacraments, and to rule
or govern the Church; and the authority of Beacons is conveyed
by the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery, or the
Association of Presbyters.
Since Presbyters, or Bishops, or Presbyter-Bishops alone
are to feed the flock of Christ or preach the Gospel, to ad-
minister the Sacraments, and to govern the Church—these
“ rights and privileges ” are conferred on them by the im-
position of the hands of the Presbytery.
This appears from the following Scriptures:— The
Apostles, who were “ Presbyters ”(1 Pet. v. 1. 2 John i.
3 John i.) in the first place conferred by Ordination, \
* Vide Appendix, Art. 13.,—Courts of Presbyters.
f The Office or Order of Presbyters.
t Vide Appendix, Art. 12—Ordination.


■“Authority,” or “rights and privileges” on “ Deacons
and “Presbyters.”
Then this coetus presbyterorum (assembly of presbyters')
attended to all the spiritual concerns of the Christians
in the city where they resided.
Thus a body of Presbyters being formed they would
naturally hold meetings and convey the Official Authority
to other Presbyters. Hence—
(l.) In Acts vi., we read of the Apostles ordering Chris-
tians “to look out seven men of honest report,” and to
bring the men so chosen to them that “ we ,” said the Apos-
tles, “ may appoint them over this business.” Accordingly,
the men were “ set before the Apostles, and when they
had prayed, they laid their hands on them.”
(2.) Acts xiii. I—3. “Now there were in the Church that
was at Antioch certain prophetsf and as Bar-
nabas and Simeon, that was called Niger, and Lucius, of
Gyrene and Manaen, which had been brought up with Herod
the Great and Saul. As they ministered to the Lord and
fasted, the Holy Ghost said, ‘ Separate me Barnabas and
Saul, for the work whereunto I have called them, and
when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on
them, they sent them away.’ ”
The phrase “ Epithentes tas Cheiras ,” i.e. “laying on of
hands,” in the passage, is equivalent to “Ordination,” for
it is the same phrase that is employed in the following
cases, importing “Ordination.”
(a) 1 Tim. iv. 14 the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery.
(5) 1 Tim v. 2— Lay hands suddenly on no man.
(c) 2 Tim. i. 6 — Putting on of my hand.
* Youths, who served the tables among the Greeks, were called “ deacons ” and
“ wine-pourers.” The term “ deacon,” however, signifies “ a dusty ” or “ hasty
servant,” from kovls — konis, dust.) Hence the term “ Deacon ” is rendered in the
Yew Testament in a variety of -ways, such as “ Minister ,” (Matthew, 20 : 26. Mark,
10 : 43, &c.), “ Servant ” (Mr 9; 35 John, 12: 26, &c.) and “ Deacon” (1 Tim. 3 :
8. 12 and Phil. 1:1.)
Consequently, though the term Diakonos occurs 30 times in the Now Testament,
yet it is only three times that it is rendered “ deacon.”
Deacons, so called, were Officers in the primitive Church, who had charge of the
alms and money of the Church.
The institution of “the Diaconate ” is recorded in Acts vi, though the name
‘‘ Deacon ” does not occur in that chapter. The Deacons were designated “ Helps,”
( Vide Appendix, Art. 12. Helps.)
+ Vide Appendix Art, 6. Prophets.
i Vide Appendix Art. 8. Teachers.


The conclusions from these passages are —
(a) That Timothy was ordained by the laying on of the
hands of Presbytery.
( b ) That Timothy was enjoined not to ordain suddenly,
(r) That Timothy was ordained by Paul and the
Presbytery.
Therefore, from the passage, in Acts xiii. I—3, we
gather :
(a) That there was a Presbytery or Association of Pres-
byters in Antioch.
(b) That this Presbytery “ laid their hands ” on, i.e .,
Ordained Barnabas and Saul.
(c) That the Presbytery consisted of a quorum, viz. :
Simeon, Lucius, and Manaen.
(d) That in the Presbytery of Antioch there does not
appear to have been a single Apostle or “ Prelate,” who
took part in the Ordination of “ Barnabas and Saul.”
(?) That the Ordination was, therefore, not “ a Prelatic
Ordination,” but “a Presbyterian Ordination.”
Thus authority to preach the Gospel, &c., was given by
the Ordination performed by the Presbytery of Antioch.
(3.) Acts xiv. 23. “And when they (Paul and Barnabas)
had ordained them Elders (Presbyters—Wickliffe, Prestis ,
i.e. Presbyters) in every Church and prayed with fasting,
they commended them to the Lord, on whom they
believed.” f
Paul and Barnabas, who were ordained as Presbyters.
Acts xiii. I—3 “ by the Presbytery of Antioch,” in their
turn ordained presbyters in every city.”
(4.) 1 Tim. iv. 14. “ Neglect not the gift that is in thee,
which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of
the hands of the presbytery (rov Tpecrfivrepiov — tou-presby-
teriou.)*
ulgate—“Cum impositione manuum presbuterii.”
Douay—“with imposition of the hands of the priest-
hood.”
This passage contains an account of the Ordination of
Timothy, and sets forth the following particulars :
(«) That there was a Presbytery or Association of
Presbyters.
14


(i) That this Presbytery performed “ the imposition of
hands” or “ the laying on of hands,” i.e., Ordination.,
(c) That this Presbytery “ laid their hands on,” i.e.,
Ordained Timothy.
(rf) That this Presbytery gave the gift to Timothy by
the laying on of their hands, i.e., by Ordination.
Consequently Timothy was ordained “ a presbyter ” by
the imposition'of the hands'of the Presbytery or Associa-
tion of Presbyters.
On comparing this account of the “ Presbyterial Ordina-
tion” of Timothy, with 2 Tim. i. 6—“ Wherefore I put
thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the gift of God,
which is in thee by the putting on of my hands, ” it appears
that at the Ordination of Timothy by Presbyters, u the Pre-
siding Presbyter” was Paul. The seeming discrepancy
between 2 Tim. i. 6, and 1 Tim. iv. 14, vanishes, when it
is remembered, that Paul, as the Presiding Presbyter laid
his hands on Timothy, his “ son in the faith,” in which act
of the imposition of hands he was followed by the Presbytery,
or “ the Court of Presbyters.”
Consequently, the Apostle Paul laid his hands, as the
Presiding Presbyter, and also did all the Presbyters, of
which that Presbytery was composed.*’ Thus Official
* Objections. — 1. That the passages (1 Tim. iv. 14, and 2 Tim. i. 6
under consideration do not contain an account of the Ordination of
Timothy.
Answer. (a ) That if the passages do not contain an account of
Timothy’s Ordination, then in the New Testament there is no account
that Timothy was ever ordained.
( b) That the above is the obvious meaning of the Passages.
(c) That the phrase cm deals Teov yeipoov — epithesis town Cheirown
“imposition ofhands” —occurs four times in the New Testament: —
(Acts 8: 18—Through the laying on of the Apostle’s hands.
1 Tim. 4 : 14—With the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery.
2 Tim. 1: 6—By the putting on of my hands.
Heb. (5: 2—And of laying on of hands); and, in these passages, the
imposition of hands denotes or describes conferring some gift or office.
Objection 2. That the term Preshuterion does not mean “a Pres-
bytery.”
Answer. {Vide Appendix, Ait. 1.) . ~
Objection 3. That Paul alone ordained Timothy, as “the bishop or
“prelate ’ of Ephesus, and therefore the ordination was not “ a Pres-
byterian ordination,” but a “Prelatic ordination.”
Answer. Paul ordained, and so ordained Presbytery. Paul laid bis
hands ; but he does not deny that the Presbytery also laid theirs. If


Authority was given to Presbyter Timothy by the laying on
-of the hands of the Presbytery.
(5.) In 2 Tim. ii. 2, the Apostle, who was a Presbyter
and had with the Presbytery ordained Timothy, as Pres-
byter, empowers Timothy to ordain men to the office of
the Presbyteryate, for he says :—•
“ The things that thou hast heard of me among many
witnesses, the same commit to faithful men, who shall be
able to teach others also.”
Hence directions are given by the Presbyter Paul to
Timothy about the ordination of Bishops {i.e., Presbyters)
and Deacons.
(6.) Titus i. 5. “For this cause left I thee in Crete, that
thou shouldst set in order the things that were wanting,
and ordain Elders (Presbyters) in every city, as I had
appointed thee.”
Here Titus is empowered to ordain “Presbyters;” and
that Titus might ordain suitable Presbyters, the Apostle
described to him the qualifications of a Bishop, i.e., a
Presbyter ( Vide 1., 1,2.)
From (5) and (6), Timothy and Titus were empowered to
ordain. They, as “Presidents” * or “Moderators,” would
ordain with their respective Presbyters; or in the incipient
or infant state of the Christian Church, which entailed a
necessity on the Presbyter Timothy or Presbyter Titus, as
“ Moderator” of his Presbytery, to ordain.
Hence Presbyteries might deem fit, when necessary , to
depute or authorize one Presbyter, like Timothy and Titus,
to ordain. Timothy and Titus, as Presbyters, were employed
as what are called in the New Testament “ Evangelists,”
suited to the infant state of the Church, f But in no
way does it follow after the infant state of the Church had
passed away, that such delegation of Official Authority to
single persons ought to be continued.
Timothy was ordained a prelate of Ephesus, then he was ordained by
a Presbytery or Association of Presbyters. Presbyters, however,
cannot make or “ consecrate ” “ a prelate consequently Timothy
was made “a Presbyter,” and not a prelate. Vide Appendix, Art.
12, Ordination.
* Vide Appendix, Art. 14, Presidents or Moderators,
f Vide Appendix, Art. 7, Evangelist.


A Beief Statement.
That there is no Order in the Church superior to that of
Presbyters for the following reasons :
1. The Titles or Names “Presbyter” and “Bishop” are
identical. (Acts 20 : 28. Titus 1 : 5,6, 7. Phil. 1 ; 1.
2 John, 1. 3 John, 1. 1 Pet. 5 ; 1,2, 3, 4. 1 Thess. 5 :
12 and 13.)
2. The Qualifications of “Presbyter” and “Bishop” are
identical. (Titus 1 : 5,6, 7.)
3. The Duties of “ Presbyter” and “ Bishop” are
identical. (Acts 20 : 28. Gr. 1 Pet. 5:6. 1 Thess. 5 :
12 and 13. 1 Tim. 4 : 14.)
4. The Testimonies of Clemens Romanus, Jerome,
Augustine, Cyprian, Isidore, Neander, Comenius, even of
English Divines, Prelates, &c., attest the convertibility
of the Titles or Names “ Bishop” and “ Presbyter.”
5. Hence “The Presbyterian Polity” is opposed to
“The Episcopal Polity,” for “The Episcopal Polity”
recognizes that there is “an order” of Office-bearers in
the Church, that is superior to the Order of Presbyters.
Consequently “the Episcopate” or the Order of “ bishops”
or “prelates” is contrary to the teaching of the INew
Testament and “ the prelates” so called cannot be “the
Successors of the Apostles,”* in the sense, in which they
understand “Succession.”
That the Government of the Church is vested in Presbyters
or Presbyteries appears from the following reasons :
1. Presbyters rule —l Tim. 5 : 17. Rom. 12 :8. 1 Tim.
3: 4,5, 12. 1 Thess. 5: 12. Heb. 13: 7, 17, 24. John
21 : 16. Acts 20 : 28. 1 Pet, 5:2. 1 Cor. 12 ; 28.
2. Presbyters or Presbyteries ordain. 1 Tim. 4: 14.
Acts 13 ; I—3, &c.
Vide Appendix Art 4—Apostles, and Art. ll—Apostolic Succession.


That the Official Authority of “Presbyters” or “Bishops”
or “ Presbyter-Bishops” to feed the flock of Christ or to
preach the Gospel, to dispense the Sacraments, and to rule
or govern the Church, and the Authority of Deacons is
derived by the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery,
i.e., the Court or Association of Presbyters. Acts vi.
I—3, xiii. 1— 3. xiv. 23 1 Tim. iv. 14.
2 Tim. ii. 2. Tit. i. 5.
Hence, —
1 The Apostles, who were Presbyters conveyed by
Ordination in the first place, “Official Authority” to
Deacons and Presbyters. (Acts vi. 1 Tim. iv. 14.)
2. The Presbyters so ordained by Apostolic Presbyters
conveyed in the second place, in their turn by Ordination,
“the Official Authority” to other Presbyters. (Acts 13 : 3.
Acts 14 : 23. 2 Tim. 2 : 2.)
3. Hence the Authority of Presbyters emanates directly
from Christ. Consequently, Presbyters are His Messengers
and Servants, appointed and commissioned by Him, and
not hy the people.
4. Hence the Scheme of the Independent or Congrega-
tional Polity is contrai’y to the teaching of Scripture, for
“ the Independent Polity” recognises that Presbyters derive
their “ Official Authority” from “ the common membership of
the Church ” in whom that Authority is lodged.


APPENDIX.
Article I,—Presbyter.
(«) The term ttpea (ivr epos (presbuteros), which means “an Elder,” is
therefore very frequently so rendered in the New Testament. (Mat-
thew, xv. 2; xvi. 21; xxvii. 1, &c., &c., &c.) It is also rendered
“old men,’’ in Acts ii. 17; “eldest” in John viii. 9.
{b) The feminine form, (preshutera), is rendered “the
Elder Women” in 1 Tim. 5 : 2.
(c) The term 7rpecr/3urepioE (preshuterion) occurs three times, and is
thus rendered :
Luke xxii. 66— The Elders of the people.
Acts xxii. s—And all the Estate of the Elders.
1 Ti. iv. 14—The hands of the Presbytery.
The renderings “Elders” and “the Estate of the Elders” do not
clearly show the meaning of preshuterion , for in Luke xxii. 66 and
Acts xxii. 5, “ the Elders of the people ” and “ the Estate of the
Elders ” mean the Jewish Council or Assembly of Presbyters or Elders
—the Jewish Senate (senior-presbyter)—the Jewish Presbytery , i.e.,
the Jewish Sanhedrim.
Consequently in these two passages the term preshuterion is applied
to the Assembly or Association or Court of Jewish Presbyters; but
in 1 Tim. iv. 14 it is applied to the Christian Council or Assembly
of Presbyters—the Christian Senate, i.e., the Christian Presbytery.
Though such *be; the applications of the term preshuterion in the
New Testament, yet it is remarkably strange that some Episcopalians
have taken upon themselves to render preshuterion in 1 Tim. iv. 14,
not Presbytery, but “the Presbyterate ” or “ Presbytership ” or
“ the Clerical office.” !!! Thus they make Timothy, who, acording
to them was “a prelate” or “a bishop,” a mere Presbyter, and
unconsciously thrust him out of “ the Episcopal Bench.” The
Episcopalians who so pervert the meaning of preshuterion might also
be reminded that the old renderings of preshuterion in 1 Tim. iv. 14
are: Wickliffe, 1380, “priesthood;” Cranmer, 1539, “ the auctoryte
of presthode;” Geneva, 1557, “ the Eldership.”
{d) rresfivTTjs (presbutees) appears to be the term employed to imply
aye, as in the following places :
Luke i. 18—For 1 am an old man.
Titus ii. 2—That the ayed men be sober.
Philem. 9—Being such an one as Paul the aged.


(' e ) The feminine form, Trpeafivns (preshutis), occurs in Titus ii. 3
Hie aged women.
While presbutees is used to imply “ age,” presbuteros is used to imply
office or officers, whether in the Jewish or Christian Churches, as
appears from the following :
(1) Officers of the Jewish Church—Matthew xv. 2; xvi. 21; xxi. 23,
xxvi. 3,47, 57,59 ; xxvii, 12. Mark vii. 3, &c., &c. Acts iv. 5,8, 23 ;
vi. 12.
“ The Elders of the people,” i.e., Presbyters of Israel, administered
justice. The Synagogues were equivalent to “ parish churcheseach
synagogue was governed hy a bench of Elders, of which “ the Angel ’’
or “ the bishop ” was the President.
(2) Officers of the Christian Church—Acts xi. 30; xiv. 23 ; xv. 2,4,
6, 22, 23; xvi. 4 ; xx. 17 ; xxi. 18. 1 Tim. v. 1, 17, 19. Luke i. 5.
James v. 14. 1 Pet. v. 1, 5. 2 John i. 3 John i. Revelation iv. 4.
&c.
Consequently, Trpecr/Surepot (preshuteroi), or Presbyters, are so called
because of their seniority or gravity.
The Apostles were Presbyters—l Pet. v. I—though they were
the extraordinary officers called “Apostles.”
All the ordinary Presbyters are ordained to office by a presbytery,
i.e., a Court or Association of Presbyters—Acts xiii. I—3 ; xiv. 23,
Presbyters are divided into two classes, i.e, Teaching Presbyters and
Ruling Presbyters. Some Presbyters rule only : others rule and also
labour in word and doctrine, i.e., teach —l Tim. v. 17,
The office ot “ Ruling Elder,’’ or Presbyter, which is now peculiar
to the Presbyterian Church, was kept out of the Constitution of the
Church of England in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, not because it
wanted Divine authority, hut because it would interfere with the
.Queen’s prerogative!
The Presbyters are Bishops —Acts xx. 28. ( Vide Art. 2.)
In the Old Testament the Hebrew Ipl ( zaken ) is rendered in the Sep-
luagint by Presbyter, and in the Authorized English Version, hy Elder
(Exodus iii. 16 ; iv. 29 ; xix. 7- Hum. ii. 24. Jud£tesii. 7. Ruth iv. 2,
&c.) as the verb zakain signifies “to he old, to frow old.” Hence
Zaken is also rendered “an old man ” (Gen. xxv. 8. Lev. xix. 32),
and “ old ” (Gen. xviii. 11), &c.
Consequently the Elders, Eldermen, Aldermen or Presbyters of Israel
were called Zakenim, on account of their seniority or gravity.
Similar also is the use of the Arabic Sheikh, which literally signifies
“an old man,” but which term is also applied not only to “the
Captain of a tribe,” —a Civil Ruler, hut also to an Ecclesiastical Euler.
The Caliphs, who were both Civil and Ecclesiastical Rulers, are
addressed as Sheikh, or in the plural Mashaekh, i.e., Presbyters.
Article 2.—Bishop.
(«) The term eTTicnamos (episkopos) occurs five times in the New
Testament, and is thus rendered :
Acts xx. 28—The Holy Ghost hath made you overseers.


Phil. i. I—With1 —With the bishops and deacons.
1 Tim. iii. 2—A bishop then must be blameless.
Titus i. 7 —For a bishop must be blameless.
1 Pet. ii. 25—Shepherd and bishop of our souls.
(b) crrtcTKOTrq (episkopee) is thus rendered ;
Luke xix. 48—Knowest not the time of th yvisitation.
Acts i. 20—His bishoprick
1 Titus iii. I—lf a man desire the office of a bishop.
1 Pet. ii 12—Glorify God In the day of visitation.
(c) The verb emaKOTreco (episcopee' occurs in the following places,
und is rendered :
Heb. ii. 6 Visitest him
xii. 15 —Looking diligently.
1 Pet. v. 2 —Taking the oversight (thereof), not by constraint.
Consequently emcmoiroi (episcopoi) or Bishops are so called because
of the supervision (“taking the oversight,” I Pet. v. 2; —“looking
diligently, Heb. xii. 15) which they exercise.
It is evident that the term “bishop” as used in the New Testament
signifies “ an overseer,” i.e., an overseer of a single church or congre-
gation ; but Episcopalians make “the bishop” “ the overseer,” not of
a congregation, but of “the clergy.’’ “Bishop” therefore being a
scriptural term, is used by Presbyterians and Independents for “the
overseer,” or the pastor of the congregation.
While in the New Testament the term bishop is applied to the
presbyter, the Prelatists apply it to “ the highest grade” in the
ministry; but it is worthy of observation that even according to
Episcopalian writers the name “bishop” was taken, after the Apostolic
age , from the second order, i.e., the order of Presbyters, and appro-
priated to the first. Having thus misappropriated the name, they
have given to “the bishop” enormous powers of Ordination, Con-
firmation, Discipline, and entire Superintendence of the Christian
Church, for which there is no foundation in the New Testament.
They have given him powers whereby all presbyters, except Episcopal
presbyters, are deprived of any right to officiate in the Church of
God—powers which render their ordination invalid, their adminis-
tration void, and their exercise of the functions of their office
a daring and an impious invasion of the rights of “the
priesthood.’ But in all the places in the New Testament
where the term “ Bishop ” or “ Bishops ” occurs, there is not
a single allusion to Bishops, as a peculiar order of men In the
numerous “ salutations ” with which the Epistles are concluded, and
in the several “ directions ” given to the Churches in cities of great
eminence, there is not the least mention made, which could be
construed into the Bishops being a superior class of Church Officers*
Indeed in none of the passages, is there the least mention of any
distinction between “the Bishop” and “the Presbyter,” in character,
power, authority, duty or office. On the contrary, there were “ several
bishops ” In Phillippi and Ephesus, which is a proof that there was no
“ Diocesan Bishop” in either of those cities ; and it is also clear there
were no “ Diocesan Bishops ” in the city of Corinth —though Corinth


was an important City. ( Vide 1 Cor. vi. 1,4,5. 2 Cor. ii. 5,6.)
And no diocesan Bishop was called upon by the Apostle to perform
“ Excommunication.”
“ The bishop” of the New Testament and of “ the Primitive Church
was nothing more than a parochial minister, i.e., a Presbyter, and this
also appears very probable from the following considerations ;
(a) Because of the large number of bishops who are represented as
living in regions not much larger than English counties. ( Vide
Art. 3—A, r, and s). They could not been prelatic bishops, but
presbyter-bishops.
{b) Because bishops often lived in small villages near each other,
and their dioceses were not larger than the parishes of presbyters.
(c) Because the bishop, like the presbyter, was elected by the
congregation or flock, and ordained in their presence. ( Vide Art. 3, A, p.)
{d) Because the bishop lived in the same house with his presbyters.
(e) Because the bishop’s presbyters, like “ the Elders ’ of the
Presbyter: belonged to the same congregation.
(/) Because the functions of the bishop, like those of the presbyter,
were preaching, dispensing the Sacraments, visiting the sick, and not
‘‘Confirmation,” “Ordination,” &c.
Consequently Bishops and Presbyters are identical persons—Presbyter
being expressive of the authority and Bishop of the duty of the Pastor.
It is very strange indeed that the Bishop, according to Episcopalians
should be a superior Ruler, when Presbyter is the word really
expressive of ecclesiastical power.
And is it not remarkable that the mode of using the terms “Bishop
and “ Presbyter ” in the New Testament is similar to the mode employed
in the Presbyterian Church, and not in the Episcopal Church ?
Article 3.—Historical Data.
From Ecclesiastical History we also gather that the two Nam.es or
Titles were at first employed promiscuously :
A. — Fathers.
When historical data are adduced from “ the Fathers,” it is not to
be understood that Presbyterians look upon “the Fathers” as infallible.
Alas, in their writings, they too often show themselves —not to be
“fathers,’’ but children oftjje Christian Church, for coo often they
are self-contradictory and pewdle in their interpretations of Scripture.
Notwithstanding it is interesting to find “ the Fathers” —so much
admired by Episcopalians—speak in favour of Presbytery :
( a ) In the Epistle of Clemens Romanus, who lived in the first
century (A. D. 64-70 J the enumeration of but “two offices”
(bishops and deacons —Philip, i. 1) occurs. He says —“the Apostles
preaching through the countries and cities, appointed such of the
first-fruits of their ministry as they had proved by the Spirit,
to be bishops and deacons.” He goes on to say—“the Apostles,
having known by our Lord Jesus Christ that there would bo
great strife about the name of Episcopacy, appointed the aforesaid
persons, namely, bishops and deacons, and ordained that there should
be a succession of them.”


Then referring to the insubordination which prevailed at Corinth,
he adds—“ It will he no small sin, if we expel from the Episcopate
those who have blamelessly and holily offered the gifts.” “Blessed are
the Presbyters, who have gone before, and who have had a fruitful
and perfect dissolution, for they do not fear lest any person should
remove them from their settled place.”
According to the above, Bishops and Presbyters are the same
persons. Again, he says—“ It is base, very base, and unworthy of
the conduct of Christians, that the ancient Church of the Corinthians
should by means of one or two persons, make an insurrection against
the presbyters.” ( Vide Epist. i. ad. Corinth). He, therefore, exhorts
—“Be ye, who have made this insurrection, subject to the presbyters.”
It is - clear that Clement knew of no bishops in the Corinthian
Church hut presbyters. Had there been a single Prelate at Corinth,
would Clement, writing on such an important subject, have completely
forgotten him P
Consequently, Presbyter and Bishop denote the same officer.
(5) Hermas, referring to the Church at Pome, where Clement
was a minister, says “ But thou shalt read (the books) in this city,
with the Elders (i.e„ Presbyters) who preside over the Church.”
( c ) The W:riters of the second and third centuries, whose works are
admitted to be genuine, abound with expressions which make no dis-
tinction between “bishops’ and “presbyters,’’ and which represent
“the presbyters as partners with the bishops” in the honors and
duties of the Episcopal office. They call the presbyters as well as the
bishops, “ the Successors of the Apostles.”
(d) Polycarp exhorts the Christians of Philippi to “he subject to the
presbyters and deacons,” hut says not one word about any bishop.
Again, he says—“ Let the presbyters be full of piety, merciful to all;
bringing back them that wander,’’ but says not a word about any
bishop.
(e) Ignatius’ epistles speak not of the diocesan bishop,” but of the
Presbyter-bishop. It may be well for Episcopalians to remember
what Bishop Stillingfleet has said—“ Of all the thirty-five testimonies
produced out of Ignatius’s epistles for Episcopacy, I can meet with
but one, which is brought to prove the least semblance of an institution
of Christ for Episcopacy; and, if I be not mi:ch deceived, the sense
of that place is clearly mistaken.”
(/) Papias designates the Apostles—“ Presbyters.”
iff) J ustin Martyr speaks of the president, but then he represents him as
being present at every administration of the eucharist, which he also
mentions as always making a part of their public worship ; so that the
bishop here must have been the pastor of one congregation.
( h ) Tertullian speaks of approved Elders ; but there is nothing said of
them that proves a diocesan, since all he says might be applied to a
parochial bishop. For instance, reciting the ordinances of public
worship and the government of the Church, he says—“ In all these
things certain approved elders preside.”
(*) Irenajus, addressing the heretics of that age says—“ We challenge
them to show that tradition which was transmitted from the Apostles,
by a succession of Presbyters” not bishops or prelates. Again, “It


behoves us to hearken to those who are presbyters in the Church;
who, as we have shown, have their succession from the Apostles ; who
together with the succession of the Episcopate, have received the
certain gifts of the truth,”
Bishop Stillingfleet makes the following remarks on this passage —
“ What strange confusion must this raise in any one’s mind, who
seeks for a succession of Episcopal power over presbyters from the
Apostles by the testimony of Irenoeus, when he so plainly attributes
both the succession to the Presbyters and the Episcopacy too, of which
he speaks.’’
(j) Firmilian, bishop of Cesarea, says —“ that in Presbyters is vested
the power of baptizing, imposition of hands, and ordination.”
(k) Hilary—“ The presbyters were at first called bishops,” and
Theodoret—“Of old they called the same men both bishops and
presbyters.”
(l) The language of Clemens Alexandrinus and Origin is applicable to
bishops— parochial and not diocesan.
Clemens Alexandrinus, who was a man of great learning,
writes —“ Just so in the Church, the Presbyters are entrusted with the
dignified Ministry, the deacon’s with the subordinate.” And though
he was but a presbyter, yet he calls himself one of “ the Oovernors.”
( m ) Cyprian, “ bishop ” of Carthage, who is esteemed one of the
most zealous defenders of Prelacy, says, that it was his invariable
rule to do nothing without the advice of his co-presbyters. (King on
the Primitive Church; iv. 4 ; v. 6.)
{n) Ambrose in A.D. 376, in his commenting on Eph. iv. 2, says—
“that bishops were at first called Presbyters.’’
(o) Chrysostom, in his eleventh Homily on the Epistles to Timothy,
speaks of presbyters being identical with bishops, for he says—“ What
things he has said concerning bishops, the same also he intended for
presbyters, for they have gained the ascendency only in respect to
ordination ; and of this they seem to have defrauded the presbyters.”
(p) Jerome, whom Erasmus calls, without controversy, the most
learned of Christians, and who lived about the end of the fourth century ,
says, in one place, where he quotes all the psssages of the New Testa-
ment, in which the names bishops and presbyters appear to be synony-
mous—“ that before there were parties in religion churches were
governed communi consilio presbyterorum (i.e., by the joint advice of
the presbytery). But that afterwards, in order to pull up the roots of
division, toto orhe decretum est — i.e., it became a universal practice,
founded upon experience of its expediency, that one of the presbyters
should be chosen by the rest to be the head, and that the care of
governing the church should be committed to him. Let presbyters,
therefore, he says, know that they are subject by the custom of the
church to know who presides over them ; and let bishops know that
they are greater than presbyters, rather by custom than by appoint-
ment of the Lord, and that still the church ought to be governed in
common.”
“In both Epistles {i.e., 1 Tim. iii. 2-7 with Tit. i. 6-10) whether
bishops or presbyters (although among the Ancients bishops and pres-
byters must have been the same , for the one name is expressive of rank


and the other of age), the husbands of one wife are required to he
chosen to the sacred office.’’ (Jerome Ep. 83, ad Oceanum.)
Jerome was led to express himself thus on account of a deacon in
the Church of Rome having broached the opinion, that deacons were
superior to presbyters. Jerome confutes the new-fangled opinion by
the argument that presbyters and bishops were identical in the days
of the Apostles, and that no man could be so foolish as to maintain
that deacons were superior to bishops.
The following is an analytic, review of the contents of the important
statement which the learned Jerome makes:—“Jerome expressly
denies the superiority of bishops to presbyters by Divine right. To
i irove his assertion on this head, he goes directly to the Scriptures, and
argues as the advocates of parity do, from the interchangeable titles of
bishop and presbyter; from the directions given to them without the
least intimation of difference in their authority; and from the powers
of presbyters, undisputed in his day.
2. Jerome states it as a historical fact that the government, by pres-
byters alone, continued until, for the avoiding of scandalous quarrels
and divisions, it was thought expedient to alter it.
3. Jerome states it as a historical fact that this change in the
government of the Church, this creation of a superior order of minis-
ters, took place not at once, but by degrees—“ paulatim,” says he,
“ little by little.”
4. Jerome states it as a historical fact, that the elevation of one pres-
byter over the others was a human contrivance ; was not imposed by
authority, but crept in by custom, and that the presbyters of his day
knew this very well.
5. Jerome states it as a historical fact, that the first bishops were
made by the presbyters themselves, and consequently they could neither
have nor communicate any authority above that of Presbyters.
( Vide Dr. Mason’s Works, vol. m.)
From the above, it is evident that Jerome opposes the “Consuetudo
ecclesise ” (i.e., the custom of the Church) to “ dispositionis dominicae
veritas,” (i.e., the true enactment of the Lord.) According to Jerome
then, the distinction which was made in his day arose, not as “an
Apostolic tradition ,” hut from “ the custom of the Church.”
Consequently the following may be considered as brief statements
from Jerome:
(1) “A Presbyter is the same as a bishop, and that originally the
Churches were governed by the joint council of presbyters.”
(2) “Let the bishops know that they are greater than presbyters
rather by custom than by the real appointment of the Lord.”
(3) “ Among the ancients, presbyters and bishops were the same.”
Finally Jerome says—that “the presbyters of Alexandria ordained
their bishop for more than two hundred years from the first planting
of that Church.”
(< i ) Augustine, who was a bishop, writing to Jerome says :
“ I entreat you to correct me faithfully, when you see I need it; for
although, according to the names of honour, which the custom of the
Church has now brought into use, the office of bishop is greater than
that of presbyter ; (* Secundum honorum Vocabula quce Jam ecclesiw usus


obtinent Episcopatus presbyterio Major est.’) Nevertheless, in many
respects, Augustine is inferior to Jerome.” (Opera, tom. ii. Epi.
xix., ad liter om.)
(r) In Africa alone there were “690 bishoprics,” and some bishops
had nothing more as their “ diocese ” than a small village, a single
monastery, or a solitary monastery, in cities even where no Christians
at all permanently resided (Du Pin) i.e., they were parochial or pres-
byter-bishops, and not diocesan. Or in that part of Africa, which was
subject to the Romans, there were in the days of Augustine about
five hundred orthodox bishops and four hundred of the sect of the
Douatists.
(s) And in Ireland, which we have no reason to believe to have
been nearly as populous as at present, St. Patrick is said to have
founded “three hundred and sixty-five churches, each of which was
governed by a bishop.”
It is clear that these African and Irish bishops were not “ Prelates,”
but Presbyter-bishops, for the diocese of each of these bishops appears
to have been equivalent to “ the parish of a Presbyterian minister. ”
Indeed it would seem that many bishoprics were much smaller than
“the parishes” in Scotland. The Churches of the Irish bishops
appear to have been so poor that they could afford them no better
endowment than l as much ground as would pasture two cows.’’
Such was the whole income, we are informed, of some of them,
Surely such humble bishops are not to be compared to “ the Prelates ”
of modern times!
(0 Isidore, bishop of Seville, 200 years after Augustine, says,--
“ After stating the different offices in which presbyters are partners
with bishops”— Sola propter auctoritatem Summo Sacerdoti Cltricorum
Ordmatio reservata est, ne a multis ecclesice discipline Vindicata Con-
cordiam Solveret, i.e.— “ It is only for authority’s sake that ordination
of the clergy is reserved to the highest rank of the priesthood, lest by
many claiming the right to administer the discipline of the Church
its peace should be destroyed.”
(u) The Second Council of Seville, about the same time says :
“ Quamyis cum episcopis •plurium presbyteris Ministeriorum com-
munis sit dispensatio, qusedam novellis et ecclesiasticis regulis sibi
prohibita noverint. (Irenicum chap, vi.) i.e. Although presbyters
have the right of performing many ministerial offices in common‘with
bishops, they know that some have been prohibited to them by new
ecclesiastical rules. J
(p Gregory Nazianzen, speaks of the great and affecting distinction
made between Ministers in prerogative of place and other tyrannical
privileges (as he calls them), as a lamentable and destructive thin<*.
(m>) Phe Waldenses distinct y repudiated a hierarchy—any grade of
office superior to that of presbyter. Seyssel, the first archbishop of
Turin, tays regarding them in 1520—“ Those whom they judge to be
the best among them, they appoint to be their priests (that is, presby-
ters), to whom, upon all occasions, they have recourse, as to the Vicars
and Successors of the Apostles.’’
(x) Hence Ncander very properly asserts that the convertibility
of the two terms “ Bishop ” and “Presbyter ” continued “till far on


in the second century." Again he says—“ Cyprian conceded to the
community the right of choosing worthy bishops or of rejecting
unworthy ones. This conceded right of approving or rejecting was
not a mere formality.’ 1
Referring to the different functions of the Presbyterate,, i.e., the
function of teaching and the function of ruling. Neander states
that as the faculty of teaching and the talent for administration are
distinct gifts, “the function of teaching and that of Church Govern-
ment were originally distinguished and held separate from each other ”
“In the first Epistle to Timothy, v. 17, those of the presbyters,
who, to the talent for government could unite also that of teaching,
are accounted worthy of double honour, and the prominence given
here to each may be regarded as another proof, that the two were not
necessarily and always united.”
{y) Hence also Mosheim says that “in the first century the rulers of
the Church were called either presbyters or bishops, which two titles
are in the New Testament undoubtedly applied to the same order of
men.”
According to thcWriters cited above,it is evident theriseand progress
of “ Prelacy’’ have been 4 paulatim’—gradual. “Diocesan Episcopacy”
evidently originated from “ parochial Episcopacy,” and was gradually
introduced. ‘The Apostles seem to have taught chiefly r in large cities;
they settled ministers there, who, preaching in country villages or
smaller towns, increased the number of converts ; those new converts,
who were situated at a considerable distance from the large towns,
when they grew numerous, would form themselves into distinct
churches, under the care of their proper pastors or bishops, independ-
ently of any of their neighbours ; but the reverence which would
be naturally paid to men who had conversed with the Apostles, (and
perhaps some desire of influence and dominion, from which the hearts
of very good men might not be entirely free, and which began to work
early, John iii, 9; 2 These, ii, 7) might early lay a foundation for
such a subordination in the ministers of newly erected churches to those
which were more ancient. Or the superiority of a pastor to his assist-
ant-presbyters would increase till, in time, it would be carried to an
excess; and this is not to be wondered at, when it is remembered
that, according to the learned Vitringa, there was a great defection
from the purity and vigour of religion, betwen the time of Nero and
Trajan, when the evil principles, which in the first place occasioned
•Episcopal, and at last, Papal Usurpation, began to work.’
B.—foreign Divines, Reformers, and Confessions of Faith.
(a) Huss and Jerome, of Prague, both scholars and martyrs, believed
in Presbyterian Principles. One of the solemn charges brought against
them was that they belonged to “a pestiferous sect,” and held “no
difference of order among those who bear the priestly office.”
(i b ) The Bohemian Church believed in one order in their Ministry.
Heylin, the chaplain of Laud, in his history admits that “the Bohemian
•Church was Episcopal neither in principle nor in practice.”
Comenius on the Book of Order, adopted by the Bohemian
brethren in 1616, in reference to the term presbyter as applied by the
Apostles, says,—“ Mot only to pastors, but to their assistants in


watching the flock, who do not labour in word and doctrine.’’ The
Book of Order affirms, “ presbyter and bishop are one and the same
thing.”
(e) Luther, commenting on the 20th chapter of the Acts, says :
“ You see plainly that the Apostle Paul calls those alone Bishops, who
preach the Gospel to the people, and administer the Sacraments, as
in our times parish ministers and preachers are wont to do. These,
therefore, though they preach the Gospel in small villages and hamlets,
yet, as faithful Ministers of the Word, I believe, beyond all doubt, possess
of right the title and name of Bishop.”
Luther not only taught, hut practised Presbyterianism. He was a
Presbyter, and for thirty years ordained many Presbyters. Aye!
within a few days of his death, he “ ordained two Ministers of the
Word of God after the Apostle’s manner.” And it is said that on one
occasion, in 1642, Luther, who was a mere Presbyter, at the request of
the Elector of Saxony, consecrated Amsdorff bishop of a diocese.
Hence it is that there are in the Lutheran Church, “ Superinten-
dents,” who are like “Moderators’’ mere presbyters, for they are
responsible to their brethren, and do not always enjoy that office for
life.
(d) Melancthon and Bucer and their Associates believed in Pres-
byterian principles, which appear in the Augustan Confession—the
Defence of that Document by Melaucthon—the Articles of Smalcald in
1537, or other Standards of the Lutheran Church.
It is said of Bucer that he was so eminent a preacher of the
Reformed Faith that Cranmer, when Archbishop of Canterbury,
invited him to' England, and he became Professor of Theology at
Cambridge.
(e) Ursinus, Musculus, Baldwin, Deiterich, Hulseman, Gehard,
Budus, and other Lutheran Divines and Professors, bear testimony in
favour of Presbytery.
(/) The Confessions of Faith of the Saxon, Bohemian, Swiss, and
Belgic Churches are Presbyterian.
Hence the Reformers Zwingle and OEcolampadins were Presby-
terians.
(g) The Protestant Church of France is Presbyterian.
Hence the learned men of that Church, not only Farel, Yiret and
Calvin, but Sadeel, Chamier, Danau, Le Blanc, De Moulin, Bochart,
Blondel, Daille, Claude, and many others, taught Presbyterianism.
Calvin, in his Commentary upon Acts xx, one of his latest
works, written not long before his death, says : —“According to Scrip-
ture, presbyters differed in no respect from bishops; but that it arose
from corruption and a departure from primitive purity: that those
who held the first seats in particular cities began to be called
bishops.”
( h) The Church of Holland is Presbyterian. The Divines of the
Synod of Dort came under the solemn sanction of an oath to the
resolution—“ We believe that the true Church must be governed by
that spiritual policy which our Lord has taught us in His Word. , .
As for the ministers of God’s Word, they have equally the same power


and authority wheresoever they are; as they are all ministers
Christ, the only Universal Bishop and the only Head of the Church.
Hence Presbyterianism is seen in the writings of the members ot
the Synod and Professors of Divinity in the Dutch Universities, viz.,
Gomarus, Polyander, Thysius, and Waloeus. _ .
Besides, the Synod itself was Presbyterian in its constitution, for
out of “ ninety members, twenty were ruling Elders. ’ It maybe well
for Episcopalians to know what Bishop Hall has said of the Presbyterian
Synod—“ There was no place upon earth so like heaven as the Synod
of Dort, or where he should be more willing to dwell.”
(f) The Swedish, Danish and Norwegian Churches, though they
now have bishops and archbishops, were originally Presbyterian,_ for
at the Reformation the first Protestant ministers, who were ordained
in those countries, were not “ prelates,’’ but “ presbyters, for they
received presbyteried ordination. Those who are now called bishops
and archbishops have, therefore, had no other but Presbytunan
Ordination.
Bugenhagius, who ordained the first Superintendents in Denmark,
was merely a presbyter. Hence it is that Swedish divines do not
believe in “the Divine right” of prelacy.
C. — English Reformers, Arch-Bishops, Bishops, Professors, and Divines-
It is a remarkable fact that at the Reformation, the only Protestant
Church, which was founded on Prelatic Principles, was “ tne Church
of England,” which arose from a variety of causes —social—religious,
and political; but it is as remarkable that the early Dignitaries and
Divines of that Church spoke in favor of Presbyterian Principles.
[a) Wickliffe, “the Morning Star of the Reformation,” and the
Translator, testified as to “the Presbyterian polity” being coeval with
the primitive Christianity of Great Britain.
(b) Tyndal maintained the identity of the bishop and the presbyter
and the perfect equality of the Ministers of the Gospel.
(q) The Martyr, Lambert, in 1538, bore testimony to Presbytenal
{pf Archbishop Cranmer held “ the identity of bishop and presby-
ter,” and proposed at one time the erection of Courts corresponding to
the Kirk-Sessions and Provincial Synods, afterwards established in
Scotland. He maintained “ that the" appointment to spiritual offices
belongs indifferently to bishops, to princes or to the people, according
to the pressure of existing circumstances. He affirmed the original
identity of Bishops and Presbyters; and contended that nothing more
than mere election, or appointment, is essential to the Sacerdotal
Office, without consecration, or any other solemnity.” (Le Bas’ Life
of Cranmer, vol. i., p. 197 )
In his “Institution of a Christian Man ” —a hook published in 1536,
and not only recommended but subscribed by two arch-bishops and
nineteen bishops, and approved by the King and Parliament, it is declared
that there are “ but two orders of clergy, and no one bishop has
authority over another, according to the Word of God, and that
“ in the New Testament there is no mention of any other degrees, but
of deacons or ministers, and of presbyters or bishops.”


(e ) Archbishop Usher projected a plan for the reduction of “ Prela-
cy.” His object was to bring it very near the Presbyterian Govern-
ment of the Church of Scotland : (a) the weekly parochial vestry
answering to “the Kirk Session” ; (b ) the monthly synod to be held
by the Ghorepiscopi answering to “ Presbyteries ” ; (e) the diocesan
synod answering to “ the Provincial Synod”; (d) and the
Synod answering to the “ General Assembly.”
(/) An Act of Parliament passed in the reign of Henry YIII. has
the following words : “ Archbishops, bishops, arch-deacons, and all
other ecclesiastical officers, have no manner of jurisdiction ecclesias-
tical, but by, under, and from his royal majesty.” Accordingly,
Bishop Bumet says—“ the King gave bishops their power to ordain or
deprive ministers ; to exercise ecclesiastical jurisdiction ; and perform
all other parts of the Episcopal function.”
(y) Edward VI. wanted to alter and re-model the English Church,
according to “ Apostolic purity’’—and this “Apostolic purity,” ac-
cording to a Lasco, was Presbyterianism or “ Presbyterian Polity.”
(h) The celebrated Hooker in his Ecclesiastical Polity says—“ The
necessity of polity and regimen in all churches may be believed,
without holding any one certain form to be necessary in them all.
And the genial principles are such as do not particularly describe
any one; but sundry forms of discipline may be equally consistent
to_ the general axioms of Scripture.” To this declaration agree
Bishop Stillingfleet, Dr. Edwards, and others.
(*') Dr. Holland King’s Professor of Divinity at Oxford says—“that
to affirm the office of Bishop to be different from that of Presbyter,
and superior to it, is most false; contrary to Scripture, to the fathers,
to the doctrines of the Church of England, yea, to the very School-
men themselves.”
(i) Sir Peter King, in his Inquiry into the Constitution of the
Primitive Church considers bishops and presbyters as exactly of the
same order and invested with the same powers, and defines a presbyter
to be “a person in holy orders, having thereby an inherent right to
perforin the whole office of a bishop, but being possessed of no place
or parish, nor actually discharging it, without the permission and
consent of the bishop of a place or parish.” (Chap iv., § 1.)
This definition of Presbyter is equivalent to the Presbyterian view,
for according to Presbyterians every minister is a bishop in his own
parish or congregation, and can forbid any other minister to preach
and baptize in it without permission asked and obtained.
Sir Peter proceeds to show that the distinction between presbyters
and bishops in the Primitive Church was little more than nominal,
because the powers of bishops and presbyters were the same. He
proves from the Fathers that presbyters had a right to preach, that
they baptized, that they administered the Eucharist, that they
presided in the Consistories together with the bishop, that they had
power to excommunicate, to restore penitents, to confirm, and lastly
that they had the power of ordination. Hence he said that “they
were of the very same specific order with bishops, having the same
inherent right to perform all ecclesiastical offices.” (Chap, iv., § 3.)


(k) Hence the Twenty-third of the Thirty-nine Articles of the
Church of England, says nothing about “ Diocesans,” or the necessity
of Episcopal Ordination, but is couched in language apparently on
purpose to comprehend other Reformed Churches, and to recognize the
validity of their ordinances. The words are—“ Those, we ought to
judge lawfully, called and sent, which be chosen and called to this
work by men, who have public authority given unto them in the
congregation, to call and send ministers into the Lord’s Vineyard.”
Consequently Presbyterian Ordination was considered valid by
the English Divines of the period, for Archbishop Grindal, in
1582 appointed Morrison, ordained by the Church of Scotland,
to pastoral duties within the diocese of Canterbury. And the
Founders of the Church of England invited the leading men of
Continental Churches, such as Bucer and Peter Myrtyr, whose
ordination was Presbyterian, and recognized their ordination.^
But when Bancroft, in 1588, first urged the plea of the Divine right
of Prelacy—the superiority of bishops to presbyters, the learned
Rainolds, Professor of Divinity in Oxford, declared, that “ all who
had laboured for five hundred years before his time taught that all
pastors, whether entitled bishops or priests, have equal power and
authority by God’s Word;” and this he declared to be the common
judgment of the reformed Churches of Switzerland, Savoy, France,
Germany Hungary, Poland, the Netherlands, Scotland, and England.
Bishop Burnet also states that for a long time after the Reformation
in Great Britain, the validity of Presbyterian ordination was uniformly
acknowledged. „
11) Archdeacon Paley says —“ It cannot bo proved that any form
of Church Government was laid down in the Christian Scriptures,
with a view of fixing a Constitution for succeeding ages.’’
&c., &c., &c.
Article 4.
Apostles. —(Eph. iv. 11, 12, and 1 Cor. xix. 28),
The term “Apostles” par excellence is applied to “the Twelve,” whom
the Saviour sent forth. They were so called, because they were “ sent,"
for the term Apostle is derived from ths verb cnrosTeWa) (apostello),
which signifies “to send.’’
Hence the term Apostles, which occurs eighty-one times in the
New Testament, is applied not only to “the twelve” sent by the Son,
but to the Son Himself, as sent by the Father. (Heb. iii. 11.)
Hence also the following renderings of the term Apostles or Apostle
conveying the idea of sending :
John xiii. 16 —Neither he that is sent (Apostle).
2 Cor. viii. 23—They are the Messengers (Apostles).
Phil. ii. 25—Your Messenger (Apostle).
It is evident the term “Apostle” is variously rendered and variously
applied. Epaphroditus is called an apostle, because he was sent by
the Philippian Church to Paul “to minister to his wants.’’ Indeed
any one, who is sent, is called an apostle as in John xiii. 16.


_ln the Septuagint, apostello is the rendering of r (Shalah) which
simply means to send, and the Arabic Rasala also implies to send.
Hence Rasyol is an Apostle or messenger. The Arabians call the
Prophets of the Old Testament and Jesus Christ Rasa el (plural of
Easool), but Mohammed, the Kasool. The term Easool, however, is
applied, like Apostles, to any messenger or person sent.
Consequently the mere application of the term apostle to any person
in the New Testament does not convey the idea that the individual
was invested with Apostolic Office or Power, as Episcopalians seem to
believe.
I'he Prelatists, therefore, err when they teach that like “the
twelve,” Epaphroditus was an Apostle, i.e., “a prelatic bishop,” for
is it not strange that a prelatic bishop should be sent by the Philippian
Church to minister “to the wants of PaulP” And is it not strange
enough that Paul should send a whole company of “Apostles,” i.e,,
prelatic bishops, on a general exploring tour through Greece ?
(2 Cor. viii. 23). And how ridiculous it is to invest any one and
every one called apostles in the Septuagint, with Prophetic or Apostolic
powers!
The Apostles of our Lord were Presbyters— (I Pet. v. 1 ; 2 John
and 3 John). And all the Presbyter-Apostles were on perfect equality
like other Presbyters—for :
(a) Mark x. 42, 45—Ye know that they who are accounted to rule
over the Gentiles exercise lordship over them, and their great ones
exercise authority_over them; but it shall not be so among you,
Eor whosoever will be great among you, shall be your minister
(diaconos—servant). These words were spoken by our Lord at the
time, when James and John wanted to be exalted above ther Brethren.
(h) Matthew xxiii. 6—12. . . “Be ye not called Rabbi . . .
Neither be ye called Masters . . . But he that is greatest among
you shall be your servant . ,
And the Iwelve Apostles had extraordinary qualifications and
gifts, and none after them possessed those Apostolic qualifications.
(Compare Art. 11).
Preaching or Teaching was the principal work of the Apostles—
though the ambition of “prelates”—“ the successors of the Apostles ”
has inverted this divine order, for the latter consider ruling to be their
principal work and preaching to be the meanest service. The Scripture
says “ Let the presbyters, who rule well be counted worthy of double
honour; especially they, who labour in word and doctrine (1 Tim. v. 17)
but the Prelatists say—let the preacher be honoured; but especially
the bishop who rules over him.
Article 5.
Pastors.
The term translated “pastor’ in Eph. 4 : 11, is tt oipr/v (poimeen).
It occurs eighteen times in the New Testament, and is rendered
“ Shepherd,” with the exception of Eph. iv. 11.


The Pastors, then, are Shepherds ; and the works of the Shepherd
or Poimoen are—
(a) To feed (Luke 17 : 7. John 21 : 18. Acts 20 : 18. 1 Cor. 9: 7.
1 Pet. 5 ; 2), and
(b) To rule (Matthew 2; 6. Rev. 2:27 ; 12:5; 19 : 15)
The Pastors, Shepherds, or Poimeenes are the feeders and also the
rulers of the flock, for the verb Troipcuvco (poimaino) means “ to feed ”
and also “to rule.”
The Apostles were Pastors (John 21 : 16), but all the Pastors were
not, or are not, “Apostles,” as in 1 Peter 5 : 2, where the Presbyter
Apostle Peter exhorts the Presbyters or Presbyter—Bishops ’’ —Feed
the flock of God which is among you, “taking the bishoprick
thereofand in Acts 20 : 28, where the Presbyter Apostle Paul ex-
horts the Ephesian Presbyters or Presbyter—Bishops—“ to feed the
Church of God.”
Consequently the epithet Pastor, Feeder or Ruler is synonymous
with Presbyter.
The Hebrew njTl (Rahgah) and the Arabic Ra-a, like poimaino,
mean “to feed” and also “to rule.” Hence in Psalm xxviii. 9
“ Save thy people and bless thine Inheritance : feed (Marg. rule,
Vulgate rega ) them also.” (See also Micah v. 6 ; vii. 14.)
Among Arabians, civil Rulers, as well as spiritual or ecclesiastical
Rulers are called Races or Pastors.
Article 6.
Prophets.
npo(f)r]Tr]s —propheetees is derived from TTpofrjfu, signifying to fore-
tell, and consequently means “ a foreteller of future events.”
It stands for the Hebrew X'33 (Nabee). And the verb Naba means
to speak by a Divine power (“holy men spokeas they were moved by
the Holy Ghost ”); and a Nabee therefore is one who is actuated by
“ a Divine afflatus” ( Gesenius ).
Consequently the noun npocprjreia —propheeteia—signifies “a fore-
telling of future events,” including also the idea of prophetic reve-
lations. Hence the term “ Prophets ” stands in the New Testament —
(a) For the Prophets or foretellers of the Old Testament, as Isiaah,
Jeremiah, &c. (Matth. i. 22 ; hi. 3, &c.)
( b ) For Persons under the New Testament Dispensation who, like
the Prophets of the Old Testament Dispensation, acted under “Divine
influence.”
Our Lord was a Prophet; the Apostles were “ Prophets.”—Mathew
10 : 41, &c.
( c) For Certain Persons who possessed the gift of prophecy in the
primitive churches.
They appear to have been next in rank to the Apostles, and before
the Teachers. (1 Cor. xii. 28).
They were “the predictors,” or “foretellers,” who spoke from “an
immediate revelation.”
{d) For a heathen Poet, as in Tit. i. 12, for among the heathen the
poets were said to be inspired by the Muses.


The Prophets of the New Testament, like the Nabees of the Old,
were under the direct inspiration of the Holy Ghost. They were
assisted in this extraordinary manner “to edify” or “build” the
Church, in the circumstances in which it was placed, when newly
founded, for it then required extraordinary guidance and direction.
Consequently Prophets in the sense of ‘‘Predictors” or “Foretellers”
are now not found in the Church; but the Head of the Church may
raise up a Prophet or Prophets, whenever the circumstances of the
Church may demand.
Article 7.
Evangelists.
The term evayyiKifa (evangelizow) signifies “to bring glad tidings,
to announce as glad tidings.’’ Hence it is rendered thus :
Matth. xi. s.—The poor have the Gospel preached to them.
Luke i. 19.— Shew thee these glad tidings.
hi. 18— Treadled he unto the people.
ix. 6 —Preaching the Gospel.
Acts v. 42—To teach and preach Jesus Christ.
viii. 4, 12, 25, 35, 40.— Preach.
xi. 20— Preaching the Lord Jesus.
Eom. i. 15 —Ho preach the Gospel.
x. 15 —Preach the Gospel , and bring glad tidings of good
things.
Eom. xv. 20—Have I strived to preach the Gospel.
1 Cor. ix. 16-—For though I preach the Gospel,
lf \ preach not the Gospel, &c., &c.
It is equivalent to the Hebrew “i£7’3 (bah-sar) and the Arabic
Bashara, signifying “to be joyful, cheerful, especially in receiving
glad tidings.” (Isaiah xl. 9; lii. 7, &c.)
Hence—
(a) Uvangelion {evayyeXiov) is rendered “Gospel,” i.e., “good
word ” or “ glad tidings.”
And
(5) evayye\i(jTrjs~JJvangelistees —which occurs three times in the
following places, is thus rendered :
Acts xxi. B—Philip the Evangelist.
Eph. iv. 11—And some, Evangelists.
2 Tim. iv. s—Do the work of an Evangelist.
The Evangelist, then, was one who evangelized, i.e., “brought glad
tidings ” or “ preached the Gospel!’ (Eom 10: 15.)
The Evangelist brought the Uvangelion —the Gospel—the good word
of great joy, and thus “preached the Lord Jesus Christ.” (Acts 11: 20.,
Philip the Deacon was such an Evangelist; and so was Timothy)
the Presbyter. (2 Tim. 4: 5.)
Paul the Apostle also was an Evangelist (compare Eom. i. 15; x. 15 •
xv. 20. 1 Cor. ix. 16, &c.)
Moshcim thinks that “ the Seventy Disciples 1 performed the
functions of Evangelists.


It would seem, however, that while Ministers of Eeligion,
whether Apostles, or Presbyters, or Deacons, were Evangelists or
Preachers of the Gospel, that certain Officers were chosen in the prim-
itive church who were not located as “pastors” (Feeders or Eulers) or
“bishops” (overseers) over any flock ; but who, without being fixed
to any Church or Congregation, "evangelized” or “preached”
wherever they were led by the Holy Ghost. They were “ Itinerant
Preachers” or “ Travelling Missionaries.”
It is evident they labored under the guidance of the Apostles or
Presbyters —travelled among the infant churches —ordained Ordinary
Officers, or Bishops, and finished what the Apostles had begun.
Mark and Silas also were Evangelists.
The rank of Evangelists appears to have been next to the 1 rophets.
The Church may appoint and send forth fresh Evangelists, i.e.,
Preachers or Publishers of the Gospel, or the Church may employ
stated Pastors now and again as Evangelists. The bishop (overseer),
may be combined with the evangelist (preacher) for both the offices
are not incompatible. ,
But since the Evangelists after Apostolic times have been transformed
into “ Prelates,” by the Churches of Eome and England, it is of
importance to know that, even In the fourth century, Eusebius
describes the office of the Evangelist thus “ They laying only the
foundation of the faith in places, which had not heard the Gospel
and appointing other pastors, to whom they delivered the cultivation
of these new plants, passed on themselves to other countries and
Timothy and Titus were not “fixed Prelates,” as
alleged by Prelatists, but Evangelists. ,
Timothy was an Evangelist, may be further shown from the
following reasons: — ~ , _ ...
(a) Because in 2 Tim. iv. s—Timothy is called an Evangelist—
“ do the work of an Evangelist.” , . ~
lb) Because Timothy, as appears from the Acts and the Epistles-
was an Attendant of Paul in his different journeys, for
In 1 Tim. i, 3 —Paul had besought Timothy “to abide still at
Ephesus ” which indicates that Ephesus was not Timothy s “See,’
but that a sense of duty had called him to reside there for a time.
If Ephesus was “the See” of Timothy, it is strange that iimothy,
the Prelate of Ephesus, should be told “to abide still ” in Ephesus.
Consequently, Timothy was not the Prelate of Ephesus, but sent to
Ephesus as an Evangelist. Besides, it is worthy of observation, if
Timothy was placed in Ephesus as a Diocesan, why is it that he is not
represented as performing any "Confirmations” or “Ordinations
the real functions of the Prelates or Diocesans of modern times ?
But instead of being empowered to “Confirm and ‘ Ordain, we
find him sent to Ephesus by the Apostle to prevent the propagation
of error and to maintain the truth—functions belonging to any
minister of the Gospel. Hence the Apostle enjoins Timothy to charge
some “ to teach no other doctrine than that which he had been taught,
nor o-ive heed to fables and endless genealogies.” Hence, also, some
ancient Christian writers have said that Timothy was sent to Ephesus


“to oppose Judaizing teachers.” The Judaizers appear to have been
very skilful in seducing Christians; hence, an extraordinary teacher
like Timothy was required at Ephesus. Consequently, when this im-
portant work, and other things naturally connected with it, were
finished, Timothy returned again to Paul.
In 2 Tim. iv. 9, 20—“ Do thy diligence to come shortly unto me.”
“Do thy diligence to come before winter.” “ The cloak, which I left
at Troas, when thou comest, bring with thee.”
Paul directs Timothy to come to him at Rome, whence the Second
Epistle was written, and to come before winter, which implies that he
was not soon to return to Ephesus.
Accordingly we find that Timothy was resident for a time at
Philippi and Corinth. (Phil. ii. 19. 1 Cor, iv. 17; xvi. 10, 11), as
well as at Ephesus of which, he is said to have been the fixed bishop.
We find Timothy with the Apostle, at Rome, during his first
imprisonment, and united with him in the letters to the Colossians,
Philippians, and to Philemon (Col. i. 1, Phil. i. 1, Phelem. i.). He was
with the Apostle in Corinth, when the Epistle to the Romans was
written (Rom. xvi. 21, compare xvi. 1, 23; 2 Tim. iv. 20). He had
been recently imprisoned, probably at Rome, when the Epistle to the
Hebrews was written, Heb. xiii. 23.
Now, it is very remarkable, if Timothy was “the fixed Prelate ” of
Ephesus, why he should he so frequently leaving his diocese —why he
should not remain in his own see, and attend to the appropriate func-
tions of his episcopate F If Timothy were such a migratory “bishop,”
who was so seldom in his own diocese, he set a very bad example of
“absenting himself’’ to his Apostolic successors.
(c) Because “ The Postscript” of the Second Epistle which statesthat,
“ Timothy was the first bishop of the Church of the Ephesians” is of
no authority, as the postcript is no part of the Canon of Scripture.
This is acknowledged by all learned men, according to whom, it was
interpolated by officious transcribers more than four hundred years
after the Epistle. It is no wonder that the postscript is not found in
the most authentic copies of the original. Besides, the postscript is
not the same in the copies in which it is found. Hence the postscript
is not found in the earliest English translation ; and when it was intro-
duced, it was printed, for a long time, in a different type from the re-
ceived text, to show that it formed no part of the Scriptures.
But the Translators of the authorized English version, being Episco-
palians, suffered the postscrip to remain as it at present stands, without
any mark to distinguish it from the received text.
( d ) Because there were other Bishops in Ephesus when the First
Epistle to Timothy was written, viz.: those whom Paul sent for to
Miletus.
{e) Because Timothy is not called “ an Apostle,” i.e., in the Prelatic
sense, “a Prelate,” but simply “a brother,” as in 2 Cor. i, 1., “Paul
an Apostle of Jesus Christ, and Timothy our brother.'" Also Col. i. 1.
Compare with Phil. i. 1.: “ Paul and Timotheus, the servants of Jesus
Christ.” See also 1. Thess. i. 1., 2. Thess. i. 1.; Timothy is called “ a
servant,” “a brother,” but not an Apostle, i.e., “a Prelate.”


Consequently Timothy was not “ the fixed Prelate ” of Ephesus, but
"an Evangelist.”
Again, what is true of Timothy is equally true of Titus ;
(a) Because Titus was left as an Evangelist at Crete. (Titus 1 : 5.)
“ For this cause left I thee in Crete, that thou shouldst set in order
the things that are wanting, and ordain Elders in every city,” which,
according to Eusebius is the very work of an Evangelist.
(5) Because Titus, as appears from the following Passages, was like
Timothy, an Attendant of Paul in his different journeys
Titus, iii. : 12.—" When I shall send Artemas unto thee or Tychicus,
be diligent to come unto me to Nicopolis ; for I have determined there
to winter.”
It appears from this passage that Titus resided for a short time in
Crete before he returned to Paul at Nicopolis. Now Nicopolis was a
town in Macedonia, or in Epirus. Titus had to sail from Crete the
whole length of the Mare JEgeum, in those days a very difficult naviga-
tion, after he had finished his temporary work at Crete, not surely to
go back immediately to Crete. As it cannot be pretended that Paul
had any purpose of becoming the permanent Bishop of Crete, so it
cannot be that Titus being left to complete what Paul had begun, is
proof that Titus was the permanent Bishop of Crete, especially when
Titus had to leave Crete, after the completion of his temporary work
in Crete, to rejoin the Apostle at Nicopolis as his Attendant.
Consequently, the work of Titus mentioned in the first chapter was
temporary. When that work was finished, he had to rejoin the
Apostle at Nicopolis as his Attendant.
From 2 Cor. ii. 12, 13; vii. 6—13, we gather that Titus was
regarded by Paul as his companion, and that Titus, as Paul’s Attend-
ant, had rendered valuable assistance to the Apostle in his travels
(2 Cor. ii. 12, 13), "When I came to Troas to preach Christ’s
Gospel’, and a door was opened unto me of the Lord, I had no rest in
my spirit, because I found not Titus my brother; but, taking my
leave of them, I went from thence into Macedonia.”
From this passage it is evident that Paul expected to find his valu-
able companion, Titus, at Troas; but, not finding him there, the
Apostle left Troas for Macedonia, where he found his Attendant, for, in
the Second Epistle to the Corinthians, which was written from Philippi,
a city of Macedonia, he says: —
(vii. 13). " Therefore we were comforted in your comfort;
yea, and exceedingly the more joyed we for the joy of Titus, because
his spirit was refreshed by you all.”
From 2 Cor. xxii. 18, we gather that Titus was employed by
Paul on a special embassy to the Church in Corinth in respect to the
collection for the poor saints at Jerusalem. “ I desired Titus” (i.e,,
to go to the Corinthians to receive the collection for the poor saints at
Jerusalem) “ and with him I sent a brother. Did Titus make a gain
of you?” Compare Rom. xv. 26.
From 2 Tim. iv. 10., it is evident that Titus was employed on
an Evangelistic Mission to Dalmatia. “ Demas hath forsaken me,
having loved this present world, and is departed into Thessolonica,
Crescens to Galatia, Titus into Dalmatia.”


From the Evangelistic tours or missions specified in the passages
cited above, we necessarily draw the conclusion that Titus could not
have been “the fixed Prelate ” of Crete ; but that he was, like Timothy,
an Evangelist.
If Crete had been “the stated charge” or “see” of Titus, surely
Paul would never have called him away so frequently therefrom ; for,
however common it has since been for bishops not to reside in their
dioceses, no such practice was known in apostolic times ; and. had there
been any attempt to introduce it, the Apostle himself would have op-
posed it as a criminal desertion of duty.
( c ) Because the Postscript, which states that Titus was “ ordained
the first bishop of the Creteans,” being no part of the Canon of Scrip-
ture, has no authority. Vide Timothy.
Titus, therefore, had no permanent residence in Crete, and was not
“the fixed Prelate ’’ of Crete, hut an Evangelist.
Consequently both Timothy and Titus were employed by the Church
as “ Evangelists.” Hence, also, the Presbyterian Church occasionally
employs presbyters as Evangelists. This is done in Europe, America,
Australia, and Asia; but, surely, because presbyters are employed
as evangelists, they cannot become transformed into “Diocesans”
or “Prelates.”
Some Episcopalians have ridiculously asserted that Timothy and
Titus were “ Archbishops.” It would be well for such to attend to
the arguments already adduced, and to what Dr. Whitby, an eminent
Epis jopalian divine, says“ The great controversy concerning this
and the Epistles to Timothy, is, whether Timothy and Titus were
indeed made bishops—the one of Ephesus and the Proconsular of Asia,
the other of Crete. Now, of this matter, I confess I can find nothing in
any writer of the first three centuries, nor any intimation that they bore
that name." He considered them not as “bishops’’but as “Evan-
gelists.” ( Vide his Commentary).
Article 8.
Teachers.
A i§a(TKa\os —didaskalos, means “ a teacher or instructor,” being-
derived from didacTKm— didaskow, “to teach, to instruct.” Hence, it
is rendered in the New Testament, very frequently— “ Master,” i.e.,
<■ a teacher, an instructor,” for this is the sense in which the term
“ master ’’ was chiefly employed at the time that the Translation of the
Bible was made. Even at the present day the term “ master ”is often
used in this sense; hence, “ the master of school,” &c. In the
United States, however, the term “master” is giving place, in the
sense of teaching, to “teacher, instructor, preceptor” (Webster)
But SiSao-xaXoy—didaskalos is also rendered “teacher” in the fol-
lowing places: —
John iii. 2. Acts xiii. 1. Rom. ii, 20. 1 Cor. xii. 28, 29. Eph. iv.
11. 1 Tim. ii. 7. 2 Tim. i. 11, iv. 3. Heh. v. 12.
The term didaskalos appears to he synonymous with the Jewish
(Rabbi), i. e., literally the great one (Psalm cxix. 156, &c.,) hut
idiomatically “master” (Dan. i. 3), “chief,” “captain,” or “lord,”


(Chaldee. Dan. ii. 10, 14, 48. v. 11). And tnough the term Rabbi
originally had the above significations, yet in the Jewish schools it
had became a title of honor, which was conferred on Jewish doctors,
teachers, or didaskaloi, under the following three-told forms:
I. 31 Rab, i. e , master, the lowest degree of honor. 2. '3”l Rabbi, i.e.,
my master, a higer degree. 3. 131 Rahhan or Rabboni, i.e., my great
master, the nmst honorable of all, which was given “to only seven
persons, all of the school of Hillel and of great eminence.’
The Didaskaloi, then, were “Masters,” “Rabbis,” doctors (Lat.,)
i.e., teachers, and instructors. Hence in the New Testament the term
didaskalos is applied to Jewish Rabbis, doctors, or lawyers (Math. ix.
11. x. 24, 25, &c.), and to John the Baptist (Luke iii. 12.) And hence
also our Lord Himself was a Didaskalos—so the Pharisees and others
called Him (Matth. ix. 11. xii. 38. xix. 16, &c.). And our Lord called
Himself the didaskalos of his disciples (Matth. xxvi.: 18, &c.). And
after Him, he left u Extraordinary to achers’’ (1. Tim., ii. 7), who,
converting the Jews and Gentiles to the trutu, should erect every
where Christian Assemblies (Mosheim). Hence the Twelve Apostles
were “ the extraordinary Teachers,” or didaskaloi, who were the
interpreters of the Divine will; and after the Apostles there were
-ordinary “teachers ’’ chosen, who enforced and repeated the doctrines
delivered by the Apostles —the extraordinary Teachers, and kept the
people in their holy profession, and in the practice of the Christian
virtues. _ .
These teachers, or didaskaloi, are mentioned in Lph. ll, and
1 Cor. xii. 28—30. In after ages they were called “doctors,” (Vulg.
Eph. iv. 11—doctores). They “edified” “the Body of Christ,’
(1 Cor. xii. 28) bv teaching.
In the Second Book cf Discipline, Chapter v., the following is the
description given of “the Doctor”: —
“ 1. Ane of the twa ordinar and pepetuall functions that travel!
in the Word, is the office of the Doctor, guha also may be callit
Prophet, Bischop, Elder, Catechizar, that is, teacher of the catechisme
and rudiments of religione. .
“ 2. His office is to open up the mynde of the Spirit of God in the
Scriptures simplie, without sic applications as the ministers usis, to
the end that the faithful may be instructit and sound doctrine teachit,
and that the purity of the Gospell be not corruptit throw ignorance
or evil opinions. . ,
“3. He is different from the pastor not only in name, but in
diversity of gifts. Eor to the Doctor is gine the Word of knowledge,
to open up be simple teaching the mysteries of faith; to the pastor
the gift of wisedome, to apply the same by exhortation to the manners
of the flock, as occasion craveth.
“ 6. But to preich unto the people, to minister the Sacraments and
to celebrate manages, preteinis not to the Doctor, unlesse he be
utterwyse callit ordinarly; howbeit the pastor may teich in the
schoolis, as he wha hes also the gift of knowledge oftentimes meit
therefore, as the examples of Polycarpus and uthers testifie.


Such being the standing of “the Doctor,” according to the fifth
chapter of the Policy of the Kirk, we find that “ When the General
Assembly, February 10, 1645, ratifies the propositions sent to them
from the Assembly of Divines, at Westminster, concerning Church
government and ordination of Ministers, they expressly provide, that the
pre. ent ratification shall be noways prejudical to the further discussion
and examination of one of the Articles or propositions, which holds
forth, that the Doctor or Teacher hath power of the administration of
Sacraments, as well as the Pastor.”
“ By the 2nd article, chap, ii., of the Discipline of the French Church
a Doctor in the Church cannot preach nor administer the Sacraments,
unless he be both Doctor and Minister.”
Consequently “the Doctorate,” or the Doctor’s Office, is inferior to
“ the Pastorate,” or the Pastor’s Office ; but the Doctorate and the
Pastorate may be both combined in one Person.
Article 9.
“ Miracles,’’ or “workers of miracles,” (1 Cor. 12 : 28, 29) “ gifts of
healing,’’ “ diversities of tongues,’’ were undeniably extraordinary
offices possessed by the Apostles, and by some or many of their immedi-
ate disciples.
“ They thus wrought miracles, healed, and spake with tongues.’’
Article 10.
Helps.
AvriKrjfeis —antileepseis, means “aid,” “relief,” i.e., “a helper,
reliever.”
Deacons are so designated because of the aid and relief they gave to
the poor and sick.
“Helps,” or “Deacons,” were ordained not by one Apostle or one
Prelate, but by the Apostles. They were not elected or selected by
the Apostles or Prelates but by the People, i.e., members of the Church.
(Acts vi.)
They were ordained “to serve tables,” to perform eleemosynary
deeds or to attend to “ the temporalities ’’ of the Church. Consequently
they were not “Spiritual” persons; to them was not committed the
Ministry of the Word and Sacraments. As Deacons, they had no right
to preach or to baptize.
If Phillip, “the Deacon,” preached and baptized in Samaria and
other places, he preached and baptized not as a Deacon, but as an
“ Evangelist,” which he was, as expressly mentioned in Acts xxi. : 8.
The duties of Deacons or Helps being temporal, as enjoined in the
New Testament, the early Fathers speak of them as “presiding over
the money-tables of the Church.” For instance, Jerome in his famous
letter to Evagrius calls theDeacon—-“A Minister of tables and widows.’’
Hence the statement of Prelacy that “ deacons are one of the orders
of clergy, and are authorized to preach and baptize,” is erroneous,
for it is contrary to the teaching of Acts vi., I—6.


Though Deacons are mentioned in the New Testament, yet there is
no mention whatever made of persons, who, in after ages came to
be called “ Arc A-deacons” or “ £wi-deacons,” or “ ordained deacon-
nesscs.”
No_ doubt, ordained deaconnesses originated erroneously from
what is recorded of Phoebe in Rom. xvi., 1, where she is called “a
Servant ’ (Gr. Blcikovos, diakonos). But there ought to be no
ordained female deacons or female presbyters; for the Apostle Paul
expressly interdicts women from teaching in the Churches (1 Cor.,
xiv. 34; compare 1 Tim., ii 8,9, 11, 12.)
As women are not allowed by Apostolic authority to give “ homi-
letical instruction’’ or preach in public assemblies, they may be
allowed, however, to render services to a Presbyter in a variety of
ways, and thus they may be considered as “ presbyteresses” and
■“ deaconnesses.”
The very fact that ancient writers speak of the early extinction of
the unscriptural office of “deaconnesses.” indicates that the Old Rule
“ Mulier taceat in eccelsia”— i.e., Let the woman keep silence in the
Church , should in no way be violated.
Ahticlb 11.
Apostolic Succession
And
Three Orders.
Prelacy teaches that there are three Ecclesiastical orders—deacons,
priests and bishops :
1. Deacons. This is the loivest order. Their office is to baptize, to
read the Scriptures, homilies and prayers to the people, to assist the
priests in the distribution of the Eucharist, and, if it seem good to
the bishop, also to preach.
2. Priests. Their business is to preach, to read prayers, to admin-
ister both Sacraments and to pronounce the sentence of absolution
upon penitents.
3. Bishop. He possesses the power to ordain priests and deacons,
to confirm those who have been baptized, and to rule over his diocese,
the clergy of which are subject to his authority.
The government of the Church is vested solely in the bishop or
bishops, for neither deacons nor priests have any share in it.
The Bishop is “the ruler” and not “ the'preacher.” He may
preach he pleases ; but this is a matter of choice, To preach the
gospel is not an essential duty of his office, for he is appointed merely
“ to rule.”
According to some Prelatists, these three orders have descended in
“ uninterrupted succession ” from the Apostles, which is designated by
them—“ Apostolic Succession.’’
Arguments in Support of “ Diocesan Episcopacy.”
Argument I.—The analogy of Jewish heirarchy, which consisted of
a three-fold order in the Ministry,
Answer: The analogy is merely alleged.


(a) Because it has no foundation in Scripture. There were not three
“ orders ”in the Jewish Church, tor “the High Priest did not
belong to an order distinct from the priests. Besides, “ the high-priest
whs supvewio head over the whole Church, and not over a bod\ of
“ prelates.” Such an analogy might suit Papal assumptions, but not
Protestant Episco-palianism.
(£) Because in no place in the New Testament are Ministers ot
Christ designated “ priests,” or “ sacrifices. ’’
(c) Because the Levites were not invested with “ Sacred Orders.
(d) Because the Christian dispensation is so different from the
Jewish that no conclusion, with respect to the former, can be drawn
from the mode of administering the latter.
( e ) Because the ceremonial system was totally-abolished at the death
of Christ, and it is gross presumption to take for granted that any part
of it was renewed, unless it can be proved that it actually was so from
Scripture. ,
(/) Becausethis argument is abandoned as invalid even by some ot
the best advocates of Prelacy.
Consequently the alleged Analogy is a mere conjecture.
But the Christian Church, without the aid of “the Prelates,” con-
tains the three orders, for Christ is the great High Priest of our pro-
fession ; His ministers correspond to the ordinary priests ; and the-
deacons to the Levites.
Argument 2.—The distinction between the twelve Apostles and
seventy aisciples.
Answer : The distinction between the twelve Apostles and seventy
disciples points out no “Episcopate.” For the Argument supposes
that the Apostles were priests, and the Seventy Disciples deacons, and
the Lord Jesus ‘‘ the Prelate'' ! !!
Again, between the appointment of the Seventy, as recorded by the
Evangelist, and the office of a “ priest ” in the Episcopal Church, there
is no resemblance ■whatever.
(a) Because there is no intimation that the office of the Seventy
was to be permanent, nor is thereany thing said regarding their sub-
ection to “ bishops.’’
(b) Because there is nothing said regarding their possessing no
power to ordain, or confirm, or take the charge of “ a diocese.” Such
language is unknown in the New Testament.
(c) Because the Seventy were simply employed by-the Saviour to
prepare the way for His personal ministry in the jjpes where our
Lord proposed to go.
(d) Because even Dr. Whitby says—“ This comparison will not
hold, for the Seventy received not their Mission, as Presbyters do,
from bishops, bat immediately from the Lord Christ as well as the
Apostles, and in their first mission were plainly sent on the same
mission and with the same power ” (Whitby’s Commentary, Note
on Luke x. 1.) .
Besides there is one Primitive Church mentioned in the rvew
Testament, which was without a Prelate, re., “ Three Orders
of clergy. Phil. i. 1, “Paul and Timotheus, the servants in Jesus
Christ, to all the Saints in Christ Jesus, which are at Philippi, with


the bishops and deacons .” In this verse only two classes or orders of
office-bearers are mentioned, i,e., bishops and deacons. The bishops
were presbyters and net prelates, for if they had been prelates, then
it necessarily follows ;
\a) That there were several, or many, Prelates in the same diocese,
the same city, and the same church, which is contrary to the funda-
mental idea of modern Prelacy.
(b) That there was entirely wanting in this Church the “ Second
; Order Prelates and no Presbyters, i.e., Prelates,
“superior” officer*to exercise jurisdiction over ‘‘priests” who had
no existence. But if it he said that the presbyters were there, but
that the Apostle did not mention them. Then it is strange enough
that the Apostle should mention deacons —“ the inferior ” officers ! It
is also strange that thfe Apostle should even salute “ the Saints,” i.e.,
private members of the Church, and entirely forget the Presbyters.
Consequently, there were not “Three Orders” in the Primitive
Church.
Akgument 3. — Timothy and Titus were Prelates.
Answer — _
(a) Timothy and Titus are not styled “ Prelates’’ or “Bishops’ in
the New Testament (
(b) Timothy was not “ consecrated ’’ as “ a prelate,” but '‘ordained ’
as “ a presbyter.” He was not raised to “ the Episcopate, but to
“ the presbyterate,” for he was to stir up the gift, which was given
to him by “ the laying on of the hands of the presbytery."
( c ) Timothy and Titus had not a stated residence in the Churches of
Ephesus and Crete, but only visited them for a time. (2 Tim. 4 : 9,13.
Tim. 3 : 12.)
Consequently, they were not “ Diocesan Bishops” or “ Prelates,’
but those itinerant officers in the Primitive Church, who were called
“Evangelists.” {Vide Appendix. Art. 7.)
They were “ Presbyters” and they could “ ordain” as Presbyters
either alone or with other Presbyters. If they ordained alone, it was
because no presbyters existed in the place previously, and being placed
in such extraordinary circumstances they ordained alone. This conduct
on their part yields no precedent in ordinary circumstances, hut may
he repeated by any presbyter placed in the same circumstances.
{d) If Timothy was a bishop and not a presbyter—Paul, from
whom Timothy received instructions must have been more than a
bishop ; and if Paul was more than a bishop and greater than Timothy,
then, Timothy could not be Paul’s “ successor.”
(e) And though Timothy was with Paul, when the Apostle took his
leave of the Presbyters of Ephesus, the Apostle gives not the least
hint of any extraordinary power with which Timothy was invested,
nor says one word to engage their obedience to him, which is a very
strong presumption that no such relation did subsist, or was to take
place between Timothy and the Ephesian Presbyters. Vide 1., 1. (a.)
(f) Were it admitted that Timothy and Titus were Prelates, and
settled at Ephesus and Crete ; it cannot be shown that they had any
other authority than that which all ministers possess—except what was


derived from “ the Commission ” of Paul, i.e., their superior wisdom
and piety and inspiration. Consequently, from no place in the
Scriptures, and in any manner whatever, can it be proved that
Timothy and Titus were “Prelates.”
(y) Even Dr. Whitby, who was a zealous advocate for Prelacy de-
clares that he “ can find nothing in any writer of the first three
centuries concerning the Episcopate of Timothy and Titus, nor any
intimation that they bore that name.” He gives up the whole argu-
ment in form.
Argument 4. The Apocalyptic Angel.
Answer—“ The Angel ” was the “ Sheliach-Tsibbur ”of the Syna-
gogue, who publicly read and explained the law and the prophets.
This title was evidently transferred from the Synagogue to the
Christian Church, for the duties of the Sheliach Tsibbur were similar
to those of the Presbyter,
Now “the Minister” is called by various titles—he is called
Presbyter or Pastor because he is a ruler or feeder of the Church ;
Bishop, because he is the spiritual overseer ; Teacher, because he is the
public instructor-, and Angel, because he is the Messenger of God to
men ( Vide Gr. Jas. ii. 25 ; 2 Cor. xii. 7 ; Gal. iv. 14 ; Ist Cor. xi. 10 ;
Luke vii. 24). Thus all these characters unite in “ the Minister,” and
by each of these names is he known in the Scriptures.
Consequently, the Angel may be equivalent to the Minister of the
Church or Congregation, or to “ the Moderator ” or “ Senior Minister ”
of the Presbyterian Court.
But “ the Angel ” of the Church of Ephesus has been transformed
by the Church of Home and the Church of England into a consecrated
diocesan !
It is remarkable, however, that a number of the most eminent
Episcopalians have asserted that “collective bodies of Pastors were
intended ” by Angels. Hence, Dr. Stillingfleet, an able Episcopal
writer, states that “the angel ” may mean “the consessus or order of
Presbyters,’’ for they are the “stars ” giving light to the churches,
Christ is present in all His Churches, and the seven stars which He
held in His right hand (Eev. i. : 16) represent all His Ministers.
These are called Angels, verse 20.
It may he further observed that the Angel is not “ the Prelate,”
because:—
1. The term Angel, as is well known, has no exclusive application
to a Prelate.
2. It is no where else applied to the Ministers of religion.
3. In its original signification, “ a Messenger,’’ or, in its usual
signification, “a Celestial Spirit.” it has no special adaptedness to a
Prelate.
4. The term Angel need not be exclusively appropriated to Prelates,
as if they were persons of extraordinary Sanctity.
5. The Prelate is not meant, but the Pastor or Minister; because
the term Church occurs in the Singular. “The Angel of the Church,’’
not the Churches, of Ephesus (Rev. ii, 1.) “The Angel of the Church
in Smyrna,” fii. 8). “The Angel of the Church in Thyatira,”
(ii. 18) &c.


6. The Prelate was not only the Pastor of one Church ; but it would
seem there were “ no inferior clergy ” over whom he could preside.
It is remarkable that the word angel in the Apocalypse is often
used to denote many. In the Epistles it appears evidently to be so
used, because in the first four of them, the singular pronoun then is
changed into the plural you ; while the same person is still addressed.
Thus our Lord says to the Angel of the Church in Thyatira—But unto
you I say, vpiv be Xe-yco (humin de legow), i.e., the consessus or order
of presbyters.
Argument 6.— Alleged Succession from the Apostles.
Answer: The bishops or prelates are not the successors of the
Apostles for the following reasons :
1. Because the Prelates do not possess the extraordinary qualifica-
tions which the Apostles possessed.
(a) They have not “ seen the Lord.”
The Apostles were “ witnesses ” (Luke xxiv. 46, 48), and they were
to be “witnesses” to all nations (Comp. Matth., xxviii. 18, 19).
Hence “ must one be ordained to be a witness with us of His resur-
rection ” (Acts i- 21), vide also (Acts ii. 32 v. 32. x. 39, 42). Hence
Paul was constituted an Apostle by being made a witness (Acts xxii.
14, 15. xxvi. 16. xxiii. 11.) Hence he tells us in 1 Cor. ix. 1. Am I
notan Apostle? Am I not free? Have I not seen Jesus Christ, our
Lord?”
(5) They possess not “the gift of inspiration.”
(c) They have not “ the gift of working miracles.”
The above qualifications were necessary to constitute a man a member
of “ the Apostolate.” Consequently the Apostolate is “ intransmissible
and it is impossible that the Apostles can have any successors in those
extraordinary services when “the successors” are not vested with
extraordinary Apostolic powers.
2. Because “the Prelates” possess merely the ordinary qualifications
which every Presbyter possesses, viz.: —
(a) They preach.
(5) They govern. (1 Tim. iii. 2,4, 5. 1 Tim. v. 17.)
(c) They dispense the Sacraments.
(<7) They ordain.
Consequently the Prelates can do nothing more than Presbyters;
hut if the Prelates had possessed “ miraculous gifts ” they might be
called “ Successors of the Apostles.” For Apostolic authority was
founded upon Apostolic gifts. None of the Prelates therefore can
pretend to a succession of Apostolic power, without a succession of
the Apostolic gifts, which qualified for it.
3. Because even some of the most eminent Episcopalians have been
disbelievers in “ the Apostolic Succession.”
Archbishop Whately says—“ Successors in the Apostolic office,
the Apostles have none. As witnesses of the resurrection—as
dispensers of miraculous gifts—as inspired oracles of Divine
Revelation, they have ’No successors. But as members —as
ministers —as governors of Christian communities, their successor
are the regularly admitted members the lawfully ordained


ministers the regular and recognized governors, of a regularly
subsisting Christian Church.” (Kingdom of Christ Delineated,
pp. 235, 236.)
Dr. Barrow, an eminent Episcopal Divine, says—“ The Apostolic
oihce as such, was personal and temporary, and, therefore, according
o its nature and design, not successive nor communicable to others,
in perpetual descendence from them; it was, as such, in all respects
extraordinary, conferred in a special manner, designed for special
purposes, discharged by special aids, endowed with special privileges,
as was needful for the propagation of Christianity and founding of
Churches. To that office, it was requisite that the person should
e an immediate designation and commission from God; that he
s oula be endowed with miraculous gifts and graces ; that he should
be able, according to his discretion, to impart spiritual gifts; that he
s ouid govern in an absolute manner, as being guided by infallible
assistance, to which he might appeal. Now, such an office, consisting
o so many extraordinary privileges and miraculous powers, which
were requisite for the foundation of the Church, was not designed to
continue by derivation, for it contained in it divers things, which
apparently were not communicated, and which no man, without gross
imposture and hypocrisy, could challenge to himself.” (Pope’s
supremacy, p. 79.)
„ tr S P wen * n his “ Plea for Scripture Ordination,” p. 56, says :
When I shall see bishops immediately sent of God—infallibly as-
sisted by the Holy Ghost—travelling to the remotest kingdoms to
preach the Gospel in their own language to the infidel nations, and
confirming their doctrine by undoubted miracles, I shall believe them
” 6 la os^es ’ true successors in the Apostolic office.”
■ Because even the Fathers exhort—“ The Presbyters succeed
in the place of the bench of the Apostles.’’ “In like manner,
r u I’evcrence 1 ’ evcrence the Presbyters as the Sanhedrim of God and college
o the Apostles.” “Be subject to your Presbyters as to the Apostles
(Ignp 8 j 1 ™*’ 0m k°P e> ” Follow the Presbyters as the Apostles.’’
5. Because if “Bishops ” or “ Prelates ” are “the Successors of the
postlcs (which they are not), then there can be no salvation beyond the
pale of Episcopal Jurisdiction. Indeed, there can be no true religion
beyond the Episcopate, for it necessarily follows, that if the Prelates
one the Successors of the Apostles,’’ then, the Ministers of other
Protestant Churches are “imposters,’’ their Churches mere “Societies,”
or “ Associations,” their people left to “ uncovenanted mercies,’’ the
Sacraments administered by them “invalid,” and they not authorised
to preach, to offer pardon to sinners, and to minister consolation!
Such, however, is the belief of the reputed “ Successors of the
Apostles; ’ but it is devoid of truth and of charity.
6. Because Granting that “Prelacy” is “an Apostolic Institution,”
the Prelates cannot show that they are descended in “ uninterrupted
succession ” from the Apostles, for—
(a) There is no authentic catalogue of the names of those who were
Prelates for many of the ages immediately following the days of the
Apostles. No records were regularly kept by the early Christians,


arising from the persecutions to which they were exposed, &c., and
consequently no records have been transmitted in a state of preserva-
tion
Hence, in many Churches,—of the Succession during the first and
second centuries, there is no notice, and in other Churches there is the
greatest intricacy and contradiction, to ascertain the Succession of
their teachers. Consequently, Eusebius, the Bishop of Cmserea, who,
though a man of great influence at the court of Constantine, begins his
catalogue by saying ;—“That it is not easy to say who were the disciples
of the Apostles, that were appointed to feed the churches which they
planted, excepting only those whom we may learn from the writings
of Paul.’’—(Hist. Eccles. iii., 4.)
For instance, it is not easy to tell, who was the successor of Peter,
who, according to the Church of Rome, is said to be the first bishop
of (that city. Clemens, Clitus, Lenius, and Anaclitus, have been
mentioned, but it is doubted whether Clitus and Anaclitus were not
the same individual, and in what order the persons named succeeded
each other. Some have suspected that they were all contempor iry
and equally bishops of Rome, as there were several bishops at the same
time in Philippi.
(A) Besides, this deficiency of catalogue cannot be supplied, for th©
earliest Christian writers employ the term “bishop’’ ambiguously-
Hence, Clemens, one of the Apostolical Fathers, who wrote in the first
century an Epistle to the Corinthians, says : —“ The apostles preached
through cities and countries, appointing their first disciples, after
having proved them by the Spirit to be emcrKOTrovs nai 81o.kovovs tmv
peWovroiv (episcopous kai diakonous toun mellonton) i.e., bishops and
deacons of those who should believe) and left them directions that
after their death other approved men should succeed in their ministry.’’
(King on Prim. Church, iv., 3). The term “bishop ’’ is not used by
Clemens in the sense of Prelate. And the other ancient writers who
have been quoted to establish “uninterrupted succession,” on a critical
examination, appear to use the term “ bishop ” like Clemens. J ids
Art. 3.
Consequent!}', although it were granted that the Catalogues are
correct, it remains to be proved whether “ the bishops,” mentioned by
“the Fathers,’’ were bishops in the Prelatic sense, and not merely in
the Scriptural sense. Vide Arts. 1 and 2.
Even Dr. Stillingfleet, who was a Prelate, has candidly acknow-
ledged “ that mere succession of single persons named above the rest,
in the successions in Apostolical Churches, cannot enforce any superi-
or it v of power in the persons so named, above others supposed to be
joint governors of the churches with them.’’ (Works, vol. ii. p. 344,
Diversities of Forms of Church Government, Part ii. ch. iv.)
(c) This “ uninterrupted succession” must now be traced —if traced
at all—through the Church of Rome.
But there were in the Church of Rome, at one time, four pontiffs,
who all denounced each other as usurpers. Now, through which of
these opposing and anathematising pontiffs have the Apostolic powers
descended to the Prelates of the Church of England '< Is it possible


that any man of piety will deliberately admit that the Divine Power,
or Apostolic Succession, has descended through those impute Monsters
who sat on the Papal throne ?
Article 12.
Ordination.
. Ordination is not an unmeaning or trivial act, as some would have
it, for it is commanded in the Word of God. Without Ordination no
man has a right to administer the Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord’s
Supper. Hence in Westminster Confession of Faith* Chap, xxvii., Sect*
iv., it is asserted that “ There he only two Sacraments ordained by
Christ our Lord in the Gospel; that is to say Baptism and the Supper
of the Lord; neither of which maybe dispensed by any hut by a
Minister of the Word lawfully ordained''
Since there are unlawful and unscriptural Ordinations, it is necessary
to know what “ lawful Ordination” is,
1. Whai is meant by Ordination ?
Ihe term Ordination literally signifies—“ the act of establishing
any one in a particular office or order f being derived from or do or
order, hut Ordination in an ecclesiastical sense implies—“the act of
investing any man with ministerial function, or power, or order.”
Hence the origin of the phrases —“ the orders,” or “ the holy orders.’’
In the Romish Church there are seven “ orders,’’ inclusive of
the Episcopate-classified into petty or secular orders, and major or
sacred orders. The petty or minor orders are four, viz., Exorcists,
Readers, Acolytes, and Doorkeepers. The Sacred or Major Orders are
throe—Deacon, Priest, and Bishop.
In the Episcopal Church of England there are three “ Orders,”
viz., bishops, priests, and deacons.
But in the Church of Scotland,” which is a Presbyterian Church,
there is only owe order, i.e., the Order of Presbyters divided into two
classes of Teaching and Ruling Presbyters.
Every man and any man does not belong to this “order,” till
Official Authority is given to him in a lawful manner, or he is
lawfully invested with ministerial function or power.
The term Ordination, however, does not imply the manner of the
investment of ministerial power or order. Hence when we are told
that our Lord “ ordained ’ Twelve, the act is given, but not the
Manner. The Apostles were received into the order of the Preshyterate,
but how they were received is not specified.
And even the Greek terms , which are rendered “ ordain,” in an
ecclesiastical sense, do not indicate the manner of the investment of
Ministerial function or power. These terms are ft) KadicrTr/p,i
(kathesteenie) ; (b) Troteco (poyeo) and (c) rtOryu (titheemi). There are
also other terms, but a remark on Xfiporoveto (kirotoneo) would
suffice. Kirotoneo occurs twice, and is rendered thus :
Acts xiv. 23 Wlien they had ordained them Elders (Presbyters) in
every church.
2 Cor., viii. 19—Who was also chosen of the Churches to travel
with us.


Now kirotoneo literally signifies “to stretch out the hand, to hold
up the hand as in voting ” —hence it signifies to vote, to give one’s vote
hy holding up the hand.
Consequently the term does not signify ordination, but election—
choosing, and it is so rendered in the second passage cited above. The
term kirotoneo, then, indicates not ordination but election , and the
manner of that election.
And it must be kept in mind that “election’’ is not “ordi-
nation,” for a candidate to the Ministry may he elected, but
not ordained. Popular e lection or “call” is not Presbyterian
ordination. The people might “ call ”or “ give a call ’ to a candidate,
hut they cannot “ordain.” The Independents confound popular, or
congregational election or call with Presbyterial ordination ; hence they
call themselves “ Congregationalists.” To this error the fifth Act of
the Assembly of the Church of Scotland, 1698, refers—“ Our Church
doth condemn any doctrine that tends to support the people’s power of
ordaining their ministers.” For, hy the sth Act of Assembly, 1698,
upon information that a divine of the Church of England had, in his
sermon, charged them as corrupters of the Word of Cod, who, to
favour popular ordinations, had caused that passage of Scripture, Acts
vi. 3 “Whom we may appoint over this business,” &c., to be
printed, “ Whom ye may appoint,” &c., they did unanimously disclaim
the above mentioned error of the press, and did declare they did not
own any other reading of that text to be according to the original, but
“Whom we may appoint,” &c. (Vide Laws of the Church of Scotland,
p. 186).
Hence Presbyterians disclaim “ popular ordination.”
2. The manner or mode of Ordination —
The manner is indicated in 1 Tim. iv. 14 ; 2 Tim. i. 6 ; Acts
xiii. I—3 ; from which may be deduced the following conclusions :
1. That lawful ordination is performed by the Imposition of hands,
and by Prayer.
2. That lawful ordination is performed hy the Imposition of the
hands, and by Prayer, not of one Presbyter, but of a plurality ot
Presbyters.
Consequently, those sects who dispense with “ the laying on of
hands ’ ’ have no lawful or scriptural ordination ; nor is the ordination
lawful or scriptural which is performed by one individual.
Hence no ordination is lawful or scriptural , unless it is a Presbyterian
Ordination.
As Presbyterian Ordination is clearly taught in the Word of God,
it is adopted even by
(a) The Prelatisfs. —With all the arrogance and assumption of being
“ the successors of the Apostles,” the Prelates feel constrained to make
their ordination—not prelatic—but Presbyterian , for the Prayer Book
of the Church of England, in “ The Form and Manner of Ordering
Priests, says “When this Prayer is done, the Bishop, with the
Priests present, shall lay their hands severally upon the head of every


one that receives the Order of Priesthood ; the Receivers humbly kneel-
ing upon their knees, and the Bishop saying:—
« Receive ye the Holy Ghost for the office and work of a Priest, in
the Church of God, now committed unto thee hy the Imposition of our
hands.” , _ , ,
Consequently, the Ordination performed, even hy Prelates, is not
prelatic, hut presbyterian. It is sad, however, that Presbyterianism
should be opposed, and Presbyterian Ordination adopted by Prelacy!
It is as well that Presbyterian Ordination is adopted hy the Prelatic
Church, for it rescues the Prelatic Church from much confusion by
making* the Presbyterian (!) Ordination of the Prelatic Church valid,
for a mere Episcopal or Prelatic Ordination would he unlawful and void.
(b) Presbyterian Ordination is adopted even by Independents or Con-
gregaiionaiists.
Though Congregaticnalists believe in Congregational election or
ordination, yet they have also felt constrained to adopt and practise
Presbyterian Ordination. The Presbyterian Ordination, however, is
not the only Presbyterian Practice which Congregationalists imitate.
They try to imitate several Presbyterian practices. ( Vide Art. 13
Courts of Presbyters.)
Errors about Ordination.
First Error. —Prelatists assert that Apostles alone, as Apostles ,
ordained.
Answer: Barnabas, Timothy, Titus, Simeon, Lucius, Manaen, who
were not Apostles, in the appropriated sense, ordained.
Second Error.— 44 Prelates 4 ” i.e., Apostles, alone possess the exclusive
right of performing 44 Ordination.”
Answer : This supposes that 44 Ordination” is more sacred than
44 preaching the Gospel” or 44 administering the Sacraments.” The
Prelatists, however, cannot demonstrate the excraordiuary sanctity
involved in Ordination, for it is not found in the New Testament.
Consequently, since 4 ‘ Ordination” is not more sacred than the
44 preaching of the Gospel,” or 44 the administration of the Sacraments,”
then, if Presbyters—even according to the Prelatists, can 44 preach
the Gospel” and 44 administer the Sacraments,” they can also perform
44 Ordination.”
Third Error. —Timothy and Titus performed 44 Ordination” alone.
Answer; This does not necessarily appear from the New Testament.
They were Evangelists. ( Vide Art. 7, Evangelists.) All that appears
to have been done hy those Evangelists, is done hy the Evangelists of
the Presbyterian Church at the present day.
Prelatists adopt a strange method of proving that Timothy and
Titus were “diocesan bishops.’’ They take for granted that 44 none
hut diocesan bishops can ordain.” Timothy and Titus ordained,
therefore they were diocesan bishops ! But will not the prelatists be
reminded that they require to prove, in the first place, that none but
44 Diocesans” alone can ordain?


Article 13.
Courts of Presbyters.
“ Representation ” is a principle of Presbyterianism, and this principle
is observed in the different Courts of the Presbyterian Church which
are Sessions, Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and General Assemblies
or General Councils. The Courts may have different names in different
countries, as. for instance, the “Kirk Session,’’ and “the Presbytery,’’
of Scottish Churches, are the “Consistory” and the “ Classes” of
“Continental” Presbyterianism. All these Courts, however, are
either small or large Presbyteries, for they all are composed of
Presbyters.
The fifteenth chapter of Acts contains an account of the General
Council or General Assembly, composed of Apostles and Presbyters.
That chapter, however, has been not only misunderstood, but mis-
applied by Papists, Prelatists, and Congregationalists. For the Papists
have founded upon it the papal authority of Peter ; the Prelatists, the
diocesan authority of James, as the Prelate of Jerusalem ; and’ the
Congregationalists have gone to the other extreme, and made the
Council a mere meeting of all Christians for consultation and advice.
But from that chapter we learn that the visible Christian Church,
whether in Jerusalem or in Antioch, in Philippi or in Ephesus, was
regarded as one body, all governed by the same laws, subject to the
same authority, and regulated by the same decisions. Hence, when a
question arose, which affected the whole visible Church, it was decided
by a Council of “the Apostles and Presbyters at Jerusalem,’ and
“the decrees,” (Gr. boypara —dogmata) i.e., authoritative adjudica-
tions of that Council were sent to “all the Churches ” to be obeyed.
The Apostles and Presbyters evidently sat as “ Representatives ” in
that Council and pronounced judicial decisions. The Council
was not Prelatic, for we do not find any Prelate; nor was the
Council a mere “ advisory Council,” as Congregationalists allege, but
“ a judicatory, ’’ possessing “judicial power,” to pronounce “a judicial
sentence,’’ and send down its dogmata, i.e., authoritative adjudications
not to one Church but to “ all Churches ” to be obeyed.
Consequently the Council was “a Presbyterian Synod.”
Since “Representation” is one of the essential principles of
Presbyterianism, we find the Waldensian Church—a very ancient
Church —a Presbyterian Church, —the purest Church in the most
corrupt periods of the Church, —to be governed by “ Synods ”
which assemble once a-year;—those Synods to be composed of
Ministers and Ruling Elders, as in any Presbyterian Church ; and
those Synods to examine and ordain candidates for the Ministry,
and authoritatively to order every thing for the benefit of the whole
Church.
Hence also that at the Reformation, the Reformers in different
countries, without concert, concurred in maintaining Presbyterian
Principles, for they asserted that the government of the Church was to
be vested in Representative Courts or Assemblies, and that individual
congregations were not to be considered as isolated or independent com-
munities. Surely the following'names ought to carry weight;—Luther,


Mclancthon, Bucer, Farel, Viret, Calvin, Zuingle, (Ecolampadius.
Peter Martyr, A. Lasco, Junius, Knox, and a decided majority of the
most enlightended and pious friends of the Reformation in England. *
As “Representation” is one of the essential principles of the
Presbyterian Church, so it is essential to the existence of any
« Society ”or “ Community.” It is well known that no system can
preserve order in any Society, whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, except
so far as it proceeds upon “ the Principles of Presbyterianism.”
Hence it is that though the Independents or Congregationalists
deny the principles of Representation, yet they are obliged to imitate
this phase of Presbyterianism. Consequently we find “ the Associ-
ations,” “the Consultations,” “the Committees,’’ “the Union” in
England, and mirabile dictu in New South Wales, “The General
Assembly ” of Independents or Congregationalists! !!
Hence also “the Convocations,” “the Conventions,” and “the
Synods” of Prelatists, which, it may be observed, are disorderly
Presbyterian Synods.
The very fact, however, that the Opponents of Presbyterianism, i.e.,
Congregationalists and Prelatists, are obliged to adopt and imitate
Presbyterian phases indicates that Presbytery is a system of Divine
appointment, for it is a system without the Principles of which neither
Church nor State can exist.
Article If.
Presidents or Moderators.
Though there is perfect equality among Presbyters or Bishops or
Presbyter-Bishops, yet it is necessary for the conduct of their delibera-
tions, and the execution of their sentences, when they are assembled
in “ Courts,” that some one should preside in their meetings.
The President may succeed to the office by seniority, or he may be
elected for life, or he may be chosen at stated times.
The greater part of Presbyterian Churches, however, from a jealousy
lest Prelacy be introduced in the form of “ Presidency,’ ’ or “ Moderator-
ship,” prefer to elect their “President” or “Moderator’’ frequently
or annually ; and it is for the same reason that the same individual is
so seldom elected as “Moderator’’ for the second time.
The Presidents so chosen maybe called “Presidents,” “Superin-
tendents,” “ Erccpositi,” “ Inspectores,” “ Moderators . ’ (T ide First
Book of Discipline, chaper iv., sec. ii. and iii.)
Presbyterians generally call their Presidents “Moderators,” for the
simple reason that the Moderators preside over the meetings of their
equals to preserve order, to regulate or ‘ moderate in ’ the proceedings,
and to declare the vote.
The term is of general application, and is even used in “ the English
Univeristies.” In Scotland, it is applied to a “ President” or “ Chair-
man ” —whether Civil or Ecclesiastical.
“ The Presidents ” or “Moderators” have no other superiority than
that which is implied in the office of President. They have no claim
* Vide Art. 3 C.


to any powers or privileges from which Presbyters are necessarily
excluded. They are simply pnmi inter pares (the first among equals)
during the term of their office, for when their term is expired, they
return to a perfect equality with their brethren.
“The Presidents” or “Moderators” are not “Prelates,’’ i.e.,
a superior order of office-bearers, who are the overseers of Presbyters,
i.e., an inferior order of Ministers, for they themselves are Presbyters.
Nor have the Presidents or Moderators the sole right to perform
“ordination,” like “Prelates;” for, though Moderators are con-
stituted pro tem. (for a term) “episcopi gregis et pastorum,” i.e.,
overseers of the flock and of the pastors, yet they are also Presbyters,
i.e., “ episcopi gregis ,” or overseers of the flock.
But the Chairman, or “ President,” or “Moderator,” appointed by
the Gcetus Presbyterorum (Assembly of Presbyters), if he happen to be
“ a vain or ambitious man,” might in time come to establish himself
as superior to the Presbyters who appointed him, for even in Apostolic
times there was a “ Diotrephes,” who loved the pre-eminence among
the brethren,” and after Apostolic times, when ambitious men
constituted themselves “ Prelates,’’ we find that even among “Prelates”
there was an imparity. For, though every “ Bishop ” claims to he “an
Apostle,” or “a successor of the Apostles,” and though “a Bishop
of the poorest city has the same priesthood as a bishop ofthe richest,”
yet in the first four centuries we find the gradation of “ patriachs,
metropolitans, archbishops, and bishops.’’ Hence the Patriarchs of
Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, and finally, “ the
Supreme Heads of the Church,” the “Bishops” and “the Popes of
Rome ” !!!
Such has been the origin of “ Prelacy” in the Christian Church.
Article 10.
Statistics of Presbyterianism.
(a) Geneva is Presbyterian.
(b) Holland is Presbyterian, having 1,500 Ministers.
(c) The great majority of the Protestants of Hungary are Presby-
terians.
(d) France has 700 Presbyterian Congregations.
(e) The Welch “ Calvanistic Methodists” are Prcsbyterirttyi with
1,040 Churches.
(/) Germany is Presbyterian.
( g ) Denmark is Presbyterian.
(h) In Hungary, there is a powerful body of Lutherans or Presby-
terians.
(i) In the United States, there are 1,641 Lutheran or Presbyterian
Ministers and Congregations.
(j) In the United States alone , there are 3,480,000 Presbyterians.
(ft) In the United States, there are 7,069 Presbyterian Ministers
and Congregations, inclusive of the Dutch Reformed and the German
Reformed Churches.
(I) Scotland is Presbyterian, with its 3,000 Ministers and Congre
tions.


United States
Great Britain
Holland
France
3,000,000
1 2,000,000
1,500,000
Austria and Russia
2,000,000
British and Dutch Colonies
500,000
Total
14,000,000
(m) in Ireland, there are 700 Presbyterian Ministers and Congre-
gations.
(») In the British Colonies, there arc upwards of 700 Presbyterian
Ministers and Congregations.
(o) The following statistics are taken from The Presbyterian of
Sept. 1, 1869 :
“The Protestant Churchman publishes the following estimate of the Presbyterian
population in Europe and the United States, from which it appears that the Preshy -
terian is larger than any other denomination of Protestants in Christendom. In this
estimate, the Presbyterian population is distributed as follows :
These fourteen millions constitute one-seventh of the entire Protestant population
of the globe. But if to these arc added the fourteen millions of the United Evange-
lical Church of Prussian and the German States, which is Presbyterian in form, we
should have a total of twenty'-eight millions —that is, a numerical superiority over
any of the Protestant forms of polity and belief.”
Past Pkesbvtbkianism in England.
(a) The early Puritans for the most part were Presbyterians.
(/>) In 1566, when the excellent Divines seceded from the Estab-
lishment, they adopted the Presbyferian form of Church Government.
(c) In 1642, Episcopacy or Prelacy was abolished in England.
(d) In 1643, the Westminster Assembly, convened by the Parlia-
ment, declared in favour of Presbytery, after long and patient dis-
cussions.
(e) The Parliament made the acknowledgment that Presbytery was
“ lawfnl and agreeable to the word of God.”
(/) by a Parliamentery Order of March, 1646, “ Ruling Elders
were to be chosen in all the English congregations.’’
(;/) In 1648, with the exception of chapels for the King and Peers,
“ all parishes and places whatever ” were declared to be under Pres-
byterian government.
(h) In 16'60 Presbyterianism was established anew by Parliament.
(*) But on the Restoration, Presbyterianism gave place to Episcopacy,
and more than 2000 ministers, nearly all Presbyterians, refusing to
comply with the Act of Uniformity, were in 1662 expelled from the
Established Church.
Surely the above statistics, present and past, do not show Presby-
terianism to be a despicable thing, and her Sons need not be ashamed
r&ec lp-'/
/


PRESBYTERIAN APHORISMS.
1. The Apostles were “ Presbyters”. (1 Pet. 5:2. 2
John, ], 3 John, 1 )
2. Timothy and Titus were “Presbyters.” (1 Tim.
4 : 4), and were employed as “ Evangelists.”
3. There is no distinction in the New Testament between
“Presbyter” and “Bishop” for the Ministers of Religion,
who are called “Presbyters” in one verse are also called
in another “ Bishops.” Acts 20 : 17—28. 1 Pet. 5 : 2, 3
Heb. 13 : 7, 17. 1 Thess. 5 : 12.) For Presbyters like
Bishups inspected or acted as Bishops. (Grr. Acts 20 : 28.
Gt. 1 Pet. 5 : 2 and 3. Compare. 1 Tim. 3 : 2—7 with
Tit. 1 : 6—10.) *
4. In the New Testament, we do not find “the three
orders” bishops, presbyters, and deacons, in any one
Church, but on the contrary, Presbyter-Bishops and
Deacons, in every city (Phil. I : 1.)
5. Presbytery is opposed to Prelacy, for Prelacy holds
a distinction of ranks among the ministers of religion—
its fundamental article being that a bishop is superior to
a presbyter, and Presbytery holds that all presbyters or
bishops are on a level in respect of office and authority-
whatever differences there may be among them in age,
and talents, and learning, f
6. “ The Presbyterate ” is the highest standing office in
the Church.
7. There is no “ Order of Prelates” or “The Episco-
pate ” in the New Testament.
8. The ultimate appeal in cases of discipline and dispute
must be made, not to “the Prelate” of “ a Diocese ” but
to “ a Court of Presbyters ” or “ Presbytery.”];
9. The distinction between “bishop ” and “presbfter ”
was made not by Apostolic appointment, but long after
* Consider the Ancient Comment of Jerome on the last two passages
f Vide Appendix, Art. 11—Apostolic Succession.
+ Vide Appendix, Art. 13—Courts of Presbyters.


Apostolic times, for the idea of “Diocesan Episcopacy”
can he historically traced to usages, which were engrafted
on the primitive simplicity of “ the Presbyterate.”
10. None but Presbyters and Presbyteries can ordain,
i. 1. Presbyteries ordained Paul, Barnabas, Timothy, &c.
12. Presbyteries are not prohibited from ordaining, in
ne New Testament.
13. The Presbyters not only fed the flock of Christ, or
preached, and administered the sacraments, but also
governed that flock by “warning” and “ admonishing.”
14. It is not the exclusive prerogative of “the Diocesan
Bishop” “to rule and ordain,” for that prerogative belongs
to “the Presbytery,” i.e., the Association or “Court of
Presbyters.”
15. The Ordinations recorded in the New Testament
were not Prelatic Ordinations, but Presbyterian Ordinations
(1 Tim. 4:14. Acts 13 ; 1-3.)
16. There is not a single passage in the New Testament
where “ a Diocesan Bishop ” is represented as ordaining.
17. “ The Episcopal Polity ’’ is not warranted by Scrip-
ture, because there is no foundation in the New Testament
for the Order of “prelates” or “successors to the Apostles.”*
18. “ The Prelates ” so designated are not “successors
of the Apostles ” in the sense in which Prelacy understands
“ Succession .”
19. The authority to perform ministerial functions is con-
veyed by the Act of Ordination, so that every person who
is ordained by Presbyters is as much a successor of the
Apostles as any teacher of religion can be.
20. “ The Official Authority ” of Presbyters does not
emanate from the people, but from Presbyters or Presbyteries
— i.e., Associations of Presbyters.
21. This authority is given at “ Ordination ” by Presby-
tery Tim. iy., 14. Acts xm., 1-3)
22. The Presbyterate do not derive their power from the
people, but from Christ as “the Head of the Church,” for
the Presbyterate or “the Eulers of the Church ” are not
the gift of the people, but “the gift of Christ”— the Official
Authority of the Presbyterate directly emanating from
Christ.
Vide Appendix. Art. 11: Apostolic Succession.


23. “ The private members ” of the Church have no right
to constitute themselves as “teachers” and “rulers.”
24. It is not competent for every or any member of the
Church to assume at his pleasure the functions of the
Presbyterate, for the Presbyterate is not an office which
an man may take upon him to perform as he deems himself
competent for it; but it is an office to be exercised only by
men who are “ ordained ”toit by the Presbyterate. *
25. Presbyters having received the Authority of '•'•feeding
the flock,” and “ governing the flock ”by Ordination from
Presbyters, have also the right of conveying the self same
authority to others by Ordination.
26. Presbyters or Presbyteries, i.e., Associations or
Courts of Presbyters, alone can ordain and convey “ autho-
rity.”
27. There is not a single passage where “the common
membership of the Church” is represented as “ordaining”
or communicating “official authority” to Presbyters.
28. The People have received no “commission” to
exercise ecclesiastical power, but they have received a
command to obey that power.
29. The People cannot convey what they have not
received; i.e., they cannot “ordain,” though they can
“ elect ” or “ call ”or “ give a call.”
30. The People are hound by the Law of God to render
obedience to ecclesiastical rule, or “Eulers of the Church,”
for “the Eulers” are expressly appointed by God for that
purpose.
31. The Presbyterate is of “ Divine appointment ,” and is,
therefore, ‘ ‘ a Divine Institute
32. The Presbyterate is perpetual , and is never to cease ;
for directions are given respecting the qualifications which
the Presbyter must possess, and the method by which he
must be ordained.
33. The Principles of “the Presbyterian Polity”
are so widely extended and professed, that “the Pres-
byterian Church” is the largest denomination in Protestant
Christendom.*
* Vide Appendix, Art. 12—Ordination.
* Vide Appendix, Art. 15—Statistics.


