

1 M


m CAZ £ TTE fRESS^
ll
Wf[J'ERGUSON CoLLECTIOINLyl?
||f Rational LIBRARY" JJJ


a flDemorial
IReitb 3. Barrett
4tb f usiUevs
(Citp of ftondon IReginient)
TKttbo was mortally wounded at
fcuemappe, in on tbe
I3tb Bprfl, 1017, and was buried
at Staples on I7tb idem, in tbe
26tb pear of bis age




Mltb Sir 3-ames anb Xab£ Barrett s
grateful tbanfes for fcinblg
s^mpatbp




(
I eT \
I * JR. I
*WBMT
I I
Ikeitb Barrett




flfcemortal
TEVER before in the world's history has
there been heard so profound, so
anguished a cry of bereavement as has gone
up to heaven from tortured hearts during
the laSt four years. Hundreds of thousands
of our loved kindred—mostly in the dawn of
vigorous manhood, with untold possibilities
of useful, or even brilliant careers before
them have given their heroic lives in
the struggle for freedom and righteousness,
against a domineering rapacity that threatens
to overthrow civilization.
True, the world has never been without
war, and even since historical times, hundreds
of millions have perished on the battlefield,
often for the pure luSt of combat. In those


far-off times, defeat often meant extermina-
tion, and the voice of the mourner was
inarticulate. It had neither the means nor the
opportunity of making itself heard. To-day
the ebb and flow, the gains and the losses,
from day to day on the blood-soaked arenas
in Europe, are brought home to the remotest
corners of the earth in a manner that
almost makes us participate in the desperate
struggle. We follow the movements with
anxiety, and when, as is so
abundantly the case, that anxiety covers the
fate of those who are near and dear to
us, we glean something of the wide-spread
horrors of modern warfare.
To so many of us the personal bearing
is keenly involved: we feel, in common with
all our kind, the awfulness of the dread
ordeal we are passing through, but we cannot
merge our personal grief in what is universal,
and find any comfort in doing so. It is some


mitigation of our sorrow to be able to call
up memories of the dear ones illuminated
by the splendid records left behind them of
duties nobly done.
It is to one such case that I have been
asked by sorrowing parents, to pen a
record of the brief but brilliant career of
their son, KEITH JOY BARRETT, who fell
mortally wounded at the head of his men
on the battlefield in Northern France, on
13th April, 1917, in his 26th year.
Though long on terms of intimate friend-
ship with his family, I did not know much of
Keith Barrett during his educational period.
He left a good record behind him at the Church
of England Grammar School, and later at
Ormond College. His tastes tending strongly
towards nature studies, he took a course at
Dookie, and graduated at the University in
Agriculture. The mysteries of plant, animal,


and bird life had a fascination for him that
was quite irresistible. In fad, having excep-
tional opportunities in his own home for
experiment and observation, he became a
highly - skilled ornithologist. I was much
impressed by this fad on two occasions
when I had his company for a few weeks
in exploring some of the islands in Bass
Straits and the EaSt CoaSt of Tasmania.
Apart from the scientific interest he took in
these explorations, and his sensible conversa-
tion about them, I realised then what made
him so delightful a companion. It was the
utter absence of any selfish motives, and a
desire, shown in every adion, to devote
himself to the well-being of our party. His
adivity was that of a fine young athlete, and
in our climbings and long tramps, it was
always at the service of the weaker brethren.
His cheerfulness was contagious, and though
he was by far the youngest of the party, we


all realised that we owed him much for
many unrecorded services.
But my young friend's dreams of country
life and naturalistic Studies received a rude
awakening when the tocsin of war rever-
berated round the world. Young Australia
rose quickly to the cry that the Motherland
was in danger, unprepared and hard pressed.
The firSt hundred thousand of the Australian
forces required no appealing speeches; the
difficulty was to hold back those who could
ill be spared. Enthusiasm for the cause,
and emulation among themselves swept aside
all obstacles, and within two months of
the declaration of war, Keith Barrett was
encamped at Broadmeadows as a Private in
the A.I.F.
On the 18th October, 1914, he sailed for
Egypt in the "Wiltshire," one of a fleet of
transports that were convoyed by English and
Japanese warships. He landed in Alexandria


on 10th December, and for the next six
months was busy in the camp life and
continuous training, which he mastered so
thoroughly that, in July, 1915, he received a
commission as Second Lieutenant in the
British Army, being attached to the Royal
Fusiliers.
On the 17th August he was sent to the
%
Dardanelles, and landed at Suvla Bay on the
24th. There he had his first experience of
facing bullets and shrapnel, and after a few
weeks of vigorous fighting, he was returned
to Imbros for a "spell." There, after escaping
the Turkish bullets, he unfortunately became
the victim of typhoid and dysentery—both
very prevalent at the time. He was put on
board a hospital ship and sent to Malta,
whence, when convalescent, he was sent to
England, and was discharged from Wands-
worth Hospital on 10th January, 1916, with
two months' leave.


From the day of. his leaving Australia
until practically within a week of his death,
Keith Barrett kept a diary roughly recording
his own proceedings, and such military matters
as seemed to him important. He appears to
have suspended these entries when he was
off duty, or on leave. Hence the early months
of 1916 are somewhat vaguely recorded; but
judging from the capacity he displayed later
when responsibility was thrown upon him,
I have no dotibt that much of the time
was passed in Ctudy of the details of his
profession.
It was not until the Bth June that he
received orders to return to France, and he
remained in the firing line with patrol duty,
skirmishing and reconnaissance, in which he
had some narrow escapes, until the ICt of
July, when, in the attack on Beaumont Hamel,
he was wounded by a burning shell and
returned to Wandsworth Hospital on 6th July.


He reported for duty again at Dover on
11th August, and was shortly after sent to
France.
From that time to the day of his death,
some seven months later, he seems to have
won success in every duty allotted to him.
The innate enthusiasm of youth developed
in that brief period into the solid qualities
of calm judgment and deliberately planned
initiative. His diaries of this period, biief as
they are, throw much light on the protracted
struggles of the winter of 1916-17, the heroic
efforts and terrible hardships that marked
that depressing season. At present they
cannot be used, but perhaps when the
history of the finished War comes to be
written dispassionately, they may be found
worthy of permanent production.
On Christmas Eve of 1916 Barrett was
given a Company and promoted ACting


Captain. He was mentioned in despatches
for "Conspicuous Gallantry" in the following-
month, and subsequently on two occasions
this honour was repeated. He was also
recommended for the Military Cross and the
D.S.O. But his death occurred before the
recommendation could be carried, and no
posthumous honours are awarded, except in
the case of the V.C.
On the 9th April, 1917, at the Battle of
Arras, he commanded the leading company
on the left of the battalion, and was the firSt
to enter the enemy trench on the Harp.
The official report of the operations on this
day says: —
" His coolness, courage, and leadership
"had the greatest influence on all ranks,
"and materially assisted in the capture of
"the Harp."
But the end was near. Four days later,
in leading his men at the Battle of Guemappe,


he received a bullet wound in the leg, but
went on under intense shell and rifle fire
with the utmost coolness, until another bullet
shattered his jaw and pierced his tongue.
A brother officer describing the scene says:—
"Unable to speak, he sat down and
'delivered his orders in writing: it was
"only after seeing that everything was in
"order that he left the scene of carnage."
Several of his comrades wrote to the
parents of the young hero with particulars of
his death. But it will be sufficient here to
quote the official report by the Adjutant of
the Regiment, merely premising that the
"Padre" therein referred to was Captain
Chaplain L. Martin Andrews, whose kindly
offices are narrated in a letter appended.
"Captain Barrett was wounded on the
"13th April at Guemappe, and although
"wounded he led his men on through three
"hostile barrages when he was severely
"wounded. Being unable to speak he issued


"orders in writing. The Padre, at the
"risk of his own life, carried him to safety,
"and it was due to him that he got medical
"attention as soon as possible. We all
"hoped and thought that his wonderful
"spirit and energy would bring him through
"safely, but I regret to say he died at
"Etaples on the 16th April. His loss is
"very great to his battalion. The Colonel
"had the very highest opinion of him and
"valued him greatly. He always did his
"work with minute thoroughness, mot
"conscientious, and was mo& courageous,
"and a fine leader."
At lea£ one kind friend has visited the
burial ground of the Military Hospital at
Etaples, and written to Keith's sorrowing-
mother that the grave, marked by a simple
wooden cross with his name, rank, and
regiment inscribed, is neatly tended. He
says: "There was a simple dignity about
"it that made me feel as if the boy was
"lying in &ate in a great company.


And so he passed—
"To where beyond these voices
" There is peace"
—laying down his life for the cause which
his strong sense of duty commended to him
as a juSt and righteous one. I see him
before me now, a handsome type of virile
energy, expressed in undaunted courage, tem-
pered by a genial kindness and sympathetic
consideration for all with whom he was
associated. In one of his earlier letters to
his parents, he said:—
" I would like to thank you both very
"sincerely for all you have done for me,
"and which I know I can never return. I
"know also that such formal thanks are
"useless, but I want you to understand
"that I realise it full well, and at present
"can only show it by doing my duty in
"this war. I will not fail in that."
And indeed the testimony of some of
the subjoined letters will show how faithfully
he carried out his promises.


It is sadly true that he was but one of
many who made the supreme sacrifice,
inspired by equally noble motives. But
when we consider his extreme youth, the
comparative shortness of his training, his
temporary invalidism, and the strain of the
responsibilities so early thrown upon him, it
is little short of marvellous that he should
have justly earned the high praise which
Colonel North accords to him in the annexed
letter. Nothing that can be said by others
can add to that generous testimony of his
Commanding Officer. It has indeed been
supplemented by the tributes of many of
his comrades in arms, and a mother's heart
has been stirred to learn how widely and
how affectionately her lo& son was esteemed
by all who knew him. These expressions
are truly priceless treasures to a sorrowing
heart, but they are not for open parade.


It is a different matter with the official
records, which as a permanent monu-
ment in the face of the world. They need
no emphasis from outsiders.
The King's letter, and those of Colonel
North and Captain Andrews, which are
attached, leave nothing to be said that can
emphasise their value.
HENRY GYLES TURNER,
BUNDALOHN," ST. KILDA.


Xetter from tbe Ifting


[COPY]
War Office,
Whitehall, S.W.,
6th July, 1917.
I have it in command from His Majesty
the King to inform you, as next of kin of the late
LIEUTENANT (ACTING - CAPTAIN)
KEITH JOY BARRETT
of the Royal Fusiliers (City of London Regiment),
that this Officer was mentioned in a Despatch
from General Sir Douglas Haig dated 13 th
November, 1916, and published in the Second
Supplement to the " London Gazette" of 2nd,
dated 4th January, 1917.
Also in a Despatch from Field Marshal
Sir Douglas Haig dated 9th April, 1917, and
published in the Second Supplement to the
" London Gazette" dated 22nd May, 1917, for
gallant and distinguished service in the Field.


I am to express to you the King's high
appreciation of these services, and to add that
His Majesty trusts that their public acknow-
ledgment may be of some consolation in your
bereavement.
I have the honour to be,
Your obedient Servant,
(Sgd.) M. D. GRAHAM,
Colonel,
Assistant Military Secretary.
Lieutenant-Colonel J. W. Barrett,
Royal Army Medical Corps,
Shepheard's Hotel,
Cairo, Egypt.




Xetter from Colonel IRortb,


[EXTRACT OF LETTER.]
20th April, 1917.
Dear Colonel Barrett,
I cannot tell you how deeply I sympathise
with you in the loss of your most gallant son.
He was one of the finest characters I
have ever met. Brave to a fault, absolutely
fearless, cool, self-reliant, most unselfish and kind-
hearted, with the very highest ideals of honour,
duty, and loyalty.
In my 27 years' service I have never met
a better or more capable officer.
His death has cast a deep gloom on the
whole Battalion, who were devoted to him.
Not only was he a first-class Company
Commander, but was an excellent Second-in-
Command, and had I been hit, would have
commanded the Regiment.
The Brigade Commander (General Potter)
thought him the best Company Commander in
the 3rd Division.
We all hoped that his splendid courage
and vitality would pull him through.


Your son behaved magnificently both on
April 9th, when he held the post of honour in
the capture of the Harp, near Arras, and on
the 13th, when he was mortally wounded, and
died on 16th April, at Etaples.
I have asked 2nd Lieut. Binn, the only
surviving officer of your son s Company, to write
to you.
Our success on April 9th was greatly due
to your son's fine leadership, and his behaviour
on the 13th simply magnificent.
He was the most popular Officer in the
Battalion with all ranks.
He was a son to be proud of, and the
world is a worse place since he has gone.
No words of mine can adequately express
my deep sympathy and that of the Battalion, and
especially his own "D" Company, at the loss of
one of the finest Officers and charming men I
have ever met.
Yours sincerely,
(Signed) EDWARD B. NORTH,
Commanding 4th Royal Fusiliers, B.E.F.




©rmon£> College, 1012


better from Captain Hnbrews.
[COPY]
The Royal Overseas Officers' Club,
At the R.A.C.,
Pall Mall, London, S.W. 1,
10th December, 1917.
Dear Colonel Barrett,
I am so sorry you did not receive
my last letter which I wrote some time ago from
France. Since then I have been wounded and
am home in England.
Your son was a great friend of mine,
and, as I expect you have heard from all sides,
he was much beloved and respe&ed by ail in
the Regiment.
I reached him soon after he had been
shot, and did everything to get him away imme-
diately. He had all his senses, although he could
hardly speak, and he wrote me several messages
in the dressing station, as we were attending


his wounds. The messages he wrote were
about the other officers and men—how they
were getting on, &Cc. As long as I was with
him his thoughts were of them.
He wrote me and said his wound was
not giving him much pain, which much relieved
me. We then conveyed him by motor ambulance
to a clearing station, where I left him, and the
doctors had great hopes of his recovery.
I did not see him again, as he was
taken by train to the base, and when I left
him he seemed confident he would recover.
After the War I hope to be coming
out to Australia again, and am looking forward
to meeting you. 1
With kindest wishes,
Yours sincerely,
(Signed) L. MARTIN ANDREWS,


1
, 'fc 4 </ ■ ' "f ■
.
. ..
*" " !
IS
•'V - \' -- I
'
* S - > I
'
. .
.
' Lll • • r<




