

A MEMOIR
OF THE LATE
JAMES STEPHEN
BY HIS SON. SIR GEORGE STEPHEN.








A MEMOIR
OF THE LATE
JAMES STEPHEN,
ONE OF THE
MASTERS IN THE HIGH COURT OF CHANCERY,
IN RELATION TO
SLAVE EMANCIPATION.
BY HIS SON, SIR GEORGE STEPHEN.
Brighton, Fttiurta:
H. OEFOED, MACHINE PRINTER, “ SOUTHERN CROSS ” OFFICE.
MDOCOLXXV.


G. H. ORFORO, PRINTER.)
“southern cross” OFFICE, NEW STREET, BRIGHTON.


SELF INTRODUCTION.
Mt Dear Relatives —
It is not likely that anybody will care a straw
for us or our family, but ourselves. But we are already so
numerous, both at home and in these Australian colonies,
and yet so separated by distance or by the engagements of
business, that many of us do not know each other; still less
do we recognise our English connections, or answer the
enquiries, often dictated by affectionate respect, as to their
earthly career. Being the only survivor of my branch in the
same generation, except a sister almost as aged, I am more
frequently perhaps than any of you assailed by such enquiries;
and as they seem to be reasonable as well as kindly intended,
I have reduced to the usual form of an autobiography, such
particulars as I can give, for in no other form can family
details be so easily as well as so correctly given. Here and
there I have introduced anecdotes, more amusing than
instructive, but only because they happen to be characteristic
of the individual to whom they relate.
Tours very sincerely,
GEORGE STEPHEN.
Caulfield,
21st Apeil, 1875.




Qtjod et respublioa me et nostra amicitia bortatur, libentur facio, ut
tuam virtutem, innocentiam, diligentiam, cognitam in maximis
rebus, domi togati, armati foris, pari industria, administrari
gaudeam.
(Cato, Ciceeoni, xv. a.u.c., 704.
A coebect knowledge of family history, is in some measure,
a good introduction to that knowledge of ourselves, which is
inculcated no less by moral philosophy than by religious
precept. The family of Stephen, as regards its moral cha-
racter or its social position, has always been, so far as I
know, in the first class of respectability; Ido not mean to
say that we have uniformly been sinless, but the exceptions
have certainly been comparatively few and trifling. This I
attribute to our having been, for at least five generations,
trained from childhood for some professional life, and success
more or le*ss decided, has been the usual result.
I should deeply regret such an event as a degradation in
this respect of any of its members; and in this colony of
Victoria we abound so largely, in consequence of the emigra-
tion of my uncle John in the year 1809, when he was
appointed to the Bench at Sydney, that it seems only due to
you to supply you with what has fallen within my own know-
ledge of our domestic biography.
Our common ancestor was my grandfather, James Stephen,
a barrister who flourished in the days of Lord Mansfield. Of
his progenitors I know but little, except that his father was
at the Scotch Bar, and his grandfather an emigrant from
Denmark, and a member of the same profession ; there is no
doubt that we were originally a Danish family of some con-
sideration, for there were lately, in the hands of some of our
Scotch relatives, papers and memoranda that establish
this; but I cannot refer to them, as I am not aware what


became of them on the death of Mrs. Huceoll, who died at a
very advanced age many years ago; nor is it very material,
though I wish to explain how I became acquainted with facts
historically beyond my personal knowledge. Mrs. JSTuccoll
was a Miss Stephen, and the sister of my grandfather. In
his days the tone of. society, as well as its habits and usages,
was essentially different from that of modern life. Chivalry
had not disappeared, and good breeding, and even ceremonious
politeness, still ruled the fashion of the day, to an extent
that would now be almost incredible. In modern times they
are utterly extinguished.
I do not dispute the fact that ceremonious formality
tends to alienate instead of uniting friends, even when
gracefully performed; but it is equally true that the absence
of all ceremonial, even in domestic intercourse, leads to
vulgar familiarity; and what is worse, and even criminal,
to a contemptuous as well as selfish neglect of all the
charities that spring from generosity, and liberal construc-
tion of duty to our neighbour. Don Quixote, though a
madman, was a fine example, although a caricature of the
chivalry of the age, and it is because he is so represented
that the work is familiar with every school-boy; but we
Christians have an infinitely higher example than all the
fancy of an ingenious author can imagine, in Him who in the
humblest character, gave us the command to “do unto our
neighbour as we would have our neighbour do unto ourselves.”
Indeed it is a truth, though not often a part of general
instruction, that whatever we possess of civilisation and
refinement, either politically or personally, we owe to that
triumph of moral over immoral perception, and of liberal
over selfish pursuit, which the Apostles of Christ uniformly
enjoined as essential to relieve the pagan world from the
miseries to which habitual selfishness inevitably leads; often
terminating in the extinction of social love, and the conse-
quent reserve, if not abandonment, of social intercourse.
Every student of classical history well knows the fact that
revenge, to the extent of murder, and avarice ending in
robbery and oppression, were classed among the attributes of
deity and heroism by the heathen, until some knowledge of
Scriptural truth brought him within the light of civilisation.


The political philosopher o£ the present day, if he really
deserves the name, also sees very clearly that the democratic
spirit which now prevails, and which originated in the times
when Burke exclaimed, “ The days of chivalry are gone,”
springs not from outraged liberties, but from the vulgar
pride, too ignorant to perceive that the only equality that
can exist among men, while dwelling in social intercourse, is
that which regards their translation to another world.
I collect from my home correspondence that this political
epidemic has of late years prevailed very much at home; and
certainly before I left England, twenty years ago, a close
observer of the times would have had no difficulty in perceiving
that it was daily self-increasing, though not in a malignant
form; even then some of the daily press exhibited a licentious
freedom that would have been visited by a Crown prosecution
at the commencement of the present century. Clubs and
combinations were beginning to form themselves under
pretext of protecting the interest of the employed; in this
case, too, they found themselves much restrained by the
activity of official vigilance, and the severity of judicial
punishment. But with a view to popularity, and therefore
to profitable sale, the speculative owners of the daily press
have always lent themselves to publish public grievances, or
what could plausibly be classified as such, and this has
gradually opened the House of Commons to the reception of
complaints, however frivolous ; for the combination of clubs
and low societies since the Reform Bill, especially, threatened
the seats of many members, and ensured to many new candi-
dates the interest of many electors. Thus it happened that
the Reform Bill* itself was passed in the second decade of
the present century, and the Abolition of Slavery Bill imme-
diately after, in the third. These successes were confessedly
due to the Radical temper that prevailed, and they were both
of a character to raise the Radical professor in public estima-
tion, and therefore to relax the vigilance with which all
democratic movement had hitherto been restrained; so that of
late years we have rarely heard of official prosecutions for sedi-
tion or libel; and the protection, at one time so essential to the
general peace against popular disturbance and public outrage,
has been so much relaxed as to be almost obsolete. In England


it still nominally exists without hazard o£ its being withheld
though it scarcely can he said to exist here, where there is no
superior class, or at all events a very feeble one, to enforce
it; but in all colonies, and Victoria is certainly no exception,
this democratic spirit is a political pestilence, that rages with
more power than in an old-established state; and for an
obvious reason, that there is no aristocracy of wealth, or
power, or rank, and therefore of tone and manners, to over-
rule the outcry of public discontent, or to afford hourly
evidence of the undoubted truth that peace and goodwill, and
even general respectability, are secured as well as obtained
»as the result of refinement and courtesy. Not one man in a
thousand of our colonial population would understand why
the “gentlemen” is classically defined as “ver generosus.” In
truth, perfect equality of position is sometimes assumed by
the new domestic as the condition of his or her temporary
and spontaneous servitude, though liberally remunerated;
this is exhibited both by their manners and their dress. I
have had examples of it recently in my own household —one
refusing to wear a livery hat'because it is distinguished by a
cockade, and another entering my drawing-room in full dress
as a lady, so that I mistook her for one of my grandchildren;
yet both of them were good servants in their respective
departments. Etiquette in some sense prevails, and ought
to prevail in all ranks of society ; it used to be enforced in
the higher classes by the unchristian system of duelling; in
the lower ranks by instant dismissal from place or employ-
ment, and a denial of character; duelling having been aban-
doned by the force of public opinion, and as is generally
supposed in compliance with'Her Majesty’s desire, we have
found no substitute for the former safeguard, and we cannot
adopt another of a similar kind.*
* " The introduction of courts of honour appeared to the cabinet
to be surrounded by too many practical difficulties. The idea was
therefore abandoned, and it was resolved to effect the desired reform
by an amendment of the articles of war. In pursuance of this
decision, amended articles were issued in April, 1844, which declared
it to he suitable to tbe character of honourable men to apologise,
and offer redress for wrong or insult committed, and equally so for
the party aggrieved to accept, frankly and cordially, explanation and
apologies for the same.” — The Prince Cons out, von. i, 172.


Autobiographies in these days seem to he intended either
to gratify personal vanity, or for libellous circulation of the
sins and follies of our friends and neighbours. Mine shall
not, if I can avoid it, be guilty of either folly, and yet shall,,
so far as I know, give the career of all with whom I have
been connected by family ties, with accuracy and truth.
Our grandfather, James Stephen, was a man of decided
ability, but unfortunately (as too many of us have shown
ourselves) of violent temper; and this displayed itself
strongly when he was in the discharge of professional duty;
whether urging the claims of a client, or defending his
alleged liability, if in either case he was assured that he was
speaking on the side of truth and justice. But if temper
made him offensive, it also made him occasionally eloquent,
and his eloquence generally commanded success. Lord Mans-
field himself bore a singular testimony to this, when pro-
nouncing sentence upon him in court, for a libel of which he
was found guilty under a Crown prosecution; and also when
my grandfather spoke in his own defence on the same
occasion, when his Lordship made the remark, loud enough
to be heard at the bar, “What a pity that so able a man
should be unable to control his own temper.” It is a curious
feature of the case, that his Lordship delivered this remark
with uplifted hands, as I have heard from my father, who was
present in court. It is a yet more curious circumstance that
the libel itself, of which he was found guilty, is a temperate
expostulation with the legislature for continuing the system
of imprisonment for debt, when we recollect that a modern
legislature has virtually determined that system altogether.
But in those days a publication of this character was held to
be a contempt of the courts of law. I have in my possession
a copy of the pamphlet, which I found on a bookseller’s stall
in London half a century ago, and perhaps the only one still
in existence; for several members of the family have been
seeking for it with great perseverance, but in vain.
Our grandfather was sentenced, as far as I recollect the
story, to three years’ imprisonment, for the publication
was considered to be not only libellous, but seditious,
though I can find no passage in it that in these days
would justify the application to the pamphlet of either
of these terms. He remained in prison till he died. During


this time he was supported by my father, who was at that
time a student at law, and maintaining himself as well as his
father, as reporter of the debates in Parliament, where he
himself afterwards became a distinguished member. I must
not anticipate, however, but still I may add that reporting
the business of the House, or the speeches of its members,
was not at that time permissible, and could only be effected
by a sort of figurative process of fiction, requiring not only a
good memory, but an inventive fancy. A capacity for this
implies more than ordinary commonplace ability, but I have
often heard my father say that he found it a very good
school of instruction, not only in public business, but iu the
knowledge of mankind. My grandfather had married a lady
of the name of Webbe, of good family, in the south of
England, I believe in Dorsetshire ; so at least the family tale
runs, and he left as his survivors three sons and three
daughters.
It may be interesting to our Australian relatives to know
something of those parties, though the relationship to most
of them is rather remote. The eldest son was William
Stephen, who afterwards became a doctor of medicine, and
practiced as a physician, first at Bristol or Bath, lam
uncertain which; he afterwards migrated to St. Kitts, with
his wife, a Miss Eorbes, a member of the Scotch family. The
second son was my father; and the third the late Mr. John
Stephen, the judge at Sydney, and the forefather of Sir Alfred
and of most of the family now occupying these colonies.
There were also three daughters, Sybella, Elizabeth, and
Hannah. Sybella married Mr. Morison, an advocate at the
Scotch Bar, and the author of a standard work in the Scotch
Law Library, entitled, “ The Law Dictionary.” Elizabeth
married Mr. George Milner; they had no family. Mr. Milner
was a country magistrate, and was educated at Cambridge, in
the neighbourhood of which he resided, in a village called
“ Comberton,” where he possessed considerable property.
Hannah, the third daughter, married the Rev. William Parish,
a Cumberland family of high respectability. He attained
the distinguished honour of senior wrangler when he was at
Magdalen College, Cambridge, and afterwards became the
professor of mathematics in the University. A comical


anecdote is told of him while one day acting in the schools in
this capacity. The usage of the University in those days
was, and perhaps still is, to allow of no language to be spoken
in the public schools, during a disputation, except Latin.
The professor was interrupted, as ■well as the disputants,
by the barking of -a dog that had intruded unobserved.
He exclaimed in a loud voice to the servant in attendance,
and emphatically repeating the words, “ verte canem ex,
verte canem ex,” which became a nickname by which he was
known for many years. He was an excellent as well as a
most able man, but as primitive in his habits as in his Latin.
One day, when, in his cap and gown in the streets of Cam-
bridge, he heard of a meeting of the committee of the Bible
Society, to be held the following morning in London ; some
business was to be considered in which he took a deep
personal interest. Steam was not then in use; but it so
happened that a stage to London was passing through the
street, immediately after the communication had been made
to him, and forgetting the academical costume which he wore,
the professor hailed it, and took his place on the box at the
coachman’s side ; nor did he discover his mistake till he had
travelled many miles, when tie was awakened to it by the
repeated shouts of laughter by which he was assailed. I was
myself, on one occasion, witness to a similar absurdity, which
set a whole congregation in laughter, in spite of the solemnity
of the duty in which we were engaged. At the conclusion of
the morning service a hymn was being sung as usual, and
the professor retired to the vestry to change his surplice for
the black gown ; it happened that the vestry was at the
extremity of the middle aisle, and to reach it, it was neces-
sary for the minister on leaving the pulpit to walk down the
passage. My aunt, Mrs. Farish, was in church, and I
occupied her pew, which commanded a view of the whole
church ; they concluded the hymn, but the professor did not
shew himself, and continued in the vestry; upon which my
aunt whispered to me to desire the organist to repeat the
last verse, so as to give him a little more time; this was
done, and still the professor did not appear; whereupon the
organist repeated the whole hymn, but still there was no
clergyman; my aunt now became alarmed, fearing he had


met with some accident, and desired me to go to the vestry
to assist him; the congregation also shewed signs of sym-
pathy that might reach to indecorous confusion; they
remained, however, in their seats when they saw me going
down the aisle. I had not proceeded many steps when I saw
the vestry door open, and the professor enter, with his usual
gravity of countenance, and properly arrayed in his black
robes, but with a ludicrous addition to them that was quite
enough to excite laughter, even if it had not favourably
contrasted with the somewhat majestic figure and grave
deportment of the professor himself. A well starched pair
of bauds projected before and behind, and the latter pair
about double the size of those in front, obviously showed
that they came from a different wardrobe; of course this was
enough to set us all in a titter, the organ still playing the
voluntary, for the organist seemed to think it decorous to
continue playing till the clergyman had resumed his place.
The professor’s face retained its accustomed gravity to the
last; though he made a slight apology to the congregation
for having unavoidably detained them, he gave them no
explanation of the cause, but he afterwards explained it to
us : he had an unconscious habit of twitching the bands in
the reading-desk, when they occasionally interposed them-
selves between his eyes and the book, as they will do if very
long and badly starched, at the slightest breeze from the
windows; it occurred that morning that he had twitched
them away so frequently that he had gradually twitched
them round to the back of his head ; and consequently, when
looking into the glass in the vestry to see that all was right
for the pulpit, he could see no bands, and could not resume
his place without them, “ it would be too great an indecorum,”
he thought; another pair was not to be found in the vestry,,
and what was to be done ! The verger, however, assured him
that in five minutes he would obtain another pair at Magdalen
College, which was close at hand, so the professor despatched
him there and seated himself till his return. Quite uncon-
scious of his being thus doubly armed, he re-entered the aisle,
and delivered his sermon as usual. With all this absence of
mind, Farish was a man of accumulated knowledge and
wisdom; still less ought I to conceal the fact that though


never childish, nor mingling in the play of childhood, he was
greatly beloved by all his children, and I may say by all
young people, for the kindness, patience, and simplicity with
which he availed himself of every opportunity however
casual, to inculcate a knowledge and a practice of their
duties to God and man.
I should have mentioned that Mr. John Stephen, the late
judge at Sydney, married a lady of the name of Pasmore, the
sister of an eminent solicitor in London; he settled in New
South "Wales in 1809, and never returned to England. I
never saw him again, as he did not re-visit England, and died
before I arrived in this country, which was not till August,
1855. Both my uncle William and my uncle John were
more than men of average talent, especially John, but not to
any conspicuous extent; so far as I remember them, they
had too much of the domestic tone about them to court
public distinction, or to indulge in personal ambition in
any way. I believe that this was due, not to their want of
education, for their father was not a man to fail in this,
but rather to the severity and violence of his temper, which
made them timid and reserved in his presence. Such is the
family story, for I was not of an age to form any correct
opinion for myself, though I still recollect them both.
While thus dwelling upon the early days of my near
relatives, in justice to those who are gone, I feel greatly
tempted to dwell on the personal appearance of some of
those who are no more; on reflection, I doubt the
propriety of doing so; but in one or two peculiar cases the
anecdote should not be suppressed. The daughters of Dr.
Stephen and Mr. Morrison, were the cause of frequent
domestic romance. One of the name of Mary, was one
day walking with her nurse in the pump-room at Bath, when
the Duke of York happened to be there drinking the waters;
she caught his eye and he took her up, and kissing her,
asked her how many hearts she would break in the course
of her life F She was a child of five years old. “ I don’t
know, sir, but I hope a good many,” was her reply; and
certainly her hope was realised; for though I was not horn
at that time, it was my fate to reside in the same house with
her for several years. When she arrived at the age of twenty.


she then exhibited in full bloom the character which her pre-
mature wit thus intimated. I should perhaps add that she
was not only highly accomplished, but well read in the
literature of the day, as well as adorned with the graces of
the drawing-room. She and her sister were married to two
clergymen; her husband was Archdeacon Hodson, formerly
tutor of Magdalen College, Cambridge, and her sister became
the wife of the Rev. W. Clarke, of Haslingfield, near Cam-
bridge.* The children of my aunt Morison were scarcely
less distinguished in the family circle. The only son John,
acquiring the name of “The Edinburgh Apollo,” and the
daughters, one of whom became the wife of my brother
Henry, and another the wife of the Rev. Bowater Yernon,
the chaplain at St. Helena, were conspicuous in every circle
for their beauty, though of a much more retired and strictly
feminine character. Mrs. Henry Stephen presided over my
father’s household from the year 1815 till his death in 1833,
so that I had every opportunity of studying her character.
It was exemplary, but unlike too many of our exemplary
ladies, courteous and refined, without the slightest tinge
of “ self ” in all her intercourse. I saw nothing of Mrs.
Vernon from the day of her marriage, for she soon after
proceeded to St. Helena with her husband. I am not a
proper party to draw my cousin Sybella’s picture, because I
happened to be desperately in love with her at the time
she quitted England; but as was very befitting the circum-
stances in after times, my eldest son has married her fourth
daughter, and consequently is the progenitor of some half-
dozen of the Australian part of the family of Stephen, for
whose amusement I am preparing these pages.
It is time that I should return to that part of the story
which relates to my father, of whom I was obliged to take a
temporary leave for the sake of introducing so far as I
could a brief account of the others. I heartily wish that
he had been equally considerate for his successors, and
* There were two other daughters of Dr. Stephen, one of whom —
Hannah —married the Eev. T. Atkinson, of Queen’s College, Cam-
bridge ; and the other—Louisa—never married. I believe that she
died about a year ago. Hannah’s eldest son lost his life in saving
two young ladies, when their horses ran away with their carriage.


had found time to leave for us an autobiography, for nobody
ever possessed a pen more capable of discharging such a
duty, though self was, in all his conduct, the very last object
of his attention. I have already stated that when his father
was committed to prison, his son James supported him.
I should also have stated that when my grandfather com-
mitted the alleged offence, he had been himself imprisoned
for debt in the King’s Bench prison; this was in the year
1770, and James was then only twenty years old and still
a law-student; but I have present access to very few memo-
randa of the dates of these occurrences; the family papers or
what remain of them, being in England, and all the parties
with whom I should otherwise have corresponded being now
dead; but any error that I have committed in dates cannot
exceed a year or two.
I ■ have reason to believe that my father’s education was
principally, if not altogether, at Winchester College. What
may have been his career at college I know not, for he
seldom spoke of these transactions of his early days; and I
only know that he retained the usual school-boy affection
for some of his fellow-students at the same college, all his
life.
On my grandfather’s death, my father was called to the
bar at Lincoln’s Inn. We have no record of him during the
early years of his practice, nor do I know in what year
he migrated to St. Kitts, where most of my own generation
of the family, including myself, were born. My mother’s
name was Anne Stent, and she was the only daughter of
a gentleman residing at Stoke-Kewington, near London;
she died when I was only three years old, and of course
I can give no description of her from personal knowledge;
but from incidents occasionally mentioned by my aunts,
I infer that she was not only attractive in her appearance,
but a lady of more than usual firmness of character, and
generosity of disposition; indeed, had she been otherwise,
my father was not the man who would have selected an
inferior or vulgar woman for his wife, however charming she
might be. She died in child-bed about the year 1797 or
1798, but I have not the exact date; my father was then
residing in Sloane-street, in the parish of Chelsea.


It was not long before lie was induced, by the representa-
tions of his brother William, Doctor Stephen, to follow him
to St. Kitts; and a few years after his brother John, who
had also been called to the English Bar, followed them; but
I never heard of his attaining any considerable practice
either in the Colonial or the English courts, and certainly
none in the latter, nor was he qualified to such an extent as
to expect it; but I believe that he did succeed to some
extent in Canada. Such at least is the family story, for
certainly he did return to England with a fortune of a few
thousand pounds, and invested it in an injudicious purchase
of landed property; but his brother James remained at St.
Kitts till the close of the century, and succeeded in obtaining
the leading practice in the Colonial Courts, though not in
securing much profit by it. While resident there, he was
attacked by the yellow fever, and displayed his natural
firmness and decision of character by an incident well worth
mentioning. Two of the black servants (for he never pos-
sessed a slave, but bought and immediately emancipated his
domestics) had been carried off by the epidemic, after con-
sulting the most eminent physicians in the colony. This led
my father to a careful observation of the disease, as well as
of the medical treatment. The last patient had scarcely
died, when he found himself attacked; his brother resided at
some distance; he sent for him, but feeling himself hourly
worse, and gradually sinking, he thought it prudeut imme-
diately to recall the physician who had attended on the
servants. Of course the doctor came immediately, and was
speedily followed by Dr. Stephen, when both concurred in
opinion that their new patient ought to be bled without
delay; but my father would not acquiesce in their opinion;
he had anticipated it, and was fully resolved not to acquiesce
in it under any circumstances. His brother became much
alarmed when he perceived the obstinacy of his resistance,
declaring to him, in the most emphatic way, that he would
die within four-and-twenty hours if he persisted; the other
medical man confirming the prediction in yet stronger terms,
charging him with a suicidal purpose. 11l as he was, he
maintained his point, and solemnly appealed to both of them,
on honour, to tell him the truth; they still insisted on their


point, and Ms brother, with tears in his eyes, recalled to his
memory his wife and children, as the strongest argument for
compliance that he could use. Upon this my father pro-
duced a bottle of port wine, which he had secreted behind
his bed for the purpose, and pouring it into a tumbler, drank
it off in two draughts, before they could arrest his hand, for
their backs were turned in consultation as to the course they
ought to take in such unprecedented circumstances, and they
did not see what he was about. The next day he was able to
leave his bed, laughing heartily at the triumph he had gained
over them. His explanation to his brother was instructive :
“ He had watched their treatment of both the black servants;
they had bled them, and both of them had died within a few
hours after, and so would it have been with me had I followed
your advice; had you bled me at the commencement of the
attack, you might have succeeded; but when the disease had
once acquired a firm hold upon me as it had on them, exhaus-
tion by bleeding assists its fatal power; it r was to guard
myself against a similar error in my own case that I watched
its progress, and secreted the wine, which I had resolved to
take in the emergency which I anticipated, though you
did not.”
He soon recovered his full strength, and the hint was
not thrown away, my uncle having several patients still on
Ms hands; it proved successful with many, and his brother
James, though habitually a temperate man, drank port wine
to the end of his life, and never was bled; nor, as I have
heard others say, ever exhibited the slightest degree of
excitement as the result of excess; but he rarely exceeded
half-a-dozen wine glasses, which were scarcely two-thirds
of the modern size, and never drank spirits of any kind.
To do justice to my father’s name and memory is the
principal object of these pages. All of my readers must
have heard of Mm, but only a few can possibly have seen
him; as he died, a very aged man, above forty years ago. A
slight sketch of Mm may not he out of place.
The photograph is a copy of a posthumous painting by
Linnell, taken six months after my father’s decease, aided by
two portraits of him, one by Sir Thomas Lawrence, and the
other by Mr. Slater, the most distinguished draftsman of the


day. Being satisfied with neither, I employed Linnell, and
the likeness is the result; it is such an identity of the
original that I could not avoid asking Linnell whether he
had some further aid than I had given him, and he acknow-
ledged that on occasion of my taking him one day to my
father’s house to dinner, to study the features of another
party who was sitting to him, he also studied my father’s,
well knowing that sooner or later he should he required to
take his portrait. Se many wanted a copy that I felt obliged
to have it engraved. In stature he was tall and nearly six
feet high, broad across the chest, and what is commonly called
a large man, hut thin and wiry; ,his habits were very active,
and he thought nothing of a walk of thirty miles; yet he
was no sportsman at any time of life, nor did I ever see him
on horseback.
At the time of his residence at St. Kitts, the great
Continental war, at the beginning of the present century,
may be said to have had its origin, though it did not break
out in any marked manner for many years. Ido not profess
to be an historian, but I believe it is generaly admitted by
all who have described the age, that the French revolution of
1780 produced the seeds that grew up into a Continental war.
Democracy, even in its mildest form, is oppressive apd
selfish ; hut if partially successful, it soon becomes revolu-
tionary. The multitude for a time will be held together by
the vain expectation of sharing wealth as well as power with
those whom they now find" are only their equals, though
hitherto they have been de jure, as well as de facto, their
acknowledged superiors. Some well-known occurrences in
this colony might be quoted to verify this position, but I
have no wish to introduce such a topic, otherwise than is
necessary by way of explanation. A most important incident
of the times was the stimulus given to maritime warfare. The
trade of Great Britain was always extensive; that of America,
at that time, of comparatively little importance. But the trade
of France, though compared with our trade very small, was
even then sufficient to warrant her maintaining powerful fleets.
Hence, with the war arose a system of Admiralty Law, being
a new field for the display of forensic talents. The captures
of trading-vessels on the high seas were innumerable; and






when Admiralty Law still remained a new and almost undis-
covered field, scarcely a capture occurred the legality of
which might not become the subject of litigation. Hence,
the Admiralty Court, even in the West Indies became a
scene of large and important litigation, and my father
obtained a lead there which proved a considerable advantage
to him, and which soon led him to quit the colony and return
to England, where, in the form of appeal, such litigation was,
ultimately disposed of by the Privy Council.
The constant loss by capture at sea led to the invention of
many manoeuvres aud counter-manoeuvres, to neutralise the
activity of our cruisers; and here I must explain briefly the
nature of the question on which the judgment of the. Appeal
Court usually proceeded; Was the cargo of the captured
vessel destined for the supply of the enemy, or of a neutral
country? for, if intended for the supply of the enemy, it was
liable to forfeiture; if for the supply of a neutral or a friend,
the capture should not have been made ; but how, it may be
asked, could such distinction be ascertained by the cruiser
that made the prize, probably some thousands of miles from
land? It was reserved for James Stephen to suggest the
means of effecting this discovery, by a process at once simple
and effective; and which enabled England in after years to
extinguish the Continental warI—rendering 1 —rendering aid as much to
that grand result as the sword of Wellington in Spain and
Waterloo; such was the statement of Buonaparte himself
to one of our family connections at St. Helena. At the
beginning of the present century, he wrote and pub-
lished a pamphlet under the singular title of “ War in
Disguise; or, the Erauds of the Neutral Elags.” I have no copy
of it in my library; I believe the first edition was published
anonymously. It was indeed, of a character to excite alarm
as well as curiosity, and many editions were published,
latterly with the author’s name. It was not libellous, nor in
any way personal; as I have often heard my father say that
the case of his father was not lost upon him; yet it was so
bold and decided, both in argument and fact, as to make it
compulsory on the Q-overnment of the day to take the author
into their war counsels; and consequently they no sooner
discovered him than they consulted him, and acted upon his


advice Ho declined office, for Ids profession was at that
time more profitable than any official prospect promised to
be; but they offered to place him in Parliament to vindicate
the measures which they proposed to bring in, and to this he
assented, because it might prove of great service iu promoting
another object of which he never lost sight, the emancipa-
tion of the slaves. He was seated therefore as a member for
•Tralee, then, an Irish borough, and afterwards, in the next
Parliament, for Lewes, in Sussex. Those who for the first
time read this singular detail, will be curious to know the
secret which this important pamphlet, disclosed. It was
neither more nor less than that various mercantile houses in
Liverpool, Glasgow, and Bristol were actually carrying on
extensive trade in supplying the enemy with warlike stores 1
and that a similar trade was conducted in the United States,
as well as by English subjects in some of the West Indian
colonies; so that while we were engaged with our armies in
shooting the Frenchman and the Spaniard, they were
dispatching us with the same powder and firearms of the
same manufacture made and .used against them; that in fact,
it might be said, we were carrying on war, not only with the
enemy but with ourselves. So many similar cases had
accumulated in the course 'of his practice, that while the
etiquette of his profession precluded him from betraying the
names of the parties implicated, or of the vessels involved in
the guilt, he also felt not less impelled by honour and duty
to make known to the public the extent of this hostile inter-
course, and the manner in which it wag carried on. It is not
improbable that they had some suspicion of it, for such
extensive crimes are rarely committed with absolute privacy:
nor is it probable that the press was wholly ignorant of the
occurrence, though at that period it was conducted with far
more restrictive self-control than it is at present: hut, on the
other hand, it was unlikely that either the press or the
Government of the day should imagine the existence of such
organised hostility among ourselves, to the extent which
accumulated practice in the Appeal Court brought to my
father’s knowledge; for reporters did not then attend
habitually in that court, nor were the subjects of discussion
supposed to be of general interest to the public.


Some explanation of .our naval usages at that time may
not be out of place; for though the same laws generally
prevail, such matters at the present day cannot occur, and
are rarely studied even as a part of legal education. The
open sea being what may be called the common property of
all nations, ought to be neutral ground as respects all nations,
and to a considerable extent it is so; and social habits ought
not to be broken so far as it is possible to retain them
under any circumstances; and consequently in every English
vessel at sea, English law, so far as the peculiar position of
the subject will permit, should be recognised, and English
power should enforce its observance; the same principle
obtains in every country, and to secure to its passengers this
privilege of protection, all ships carry at their mast-heads
the colours of the country to which their owners belong; if
the standard is British, it denotes that the ship must be
respected as British property, and entitled to British pro-
tection; and so it is in respect of the French, American, or
any other flag. But during the general hostility that pre-
vailed in those days, it was notorious that many ships hoisted
flags to w'hich they were not entitled, merely to cover cargo
that they could not legally carry, or to enable them to carry
on some piratical purpose under an assumed and fictitious
nationality of right, and thus the colour of the flag might be
exhibited for an illegal purpose; thus, notwithstanding the
respect due to the power which the flag displayed, ships were
often boarded at sea, and their papers and logs examined, to
ascertain that all things corresponded with the verbal state-
ment; if the voyage thus appeared to be consistent with the
master’s story, the vessel was allowed to proceed on her
voyage. If, on the other hand, they did not consist with each
other, she was captured, and sent home by a prize crew. If
she had been captured on a legitimate voyage, the owners
appealed to the Privy Council, and, according to the judg-
ment of the Lords of the Council, the vessel was condemned
or restored with the cargo.
A ship carrying ammunition openly to a French port,
whatever might be the colour of her flag, would be liable to
capture; for such a vessel must necessarily be deemed, in a
war with France, to be an ally of the enemy, and therefore a


fair object of hostility, so far as we were concerned as the
enemy of Prance. But though we were at war with Prance,
the United States maintained their neutrality, and conducted
their trade as they pleased, regardless of the inconvenience
it might occasion us, or, more correctly speaking, enjoying
the opportunity of adding to our difficulties. This supplied
an easy method of disguising the ultimate object of the ship-
ment, and cargoes of warlike ammunition were despatched
from England on apparently a legitimate voyage to America,
and transhipped under American colours to Prance. I
believe that this ultimately led to the war with the States, but
I have not time to examine into that subject. The battle of
Trafalgar occurred in 1805, and was followed by other
minor engagements at sea. The whole of the French and
Spanish fleets were eaptui’ed or destroyed, and hence the
trade of Prance was utterly extinguished for a time, and
this circumstance also for a time, gave to America the oppor-
tunity of practising her frauds with yet more facility as well
as advantage. In fact, it may he said without much exagge-
ration, that the trade of the world was in the hands of Great
Britain and America, while' Great Britain was then, as she
still is, virtually the Sovereign of the Seas.
To check the supply of ammunition was, in fact, in some
sense to destroy the enemy ; and it was absolutely necessary,
therefore, to -devise a means whereby this traitorous system
might be effectually resisted, notwithstanding all devices of
the traitors, and Mr. James Stephen suggested a plan for
accomplishing, this ; that no vessel should be free from the
risk of capture if found trading without a British license; or,
in other words, that it should be maintained by the power of
our fleet that foreign trade no less than our own, should be
uniformly conducted on such principles as we were willing
to sanction, by granting a licecne ; and if not so conducted,
that the recusant country should be considered as an enemy.
I believe that this, in very general terms, is the substance
and principle of the celebrated “ Orders in Council,” that
excited so much discussion in Parliament at the beginning of
this century. The system was adopted and carried out to its
full extent, and worked miracles in its ultimate effects. The
United States in vain opposed it, though a few successful


naval actions enabled them for the moment to question our
naval supremacy; and though the progress of the war in
Europe to a considerable extent allied all Europe against us,
every nation was powerless before our mighty flag, for they
had no ships; and such was our navy at that time that we
should to a certainty have captured them sooner or later if
they had. The historian who closely investigates the events
of the day, will be at no loss to discover the main cause of
the utter discomfiture of France, of which in fact my father
was the original projector, and to a considerable extent the
instrument.
"Writing as I am for the instruction of my children and
grandchildren, yet more than for the benefit of my in-
numerable Australian relatives, it would be wrong in me to
conceal my honest conviction, that this was in truth the
immediate act of God, for which he made my father the
instrument. It cannot be supposed that the diabolical
atrocities which marked the French Revolution, would escape
His wrath, even upon us; or that He would display it other-
wise than by human means, in permitting all criminal excess
to work its own destruction. It has been by human means
and human instruments alone, that national annihilation has
been effected, when such has been indicated as the declared
will of God, from the time of Noah to the present day, and
the same authority which narrates the facts, declares to us
that “ God is immutable.”
Of course, with the change in the system, the prize
business of my father largely declined, and he was appointed
a Master in Chancery, at that time a high judicial office, as a
sort of compensation for his professional loss; that loss being
due yet more to the vindictive manoeuvres of the mercantile
houses, and their attornies, than to the decrease in the
number of the captures. On being appointed to this high
position he dropped his practice at the bar, and attended
more to his parliamentary duties.
The oratory of the bar is not a good school for parliamentary
eloquence, nor did I ever hear that my father distinguished
himself as a parliamentary speaker, except upon two occa-
sions ; on a discussion of the extent to which the regency
ought to involve interference with the domestic arrangements


of the Sovereign during his insanity. He then spoke -with a
power and feeling that marked his speech, according to all
accounts, as the most powerful as well as the most pathetic
that had been delivered in the House during the discussion.
He was a man of strong feeling; he had himself lost two of
his children, and therefore felt the deepest personal sympathy
for the King, whose infirmity was traced to the recent loss of
the Princess Amelia, his favourite child. On such an occasion
it was impossible for my father to speak in moderation, even
had he wished it, and we afterwards heard that many in the
House either left it, or betrayed their sympathy by their
tears, for their domestic losses were painfully recalled to
mind.
It is seldom that a barrister, however eminent, has been
distinguished by his oratory in Parliament. Remarkable
instances of this were found in the cases of Brougham and
Macaulay, both of them men of great literary talent, and the
last especially endowed with a memory sufficient to convert
his head into a library. Macaulay, it is true, made half a
dozen speeches, mostly, if I recollect rightly, on the Reform
Bill, of great power and combined with much elegance of
composition; yet Macaulay himself on his return from India
consulted my brother, Sir James Stephen, on the course
he ought in prudence to pursue as regarded his future
career, and introduced the conversation with the remark,
“ Ton know, Stephen, that I am not, and never shall be a
public speaker, I am therefore opposed to a parliamentary
life, and of law I know nothing by practice.” The latter fact
I could vouch for from my personal experience, for he had
no business except a brief from me in the Sheriffs Court in
a very simple matter, and even there he broke down; while
his half dozen speeches on the Reform Bill were not extem-
porary, but only so many philosophical essays which he had
previously prepared with great labour, and which his extraor-
dinary memory enabled him to repeat in the House with the
manner and tone of a schoolboy saying his lesson. Brougham
I heard frequently; his talent was extraordinary and of a very
different kind. He could address a public audience at a
moment’s notice, upon any subject under heaven, and say the
bitterest things of which the subject was capable; for in a


practical way Ms experience was great and Ms license was
intolerable. He also possessed what is commonly called a
ready wit, for he mixed with all men with a familiarity that
enabled him to dive into their motives whatever the case
might be, with great penetration. It followed from this that
he was not only a ready speaker, but that he was able
generally to select the most telling points on which to
address himself ; but he had no memory like Macaulay, nor
any remarkable literary power, and his speechifying, though
always well-delivered, was often if not habitually, a mere
common-place argument, such as is heard hi the quasi
parliamentary quarrels of a parochial, or I regret to say, to
render it more intelligible to my readers, a colonial assembly.
1 knew' the man well in private as w T ell as public life, for I
was professionally opposed to him in the great cause of the
prosecution of the Queen, and almost fraternally connected
with him in the yet more important matter of negro emanci-
pation ; though in the latter casehis avow'ed intimacy with
Liverpool precluded all our party from trusting him too far.
I must not anticipate, however. The Orders in Council were
opposed by many, but especially by the Liverpool merchants,
as a violation of neutrality very detrimental to trade; and so
no doubt it would be, if continued beyond the time of war, or
even beyond the time that the nature of the war made the
peculiar remedy necessary ; but the ignorant public, or rather,
the traitorous class, which in this instance created the
necessity, could not be made to understand the mystery of
secret, though decided hostility in so-called neutrals. It
often is a merely hypocritical peace obtained by a cowardly
assent to the alleged rights of all parties ; when really the
neutrals, as they call themselves, w'ant the spirit or the means
openly to oppose that party whom they condemn. I think
there can be little doubt that even the Americans inwardly
felt that supplies to an enemy in open war were Lable to the
same penalty as any other contraband goods; such ignorance
could not have been more than barely possible under any
circumstances, so that as regarded such of the traders as
resided in Great Britain, it is impossible to extend to them
the apology of ignorance; to gratify their cupidity is the only
way of accounting for acts of trade which charged agaiu-t


them in another form would have secured for each of them
the honour of a halter ; hut the doctrine of agitation, though
not carried to the extent to which it was practised in after
times, was even then not wholly unknown. The cry of “ our
trade is in danger,” was always very popular, and no difficulty
occurred in raising it. Petitions against the Orders in
Council were easily obtained, and powerfully supported in
the House of Commons, by what is now termed the Eadical
party. They eventually succeeded, hut not until after the
principle had produced its effect, and the war died out by
the capture of Napoleon Buonaparte. Ido not remember
that the House of Commons took any decided step on the
occasion, and writing from memory I incline to think they
did not, but that the enquiry ceased upon the death of Mr.
Spencer Perceval, and this is one of those sad events which I
feel bound to record.
When the House ordered the enquiry into the legality of
the principle, as prayed by the petitioners, Liverpool deter-
mined to send Brougham into Parliament, as the proper
advocate of their case. My father had been already seated
with the view of sustaining, the policy, and Brougham was
considered, and perhaps ho was rightly considered, the ablest
man on that side of the House to oppose it. It was while
they were engaged in the examination of a witness, that
Perceval was shot in the lobby of the House, by a Liverpool
merchant of the name of Bellingham. He was immediately
captured; the alarm was intense, when he became identified
as one of the Liverpool traders who had been ruined by the
Orders in Council, for, when asked for his name and address,
he at once replied, “ that he did not mean to shoot Mr.
Perceval, but the author of the Orders, for it was by them he
was reduced to ruin.” This answer was immediately circu-
lated through the House. Perceval was a friend of my
father’s whom he had known at the bar. The adjournment
of the House immediately followed as a matter of course,
and my father first escorted Perceval to his house in Downing-
street, and then hurried home as speedily, but as quietly as
he could; for this statement of Bellingham gave rise imme-
diately to the suspicion that this was only the first act of a
tragedy, the revolutionary massacre of the opponents of


free trade. I shall never forget the circumstances. We
lived in Q-reat Ormond-street, about a mile or a little more
from the House of Commons, when a report reached our
house in the evening that my father was shot. I instantly
hurried down to Westminster to ascertain the truth, and
found everything in such confusion and alarm, and so many
reported victims that I could not learn anything conclusive
about it, and returned home a little before midnight. To my
astonishment my father answered the doorbell, not by opening
the door, but by demanding in his natural voice to know who
had rung the bell. On satisfying him that it was 1, he of
course admitted me immediately, but with much care reclosed
the door, for Bellingham’s confession had reached him, and
of course he too believed that he was the intended object of
the murderer’s assault.
Perceval died the same evening, and Bellingham was con-
victed of murder, executed, and dissected. Perceval was a
public favourite, and the horror was universal and loudly
expressed. lam unable to recall the proceedings in Parlia-
ment in reference to the Orders in Council after this event,
but so far as I recollect they were dropped by the opponents
of the license-system, because there long existed a general
suspicion that the whole party was more or less implicated
in Bellingham’s guilt. So far as I remember, there was no
longer any parliamentary struggle on this particular point;
and the rather because as a naturally practical question it
had ceased to be practically important, having attained its
main object.
Such of my readers as require more accurate information
will do well to refer to contemporary history as found in the
journals of the day ; especially the “ Times,” the “ Chronicle,”
or the “ Courier,” which were the leading papers of that
period.
I have already mentioned that on his return to England
Mr. Stephen succeeded in obtaining jointly with Mr. Dallas
all the business of the Cockpit, which is the old name of the
court in which the appeals were conducted, and here he
remained till his appointment to the mastership. I doubt if
he ever held a brief in any other court, nor was he the man
to be carried away by pecuniary gain so long as he had


enough to support his family decorously. His first wife did
not long survive the change of residence, and on her decease he
gave up housekeeping, and lived in chambers in the Middle
Temple, devoting himself in his leisure hours to the work of
explaining and urging the case of the negro-slave. I incline
to think that he was acquainted with Zachary Macaulay in
the West Indies, for like other colonists he visited Jamaica
and the colonies very often in the course of professional
duty, and I do not recollect any time of my life that we were
not more or less intimate with the Macaulays. I fancy too,
that through Macaulay he became intimate with Mr. Wilber-
foree; however this may be, his work containing the “Deline-
ation of Slavery” had a considerable sale, and assisted no
doubt to establish, on unchangeable grounds, his domestic
intimacy with both these well-known families. It led
ultimately to his union with Mr. Wilberforce’s sister, Mrs.
Clark, the widow of a clergyman. To the best of my recol-
lection this marriage took place very early in the present
century, but I cannot assign the exact date, nor is it of
any consequence, as there was no issue of the marriage.
But a sketch of the second Mrs. Stephen ought not to be
omitted. She was at once the most excellent woman in her
way that ever existed, and yet with all this, in manner and
deportment she was very eccentric, and peculiar to the
extent of comicality. She partook of her brother’s high
tone of religious feeling and duty, but she was altogether
wanting in that knowledge of society in which her brother’s
lively wit originated; and instead of feeling any deference
to its habits and ideas, she, like some other religious parties
I could mention of the present day, often exhibited
an uncharitable estimate of all she came in contact with,
and seemed to regard them as sinners lost beyond redemption;
in other words, -she was, as far as I could make her out, for I
was only one-and-twenty when she died, a thorough Calvinist.
But she was consistent and self-denying to a most singular
extent; she had a private fortune settled upon herself, of
between three and four hundred pounds per annum, but all
this she punctiliously devoted to the poor, and considered
herself compelled by Christian charity to limit her private
expenditure to ten pounds per annum; in consequence of


this, she often paraded Clapham in rags and tatters, and
dressed literally “unfit to he seen.” On one occasion she was
on a visit to the Eev. T. Gisborne at his seat, Toxall Lodge,
where a large party was assembled; she came down to the
drawing-room, of course, fully dressed, as was then the
universal fashion; but such was the appearance of her dress,
that Mr. Gisborne, who never could forbear a practical joke,
stepped behind her as she left the room, and putting his
fingers into the skirt behind, tore it open from the top to
the bottom, saying exultingly, “now Mrs. Stephen, you
must purchase a new dress.” She did nothing of the kind,
but stitched it together again, and re-appeared in it the
following day. She was very intimate with Hannah More,
and aspired greatly to her literary fame. She was also
familiarly acquainted with Mrs. Siddous, and many other
literary ladies ; but a single fact will acquit her of more
learning than became a female, for she made me and my two
sisters, while still under seven years of age, read Butler’s
Analogy to her daily ; she understood it no more than we,
as we speedily discovered; but two chapters were appointed
for daily study and explanation; so we soon acquired a just
perception of her powers of tuition, by skipping alternate
passages that seemed more unintelligible than the rest, and
thus expediting our release for the day, for she did not even
once detect this schoolboy invention, so far as we could
discover. She was in person a fine majestic woman, but
without any beauty of feature, and some sternness of
expression. She was also not only charitable in the extreme,
but wholly destitute of any of the usual weakness of the
sex. One winter she fell down upon an icy path, on
Clapham Common, and a gentleman seeing her fall, hurried
to her assistance, and promptly endeavoured to raise her
up, so as to enable her to resume a standing postion. “]N r o,
sir, that won’t do, for I have broken my leg, but I shall
be obliged to you to go to my house, which is a short
way off, and order my carriage.” A brighter example of
patient endurance could scarcely have been given, but the
accident confined her for many weeks. There was one
peculiarity about her that well deserves particular attention.
She had that air of self-possession, untainted with the


slightest tinge of arrogance, that is the foundation of good
breeding. She seemed at home in all society, high or low,
vulgar or refined, and never at a loss to join its conversation,
so long as it was conducted with propriety and decorum.
Her brother, Mr. Wilberforce, had the same valuable
faculty, but he was more remarkable for his ready wit,
and therefore such self-adjustment to the tone of others
was not so much a habit of principle; but with Mrs. Stephen
it was founded, as I really believe, on the high principle of
charity that is the real spirit of Christianity. She -wished
to consult the tastes and even the prejudices of every class
on all occasions that it was not improper to do so, though
nobody could be more firm in repudiating error, where
ignorance could not be pleaded for the mistake. The edu-
cation of my sisters and my female cousins in their juvenile
years was very much entrusted to her, and it was on this
point of self-possession that she excelled in her instruction.
In matters of mere accomplishment, such as drawing, music,
or dancing, she was too uninformed to teach others ; but
in conversation or drawing-room intercourse of all kinds
she was fluent and refined. She perfectly understood the
difference between attractive freedom and unbecoming
license, and to enable the girls to understand it like herself,
she compelled them habitually to join in the conversation of
the dinner table at home ; where it touched literary character,
she would suggest points for discussion on subjects, and
authorities by which they might.guide their judgment; if the
current events of the day formed the subject of discussion,
she would confine it to such details as necessarily implied
accuracy of report; and I need scarcely add, that in every
case in which the details touched upon matters of feminine
decorum, she would not allow conversation to proceed. The
same principle guided her in her explanations of personal
propriety; she never checked the laugh or even the frolic
of the young ladies; she never objected, as many did, when
the return of peace introduced among other things, the
attitudenizing of the waltz, and other Parisian freedoms; but
whenever in the slightest degree they degenerated into
romping, she would recall the girl to her side and forbid
her to leave it for the rest of the evening, careless of what


might be said, and with perfect indiiferenco to the incon-
venience she might occasion.
Some perhaps may think such daily check to be injudicious,
others may deem it severe; I can only add, as regards its
fruits, that more refined and more amiable and cheerful girls
were rarely met with than those who generally formed the
Clapham parties, whether at the table or in the dance, nor
more fortunate successors in conjugal alliance. Whether or
not such a course of education is nevertheless undesirable,
I leave to the consideration of those whom it more imme-
diately concerns, but I believe I may truly say, that in
the case of female education, it is of the highest moment
to qualify the pupil by initiating her in the domestic inter-
course and conversation of the family table, and teaching
her practically to understand the nature of decorum in
respect to habitual association with the other sox ; if well
instructed so far, she will rarely turn out in .after life to bo
either a flirt or a prude, or be plagued till death with a fool
for a husband.
Now that he was comparatively an idle man, my father
became an habitual labourer in the- charitable field, and was
of great service, first in the abolition of the slave trade, and
then of slavery itself; indeed, I may say, and that from
personal knowledge, that Mr. Macaulay and my father
between them, revised all the statements that emanated from
authority at anti-slavery meetings as colonial; their personal
knowledge of most of the colonies enabling them to do so
with accuracy. Of course they attended most of the anti-
slavery meetings of the societies, and spared no effort to
stimulate the public feeling in the same direction. The
slave-trade, so far as regarded the legitimate shipment of
slaves from Africa to the British Colonies, was abolished in
the year 1807, when I was still a school-boy and knew
nothing about it; through the activity of Brougham, a still
stronger measure was passed in 1811, when slave-trading was
declared to be felonious. But although these decided
measures at once displayed and for a time satisfied the
public sympathy, I must confess my surprise when I found,
as I did, that as regarded the poor slave himself, he had
almost ceased to be an object of interest; but that the


associated bodies who met almost weekly to devise .plans
of amelioration and relief, had long since abandoned all
public agitation, and were desponding of success beyond
temporary mitigation of the hardships and cruelties under
which they suffered ; but here I must begin a new chapter,
for though it is my wish to abbreviate my remarks upon it
to the utmost possible extent, I also wish on this subject
to be perfectly accurate, even in details.
CHAPTER II.
Maxt societies existed at this time, having for their
avowed object slave emancipation ; of these the Anti-Slavery
Society in London was the principal. Such societies
assembled together once a year at some public room, to
make a display of their professions and of their support,
which in two or three instances was large and powerful;
but it could not be disguised that very little was done, and
year after year passed with scarcely a public effort being
attempted. Wilberforce, Stephen, Clarkson, and Macaulay
exhibited the gradually approaching feebleness of age, so
that, in fact, early in the second decade of this century, I
think about the year 1821, Wilberforce resigned the lead
of the party into the hands of Sir Eowell Buxton. My
father also felt himself too aged, and probably too depressed
to prosecute what he began to consider as a hopeless case ;
nor is there any doubt that the Radical movement, then
at its height, forbade all agitation by that high church party
by which the benevolent societies of the day were chiefly
supported. Such was the state of things at the time when
I was called upon, by very peculiar circumstances, to take
an active part in slave emancipation. From time to time
I had taken on myself to perform the office of my father’s
clerk in all colonial matters. I used to copy as well as
arrange his papers in reference to West Indian matters, and


w.i3 thus become well informed on the abstract question,
as well as on the details of evidence. This gave me a
personal acquaintance with all the eminent men who took
an active part in promoting the same object, and thus
commenced an intimacy with Buxton, which lasted all his
life. In the session of 1820, there came home from the
Mauritius, Mr. and his family. He had been chief
of police in the island, and he brought to Buxton such a
dreadful statement, not only of the slavery, but of the slave-
trade existing there, that it was obviously absurd to bring it
before the public, except upon indisputable evidence; and
the more so because it challenged Sir Eobert Farquar, who
was in Parliament and just returned from the Government of
the Mauritius, with being himself one of the principal
offenders.
Buxton was one of those bold men who cared for nothing
when in the path of duty. He consulted me as to his proper
course, and I believe at the same time he consulted my
father and Macaulay; on one point we all agreed, whatever
the real facts might be. There was enough stated to justify
enquiry, and Buxton must therefore move for it. He did so,
and obtained his object, the House determining at the same
time to retain me as the conductor of it. I was not a
stranger to many in the House, as I had been retained as an
agent in the prosecution of the Queen; but I felt it due to
my father’s reputation to insist upon the retainer nftt being
pecuniary.
It happened, fortunately, that the 56th regiment had
recently returned from the Mauritius, and was then stationed
at Hull; so that there was immediate opportunity of arriving
at a just estimate of the evidence hereafter to be obtained.
I determined at once to examine the officers and men, so that
we might obtain a probable case before the session concluded.
I obtained the usual order of Parliament, and proceeded to
Hull. I forget now who was the commanding officer, but he
was a foolish man, whoever he was; for his idea of the proper
mode of proceeding was to muster the men on parade, and
there subject them to such examination as I might deem
necessary. He would not allow a single man to come to my
inn, that I might take down in writing what he had to say.


I believe that it was sympathy with Sir Eobert Farquar,
rather than enmity to the cause that led him into this folly;
however, I easily cured him of it by carrying on a tedious
examination of the first man he called from the ranks,
and when the farce had continued for an hour, he found
it expedient to give way, and allow the men to be examined
at my private room at the hotel; and terrible indeed were
the facts they narrated; I doubt if such a dreadful tale
has ever before or since reached the public ear, and for
the most part upon the evidence of disinterested eye-
witnesses. There was amply sufficient not only to satisfy
the Government of the truth of the charges, but to vindicate
a Bill for the emancipation of every slave in the British
dominions, and to this it ultimately led. The immediate
course taken by the Government was to send commissioners
to the Mauritius to prosecute enquiry there, and meantime
1 was ordered by the House of Commons to prosecute the
same enquiry of every witness who could be discovered
in England. These orders were carried out. The evidence
thus taken largely exceeded a hundred names. I have it
still in my possession, for, pending the enquiry, Sir Eobert
Farquar died, of course there was no longer any
probability of a prosecution following; for the charge pre-
ferred in the house by Sir Fowell Buxton, was virtually
this, that Sir Eobert had, while governor, carried on a
considerable trade in slaves, for the cultivation of his own
land in the Mauritius. The best proof in such cases is
found in statistics. The number of slaves in the Mauritius
was, on the average, sixty thousand, and we obtained proof
that this number had been replaced three times by the
Seychelles trade since the colony came into our possession;
so great was the mortality .occasioned by starvation and
labour, irrespective of the frequent murders incident to
the system. The Mauritius enquiry lasted for some time,
and eventually terminated in the emancipation of every slave
who could establish the date of his arrival to be subsequent
to the surrender of the colony ; but the cases were very
few in which it was possible to do so, in such a manner
as would be admissible according to the rules of evidence.
The difficulty was, however, at last surmounted, by the


determination o£ slavery throughout the British dominions.
I resolved, from that time, to devote all my energies to the
cause of abolition. My own personal share in this particular
part of the case terminated with the close of the evidence,
hut I was much urged to publish it, and show to the world
the truth of the case in a form, which even the West Indians
could not withstand. I had, however, my own scheme for
doing this, and doing it effectually, and I own that, with the
exception of some of the Anti-slavery Committee, and the
practised leaders of the case, I had no confidence in the
activity of the members, or in their political courage or
power. Mr. Wilberforce, as I* have stated, had already
resigned the lead of the party; Mr. Zachary Macaulay was
gradually sinking into the feebleness of age; Mr. Fowell
Buxton (as he was then) was indeed a man of determined
character, and a speaker of much power; but he had such a
difficult card to play as it was, that I could not trust him
with mine; especially as I acknowledge, somewhat sadly, to
have been the case, because in the anti-slavery speeches which
I was called upon to deliver occasionally, I had betrayed too
much of the vehemence of our race, and was therefore always
distrusted for my prudence by the Anti-slavery Committee;
■though granted free access to all their proceedings, yet I did
not like to thrust myself forward in any way that implied
presumption, for I was still little more than a schoolboy of
thirty at the time.
It was under these circumstances that I determined to
introduce myself to Daniel O’Connell, and confer with him
on the expediency of following his example of agitation;
of the result I will speak hereafter, but in the meantime,
I ought perhaps to supply a few further particulars of my
own immediate generation, so that my Australian relatives
may know from authority the connection which subsists
between them, and the equally numerous descendants in the
mother country. I have already stated that Mrs. Stephen,
my father’s second wife, died in 1815, leaving no issue; he
had, as I have said, four sons and two daughters to occupy
his attention, and, as regarded most of us, to provide for
our wants.
We were all Cambridge men. William, the eldest, was
a clergyman; he kept his terms at St. John’s College, and


there passed through the usual degrees. Of his early days
I know nothing, not having the good fortune to have been so
early in the field; and the last sixty years of his life were
spent between his two livings, one at Bledlow, in Bucking-
hamshire, and the other at Stagsden, in Bedfordshire. He
married Miss Grace, the daughter of a country gentleman of
highly respectable family, but they had no children, and
both are now gone to another world, after sixty years
incumbency; perhaps there is no similar instance of clerical
ongevity in the country.
Henry, my father’s second son, was also at Cambridge and
at Bt. John’s College; but he took no degree, for he was
rather wild, and at the end of his second year, my father
having heard of this, determined to judge for himself. With
his usual sense of justice, he started off on the instant for
Cambridge, and as soon as the coach arrived, made for
Henry’s rooms; he found, no doubt, sufficient evidence of
dissipation, though he did not find his son, who happened to
be out at a coursing match; hour after hour my father
waited his return till about five o’clock, and by way of
salutation, drily announced the paternal decree, that to
London the following day he must depart, and make up his
baggage meantime. Henry did as he was commanded, but
he never entirely got over this quasi-banishment from Cam-
bridge.
Henry nevertheless turned out to be a very talented man;
as a lawyer he was in some respects considered the ablest of
the day. He studied special pleading under Mr. Marriat,
of Lincoln’s Inn Fields, who was then considered the leading
man in that department of the law; but he was in after times
succeeded by Henry Stephen with far more distinguished
reputation; and ultimately he was called to the bar in the
hope, which turned out not to be fallacious, that he would
ultimately rise to the bench. He remained a judge of the
King’s Bench for exactly four and twenty hours, when he
sent in his resignation to Lord Lyndhurst before he was
gazetted, and for a reason that will scarcely be intelligible to
modern barristers: “ That on self-examination, he felt it
would be impossible for him ever to pass a capital sentence
upon a criminal, however great and certain his guilt.” Lord


Lyndhurst expostulated in vain, but Henry was a true
Stephen in determination, and Lord Lyndhurst then gave
him his choice of the new courts in bankruptcy about to be
opened; Henry chose Bristol, and remained there till his
death. He had married his cousin, Mary Morison, by whom
he had a son, James Stephen, who is still, I believe, a judge
of one of the inferior courts in the country, but I have heard
nothing of him beyond this for five and twenty years, and
cannot therefore speak with accuracy. Henry and his wife
were domiciled with my father, and she was in fact his house-
keeper from Mrs. Stephen’s death, in 1815, till he died.
James, the third son, afterwards the Right Honourable
Sir James Stephen, was educated at Trinity Hall, Cambridge,
and went out in law, as we used to term it, so of course his
name does not appear in the academical lists of the Univer-
sity ; but he was a man of unquestionable talent, though not
known to the world, either as a classic or as a mathematician.
Seldom, however, has a man more distinguished himself by
his familiarity with literary records, as- well as by political
character and life, than Sir James Stephen. In his early
days he was remarkably shy, and somewhat timid. I was at
the same schools with him for about five years, and had
ample opportunity, though five years younger than himself,
of learning his peculiar character. He practised in the first
instance at the Equity Bar, and continued a member of it
throughout his life; but he did not continue a practitioner
beyond a few years, for he was offered the appointment of
Counsel to the Board of Trade; at first it was merely a
consulting retainer; but he showed himself so familiar with
every subject, and so safe an adviser, that eventually they
consulted him almost exclusively on colonial affairs, and
invited him to desert his profession and become a permanent
Secretary of State for the colonies. Of course the position
was subordinate to that usually known as the Secretary of
State, when it is spoken of as the Colonial Secretaryship; but
on the other hand, being a permanent appointment, he would
not retire upon any change of government, and Sir James
had no expectation of ever realising at the bar an equally
profitable return; but it had another peculiarity attached to
it, which is rarely violated by any men high in office: they


must take no active part in political life without formal
resignation; such at least was the general understanding in
those days, and I believe it still exists. Hence, Sir James
was precluded, at least in his own estimation, from taking
any part whatever in the great question of the abolition of
slavery. Hence, I too was precluded from all private com-
munication with him, and to a certain extent it was forbidden
in the general conversation of the family. lam the more
anxious to state this, because Mr. Greville, in his “ Memoirs,”
represents my brother as being an active man in the anti-
slavery proceedings.
He may have mistaken him for my father, or for myself;
or it is possible that he may intend no more than that he was
a conspicuous member of the anti-slavery party; but intimate
as I was with all who belonged to it, I do not remember a
single instance of his taking a part or making a suggestion
in any branch of the subject, on any public occasion; indeed,
in his peculiar position, it would have been something like a
breach of honour to have moved in it in any way not strictly
official. He married Miss Jane Venn, the daughter of the
Eev. H. Venn, rector of Clapham, and the representative of
an old and well-known family. I believe that for seven
successive generations they have been clergymen of the
Church of England. Lady Stephen is still alive, and, if Ido
not mistake, at the advanced age of eighty-four.* They had a
large family, all of whom have been called to the bar. Sir
James was distinguished as an author by his Political Essays.
They had too much of the novelty of the day to suit my taste,
nor do I think they were much read. He acted for a time
as Professor of History at the East India College; but it was
in his character of Colonial Secretary of State that he was
best known, till at length he acquired the nick-name of King
of the Colonies, a little assisted perhaps, hy a sort of a
pseudo-sketching of official manner to colonial interviewers,
for James was by habit very reserved and cautious in his
intercourse with strangers of this character, though they
were at that time gentlemen of more consideration than they
•usually are at present. He was also an occasional writer for
* She died since these pages were written.


the “Edinburgh Review,” which was then the leading
periodical of the day. Fitz-James Stephen, a barrister
of modern times, and also the eldest son of Sir James,
is sometimes confounded with him. His eldest son,
Herbert, died while on a tour on the continent, I think at
the age of four or five and twenty, perhaps a year younger,
and there was a remarkable circumstance about the case
which justifies allusion to it. He had been long under
medical treatment, and by medical advice undertook the
tour. The case, as it was understood in the family, was
to all appearance one of extreme debility without any visible
cause ; but his stature was enormous, and said to nearly
approach seven feet. It was certainly the fact that his
altitude was still yearly increasing, notwithstanding his age;
and I have heard from some of his family, that he still
continued to grow to the extent of two inches during the
last year of his life. I never heard of a similar case, and I
am quite unable to say whether such preternatural growth
is, in its continuance through adult age, met with as an
occasional disease, though we read of extraordinary giants
who do enjoy good health. Leslie Stephen, the well-known
author and journalist, was another son of James, and married
Miss Thackeray, a daughter of the novelist. My sisters, of
whom only one survives, were both married at the early age of
seventeen; one to a barrister, of the name of Garratt, who was
a Cambridge man, and second wrangler, as well as the first
Smith’s prizeman of his year ; the other married a barrister
who was senior wrangler of his year. He never practised at
the bar; his name was Thomas Edward Dicey, but he was
very retired in his habits, and lived the life of a country
gentleman. My sister Garratt is no more; Mrs. Dicey
is still alive, and at the advanced age of seventy-nine, so far
as I can judge from my English correspondence, in which
she takes a large share, as animated and nearly as 1 active
as ever ; it is only three or four years ago, by way of a
frolic, she went to Algiers to spend the long vacation there ;
and returned to England all the better for her excursion !
Not many ladies of her age, and perhaps not many gentle-
men would have joined her on such a frolic; but though


slight in form, she has all her life exhibited, similar
energy and activity. Her youngest son, Prank Stephen,
accompanied her, and was her only companion and pro-
tection ; no wonder that she is still alive and capable of
much effort, though her age verges upon eighty.
Dr. Stephen, the eldest brother of my father, died about
the year 1807, leaving, so far as I know, but one son and five
daughters. The son died in India, when he had obtained the
rank of captain in the engineer service. I know but little
of the family, but most of them married clergymen, and
except that one of them, as I have already stated, was
remarkable for the beauty of her person I never heard
of any incident occurring in that branch of the family worth
recording; for their lives were spent as a clergyman’s life
ought to be spent, in discharging the humble duties of a
clerical home. Their accomplishments and intelligence, no
less than their religious education, well adapted them for
such occupation, and to their dying day I can add that those
of them whom I have named did discharge them in a way
to acquire general love and respect.
It may be assumed from the subsequent career of almost
every member of the family, that their early education, not
only was not neglected, but was entrusted to competent and
judicious tutors. If I except myself, Ido not know a single
instance in the last seventy years in which numerous as it is,
man or woman belonging to it can be mentioned who has
been found guilty of any act to call for a reproof from a
judicial court. But of course I refer only to the branch
of the family settled in England, as I do not profess to
write of matters beyond my own personal acquaintance,
except where they are of public notoriety, and I and my
family habitually resided in England from 1797 to 1855.
My grandfather certainly received, not only reproof, but
punishment; but the subsequent proceedings of the Legis-
lature in adopting the very measure which his libel aspired
to effect, shows that the publication of it, though premature,
was not only not criminal but meritorious. As for myself,
the only offence that I ever committed was too trifling to
record. The judges, however, could not forbear laughing
when they heard the particulars of the case, and let me off


on entering into my own recognizances to keep the peace, so
it is clear they did not see much iniquity in the transaction.
What led to the general respectability of our future lives,
in a family numbering above a hundred, was undoubtedly tlm
religious discipline to which I believe all were subjected, at
once gentle and firm. We belong to the Established Protes-
tant Church, and our teachers were for the most part clergy-
men connected with it; names that are now almost forgotten,
but which should be gratefully remembered by their many
pupils, were then familiar to us by their writings, no less
than by personal intercourse. Mr. Simeon, Dr. Dealtry, Mr.
Venn, Eowland Hill, and Mr. Daniel Wilson were con-
spicuous in the list. Those who are of the same generation
as myself will have no difficulty in adding many to the
number, and many perhaps will blame me for the omission of
them; but on such a subject I dare not write from hearsay.
It was a peculiarity of most of these worthy men, that while
they were thoroughly attached to Protestant doctrine, and
sound expositors of it, they were all thoroughly impressed
with the conviction that the Church of England service was
itself the best expositor, except perhaps in reference to the
Athanasian Creed, which they never read when it could be
avoided. Two or three of them, it is true, like Eowland
Hill, would not be limited by the forms of rituality, and left
the church; but such a decided expression of dissatisfaction
was very rare.
Eowland Hill was the brother of Lord Hill, the celebrated
Peninsular General. He was a singular man; he affected an
almost domestic familiarity with his congregation. On one
Sunday, Mrs. Hill, overcome by the heat, fell asleep during
his sermon; he observed it, and addressing another lady in
the same seat, requested her to awaken his wife! She did so
accordingly. Eor this offence, Mrs. Hill administered due
chastisement, and having done so, and made him promise
never to offend in that way again, she went to church the
following Sunday in peace. But alas! your evangelical
clergymen, who think it a sin to preach for less than an hour r
have no idea what it is to listen! and again Mrs. Hill fell
asleep, and again Eowland Hill interposed, “ Don’t aw'ake
i'V’-h Hill; I promised never to do so again.” 1 don’t envy


him his dinner that Sunday. Tet Eowland Hill was an
amiable as wejl as a good man.
Education was with these men a topic frequently selected
for the pulpit, and hence parents as well as children were
taught to consider it a religious duty of the highest practical
importance. I own that to myself the syllogism has always
appeared irresistible; “Thou shalt do no murder,” “Thou
shalt not steal.” Murder and robbery, then, are acts of
disobedience to G-od; but who is God? Why must I obey
Him? There cannot exist a doubt that to answer these
natural questions the child must be taught, as the earliest
step of education, to know the Creator, as far as human
means avail to teach him, and this is a knowledge which lies
at the very root of all secular intelligence, and therefore as
inseparable from scientific study as mathematics are from
astronomical investigation. There can be no doubt that thus to
make a student of a young believer, is virtually to invite him
into the philosophical school of atheism; but the judicious
teacher never loses sight of the important maxim that all
knowledge is of God; and to be received from Him, not as
explained to the conviction of our understanding, but as a
matter of implicit faith in the truth of that Book which He
calls His own Word —the Bible; and in this fundamental
theory all Christians are, and always have been, agreed. And
indeed, to hold otherwise is a platitude, I might say a plain
absurdity, for how can any man exhibit faith in any matter
which is proved to the necessary conviction of his rational
faculties ? Eaith then ceases, because knowledge begins; and
so far from its being the will of God that knowledge should
be accessible to man, beyond the extent to which He has
graciously revealed His will, His pleasure was that the very
means of knowledge should be withheld from him at his
creation, and prohibited to him at the very moment that he
was ushered into the world from Paradise. And so they are
still, for while Heaven is revealed to him as the place of his
eternal habitation, if his faith in God and Christ justifies the
expectation of his reaching it, no other means are extended
to him of gaining this promised destination, but a mainte-
nance to the end of unfailing and constant faith; and any
process which endangers it, or supersedes it, cannot be


deemed other than a blast from hell. Such were the
doctrines held by the reverend gentleman whom I have
named, and many others whom I could name; and such I
believe to be the doctrines of sincere Christians for many
centuries back, if not from the death of Christ. These
doctrines were inculcated from time to time with persevering
zeal, and yet with mildness, benevolence, and an eloquence
that often seemed the immediate gift of heaven. There was
none of that fury in the pulpit which implies ignorance,
where it is not the result of insanity; none of that Hiber-
nian rage which consigns to damnation all that deny the
immediate inspiration of the surpliced orator; none of that
vulgar impudence which resents all questions of the logical
consistency of what is termed rationality, and endeavours,
where it cannot convince, to bully an opponent into popular
folly.
In modern times, I have seen a clergyman literally
stamping and dancing on the pulpit floor, and as I believe
unconsciously to himself; though as most people would say,
in affectation of an earnestness which he did not feel; I
have heard a man sighing and weeping and grimacing in the
pulpit, with the manner and tone, of a well whipped boy of
ten years ; seeking in this manner to persuade when his
minatory objurgations fail of effect, except to disgust his
hearers. All such vulgar nonsense was utterly excluded
from the polished schools that flourished in the days of our
fathers ; yet I do believe that true evangelical principle was
never more abundant and never disseminated with more
effect than it was then; when the British and Foreign Bible
Society originated, and succeeded, in spite of opposition and
resistance, so that now it circulates millions of copies per
annum, though at its commencement it could scarcely main-
tain existence.
In all the schools with which I was acquainted, and I was
either at a public or a private school with my brother James
nearly all my early days from the age of six years, religious
education commenced daily the work of the pupil. It was
neither formal nor tedious, but consisted simply of a prayer
for guidance and protection through the day, preluded by a
brief explanation of the duty, and followed by a short


interrogation of the younger pupils as to the meaning which
they attached to the teacher’s explanation. On Sundays the
course was more detailed, and included the repetition of the
catechism, and an inquiry how far and in what sense the
children understood it. The limited character of such
instruction as this, though sufficient to lead the studious
mind to inquiry, precluded the possibility of sectarian
excitement; nor do I recollect an instance of it; the whole
form of proceeding rarely occupied half-an-hour a day, and
consequently created no monopoly of time of which any
parent could reasonably complain; the result certainly was,
in every school where I was pupil, that while the boys were
as full of fun and frolic as other boys, and sometimes of a
little fighting too, I cannot recollect an instance of that
vulgar wildness of conduct that often marks even the
educated man, by his indecency and insubordination to
common principle. I certainly do remember one case of
this description, in which my cousin, Sir Alfred Stephen,
the late Chief Justice of New South Wales, was guilty with
myself, and I was perhaps more to blame than my cousin,
because lam some years his senior; we set fire to the roof
of the venerable old church at Bledlow, one of my brother’s
livings, in order to get at a hive of honey deposited there
by wild bees!
I acknowledge that it has often been my wish, especially
since ‘I came to this uncivilised country twenty years ago,
that I could introduce into it a more simple and effective
system of religious education than has hitherto prevailed
here; and so far as example goes, I ha ye for many years,,
indeed as long as I was equal to the effort, tried to carry it
out by keeping a gratuitous daily school, combining religious
principle and secular instruction, in my own house; it has-
answered very well, so far as it went, but I received no
support or assistance, and between seventy-five and eighty
the most active man, when unaided, can do but little, and
therefore I reluctantly gave it up. All the family 0 f
Stephen had one advantage of no slight importance, in the
intellectual character not only of the ladies of their family,,
but of the circle in which they moved. It was a literary
rather than a fashionable circle, and excepting Hannah


More and Mrs. Siddons, I do not recollect that it was
frequented by any other remarkable women; but never-
theless the literature of the day had the highest place in
the drawing-room, and formed a great attraction to its usual
society; this, no doubt, contributed largely to the intro-
duction of its young visitors to a high tone of social
intercourse, as well as of social decorum.
In deprecating the passion and wild absurdities of some of
our extempore preachers, I am far from denying its power
where the speaker is a man of talent, and at the pains of
preparing and writing down his sermon previously; then
there is little risk of his being betrayed into indecent license
or childish sentiment. Tor many years of my life I was in
the habit of hearing Charles Simeon, of King’s College, who
never preached except extempore; but I have reason to
believe, from my intimate acquaintance with his habits, that
his extempore preaching, like Tom Macaulay’s platform
oratory, was most studiously prepared. Such, however, was
the impressive character, that to this hour I remember, as if
it occurred yesterday, a scene when he was preaching in the
village of Stapleford, near Cambridge, more than seventy
years ago. Stapleford belonged to Lord Francis Osborne,
who resided there during the New Market season. Lord
Francis was Lord of the Manor, and on Sunday following the
New Market week, he was the sole occupier of the manorial
pew, close to the pulpit. Simeon was expounding the nature
of the Satanic possession, of which so many instances are
given in the New Testament, as figurative of the habitual
sinfulness of man, and in his earnestness adopted a very
personal illustration.- “The devil,” he said, “in the form of
some favourite sin, occupies us all; he is (extending his arm
and hand to different parts of the church) in that pew, and
in that pew, and in that pew, ‘ aye, and in that pew,’ ” point-
ing downwards to the manorial seat where Lord Francis was
looking up in amazement, wondering what would come next,
for unfortunately he had lost £5,000 at New Market on the’
previous Thursday, and the circumstance was notorious in
Cambridge, as well as his gambling habits; he was no
favourite at Stapleford, and a laugh in church at his expense
was provoked in spite of decorum. Daniel Wilson was


another clergyman whom I heard for many years, when he
habitually preached at St. John’s Chapel, Bedford Eow. He
too preached extempore, and he certainly was a very able
man. He afterwards became Bishop of Calcutta. Yet
Daniel Wilson was on one occasion guilty of an indecorum
in the pulpit, which was visited in a manner he little expected.
Such was the power of the man, that it was reckoned that
the usual number of his communicants on the administration
of the Sacrament exceeded three hundred and fifty; the
average number of the congregation was supposed to be
more than a thousand, and consequently very many of it
were habitually absent from the table, notwithstanding
Wilson’s repeated addresses on the subject. This occasioned
him great annoyance. I was present one Sunday when he
most emphatically addressed his congregation on the subject,
and gradually worked himself to such excitement, that he
wound up his address in this manner: “Let me see who
dare offer such an insult to his Maker. I will mark the
men who dare turn their backs on the altar of their Maker.”
The consequence was that nearly all rose from their seats
and left the church, there remaining only twenty or thirty
communicants to receive the Sacrament as usual! It is right
to add that it was generally reported that in the evening
he amply apologised for his intemperance. I was not
present myself, but from my personal knowledge of the
man, for I knew him well, I entirely believe it, and certainly
I never knew him guilty of any repetition of such indecorum.
There was another incident in which a reverend gentleman,
but not a minister of the Church of England, though I
believe educated at one of our Universities, the Eev. Mr.
Stratton, of Paddington Chapel, was guilty of thoughtlessness,
the too frequent fruit of extempore preaching. In point
of persuasive eloquence and affecting oratory, I never in all
my life heard any man equal to Mr. Stratton. I often heard
him, but it was one of, those stolen enjoyments, in which
I was af Aid to indulge habitually, lest I should be. taken
for a deserter from the church ; a stigma that would have
materially affected my anti-slavery popularity and move-
ments; but my estimate of the man will be appreciated,
when I add that it was only in Stratton’s well-filled chapel,


that I ever saw or heard of on good authority, a congregation
in tears. The topic, if I remember right, was the death
of an impenitent sinner, well-known to most of his con-
gregation. What excited my notice was the silent withdrawal
of some half-dozen members of the congregation successively.
I looked round the seats, and saw that many of them in
every part of the chapel were visibly disturbed; some were
sighing, and several were wiping away their tears with their
handkerchiefs; and nearly all were hanging their heads down
to conceal their faces from the rest; it was a sad sight,
such as I shall never forget, and well displayed the power
of the man; but to return to the act of thoughtlessness.
He was wishing to illustrate the self-reproach that usually
followed some habitual course of folly, when the offending
party recovered his self-control, and he exclaimed, “I would
rather be a slave in Jamaica than the slave of habits like
these.” It so happened, that the very next morning,
Stratton entered the omnibus to the city, in which I was
seated, and took his place opposite to me, when I introduced
myself to him as one of his occasional hearers, and said
to him, “You told us yesterday that you would rather be
a slave in Jamaica than habitually addicted to certain vicious
habits. Were you ever in Jamaica ? ” He replied, in a very
cautious manner, “That he never had been, but that in these
days nobody could very well be ignorant of the subject. I
replied, “ Excuse my freedom, but I think you know nothing
about it.” “Then have the goodness to enlighten me.”
And accordingly I sent him some recent anti-slavery
reports. I went next Sunday to hear him, and to my
surprise and gratification, he delivered an anti-slavery
sermon, which he preluded with a statement of our late
omnibus conversation, and wound up with a benevolent
appeal to the sympathy of his congregation, that received
a most liberal response. I might add much to the same
effect from personal experience; but my own blunders and
intemperance as a platform speaker would not be so in-
structive as these casual reminiscences of able and well-
known men in the religious profession ; and indeed are more
excusable, for I was too often compelled to address an
audience on ten minutes’ notice, and have long discovered the


truth, however humiliating, that all speechifying of the kind
is of no practical value unless to fill up an interval of time.
I have heard the ablest men of this reputation, Brougham,
and O’Connell, and Burdett among the rest. Here and
there it might be, that a remark told because strongly or
pointedly expressed; now and then a fanciful illustration
would amuse, or a ludicrous comparison would excite a laugh,
and sometimes weak minds, especially in the case of women,
might he taken by a pretended tear or a plaintive whine ;
but for permanent, practical effect, no rhetoric, whether
natural or affected, is of the slightest use, and but very
seldom credited with sincerity. Any person who carefully
studies the oratory of Pitt, or Burke, or Pox, will at once
perceive, if he is a real student, that their most powerful
addresses to the House were generally on subjects not
reducible to the influence or even to the comprehension of
excited passion ; it was less so in the days of Democrates and
Cicero, though even in those times, there is about the orations
of both of them, and especially of Cicero, a refinement of
utterance and tone that implies much quiet preparation;
indeed, his lectures on oratory exhibit an anxiety to cultivate
self-control to an extent that it is improbable he should
himself have lost the art of self-possession. It is curious
how rarely orators of this kind only acquire a hold upon
parliamentary attention; in modern times, the man likely to
have done so was George Thomson, one of the parties that I
had employed in the work of anti-slavery agitation. He was
so fluent that his words seemed to flow in a continued stream,
and Brougham told me, after hearing him, “ that he was
worth going fifty miles to hear;” yet he was uneducated, and
destitute of all opportunity of supplying the want of educa-
tion. Tom Macaulay, as he was usually called, also broke
down altogether in the House, in respect of the purpose for
which he was wanted. 1 have already observed that those
“Political Essays” which he delivered on the Eeform Bill were
a brilliant exhibition of talent, and he was wanted by the
Government of the day to act as their habitual defender in
Parliament on every emergency that accidentally occurred.
His talent, however, did not exhibit itself in this way to
justify the expectation that he would sustain the confidence


which his reform speeches had gained for him: and conse-
quently he absented himself from his place in all matters of
minor importance. Government remonstrated with him; he
received the remonstrance with indifference, and intimated in
reply his readiness to resign his post whenever it was desired.
This, however, did not suit the Government policy, and thus
originated his appointment in India, and his abandonment for
ever of political speculation after his three years’ service
there. I know this upon authority of the must unques-
tionable value. In truth, the House of Commons has
invariably shown a reluctance to listen to the oratory of
platform speeches amounting to contempt, and hence the
explanation of the silence of such men in debate, after they
have been favoured on their first appearance with a quiet
and somewhat credulous goodwill.
I cannot supply even an imperfect list of the family of my
uncle John, for they have, from the beginning of the century
to the present day, been, so far as I know, domiciled in one
or other of these colonies, where many of them have died,
and others have married, and have been succeeded by
numerous children. The only one amongst them with whom
I became intimately acquainted is the late judge, Sir Alfred
Stephen. Like all his relatives he became a barrister, and
showed himself likely to succeed when still a very young
man; but the field was so well filled at home that he soon
emigrated, and rejoined his friends. His career in these
colonies has been so conspicuous and honourable, that it is
quite superfluous to notice it. I see but little of him, as I
never leave the colony, and am therefore unable to enlarge
upon the subject, even were it decorous under these circum-
stances to do so. I trust that he will yet long survive to the
credit as well as the comfort of his family.
My aunt Milner never had any family. My aunt Parish
had six children but they all died, with the exception of their
eldest son, in their minorities; and even he, though he lived
to prove himself an able and eminent surgeon, died before his
mother, leaving no issue. His widow afterwards married a
second husband of the name of Jones, and I believe he is
practising and distinguished as a surgeon at Epsom in
Surrey, but I never saw him, and am wholly a stranger to his


family and connections. I am equally so to several other
families with whom we have some hereditary alliance. The
Calders, are one of these, and the Webbs another. Marriage
connected our families in the days of my great grandfather.
The accidents of life have occasionlly brought us into inter-
course with some of their descendants, and it is therefore I
mention the fact.
I have thus disposed, as far as memory enables me, of all
our English family in detail, with the exception of myself.
My own career has been such that, except in connection with
a few public men, I should not regard it as worth the paper
on which I write it, were it not that these public matters are
of the highest interest, and thus brought me very often into
public notice, sometimes flattering, and at other times con-
temptuous.
My youth, as I have already said, from the age of six
upwards, was spent at school and college, but not in the
usual hackneyed course of English education, except that I
was prematurely flogged through the Eton Latin and Greek
Grammars, in a way that would now be regarded as cruel and
scandalous; and in its excess it certainly was so; in its
moderation it was proper and judicious. The only school in
which I ever knew it to be carried to excess, though it was
practically in all as a part of school discipline, was at Cheam,
in Surrey; it was not a foundation school, but it was
carried on upon the same principles as the foundation schools,
and numbered about one hundred and fifty boys. I don’t
know what would be thought of such an incident in these
times, but I witnessed the following scene: —A lad, nearly six
feet high, of the name of Billery, was sentenced to a flogging;
he told the master plainly that he would obey him in every
respect, but that if he struck him with the rod, he would
knock him down. The master was a determined man, though
of feeble stature; he ordered the boy to strip, and surrender
his hands to the assistant; he stripped accordingly, surren-
dered himself to the usher, and assumed the usual position;
the master applied the rod, and the next instant found himself
prostrate on the floor, bleeding from a violent blow he received
■on the face. Of course Billery was expelled the same after-
noon, and there was no more flogging on that day. Young as


I was, I escaped my share for once, thanks to this murderous
assault, but Billery never escaped his penalty; he was
refused admission into the army, and rejected at Cambridge
and Oxford. I don’t know what became of him in after life,
but I have heard that he returned to one of the West Indian
colonies, of which he was said to be a native. It may excite
some surprise that such an offence should become so
generally known as to excite such universal rejection; but
at that time it was the custom, at every college I believe,
as well as in the army, to enquire into the previous history
of young men who applied for admission, unless the appli-
cation was made through a channel of introduction with
which the tutor was familiar, and especially when they had
been pupils at a public school.
I could enlarge much upon this subject of flogging, of
which I had awful experience, but interesting as the topic
of education is in all its branches, I will say no more upon
this peculiar branch of it, than that in public schools it ought
to he confined to insubordination, lying, and other moral
offences, including obstinate resistance; but not applied
merely to enforce accuracy of repetition, or industry of
application, as in those days it too often was. It is sheer
absurdity to contend, as its opponents often do, that it curbs
the spirit, or enervates the victim; for the children then
flogged became the conquerors of Spain, of whom Buonaparte
said, that “ With a British army at his command, he would
conquer the world ! ” Yet I remember, as a child, when we
occupied a house in Queen’s Square, Westminster, over-
looking the Birdcage Walk, where the Guards paraded every
morning, it was part of our nursery amusement to watch
from our windows the dress parade, on which a sergeant of
the Guards, armed with a cane, used to examine the uniforms
a tergo, and give an unmerciful blow with his cane on the
back of every soldier, wherever he found a visible defect. I
take it that such license in the present day would raise a
thunder-storm in the House of Commons.
While at the private school of Mr. Greaves, at Clapham
Common, I became acquainted with Tom Macaulay, afterwards
Lord Macaulay; he was many years younger than myself,
but the intimacy between our parents, led to a corresponding


intimacy between us boys ; and that school acquaintance con-
tinued to the end of life. I cannot agree entirely, though in
great measure with Mr. G-reville’s “ Memoirs,” in their portrait
of this gentleman. There is no doubt that his memory was
lively and retentive to a remarkable extent, and his literary
powers extraordinary. At the early age of nine years, he
wrote an epic poem, in imitation of Virgil’s “iEneid.” It w r as
privately exhibited by his father to the Clapham critics, who
already began to feel considerable parliamentary importance,
but it was never published, so far as I have heard, because
with all its ingenuity, prudence forbade such a step ; though
doubtless in future years, it would have been very gratify-
ing to literary curiosity to see such a proof of precocious
intellect, for it consisted of twelve books, strictly according
to the model. But Macaulay was utterly destitute as a boy
of all the fire of sentiment, though memory supplied him
with its language ; in fact, he was almost an alien from those
who ought to have been his companions, and never associated
in their games, and much less in their wild frolics when
school hours were over; he equally disdained cricket or
marbles, nor had races or wrestling, or even the art of
fencing, though at that time much followed by the boys, the
slightest attraction for him. So far as our intercourse in
after life enabled me to judge, this coldness of temperament
marked him -in all his intercourse with the world. I never
knew him to fall in love with any young lady whatever, and
I much doubt whether he was capable of the feeling; nor do
I remember even a single instance of his self-indulgence in
passion, temper, or other gratification of momentary excite-
ment ; for when he received irritation or provocation, though
such as would irresistibly have excited other lads, he would
turn his back upon the opportunity, and retreating ta
some quiet comer, would draw a book from his pocket and
sit down and read. At this particular time, the school,
which only numbered about thirty boys, was generally filled
by the sons of members of Parliament; and as such had free
admission under the gallery of the House, where we often
met and listened to the debates ; we were thus led, and in
a measure qualified to have a House of our own ; the idea
was approved of, and once a week during the session, the


Clapham House of Commons assembled in our school-room,
to talk nonsense in parliamentary style ; it became a resort
of many of the parents, and assuredly contributed much to
our fun, if not to our improvement. When it commenced,
Macaulay took an active part in it, but latterly he never
could be induced to join in a debate, though he habitually
attended it; the interest in its success which he at first
betrayed, wholly subsided, for he ceased to be an applauded
speaker, probably for no other reason than that he was not
a beloved companion. I have but one anecdote of his after-
life, that is worth recording: He was invited to make his
first speech in public at an anti-slavery meeting at the
Freemasons’ Tavern. It was the custom then to give any
promising young man some minor resolution to move, and of
course, according to the rule on such occasions, his turn
would arrive towards the conclusion of the meeting, which
would be about five or six o’clock in the afternoon. Accord-
ingly his turn came on about this hour, when he rose to
address the chairman, which he did in a very appropriate
speech; it was observed by some of the severe critics that the
reporter’s table was a scene of suppressed laughter, which
was shared by two or three individuals in other parts of the
room; the cause of it soon circulated through the immense
audience, for the room held many hundred auditors.
Macaulay, however, was by no means embarrassed, and
proceeded to the end, repeating what he had to say, very
much in schoolboy fashion, with little or no change in
manner or tone. It afterwards came out that he had
delivered to the reporter of the “ Courier” the manuscript of
his speech, and the reporter at once dispatched it to the
editor of the “Courier,” an evening paper, that usually went
to press at six o’clock, so that Macaulay had the mortifi-
cation to find that some of the plaudits which he had
received, did'not tally with the correct incidents he had
anticipated; though his memory enabled him, with two or
three exceptions, to deliver it in the very words in which
he had prepared it fot the reporter !!! He took good care
never to offend again in this way.
On his return from India, I have already mentioned that
he consulted my brother, Sir James Stephen, as to his future


“career, and James consulted me on the prudence of his
abandoning his profession. It was owing entirely to his
total want of the ease of manner, and emphasis of tone, that
give popularity to the orator, that led me to concur in
thinking forensic success to be, in his case, utterly hopeless.
I believe that his extreme coldness and stiff formality were
natural failings, not to be overcome; in all other respects,
Macaulay was a man well calculated to do honour to the
profession. He was never married; but Ido not concur in
the propriety of the stipulation reported to have been made
when his title was bestowed upon him, that he would pledge
his honour never to be married. No man should be raised
to the peerage who, for any reason whatever, is unfit to hand
down his honours to his children; nor should any man regard
such a stipulation as becoming a man of honour. If it was
on public grounds that this was required, it was revolutionary
in its character, and did dishonour to the Crown.
These little anecdotes of collateral biography and public
events will, I hope, be deemed excusable, as their general
interest is the only ground on which I can be able to rest my
excuse for writing an autobiography at all; but I cannot
invent any other mode of giving them to the world with
equal accuracy and clearness.
My education was in the accustomed course, at whatever
school I happened to be placed, nor was it materially changed
in principle till I went to Cambridge ; for the LTniversity
discipline is rather addressed to the voluntary student than
to the schoolboy; there were, however, some slight deviations
in my own case which will be not uninteresting to those
who take a lead on the subject of secular education in this
colony, and I must be pardoned if it savours a little of the
unavoidable egotism of autobiographies. I was intended
originally for the medical department of the army, at that
time the occupation being certain, and the promotion rapid.
With this view, at the age of fifteen, I was sent into the
dissecting-room at Windmill-street, and placed under the
instruction of Mr. James Briggs, a most skilful anatomist j
who was the surgeon of the public dispensary, and after-
wards of the Lock Hospital. I remained in this occupation
for about three years, when all my plans were again changed;


there being at least five hundred young men in the same
position, who returned to England after the battle of Leipsic,
in consequence of the prospect of peace, which then opened
upon Europe. It cannot he denied by me on self-exami-
nation, that this temporary interruption of the general
routine of education had a material, and by no means, in
some few respects, a more favourable result; so far as it was
prejudicial, I have no hesitation in admitting that it was
in consequence of the premature introduction, which it
gave me to the usual vices and vulgarities of social life,
hoys ought not to be introduced to them at an early age, and
I have never ceased to regret it; into that point I need
go no farther than make the confession, as a necessary
preliminary to what I am about to say of advantages to
be derived from such eccentric studies; for, on the other
hand, it is, I believe, due to the hardening process which
they involve, that I have attained my present longevity,
without, so far as I can remember, one hour’s serious disease,
except when it has been the result of accidental injury;
of course 1 am here speaking in a philosophic tone, but not
forgetting the gratitude I owe to a' higher power for such
unusual exemption.
The anatomical school is in truth, till you become familiar
with it, a horrid and disgusting scene, and it may be perhaps
that it is only by early introduction to it, that one learns
to overcome the feelings that it excites in all who have a
particle of sensibility in their nature; a daily and familiar
intercourse with dead human bodies of every age and sex,
and a critical examination of every part, often in a state of
semi-putridity, has, I can assure my reader, nothing to
attract, unless it is the gradual acquisition of practical as
well as scientific knowdedge; nor does medical examination
of the details of every day life tend much to elevate humanity
in his esteem. Such was my employment for nearly three
years of my existence, when I first associated with freedom
with my fellow-mortals. But yet it is a most material
advantage to learn the structure of man, and to be early
initiated in the folly of needless alarm and the simplicity of
cure. In such matters, the late Mr. Wilson, of Windmill-
street, the celebrated anatomist of his day, was during the
season our daily lecturer.


Yet even in such a school, there often occurs casual
instruction of a higher kind. I was sent for one night to
attend a poor woman in childbirth ; it was a case of imminent
danger, for it was a first child. I never shall forget the
piteous tone in which she asked me, not whether there was a
chance of her recovery, of which there was seemingly hut
little; hut if she should ever have another child its life
would be uncertain, for the little one had died before it
saw the light, and it was her first child. She did recover
after tedious sickness. In another case I acted as assistant
to Mr. Briggs, who had just removed a cancer from the
breast. The patient was a lady of forty, and bore the
operation with extraordinary firmness. In the course
of it, Mr. Briggs wanted a towel, those usually provided
being used up. She told me to ring the hand-bell. The
servant entered, and she said with extraordinary self-pos-
session, “ Mary, go into the next room, and you will find
some more clean towels in the lowest drawer;” her voice
being as firm and as steady as if she had been in perfect
health. Her recovery corresponded with this firmness, for
in a few weeks’ time, she was able to go about as usual;
if I recollect right, she was a dressmaker. Cases like these,
and there were many similar, exhibited character in its
amiable light, and were well calculated to benefit the thought-
ful student; nor perhaps could the divine estimate of human
equality be more advantageously studied than in the hospital.
In a similar operation at Q-uy’s Hospital not less than eighteen
young men were obliged to leave the room; but I generally
found more firmness and self-possession in women than in
men, in such cases. Hence, I have long thought that, to a
limited extent, anatomy and medicine should be subjects of
general education in all our Universities; it does not neces-
sarily follow that they should be subjects of examination.
Another advantage would be derived from it, and it' is one
that I have personally experienced; in case of accident,
whether to himself or others, every pupil might prove to be
so much of a surgeon as to suggest and apply the immediate
remedy, or at least the best immediate relief; for it often
occurs that a wound becomes dangerous only because no
surgeon is at hand to intimate the proper course, or to do


what is immediately required. On two occasions in after-
life this occurred to myself, and I was able to give immediate
and useful assistance, though no unprofessional man of
common sense would incur the responsibility of retaining
the patient upon his hands.
I have stated that the expectation of early peace after the
battle of Leipsic sent multitudes of medical students home
to England, and changed my own destination in life; it
determined my father to alter his plan respecting myself,
and I went to Cambridge, with the view of becoming a
physician. I was entered at Magdalen, where there was at
that time about forty students, and most of them in their
first or second year; but though I was very successful in
obtaining all the college prizes, with only one exception,
during my two years’ residence, I learned nothing else, except
the art of riding and hunting, to which indeed I had been
bred as a, boy, and of inventing mischief for the special
service of the under graduates. This soon came to my
father’s ears; he removed me abruptly, as he had previously
removed my brother Henry. He came to the conclusion,
perhaps somewhat prematurely, that.l wanted steadiness to
acquire successfully the gravity becoming a physician, and
he asked Mr. Ereshfield, the well-known solicitor of the
Bank of England, to find room for me in his office. Such
was at that time the discredit generally attached to the
profession of an attorney, that I actually shed tears on
hearing that this was to be my fate, for it placed me at once
below the level of our family intercourse, according to the
etiquette of the times; but my brother James argued the
point with me till he obtained my assent, and though of the
age of twenty, I executed the necessary contract. It was
soon after this that I became mixed up, with others, in the
anti-slavery cause, as a kind of clerk of the papers; and it
was found, in the course of my anti-slavery life, that in the
most important duties I had to perform, I had become a
member of the only profession with which such duties were
consistent and reconcilable. Mr. Ereshfield, out of courtesy
I suppose to my academical education, employed me in no
other business than drawing cases for counsel, and conducting
the bankruptcy department, and in Bank of England prosecu


tions for forgery, at the different assizes. I served my five
years’ apprenticeship, that time being then necessary. Mr.
Ereshfield was many years in Parliament and a distinguished
man, but rather by his intellectual and high character than by
his oratory. I then began to practice for myself. One cir-
cumstance connected with that practice is worth mentioning;
The sale of an expectant interest in property, commonly
argues poverty and distress on the part of the owner, and
used therefore to be watched with great jealousy by the
courts; consequently there was no market price for such
property; and it was commonly sold to the Jew or the
pawnbroker for less than half its net value, when estimated
by the tabular standard of the expectation of human life.
I therefore planned a society under the name of the
Reversionary Interest Society, for the purchase of reversions
and life policies. As it became understood I floated it,
as it is termed, with facility, appointed my friends as
directors, and they retained me as the solicitor; my duty
being to investigate the vendor’s title to the property
offered for sale. I continued to act in that capacity
for eighteen years, and happily without a single error; but
as times alter, so do boards of directors and everything else,
and it happened that most of them were changed, and new
men came in, who neither understood the principle nor the
details, and unwisely introduced a rigorous system of econo-
mical purchase, that threatened to revive the former jealousy
of the courts, and produce at a future day. as the property
fell in constant and ruinous litigation; to this I objected,
but my objections passed unheeded, except to provoke their
resentment. It so happened that one of these same gentle-
men had offered to the society a very valuable policy in the
Equitable office, of which he had some time previously
become the purchaser; in this case, as in others, I examined,
and took a fatal objection to the title, though he was a
director. He never forgave me, though we had had no
previous quarrel; and now that I openly condemned the new
principle on which they were acting, of rigorous economy, he
insisted upon it, that it was necessary that I should resign,
as where a difference of principle existed as to the proper
management of the concern, a prosperous course of action


could not be expected. I resigned my post accordingly, and
was thus thrown upon the world with a large young family
upon my hands to maintain. I have since heard nothing of
the society, and believe that it has gradually died away, as
otherwise, from the nature of the case, I think I must have
been frequently called upon to give professional information
and assistance in reference to its early transactions. lam
sorry to say that this is not by any means the only instance
that I have seen of similar arbitrary and oppressive conduct
on the part of directors and official boards towards those who
are their proper advisers in cases of large importance. It
should be a standing rule that the directors of a public com-
pany, whatever may be its nature, should not have interest
in it, direct or indirect, beyond the usual pecuniary qualifica-
tion for office.
It was about this time, but I forget the exact year, that
the prisons were reported to be crowded with prisoners for
contempt of court, and many of the pauper class were found
to be among them. A bill was introduced into Parliament
for their relief, and a solicitor was invested by the bill with
sufficient powers to take the necessary professional steps;
but by a singular piece of carelessness, or perhaps it may
have been ignorance, no provision was made for the solicitor’s
remuneration, or even for repayment of any money that he
might have expended out of his own pocket. The conse-
quence was that the appointment of solicitor was rejected in
every quarter. It is a serious nuisance to acquire the
reputation of being a good-natured man, for the consequence
in my case was, that Lord Lyndhurst requested me as a
personal favour to accept the retainer, and I held it for about
eighteen years, not so much to oblige Lord Lyndhurst, as
because gratuitous service to the poor, and especially to the
poor prisoner, was obviously a Christian duty; but I soon
found that the service was not simply gratuitous, but involved
a constant expenditure of petty sums, for repayment of
which provision could not be made by Parliament, from the
nature of the case; as, for instance, many of the prisoners
had been incarcerated for years, and when discharged had not
a shilling to purchase a meal or to pay their travelling
expenses- to a distant county, or a friend in London for


whose assistance they could apply; yet for these, immediate
pecuniary relief must he afforded; very often I could not
obtain it, and was obliged to advance it myself. The aggre-
gate expenditure in this way during the eighteen years was
about £6OO, of which I could never obtain repayment of a
single shilling by the Government, though the justice of the
application for it w 7 as admitted. In the course of my official
duty I liberated many prisoners; so far as I recollect, the
number was 137, but the papers are still in England. One
of these cases is worth mention: The poor man had refused
to file his answer to a bill in chancery, and had been a
prisoner, in consequence, for nearly thirty years. He still
peremptorily refused, and, if I remember right, Lord Lynd-
hurat discharged him without compliance, on my explaining
to his Lordship the real grounds of the refusal. By his long
imprisonment he had become the oldest of all the inmates,
in respect of his occupation of the prison, and by virtue
of this seniority, he was entitled to occupy the best apart-
ments it contained. These he let from time to time to such
new comers as could afford the rent, while he himself
occupied the low and dirty room, to which only as new
comers they would have been entitled; he thus made a
tolerable subsistence, when eked out by menial services
that he daily performed for other prisoners. During his-
long confinement, his relatives, so far as he knew, were
gone, for he was a very old man; and hence, to he ejected
from the prison into the street, vras tantamount to death
by starvation. The prison authorities felt such compassion
for his case that they allowed him to remain an inmate,,
and to continue in the discharge of his menial duties so far
as to maintain himself. Such probably had been the fate
of many before the Bill had been passed for their relief.
The lesson it conveys to the draftsman of similar acts
is too important to be lost, especially in this colony, youthful
as it is in the art of legislation.
I should have found myself in a very difficult position,
but that I had acquired considerable professional distinction
in early life; in fact, when I was only five and twenty, from
having been selected, though only in an inferior branch of
the profession, to collect on the Continent evidence of the


Queen’s conduct during the last six months of her con-
nections with Pergami, so as to carry the inquiry, then
proceeding in the House of Lords, down to the very time
of her arrival in England. It may he recollected by those
who are familiar with the history of the day, that the case,
as it then stood, was confined to the first three years of
the six that were occupied by her Continental wanderings.
The commissioners who were engaged in it, had not reported
the result of their mission, so as to make it available beyond
the first three years, nor had the final three months of
the time been included in their instructions. It was to
examine into the details of these concluding six months that
I was instructed, and the case in the Lords was adjourned
to enable the Government to give her whole career with
impartiality.
For a month I was incessantly engaged in the work,
and such was my natural activity, that during this month
I never slept, except in my travelling carriage. My
adventures were many and amusing. One of them en-
dangered my life for the moment. Post-horses, in France,
always moderate their pace to a wulk on ascending ground;
and one night, I and my secretary alighted from the carriage
to stretch our limbs by walking up the hill. Our cigars
were exhausted, when we overtook an open carriage, in
which were two gentlemen smoking; on passing it, I thought
this was a good opportunity to replenish my cigar-case, at
least for the night. I went up to the side of the carriage,
and told them in French, speaking rather loud, to be heard
through the noise of the wheels, that we had used all our
cigars, and should be grateful to them for a little aid;
when, to my surprise, a pistol was produced instead of a
cigar, and I instantly dropped down to avoid it, for it was
presented with a loud peremptory threat in German. The
post-boy, however, was bdtter informed than I was, and
understood both French and German ; he immediately sung
out pretty loudly in the latter language, that we were
passengers in the carriage that followed behind, and a
cigar-case was substituted for the pistol, with a very
courteous request, translated into French by the post-boy,
that we would appropriate as many of them as we liked,


and a courteous apology for the unavoidable mistake. I
was very grateful for the -cigars as well as for my escape,
and resolved never again to approach a carriage after night
had set in. Another adventure, although in broad daylight,
brought me into collision with the police. That I might
clearly understand the evidence given to me in all its
bearings, I made it my habit at every hotel, to occupy
while there the same apartments that had been occupied
by the Queen. When I arrived at Lyons, I was shown into
a room in which she had slept, and usually dined. I ordered
some dinner, and afterwards, when the waiter had finally
left us, I searched the room with minute accuracy, and
discovered a secret closet in one of the walls, concealed for
the time by the papering, which appeared to be recently
torn; I removed it to the extent necessary to expose the
whole of the cabinet door, which had been locked, but
remained open. This door had been sealed and secured
with a rivet, which I found cut through; the wax at both
extremities bore the royal arms and Pergami’s initials
together. I cut these impressions off, and sent them with
the front of the door to Downing-street in my first report.
I then rang the bell of the room, and asked the waiter,
“ Who had been the last occupier?” His answer -was, “That
Pergami had been there a few hours before my arrival,
but he only remained half-an-hour, when he returned to
Paris.” I enquired for what purpose he came, if he only
stayed so short a time, and he replied, looking at the
secret closet, “Only to take away some letters which
he had left there.” “Did he find them?” “He did; just
as he had left them.” The man then retired, and informed
the master of the hotel that I had broken into the closet,
and he in his turn informed the police, who at once came
and intimated to me, that I must attend them to the mayor
of the town; I accompanied them immediately. I was
received with about as much courtesy, as I suppose is usual
in the case of house-breakers, or other great criminals; but
I was armed against such accidents, and carried my cre-
dentials in my pocket book. On producing them to his
worship, the abrupt change of manner and tone was ludicrous
to the last degree. Apologies without end flowed in rapid


succession—“ Was there any assistance he could render me?
Would I take a seat hy his side?” &c., &c., &c. I shall
not presume to enter into further details of evidence that
I obtained here, and at other places, except to state that
it was perfectly consistent with all that had been given in
the House of Lords, and, indeed, in one instance in which
I made the witness return with me to England, that he
might never he out of my sight till he was examined, the
facts stated, and apparently on irresisteble evidence, were
so gross, that the G-oyemment, as I afterwards found,
thought it impossible to enter publicly upon them. They
were indeed, if true, absolutely conclusive, for it is admitted
even by her friends, that intemperance was the Queen’s
habitual failing. I understood that this circumstance was
one of the reasons why it was deemed expedient to close
the case without entering upon the last three years of the
Queen’s residence on the Continent; hut I may add, that
long afterwards, when we could without impropriety converse
together upon it as one of mutual interest, I was informed
by a gentleman, who had been actually engaged in her
defence, that Pergami had dogged 'my steps from England,
till he had secured the letters at Lyons; so that but
for the incautious detention of me at Paris, hy Sir Charles
Stuart, then our ambassador, I should have arrived at Lyons
before Pergami, and probably have obtained the corres-
pondence which he was so anxious to secure. Mr. G-reville’s
“Memoirs” well warrant the inference, which I cannot but
draw from my own experience in this ease of the Queen,
that there are always dishonest officials to be found in high
quarters.
I believe that it was essentially to the reputation I acquired
from being entrusted with a part in this important matter,
combined with my well-known experience in bankruptcy
law, that I was enabled to make my livelihood in the inferior
branch of the profession as a solicitor, after resigning my
official business and connection; not that there is much
profit to be attained from it, but it is neither of that
character that a right-minded man would desire, and to any
considerable extent it is not practicable, except in the com-
mercial world. I had kept my terms at Gray’s Inn many


years previously, and never removed my name from the
boards. 1 was therefore in hopes that I should be relieved
from the rule, at that time always enforced, that I must
spend two years previously to my call, in absolute self-
exclusion from all remunerative occupation of a professional
character. I believe that I was the last instance of such
a rule being enforced. In my case, however, it was required,
and though I had succeeded through Brougham, in obtaining
for my then profession, the advantage to Oxford or Cam-
bridge men of two years’ standing, of admission to practise
as solicitors in the courts of law, after three instead of five
years’ clerkship, I could not obtain from the benches at
Gray’s Inn a similar boon for myself; but I was so disgusted
with the general tone and frequent character of the profes-
sion, that at all hazards I resolved to change it and be called
to the bar; accordingly, in 1847, I quitted London altogether,
that I might not even be suspected of breaking through the
rule of exclusion, and resided in the country for the
necessary two years; so that I was not called till 1849, thus
making me junior at the bar to fny eldest son, who had been
called a few months previously-; rather a peculiar position
for any man. I trusted, however, and not without reason,
to my acknowledged reputation in bankruptcy business to
carry me through. It is a department in which there is
little to entertain, but which, in England at least, used to
be abundant in opportunity, and therefore I selected Liver-
pool and the northern circuit as the most hopeful field for
my exertions; nor did I require much introduction, for it
was well-known that I had the lead in all bankruptcy
business, and had been also equally active in the reforms
of the police and the Poor Law system. Nor was I dis-
appointed, for I soon acquired a profitable lead in Liverpool,
and its neighbouring courts; but the result of this was
unfortunate, for after five years’ experiment, I deterred
most of the trading rascals from seeking the relief of the
court, and thus in effect committed suicide in my business,
which was chiefly found in opposing them. Hence it was
that I came with all my family to Melbourne, a step I shall
never cease to regret. This was in 1855.


I fancied, very erroneously, tliat these colonies were subject
both in principle and administration to the same laws that
obtained in England, subject to a few local variations, and
that the intercourse of society was, allowing for difference of
climate, whether private or forensic, governed by the same
etiquette. I soon found myself mistaken to such an extent,
that I have since lived the life of a recluse, till, I have now
one foot in the grave; but on these points I shall only
provoke controversy and abuse if I proceed further, and
it is time to revert to one with which my course has been
identified, and which I have deferred till I had disposed
of every other on which my descendants are likely to desire
information, for again and again I have been asked the
■question, why I came to Australia, and being here have
taken no part, and shown but little interest, in the public
business of the colony ?
I ought to have stated that I had already allowed two
of my sons to migrate here, one of them on a Government
mission, and the other on a Government appointment, and
both had married on their arrival in the colonies, and
might be said to have established’themselves here. The
interest of my brother, Sir James Stephen, had secured for
them these introductions to business, and determined me
in my wavering between Canada and Australia, as I wished
to re-unite my family.
I have been engaged for many pages in the narrative
of my connection with the Queen’s prosecution, as it is called,
and were the topic less offensive, I could relate much more
that would justify the conclusion at which I have arrived,
but even private publication, to adopt the usual phrase, has
certain limits to its freedom that may not be transgressed.
My retainer for the Crown was soon followed by another
from the House of Commons, in the matter of the Mauritius
enquiry, which I have already fully explained. It was about
this time that an accident brought a French slave-trader
into one of the southern ports; there were only five slaves
on board, the rest of the human cargo having been thrown
overboard to lighten the ship in a heavy gale. When the
fact became known, it was instantly communicated to me
by one of our local anti-slavery societies. I sent down


Writs of Habeas Corpus, and of course they were immediately
liberated by the court of Queen’s Bench, and here I might
let the matter drop, with a simple statement that two out
of the five died shortly after their landing, of the small-pox ;
other two elected to be sent back to Africa, and the fifth,
then a boy of ten or twelve, preferred remaining with me;
1 took him into my family, as a servant, without hesitation ;
for I found that, even at that early age, he had been educated
to a certain extent on the principles of a gentleman. When
at Exeter, where they spent two or three days on their
way to London, the five had been invited to exhibit them-
selves at a public ball, and went there accordingly. On this
occasion two or three young men, who could talk a little
French, introduced Asa-Asa, for that was his name, to
one of the young ladies, and telling him that it was customary
in England to salute, on introduction to a young woman,
desired him to kiss her, at the same time, kissing his sister
to show him the manner. He then went to the other side
of the room, and bowing to a young lady seated there,
formally presented the child; the lad approached nearer
to her, knelt down before her, and taking up her dress,
kissed it three times, and said in French, “ That is how
We salute our women at home.” I believe the incident
was noticed in the public press; but years afterwards, when
Asa-Asa had acquired familiarity with English, I asked him
about it; he repeated the statement with minuteness of
detail, that warranted the truth of it; nor during my long
acquaintance with the boy, did I ever find him guilty of
falsehood. He gave me a narrative of his capture as soon
as he was able to converse in English, and the general
circumstances fully corresponded not only with the details
of such cases, but with the reports of the other four. His
African home was clearly of a superior character, and his
father would seem to have been the native chieftain of the
place. According to his son’s account, he kept eleven horses
in his stable, and the boy’s familiarity with the treatment of
horses, though different from ours in many respects, proved
that in some school or other he had been accustomed to the
use of them. The slave traders entered the town by stealth,
at midnight; they were fully armed, and required immediate


surrender from every one they happened to meet. The
whole town was awakened to the matter very shortly and the
fellows shot all who resisted them, and soon became masters
of the place. Asa-Asa’s father had a wife and seven children
of whom Asa-Asa was the youngest, and of these all were
killed in the attack, except the father and two hoys, of
whom Asa was one.
The father thereupon hurried out to the hack premises
into the hush, taking the two hoys with him. They hid
themselves in a tree a few yards from the house, were found
hy the slave-traders early in the morning, and required to
surrender. They refused, and the father and the eldest son
persisting in the refusal, were shot down and murdered
in the tree. Asa-Asa was frightened, and gave himself up ;
he was immediately conveyed on board, and found himself
among about a hundred and fifty of his fellow townsmen,
including men, women, and children. The ship could contain
no more. In a few days they found themselves transferred
to another vessel in waiting for them, and on their way
to the west. The voyage was tedious; had weather came
on, and to lighten the ship the master, by degrees, threw
overboard the whole of them, excepting the five whom they
retained for the convenience of the crew, because they had
been from the first selected from their fellow captives to
discharge the menial duties of the sailors. Such was the
state of the vessel, when stress of weather compelled them
to take refuge in Plymouth. This realisation before our
eyes, as may be almost said, of the infernal horrors of the
trade, greatly promoted the spread of anti-slavery feeling,
and well prepared the way for the agitation that I was about
to excite. I may as well state, before Igo into that matter,
the rest of Asa-Asa’s history, so far as it has reached me.
He remained with me for several years, and until the Niger
Expedition was launched. At last he married our cook,
unknown to us, and as it was no part of my anti-slavery
charity to maintain a family of half-castes (though they
proved afterwards, when they grew up, to be pretty
and honest girls). I gave him notice to quit, although I
regretted the necessity, but they had no difficulty in main-
taining themselves as occasional servants, by their aptitude


for the duty. When, however, the Niger Expedition was
undertaken, Asa-Asa thought that it would be a good
opportunity for revisiting his native country, and in this
view he obtained an appointment as steward on board the
exploring vessel. The disastrous character of the voyage
will be remembered by those who are familiar with the
history of the times. Many of the crew were disabled and
some were lost by the African epidemic, so that at one
time, when they were at anchor in the Niger, the whole ship
was practically under the charge of Asa-Asa, subject only
to the orders of officers, given from sick-beds. On their
return home, such had been his meritorious conduct in this
strange position, and so unceasing and satisfactory had
been his care and attention to the sick, that he was specially
reported to the Admiralty, and received a pension for life
of moderate amount, in acknowledgment of his services.
X am unable to trace his history for the last twenty years,
but I have reason to believe that he is still alive, for I
received a letter from him some years after I came to the
colony, assuring me of his welfare, although he must at
the time of writing it, have arrived at a very mature age.
I have brought my personal details, except in reference to
the subject of slavery, up to the time I became acquainted
with O’Connell. Ido not for a moment suppose, nor wish
it to be understood, that O’Connell, though he knew me
well by character, confided to me any of his political objects,
or of his schemes to obtain those objects; all that he ever
said to me respected only the art of agitation, without the
slightest reference either to the legality or even the pro-
priety of it; but I learned this from him, that to secure
the co-operation, even of a respectable multitude, perfect
concordance in feeling, irrespective of concurrence in
principle, must he obtained, and that such concordance
was impossible, except by incessant agitation, as well as
by resolute and bold public appeal. He, goodnaturedly,
regarded me as an anti-slavery pupil, and not as a political
adherent; nor did I give him the slightest information of
what I proposed to do, hut so far as I can remember at this
date, I only expressed my desire to strengthen and extend
the action of our Anti-Slavery Societies, concealing the plan


by which I wished to effect it, while I avowed the principle
to be that of organising a national movement. O’Connell
is himself gone, and I cannot appeal to him, as I otherwise
would have done to correct my error, if I do err in this
statement of what passed between us. I learned, however,
from him enough to satisfy me that there was no impracti-
cability, and I required no opinion as to the propriety of
it, in stirring up an active and determined appeal to
the legislature on behalf of the so-called slave. I proceeded
in my plans for this purpose, for independently of general
and extensive knowledge of the facts of the case, I was
now armed with the Mauritius evidence, and could use it
without the slightest breach of decorum, although the sole
possessor of it. Parliament had not demanded it, and as
the service was gratuitous, had left it in my hands to do
what I liked with it, without any condition of^secrecy.
With this explanation, I may now proceed to explain
my course of action. My first step was to prepare an
anti-slavery creed, and this I did in the simplest terms.
I laid it down as the principle that “to uphold slavery,
was a crime before Q-od, and that every Christian was
called upon to aid in its suppression.”
To support this doctrine, I selected some of its character-
istic traits, and gave examples from the Mauritius evidence,
taken under the authority of the House of Commons; on
the strength of these, I suggested the duty, not only of
instituting official enquiry, but of enforcing it upon our
representatives by unanimous and minatory remonstrance;
the only remaining point was how to accomplish this, and
it occurred to me as the most certain method, to employ
agents throughout the country to disseminate these prin-
ciples simultaneously in every part of it. There were many
gentlemen with whom I was< acquainted, willing to undertake
the duty gratuitously in London and its suburbs, but they
could not, except in some half-dozen instances, leave their
business, or afford, on the score of charity, to pay their
travelling expenses. It w r as therefore obviously necessary, to
carry out my plan, that stipendiary agents should be
employed to effect a simultaneous movement throughout
the country. If I could obtain the means, I entertained


no doubt of success, and although it threatened a heavy
expenditure, I had no doubt that with the help of such
contributions at anti-slavery meetings, as in those times
always occurred, I could carry out the scheme successfully,
so far as it involved pecuniary liability.
I had found frequent opportunity of being introduced
to young men, who had, to a certain degree, distinguished
themselves, by ability as well as zeal, in propagating anti-
slavery principles; and I found several, who, for very
moderate compensation, were willing to undertake the
enterprise, though it appeared somewhat Quixotic. I first
subjected them to close examination, and then laid down
a table of instructions, somewhat dictatorial and peremptory
in their character, requiring them to subscribe to a pledge
of honour, strictly to follow them, and to travel through the
country, taking such a route as I should prescribe, calling
public meetings at every town; and whether they were
attended or not, securing the presence of a newspaper
reporter, and a report of them in the usual provincial
journals.
When my scheme was thus far advanced, I thought it
prudent to summon a meeting of the Anti-slavery Committee,
for the purpose of obtaining their adoption of it; well
knowing that their patronage and influence would promote
its efficiency to an extent that I could not possibly obtain by
my own unassisted exertions. The committee assembled,
and was the largest that I ever remember; I think, from
recollection, that between thirty and forty gentlemen were
present at. it, including .several peers and some of the
bishops. I was called on to answer a few important
questions of detail, and was under examination for above
an hour, when I was desired to withdraw. A discussion
followed that occupied several hours more, and then I
was recalled, and courteously informed, that after full and
friendly consideration, my plan could not be adopted; the
only objection to it, as I was afterwards informed, was,
that it was too Eadical in its character to be considered
expedient in the then temper of the public, and would tend
to alienate much of the Parliamentary support, on which
they calculated whenever the subject was again revived in the
House.


On receiving this answer, I was for tlie moment greatly
depressed. Mr. Cropper, of Liverpool, was present, and
following me out of the room, invited me to dine with him
and some of his friends at the hotel where he was staying,
with the view of further explanation of the scheme. Of
course, I accepted the invitation, and found myself to my
surprise, in the company of twenty Quakers, who had
assembled on the occasion. After dinner, Mr. Cropper
opened the subject, and I went again through the whole of
my intended plan, not perhaps the less emphatically for the
refreshment that I had obtained by an excellent dinner, and
two or three glasses of good wine; but it appeared that
before the dinner-hour, Cropper had himself stated to his
guests what had occurred at the meeting of the committee,
and to my infinite gratification, in place of the usual expres-
sions of approbation, asked me what I intended to do now
that the committee had rejected my overtures? “I shall go
on to the end,” I simply replied, “ and do my best to carry
it through, if I can raise £1,000.” “ All right,” was imme-
diately exclaimed by everyone round the table, and was
followed by a subscription of £5OO from Cropper, and £250
from Joseph Sturge. The rest of the money wanted was
contributed by those present, aided by liberal subscriptions
from Mr. Wilberforce and my father. Such was the com-
mencement of the celebrated Agency Committee, which
however, never consisted of more than three acting members,
being myself, my excellent coadjutor Emanuel Cooper, and
Zachary Macaulay. Mr. Cooper was the most thorough
anti-slavery man that I ever knew, so far as incessant activity
and perseverance could make him so. I believe that he was
identified with me in all anti-slavery principles.
Of course the liberal subscriptions which I have mentioned,
accompanied by such influential names as those of the leaders
of the anti-slavery party, obtained credit for the new com-
mittee, and many were from time to time added to the list,
but I knew very well that they would never attend regularly
and punctually. I therefore laid it down as a rule, never to be
altered, that business should commence daily at three o’clock,
and be transacted from the moment that three members had
assembled. I explained my motive for this to Emanuel


Cooper and Ms brother, and the consequence was that we
were always the first three in attendance, and were able to
get through all the work generally before four o’clock, so
that in effect we had it all our own way, though nominally
the Agency Committee contained above a dozen names. I
would recommend other public bodies to adopt a similar
principle.
The course of proceeding which the agents were required
.to pursue was briefly this : We sent them to a county town
with a letter of introduction to the mayor, and the request
that a public meeting might be summoned as speedily as
convenient, to consider resolutions that would be submitted
to them by the agents of the Society, to the effect that to
uphold the slavery of man was criminal in the sight of God,
and that therefore it was expedient, with a view to the early
dissolution of Parliament, to establish a local Auxiliary Anti-
Slavery Society without delay; that if the mayor refused to
assist, such meetings should be called by advertisement in
the local paper, to be held at the most convenient place that
could be found. The agent was, of course, to attend it and
to proceed to business and make his address, even if only
ten or twenty persons should be there to hear him; he was
to engage a reporter, or send notes of it himself to the pro-
vincial paper. The plan succeeded admirably; Ido not think
there were a dozen instances in which it failed, for curiosity
led multitudes to attend, and the tenor of the Mauritius
evidence excited feelings that the gratification of curiosity
alone could not satisfy. We had only half-a-dozen of stipen-
diary agents at the commencement of our agitation, among
whom was Mr. G-eorge Thomson, who afterwards filled a seat
in Parliament, and of whom I shall presently give a few par-
ticulars. We were greatly assisted in our operations by the
folly of the West Indian interest. Its leaders, of course,
soon heard of our proceedings, and watched them closely.
At first they were silent, and apparently indifferent; but as
we spread ourselves over the country they became alarmed,
and adopted the very step for which we secretly prayed.; they
had the audacity to array themselves in opposition, and, fol-
lowing the steps of our agents, attempted to defeat them at
the public meetings whenever they produced a marked effect;


it was the very thing we desired to give effect and variety to
our proceedings. Thomson was the agent whom they princi-
pally assailed, for he was the most successful and persevering
of the travelling party. We had this advantage over them,
that they could not discover the route which we had laid'
down, and which I directed from time to time by the post.
Hence they could not anticipate, hut only follow our steps,
except occasionally when the public meetings were adjourned
for a few days, and this seldom happened. The excitement
was in many places intense, for the peculiar turn given to
our anti-slavery faith, that to uphold the existing system was
criminal in the sight of God, brought to our aid many of the
clergy of all denominations; and this aided us in giving to
emancipation the motive of religious duty. The extent of
the power that, as a party, we acquired, may be judged of by
the fact that, when at last the Bill actually came before
Parliament, an anti-slavery petition, with 187,000 signatures,
was got up by the committee from all parts of England in>
less than ten days, a fact lately noticed by the .“ Daily
Telegraph,” in a “Memoir of Mr. Cropper.” Another-
circumstance generally noticed at the time was, that in the
general election for the return of the first Eeformed Parlia-
ment, every contest turned upon the point of the anti-
slavery principles of the candidate. “I care not,” said m
sturdy Lincolnshire farmer, and who for the first time in his
life had a vote to bestow, “ whether you be for Lords or
Commons, but you shall have no vote of mine unless you
promise me yours to set the negro freeand such was the
tone and temper of nearly all the new constituencies. The
West Indians now changed their policy, and tendered a com-
promise to the Government to withdraw their opposition on
payment of £20,000,000 to the planters and their mortgagees.
Stanley consulted Buxton, and Buxton came to me asking my
assent to the compromise. I own that I never felt more
embarrassed, for, according to the views that I had circulated
by the agents throughout Great Britain, it amounted to a
purchase of negro libertj', and therefore to an absolute
abandonment of principle; for a purchase implied an owner-
ship of property, which on principle I had declared could
never exist. Nor was it to be forgotten that the rejection of


what appeared on the face of it to be a reasonable and
equitable demand, might lead to dreadful consequences to the
slave, should the Bill after all fail to pass. I had not much
time for reflection, but I found on enquiry that my answer,
as the representative of the agency party, would determine
the fate of the Bill, and, that an immediate answer was
required, for Buxton was most urgent, and fully convinced,
by intercourse with the members, that except on these terms
a majority was hopeless. I had not time sufficient to consult
either my father, Mr. Wilberforce, or Z. Macaulay, I dare
not appeal to the Agency Committee, for I knew that, to a
man, they would oppose it, and that compromise of any kind
was out of the question; so I made it a condition of my
forbearing from agitating the point, that the Bill should
contain an absolute prohibition of all slavery in the British
dominions for ever. Stanley conceded this, and I gave way.
The old Anti-Slavery Committee approved of my conduct, I
believe, not excepting one of them, and nobody more than
Mr. Wilberforce and my father; but some of the Agency
Committee did loudly condemn me, and probably would have
withdrawn from the society altogether, but that the determi-
nation of the controversy virtually extinguished our continued
union. No doubt I could have excited a powerful agitation
on this occasion, for the auxiliary societies which I had
established were almost all up in arms about it, as a
degrading conclusion when they expected a glorious triumph.
The provision, however, on which I had insisted, was I
believe considered by all to expiate my error, if it could
be called an error; while the prospect of ample pecuniary
compensation disarmed all criticism by our opponents, from
the day the Bill received the Eoyal assent. A preparatory
apprenticeship of five years, as introductory to perfect
freedom, had been introduced with a view to secure peaceable
and orderly conduct at the commencement of the new system,
but the apprenticeship itself was so restricted in the
authority it gave to the master, that it was speedily aban-
doned in Antigua; and her example was soon followed by
all the other colonies, and thus emancipation became general
and complete.


I promised a few words respecting Mr. G-eiJrge Thomson.
When making my enquiries for stipendiary agents, he was
mentioned to me by a friend, as a frequent and effective
speaker in the parish vestry at Islington, where he was
an assistant to a grocer, and of course not likely to have
received a liberal education. I sent for him, and examined
him strictly, and found him utterly unacquainted with the
whole subject, hut remarkably fluent, and as far as I could
judge, well qualified for the rough duties he might have
to discharge. I therefore put some anti-slavery publications
into his hands, and he promised to peruse them, and call
on me again at the end of a fortnight. He did so; and
when he returned, I was astonished to perceive, after some
hours of discussion, how completely he had mastered the
whole subject. I then put the Mauritius enquiry into his
hands, and he read the whole of it, extracting such passages
as he might want in addressing the public. I believe he
had no other preparation for his career than what I have
here stated. Finding, however, that he had been in the
habit of reading some of our best authors, I did not hesitate
to engage him at a salary of £2OO per annum, on condition
that he should neither ask nor receive emolument or
advantage of any kind or from any quarter, except with
our consent. He had liberty, however, to pay his travelling
expenses out of such funds as he might collect at public
anti-slavery meetings. My reason for imposing such
peculiar conditions was, that I knew too little of his
habits and character to place him in a position of which
he might avail himself as am opportunity of reaping a
harvest to the prejudice of the anti-slavery reputation. He
stood my examination as to his anti-slavery creed well,
and assuredly rendered eminent service to the cause. I
do not remember ever hearing him speak in public, but
Brougham did on one occasion, and told me he was worth
going fifty miles to hear. On leaving the Agency Committee
he made a similar engagement with the Anti-Corn Law
League ; but it was a dull subject, that offered him no room
to display his declamatory powers, in which he excelled. Of
his subsequent career I know nothing, except that eventu-
ally he succeeded in obtaining a seat in the House of


Commons, as I believe, in the Eadical interest, where he
broke down in the accustomed manner of all half-educated
men. He certainly made considerable sensation at all
popular meetings, but, as I before observed when speaking
of young Macaulay, the platform is but a poor school for a
Parliamentary orator. Cobbett, whom I knew w r ell, was
another instance. I was present when Cobbett returned
his thanks to the electors of Oldham for having elected
him; in fact I had been of substantial assistance to him
on the occasion. He had declared himself as a candidate
to represent Manchester, but failed by a small majority
while he was secure of being returned for Oldham if he
offered himself; and to maintain his position, I offered to
become a candidate, and to resign my post, should he be
defeated at Manchester. I thus kept his friends together,
and it proved to have been a necessary device. When he
showed himself on the platform, a boy was drawing his cart
across the market-place, and created some confusion in the
crowd, thus arresting the general attention at the very
moment that he began. Silence being obtained, he opened
his address as follows : —“Fifty years ago I was in that
boy’s position, driving my master’s cart across this very
spot, dressed in the fashion of that boy, ragged and torn,
and with the accumulated dirt of a week upon me; thought-
less, turbulent and refractory. Now, gentlemen, I occupy
the highest station that my utmost ambition desires, and
thanks to you and my other friends, I stand in the proud
position, of your first representative in Parliament.” Cobbett,
however, though he thus began his Parliamentary career
in a manner that promised well, w r as not calculated for
the position; there was a certain respectful attention that
never failed to secure him a hearing, yet he rarely carried,
the House with him; nor did he ever quit the dry routine
of business in debates on those subjects on wdiich he was.
well-known to be accurately informed. Hence his speeches.
wore usually very short, but not entertaining nor emphatic;,
on the contrary, they were prosy and common-place, and
entirely failed to support the credit which he had gained
by his pen. He was however, hearty in our anti-slavery
cause, and an honest man, and hence he commanded our


anti-slavery confidence and assistance, and tliis helped him
much at Oldham.
We had still, for a short time, enough to do; hut as slavery
vanished so anti-slavery efforts ceased, and to my exceeding
relief; for while the agency agitation continued 1 was called
upon to attend public meetings in the evening, at one or
other of the suburbs, at least once a week, and sometimes
twice, and yet more frequently, so that I had my own large
share of platform speaking and contention; but many gentle-
men came forward to assist me in bearing the burden, when
the weight of it became apparent, and fortunately it was
long before personal malice had succeeded in compelling me
to resign my official duties. My father did not live to see
the passing of the Act, but he saw enough to satisfy him that
our triumph was secure. Mr. Wilberforce did survive, and
exclaimed upon his death-bed that had he not seen it, he
never could have credited such an astonishing event as that
England would give £20,000,000 to emancipate the slave. I
believe that Mr. Macaulay also was still living at the time,
but on this point lam uncertain. He was a remarkable man,
a native of Scotland, as his name implied, and of liberal
education, according to the habit of his country; but he was
no speaker, and in manner austere and forbidding, though
in temper kind and quiet in the extreme. His peculiarity
was his extreme activity and industry; he rose every morning
at four o’clock*, and dispatched his literary business as
editor of the “Christian Observer,” daily, before he break-
fasted. His business as a merchant, which at one time was
considerable, was always dispatched by one o’clock, and
after that hour he found himself at liberty to attend to
the frequent calls made upon him in reference to one or
other of the many benevolent societies to which he belonged.
I think that I have already stated in an earlier page, that
for many years of his juvenile life, he was engaged in the
planter’s business, as the overseer of a plantation in Jamaica,
and he then was selected to he the governor of Sierra Leone,
in Africa, which was then a small but rising colony. It
was in these positions that he acquired the anti-slavery
principle, and that accurate knowledge of all the statistics,
and details of colonial life, which converted him into an anti


slavery dictionary. Yet even upon an anti-slavery platform
he was no orator, nor ever assumed the character. He
would move a resolution in a few words, marked by good
sense, or answer factious objections with the firmness and
decision that accurate knowledge bestows, hut there he
always stopped, for as I believe he despised the excitement
that an inflammatory harangue usually provoked, and the
intemperate proceedings to which it often led. I have heard
him say at times, “We must be guided by intellect, and
not by ephemeral excitement. Yet he gratified my personal
vanity, displayed at the early age of fourteen, by the publi-
cation of a review of mine, in which I was guilty of drawing
a caricature of Mr. Babington, at that time the member for
Leicester, and one of our most intimate friends, and with
whose family I became intimately connected by marriage.
Such was Zachary Macaulay, one of those men who never
have justice done to them while alive, but whose merits
are disclosed when the full value of their services is dis-
covered by the want of them when they are gone.
There are others whose names I would gladly recall as
my coadjutors in the anti-slavery field, but most of my anti-
slavery papers remain in England, and I cannot do so with
accuracy, nor is there any practical advantage lost by the
omission, for as respects them, most of them were my seniors
in age, and all of them probably, therefore, are now gone to
their reward in heaven.
My expectation of succeeding professionally at Liverpool
was fully borne out, but with rather a singular conclusion.
So far as I know, there was not a single case of bankruptcy
in which I was not retained, though the London fashion
of employing counsel in the bankruptcy court had hitherto
been only occasionally followed. "When at length a new
system arose, combining the administration of bankruptcy
law with common insolvency, there was far less resort to
the court; the professional business in it fell into disrepute,
and respectable solicitors declined to undertake it. Such
was the conversational report of the day, and so far as
I was engaged in it, my experience justified the opinion;
I had been in the habit for five years of earning by it
about £IOOO a year. I retained the same professional


reputation, and attended the court with the same regularity
and perseverance; when it suddenly declined to a fifth
of the usual amount, and showed no signs of recovery,
while the insolvency list exhibited a far larger number
than ever of penniless and fraudulent insolvents, not worth
the expense of prosecuting. My brother Henry was still
continuing to act as the bankruptcy judge at Bristol. On
consulting him, I found that his experience there was
similar, and I also had professional friends at Manchester
and Birmingham, who concurred with him as to the
operation of the new system in these towns. This was
the immediate motive of the change of my scene of action.
I did not desert the court when I came here, and should
have continued to practise in it, while health remained,
had not my intimate acquaintance with it, and with all
its secrets, given me too accurate information of its real
character, in those cases which required thorough investi-
gation and hostile action.
I need go no further into the matter, as it is well-known
to most of my personal friends, that here too I became the
victim of a malicious and secret combination, that sought
to revenge the exposure which I had made of some of their
disgraceful proceedings. During the many hours occasioned
by the depression of professional business, I was accus-
tomed to occupy myself for the printer, sometimes in
professionally reporting, and at others, in literary labour.
The first specimen of the latter that I published has proved
successful to an extent that, in my most sanguine hopes,
I never expected. “The Adventures of a Gentleman in
Search of a Horse” first appeared in 1837, and is now to
he found in almost every family that can boast of a library
in England. Edition followed edition, and since I came
here I have received copies of spurious editions, which
had I remained at home I should have prevented. The late
Mr. Bagster, of Paternoster Bow, published it at his own
risk. Before his death he told me that he had settled it
upon his wife, and that if she survived him she would pay
to me £SO, as he had done on each edition as it came out.
She did become his widow", but she soon after married
Mr. Saunders, of the firm of Saunders and Ottley, and I


have received nothing since on account of it, nor been
again consulted as I used to be by Bagster. I therefore
cannot speak from authority beyond what I have already
said above. The first edition was illustrated by Cruikshank,
the eminent artist. I wrote the book only for the amuse-
ment and use of my own boys, who were then full grown
children. It gives the ordinary course of horse-dealing, and
horse anatomy, and the concluding pages contain reports
of litigation connected with the subject adapted to the
understanding of school-boys; but accurate enough to be
cited as authorities in a court of law. I was one day
accidentally in court on my own business when a case of
warranty was being tried. The counsel was citing my reports
of it, when Lord Denman put on a grave face, and looked at
me as I was about to answer a question of the counsel, with a
suppressed smile, restraining me as I stepped forward, “ Sir
George, I cannot allow you to answer the question, except
upon oath.” Whereupon I of course declined making my
reply, regarding it as a call to order, though it raised a laugh
at my expense. But Lord Denman was a very good-natured
friend of mine, and some years- afterwards when I published
a law book under the title of the “ Juryman’s Guide,” in
1845, he condescended to review it, though Lord Chief
Justice at the time, and gave me the original draft of the
article in his own hand-writing. I have it still and regard
it as a most valuable relic of the man. I cannot recall even
the titles of the novels and nonsense that I have written, nor
is it expedient that I should do so, except in reference to only
one, of a very different character, entitled the “ Life of Christ,”
which was intended only to give a consecutive biography in
a continued form, for the use of the poor and young. It
seems to have had little or no sale here, but it has circulated
widely in England, if I may credit my correspondents. It is
indeed a curious fact that, while by my English publications
I never lost a penny, but on the contrary, realised about
£3OO a year, the few that I have published in Melbourne
have never paid me a farthing, but on the contrary, have
ended in a loss of about £l5O. I attribute this to the
absence of literary taste, for the same works that pass
unnoticed here, have attracted favourable attention at home


in the papers and reviews ; nor can it with any truth be said
that our colony is given too much to reading or expends too
much money on books.
My purpose in writing the “Life of Christ” was, to enable
children to remember the great and all-important incidents
of it; for I kept a daily and gratuitous school here as long
as I was in a position to do so, and was sorry to give it up
when my increasing age compelled me to abandon it. My
experience in this way enabled me to discover that hardly
any hoys, even of those who had received the usual amount
of religious instruction, were able to give an intelligent or
even an accurate account of the history contained in the
'■Gospels.
It was also my lot to publish a variety of pamphlets on
various subjects of professional and political interest, and in
respect of two of these they wrought a change in our social
economy of much political interest. I allude to the substi-
tution of unions for our accustomed workhouses, and to the
great change in the character and duties of our police; indeed
the reform of the latter was generally ascribed to a pamphlet
of mine, published in 1829, that while it exposed the utter
inefficiency of the then existing system, suggested the rules
of discipline that ought to he introduced, and that were intro-
duced almost in the very words of my pamphlet.
I ought at an earlier period to have stated that in 18211
married Miss Eavenscroft, a daughter of the Eev. Henry
Eavenscroft, the chaplain of the Bishop of Down, and one of
the ancient Cheshire family of that name. Our wedding was
at Kensington, and honoured by the presence of Mr. "Wilber-
force; but it was also attended by an incident, worth
mentioning for its ominous singularity. The clerk had
carelessly appointed a splendid funeral to take place at the
same hour, so that their procession clashed with ours, and it
was necessary, according to the then existing practice, that
the marriage ceremony should commence before twelve
'O’clock; the hour appointed for it had been fixed for eleven.
The funeral arrived before us at the church, and the service
had already commenced. It must he owned that this was
felt to be very vexatious; there was, however, no remedy but
to wait, and run the risk; and the clergyman, I believe,


managed it in some way unknown to us, so that we were
able to take our places at the altar exactly two minutes
before noon. The bad omen was not realised, and Lady
Stephen survived till the 16th of August, 1869. We have
had seven children, of whom the present judge is the oldest,
and Selina, the sixth, died while yet an infant.
In 1850, I published a review of the case of Mr. Barber,
at very great length. Mr. Barber was a solicitor, and had
been convicted on a charge of assisting a client in uttering
forged titles to unclaimed dividends. Being convicted, he
was sentenced to transportation, and remained for five years
in the colony; but during these five years his conduct was so
good, and his character so consistent, that he was allowed to
return to Europe, on condition, however, that he did not set
foot in England. He settled at Paris, where again he
succeeded in convincing our ambassador of his innocence,
and obtained, through him, the Royal pardon. On his return
to England, he naturally applied to the Court of King’s
Bench to be reinstated in his profession, and was refused
re-admission. It was in this state of matters that I was
solicited very earnestly to undertake his defence. I was
extremely reluctant to do so, and in the first instance I
peremptorily refused, for I was afraid of its being represented,
or at least suspected, that my real motive was to insinuate
myself into the good graces of the inferior branch of the
profession; but several of my fellow-barristers joined in the
entreaty that I would at least read the papers, and decide
for myself after the perusal. I did read them accordingly,
and could refuse no longer, for not only did they correspond
with Barber’s representations, but proved that the Royal
pardon had been granted, not simply as an act of compassion,
but of common justice; and that the court had been actuated
either by oppression, or given their judgment in absolute
ignorance of the facts. It also entitled him to credit when
he represented his position to be one of absolute destitution.
The result was my pamphlet, in “Vindication of the Royal
Pardon in the case of Mr. Barber.” It followed that no less
than twenty thousand copies were published and sold, if I
remember rightly, in less than a month, and as the conse-
quence Barber was at once restored to his profession, and


Parliament granted him £5,000 as a compensation for Ms
nnmerited prosecution. I gave Mm the copyright of the
pamphlet as my own contribution to his relief. He repaid
me with grateful thanks, hut I have never seen him since,
nor, so far as I remember, on more than one occasion in all
my life. What made the pamphlet so popular was, I
believe the severity as well as the justice of my remarks
qpon such mal-administration of our penal law. Such, at
least was the opinion of my professional friends. I forget
the number of editions through which it passed, but they
were so many that I am afraid to specify the number from
memory, though I made a note of the fact when I heard it,
that there were 20,000 copies that had been sold. The other
subject on which one of my pamphlets is descrying of
mention, was a Eeview of Bankruptcy Law in connection
with Credit Trade, published in 1852. It is a dry, dull
subject, into which few writers entered; but my monopoly
of the practice for many years made me an authority upon
it, and secured to some extent an adoption of my views.
It had an extensive sale. It is most true that the Bankrupt
Law, reformed and amended (as they call it) as often as it
has been, with little consistency, and even without reference
to first principles, does not work well, and worse than ever
mixed up as it has been lately with the insolvent law. Ino
longer have any personal or professional interest in the
question; I may, therefore, hope for credit when I say, that
I believe one of the principal causes of this is false economy
in its administration. The principle of the law is not sound,
and it is carried out in an illiberal and even niggardly spirit.
Nothing can be more true than that in some sense we all
live more or less upon credit: the wealthy trader and the
needy labourer alike obtain a weekly credit with their butcher
and baker, unless they are known to ramble from one shop to
another; mutual convenience requires it. This, however,
varies essentially from the credit given as the basis of mer-
cantile dealing, when the owner may be said to throw his
goods upon the world, subject to certain conditions, as to
payment for them which custom and general assent have
established, and which, therefore, the law will vigorously
enforce. The most important is payment at the stipulated


time ; another is the bona fide possession of property at the
time of the contracting, sufficient to justify the’ r adventure ;
and a third, to forbear, from the very first consciousness of
approaching insolvency, from all partial or preferential dealing
with the remaining assets. Many rules of minor importance
have from time to time been adopted, but the enumeration of
these three is sufficient to explain my meaning, when I add
that from the moment a man embarks in trade, or I might
almost say from the very moment that he avows such a pur-
pose, he holds his property, whatever it be, by a new tenure,
and subject to a sort of equitable lien in favour of future
creditors, as the condition as it were of his admission into the
mercantile world as one of its privileged members. No doubt
it may be asked by a superficial reader, what difference exists
between the bankrupt and the insolvent in respect of broken
credit : does not the same moral criminality lie at the
doors of both ? Or if you only view the matter as respects
the collection and distribution of their estates, why should
any difference prevail P It has always struck me that this
is short-sighted reasoning, that scarcely deserves an answ r er.
In the actual insolvency of any individual, when it is not
traceable to unforeseen accident, to sickness, or to some one
of the misfortunes to which humanity is always subject,
there is necessarily a taint of moral guilt ; it argues a
systematic deceit practised against his creditors, and there-
fore insolvency of this class leaves a stain behind it most
difficult to erase. But it is otherwise in the case of a trader,
unless he has practised fraud or deceit in commencing or in
carrying on his trade; for his very entry into the commercial
world, subjecting his property, as he does to an irksome
tenure hitherto unknown implies an honesty of purpose, as
well as an enterprising courage more worthy of praise than
censure ; he throws himself and all he possesses upon the
good faith of others, and affects no pretensions calculated
to deceive; there is no moral guilt in this to draw down
upon him the reproach of society, or to deprive him of
social immunity, so long as he exerts himself to do such
justice to his creditors as circumstances permit; on the
contrary, in a social sense he is justified in the hope that he
may be made a new man, and begin the world again, free


from reproach; for credit is *the foundation of trade, and
trade flourishes in exact proportion to the extent to which
credit is sustained. What is trade, but an extension of
trust to a pecuniary amount, far exceeding, I might almost
say infinitely exceeding, the amount of capital invested in it?
It is on this principle that the bankruptcy law was
originally constructed, and has been uniformly professed to
be constructed; for trading misfortune is for these reasons
uniformly regarded by the courts of law as a calamity, and
not a crime; latterly, however, it has been subjected to the
requisite investigation, conducted by the same tribunal and
in the same locality as insolvencies, and consequently a
discredit, often as unjust as it is cruel, adheres no less to the
unfortunate trader who gets his discharge from the same
court, as it does to the fraudulent insolvent who ought not
to be discharged at all; while it generally happens that the
estates surrendered are unequal to defray the cost of enquiry,
much less to be worth distribution amongst the creditors,
though their accumulation sometimes fills the pockets of the
assignees, and is often appropriated by them.
It is mainly in consequence of this. that another mode of
extrication has come into general practice, and in important
cases it is certainly preferable to the Insolvent Court for
relief. Large but insolvent estates are now usually convoyed
to one of the creditors for distribution among the creditors,
and a release executed by them all to their insolvent fellow-
traders. This plan usually prevents reproach, and gives
more speedy relief to creditors, but it opens the door to much
fraud, and to some partiality of distribution. In one form
or another I have had, for sixty years, a most extensive
bankruptcy practice. I have already mentioned that I
had the management of the department, and it was an
extensive one, in the office of the Bank of England Solicitors,
and this continued for five years. When I entered the
profession, they handed over so many of their bankruptcy
cases to myself, that it secured to me extensive business in
the Bankruptcy Court for nearly twenty years, and this led
me to adopt it as my peculiar province for the rest of my
professional career, both at Liverpool and Manchester, as
well as more recently in Melbourne. Hence, lam warranted


by experience in avowing it to be my opinion, that the
modern system of substituting the Insolvent Court for the
Court of Bankruptcy has operated most injuriously to credit
trade, and introduced into it dishonest men in ten times the
proportion that used to be found to exist there. I might
almost express myself correctly by the assertion that, in
point of deserved mercantile credit, a sort of felonious
speculation has often superseded honest enterprise, so that
even the practical administration of the law is no longer
governed solely by an anxious effort to do justice to the
losing creditor. Nor does the business of the court in this
colony admit of sufficient remuneration to any counsel to
devote himself exclusively to it, or to avail himself of oppor-
tunity to expose in their true light the infam'ous frauds that
have fallen within his personal knowledge. It is well known
that in the course of my practice here, I have myself on
more than one occasion, while acting in my professional
character, held up some of the perpetrators in their true
light; but in no instance has it ever obtained for me a single
brief, or any other acknowledgment, than the combined
hostility of parties to prove thqir vindictive feeling, as well
as their official opportunity.
Nor had I any chance of submitting those views to the
colonial chamber of commerce, for I soon found that I
was a perfect stranger to all its members, though so much
consulted at Liverpool, that I was indulged with a room
under the same roof, as the court for the general convenience
of the profession, as well as myself.
In the year 1838, Her Majesty was pleased to confer on
me the honour of knighthood, in reward for my anti-slavery
services, in the cause of negro emancipation; and this cere-
mony was marked by a little incident of such a comic
character that I cannot resist the temptation to make it
known in my family circle. I was given to understand, as I
believe on good foundation, that the Queen had been pleased
to intimate her wish that I should be the first on whom she
publicly would confer the honour, and accordingly I attended
the first levee after her accession. The throne-room was
crowded, not only with the usual officials, but with many
visitors, anxious to do honour to the first appearance o£


Her Majesty in state, and probably to see how the young
lady conducted herself on the occasion. I was formally
introduced to Her Majesty, and directed by the Lord
Chamberlain to kneel down before her, and kiss her hand,
when Her Majesty graciously extended the left hand instead
of the right, clearly by mistake; but it secured to me the
honour, unshared, perhaps, by any other man save the Prince
Consort, of kissing Her Majesty’s wedding finger. I saw
a smile on several faces; however, there I remained on my
knees before Her Majesty for three or four minutes! the
Lord Chamberlain, during this time, being actively engaged
in searching every nook and corner for the state sword,
which had been for the moment mislaid. I must honestly
avow, that with all my assurance and self-possession, of
which I always had abundance, this was rather too much
for me, especially when the previous smile had almost
swelled into an audible laugh. My annoyance was by no
means removed, when, being still upon my knees, and
somewhat worried by the inconvenience of the position,
1 overheard Her Majesty ask the Lord Chamberlain, in
a gentle voice, “What am I to do. next, my lord?” I
could easily have told her, if she had asked me, for heraldry
was one of the amusements of my early days; but I dared
not venture to offer my voice unasked, nor could I, even
had it been proper to open my mouth to speak, for the
absurdity of the scene began to be too great, so I calmly
awaited its close, and backed my way from the throne with
as much gravity as I could muster, but I think I shall never
forget it. Her Majesty soon recovered her self-possession.
I have already adverted, and I think more than once,
to the novelty of my introducing public agitation, as a,
new weapon in anti-slavery warfare; and by a course of
action, founded on the model that O’Connell had given
to us, for it has been sometimes in reproach, more frequently
in jest, intimated to me, that it was an absolute departure
from my own, and from my family creed, to resort in such
a way to democratic power; I may be allowed to say a
word upon this point to vindicate my consistency with
my professed principles. I frankly admit that if any
question of personal character could have been raised on


such a question, I could have sacrificed every claim to
respect, for a plausible assurance of success, had it been
through the medium of Daniel O’Connell himself; for the
Mauritius enquiry had satisfied me, by proof that I deemed
conclusive, that a slave colony was a miniature hell. But in
fact, I so far differed from most of those associated with
me, excepting my father, Mr. Wilberforce, and Mr. Macaulay,
that I regarded this question much more religious than
political, and only in respect of religious duty to be
considered as involving an appeal to the community instead
of to Parliament. The committee of the Anti-Slavery
Society, on the other hand, had uniformly governed its
proceedings far more by what they considered policy and
party power, than by any reference to the moral or religious
duty of the community at large. I had long suspected this,
for how otherwise could it be explained that nearly twenty
years after the trade had been abolished, and ten years after
it had been declared to be felonious, no progress whatever
towards actual emancipation had been made, though the
measure was backed by leading men in society ? When the
committee, after full consultation —and it was the largest and
most influential meeting that I ever attended —rejected my
overtures, while they eulogised the plan in detail as well
as principle ? I felt convinced that I had formed a right
estimate of their public character, and that it was folly to
confide any longer in their ultimate success ; at all events,
I had in my possession stronger evidence than had ever
before been offered, of the high criminality of the system,
and it was well worth the experiment of securing for it
general publicity. The policy of immediate emancipation
might be questioned, for many thought that the mere
parliamentary suggestion might lead to revolt throughout
the colonies : the equity of it was also a matter of plausible
argument, for it appeared necessary to involve the extinction
of a property of enormous amount that had accumulated
under parliamentary sanction. But assuming that the
existing system was an increasing crime in the sight of God,
nationally committed, and from its nature, if continued,
perpetually renewed from day to day, it could scarcely be
doubted that such a case would excite the active hostility of


all that was respectable in the United Kingdom, and enlist
every class into an anti-slavery army too powerful to be
restrained. I drew up a creed on the principle, and not
only required every agent to subscribe to it, but to enforce
it upon the conscience of every subordinate society that
they succeeded in establishing. The scheme proved to bo
successful beyond my expectations, while it gave a decisive
assistance also to the popular cause of Parliamentary
Reform, by making its democratic tendency subservient to
the claims of religious duty. I have yet to learn that there
was in this any departure from Tory principle or proper
consistency of political profession. It might almost be said
that a superior power seemed to become immediately visible
in the moulding of events to the grand result; for not only
were the West Indians guilty of the enormous folly of
resisting us in our agency movements, but as though guided
by infatuation, they called for an enquiry into the nature
of colonial slavery, before a committee of the Lords, at
the very same moment that a reformed House of Commons
was discussing the best method of abolishing it! This
committee examined many witnesses,, and thus a new task
fell upon me ; for though it was obvious that nothing
could prevent the abolition, it was also apparent that
grounds of objection might be raised that might retard
the measure till the existing excitement had abated into
languour. Hence it became necessary to scrutinise the
West Indian evidence as it proceeded, and this I t did in
successive pamphlets, under the nom de plume of “Legion.”
They told well, being published as the controversy proceeded,
and it terminated, as everybody knows, in the manner
described in the previous papers ; and with it terminated
my agitation proceedings.
I am unwilling to close these pages, intended as they
are not only for the amusement, but for the information
of the rising generation of my numerous descendants,
without stating my views upon the important subject of
education ; for of late years it has become the general
topic of conversation, and modern views are, in my judg


ment, such as it is, very erroneous in their principle, and
not unfrequently so in the details of their practice. I regard
“secular education” as a contradiction in terms, nor do
I believe in the practicability of it. Man is a gregarious
animal, and society from its very nature involves obedience
to law; and the very nature of law implies authority on
the part of the law-giver ; and authority argues the support
of a superior power, which is thus logically traced to the
existence of what we term “ Hod” Himself, so far as He
has condescended to reveal Himself to us human beings ;
all of whom, as immortal beings—that is, as regards not
our bodies, but the soul that animates the body—are
equal in his sight, however varied may be our gregarious
lot on earth; but how is all this to be learnt unless by the
revelation of the Scriptures ? I disdain, as a Christian to
enter into the reasoning or “ free thinking” of the sceptics
of the day, against the authenticity of the Holy Scriptures.
It suffices for my conviction of their truth and of their
inspiration, that if they are taken away we have no other,
and are left utterly destitute of all revelation of the
nature or existence or will of that ultimate sovereignty
which we confess to exist somewhere ; while everything
around us on which our eyes can rest, not only speaks to
the existence of the power, but proves that it is hourly
exerted for mercy as well as chastisement. These Scriptures
form the only guide to higher knowledge than the operations
of nature can convey, and they distinctly tell us that man
is admissible to such knowledge, only to a limited extent,
and proscribe his going beyond it, as one of the conditions
of his mortal existence, when they declare it to be a sacred
maxim, that “ man shall not see Hod and live,” and have-
even denied to him, while yet in Paradise and guiltless of
sin, the privilege of feeding on the Tree of Knowledge, and
the ideas and language indispensably required to do so;
hence I arrive at the conclusion, and trust I shall never
waver in it, that while it is our duty to exert, our reason
to the utmost extent to which Hod has given to us the
logical power, it is not the less our duty to repudiate such
exercise of it as would substitute or exchange, or in any
way affect our faith in His attributes to the full extent to


which He has condescended to reveal them by His Holy
Word, or to penetrate those mysteries over which He has
drawn the curtain.
Can it he doubted that this is the very foundation of all
that knowledge which is required by our social wants ?
which is indispensable for our social peace P without which,
in a word, man cannot by possibility combine order and
happiness with social existence ? or, can it be questioned
that this is the earliest subject on which, abstruse and
difficult as it is, the infant mind should be informed? and
when its tuition exceeds maternal ability, on which the
practised teacher should take her place ? or can it be
supposed that the elements of such instruction in human
responsibility to God, and absolute submission to His
commands, are of less importance to the boy or girl than
a sum in practice or the darning of a worsted stocking ?
On this point therefore of secular education, apart from
or superior in value to religious education, I am entirely
dissentient from what I fear I must call general opinion
in these modern times. There are a few points also in
the details of what I understand to be the usual course of
modern education, which strike me as objectionable. I
allude to them only as affecting the subjects of education
in higher life.
The memory is not daily exercised as it ought to be.
It is well known that there is no power of the intellect
more susceptible of improvement than the memory. It gives
as it were a power of converting the brain itself into a
library, and thus rendering every hour of judicious reading
of practical value to the student hereafter. I once was
able myself to repeat the whole of Horace’s “Arte Poetica”
without missing a word or even a comma, from beginning
to end, and, though less perfectly, nearly all his odes.
Tom Macaulay far excelled me, and knew the whole
“ yEneid ”by heart. Many others of my schoolfellows were
yet more tenacious of their reading; and we became thus
endowed, by the constant practice of learning ten lines of
Latin Heroics daily. But Lcannot ascertain, though I have
examined* many boys in one or other of our colonial public
schools, that similar pains are taken on system to improve
their memories.


Another omission, so far as I can judge by similar
examination, is the art of English composition, by frequent
practice, and reference to the elegant writers, to be found in
every library ; yet, when it is recollected that in every
sphere of life, men are required, in many cases almost daily,
to correspond with others on paper on subjects of difficulty,
and sometimes of obscurity, the art of correspondence ought
not to be overlooked among the useful arts, in which all
should be instructed. It was our frequent habit as a sort
of holiday task, to take a distant walk to some place of
interest or amusement, of which each boy in the upper
class was required to write an account on the following
day, and u< accounts were revised by the master, and
the best of them, if it came up to a certain standard,
received an appropriate reward.
Accomplishments, such as painting and drawing, music to
a limited extent, dancing and fencing, were also admitted to
a place in the school-room; and chess was much encouraged,
but cards and backgammon were generally prohibited. So
various are opinions on points of this character, that it is
perhaps impossible to lay. down any general rules for
adoption; and yet, such is the request in which rational
amusements- are held, that while tuition in them may be
enforced, systematic explanation of them should be open
to all; and in respect of philosophical exhibitions, such
as the magnet and compass, the air-pump, the telescope,
or the electrifying machine, a lecture upon one or the other,
used advantageously to occupy an hour, at least once a
week in our schools, when the weather was too damp to allow
of play out of doors; and at such lectures, the boys were
encouraged to ask such questions as curiosity might excite.
1 cannot find that occupation of this character is regarded
here as necessarily incident to general education. It may be
so in private institutions, but not sA generally as I think it
ought to be, so as to make us social in our amusements,
as well as in our ordinary wants and feelings.
There is yet another point on which 1 have often been
questioned, and which, delicate and difficult as it is, I should
reluctantly be silent, if my observation and experience of
the past can be of any service in assisting juvenile decision


hereafter. The question put to me in varied forms, resolves
itself into this, What are my expectations as to the colonial
future? I do not propose to go into any question of
political economy, for except so far as experience tells us>
that under similar circumstances, all causes will produce the
same effects, there is no reliance upon the deductions to
he drawn from political philosophy; for man can never tell
with accuracy whether the circumstances of one century
are similar to the circumstances which history gives us of
the last century. So far as we are informed, for instance,
all gold-producing countries have ended their public career
in difficulty and insignificance, yet we feel that it would
he absurd to infer from the fate of Mexico, Chili, and Peru,
that such too is the destiny of Victoria.
Our case, perhaps, is more nearly allied to that of the
United States than of the gold-producing colonies of
America; hut it is nevertheless equally open to the mis-
chievous operation of the causes that have operated upon
the latter; and the action of some of those causes is visible
already in the general intemperance and recklessness of our
social character.
I profess to he no believer in the doctrine of political
progress as part of the science of political improvement,
where by progress is intended the expansion or the expression
of .popular power; on the contrary, it is my belief that in
proportion as authority is weakened by expansion, among
greater numbers, it is less respected and obeyed, and that
consequently social law is less respected, and social comfort,
as well as personal independence, is more frequently invaded
and more generally disregarded. It is shown by the recent
cause of Cameron t). Hughes that, at this very moment, both
here and in England, w'e are the victims of a newspaper
tyranny, rather than the subjects of constitutional power. It
is not eighty years since the “ Times ” newspaper was known
to be insolvent, while now it may almost be said to govern
the State itself, by its influence and moralpporer,w r er, aided by
its mechanical machinery. Yet to what has it led, but a
flourishing Atheism, and all but an annihilation of our
national dignity and continental importance; so that the
morning’s telegram from Europe intimates at least a prevail


ing suspicion that even our Conservative leader, Mr. Disraeli,
has been capable of retracting his views at the dictation of
Prince Bismarck! What a declension is this from the
reputation of Great Britain in 1815, when her voice governed
the world! Yet who will deny her social progress during
the last fifty years ? But still the practical question that
I have mentioned as being frequently addressed to me,
remains to be answered. What is the reasonable expectation
of the rising generation in Victoria? Whatever may he
the designs of Providence as to the future, we are justified
in regulating our own proceedings by the reflection that
such designs have always been carried out gradually, and
by human means; excepting only where they contemplated
national chastisement, and hence I consider it probable
that many, many years may yet elapse, before our national
degradation, if such be intended, is complete. During that
interval, whether shorter or longer, it is therefore rational
to assume that the business of life is to be found on the
spot where we were born; and that to migrate from it in
search of a better fortune elsewhere is a rash if not a
dangerous enterprise. I believe sincerely that the pro-
fessions here are already overstocked, and by no means by
the superior class of professors; but I also know that it is
the same in England, though not to the same extent of
degradation. Trade also, except that which is merely
mechanical, seems to exist far beyond the demands of the
natural market, and I should infer that the exceptions are
not many in which it can be said to be profitable. This is in
its nature an evil that will cure itself, if my suspicions are
just; but nevertheless it should not be disregarded, when a
trading speculation is such as to require, not merely personal
exertion, but the investment of capital or credit.
Official employment is, and long has been, unattainable,
except by political influence; and that has long proved itself
to be the influence of a day, and in this democratic country
to be by nature as corrupt as it is arbitrary. There must be
an utter change of our political morality before any prudent
reliance on political influence can justify the hope of official
maintenance, except by those who are already enlisted in the
Civil Service. Literary support, except in the very subordi


nate position of clerks or copyists, is out of the question. I
doubt if Sir Walter Scott himself could obtain a livelihood
by his inventive powers as an author if he were to revive and
exhibit them only in Victoria.
An overstocked community finds its level as certainly as
overstocked credit or mechanical power; and the constant
return of so many of our well-to-do colonists to England,
seems to prove that we are at present undergoing one of the
processes by which it is effected. Our frequent suicides and
premature mortality by intemperance form another; but the
population still multiplies by the birth of children, of whom
very few are likely to have any other home to which they
can retreat; and what are they to do when they arrive at
manhood, some ten or twenty years hence ? It is the most
important practical question that exists, and yet I cannot
say that, apart from that of our own immediate self-mainte-
nance, it has ever excited public attention. I may he short-
sighted, for I affect no wisdom beyond my neighbours, nor,
old as I am, do I pretend to the personal experience of half
of them; yet it strikes me that in a country like this, where
the land alone abounds, and all besides is scarce, it is to
the land alone we must look as our ultimate resource, till
labour and ingenuity have enabled us by its produce to
add manufactories to our means, and wines and agricultural
productions to our mineral trade. Nor have I any serious
doubt that such will be the legislative view of the matter,
as soon as legislative corruption is either satisfied or
extinguished. In this view, pending the plethora of pro-
fessional, as well as commercial life, those occupations
that will necessarily he required in all arrangements for
any gigantic settlement of land, are those to which I would
advise the juvenile student to apply himself. Geology,
mineralogy, and chemistry may not be indispensable, but
are obviously auxiliary; surveying and engineering, as well
as familiarity with the action of mechanical power, are
essential to decided skill in the capacity of a surveyor.
When to these qualifications we add some degree of agri-
cultural experience, I think we have found amply sufficient
subjects for three years of practical study.


The work of survey is of course preliminary to the allot-
ment and cultivation of millions of acres, and, so far as I can
learn from enquiry of those who are likely to be better
informed, has not hitherto been even attempted on any large
scale, much less with an accuracy, proportional to the magni-
tude of the task. Roads must follow surveys, and railways
follow roads, and be defined simultaneously with the sur-
veyors’ plans, so Air as they can be speculatively laid down,
in the absence of towns and population. This could not be
done in a day, had we all the surveyors and labourers, as well
as all the capital of England at command; nor do I expect
that here it will be completed, even were it bona fide com-
menced already, in less than half a century; but because the
work is slow, it may be deemed perennial, and will supply
maintenance, and possibly secure wealth to those who are the
first to find themselves in a condition to answer the public
cry for professional help.
I have mentioned fifty years as the shortest term within
which it is probable that this market for the profession of
surveyors will be completed. I doubt, however, whether even
in that time, having regard to the enormous extent of the
country, and to the comparative paucity of the population,
such a work would approach completion, though it would
answer the expectation of life, so far as life is applicable to
active service of all who now exceed ten years of life. Such
are the changes and vicissitudes of modern existence in these
times, that it is absurd to speculate upon what may be the
operation, even of fifty years, upon the attitude or political
prospect of any community, so limited and insignificant as
Victoria, that with the exception of gold and wool, we have
nothing to sustain an export trade; and to this may be added
the undoubted fact that our gold trade has become far less
profitable than it was for nearly five years after its first
discovery, and no certainty exists as to the impossibility of
its exhaustion, however great on this subject may be the
credulity of some of our Victoria public. Many other
objections might be raised to the views I have expressed in
the latter pages, but I.have expressed them only in the way
of advice, for so far as I feel personally interested in their
adoption there will survive me, as I hope, parents who will


be fully competent to modulate them according to circum.
stances as they hereafter arise.
Apart from its democratic constitution, I am an admirer of
the colony. Its climate, though variable, is excellent; its
natural abundance is magnificent, though the richness of the
soil seems very capricious. Its scenery often resembles the
most striking parts of the West of England, and the whole
country deserves an English population. I trust that the
progress of education will be such as to neutralise the
mischief I anticipated from its secular character, and to
train our colonial descendants till they become equal to
our fathers of the last generation; and then the colony
will be complete. At present it much resembles a splendid
carriage, paraded in state by a half-starved mule and a
dirty donkey of dissentient minds, being driven by a
bearded ploughboy who never had the reins in his hands
before, and neither knows where he is going, or whence
he came, or how he became the drunken guide of. the
two or three ladies and gentlemen whom the carriage
contains.




APPENDIX.
The strange disclosures recently made o£ the manner of
disposing of the Crown lands, has led to much anxiety as to
our Australian future, and my opinion on that point is desired.
I am not very willing to give it, because to a certain extent
it is a departure from the semi-domestic character of the
publication; yet it is so closely connected with the latter
portion of what I have written, that I cannot remain wholly
silent.
There can exist no doubt that the grant was made for the
public benefit, for the general advantage of the community;
not to promote the wealth of individuals, high or low, but as
a resource to new communities beginning the hazardous
experiment of self-government, under great difficulties and
expense. Let any man review his own position, and he will
feel the truth of this, though guiltless of folly, extravagance,
or intemperance—guiltless even of gold speculation.
This was foreseen by wiser heads than ours; and other
reasons of a political character certainly combining, the
Crown lands were granted for our aid. Have they been
devoted to it in the administration of them P Hitherto they
certainly have not; but hereafter I think they will be, or if
we cannot rescue them for ourselves, I believe the same
power that granted them will find little difficulty, with the
aid of the Imperial Parliament (Great Britain has never
shewn herself afraid to apply the whip to her refractory
children), in recalling the grant, or in enforcing the recall.
I maintain, then, that in no possible contingency of cir-
cumstances ought our lands to be alienated unless on
trust for the public benefit, or for the bona fide value, like
other real property in the market. It is under the impres-
sion that this will be the case, sooner or later, now that the
public attention is so much awakened to the subject, that
I have written the concluding pages. Personally, I can


have no interest in the question, my age forbids that; but,
with six children and thirty grand-children, and I know not
how many more remote but not distant relatives, all
settled in these rising states, I cannot regard this question
with cool indifference. I have no prejudice against the
colony, but I heartily wish that the exact truth had
always been published respecting it. We should have had
fewer desperadoes, and not half so many suicides amongst us,
bad due provision been made out of the Crown lands for the
inevitable want of this numerous class of adventurers; but
till lately our actual poverty was carefully concealed from
England, lest the knowledge of it should check immigration,
as at last it has done. In common with multitudes of most
respectable colonists, I feel indignant at this, but otherwise
I acknowledge gratefully my debt to the colony for twenty
years of happy existence in a small but honourable circle.
G.S.


NOTES.
Soow after the Eeform Bill was carried, £20,000,000 were
granted as compensation to the owners of slaves. Mr.
Stephen (whose portrait will be found between the 17th and
18th pages), one of the ablest men whom I have known in
the course of my political life, and Mr. Taylor, whose high
worth as a poet all England knows, and whom it is a
happiness to me to call my friend, had estimated at twenty
millions, the loss which the planters would incur by the
abolition of slavery. But it was one thing to estimate
the loss, it was another to obtain from Parliament means
to defray the twenty millions charged upon the national
revenue. This could only be done by Lord Althorp, the
guardian of the public finances, and the responsible
Minister for the national exchequer. Lord Althorp did
not shrink from the appalling task. The British nation
had been aroused to enthusiasm, by agitation, and the con-
tinual distribution of pamphlets and addresses. Mr. Stephen
said, with great justice, “ that we ought to be thankful to
God for having permitted us, even at such a cost, to atone
for the sin of so many years of slavery.”— Bussell's Memoees,
page 424.
To show the temper in which the controversy on anti-
slavery was conducted, I am bound to acknowledge three
assaults on myself, one at Bristol, one at Whitechapel, and
the last in the borough, all at public meetings, and the
ceremony was wound up by the presentation of a dagger,
thirteen inches long, on which were engraved the words,
“Death to the Abolitionist!!! James Eobebtson, Sheffield.”
I heartily forgive the senders.


ERRATA.
Page 20, 9tli line, for “ Lewes ” read “ East G-rinstead.”
Page 57, lltli line, for “ was ” read ’‘were.”




