

A BRIEF
MEMOIR
OF
MRS. SUSANNA DAY,
| wau was
li'uni :JJiccmber, 17U8, and who Died 2-tyA April, I S-j-,
/ * AT SYDNE Y,
• »
• • IK
NEW SOUTH WALES.
* . •
■ ** Blessed are the dead, w'hn die in the Loid 5 yea, saith the Spirit,
that they may rest front their labour* j ami theu work* do follow
them.”— Bevel, c. 14, v. 13. >
“ Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth ?*-Come and
tee.”— John, c. i. v. 4tl.
_ V '
'SB CO XL EDITION. .
StiimtM; . -
f'K.IKTEI) UV STEPHENS AND STOKES, KINC-STAE£T.
W
1835?




Engraved by W. Wilson
The Old Church, Sydney, N.S. Wales.


A BRIEF
MEMOIR
OF
MRS. SUSANNA DAY,
wiro was
Dorn December, 1708, and who Died 241 A April, 1802,
AT SYDNEY,
IK
KEW SOUTH WALES.
“ Islt**cd Are the dead, who die in the Lord j yea, salth the Spirit,
Hiat they may rest from their labours; and their works do follow
them,”— Revel, c, 14, v. 13.
“ Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth ? Come and
ee.” — Jvhn, c, 1. v. 4C.
SE COND EDITION.
SpEiTcy \
TAINTED ST STEP HEWS AND STOKES, KINO-tTREIT.
1833, *


ADVERTISEMENT
TO THE SECOND EDITION.
Several person* having expressed to the writer their approbation of
the “ Brief Memoir,” and applications having been made for copies,
considerably above the number of th e first impression ,• it appeared
to the writer, expedient that a Second Edition should be printed, to
meet the wishes of those who may desire to know the influence of
Christianity on the mind of a Daughter of Australia, not in exalted
rank, but in humble life.
The present Edition has been enlarged by a few additions, which
the writer could indeed have greatly extended j but he was unwilling
to Increase the « Memoir” beyond the size of a small Tract.
Tire Frontispiece is a view of the Old Church , in which Mr*. Day
was accustomed to attend Public Worship, Reader, " Wait on the
Lord, and he shall save thee,”
Sydney, 24M April, 1833.


PREFACE.
It is generally expected, that every one,
whose composition appears in print, will assign
some cause for obtruding upon the Public,
himself or his work. The writer hopes it
will be quite sufficient, in the present instance,
to observe that, besides acceding to the wishes
of the friends of the departed, he was desirous,
if possible, to inform some other persons what
marvellous grace the Lord had been pleased to
bestow upon us, at these ends of the earth.
The writer of this little Tract is not aware,
that any female, in the middle or lower walks
of life, who was born, who always lived, and
who also died in this Colony, has ever exhibited
a more decided and exemplary character, than
the subject of the following pages.
Indeed, so many and so great were the
temptations in which the daughters of Australia
were formerly placed, and so few the privileges
which they enjoyed, that it could not be sur-
prising, to a reflecting mind, if, through the
frailty of their nature, in such a peculiar situa-
tion, some of them should never have attained
a 2


to those religious and moral excellencies, which
constitute the truly Christian daughter, or sister,
or wife, or mother. But now, under various
distinguishing blessings, it may reasonably be
expected, that many daughters of our land will
do virtuously.
May they be careful now, so to improve their
privileges, that they may become, as polished
corner stones of God’s temple; that they may
be an honour, a praise, and a crown to our
present community, and a blessing to suc-
ceeding generations. May every daughter of
Australia, now, so hear counsel and receive
instruction, as to be truly wise at her latter
end. And, may each reader of this “ Brief
Memoir,be favoured with such spiritual under-
standing and holy affections, by faith in Christ,
and the renewing of the Holy Ghost, as finally
to enjoy no less peace and felicity, glory and
immortality, than those now enjoyed by Mrs.
Susanna Day.


MEMOIR, &c.
When - Mr. Day had seen and perused a
small Tract, occasioned by the decease of a
little Girl, who departed out of this world, about
six weeks before the death of his late excellent
wife, it immediately occurred to him that there
were some papers, on which were written, with
Mrs. Day’s own hand, Remarks and Quotations,
upon religious subjects, as well as a few parti-
culars concerning herself; and he then instantly
felt a strong desire, that a short memorial should
be compiled and printed, for the purpose of re-
minding himself and his children, and likewise
her friends, of the great grace which had been
conferred upon this daughter of Australia; and
what manner of person she was, both in prin-
ciple and in conduct; moreover, that all who
read the narrative might be directed and en-
couraged to look unto Him, who had been
pleased so graciously to regard Mrs. Day, and
to save her with an everlasting salvation.
Mr. Day soon afterwards, stated to the writer,
his wishes, and likewise handed over the papers
above mentioned, with an earnest request, that
if practicable, a brief memoir should be pre-
pared for publication ; and the writer, having
known Mrs. Day’s course of life more than
twenty years, undertook to read over the notes
and memoranda, which had been left by her,
a 3


and to attempt, so far as his time and ability
would permit, to form a small Tract, or Book,
which might give a concise and faithful charac-
ter of the departed; and, at the same time, be
calculated to lead the reader to contemplate the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus,
our Lord.
Here the writer would, once for all, observe,
that although Divine Revelation declares, “ A
woman who fears the Lord, she shall be praised,”
and, “ Them who honour God, he will honour
yet, should any good thing bo discovered in the
favoured creature, let not' the chief praise be
ascribed to her, in whom the fruits of the Spirit
are found; let no one speak of her goodness ;
but, while we may properly honour the in-
dividual, whom God himself delights to honour,
and acknowledge what he has wrought in her,
let us render unto Him, all the worship and
praise due to his great name and (i special
grace.’* And, on her account, let our thanks-
givings be offered lo Him who loved her, and
gave himself both to her and for her, and also
prepared her for his own blissful and glorious
presence in heaven I
The writer is conscious that his talents are not
such, as to enable him to do full justice to the
grace of God, in the character which he at-
tempts to describe; he was, nevertheless, willing
to do what he could, to meet the wishes of the
surviving head of the family, from which the
deceased had so recently been removed.
May the reader be induced and also encou-
raged, to love and serve the Lord Christ; and
to follow them, who, through faith and patience,
now inherit the promises, and enjoy such feli-
cities and glories, as the tongue of man is unable
to express, and the heart cannot conceive.


Mrs. Day, whose name before her marriage
was Susanna Stubbs, was born at Sydney, in
New South Wales, on the 28th December,
1798. Her father professed the Christian
Faith ; and, like many others, he probably had
more knowledge of that religion, than he was
inclined to practice. Her mother, however, was
a Jewess, and continued to profess her belief in
the doctrines and sentiments of that people, who
still “ arc beloved” of God “ for the Fathers’
sakes.” Whence, by one Parent, Susanna, was
literally a Ilehrewess , and a Daughter of the
honoured Patriarch Abraham. Now, although
“ they are not all Israel, which are of Israel ;
neither, because they are lineally the seed of
Abraham, arc they all” verily his “ children
yet, the promise is true, according to the elec-
tion of grace; and in God’s appointed time it
was manifest, that Susanna, b} r her lively and
purifying faith in the Messiah, w r as really a chikl
of Abraham, and also blessed with him ; for,
“ if ye be Christ’s, then are ye assuredly Abra-
ham’s seed, and heirs according to the promise.’’
—Gal. c. 3. v. 29,
When Susanna was a little girl at School, it
has been noticed by those who instructed her,
that she was attentive, diligent, grave, and
quiet, and seemed not so playful as many of the
other children ; yet, it does not appear that any
thing very extraordinary was then observed in
her conduct.
The mind of Susanna, it seems, was under
some divine or serious impression, even from
her infancy; for, while many profess to know
God, who in their works and habits deny him,
who neither fear him, nor esteem his precepts,
with her it was quite otherwise. In her child-
hood she hud serious thoughts of an all-seeing


God; and although she did not rightly know
him, yet, even then, she greatly feared him.
So soon as she was able to think, according to
her own expression, when not more than between
five and six years old, she felt very sorry that
ever there was any world created, or that any
people had been made to exist upon it; because,
had there been no world, she thought no one
would have gone to Hell, to be tormented there;
for, at that early period, she was convinced, the
wicked must go to that dreadful place, and she
felt she was one of that description, and could
not see any way of escape.
In a little time subsequently, it would seem,
she dreamed that she saw the Saviour, Jesus
Christ, in the Heavens, and that he held out his
arms to her; and she thought that she loved
him. The impression produced upon her mind
by this dream, was never entirely effaced ; and
when she was brought to see herself interested
in the grace of Christ, then, with a pleasing
satisfaction, she spoke of the dream as realized ;
and, in the language of Mr. Newton, could thus
declare—
“ In his own appointed hour,
To my heart the Saviour spoke,
Touch'd me by his Spirit's pow'r.
And my dangVous slumber broke.''
Sometime after the above mentioned dream,
when enticed, by another little girl, about her
own age, to do something which Susanna con-
ceived to be wrong, she refused to do it. The
other girl said, <{ No one can see us Susanna
said, “ Yes, God can see us.’' And, notwith-
standing the further arguments and entreaties
of the other girl, Susanna would not do that
which, according to her apprehension, would be
hspleasing in the sight of God. Before this


event, she probably had been taught to say and
believe the solemn, scriptural Truth, as ex-
pressed by Dr. Watts, in the following lines,
viz. ;
“ Almighty God, thy piercing eye,
Strikes through the shades of night;
And our most secret actions lie,
All open to thy sight.”
But, in the practice of what is good, how
rarely can such firmness and piety be found I
When she was about nine, or ten years old,
being one day with another girl in the street,
while there came a dreadful thunder storm,
Susanna was very desirous to get home as soon
as possible; but the other girl was heedless, and
much inclined to stop by the way. Some
remarks were then made about the thunder
and lightning ; the other girl observed, that
some people said there would be a day of
Judgment, but she did not believe there would
be any thing of the sort; Susanna, then de-
clared her own firm belief in the Judgment day,
and that God would certainly bring every one
to a solemn account for his actions, words and
thoughts, and recompense each person accord-
ingly. Few persons consider, that from the
Creed, which even Children are early taught to
repeat, we may learn the most important doc-
trines for our comfort and guidance upon earth,
and our everlasting happiness in heaven; parti-
cularly, that “ Jesus Christ, who is our Lord,
and now sits at the right hand of God the
Father, will come to judge the quick and the
dead.”
When she had arrived at an age to be placed
in Service, then she exhibited the most decided
proofs, that she was endued with more than or-
dinary firmness and integrity. Her virtue and


her godly fear were both severely tried, and for
these she suffered both unkind treatment and
reproach; her moral conduct was, however, most
exemplary. She was not only strictly honest,
and attentive to the duties of her situation, but
she was likewise remarkably circumspect and
modest in her behaviour ; and although she had
not then any correct ideas on the nature of
Public Worship, yet she always thought herself
happy'whenever she could be allowed to go to
Church. And, at a subsequent period, when
she had obtained a more agreeable and respect-
able Service, and could more frequently attend
the public worship of God, even then, she
Would feel a painful regret, when she saw the
people going to Church, but she could not go.
During these periods, however, she heard many
sermons which made deep impressions on her
mind, and these impressions were never erased ;
for, in later years, oftentimes, she spoke of the
sermons she recollected to have heard when she
was a girl. Hereby her understanding became
progressively enlightened, and her mind more
seriously affected.
A short time previous to her marriage, which
1 was then in contemplation, Susanna’s mind, very
unlike to that of many young persons, was exer-
cised with serious and some affecting and truly
pious thoughts; one in particular, she had, res-
pecting her future conduct, when she should
become a wife, and be the mistress of her own
lioyse. This thought she recollected about six
months before her death, and wrote down in the
words following ;— u When on my knees in the
act of scouring a room, before I had any right
views of religion, or of the gospel way of sal-
vation, it came into my mind, what an excellent
thing it would be to serve God. I then


stopped and thought of it, until my whole soul
seemed to be in a flame I I could see no way
of being happy, but this. I was then in expec-
tation of being married in a few months, and I
came to this conclusion, that I and all who com-
posed my family, should serve God, not know-
ing what I promised,” What an amazing in-
crease of morality, of piety, and of happiness,
might we soon enjoy, if all who think of enter-
ing into the married state, like Susanna Stubbs,
or like the Patriarch Joshua, would individually
resolve, —“ As for me, and my house, we will
serve the Lord I” Then, verily, our Land
would yield her increase of every good; and
God, even our own God, would bless us.’
Of the powerful and manifold temptations to
which young females were exposed, in the
earlier periods of the Colony, few persons now
can be aware ; but while several were drawn
aside from the path of righteousness and purity,
Susanna’s deportment and appearance were so
grave and reserved, that the licentious and im-
moral person was deterred from.making any
unbecoming approaches towards her. Thus she
escaped* many snares,, and was preserved from
various evils, and so, by the restraining grace of
God, she was kept “ unspotted from the : world.”
On the 10th October, 1816, Susanna was
married to Mr. Thomas Day, Boatbuilder, of;
Sydney. This event, for some time, occasioned
a painful interruption to her pious intentions and
proceedings; and, her godly resolution of serving
the Lord with all her house, was not immedi-
ately carried into effect. She and her husband,
though very industrious, correct and regular in
their habits, did not attend public Worship so
frequently as ‘might have been expected.—Mrs.
Day could not prevail upon her husband to ac


company her to Church, every Sunday, and she
did not like to go alone.—This new course of life
was not satisfactory to her enlightened and
serious mind; she thought and felt that their
Sabbaths were not improved, and their souls
were neglected ; and she became very unhappy.
“One night/' says Mr. Day, “about two years
after our marriage, I awoke, and found my wife
in tears ; I felt alarmed, and became very anxi-
ous to know the cause of her grief, and I pressed
her much to tell me; her own words were, as
near as I can recollect— * We have souls to be
saved, and if we were to die in our present state,
our souls, would be lost.' Hearing these words
so unexpectedly, I became much alarmed ; for I
thought she was going to die. I then asked her
what we should do; for I thought I could do
anything that would make her happy. She
proposed that we should pray to God, and go
regularly to Church ; to which I agreed. But
although we commenced reading a form of
prayer, we were not quite regular in our attend-,
ance at Divine Service, until we had been mar-
ried nearly four years/' “In August, 1820, I
was visited/’ says Mr. Day, “ with a
illness, and then my wife’s mind was greatly
exercised about my future state. So soon as it
pleased God to restore me to health again, we
became constant attendants at the Church; and,
from that period, she never would be absent
when her health would permit her to go. The
weather was no hindrance; for she used to say—
* If the weather would not keep other persons
from joining a party in worldly pleasure, it surely
ought not to keep Christians from the House of
God.' At that time, and ever afterwards, she
worshipped God not less than four times each
day, twice with her family, and twice in secret.


The service of God and the care of her family
were her whole delight. She was most careful
and laborious, frugal and exemplar}', In all her
domestic duties and arrangements ; —and I may
add—Happy was the man who made her his
wife; and happy the children who called her
mother.”
From infancy, Mrs. Day’s mind had been
strongly impressed with godly fear, and she like-
wise knew something about the Saviour of man-
kind. But, by whom she had been thus piously
instructed, or by what means the impression was
niade, the writer is unable to state correctly; at
a very early period, however, as before observed,
she believed that there verily is an Almighty
and all-seeing God ; and she was therefore
afraid of offending Him; and when she was
tempted, or enticed, she would say, or think
with herself, —* How can Ido this wicked thing,
and sin against God, who sees me ?’ Even then,
she was not unacquainted with the name of
Jesus Christ; as yet, however, she did not
rightly know, or deeply feel, her interest in his
blood and righteousness. But, now , (1820), the
Lord was pleased to endue her soul with such
divine liyht and life and love , that, with decision
and firmness of mind, she became a faithful
and zealous follower of Christ.
When first the writer of this Memoir held a
short religious, but deeply serious conversation
with Mrs. Day, he remarked, that even hypo-
crites, or dissemblers might have such feelings,'
desires and apprehensions, as those which she
then had mentioned ; we ought not; therefore;
to rest in them ; and although some other obser-
vations were made upon the same occasion,
with a view to distinguish between: false and
true impressions; yet the very sound of the
B


word hypocrite sunk so deeply into her mind,
that it induced her to search more particularly
into her views, desires and feelings. She also
related to some other persons the above remark,
which, from the manner she expressed herself,
was thought, and said to be, both uncharitable
and unkind. She, however, being jealous over
herself, and not satisfied with her then present
state, rather concluded that it was quite possible
she might have been acting the part of a hypo-
crite ; and she, being anxious to be set right in
the way to Heaven, could not rest until she had
conversed again with the same person in her
own house. How exactly do these things cor-
respond with the disposition and conduct of
Lydia, whose heart the Lord opened, so that
“ she attended to the words which were spoken
by Paul:—And she besought the Apostles, and
constrained them, saying,—‘lf ye have judged
me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my
house.”—The next interview, not many days
after, afforded Mrs. Day much encouragement.
The same grace, and the same voice, which
wounded, also healed and comforted. Now,
indeed were fulfilled the words of the Apostle
to the Corinthians—“ I rejoice, not that ye
were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed to repen-
tance: for ye were made sorry after a godly
manner, that ye might receive damage by us in
nothing.*'—“ Faithful are the wounds of a
Friend,” said the wise man; and, “He who
rebuketh a man, shall afterwards find more
favour than he who flattereth with his tongue.*’
From that time, until the very hour of her death,
the writer frequently conversed with Mrs. Day
upon the concerns of her soul.
It is much to be regretted, that she did not
leave in writing, some particular account of her


early life, and of her Christian experience; also
of the means which God was pleased to use, in
leading her into the right way, and in bringing, her
near to himself in faith , and hope , and love , and
holy obedience ; and, likewise, in the spiritual
assurance and enjoy ment of his favour , through the
knowledge of Jesus Christ. This probably would
have been much more interesting to the reader,
and certainly more pleasing to the writer.—He
will, however, so far as he is able, now endeavour
to supply this deficiency, by relating a few of
such facts as have come to his knowledge, and
some of the conversations held with her, in refer-
ence to her Christian experience.
From the time above mentioned, say about Sep-
tember, 1820, until January, 1828, Mrs. Day con-
tinued to enjoy a state of tolerably good health;
and through this period of seven years and four
months, by the more abundant grace bestowed,
with helps and encouragements, in her Christian
course of life, she was most diligently improv-
ing every opportunity of public and private
worship, for the instruction and edification of
her soul; and while she was most careful and
laborious for the comfort, the welfare, and the
prosperity of her family; her husband and her
children, the apprentices and servants, all shared
in her exertions and anxieties, her attentions
and her prayers. She met with many hin-
drances and interruptions, from without and from
within; but He, from whom all holy desires
proceed, and who had been pleased to com-
mence the good work in her heart, was also
pleased to carry it forwards, and finish it in
righteousness. Though sometimes she was
afraid and faint, and almost ready to despair;
yet, her difficulties and oppositions, her dejec-
tions and relentings, on account of infirmity, or
b 2


sin, were so sanctified to her soul, that they
became real helps, and sources of consolation
“ The bitter was sweet, the med’cine was food.’*
The public worship of God, in the Church
where she had been accustomed to attend from
a child, was usually much blessed to her advance-
ment in acquaintance with God and herself.
Sometimes the services of the Sabbath, or of
the Week day evening, were accompanied with
most comfortable, or even joyous feelings, by
faith in Christ; at other times with most humi-
liating discoveries of her own sinfulness, or un-
likeness to the Saviour. But, whenever she was
elated, or cheered by any Gospel promises, or
by any lively and evangelic views of the Re-
deemer, and the blessings which he has pur-
chased for his people, she was very soon re-
minded, by some occurrence, that from the
Mount of these glorious visions, for a little while,
at least, she must come down into the valley of
this world, which lies in the wicked one, and
again be affected with a sense of human igno-
rance and vileness. And when she had been
most deeply cast down in her spirit, whether at
Church, or at home, she was again revived and
encouraged by meditating on the promises in the
Bible, or on the kindness and love of God her
Saviour; or by a short interview and pious con-
versation with the Clergyman, to whom she not
unfrequently applied for personal direction, and
particular instructions.
The pulpit discourses which Mrs. Day ap-
proved, or which afforded her the greatest satis-
faction, were the most heart-searching and most
humiliating; or such as allowed no flesh to glory
before God, but cast down every proud and vain
imagination, and honoured Christ, as Lord of all.
Occasionally, she would express herself nearly


as follows:—“ Such a sermon may, perhaps, be
useful to other persons; but, oh I such is the
darkness of my understanding, and such is the
dulness of my affections, that I, poor vile sinner,
need something more plain and simple, or more
striking and affecting, or more convincing and
animating, or more supporting and comforting
for my soul. I need something more of Christ,
and what he has done for man’s redemption, that
they who glory, may glory in Him alone.” Of
some preachers may it not be said, “ They have
taken away my Lord, and 1 know not where
they have laid him T* But, unto a poor, needy
sinner, how beautiful, how cheering is the voice
of him, who bringeth good tidings, who pub-
lished peace; who bringeth good tidings of
good, who published salvation; and said unto
Zion— Thy God reigneth 1 Behold, O Sin-
ker, FOR THEE THERE IS. A SAVIOUR, CHRIST
the Lord I
Mrs. Day could , never be satisfied with her
own attainments in religion. She felt that she
was not already perfect; but the greater disco-
veries she made on divine subjects, and on the
fallen and perishing state of mankind, the greater
she perceived to be her own deficiency; and
thence, the more ardently, she would press on
towards perfection. She was extremely anxious
to acquire more faith and holiness, more humi-
lity and heavenly-mindedness;—to be “ perfect
and complete in all the will of God.” She not
only inquired and sought the way to Zion, but
she likewise, by the renovating influence of the
Holy Spirit, set her face thitherward, and ma-
nifested a determination to proceed in the path
of righteousness, and to secure, if possible, the
enjoyment of the divine favour, because it is
better than life. Nothing short of a likeness to
B 3


the Son of God, or the mind which was in him,
could satisfy her; nor any gift, or blessing, short
of God himself, as her portion and exceeding
great reward, could afford her spiritual content-
ment.
Through that period of Mrs. Day's life, which
we are now reviewing, her soul was increasingly
enlightened and sanctified; strengthened and
settled in the true faith and in the good and the
right way. She really waxed stronger and
stronger; and, by the Holy Spirit's illuminating
influence, she verily shone brighter and brighter;
and, before the time, when the enfeebling sick-
ness came upon her, she could, in general, truly
rejoice in hope of the glory of God. Her tri-
bulations, or trials, wrought patience; and pa-
tience, experience ; and experience, hope; and
this hope made her not ashamed; because the
love of God was more abundantly shed abroad
in her heart by the Holy Ghost. And she could
look forwards with undismayed confidence in
Christ, and with full assurance of eternal re-
demption.
More than six years before her decease, her
mind was evidently in a very spiritual and hea-
venly state, endued with a purifying faith in the
atonement of Christ, and under the special re-
newing operation of the Holy Spirit; for, on a
paper, dated 26th March, 1826, were found
pencilled memoranda, to the following effect :
“ That Christ died and made satisfaction for sin,
and rose again from the dead, would avail us
little, if God had not sent his Holy Spirit into
our hearts, to sanctify us/' “ What a mercy
it is for us, who believe, that heaven is a holy
place , and that sin shall not enter there !*’
In the month of January, 1828, commenced
the illness with which Mrs. Day was afflicted


during the remainder of her short life upon
earth. About four years and a quarter, she
suffered by sickness in the body; but, it was no
less pleasing than painful, to observe, while the
outward man was perishing, the inward man was
renewed day by day. Such, indeed, was the
nature of the complaint, that she was often re-
minded that her continuance in this world, most
probably, would not be prolonged to any distant
period. Upon various occasions, she was lan-
guid, and burdened with sickness, and with sin ;
but she knew that the strength of Christ would
be made perfect in weakness, and that his grace
would be sufficient for her. . She, moreover,
knew, that when the earthly house of her taber-
nacle should be dissolved, she bad “ a building
of God, a house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens;” still, according to her strength,
and hot unfrequently beyond her strength, she
exerted herself to promote the welfare of her
family, and was also very careful to attend every
ordinance of the Church, and means of grace,
that thereby she might enjoy closer communion
with God ; and that, whenever it should please
him to call her out of this world, she might be
ready to depart, and quite prepared to enter
into the blissful presence of her Saviour, in the
heavenly state of holiness and glory.
The house of God was to her, the house of
divine mercy, and the place of her highest de-
light; and, the public means of grace, she never
would omit, while she possibly could be present,
on Sunday morning and afternoon, also on
Thursday evening. Often her friends were sur-
prised that she could go to church twice on
Sunday, but could not walk to see them on the
other days ; and sometimes she thereby in-
curred their displeasure.


Her soul verily longed for the courts of the
Lord, while on earth; and she seemed to ap-
prehend, that “ they who are thus planted in
the House of the Lord below, shall flourish in
the courts of our God above.”—But the strongest
inducement for her to attend Church, was her
experience of the fulfilment of the gracious pro-
mise—“ Where I record my name,” said Jeho-
vah, “ I will come unto thee, and I will bless
thee.”
Mrs. Day, notwithstanding the great grace
which was given to her in Christ, being endued
with an anxious and deeply reflecting mind,
for several years, occasionally, experienced
painful apprehensions concerning the state of
her soul; and, at times, she felt some despond-
ing and alarming fears, lest God would not hear
and save her, because she saw and felt herself
to be so sinful and so vile; but latterly, her
experience was more composed and happy, and,
towards the end, she was favoured with no
small share of religious enjoyment, by being
enabled to rely more steadfastly on Christ Jesus,
ns her ( wisdom and righteousness, her sancti-
fication and redemption/ Than Mrs. Day, few
Christians were ever blessed with clearer and
more affecting views of the sinfulness of human
nature; or with a deeper sense of personal un-
worthiness ; or with a more cheering persuasion
of acceptance before God, through the merits
and mediation of Christ- She perceived that in
herself she was indeed altogether sinful, and
utterly helpless; but in Christ, she possessed
all that could both constitute and make her holy
and happy for ever.
“ To all that's good, averse, and blind,
But prone to alb that's ill;
What dreadful darkness veils my mind I
How obstinate my will I


In self, I nothing am but sin,
And nothing else can be;
In Christ all righteousness I win.
And bless’d eternity I”
Here the writer would introduce a few of
Mrs. Day’s own observations, all of which,
except the first, are dated in 1831.
1828, October 10.—“ It is well indeed for
me that I am not under the law, but under
grace. I cannot say any thing which I have
done myself; only what Christ has done for
me.”
Early in 1831, she was recommended to
leave home for a short period, that she might
have the benefit of the country air, and be
removed from the' cares of her family. This
was, to her, a great trial, as she never had
been from her husband, or family, a single day.
During her first visit to the country she addressed
to the writer of this memoir a letter, of which
the following is an extract: —
*“ Clydesdale, Feb. 16, 1831.
“ Dear and Rev. Sir,
“ Respecting the object of my journey
hither, lam not yet able to decide. I certainly
feel better, and my appetite is better than when
1 Jeft Sydney; but 1 do not feel at all anxious
about the event. I do hope the Lord will give
me that state of body in which I can best serve
him ; for what do I want with a healthy body,
should it prove the means of a sickly soul?—
rather let me have a sickly body, and a healthy
soul. I did beg of the Lord, some time before
* Clydesdale is the residence of Mr. Charles Tompson,
and of the very kind attentions of himself, Mrs. Tompson,
and the whole family, Mrs. Day spoke afterwards in the
strongest terms of respect and gratitude.


1 left home, that if it should be his will that
I should go away, he might go with me, and
grant me his presence; 1 felt some degree of
confidence that he would, and I believe 1 have
not been disappointed. I find that the Lord is
not confined to places. I have felt much more
calm in my mind than I thought I could have
done, away from home; yet, far from being
unconcerned; for, on Sunday, when it came
to the hour for Church, I felt very impatient,
and could not help shedding tears, when 1
thought how ye were all privileged. I was
afterwards in some measure relieved, by hearing
the church service, and a sermon read in the
family, which they do twice every Sunday.
The former part of the forty-second psalm
will better describe my state of mind then,
than my own words. 1 am very fearful of
being left to my own weakness, and am obliged
to cry * Hold thou me up, O Lord, then I shall
be safe.* I feel like a helpless child, afraid to
take one step alone. May an unworthy creature
beg an interest in your prayers, that the Lord
may grant me his presence, and keep me stedfast,
while away from home, and preserve me faith-
ful unto the end ?
“ From your obedient Servant,
“SUSANNA DAY”
The part of the Psalm which Mrs. Day here
mentions is as follows; viz.:—“ As the heart
panteth after the water brooks , so panteth my soul
after thee , O God . My sold tliirstcth for God ,
for the living God . When shall I come and
appear before God ?”
Mrs. Day returned home for two or three
days only, and then left a second time; and
while on her second visit she wrote the follow-
ing letter:—


“ Clydesdale, March 14, IBdl.
“ Dear and Rev. Sir,
<( I again take the liberty of troubling you
with a few lines. I hope they will find you
better in health than when I saw you last;
and I trust you are abundantly supported in
mind under your late trial. I have thought
of you much since I last saw you. I think I
can see you greatly privileged, in being made
more conformable to our dear Lord. I believe
he will give more to his people than he will ever
take away.
“ Respecting the state of my own health, I
hardly know what to say. I was much better
a week after I came up; but I have not been
so well since. I have written the particulars
to Mr. Day. I will not trouble you with the
detail,
“ I promised myself a great deal by coming
to Sydney, but 1 was disappointed; perhaps
through some , mistaken views. It was with
great difficulty that I was able to remain during
the service on the Sunday morning; and I was
altogether prevented from attending in the
afternoon. This was a trial to me, but I sup.
pose what the Lord sees right to deny, cannot
be absolutely necessary. The frame of my
mind does not run very high. I see great
cause to abhor myself, on account of my
many deficiencies; but still I think I can say,
I have a “ good hope through graceand I
desire to be thankful for the fountain that is
open for sin and for uncleanness, where I can
have access, though away from home.
“ Oh, dear Sir, it appears to me a great and
distinguishing mercy, that the Lord should call
me to a knowledge of his truth, and preserve
me at all in * the right way/ May I not trus t


his ■ gracious promise?— * I will never leave
thee; I will never forsake thee.’ But for this
hope, what a poor miserable creature should I
he ! But now lam enabled, with a weak and
sickly body, to look forward to a place where
the inhabitant shall not say ‘ I am sick;’ where
there will be no more complaints of coldness
in my affections, nor any thing that may inter-
rupt my communion with God. Oh that ! could
be more humble and more thankful for these
great mercies !
“ The following passage has been much on my
mind, —< Acquaint now thyself with God, and
be at peace, thereby good shall come unto
thee.’ May he enable me to renew this acquaint-
ance daily; I think it is my desire.
“ May the Lord be pleased to bless you with
all spiritual blessings, for the sake of our Lord
Jesus Christ.
“ From your’s, most obediently,
“SUSANNA DAY”
“ P.S. I shall know when I hear from Mr.
Day when I shall be home. I hope it will be in
a few days, for it is mot my choice to be here.”
Very soon after the date of the above letter,
Mrs. Day returned to her family, and became
very ill; * from this illness, however, she reco-
vered, so as to be able, for several months, to
attend partially to her domestic affairs, and to
walk to Church twice on a Sunday. . '
“ 1831, May 9.—1 have lately been afflicted
with a sickness, in which I was supposed to
be in great danger, and in which any strong
emotion of either joy or sorrow, was likely to
prove fatal. It pleased the Lord wonderfully
to preserve my mind in peace. I did not feel
those sweet and animating foretastes of the
heavenly state, which I might at other times


have felt; but I could perceive myself in the
hands of a faithful and covenant-keeping God;
and I did not feel one doubt or fear of my inte-
rest in the Saviour, nor any soul-distressing care
about my children. It has pleased the Lord to
raise me up, and in a great measure to restore
me to my former state of health; but can it be
possible, that after having been the subject of
such great mercies, my affections can be so cold,
so dull, and so lifeless ? Why do I not feel
more gratitude? and why is not every breath in
ascending thankfulness to my dear Kedeemer ?
I cannot tell that I have learned any useful les-
son, from these dispensations of Divine Provi-
dence, unless it be, that I see more of the insuf-
ficiency of earthly things to afford comfort in d
dying hour; and more the need; of having
clearer views of my interest in the Lord Jesus
Christ.*'
“ May 19,—1 have this day felt a sort of sul-
len indifference to spiritual things, which has
grieved me much.”
“ May 29.—1 heard a good sermon from the
first two verses of the Bible. When the text
was given out, I could not see much, beauty in
the words; I thought it would be a descant upon
the Creation; and I thought my soul was very
languid, and needed something more. But I
was agreeably disappointed, when the Minister
spoke of the disordered and dark state of the
world, before its formation; but, the moving of
the Spirit upon the chaos, caused order and
regularity ; 1 then felt persuaded, that the same
Spirit must have brooded on my dark and be-
nighted soul, and caused life, animation and
order or it would still have remained in
its native darkness and confusion; and that I
continually needed the operation of that good
c


Spirit to keep my soul alive to God. I had
very comfortable feelings in considering the
office of the Holy Spirit in sealing believers
unto the day of redemption. I thought as sure
as they have within them, the earnest of the
Spirit, so sure they shall obtain the purchased
possession. The ordinance of the Lord's Sup-
per was administered, and I think I was, or, at
least, I desired to be, thankful for the whole
service."—
“ The Spirit brings his comforts down,
In witness from above ;
And seals his members for his own,
With light and life and love."
“ June B.—My heart is a very hard one. To
be humbled, I must go lean, from day to day,
and be left to feel my utter weakness and deep
depravity; and even then I do not find any
thing effected as I could wish. Behold, I am
vile I what shall I answer ? Lord thou knowest
that Ido desire to serve thee. Oh, satisfy this
desire from thyself. Give me closer communion
with thee. Conform me to thy divine likeness.
Grant me thy favour, which is better than life.**
“ If thou these blessings give,
And wilt my portion be ;
Cheerful the world’s poor toys I leave,
To them who know not Thee."
« June 9,—My family are gone to Church as
usual, being Thursday evening. On account of
the critical state of my health, I am not per-
mitted to go ? but though I lose in one way, yet
perhaps it is not all lost time while I remain at
home ; for I have a quiet house, and the oppor-
tunity is, I think, generally profitable to me.
My soul has been in a very languid state lately.
1 have been asking the Lord, and I think with
some earnest desire, to take away every thing


which would separate between himself and my
soul, and to set up his Throne in my heart. But,
here, perhaps,/ ! know not what I ask. Have I
not reason to pray, ‘ Lord, let me not need thy
judgments, to remind me of thy mercies ?'”
“ June 21.—Backslider, what hast thou been
doing this day? Thou hast been contented at
too great a distance from thy God. Well, in-
deed, mayest thou take shame and confusion to
thyself. When I look back upon my life, and
see what wonders the Lord has done for me, I
am astonished at my ingratitude, and his for-
bearance. And, can I, ungrateful wretch, go on
thus at ease ?—Oh, that my head were waters,
and my eyes a flowing fountain of penitential
tears, that I might weep for sin with constant
grief I'’
“ June 25.—1 have, this night in secret, felt
much satisfaction and pleasure, in God's method
of Salvation. My views of the way of access,
through a crucified Redeemer, have been clearer
than usual. O, how I could pity those, however
wise, or learned, or great, who know not how
God can be just, and yet justify the ungodly I
Oh that the love of Christ might constrain me
more and more to live unto him I"
“ Oh I to Grace, how great a debtor,
Daily I’m constrain'd to be I
Let that Grace, now, like a fetter.
Bind my wandering soul to Thee.”
“ August 23,—1 have passed through many
changes since I last wrote here; and a great
deal of matter must be omitted, which in future
might be very useful to myself. I have very
few opportunities of writing in this way; there-
fore cannot insert what daily occurs. One thing
which has exercised my mind very much, was
my dear little William’s being taken dangerously
c 2


ill. At this, I was exceedingly distressed, and
could not find consolation any way, but in giving
him up—body and soul—to the Lord ; begging
that he might be his , in life and in death. It
has pleased the Lord to restore the child to
health again, and I have been taken very ill my-
self ; and the trials which I have gone through,
of body and of mind, I am not able to express.
Death has appeared more near, and more serious
than ever before. My soul has felt rather a sin-
ful unwillingness to leave my dear children and
husband.—Oh, the strength of earthly ties I
But, I do when the Lord is pleased to
take me, he will enable me to resign them, all to
him.”
rt September 4th. Sunday.—-I think I found
it good to wait on the Lord at home this morn-
ing. It has been my desire to feel a closer union
and communion with God; and I have been en-
abled to plead with him for it. And will he not
satisfy those longings of soul which himself has
given, and crown his own work ?—On account
of the damp and windy state of the weather, and
the ill state of my health, I felt it my duty to
remain at home. All the family are at Church.”
“ Within the last few days, 1 have been led to
question my state, and to doubt whether I had
ever yet experienced the real saving grace of
God ? But, here I see there is danger of ovejr
valuing human nature. For, if lam not greatly
deceived, I value the light of God*s countenance
more than thousands of gold and silver, or any
earthly good; and I find my interest so inter-
woven with his, that what grieves him, grieves
me ; and I think it is my chief desire to devote
my whole self—soul and body—as well as all my
family, to his service alone. And can this be
the production of corrupted human nature ?


Abhorred be the thought; for, in my flesh,
dwells no good thing I Mone but God could
perform such wonders ; and the consideration of
it, sinks me in wonder, love, and praise I*'
“ Sept. 11. Sunday.—l heard a sermon this
morning, from Job, c. 42, v. 5 and 6 :—“ I have
heard of Thee by the hearing of the ear; but
now mine eye seeth Thee ; wherefore, I abhor
myself, and repent in dust and ashes f by which
I was led to look on all my past religious expe-
rience with dissatisfaction. It appeared so shal-
low, and so full of short comings, negligences,
and sins against light and knowledge, that I be-
gan to question whether I had ever been truly
humbled for sin ?—Along with this, calling to
mind the Ijoly zeal and humble walk of Christian
women, of whom I have read, I am ready to con-
clude that I know very little yet of pure, spi-
ritual religion. But let me not be unthankful.
Who has been more favoured than I ? But, it
is my unskilfulness in improving those blessings
which I would mourn.’*
. <c September 18. —I heard this morning a ser-
mon on a favorite subject, — ( Holiness, without
which no man shall see the Lord.’ The final
salvation of believers, and consequently their
sanctification, was set forth ; and I thought I
could feel the truth of every word. How true
it is, that none can enjoy the heavenly inherit-
ance without a previous preparation I—a conge-
niality of mind and will to the great Three One I
The finished salvation of Christ, would not be a
doctrine full of comfort to me, if it did not in-
clude a deliverance from sin; and if I did not
feel the work of grace begun and carried on in
my soul,”
“ October 6.—This evening I have been fa-
voured with unusual liberty in pleading with God
b 3


for my dear children ; and I had some humble
hope that he> in his own- good time, will answer
prayer for them. The resolution which I made,
sometime before my marriage, * that I, and all
who composed my family, should serve God,’
occurred to my mind, and encouraged me. It
seemed to add wings to faith and hope. The
thought indeed lay buried, for the first year or
two after my marriage. But, how must-I look
back with feelings of gratitude and praise, to
find that though it was impossible for me to fulfil
the resolution, yet the Lord has done marvellous
things for me and mine I But, though my house
may serve God by profession, this will not Satisfy
me. Lord, I would plead for the regenerating
grace of thy divine Spirit to be poured upon my
dear children."
- To the writer, Mrs. Day, many times, with a
deeply affectionate concern observed, “ Oh, Sir,
I have much cause to grieve and to complain, not
only on account of my own deficiencies and un-
profitableness; but also, because my house, or
family, is not as I could wish it to be with re-
gard to Christ, and the fear and love of God.*
Or nearly thus;
“ Oh, let my friends and children cry,
And look to Jesus for his grace I
May they behold, as well as I,
His glory in the heav’nly place I"
“ October 27.—Lord, I am oppressed, under-
take for me. Oh, that I could weep for sin, in
myself and in my house I My house is not so
with God as I could desire; but, Oh, I trust he
has made with me an everlasting covenant, or-
dered in all things, and sure ; this, indeed, is all
my salvation, and all my desire I What a mercy
that there is another, and a better state in anti-
cipation, where sin cannot be admitted I Oh,


my soul, then shake thyself from the dust of this
earthly state, and address thyself afresh to thy
journey. O Lord, may I patiently do and svffer
all thy will, while 1 may be spared on this earth ;
and, Oh, keep me from sinning against thee, and
make me all holy within.'’
“ December 4, 1831.—This morning I heard
a sermon, from 1 'Peter, c. 4, v. 17, “ What shall
be the end of them that obey not the Gospel of
God?’' with a great deal of satisfaction, while
the state of those that obey not the GospeI r was
contrasted with the happy state of those who
have received it, and live under its influence.”
The following remarks were without any date,
but they seemed to have been recently written :
■ “ I hear that I have been charged with the
crime of covetousness. Now I desire sincerely
to search myself, and see whether there is any
real ground for the aspersion. Ido consider it
a detestable thing in any one, but much more so
in a Christian. 1 have always thought it very
dishonourable to the cause of godliness.”
• • “ I know not how I grow in grace ; the path
of the just is as the shining light which shines
more and more unto the perfect day. What a
comforting consideration it is, that Christ's sal-
vation is a salvation from sin I I want to be con-
formed to his image here, as well as to be saved
by him hereafter. I want to be sanctified in
heart. My cry is not, —let me be saved; but,
let me be sanctified. I desire to know nothing
but what will make sin more hateful, and Jesus
more precious : yet this desire is imperfect, I
feel things of a contrary nature; there is a con-
flict within.”
“ Sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye
are not under the law, but under grace. Well,
indeed, for me ! Now lam encumbered with a


corrupt nature, a body of sin and death; but
when this wall is taken down, then I shall serve
Him with my whole heart willingly I
“ When I see thee, as thou art,
I’ll praise thee as I ought,’'
“SUSANNA DAY”
About nine or ten weeks before her decease,
Mrs. Day desired to visit the burial ground, that
she might see the tomb of a departed Christian
friend ; and select, or suggest to her husband,
who accompanied her, the spot where her own
grave should be made. “ This,” observes Mr.
Day, “ was the last time she went out of doors,
except once to church; and while amongst the
tombs she was unusually cheerful and lively, and
expressed herself pleasantly, as with the de-
lightful prospect, and most joyous apprehension,
that very soon her poor enfeebled body would be
laid in that ground, but her accepted and re-
newed soul would ascend into the heavenly man-
sion.” Here she seems to have, manifested a
feeling which, at another time, with pious exul-
tation, she expressed in the language of Dr-
Watts :
“ The holy triumphs of my soul
Shall death itself outbrave,
Leave dull mortality behind,
. And fly beyond the grave.
There, where my blessed Jesus reigns,
In beav’n’s unmeasur’d space,
I’ll spend a long eternity,
In pleasure and in praise.
Haste, my beloved, fetch my soul
Up to thy bless’d abode;
Fly, for my spirit longs to see
My Saviour and my God.”


The last time she attended the church was
on the 19th Feb. 1832.- Then she was very
weak, and with much difficulty she walked
thither; but the sermon was made profitable to
her soul. The text was Acts, c. 14. v. 22.
“ Confirming the souls of the disciples, and ex-
horting them to continue in the faith; and that
we must through much tribulation enter into the
kingdom of God.”
Some time before her decease, Mrs. Day was
much afraid lest, through the pains or the sick-
ness in the body, she might dishonour her
Saviour, or her Christian profession, in the sight
of those who should be attending her, or about
her, and who might perhaps not fully under-
stand the difference between spiritual and gra-
cious joys, or fears, and the convulsions, or
strong agitations, of dissolving nature ; or how
the renewed soul could experience the divine
favour, and everlasting consolation, and be
blessed and happy in Christ Jesus, while the
poor, sickly, and emaciated body was tortured
with disease; and thus, her attendants or friends,
misapprehending her case, be led to infer that
the Saviour did not, or would not, support his
disciples in the trying hour. She could at the
same time verily say— <c I know that my Re-
deemer liveth,” and <e I know in whom I have
believed, and that he is able to keep that which
I have committed unto himand, before the
time of her departure, all her fears vanished
like the morning cloud. Seldom, indeed, has
any soul been favoured with a more composed
and happy removal from earth to heaven. This
ought to minister comfort to other believers in
Christ, who has declared to every one trusting
in him—“ I will never leave thee; I will never
forsake thee.”


A few evenings before her death, she found
that her cough was very troublesome, and she
said to her sister, Mrs. Jones, t( 1 know not how
I shall get through this night.” Her sister
kindly replied, “ the promise ‘ As thy day, so
shall thy strength be/ will help you through.”
And the next morning, Mrs. Day observed, with
cheerfulness, that she had experienced the truth
of the above precious promise,—it had indeed
been a' help to her, for she rested much better
than she had anticipated.
When Mrs. Day became so reduced and weak
as to be unable to lift, or use her Bible, she kept
by her, a small edition of the ** Scripture Pro-
mises” This little volume, and a small edition
of the u Olney Hymns,” were her companions
while she could read. Several of the Hymns,
which afforded her both edification and comfort,
might here be introduced; but the following
three verses appear to express, comprehensively,
all her views, desires, and consolations: namely—
<c Poor, weak, and worthless, though I am,
I have a rich, Almighty Friend;
Jesus, the Saviour, is his name.
He freely loves, and without end.
He ransom'd me from hell with blood,
And by his pow’r my foes controlfd;
He found me wandering far from God,
And brought me to his chosen fold.
He cheers my heart, ray wants supplies,
And says that I shall shortly he
Enthron'd with him above the skies;
Oh! what a Friend is Christ to me I”
The doctrines and promises, which were most
cheering and supporting to Mrs. Day's mind,
were such as the following, viz,
“ I will forgive their iniquity, and I will


remember their sin no more. I will cleanse them
from all their iniquity, whereby they have sinned
against me; and I will pardon all their iniquities
whereby they ■ have transgressed against me.
None of the sins that he hath committed shall
be mentioned unto him. The blood of Jesus
Christ cleanseth us from all sin. He loved usi
and washed us from our sins in his own blood.
In whom we have redemption through his blood,
the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches
of his grace.
“ Behold what manner of love the Father
hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the sons of God I I will put my Spirit within
you, and cause you to walk in my statutes, and
ye shall keep my judgments, and do them. I
will pray the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, that he may abide with you
for ever, even the Spirit of Truth. The Spirit
beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God. The Spirit helpeth our infir-
mities, for we know not what we should pray
for, as we ought; but the Spirit itself maketh
intercession for us, with groanings which cannot
be uttered. The Lord will perfect that which
concerneth me. My sheep hear my voice, and
I know them, and they follow me; and I give
unto them eternal life; and they shall never
perish, neither shall any pluck them out of my
hand. Neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor
any other creature shall be able to separate us
from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord.
" Whom the Lord loveth he even
as a father the son in whom he delighteth.
Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest, O


Lord, and teachest out of thy Law; that thou
mayest give him rest from the days of adversity.
“ The Lord doth go before thee; he will be
with thee; he will not fail thee, neither forsake
thee. They shall know, that 1 the Lord their
God, am with them, O Israel, thou shalt not
be forgotten of me. This God is our God for
ever and ever; he will be our guide, even unto
death. Thou shalt guide me, with thy counsel,
and afterward receive me to glory. Jesus deli-
vered us from the wrath to come. Father, I
will that they whom thou hast given me, be
with me where I am, that they may behold my
glory. Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, nei-
ther have entered into the heart of man, the
things which God hath prepared for them that
love him. The sufferings of this present life are
not worthy to be compared with the glory that
shall be revealed. It is your Father’s good plea-
sure to give you the Kingdom. An entrance
shall be ministered unto you, abundantly, into
the everlasting Kingdom of our Lord and Sa-
viour Jesus Christ.”
The day before her great change, perceiving
that the time of her departure was at hand, she
sent for the Clergyman, that she might once
more, on earth, see and hear him, whose mini-
strations had been peculiarly blessed to-her soul
for nearly twenty years; and that she might
have the further benefit of his exhortations and
prayers, for the last and most trying hour of her
life. He came and enquired, what was then the
state of her mind; she very calmly, with an
exceeding low voice replied, “ Happy in Christ,
He has done all for me." If strength and articu-
lation had then been afforded her, she seemed
so full of grateful praise to the Saviour, as if she


would have expressed her thoughts in the lan-
guage of the seraphic Young:—
Oh Christ I “ Thou art my all I
u My Theme Imy Inspiration.l and my Crown!
“My Soul's ambition ! pleasure I wealth I my
world I
“ My Light in darkness I and my Life in death!
“My boast through time ! Bliss through Eter-
nity I
“ Eternity too short to speak thy praise!
“ Or fathom thy profound of love to man I
“ To tvoman 9 ev’n the meanest, ev’n to me I
“My Sacrifice! my God!”—Thiswas 23d April.
Mrs. Day appeared perfectly composed and
extremely happy in the Redeemer. Thus, in
the most trying scenes and events of human
life, and even in the solemn hour of death,
with dread Eternity full in view,
“ His faith, the Believer places firm in Christ,
Bids the earth roll, nor feels her idle whirl I”
In the night she seemed to be uttering some
expression about work, or works; when Mr.
Day said, “ My dear, your work is done; you
have now finished your work,” Immediately,
and with great earnestness, she replied, “ No;
I have done nothing—Christ has done it all for
me."
In the forenoon of the following day, the
Clergyman again called to see her; when she
was almost gone. Upon her forehead, stood
large drops of cold sweat; her eyes were sunk;
her cheeks were fallen ; her lips were pale; and
she appeared under all the symptoms of approach-
ing dissolution. Yet she was remarkably cheer-
ful ; somewhat like a person going on a plcasur-
D


able excursion, or as one proceeding on a jour-
ney to see a most beloved relative, or friend.
Her voice was clear, and her articulation quite
distinct; and she herself observed, “How strong
is my voice I” «It will now soon be over.”
The Clergyman, perceiving that all these were
the last efforts of nature, and that her eyes
must very soon be closed upon all around her,
commended her soul to God’s protection, and
guidance, and favour, through the Lord Jesus
Christ. He then spoke a few words, with special
reference to her passage through the “ Valley of
the Shadow of Death/’ and to the unspeakable
felicities and glories of the place into which,
.very speedily, she would have an abundant
entrance .ministered unto her. Afterwards, he
repeated the following lines
u Behold, around Emmanuel’s Throne,
Another spirit bowing;
Low at his feet she casts her crown
. With love and rapture glowing I
'Tis she whose body there is laid,
Who now these joys is sharing;
From earth, and earth’s encumbrance freed,
A Crown of glory wearing.
Her body rests in hope, to rise,
When the glad trump is waking;
Her soul with Jesus in the skies,
Of endless joys partaking.”
Then, as with renewed animation in her
eyes, and with joy beaming over all her coun-
tenance, she said, —“ And you shall see it.”—
After this, and only a few minutes before she
breathed her soul into the hands of her blessed
and adored Redeemer, she said to a female friend
who was with her,—“ I am—more—than—


conqueror—through Him —who loved—me.”
-Thus the true arid zealous believer even in the
solemn hour of death, can say— u Thanks be
; to God, who giveth us the victory, through
our Lord Jesus Christ.” “ I have waited for thy
salvation, O Lord.” Thus lived and died the
subject of this Memoir; and who would not now.
say, c Let my last end he like hers?”
** How bless'd are they in that abode,
Where Saints and Angels dwell with God,
Where the Redeemer's glorious grace,
Creates a heav’n through all the place I”
. In the character of Mrs. Day, besides
what has been already stated, there are a few
particulars which, in the writer’s opinion, de-
serve to be noticed.
She has, by some persons, been accounted
proud and unsociable; but this, the writer appre-
hends is a misrepresentation. He does not pre-
tend to say that she was without pride,; because
perfect humility is not the state of any, while in
the flesh, or in the body. Nor can he justify
her in every act, and word, and thought . He is
aware that in some cases her patience vras much
tried, and that she might, upon such occasions,
too hastily do, or speak, what would subse-
quently cause her to grieve. Mrs. Day, how-
ever, was not proud in the ordinary acceptation
of that word; and the writer thinks the follow-
will sufficiently shew that she was rather
of an humble spirit:—When a decidedly pious
Lady, on account of Mrs. Day's religious prin-
ciples and exemplary conduct, and for the sake
of mutual edification, had several times expressed
a wish to be upon intimate terms with her, she
thought it more adviseable to call occasionally
to see the good Lady, for Christian conversation,


and at the same time to behave with the greatest
respect towards her, with civility and gratitude;
and she observed to the writer,—“Our situations
in life are so very different, that it does not become
me, to be familiar, or forward with that Lady,
whose husband is one of the highest officers in
the Colony.”
She was a person of domestic and retired
habits, and could not be sociable with persons
even of her own rank, if they did not give some
proof of their love to that blessed Saviour, whom
she delighted to honour. In her , verily, there
was no small portion of Martha’s carefulness;
but, in her also, there was Mary’s teachable-
ness ; and she was really anxious, in all things,
to adorn the doctrines of God her Saviour. From
a Child she seemed to have been influenced by
a strong sense of propriety, and she would not
knowingly encourage, or countenance any dis-
honesty or impurity.
From high and conscientious motives, she
also declined all intimacy with persons of irre-
ligious or immoral habits, and even with persons
whose characters were questionable, or whose
conduct did not appear to her quite satisfactory.
She was unwilling that her soul’s communion
with God, or the Peace, and Order of her house-
hold, should be interrupted by associations or
acquaintances, not decidedly and manifestly such
as the Gospel prescribes, or Christ himself ap-
proves. When invited to spend an evening, or
an afternoon with any friends, or acquaintances
who were not accustomed to think seriously on
religious matters, Mrs. Day would observe to
her husband,— 46 How can I leave my family,
and go where my heavenly master is not ho-
noured, or is not welcomed I There is no room
for him, and without him, .1-cannot be happy—l


cannot go.” She was jealous over herself, and
zealous for her God. She wished that Christ
might be magnified in her and by her, in life and
in death; and she appeared to have no desire to
know intimately, any person who did not wish to
know and follow Christ. Thus she loved and
feared the Lord, and she ought to be praised.
It is but just to the character of Mrs. Day,
here to remark, that notwithstanding her very
domestic habits, and her great anxiety and in-
dustry for the prosperity and happiness of her
own family, she was, according to her means
and opportunity, very attentive to the wants of
the sick and the needy. She would also visit
them, and do many kind offices for them at their
dwellings. She likewise took a lively interest in
whatever she considered calculated to promote
the knowledge of Christ, as a Saviour, and the
edification of souls; and, as her circumstances
would enable her, she was always ready to aid
and countenance every charitable Institution, for
the benefit of old or young.
Of God's goodness in giving her a kind, sober
and industrious husband, who, according to his
knowledge in divine things, was willing to unite
with her, in every plan for the religious im-
provement of themselves and their family, Mrs.
Day frequently spoke with great thankfulness.
And her importunate prayer was, that her hus-
band might be favoured with grace to perceive
more clearly, his own eternal interest in Christ,
and to experience more fully, the strong conso-
lations of the gospel.
Her children were much upon her mind, and
while she was able, she endeavoured, upon all
occasions, more especially on the evening of the
Lordfs J)ay y to instruct them in the doctrines


ami precepts of true religion; she taught them
the sinfulness of their nature, and the Salvation
which is by Jesus Christ.
Yet Mrs. Day was not without her domestic
troubles; but these arose, almost entirely, from
the dishonest or slothful; the impious, or dis-
orderly conduct of servants, or apprentices.
. Those who are acquainted with some of the
difficulties and oppositions, peculiar to New
South Wales, in maintaining domestic and reli-
gious order, as well as a strict economy, and a
suitable appropriation of the Divine bounty, w'ill
readily allow, that with disobedient apprentices,
and with immoral female servants, Mrs. Day, as
the mistress, and managing partner of the house-
hold concerns, with five children, and in a weak
and sickly state, had quite sufficient to exercise
her faith, and to try her patience.
The reader, therefore, will not be surprised,
when he is told, that, upon certain occasions, she
would exclaim, and say —“ Woe is me, that I
am constrained to dwell with Mesech, and to
have my habitation among the tents of Kedar I
My soul hath long dwelt among them, that are
enemies unto peace. I labour for peace; but
when I speak unto them thereof, they make rea-
dy to battle.”—“ This is more than I can well
bear”—“ How I long to depart and to be with
Christ I ”
That believing masters or mistresses should
be despised, or calumniated, by ungodly servants,
is not a strange, or new thing; it was evidently
so in the days of the Apostles ; and the human
heart, by nature, is not less corrupt in the pre-
sent age than it was in that period.—And to be
accused of severity, or unkindness, towards those
around them,' or under.their direction, isa charge


not unfrequcntly brought against the real Chris-
tian character. But, it should always be re-
membered, that to do our duty faithfully, and to
please carnal men , is what the Son of God himself
could never do,
“If the world hate you," said Christ to his
disciples, “ye know that it hated me before it
hated you; and me.it hateth, because I testify
of it, that the works thereof are evil. If ye were
of the world, the world would love his own : but
because ye are not of the world, but I have
chosen you put of the world, therefore • the
world hateth you.”
The Christian may be charged with unsocial
dispositions; but is there not a cause for his
retirement, or separation from the iniquity which
surrounds him? Do not the unlawful deeds;
and the filthy conversation of the wicked* vex
the soul of the righteous from day to day? Yet,
notwithstanding their immoral, or unholy course
of life, the men of this world think it' strange
that spiritual minded Christians do not run, or
associate with them, speaking evil of those per-
sons and things, which they know not. But they
shall give account to Him, who is readyto judge
the quick and the dead.
The Christian, however, takes the consolation
afforded him by the scripture, which saith:—
u lf ye suffer for righteousness’ sake, happy
are ye; and be not afraid of their terror, neither
be troubled; but sanctify the Lord God in your
heart. Having a good conscience, that whereas
they speak evil of you, as of evil doers, they may
be ashamed, who falsely accuse your good con-
versation in Christ. If any be reproached for
the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit
of glory and of God resteth upon you; on their’


part lie id evil spoken of, but on your part ho is
•glorified. Rejoice* therefore, inasmuch as ye
are partakers of Christ's sufferings; that, when
his glory shall be revealed* ye may be glad with
exceeding joy.” “Be thou faithful unto death*
and I will give thee a crowri of
t ■" •
“May I resolve, with all my heart,*
With all my pow’rs, to serve the Lord ;
Nor from His precepts e’er depart,
Whose service is a rich reward I
Be this the purpose of my soul,
My solemn, my determin’d choice;
To yield to Christ’s entire control,
And in His kind commands rejoice!
Oh, may I never faint, nor tire,
Nor, wand’ring, leave Thy sacred ways I
Great God, accept my soul’s desire,
And give me grace, thy name to praise.”
• See page 11.
• STEPHENS AND STOKES, PRINTERS, SYDNEY.


