

& JHemorial
ME. EDWAED DIYETT, M.P.,
IN HIS RELATION WITH THE
Australian Cfllmvits.




MR. EDWARD DIYETT, M.P.
The death of Mr Divext, who for thirty-three years
represented Exeter in Parliament, is an event of
more than common interest to the Australian colonies.
Within that long period, the time is to he distinctly
traced when it was by no means popular to advocate
emigration, and when in the British House of Commons
Colonial questions were regarded as neither agreeable
to entertain nor necessary for the general interests of
the Empire. This was essentially felt with regard to
Australia. Its recent origin, its relation to couvictism,
and its long distance from England, contributed to
make it a terra incognita to those whose ambition was
confined to the broad acres of their own country, and
whose souls never aspired to the idea of distant nations
bound together by common instincts and interests.
The change witnessed within the last ten years has
shown that Mr. Divett’s early sympathies were well
and wisely founded. The Colonial Empire has grown
and prospered. The importance of Australia is every-
where recognized. It is conspicuous for its admitted
wealth. Transportation of criminals there has almost
ceased. Home feelings and affections are known to
abound in every settlement. Steam has bridged over
space, and although the “world of waters” still
intervenes, instead of weary months, only weeks are now
required for the most perfect system of correspondence.
Early in his public career Mr. Divexx identified
himself with these questions. He openly advocated
the cause of colonisation. He regarded it as a safe
solution to the troubles which afflicted England ; for then
distress was unrelieved by free trade, and poverty stalked
abroad with yearnings for manly labour unsatisfied.
The cry of discontent was loud and rampant in the


land. In those days the doctrines of Gihbon Wakefield,
Sir W. Molesworth, and Charles Puller had the support
of a goodly band of earnest, striving politicians, and
in Parliament, through the pi'ess, by means of lectures,
and the aid of public bodies, ever)- opportunity was
embraced for imparting information or encouraging the
industrious to seek better homes and new fields for
employment. Time nor money were spared to give
effect to the principles thus promulgated.
It was a work not less noble than its leaders. It
early attracted a goodly following, and were it necessary
now to recount those who constituted the pioneers,
no wonder would be felt that Edward Divett was of
the number. He laid no claim to originating measures
of colonisation ; but South Australia was then struggling
into existence, and had atti’actions which induced him
to identify himself with its progress. It greatly needed
true and ardent friends. Its affairs were at a low ebb;
instead of progress there was retrogression; quarrels
between Colonial and Home authorities increased the
diificulties, and those who had embarked in the ad ven-
ture were almost for abandoning their hopes and giving
over in despair. His firm and resolute will, however,
was for a very different course. He counselled per-
severance, stimulated those whose zeal was flagging,
infused new blood where wanted, and as his influence
extended, he imparted a vital power to all who had
charge or control over the interests concerned. In this
way he served the young and rising colony. He rejoiced
that by a good system of land sales labour and capital
were together attracted there, and with his large faith
in hard work, he witnessed with pleasure the accession
of many true English yeomen to the settlement. As
a country gentleman he had leanings to his class.
He loved the land; its productive power gave new
interest to his mind, and he often asserted that with


a virgin soil and ordinary intelligence, there were no
bounds to the prosperity which a young settlement
might attain. Mining, whether for gold or other
metals, scarcely had equal attractions. Probably, living
in the neighbourhood of a mineral county, he saw
too much of the worst side of such pursuits The
uncertainty, the gambling, the infinite risks, deterred
him from thinking them suitable to the patient, plodding
industry which leads to greatness in individuals as in
states. But as the external commerce of the young
Colonics widened every fear was removed of their
future greatness. Sound free trader as he was,
he regarded their increased connections as the best
guarantee for prosperity; and above all things it
gladdened his mind to find India receiving Australia’s
wealth in exchange for her products, England’s manu-
factures exported in return for the raw staples, and
when in the progress of time countries like America,
the Cape, and the distant Isles of the Pacific, had
supplies from the Colonies, there was ample confirmation
of his opinion that trade in the world at large was,
after all, hut young, and might yet have an expansion
beyond any of the limits hitherto attained.
With these principles he became eminently useful,
especially, too, from having a seat in Parliament. He
was not on the Committee, but he gave some assistance
in arranging the affairs of South Australia in 1841-2,
and by assiduous attention and study of the complica-
tions which had arisen from divided authority, helped
to bring that amount of Government interference
necessary alike for financial purposes and restoring
regularity to the social machine. He determined to
maintain South Australia free from convictism, and
he successfully resisted the Home authorities in the
attempt to pass the act of 1842 without a clause which
would preserve that as a fundamental feature of its


existence. With an early belief in the application of
steam to ocean navigation, he also rendered effective
service in 1851 on Lord Jocelyn’s Committee, which
settled some important principles not yet disturbed,
—for instance, the lied Sea route rather than that via
Panama; the southern course instead of the northern
by Torres Straits; powerful sea-going vessels, hut not
of too heavy a tonnage, rather than steamers with
mere swiftness or of unwieldy proportions. As a true
disciple of Post-office reform, he joined in every
endeavour for quick, cheap, and regular transmission
of letters, and, like all engaged in that interesting
social experiment, marvelled at the results achieved
by the wise yet simple measure of improving communi-
cation, facilitating business, and fostering kind and
friendly feelings.
By his steadfast adherence to South Australia,
Mr. Divett was recognised as the most fitting Chairman
both of the South Australian Company and the Bank
of South Australia. The Proprietors regarded him as
a firm and vigorous chief; the Directors felt that
under his presidency, they were certain to have high-
minded, gentlemanly co-operation, and the executive
officers knew they had a true and loyal friend. In
his relations with these Companies, there was something
eminently suited to his genius. He knew business
rather in connection with sound principles than by its
actual details. Without a commercial training, and,
indeed, with no professional education, he was often
surpassed by many in ordinary commerce. He shone,
however, in controlling and following others’ proceed-
ings ; as a critic he was often perfect, and none could
sooner discern a fallacy either in principle or the method
of its application. In his judgment of men, few could
be better relied upon ; and this faculty in dealing with
those at a distance, whom he could only see with


the “eye of faith,” was, in the position he held,
an invaluable gift. Prompt, zealous, painstaking,
endowed with great physical strength as well as a
fine nervous energy, and with a temper that he held
in admirable obedience to reason, his connection with
these Companies mnst long, very long, be remembered
with pleasure, and distant will be the day when those
now in charge can feel that his superior has been
found, or that confidence can again he so largely and
ungrudgingly bestowed. The Bank Directors only
twelve months before his death, desiring to testify
their regard, requested from him the favor to sit for
his portrait. This picture, which is a fine specimen
of the genius of Mr. Boxale, TLA., was only hung
in the Board Boom a week or two before his death
—just in time for those meetings, when, in singularly
appropriate terms to the Proprietors and in affectingly
kind words to his brother Directors, he seemed to be
lingering his thanks for long years of confidence with
warm and manly feelings of regard to those with whom
he had been so honorably associated.
Evil may live after some men, but the good, far
from being “ interred with the bones ” of others, ought
to be regarded with admiration. If, then, nobleness,
disinterestedness, and fidelity have any claims, Mr.
Divetx possessed all these in no common degree. He
was a fine specimen of a “ fighting English gentleman”
• —brave yet chivalrous, —and if there were battles to
win, principles to contend for, and any good cause that
needed a champion, none so well as he to be relied
upon or trusted in the hour of adversity. The
pilot who safely guides the vessel when storms beat
high, is a good representative of the statesman, who
is never so well tried as when difficulties and dangers
surround his country. Edward Divett was of this
class. He had a true ambition which soared well when


fAT/
BtSUO
co/jLf 8
ALFRED BOOT, PRINTER BY STEAM POWER, DOCKIIEAD, S.E.
clouds were gathering, and if the storm was tierce, it
had a charm for him, that he might by boldness allied
with prudence, conduct himself and others properly
through all trouble. With imperial rather than local
instincts his public career was frequently thus distin-
guished, and those who remember him when all that
is valued as political progress in these modern times,
had to he contended for, know full well and have amply
testified that he has done “ good suit and service.”
Now that his name will no longer be on the country’s
“muster-roll” in future divisions, there is enough
recorded in the past to prove he lived in a great age,
fought for great principles, and had the satisfaction of
witnessing more than ordinary triumphs. Apart from
his Parliamentary life, that portion of his career devoted
to industrial pursuits is by no means unimportant.
Here in counsel he was sagacious, far-seeing, and
prudent, daunted by no difficulty and persevering to
the end. These qualities of mind and character, which
have had many admirers, cannot be without their value
even as a remembrance among old friends, or as an
example to those who may enter into his labours; and
now that he has gone to his fathers, Mr. Divett has
left in the circles where his noble presence was
familiar, those who can testify to his many public
virtues; those who will remember his conversational
powers, fine animal spirits being in harmony with
genial humour ; those, too, —even though their number
be more rare, —who well know that he was in private,
sincere in his attachments, generous in his friendships,
kind and considerate to all. —Extracted from the
41 Australian and Netv Zealand Gazette .”
