

Purity Series—No. 14.
Australasian White Cross League.
A MEDICAL TALK
To Girls,
BY A SYDNEY DOCTOR.
Price: One Penny.
AUSTRALASIAN WHITE CROSS LEAGUE,
56 ELIZABETH STREET. SYDNEY.


Australasian White Cross League.
Headquarters:
56 Elizabeth Street, Sydoey, N. S. Wales.
Postal Address : BOX 1280 J., G.P.0., SYDNEY.
Telephone: 81094.
President: Hon. Richard Arthur, M.D., M L.A.
Hon. Treasurer: Mr. W. E. Cooper.
Hon. Secretary : ff«, E. Wilson.
YOU MAY HELP BY—
!• Warning young people, or seeing they are warned
against impurity by competent persons, as
Parents, elder Members of the family. Clergymen
or the family Doctor.
8. Circulating White Cross Literature, which can be.;
had from the General Secretary. Boot lets for,
Men and Lads, Women and Girls.
(See List on Back Cover.)
3. Endeavoring to induce Clergymen, Schoolmasters
and others to read the literature, and arrangb
■with General Secretary for Lectures to Men, and
to Boys in class or mass meetings.
4. Subscribing a Small sum annually to aid the
increment.


A MEDICAL TALK TO GIRLS.
The sex instinct has been implanted in us 6 y
God. It is the strongest next to that of Self-
preservation. There is nothing unworthy about
it —nothing impure. You remember God created
male and female of all species and last of all
man and woman, and pronounced them to be
good. Anything, then, that is “bad” about
sex is what has been brought into it by bad
thoughts of people. In God’s sight it is one
of the most wonderful things of His creation.
Being God’s gift it must be good and natural.
This instinct is always the more powerful in
the male, though in the female it is present
but not so marked until aroused.
What has God given this instinct for, and
why has He thus made us? So that by this
means the world may continue. God has
entrusted to all species to reproduce themselves.
In Genesis 1, 22-28, God said to all His creation,
"Be fruitful, and multiply and replenish the
earth;” and to enable this to be done God
implanted in all His creation the sex instinct,
and the different sexes.
These different sexes are seen not only in
what we call living animals, but in the vege-
table creation as well —flowers, etc. The pro-
duction of a new flower or plant or animal of
any kind depends upon the union of the male


element with the female. In the flower, as
most of you know, the two sexes are often
combined. There is the stamen with the anther
containing the pollen—this represents the male
part—and there is the stigma, style and ovary
with seeds (eggs)—representing the female
part. By means of wind, bees, butterflies and
other insects, this pollen is carried to the
stigma, down the style to the seed box or ovary,
and there the union takes place, the seeds are
fertilised and can grow when placed in suit-
able soil. At other times there are male
flowers distinct from the female, but the same
process takes place and the pollen is carried
from the male flower to the female flower.
When we come to another species, viz., the
fishes, we find that some kinds of fish, e.g.,
oysters, have the male and female elements
within themselves. On the other hand fish have
the separate sexes, and the female fish deposits
her eggs in the still water, and the male fish
deposits the male material called sperm or
semen among these eggs and they become fer-
tilised and rapidly form into young fish. Thus
you will see that the eggs are fertilised after
they leave the mother’s body.
In birds, as you know, the eggs are fertilised
while in the body of the female, and then after
a short time are laid in the nest and hatched
out.
In higher animals or mammals, including
man, the process is more complex. Not only


is the egg fertilised while in the mother’s body,
hut as the egg grows, instead of being laid
as an egg, it actually “hatches out” in the
mother’s body, and is only expelled or “horn
after it has grown quite large. The female
thus nourishes her young for some time, often
for several months, in her 'own body before
hirth occurs.
Another way, too, in which the higher
animals differ from all the lower ones is by
feeding the young for some time after they
are born with special milk forming organs
called the breasts. All female mammals have
one or more pairs of these breasts, which
become active just after the birth of their
young and continue so for some months. There
is no need for me to go into great detail as to
the actual formation of the sexual organs of
all females, including girls, but something
should be said to enable you to understand
the importance of the subject we have in hand.
All females have in their bodies the ovary
which contains the eggs, and a tube leading
from this ovary to the uterus or womb. As
you are all aware, about each four weeks, some-
times shorter, sometimes longer, there comes
from every girl and woman a blood discharge
which is called the menses. About this time,
too, although you are not aware of it, one egg
in the ovary becomes mature and leaves the
ovary and travels down the tube into the womb.


If there is no male element or semen to meet
this egg, then it dies and nothing further
happens until another month comes round. Of
course, in single girls and women there should
nener be any male semen introduced into the
womb. In married people God has so ordained
that this is the way the race is to be con-
tinued and so by the union of the mature egg
from the mother and the semen from the father
which is introduced into the womb of the
mother, there begins a new life —a baby.
Unfortunately we see and hear of single girls
and women who have committed that awful sin
of fornication or adultery with some man or
boy, the result of which is that before marriage
they become what only they should be after
marriage, viz., mothers, and have the disgrace,
instead of what should be a joy, of giving birth
to a baby. We may have occasion to refer to
this later.
So the mother nourishes her baby within her
own body in the womb for nine months, during
which time the baby grows larger and stronger,
the nourishment from the mother going into her
blood and her blood into her baby, and thus it
grows. You can see from this how intimate
is the connection between mother and baby and
how careful the mother should be that no harm
comes to her growing baby. This harm is not
only physical in nature, but even more so
mental and spiritual , We all know how childroa


"take after” their parents, how like in appear-
ance, in temperament and character. And this
is more true of the mother than of the father,
and we can well understand how this comes
about by the fact we have just mentioned of
the close and intimate connection of the mother
and baby before it is born. Thus it follows that
as children inherit the physical appearances of
their parents, so they do the mental and
spiritual characteristics. This is most
important to remember, because, as girls and
boys grow into young womanhood and man-
hood, their characters become formed and these
characters will be handed down to their
children. If there are any defects in the
parents they are generally noticed more or less
in the child.
This brings me, then, to say that every girl
worth the name has the desire that in due time
she should become a mother and have a home
and all that motherhood and a home really
should bring of joy and happiness to her life
and to others. If, then, she is to be a worthy
mother she must begin to equip herself for such
a “high and holy office” while she is growing
np. You girls are now forming your characters,
and as your characters are formed and settled,
so to a large extent will be the characters of
your children. There are three lines on which
you must devote some care and attention if you
are to be what you desire to be, viz., mothers
worthy of the name. Unfortunately, many girls


do not realise the importance of beginning,
when they are girls, to prepare for their future.
First. Physical Health. Do not forget that
your “body is the temple of the Holy Ghost,”
1 Cor. 6, 19-20, and, therefore, you must take
care of your bodies, not abusing them in any
way. To keep in good health you need plenty
of fresh air, exercise, work, sufficient sleep and
rest.
We all feel better after a day’s outing because
we inhale so much oxygen and therefore are
stronger and healthier. Everybody should have
as much fresh air day and night as possible.
Exercise. Recreation is good and necessary:
not to be overdone. Work also -within modera-
tion. Some people work too much, others too
little. Sleep and Rest are most essential for
the repair of the waste which occurs during
the day—therefore night tennis, except occa-
sionally, is apt to be harmful. But far more
harmful is the habit of spending the night in
the foul and heated air of the Picture Show
or Theatre, or the more dangerous habit of
going to dances. This last habit is not only
fraught with much danger physically, hut also
morally.
So, then, if a girl is to be a strong mother
physically, she must be a girl who looks after
her health in the way we have indicated, not
forgetting, of course, good food, the regular


daily bath with plenty of soap, the absolute
avoidance of alcohol in any form, instead, drink-
ing plenty of water, or milk and water.
Second. Mind Health. You must store your
mind with good, wholesome, healthy thoughts,
read good books, books that will give you
something worth while to think about, that
will place before you high ideals, worthy of
aiming at, that will let you see women worthy
to be imitated.
The mind grows by what it feeds on, and if
you only read trashy novels or if your thoughts
are only those that you have of the play or the
picture, or the latest fashion or craze, then you
will develop into a worthless person who can do
nothing but giggle and whose whole conversation
is about pleasure, dress and such like. Surely
you want your child to be a “worth while”
child. Surely your husband expects of you
something more than being a doll. Remember
your child will have some of your charac-
teristics of mind as well as of your body.
Third. Soul Health. Above all, live a
Christian life, think of good, religious things,
read your Bible, attend your Church, keep in
touch with God by prayer and communion, and
not only will you be a blessing to others, but
your child will have a better start in life and
be strengthened to resist the temptations of
life, because his mother was a good, saintly
woman and did her best before her marriage


and after to live to the highest and best. This
means that you must give your heart to Jesus
noio while you are girls and young women,
because so often, as you get older, you are
drawn away with the many attractions of life
and thus lose your greatest opportunity of being
a strong woman in the best sense and of im-
pressing your spiritual strength upon your off-
spring. Having thus prepared yourself, and
keeping yourself constantly prepared, you will
realise that motherhood and home demand a
mate for their accomplishment. Hence the
question of choosing a husband is one of the
most important events in a girl’s life. It
should not be rushed. Beautiful as mother-
hood and home should be, and may be, there
are worse things than ncft being married. We
have all probably had experience of people who
instead of being happy after marriage and their
home a heaven, their home is hell, and natur-
ally they are unhappy.
This is largely due to unsuitable marriages,
and too young. Without sufficient knowledge
of each other the man and woman are legally
married, but there is no real spiritual union
or affinity, and soon, how soon, they tire of
each other and their lives are soured and spoilt.
Because this act of choosing a husband is so
important it should not be undertaken lightly.
If there is anything about which we need God’s
guidance it is in this matter. Generally a


husband is chosen from our companions.
Hence the importance of being careful in the
choice of our companions. We may never think
that our companionships will lead any further,
but we cannot tell, hence it is of the utmost
Importance that our companions should be of
such a character that, should companionship
ripen into anything deeper, we will have
nothing to regret. Thus, from the beginning
■choose suitable companions, both female and
male.
But among your companions or acquaintances
there may be one who seems to care for you
and is paying you special attention and you do
not object to these attentions. What kind of
a young man should he be? What kind of
life do you expect him to live? What char-
acteristics should you demand that he possess?
(1) Purity. He should be a man of clean
lips and clean mind, as well as, of course, of
clean, healthy, not diseased body. The man
who can look upon impurity in thought, word,
or act, with any allowance, is not the man for
you, or the man who will make a fit lifelong
companion for you.
(2) Chivalry. He should respect the oppo-
site sex and say or do nothing that will be
nngentlemanly or coarse or indelicate. The
man who can talk slightingly or irreverently of
women will not have much love or respect for
you.


(3) Total Abstinence from Alcohol. Beware
of the man who takes the smallest drop of
alcohol in any form. Many will say that they-
only take it in company or on special occasions,
and that it will never enslave them. Do not
forget that all drunkards were once moderate-
drinkers. My experience as a- doctor tells me
that so. much of the misery in married life is
due to the husband “drinking.” How many
tell us that they did not know their husbands
drank until after they had been married, or
that, if they did know, their husbands had
promised them that they would give up the
drink after marriage. They never do, but
generally go from bad to worse. So beware
of the smell of alcohol and have no one as
your husband who is not entirely opposed to.
alcohol as a beverage.
(4) Religious Feelings and Desires. There
are many people who think they are happy
without religion, and will point to many
religious people who do not seem to be happy.
Pleasure is not necessarily happiness. One
may be happy without much that people call
pleasure, and there are many people who have
much pleasure and are far from happy. Why?
Because true happiness does not depend on
external circumstances. Happiness is really a
condition of the heart, not of the pocket or the
stomach or the mind. And you all want to
be happy in the best sense, thus you must


yourself have the source of happiness in your
heart and your companion must have the same.
You cannot demand of him more than you
are prepared to concede to him, if demanded.
If you have one who is prepared to be pure,
chivalrous, a total abstainer, truly religious,
then, if he seeks you to be his wife, you should
not lightly refuse him. I know there are
other things which influence choice, such as
family reasons, ability to support a wife and
home, and other reasons, but these are outside
the scope of my address. lam only dealing
with the personal relationships of the man and
woman.
Having demanded from the man such high
qualifications, what kind of a ivoman are you
going to he? Remember that, as a rule, men
require the women who are to be their wives
to be better than they are themselves. There
is in many quarters the idea that a young
man may or even must “have his fling,” must
“sow his wild oats,” before he settles down.
With this X entirely disagree. The moral
code should be equally binding on the man as
on the woman. The main thing for you to
remember is that “Dove must he founded on
respect.” You cannot love what you do not
respect. You may respect what you cannot
love, but you cannot do the reverse. Thus, if
you are to merit the love of a true, good man,
you must first of all win his respect. The way
to do this is to do nothing to lose your own.


self respect. Many girls do things today with-
out realising that they lose their self-respect
In so doing, and many men laugh at what girls
do, while the girls themselves think that the
men admire them; they do not. As I said at
the beginning of my address, the male is always
the stronger sexual animal, and lils sex instinct
is very easily aroused by the actions of the
female. This is true of lower animals, and
especially true of man. Hence you girls must
realise that there are things you may do and
say and allow to be done, that, unconsciously
to you, arouse the sex instinct in your male
companions.
With this aspect of the question I will close
my talk. Do nothing that will in any way
make your companion fall a victim of his sex
passion. It is not wrong for a man to have
this instinct, but it is his duty to keep it under
control, and it is your duty, if you truly love
your companion, to help him to control what
otherwise will ruin both him and you.
(1) Behave yourself in a modest womanly
fashion. How often do we see girls, and even
women, behaving in an immodest, unseemly
manner in the presence of men and, instead of
being a help to them, are the means of exciting
them. Keep away from the company of girls
who thus behave and you will not get into the
habit of so doing and hence, when in the
company of the one you love, either by yourself


or with others, you will not be guilty of making
it harder for him to be a true man and a true
lover.
(2) Dress Decently. The dress of most
girls is positively indecent and, in my opinion,
a direct incentive and appeal to a man’s sexual
appetite. The modern fashion of short skirts
and short (if any) sleeves, and low necks, is,.
I believe, a device of the Devil, and largely
accounts for the amount of immorality that,
exists in our midst.
(3) Allow no Familiarities. The sex:
instinct in man is aroused not only by sight,
but by touch, and if a girl allows a young man
to embrace her and to feel her body close to
his, then his passion is aroused even more than
by sight. lam quite aware that such things
can be done without any further familiarity,
but such is dangerous, unless you have known
your companion to be a man of strong moral
character, who is able to control himself under
such circumstances.
Allow no familiarities in speech. Suggestions
may be made .that may lead to acts which are
morally wrong. Most of the troubles between
young people occur because Love is confused
with Passion. Many a man deludes himself
and his female companion that he greatly loves
her, when he has a passion for her and not love,
and whereas. Love is the greatest thing in the
world. Passion is the basest thing in the world.


“God is love,” and therefore love is the purest,
highest thing possible. On the other hand,
Passion is the uncontrolled desire for lust, the
gratification of the sex instinct, which desire
if not checked leads to disaster and ruin. Many
girls have been ruined in body and soul by
yielding to the persuasions of those -who should
have heen their protectors, who professed to
love them, whereas, they only wanted them
so as to gratify their sexual desires, with the
result that so often a girl becomes a mother
and the man who is no better than a beast
forsakes the one he has ruined and accepts no
responsibility for the support of his child.
You girls have no idea how common this is
or how many girls have found that the supposed
Jove is nothing more than passion, and are left
to face the world, which is very unsympathetic
with such girls, with the added responsibility
of a baby to keep, or else they are urged or
compelled to marry by the relatives and, as
there is no love between them, the future is
generally one of misery and unhappiness. All
because the man has not controlled his sex
desire, and the woman has not helped him,
because she has allowed things to be said and
done, when she should at all costs, have resisted
any such familiarities. I have said these
things so plainly to you because of what I see
and know from my own experience as a doctor
In an Industrial district for the past 28 years.
If, then, you are to avoid these pitfalls, I


urge you to take to heart what I have said.
If you want to be what God created you for,
girls who will bear His image and grow to be
like Him, girls who will grow into womanhood
and be the mothers of the future British race,
mothers who will place high ideals before their
■children and bring them up to love and serve
■God and their generation, then you must give
your lives to God, you must have Jesus as your
own personal Saviour and Friend, and must
seek the help and strength which the Holy
Spirit can give you, without which you cannot
be sure of overcoming the temptations of life
or of living to please God.
White Cross Publications.
The White Cross Booklets mentioned on
the back cover are procurable from the Aus-
tralasian White Cross League, 56 Elizabeth
Street, Sydney, and the Father and Son
Welfare Movement, 160 Castlereagh Street,
Sydney. When ordering, please add one
penny for postage.
Shilling packets containing all the booklets
may also be had at the above addresses.


The [?]TIVE. [?] (PRONT SECTIONAL. VIEW)
The female reproductive system consists of—
1. Two ovaries—glands in which develop the ova or egg ceils.
2. Two fallopian tubes—through which the egg cells reach the
uterus.
3. Uterus (womb)—a chamber with muscular walls in which the
fertilized egg grows into a baby. The uterus enlarges as the
baby grows.
4. Vagina—a tube connecting the uterus with the outside.
Information of Vital Importance to
QIRLSOF ELEVEN AND OVER.
Menstruation (monthly period) is connected with reproduction. At
puberty (12 -14 years of age) ripe ova (eggs) begin to leave the ovaries
periodically. Near the time of each period, the inner wall of the
womb becomes spongy and filled with blood. If the egg is fertilized,
it normally becomes attached to this spongy wall and develops. If
not fertilized, it does not so attach itself, but the fine blood vessels
break, and the blood escapes in the menstrual flow.
Menstruation is. therefore, a normal function. If it is disturbing,
don’t worry; consult a physician. Continue moderate exercise;
take a warm, cleansing bath daily ; use a proper diet.
RLBATHING IS NOT DANGEROUS DURING THE MENSTRUAL
PERIOD IP CARE BE TAKEN TO AVOID GETTING CHILLED.
IT IS UNHEALTHFUL NOT TO BATHE AT THIS TIME.
Avoid —Constipation, over-exertion, emotional excitement, getting
skin or feet chilled.


Of Vital Importance to
Parents and Young People
The Father and Son Welfare Movement,
in conjunction with the Health Department,
conducts an Every-day Campaign in the
interests of
Home, Health and Putity.
Film Lectures on Sex and Health are
delivered to Women and Girls, and to Men
an d Boys, and expert advice is ever available
at the Head Quarters, 160 Castlereagh Street,
to Parents and young people with perplexing
problems.
TELEPHONE: M.A. 2330.
P. J. L. KENNY
Director.


White Cross Publications.
s. d.
I. Helps to Parents, by the Bishops
of Australia ----- o 3
H. Purity—for lads 15 years - - 0 1
HI. The Choice Between Purity and
Impurity—for young men - 0 1
IV. The Training of Children in
Purity—for parents ---01
V. Tine Manliness—for young men 0 1
VH3. A Talk to a Boy, by a Doctor - 0 1
IX. A Talk with Girls, about Them-
selves -------01
XI. Leaflet for*a Girl - - - - 0 1
XU. The Innocence of Children - ' - 0 1
XHI. The Vestibule of a Girl's Life
F. B. Meyer 0 1
XIV. A Medical Talk to Girls - . . - 0 I
By a Sydney Doctor.
F. W. WHITE, Printer 344 Kent Street,
AUSTRALASIAN WHITE CROSS LEAGUE
86 ELIZABETH STREET, SYDNEY.
