



A Memoir of
Richard Hodgson
i855-igos
M. A. DeW. H.
Readout the
Annual Meeting of the Tavern Club
6 May 1906


Richard Hodgson
On the twentieth of December, 1905,
there died in the over-active exercise of
his body one whose life was preemi-
nently an exercise of the spirit. Indeed,
it was as an explorer of the spiritual
realm, an adventurer beyond the bourne
from which he believed the return of
travelers could be proved and guided,
that he was chiefly known to the world
at large. Before recalling the distinctive
qualities of his private life as we knew
it, let us look for a moment at the main
facts of what may be called his public
career.
Richard Hodgson was born in Mel-
bourne, Australia, in i 855. In due time
he graduated and took a law course at


Melbourne University. This was followed
by study and graduation at the English
Cambridge, where he devoted himself
especially to the mental and moral
sciences. After six months more of study
at the University of Jena, he found him-
self, 1882-83, delivering University Ex-
tension lectures in the north of England.
In 1884-85 he served as lecturer at Cam-
bridge on the philosophy of Herbert
Spencer. From 1882 to 1887 he was
active in the investigations of the Eng-
lish Society for Psychical Research. One
of his most important and conspicuous
pieces of work in this period was the
exposure of Madame Blavatsky, for the
accomplishment of which he spent some
months in India. Another was the pene-
trating study of S. J. Davey’s “Imitations


by Conjuring of Phenomena sometimes
attributed to Spirit Agency.” In 1887 he
came to Boston as secretary of the Ameri-
can branch of the Society for Psychical
Research.
The results of his whole-hearted de-
votion to this task may be seen in the
Reports of the Society, and in what he
did towards completing the monumental
work on “Human Personality and its
Survival of Bodily Death” by his Mend
F. W. H. Myers. Through the last years
of his life he was peculiarly identified
with the trance sittings of Mrs. Piper and
the communications from the spirit-
groups of which he recognized “Phi-
nuit” and “Imperator” as the central
figures. Though finally surrendering his
own fife to the direction of ‘ ‘ Imperator,”


he sought to retain in his work of inter-
pretation for others the attitude of the
investigator insisting upon the best of
evidence. It was his unflagging desire to
accumulate a mass of evidence sufficient
to form a reasonable hypothesis regard-
ing the “spirit world.”
There is no lack of pathos, from one
point of view, in his having dropped this
work unfinished. From another there
is the satisfaction of his having passed
quickly, as he wished to pass, from the
present to the future fife. More than one
of his friends recall the eagerness with
which he said only last summer, ‘ ‘ I can
hardly wait to die.” A keen intellectual
curiosity regarding what awaited him
was his own chief concern about death.
Then came that which he had desired;


and neither the doubters nor his fellow-
believers could wholly grudge him the
opportunity to carry forward—as he
would have said—“on the other side”
the work to which he gave his life on
earth. With a swift passage from the
known to the unknown sphere, the visi-
ble life among us came to an end.
To those who knew him in private his
utter confidence in the work was one of
its highest justifications. To hear him
talk of that “other side” as if it were lit-
erally a room separated from the house
of fife only by walls and doors of glass,
to see him year in and year out devoting
to an idea intellectual and moral powers
which might well have won him many
of the rewards which men prize most,
this was to realize in a measure the


spirit which has animated the idealists
of every age, the spirit through which a
man saves his life by losing it.
The general and the personal signifi-
cance of his work were so inextricably
twined together that it is hard to discuss
it at all without seeming to invade the
inmost sanctities. Yet in this company
it is no sacrilege to quote from a private
letter of 1901 a passage which reveals at
once the intense conviction of Richard
Hodgson’s belief and the pure spiritual
faith of which it was the embodiment:
“I went through toils and turmoils and
perplexities in ’97 and ’9B about the sig-
nificance of this whole Imperator re-
gime, but I have seemed to get on a rock
after that, —I seem to understand clearly
the reasons for incoherence and obscur-


ity, etc., and I think that if for the rest
of my life from now I should never see
another trance or have another word
from Imperator or his group, it would
make no difference to my knowledge that
all is well, that Imperator, etc., are all
they claim to be and are indeed messen-
gers that we may call divine. Be of good
courage whatever happens, and pray
continually, and let peace come into your
soul. Why should you be distraught and
worried? Everything, absolutely every-
thing,—from a spot of ink to all the
stars, —every faintest thought we think
of to the contemplation of the highest
intelligence in the cosmos, are all in and
part of the infinite Goodness. Rest in that
Divine Love. All your trials are known
better than you know them yourself. Do


you think it is an idle word that the hairs
of our heads are numbered? Have no dis-
may, Fear nothing and trust in God.”
His friends and brothers here—for
surely friendship and brotherhood were
almost indistinguishable in his relations
with us—care especially to remember
one thing—that this idealist did not de-
tach himself from the most earth-bound
of us all. Though so much of his com-
merce was with the unseen, his feet kept
step with ours on solid earth. In the field
of mental activities, there was no one
better qualified to discuss the freshest
topics of physical science, the events and
tendencies in the world of affairs, and
their deeper significances. There was no
one here to whom the pleased discov-
erer of a new minor poet—since the


major phenomenon is so rare—could
come with such conviction that his dis-
covery had been anticipated. Indeed it
was no unusual thing to have Dick quote
you off-hand the new singer’s best
verses, with all the fervor and under-
standing which made him the favorite
interpreter of certain of our own poets.
One cannot forget how he entered into
the reading of other men’s verses. No
matter if there were twenty valentines or
prize songs to be read in a single even-
ing, every one of them rang out in his
loyal voice as heartily as if Dick himself
were the author, bent upon bringing
forth every particle of meaning or wit
the lines might contain. His intimate
association with the more serious muse
will be a recurring remembrance to


most of us, when Christmas and New
Year come round without the card
which brought us his poetic greeting,
in which an old or a new poet seemed
merely the mouthpiece of the sender’s
own thought.
Nor was this community of interest
restricted by any means to the things of
the mind. The healthy Anglo-Saxon de-
votion to every exhibition of physical
prowess was conspicuously character-
istic of this child of the spirit. The pro-
fessional ball game, the college boat race
and foot-ball battle excited his keenest
interest; and it was like him to double
his enjoyment in these sports by the
companionship of one or more of us.
The cheery call for volunteers for the
2.20 boat must remain one of the bright-


est memories of our summer lunch-
table, not only for those who used to
join the almost daily expeditions to Nan-
tasket, and huddled into their clothes
while Dick’s head was still a mere speck
amongst the ocean steamers and harbor
islands, but for all whose paths led in-
land or to other shores. In the pool-
room, its dominating figure was for the
tyro the most patient and encouraging
of teachers, for the expert the most for-
midable of rivals, for the box the most
active inciter of tickets. Is it —by the
way —a mere coincidence that the par-
rot, since losing his most devoted friend
and champion, has stood in less need of
a defender than ever before? In the
squash-court Dick was the best and gen-
tlest of antagonists in victory or defeat.


From the gallery above it his initial
inquiry, “Score?” his rallying shouts—
“two-yard-line,” “anybody’s game”—
put spirit into the flagging player, and
made him happily conscious of a gallery
to which it was no shame to play. Down-
stairs by the fire-place and at the table
above, it was generally Dick who first
taught the new member to know him-
self here by his Christian name, and to
feel that gray hairs and youth might after
all be contemporaries.
Just because he was the contempo-
rary of all, the man between whom and
the rest of us the barriers were the few-
est and the lowest, he typified, perhaps
more than any individual member of
the club, the spirit of the Tavern. The
last words that certain of us heard him


speak are a memorable illustration of his
unique and beautiful place among us.
Eight or ten men were gathered in the
lower room—one defending an unpop-
ular cause, which the others were hotly
denouncing. The debate was growing ac-
rimonious. Down from luncheon came
Dick. “Go for the scoundrel,” he thun-
dered from the stairs. “Don’t give him
a chance to speak; down with him!
Don’t let him be heard I” The genial
shout, with its animating love of fair
play as well as of peace, drew a laugh
and a response. “How can anybody be
heard when you ’re in the room, Dick?”
There was another laugh—and the un-
pleasantness was past. A few moments
later Dick left the club. That evening his
lifeless body was carried upstairs.


A purity of nature which leaves his
friends unable, even should they try, to
recall a single taint of coarseness in his
word or thought; a sincerity like that of
a true-hearted boy; an unselfishness and
absence of egotism which made our con-
cerns far more often than his the topics
of our personal intercourse; a self-re-
spect which included in its operations a
body as wholesome as the air and sea he
loved; —these must surely be remem-
bered in any enumeration of the quali-
ties which made his personality so rare
a blending of the spirit and the flesh.
Who better than our well-loved friend
can remain for us the interpretation and
type of this blending? What man of us
has lived in the flesh a life so illuminated
and controlled by the spirit that the


transition from the seen to the unseen
could have seemed so short a journey
as for him? One whose spirit, like our
friend’s, was clothed with the whole
armor of faith and courage has told what
it is for such a man to die: “In the hot-
fit of life, a-tiptoe on the highest point
of being, he passes at a bound on to the
other side. The noise of the mallet and
chisel is scarcely quenched, the trum-
pets are hardly done blowing, when,
trailing with him clouds of glory, this
happy-starred, full-blooded spirit shoots
into the spiritual land.”*
It is much to have left behind one
what Richard Hodgson has left to us, —
a memory the sweetest, the purest, the
best-beloved. When his spirit had gone
*R. L. Stevenson, conclusion of Aes Triplex,


on its final quest that memory in all its
freshness remained to hallow the room
in which he shared so many of our de-
fights. There it brought together an un-
exampled assemblage of the friends of
him who had come to us a stranger. For
his sake the place which was so truly
his home must be, to us who like to call
ourselves his family, more than ever
unlike all other places. For his sake we
shall sing without sorrow,
Mewn est propositum in Taberna mori, —
for we shall sing it, remembering what
it is both to five and to die here, and
rejoicing always in the sense of his con-
tinuing fellowship.
