





A
MEMOIR
OF THE
Principal Rccurrences
DURING
AN EMBASSY
FROM THE
BRITISH GOVERNMENT
TO THE
COURT OF CHINA
IN THE YEAR 1816.
BY THE REV. DR. ROBERT MORRISON,
AUTHOR OF THE CHINESE DICTIONARY, GRAMMAR, &C. &C.
AND ATTACHED TO THE EMBASSY.
LONDON:
Printed for the Editor;
SOLD BY HATCHARD AND SON, PICCADILLY; SIMPKIN AND MARSHALL
4, STATIONERS’ COURT, LUDGATE STREET; AND
BY OTHER BOOKSELLERS.
1820.
ll l —■■ n ipi—■ ummamrm*
.9 ~~
Price Three Shillings and Six-pence.


James Nichols, Printer,
No, 2, Warwick Square, London,


PREFACE.
It is pleasing to reflect that the good man who wrote
these remarks, although invested pro tempore with
a kind of diplomatic character, never forgot the par-
amount claims which Christianity had on his attention
and regards. He looked around him with the prying
eyes of one whose youthful studies and manly labours
had been zealously devoted to the extension of the
Redeemer’s Kingdom; and were it the will of Heaven
that he might hereafter witness, in his declining years,
the conversion of that vast portion of the Heathen
world, he would, like pious old Simeon, sing “ Nunc
dimittis ” with a joyful voice, and, modest as he is,
he might then be induced to think that he had not
lived altogether to little purpose,-—that “he had
not run in vain, neither laboured in vain.”
The valuable quarto volumes of the Honourable
Commissioner Ellis and Mr. Abel, which enter into
much interesting detail concerning the same Embassy,
severally possess peculiar excellences, but by no
means intrench on the statements of Dr. Morrison.
Those two gentlemen occupy, to great advantage,
literary ground of a different description. But though
this work assumes only the unimposing garb of a
pamphlet, it will be found to contain copious and
entertaining descriptions of the manners and customs
of the Chinese; and, in the narration of events which
transpired in the course of the Embassy, it exhibits
many striking traits in the national character of that
singular people.
V


All this eulogium will be attributed, by some
persons, to the warmth of my feelings as a rela-
tive, and to the partiality of my friendship. I am
not conscious however of the influence of such a
motive in what I have now expressed. To have said
less in favour of the author and his work, would have
been disguising my real sentiments, and betraying
the cause of the indigent, in whose behalf, as before
stated, the publication has been undertaken.
JOHN MORTON.
London Road, Liverpool,
July 20 th 1820.


A
MEMOIR,
&C. &c.
INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
As individuals are improved by an amicable inter-
course with each other ; and as parts of the same empire
are gradually ameliorated in proportion as they have an
easy intercourse amongst themselves; so separate and
independent nations are mutually benefited by a liberal
and amicable intercourse. Those governments which
with sincere minds endeavour to extend the friendly in-
tercourse of nations, deserve the thanks of mankind.
Whilst they pursue the good of their own country, they
promote the welfare of the species.
As the productions of human labour, and of the surface
of the earth, are exceedingly various, and generally
superabundant in one thing, whilst there is a deficiency
or a total want of another; it comes to pass that the
exchange of commodities, or commercial intercourse,
tends to ameliorate the temporal condition of the whole
human family.
Human ability being limited, the whole business of a
community is best effected by different persons devoting
themselves to different parts of the general concern.
The agriculturist, the manufacturer, and the merchant,
are alike usefully employed; and it is probably as neces


sary a part of the duty of government to exert its influx
ence with the rulers of foreign nations in behalf of its:
merchants, as to encourage and protect the agriculturist
and manufacturer at home.
Further, as an exchange of commodities, on a small
scale, is best effected under an idea of the perfect equa-
lity and recipocrity of the dealers; not under the relation
of slave and master; or a dependant and his lord; so
national and commercial intercourse will proceed best
under an idea of the equality and recipocrity of the two
countries. The idea that the one owes and yields homage
to the other, is likely to be prejudicial to the fair com-
mercial intercourse between the two nations.
What are called “ceremonies,” sometimes affect mate-
rially the idea of equality. They are not always mere
forms and nothing else, but speak a language as intelli-
gibly as words; and it would be just as conclusive to
affirm, ie it is no matter what words are used, words are
but wind;” as to affirm, “ it is no matter what ceremonies
are submitted to, ceremonies are but mere forms, and
nothing else. Some ceremonies are perfectly indifferent,
as whether the form of salutation be taking off the hat
and bowing the head, or keeping it on and bowing low
with the hands folded before the breast; these, the one
English, and the other Chinese, are equally good. There
is, however, a difference of submission and devotedness
expressed by different postures of the body; and some
nations feel an almost instinctive reluctance to the
stronger expressions of submission. As for instance,
standing and bowing the head is less than kneeling on
one knee; as that is less than kneeling on two knees ;,
and that less again than kneeling on two knees and
putting the hands and forehead to the ground; and doing
this once, is, in the apprehension of the Chinese, less than
doing it three times, or six times, or nine times. Waving
the question whether it be proper for one human being
to use such strong expressions of submission to another
or not, when any, even the strongest of these forms are
reciprocal, they do not interfere with the idea of equality.


or of mutual independence; if they are not reciprocally
performed, the last of these forms expresses, in the
strongest manner, the submission and homage of one
person or state to another: And in this light, the Tartar
family now on the throne of China, considers the cere-
mony called thrice kneeling and
nine times beating the head against the ground. Those
nations of Europe who consider themselves tributary
and yielding homage to China, should perform the Tar-
tar ceremony; those who do not consider themselves so,
should not perform the ceremony.
The English Embassador, Lord Macartney, appears
to have understood correctly the meaning of the cere-
mony, and proposed the only alternative, which could
enable him to perform it, viz. a Chinese of equal rank,
performing it to the King of England’s picture. Or
perhaps a promise from the Chinese Court, that, should
an Embassador ever go from thence to England, he
would perform it in the King’s presence, might have
enabled him to do it.
These remarks will probably convince the reader that
the English Government acts as every civilised Govern-
ment should act, when she endeavours to cultivate a good
understanding and liberal intercourse with China; but
since, whilst using those endeavours, she never contem-
plates yielding homage to China, she still wisely refuses
to perform by her Embassador that ceremony which is
the expression of homage.
The lowest form by which respect is showed in China-
at this day, is Kung-show, that is, joining both hands and
raising them before the breast. The next is Iso-yih,
that is, bowing low with the hands joined. The third
is Ta-tseen, bending the knee as if about to kneel. The
fourth is Kwei, to kneel. The fifth, Ko-tow, kneeling
and striking the head against the ground. The sixth,
San-kow, striking the head three times against the earth
before rising from one’s knees. The seventh, Luh-kow,.
* It is otherwise called the Ko-tow, which strictly denotes onlv once kneeling.


that is, kneeling and striking the forehead three limes,
rising on one’s feet, kneeling down again and striking
the head again three times against the earth. The climax
is closed by the San-kwei-kew-kow, kneeling three diffe-
rent times, and at each time knocking the head thrice
against the ground.
Some of the Gods of China are entitled only to the
San-kow; others to the Luh-kow; the Teen, [Heaven]
and the Emperor are worshipped by the San-kwei-kew-
kow. Does the Emperor of China claim divine honors,?
SECTION I.
The Embassy announced at Canton .
The British Government, in conjunction with the
Honorable the Court of Directors of the East India
Company, deeming it expedient to send an Embassy to
China, Earl Buckinghamshire, President of the Board
of Control, wrote to the Viceroy of Canton to announce
the intention of his Royal Highness the Prince Regent.
His Lordship’s letter arrived in the close of May, 1816.
Sir George Staunton, President of the Select Committee,
wrote from Macao to inform the Local Government,
and to request a proper conveyance to Canton, in order
to present the letter. Sir Theophilus Metcalfe, a mem-
ber of the Committee, Captain Clavel of his Majesty’s
Ship Orlando, Mr. Morrison, who then acted as transla-
tor and secretary for the Chinese department to the
Select Committee, and Mr. Daniell, a member of the
Company’s establishment in China, proceeded to Canton,
and requested an audience of the the Vice-
roy then being at Court, which was accordingly fixed
to be on the 4th of June, the day after our arrival in
Canton.
We proceeded in chairs to the office of the Foo-yuen,
ut the gate of which we alighted, and were led into an
* Foo-yucn is the second officer in a province. He acts for the Viceroy in
his absence.


apartment on the leftside of the great hall, in which the
principal Hong merchants were waiting to receive us,
and give us tea.
We had sat about ten minutes, during which time it
was negociated, whether Sir Theophilus should give the
letter into the Foo-yuen’s hand, or pass it through ano-
ther person. Sir Theophilus insisted on the first, which
was granted. At a signal given, the doors of the hall
were thrown open, a shout raised by the attendants, and
a salute of three guns fired. The Tartar General, called
Tseang-keun, was present on the occasion, with a de-
tachment of troops, forming a path up to the hall. The
Imperial Commissioner for foreign trade, called the Hoo-
poo, or Hoppo, was also there. Our party was then
requested to proceed with the letter, which, contained
in a box, was carried in form by Mr. Morrison. We
walked up to the higher end of the hall, made a bow,
and put our hats on again, as it was inconvenient to
stand with them in the hand; after which Sir Theophilus
Metcalfe opened the box and gave the letter into the
Foo-yuen’s hands. He received it, rose, and asked if
our aged King was well, and how the Prince Regent
did, spoke of the former Embassy with satisfaction, and
then gave the letter into the hands of an attendant
officer. On this we withdrew, returned to the door of
the room we had left, and prepared to leave the palace.
Puan-ke-qua, an old and active Hong merchant, who
managed the announcing of the last Embassy, desired
us to wait till some questions should be put by the Foo-
yuen. Sir Theophilus however thought that those had
better be sent to the factory; as more respectful on the
part of the Chinese, and also as affording more time to
give suitable answers. Old Puan-ke-qua pressed our
stay in vain; then sighing, said, “Mei-yew-fa” there
is no help for it.
Sir Theophilus remained in Canton some days, during
which time various questions were brought from the
Government; as,what number of ships were coming;
what the Embassador’s name was; what the presents


were; whether the ships would come to Macao or not;
what nations of Europe had been at war; what age the
Prince Regent was; when the reins of Government
were given to him, &c.
In a day or two the Government sent out to require
that Captain Clavel, whom Puan-ke-qua had untruly re-
presented as the bearer of Earl Buckinghamshire’s letter,
should remain till an answer was received from Court. A
document was found on record proving that the Hong
merchants had, when Lord Macartney’s Embassy was
announced, given a bond to Government, promising
that the gentlemen who brought the dispatches there,
would remain for a reply from Court. Captain Clavel
would not make any such promise, as the letter in fact
was not brought by him; and he purposed to leave
before any answer could arrive. Sir Theophilus gave
a written paper, saying, that he would remain, but the
Government would not be satisfied with it, but required
the Hong merchants to promise in behalf of Captain
Clavel. The Hong merchants declined. They were
taken to the Kwangeibow Foo’s office, and detained a
day or two, when, finally, they came to an understand-
ing, by giving the bond required, and obtaining assurance
from the Government, that the promise given in the
bond should not be exacted of them.
This affair being arranged, Sir Theophilus Metcalfe,
and the gentlemen who accompanied him, returned to
Macao.
Europeans and Chinese had various opinions respect-
ing the reception of the Embassy. Some of the first,
who had means of knowing a little of the temper of the
Court, affirmed that the Embassy would not be allowed
to land; and Chinese of respectable standing in society
were persuaded, that it would certainly not be received
by the way of Teen-tsin,*but would be required to go by
the way of Canton; that if it did go so far as Teen-tsin,
it would have to return and land at Canton.


SECTION II.
The arrival of the Embassy, and Voyage to the
Gulph of Pit-che-lee.
On the 9th of February, 1816, His Excellency Lord
Amherst, Embassador Extraordinary from his Iloyal
Highness the Prince Regent, in behalf of his Majesty, to
the Emperor of China, embarked at Portsmouth, on
board his Majesty’s Ship Alceste, Captain Maxwell.
The Honorable Company’s Ship Hewit, Captain Camp-
bell, was laden with presents; and his Majesty’s Brig
Lyra, Captain Hall, was attached to attend on the Alceste.
June 23. Sir George Staunton received at Macao a
letter from Lord Amherst, informing him of his arrival
in the straits of Sunda on the 9th of June; and that he
proposed prosecuting his voyage in a few days.
Sunday morning July 7th, Sir George Staunton,
Messrs. Toone, Davis, Pearson, Manning, and Morrison,
embarked on board the Honorable Company’s cruiser,
Discovery, Captain Ross, then lying in the Typa, near
Macao. The Honorable Company’s cruiser. Investiga-
tor, Captain Crawford, put to sea with the Discovery
to meet the Embassador. The following day, the brig
Lyra arrived, announcing the Embassador’s approach.
The Alceste and Hewit arrived off the Lemma Island
on the 10th of July.
It was then found that the Embassy was constituted
of the following persons: his Excellency Lord Amherst,
Embassador Extraordinary, and Minister Plenipoten-
tiary; Sir George Thomas Staunton, Bart., first Com-
missioner; Henry Ellis, Esquire, second Commissioner;
Messrs. Toone, Davis, Morrison, and Manning, Secreta-
ries and Interpreters for the Chinese Department; Mr,
Hayne, acting Secretary to the Embassy, and the Em


bassador’s Private Secretary; the Honorable Mr. Am-
herst, gentleman; Rev. Mr. Griffith, Chaplain and
Tutor; Mr. Abel, Surgeon and Naturalist; Mr. Pearson,
Dr. Lynn, Surgeons; Mr. Havell, Artist or Draughts-
man; Lieutenant Cooke, Commander of the Guard;
Honorable Mr. Somerset, 2nd officer of the Guard; Mr.
Marrige, in care of the presents; Messrs. Abbot, Martin,
and Poole, attached to the Embassy; Guard 22, Band 12,
and servants, —making in all 75 persons.
On the 11th and 12th of July, the above mentioned
five vessels watered at Hong-kong, near the Lemma.
Mr. Abel went on shore in pursuit of his object as Natur-
alist. During our stay, we received his Imperial Majes-
ty’s reply to the Foo-yuen’s report respecting the
Embassy; in which his Majesty declared his readiness
to receive it by the way of Teen-tsin, and stated, that he
had given the necessary orders, for due preparation to
be made to receive the Embassy, to Na-yeu-ching, the
Viceroy of Pit-che-lee, and Kwang-hwuy,then Director
of the salt department, at the port of Teen-tsin. His
Majesty directed also that a native linguist, acquainted
with the language and manners of foreigners, should be
sent to Court, and one to the Che-keang, where the ships
of the Embassy might probably touch. Sir George
Staunton and Mr. Morrison moved into the Alceste,
Messrs. Toone and Davis to the Hewit, Messrs. Pearson
and Manning remained in the Discovery.
July 13th. Our little fleet got under way with a fair
wind, which in twelve days carried us within sight of
Ching-shan, the promontory of Shan-tung. The many
pointed hills which form the promontory, presented an
interesting appearance; as almost any land in fact docs,
after the dull sameness of sea and sky, with the unvaried
unbroken line of the surrounding horizon. We kept so
far out to sea as to perceive nothing of the Island Chow-
shan. Our track appeared q uite clear and safe.
During the passage, Mr. Morrison translated his Royal
Highness the Prince Regent’s letter to the Emperor of
China; a list of presents, and of the persons in the Em


bassy, with some other official On the 2Gth
Mr. Toonc was sent forward in the Lyra to Ta-koo,
with a letter from the Embassador to the Viceroy of
Chih-le, informing him of our approach, and requesting
him to announce it to his Imperial Majesty. Copies of
the above lists were inclosed, and a request made that
his Excellency would send off 20 boats for the presents
and baggage, and 10 boats for the Embassador and Suite.
On the 28th of July, the Alceste r Hewit, Discovery,
and Investigator, anchored about 12 miles from Ta-koo,
in about 3 fathoms water. The Lyra was nearer in shore,
but could see little of the land from its being so low.
Mr. Toone wrote on a piece of paper the object of the
Lyra’s approach, and gave it to some fishermen, that
they might give it to any officer on shore ; which they
did, and which brought off the next morning, July 29th,
inferior officers, to whom he delivered the letter to the
Viceroy. Those persons asked whether we had any
likeness of the Emperor on board; remembering that in
the last Embassy, an officer was degraded, for not going
off to see the picture of Keen-lung, which happened to
be in the fleet. During 1 the next day the Lyra joined the
squadron.
The gentlemen of the Lyra were astonished to find
the fishermen in their boats as naked as savages, without
• In those papers the Embassador and Commissioners were styled, JFang-
Chae, “royal envoys,” and the presents, Le-wnh, “ things given from courtesy.”
The Chinese wish to call Foreign Embassadors, Kung-she, “envoyswith tribute,”
and the presents, Kung-wuk, “articles of tribute.” That the word Kung has
long been understood as here stated, appears by the following quotation, “ Kao-
tsong of the Sung dynasty made peace with the Tartar King He-tsong, on very
dishonorable conditions ; for in signing this treaty, he made use of the word
Chin, which signifies subject, and of Cong, which is tributary.” (Du Halde.)
It may occur to the reader that the Chinese give presents in return: true, but
they call them by a very different name, viz. Shang, “a thing bestowed on an
inferior.” The letters which have passed between European Sovereigns and
Chinese Emperors, have not been called by the same name. The letters brought
they wish to be called Peaou-u'an, “ A representation made,” as if by petition.
The letters they give are called Chih, “An Imperial Mandate.” We used the
word Shoo, “ A book or letter,” such as passes between equals. The Chinese
allowed us our own phraseology, and in speaking to us, generally used it; what
they wrote on the flags of boats, or used amongst themselves, we could not
control.


appearing conscious of shame. Sometimes they wore ft
jacket over their shoulders, but had no clothing for the
lower part of the body. The same was true of the
trackers up to Teen-tsin. They passed crowds of peo-
ple, amongst whom occasionally were females at no
great distance; it appeared so usual as to create no
notice. Throughout the provinces of Chih-Ie and Shan-
tung, poor boys to the age of twelve or thirteen were
generally naked, standing, or running about in promis-
cuous crowds.
August Ist. Four Mandarins of inferior rank, one a
military man with a crystal button, came off to the ships,
and informed us that Kwang, a Rin-chae, or Imperial
Commissioner, whom we shall hereafter call the Legate,
was on shore at Ta-koo. They were instructed to ascer-
tain the number of ships, of persons in the ships, and so
on; most of which questions had been anticipated by
our letter to Court; but every Chinese officer wishes to
inform Himself of the numerical details of any affair, that
he may be prepared for the interrogatories of his supe-
rior. However proper it may be for them to obtain
this information, they often act improperly by annoying
the same person to give often the same information.
These persons requested that some gentleman should
go on shore to see the Legate, and give him such infor-
mation as he might desire. It was therefore directed
that Mr. Morrison, accompanied by Lieutenant Cooke,
should go on shore in a ship’s boat. A boat of the Dis-
covery, under the care of Captain Crawford, and rowed
hy Lascars, accordingly went. The passage is exceed-
ingly shallow; in some places not more than two feet:
Ta-koo, a poor village, is situated a mile or two from
the entrance. At it there is a temple, at which the
Legate had taken up his abode. It rained when we
reached the beach, and we had to wa-ttill we were an-
nounced. The officer with us was civil in endeavouring
to keep us from the rain. In a short time carriages, or
covered single horse carts, were brought to the beach:
We got into them, and drove off about a quarter ol a


mile through a very dirty road to the temple. All
around was a flat, marshy, unproductive, gloomy region*
We entered an inner room in the temple, and were re-
quired to send in our names, and what we were, to the
still inner apartment. On being ushered in, we step-
ped over the threshold, walked up, and made our bow*
On looking round there were no chairs there to receive
us, but withoutside the threshold on the left side were
placed three chairs. We went to conciliate, and there-
fore, though we felt the haughty reception intended,
took no notice of it, but sat down.
In Chinese apartments there is placed at the head of
the room, a large broad couch, called a Kang; in the
middle of it stands a table about eighteen inches high,
intended to rest the arm on, or to place tea on; on each
side of this the two principal persons sit; the left is the
place of honor. From the ends of the couch, at right
angles, are placed two rows of chairs; the rank dimin-
ishes as they recede from the couch: the first in the left
side row is the highest place. To prevent persons taking
a place they do not wish them, they sometimes remove
the chairs, as was the case in the present instance. There
were no chairs at the head of the right-hand row, but
three placed, as I have already observed, withoutside
the threshold. The Legale sat on the right-hand end of
the couch, leaving the chief place empty for his absent
colleague. At the upper end of the left row of chairs,
the commander of the district, with a red button in his
cap, sat; next to him Yin, a military officer [Heetae]
with a red but ton, and Chang, a civil officer [Tnon-tues]
of Teen-tsin, with a blue button. These two latter per-
sons were to attend upon the accommodation and safe
conduct of the Embassy, under the Legate and Viceroy.
These two gentlemen properly bore the title of Ta-laou-
yay, “ Great venerable father,” but, in their intercourse
with foreigners, were called by their domestics Fojin,
“ Great Man.” The Legate and Yin were Tartars;
Chang was a Chinese. Kwang, the Legate, was a little
man, about 58 years of age; pleasant and conversible in
B


his manner; but artful and fraudulent; seeking to
obtain his purpose rather by negative than positive acts;
by withdrawing the means of comfort, rather than by in-
flicting what was disagreeable; close-minded, specious,
and clever. Yin was of low stature and ruddy com-
plexion, good-natured, with a little of the feudal pride
of the Tartar, and ignorant, as Tartar Chinese military
men generally are. Chang was rather old, tall, thin, and
emaciated, it is to be apprehended by the use of opium
and debauchery. The Commander of the troops at Ta-
koo was not seen frequently enough to form an opinion
of his character.
In the presence of this assembly, the Legate began,
in a distinct and cheerful tone, to enquire the distance
we had come; whether we had touched at Macao; how
long we had been from thence; whether we had met
the vessels he sent to meet us—he never sent any;—the
number of ships; of men in the ships; of persons in the
Embassy, and so on; to which he received such answers
as truth and prudence suggested. The other gentlemen
joined the Legate in expressing their satisfaction. He
hinted that instead of seventy-five persons, fifty would
be enough; to which it was replied, that to China twenty
or thirty more or less, could be of very little consequence ;
that to do the thing liberally would be handsome. He
received the, suggestion, and we heard no more of the
objection till it was too late to alter it. He said that
Chang and Yin would the next day go on board our
ships to wait on the Embassador and the Commissioners.
After this w T e withdrew, and had a dinner in the Chinese
manner with the inferior officers who had been on board.
In the Temple there was an upper story, from which
we had a view of the surrounding country, and of the
ships in the roads. Their masts only were visible. An
officer entered into conversation with Mr. Morrison,
and informed him that he understood the Embassy would
not remain at Court so long as the last one did; that his
Imperial Majesty was going to Je-ho in Tartary, and did
not mean to take the Embassy thither. We heard that


the Viceroy Na-yeu-ching, who had been ordered to at-
tend to the Embassy, was since degraded and cast into
prison.
We went into one of the priests’ rooms to take tea,
and found hanging against the wall, as idol pictures do,
an European print of the Head of Jesus Christ, crowned
with thorns, and a reed in His hand. Around on the
Chinese paper, in the centre of which it was pasted, were
Chinese characters. When requested to take it down,
the priest declined, saying, that it was dedicated, and he
could not take it down; but he showed to Mr. Morrison
a service, in mysterious Chinese phraseology, which was
read when the picture was worshipped. We remained
at the temple all night, lodged upon benches covered with
mats, without any bedding whatever, not even a pillow
for our heads. Lieutenant Cooke and Captain Crawford
being inured to bear fatigue, did not regard it; Mr. Mor-
rison, from the want of rest, and a rough passage back to
the ships next morning, was much indisposed for two or
three days. The Legate intended to have given us
some presents in the morning, but our rough lodging in-
duced us to hasten our departure very early. The
Chinese afterwards made an apology for entertaining us
so ill.
August 4th. Chang and Yin, or as their servants call
them Chang-Tajin and Yin-Tajin, “the great men
Chang and Yin,” came off to the Alceste to wait on the
Embassador and Commissioners. The boats in which
they came off were flat bottomed, and usually employed
to carry rice to Leaou-tung. On the deck a temporary
cabin was erected for the two gentlemen. They sent
before them large red cards of numerous folds, and about
18 inches from top to bottom. In the middle of the page
were written their names and rank beginning with Teen-
chaou, “Of the Celestial Empire.” This style of card
is commonly affected in their intercourse with foreigners.
Amongst themselves they write, on a much smaller card,
their name, prefacing it with Yu-ie,“ Your simple young-
er brother,” or some other expression of humility, and
2 u


closing it with Tun-show pae, “ bows his head and wor-
ships,” At all these assumptions of greatness, of course,
the Embassador was prepared rather to smile than be
?mgry. They were saluted as they came alongside, and
remarked afterwards the tremendous roar of the guns.
Having, with some apprehension on their part, reached
the deck of the Alceste, they passed through a line of
marines, and were received in the upper cabin by Cap-
tain Maxwell, The Embassador and two Commissioners
received them in Lord Amherst’s cabin, which was below.
The Embassador was dressed in his robes, and taking the
centre seat placed them on a row of chairs at his left, —in.
their apprehension the place of honor; Sir George and
Mr. Ellis took the right-hand row of chairs. Chang
afterwards desired his servant to hint to Mr. Morrison,
that he wished to be placed on a line with the Embassador.
The novelty of their situation evidently embarrassed
them; they had never seen Englishmen before. As di-
rected by the Legate, they made some enquiries about the
Prince Regent’s Letter; its tenor; the number of persons
in the five ships; whether we would land in our own
boats, or theirs; said it would be proper to practise, on-
our landing, the ceremony which it was the custom to
observe when introduced to his Imperial Majesty. The
Embassador declared his intention to practise the same
ceremony as Lord Macartney did in the last Embassy,,
which they always designated by “ the Embassy of the
68th year,” it being in the 68th year of the reign of Keen-
lung. They told us that Tuh Chung-tung, the second
Minister, had arrived at Teen-tsin to receive the Embassy.
This did not prove to be true. An old servant, in a loud
tone, stood prompting and explaining for Yin; Mr.
Morrison checked him by saying, he understood the
master better than the servant. Chang and Yin, after
having walked about the ship, and gone to the top of the
poop, took their leave and were again saluted.
Presents of bullocks, sheep and so on, came off in the
course of the day, in the name of his Imperial Majesty.


Monday sth. Began to unload the presents and bag-
gage, boats being sent off by the Chinese for that purpose.
Chang and Yin had not been able, from the wind being
against them, to regain the shore, and came again along-
side the Alceste. Mr. Morrison was sent to invite them
to dinner, in the name of the Embassador. They re-
ceived the message with civility, but declined accepting
the invitation from a dread of passing and repassing
from one vessel to the other.
Tuesday 6th. Mr. Davis and Lieutenant Cooke were
sent on shore, to see that the boats were ready for the
reception of the Embassy; they returned with an answer
in the affirmative.
On the 7th and Bth, several official papers were pre-
pared in Chinese. The wind blew fresh, and pre-
vented boats coming off. The Legate sent his card, and
a request to the Embassador to land. To prevent the
messenger assigning an untrue reason for not landing
that day, a note was written to the Legate, to inform
■him of the real cause, and promising to go the next day.
SECTION III.
Landing of the Embassy, and arrival at Teen-tsin.
. August the 9th. It was determined to land; and
accordingly all the personal baggage was put into Chi-
nese vessels. Lord Amherst, Sir George Staunton, Mr.
Ellis, and some others, went in the boat in which Chang-
had come off, as he offered it and seemed to wish that
it should be accepted. The barge of the Alccste, boats
from the Hewit, Lyra, Discovery and Investigator, were
manned. About three o’clock every thing was ready;
yards were manned; the standard of England hoisted ;
a salute fired, and three cheers given by the seamen. In
the midst of this, the Embassador and suite left the ships
and proceeded with a fair breeze in the Chinese vessel
and ship’s boats to the shore. When near it the Em-
-1! 3


bassador exchanged the Chinese vessel for the Alceste’s
Barge. The boats then formed themselves into two
lines, and rowed slowly with the band playing toward
the beach, on which crowds of people were collected.
Within the mouth of the river, a long line of Chinese
troops were drawn up, with a band, and petards to fire
salutes. As we approached, their band struck up, ours
ceased, and a salute was fired. Going farther up, the
line was somewhat broken by Chinese boats. Crowds
of men, women, and naked children lined the banks of
the river; and finally we reached the place prepared for
our landing; where the ebb tide was running so strong,
that the small boats found it difficult to secure themselves.
There were now about a hundred and fifty English-
men, and as many Chinese of various ranks, agreeing
only in their ignorance of each other’s language, and
usages on such occasions, and consequently considerable
confusion ensued. In each party there was probably a
want of previous arrangement. The Chinese did not
excel on this occasion. It was now evening; the heads
of each party were to meet; the baggage was to be re-
moved to the boats intended to receive the Embassy,
and our whole party to be fed and lodged. We had
indeed marked all our baggage with Chinese characters,
in the hope that the Chinese would be enabled thereby
to remove the baggage at once: but neither the boat-
men nor porters could read, and our labor was useless.
The boats were pointed out for the gentlemen, agreeably
to a list we had given, but when three or four men took
a box to carry it away; not being able to read, they did
not know where to go to, and laid it down before they
reached its destination. The work went on slowly, and
the boatmen, indifferent to any thing but saving them-
selves trouble, shoved off from the shore. Our defect
on that occasion, was the not appointing ten or twenty
servants to attend to the general concern. Each servant
cared only for his own master’s things, and whilst he
ran with one box, the other things belonging to him
were turned aside, where they were not to be found by
another servant, rummaging for his master’s things.


All this going on whilst aided hy Chinese, who did not
understand the English servants, caused of course great
confusion. Several gentlemen did not obtain their cots
that night.
Embarrassment arose also from another cause. Our
stores and eating utensils, table linen, &c. had been sent
on shore marked in Chinese as the Embassador’s bag-
gage, under the reasonable expectation, that it would be
found waiting for him on shore. But the Legate in his
haste to get us to Court before the Emperor went to
Tartary, had sent off all our stores, &c. together with
the presents. He made many fair promises that they
should be sent after and brought back, but did nothing
more than promise. We did not obtain them till we
reached Tung-chow.
The Legate desired Mr. Morrison to go to him, and
began to ask several questions about the rank of the per-
sons in the Embassy, and to request that some expres-
sions in our list might bp changed, as that the expression
for Secretary, viz. Peih-tee-shih, should be changed to
Tae-peih, because the first was a Tartar term, and that
E-foo for Medical Man should be changed to E-sang.
These verbal changes Mr. Morrison took upon himself
to say, might be made; for an answer to some other
questions he referred the Legate to the Embassador;
taking an opportunity, however, to suggest, that, after
the fatigues of the day, it would be indecorous to trouble
his Lordship with business immediately on landing. The
Legate took the hint, and forthwith, in company with
the military Governor of the district, paid a visit to the
Embassador and Commissioners. Captains Maxwell,
Hall, Campbell, and other gentlemen were present in
the Embassador’s boat, which made it a crowded hurried
interview. The Legate carried himself with courteous
cheerfulness, and filled up the time by taking particular
notice of the Embassador’s son, the Hon. Mr, Amherst,
then fourteen years of age. The Legate affirmed on
this occasion, agreeably to a message that he had sent
to the ship, that his Imperial Majesty had made parti


cular (inquiries about him, his age, studies; and So 6H.
Whether this was really the case, or whether he wished
to flatter the Embassador, is uncertaih.
Having returned to his own boat, he sent to sdy that
he was about to set off for Teen-tsin that evehirlg, if the
Embassador intended to return his visit.—As this ap-
peared a hint, signifying he wished to be visited ; the
Embassador immediately offered to call on him, and
forthwith did so, in company with the two Commission-
ers. The visit was short, and the vain Legate much
gratified, affected to say, they carried their politehess
to an excess. He set off immediately for Tebh-tsin, to
make preparations for our reception there; leaving
Chang and Yin to urge our speedy departure ; he even
went so far as to request through an attendant, that W
would leave by the tide, which occurred during the
night: that, he was told, was impossible, and Was ac-
cordingly given up. The gentlemen from the ships
made out as well as they could during the night; sdriie
slept in their own boats. At day-light the next mofnirig
they took their leave, and returned to their respective
vessels in the roads.
It was the previous intention of the Embassador, that
the whole party should dine together, and a large boat
was provided, in which about twenty persons could sit
down. We had however no table large enough ; nor
were there chairs or stools sufficient in the boat. The
plate and table-cloths had been sent on before us, arid
we were obliged to place Chinese tables together, and
make up the deficiency of chairs and stools by planks.
We were in this state till we reached TUng-chow, where
we had the table in a more comfortable and respectable
state, and were enabled to breakfast and dine together
as long as we remained on the Canal, which was till the
12th of October, when we changed boats; to enter on
the large rivercalled Yang-trye-Keang.
The boats in which we were now to sail were called
Nan-chu-en, “ southern vessels,” from their being boats
which came from the south with passengers of different


ranks in the country. Some were fine large roomy boats,
and others but small. They were divided into rooms:
first was a kind of anti-chamber for servants; next, a
room in which to receive visitors; and farther back a
bed-room. Some had four apartments, beside a place
at the stern occupied by the boatmen, and used as a
cooking-room. The Embassador’s and Commissioners’
boats were large and handsome, with streamers in the
Chinese manner. Most of the others were too small for
two persons, which was the general arrangement.
August 10th, 11th and 12th, were spent in passing up
the river to Teen-tsin. The boats were dragged by
human effort; poor miserable-looking men passed cords
across theirbreast, over one shoulder and under the other
arm, and walked forwards in a leaning posture, pulling
at the end of a rope, wdiich had its other end fastened
to the mast-head of the vessel, to which they were giving
motion. There are sometimes ten, twenty, or thirty
men employed to drag one boat. These men thus en-
gaged are called Tseen-foo: where there are not persons
whose constant occupation is tracking, or where an ex-
traordinary number is required, government impresses
poor people, wherever they find them, for one day’.s
journey; and, to have them ready on the arrival of a
fleet, sometimes confines them a day or a night: at one
place we found a temple, dedicated to the Ming-keen-
ten judges in Hades,” convertedinto a prison
to confine the trackers over night: four of our party
went to see the temple, but found its gate chained up,
and the Magistrate of the town’s seal upon it. A Mili-
tary Officer used his influence to have it opened for us;
but the large group of imprisoned trackers had so ma-
nured the courts of the temple during the night, it was
with great difficulty we could find an uncovered spot to
tread on, or bear the strong effluvia which exhaled from
the rich deposit. They commonly have a song called
the Tseen-foo Ko, which they chaunt to inspirit them,
and give union to their efforts. The greater part of it is
merely the tone of exertion, interspersed with a few ex


pressions alluding to the country they are passing, and
the place to which they look as the end of their toils.
One person repeats the sentences which have meaning,
and the whole .join in a chorus, Hei-o, wo-te-hei-o, the
import of which appears to be, “ pull away, let us pull
away.” Mr. Morrison requested a man to write down
a tracker’s song, and it closed by holding out the hope of
a breakfast when they reached Teen-tsin.
The appearance of the country was miserable; nothing
but low mud huts were seen on the banks of the river.
Crowds of people were every where collected to gaze
on us as we passed: they were all of a more dark and
swarthy complexion than a stranger, who considered the
latitude in which they lived, would have expected to
find them. The head-dress of the women was different
from that which prevails in the southern provinces of
China; the hair was put up so as to extend from a base
on the top of the head, horizontally, about six or eight
inches. A rosy flower generally decorated one side of
the head of the poorest females. Whilst passing along,
various expressions of civility passed between the atten-
dant officer, Chang, and the Embassador. .
August 12th. Our approach to Teen-tsin became
apparent by the increased number of spectators, and
the vast collection of boats which filled the river.—
They were drawn to each side, so as to leave an open
passage for the Embassy: the troops were drawn out
below the town. Towards evening we arrived, and
were brought up, near a public office called San-shoo-
yuen, opposite an Imperial palace, at which the late
Emperor had resided some time when travelling to the
south, or, as the Chinese otherwise express it, “ when he
blessed the south; ” for of all places which the Emperor
passes, it is said, not that he travelled through it, but that
he Hing-ed “blessed” it.
The moment the boats arrived, it. was announced
that Kwang and Soo wished,to wait upon his Lordship
and the Commissioners. Kwang we know by the name
of the “ Legate;” Soo was an old man, near seventy, the


Shang-shoo or President of the Kung-poo or “Board of
Public works,” the last of the well-known Luh-poo, i.e.
“ Six Tribunals or Boards ” at Pekin, amongst whom the
whole of the business of the Empire is divided. Soo
had been a stout large man ; he was now rather bend-
ing under the weight of years: he was marked with
the small pox, and was of a rather blunt address: he
commonly resigned the labour of talking to his junior
Colleague Kwang; though Soo’s permanent rank was
much greater than Kwang’s; Soo was of the first rank,
and wore a red button on his cap; Kwang had only a
crystal one: they were however now both
“ Imperial Commissioners,” which for the time being
confers the greatest distinction.
Chinese gentlemen are always dressed and prepared,
the moment they arrive at a landing-place, to see com-
pany ; and when they reach the shore, there are crowds
of visitors waiting on them. This is not our usage;
and we generally require a short space of lime to elapse,
after arriving at a place, ere we can receive formal
visitors. This circumstance more than once caused a
slight embarrassment, which a knowledge of the usage
would have prevented.
When Kwang and Soo were announced, his Lordship
was in his dressing-gown, and said, he could not receive
them at that moment, but would prepare for them in a
very short time; and forthwith requested the two
Commissioners to come to his boat: the Commissioners
came, and his Lordship put his coat on; but when Soo
and Kwang were informed that the Embassador was
not ready to receive them, they said they would defer
the visit till the next day, in the mean time requesting
that some messenger from his Lordship would call orv
them: accordingly, Messrs. Toone, Davis, and Mor-
rison waited on them, and being seated, the Legate
desired them to invite his Lordship and the other
gentlemen of the Embassy to an Imperial Entertainment
the next morning early; however nine o’clock was
finally agreed on as the hour; it being deemed prudent


on our part to breakfast at home, before going to the
formal repast to be given in the name of the Emperor.
Eoo and Kwang further requested that they might be
favoured with a copy of the Prince Regent’s Letter to
the Emperor of China, that they might forward it to
Court. To this request it was replied, an answer would
be given the following day.
Tuesday, August 13th. At the hour appointed, the
Embassador, Commissioners and gentlemen of the
Embassy, went in procession to the Hall of Chang our
conductor, which was situated in the town, or as it is
called in Chinese, differently from other towns, the
Wei, of Teen-tsin. The band preceded; next followed
the guard with colors flying, headed by Lieutenant
Cooke, and the Honorable Mr. Somerset, on horseback ;
the Embassador in his robes followed; the first Com-
missioner dressed in a Fellow Commoner’s gown and
cap, and the second Commissioner in his Windsor
uniform, succeeded; the Honorable Mr. Amherst, and
gentlemen of the Embassy in sedan chairs, closed the
procession. The Hall where the entertainment was
given, was about a mile from our boats. The streets
were crowded by people, who by order of Government
preserved a profound silence; the Legate seemed to
take credit to himself for its being so, by asking, at the
interview, if it were not so.
On entering the Hall we passed through a large room,
in which were various preparations for a play and a
feast. Five of the party, the Embassador, two Com-
missioners, Mr. Amherst and Mr. Morrison were
conducted by a side door to an inner apartment, in
which Kwang, Soo, and four Tartar Secretaries from
Court, were waiting our arrival. The other gentlemen
remained without, amusing themselves by surveying
the ornaments of the outer court. Within, the Tartars
took the left side of the room, and gave to the English
the right-hand side. Kwang, after a few common
civilities, said, that we were about to partake of an
Jmperial Feast, in which they would join with us, and


that it was the custom on such occasions, first to give
thanks to his Imperial Majesty, and then sit down to
the feast; and that in giving thanks it was wished we
would imitate their manner of doing it, which was by
performing the San-kwei-kew-kow before a table at
which his Majesty w T as supposed to sit. On the other
side it was replied by the Embassador, that he felt the
highest possible veneration and respect for his Imperial
Majesty, and would cordially return thanks for the
entertainment about to be given, only he would wish to
do it in the way that was usual with the English. In
his Imperial Majesty’s presence he would kneel on one
knee and bow the head; which, with the addition of
kissing the King’s hand, as a mark of affection, was
what he did to his own Sovereign; that the Tartar form
was exceedingly proper for the subjects of the Emperor
of China; that though our form was different, they
must not infer that we were less respectful. On the
present occasion the Embassador was prepared to make
a low bow, as frequently as the Tartar gentlemen knelt;
to preserve a decorous and uniform appearance, and for
that reason alone, as in his apprehension he paid as
much respect by bowing once as by bowing twenty
times.
The Legate said, “the feelings of the heart must be
expressed by some external sign:” “ Granted,” it was
replied; “our mode of expressing them is that we have
mentioned: and it is the mode which the King of
England has commanded the Embassador to follow,
as the present Emperor’s Father was pleased graciously
to accept that mode from Lord Macartney.” Soo at
first affirmed, that Lord Macartney performed the
Tartar ceremony, as, for brevity’s sake, we shall here-
after call the thrice kneeling and nine times striking
the head against the ground, and referred to Sir
George Staunton’s recollection to confirm what he
said. On further conversing, however, he admitted,
that Lord Macartney performed our ceremony, the
first lime he saw the late Emperor; but at a subsequent


period he performed the Tartar ceremony, in conse-
quence of Keen-lung being displeased with the first
mode. When asked at what place the performance of
the Tartar ceremony by the late Embassador occurred,
he was unable to say.
The Legate then proceeded to say, that the- Tartar
ceremony was indispensable: that without it our inten-
tions by the visit, which were he believed to cultivate
amity, would be unaccomplished, and a contrary effect
produced. The Legate was assured that his view of
the intention of our visit was correct: and it was
sincerely hoped no such consequences as he apprehended
would occur : the Embassador had too much confidence
in the gracious disposition of his Majesty to' anticipate
any such result; his liberal mind would certainly accept
what was graciously accepted by his father; for we
must still use that language, as Lord Macartney was
never made to know, that Keen-lung was displeased
with the ceremony which he performed. Kwang said,
“the Emperor would be angry with the King of Eng-
land;” the gentleman interpreting replied, “ that will
be so offensive, I dare not say it;” “-Well then,’, added
he, “do not mention it;” and it was accordingly re-
served to be communicated after the conference was
closed. ' : '
The Embassador apprehending that wo could not
come to an amicable conclusion with the argument, in
which one of the secretaries, a smart young man, some-
times joined, proposed to dispense with the banquet that
morning, and resume the subject on our arrival at Pekin :
the Legate ssid to that, “We will not bo violent this
morning; return thanks in your own way, and what-
ever it be, we shall report it to the court, as is our duty,
and wait for his Majesty’s pleasure; you will give offence
if you do not conform; we warn you of the consequen-
ces; do not reflect on us hereafter.” Old Soo joined in,
“Do not reflect on us hereafter.” The Embassador
assured them that he had a strong reliance on the gracious
acceptance of his Imperial Majesty, and whatever oc


curred, he should by no means reflect on them. Kwang
thought we began to waver, and sat it out a little longer;
Urging over again the same arguments as before. As
they did not succeed, Kwang said, “We will return
thanks, each in his own way —do not view our form
contemptuously; ” and we rose to go to the feast pre-
pared; when we came to the door of the room, the little
Legate turned round, old Soo being before him, and
screwing up his arch mouth, to be very serious and
impressive, said, “Do conform! imitate us! if you do
not, it will not be well!” of course it produced no
change in the Embassador’s resolution; who, when he
entered the banqueting room, desired the gentlemen,
who had waited long, and began to apprehend all was
not right, to do what he did. in point of ceremony —
neither more nor less.
We were conducted to the lower end of the room, at
one corner of which was a table with a semicircular screen
behind, and a piece of yellow cloth hanging before. Soo
and Kwang had some difficulty in deciding, which was
the proper order in which the Embassador and Com-
missioners should stand. It being finally settled, a mas-
ter of ceremonies gave the word; on hearing which, Soo
and Kwang knelt down and put their foreheads to the
ground, raised their bodies erect on their knees and then
put their foreheads down a second time, raising the body
again, still kneeling, and a third time put the forehead
to the ground. , When their heads went to the ground,
the Embassador made a low bow standing. This was
done a second and a third time, and constituted the San-
kwei-kew-kow, “ three kneelings and nine prostrat ions.”
This being over, we advanced to the higher end of the
room to sit down to the banquet, and the play began.
The upper end of the room was raised about a foot
higher than the lower end, with pillars marking the
limits of the former; three low cushions were placed on
fhe right-hand side for the Embassador and two Com-
missioners. On the lower floor were pieces of red cloth
in a line with the cushions, for the gentlemen of the Em


bassy. Soo and Kwang sat opposite to the Commission-
ers, and on the lower floor, in a line with them, were two
or three military men, the Tartar Secretaries, and Chang#
We were compelled by this arrangement to sit cross-
legged. Some of our party, incapable of this, stretched
their legs under the tables; which was not easy to effect,
as the tables were not more than twelve or sixteen
inches high. Each table had a false top removeable at
pleasure, and by this means the whole was taken away
and a new course brought on at once. The repast was
not continued long. The Tartars ate little, as they
had, probably, like ourselves, breakfasted before. The
dishes were in very good style; but from the awkward
posture in which we sat, it was a most uncomfortable
meal. Kwang and Soo gave the signal for taking wine,
which in China is done by the whole party at the same
time. The play, as is usual in China, went on all the
time of the banquet. It seemed a mythological piece,
in which the monsters of the deep are introduced. The
dresses were splendid.
When we rose from the banquet, a large collection
of various coloured silks were presented in the name of
his Majesty, for which we expressed our thanks, and
the party which at first were in the interior apartment
again retired thither. The Legate entered again on
the subject of the ceremony, with arguments similar to
those already mentioned. The young Secretary show-
ed an outline of the manner of our intended reception,
and spoke much of the gracious disposition of the Em-
peror ; that we should be admitted to an Imperial
Feast, a play, and see the gardens, and so on. The
Legate tried to work on the feelings of the Embassador
as a father, and desired him to have a due regard to the
welfare of his son, Mr. Amherst, then present, who in
the case of compliance would be blessed with the gra-
cious regards of the Great Emperor; which ideas all
met with appropriate answers in the tone of perfect
cordiality. The Legate wished to ascertain exactly
the form of our ceremony, and desired the Embassador


to shew him. This was a request that could not well be
complied with; but to enable him to see the form, and.
to accommodate as far as possibje, Lord Amherst caused
the boy to kneel down on one knee, bow the head and
kiss his father’s hand: “ This” said the Embassador, “is
our ceremony, and to perform it once ,we consider as
strong an expression of veneration as to perform it
twenty times; if it be his Imperial Majesty’s-wish that
I should repeat it nine times, rather than perform it
once, I will cheerfully comply with his wishes in that.”
We now prepared to take our leave, and a copy of
the Prince Regent’s Letter to the Emperor was given
to Soo and Kwang, for the information of the Ministers,,
at their very urgent request.
The Embassador and suite returned to their boats in
grecession, as on their way to the Imperial banquet,
ome thought that a victory had this day been gained ;
but the less sanguine did not cherish any high expecta-
tions from what had occurred. Chang afterwards in-
formed us that the Emperor was in a great rage, when'
he heard that we stood, whilst his own people were
kneeling and knocking heads.
A gratuity was here offered through an attendant
officer to the bearers of the chairs; the officer reported
it to Kwang, and he would not allow the people to
accept it. He always maintained a high tone of affected
purity in prohibiting the reception of any present by
his own people. The poor men who labored for us in
any way, were afterwards rewarded by ourselves, with-
out the intervention of any officer, and in that way the
reward was conferred without the ostentation of confer-
ring it.
The Chinese attached to each boat a military officer
and two soldiers. Sometimes men wearing a crystal or
a blue button, were attached to the Embassador’s, at
other times officers wearing a white stone button. In
the province of Chih-le, for so the province usually called
Pechele is more familiarly denominated, a middle-aged
robust man, who held the rank in China called Pa-tsung,
c


was attached to his Lordship’s boat. His name was Ko,
and to have given him his proper title he would have
been called Ko-foo-yay; but as his title was unmeaning
to the most of our party, and it was difficult to distin-
guish him by the single syllable Ko, ho was denominated
Commodore Ko. He was a bustling man, and generally
ready to oblige; at least was considered so for a long
time: further acquaintance made many doubt this, and
he obtained the appellation of being “ a good old soul,
and a big old rogue.” Commodore Ko will always be
remembered by most of the gentlemen of the Embassy.
Chang also put two servants into the Embassador’s boat;
who were well-meaning and useful men. One of them
obtained the appellation of “ old blow-hard,” from his
being short of breath; the other was too sedate and
quiet to acquire any ridiculous epithet. Chang also at-
tached to Mr. Morrison a faithful active young man,
who assumed the character of a Shoo-pan, or writer in
public offices. These three persons would have accom-
panied the Embassy to Canton, had not Kwang set his
face against it, agreeably to what appeared to be his
uniform system of discouraging a free intercourse with
the natives, in order to prevent our obtaining informa-
tion respecting the government or country.
At Teen-tsin many of the gentlemen felt much the
want of musquito curtains, and there was not time to
have them regularly procured. Commodore Ko went,
as he said, amongst his friends, and obtained several
pairs, for which he charged a rather exorbitant price.
SECTION IV.
From Teen-tsinto Tung-chow.
August 14th. We again were put in motion to proceed
to the Capital. The well known grain boats were here
seen in considerable numbers, and, from their uniform
structure and decorated sterns, presented an interesting


spectacle. They go in large fleets. Wherever they
occurred, they were moored on one side of the fiver, to
allow the Embassy to pass. On common occasions
every other species of vessel must give way to them;
they stop for no man: the progress of grain to the Capi-
tal must not be delayed. A scarcity of water in the
course of their voyage sometimes impedes them: it is,
however, always an affair seriously taken up by Govern-
ment.
In the evening Soo and Kwang called on the Embas-
sador and Commissioners; they returned the copy of
his Royal Highness the Prince Regent’s Letter, and
said it was a good letter. They objected only to the
term Hwang-kaou applied to the late Emperor. It is,
they said, not the usage to speak of him by that term.
Also the word Heung “ brother,” from the Prince Regent
to the Emperor, was inadmissible; they could not take
upon them to forward it to Court, and begged that the
words should be taken away altogether. To this no
positive answer was given. They again insisted on the
happy effects of conforming to the ceremony, and con-
trariwise. Old Soo threw out, in a rather gruff tone,
that the Russians had been rejected for their non-com-
pliance, and their commerce interrupted; and hinted
that it would be the same with us. He was told that in
comparison with national honor that was a small matter.
The interruption of commerce was never again men-
tioned by him or any other person. Kwang threw out
what his own better knowledge would scarcely let him
utter, viz. that as there is but one Sun in the Heavens,
so there is but one Sovereign in the world; which So-
vereign is the Emperor of China; to him all kings owe
homage and submission. It excited a murmur on the
other side, but w T as too ridiculous to be seriously opposed.
It was merely said, that was not admitted.
About this time the two Legates, Soo and Kwang,
entreated to be favored with a sight of the gold box con-
taining the Prince Regent’s Letter; they were accord-
ingly favored with it oneevening. They asked anxiously
c 2


whether the translation was to be enclosed in it, and
were answered in the affirmative.
August 16th. In the morning, Soo and the Legate
called, and said that his Imperial Majesty had sent down
an order to dispense with the Band. They showed a
copy of the Imperial edict. As usual, the Emperor had
interlined with red ink one of the Legate’s dispatches in
reference to the Band; “These may be withdrawn.”
This was thought a strange remark, and rather indicating
a weak capricious mind. It was said to the Legate, that
the Band were few and innocent; that to separate them
from their companions, and deprive the Embassador of
the pleasure of hearing them, was ungracious; he was
begged to represent it again. Kwang asked of what
use they were; ho would lake care and send them down
safely to the ships. As to the use, it was replied, they
were just of the same use as many other things which
contribute to innocent amusement and ornament. The
ships, the speakers knew, were probably gone, but they
evaded saying any thing about them. The conference
broke up without any final decision of the question.
The impracticability of sending them back soon appear-
ed, and nothing more was ever said about them. From
the cheerful effect which they had on our own party,
and the great interest they excited amongst Chinese of
all ranks, they proved a most useful partofthe retinue.
In the evening, a message came to say that Soo and
Kwarig proposed to call immediately. They were ac-
cordingly requested to come. When Kwang reached
the head of the boat, anger was evidently .marked in his
countenance. He was scarcely seated ere he said, that
they had heard with surprize the ships had left. Provi-
sions had been carried off to them, but they were not
there ; where had they gone ? Where they were at this
moment, it was replied, was not known. Every person
knew very well that for such large vessels the gulf of
Pet-che-lee was very unsafe; that whilst the Embassy
lay there much apprehension was felt for the safety of
the ships. It was extremely difficult to go to the south


ward against the monsoon; and the ships would proba-
bly precede his Excellency, as in the last Embassy.
Kwang said he knew the unsafeness of the anchor-
age, but they ought to have been informed of the
intention to depart; and his Majesty’s permission ob-
tained, as in the last Embassy: that we had been guilty
of a Puh-she,\. e. “doing what is not right.” It was
said in reply, had the question ever been asked, a candid
and direct answer would have been given: if there was
any fault, their’s was the fault in not asking. The Legate
said that the tenor of his conversation, in frequent allu-
sions to the ships, supposed their remaining; and if they
were not to remain, it should have been said so: he sup-
posed the Embassador intended it, and the fault rested
with the person who had been the medium, turning at
the same time to that person, and holding up his linger,
he said, “It is your fault.” That person, a man of warm
temper, and who had given his opinion against doing any
thing that could be construed by the Chinese into a want
of perfect candour, and against silence respecting the
ships in particular, said, “If I must be accused thus in-
nocently, I’ll be the medium no longer;” drawing back
at the same time in his chair. Soo then took up the con-
versation with another gentleman who spoke Chinese.
Kwang, looking at the Embassador, pursed up his old-
fashioned mouth, and put his fingers on it, signifying he
was now dumb, from not knowing a language common
to both. The Embassador, always of a conciliating dis-
position, said something in favor of the integrity of the
person who had been interpreting, which was communi-
cated through another medium tothe Legate, and added,
“We will lay aside mutual recrimination, and discuss
the question amicably:” the person accused communi-
cated this, and Kwang resumed his usually cheerful good-
natured tone of voice. It was finally agreed that the
ideas mentioned above, respecting the unsafety of the
anchorage off Ta-Koo, &c. should be committed to
writing m Chinese immediately, and sent to the Legate
to be forwarded to Court. This was done, and the ques-
c 3


tion of the ships set at rest. The Commanding Officer
at Ta-Koo was degraded for not having given the first
information of the departure of the ships; and Chang
was ordered to go and enquire on the coast of Shan-tung
about them. He used effectually his influence at Court
to have this order dispensed with.
August 16th. Early in the morning a messenger came
from Soo and Kwang, saying that they had received
from Couxd an imperial edict of importance, which they
wished to communicate. The Embassador and Com-
missioners were scarcely out of bed; but they rose im-
mediately, and sent to say when they were ready.
Instead of the Legate and Soo coming, the conductors
of the Embassy, Chang and Yin, came, and being
seated, said, “ The purport of the Emperor’s edict is
this—by conforming to the Tartar ceremony, viz.
kneeling three times, and nine times putting the fore-
head to the ground, you may proceed to Court and be
graciously received; —if you decline to conform, neither
the tribute nor the Embassador can be received, —you
may return ; say, yes or no.” Lord Amherst and the
two Commissioners declined giving an answer to the
conductors of the Embassy. They said; “We rose
from our couches to receive the Imperial Commissioners,
Soo and Kwang; we wait their arrival.” Chang and
Yin urged, but urged in vain, that an answer should be
given them to the message they had brought; alleging
that to send them back without an answer, put them in
an unpleasant situation, inasmuch as it made them appear
useless. The Embassador, however, was firm, and they
were obliged to depart without an answer.
Soo and Kwang then came, and delivered the purport
of his Majesty’s will in much the same terms, and closed
by asking what was to be done. It was proposed that
ifsome of his Imperial Majesty’s Ministers would per-
form the Tartar ceremony before his Royal Highness
the Prince Regent’s picture, the Embassador would
perform it before the Emperor; Kwang said, with a
countenance half sneering and half dissatisfact ion, “ To


what are we to perform the ceremony ? we are not sent
to England—if we were, we would not object to per-
form it.” This last expression was taken hold of, and
replied to thus: “If the Emperor will in writing declare
it to be his will, that, in case of an Embassador going
to England, that Embassador shall perform the Tartar
ceremony, I will perform it to the Emperor.”
The fact is that all such propositions, as they imply a
perfect equality, are more offensive to the Chinese and
Tartars than declining to perform their ceremony.
Kwang said that he and his colleague Soo did not dare
to make any such proposal to Court; such a question
could not be discussed as between equal states.
The Embassador urged that such a statement as he
had made brought round an arrangement in the last
Embassy, and it might do so now; the Emperor Kang-
he had himself proposed something similar in his time,
in reference to the Russians—if the Legate and his col-
league would not transmit any statement of the Embas-
sador’s views, he must charge the rupture on them.
They replied, “ We have already incurred a Puh-she , ‘ a
charge of having done wrong,’ from his Imperial Majesty,
the Ta-hwang-te, and we dare not make any such pro-
posals : if we be withdrawn, and other persons appointed,
perhaps those persons may take upon them to transmit
such sentiments; we dare not.”
As to the case of the Russians and Kang-he, he had
heard something of that Emperor’s causing a person of in-
ferior rank, about the third degree, to perform the cere-
mony before an altar, on or behind which an image of the
God of the Russians was placed; but he believed it was
merely traditional; it was not found in any authentic
records. Kwang, in broken interrupted language,
hinted that we could perform the ceremony, and repre-
sent it in England as we pleased. To do one thing and
say another, was declared to be impossible, and the Legate
did not mention it again.
Old Soo dwelt on the happy effects of conformity, viz.
being invited to an Imperial Banquet; seeing a play,


and walking in the gardens. To receive homage, and to
display its own pomp and grandeur, are the objects
which the Chinese Court proposes to itself in admitting
foreign Embassies. The bad effects, Soo added, will be
your going away in disgrace, and a stoppage of the trade
between the two nations; as had been the case with the
Russians. The last clause was uttered in an under tone.
To his tone of intimidation a high tone was opposed, and
it was said that the stoppage of the trade was compara-
tively a small matter:—since they would not accept of
any of the above proposals, nor yet transmit a paper
from the Embassador, or his sentiments in their own form,
so that they might reach the Emperor’s ears—since they
refused all these, and affirmed that the result of any
thing less than unconditional compliance must be his
departure, he was ready to depart;—and in this abrupt
termination of the negociation still thanked them for
their personal civilities—he did not reflect on them.
In all these conferences Kwang adopted the privacy
of English usage. The Chinese affect to do every thing
in public with a crowd of attendants around them.
He could not well order out his own people; but he
often desired an English gentleman present to keep
them out.
It was now determined that the boats should turn
about, and go down the stream to a more convenient
anchorage, there to wait for the return of the presents
and baggage, which had been hurried on to Tung-chow,
as well as for further advices from Pekin.
We were within about thirty miles of the capital of
China. At breakfast, the Embassador mentioned to the
gentlemen of the Embassy the alteration in our destin-
ation which had taken place, and which, when the
gentlemen had returned to their own boats, was carried
into effect. The Embassy fell down the stream to a
pleasant situation on the left bank of the river, called
Tsae-yuen, “the vegetable gardens.”
The dispatches from Court at this time were, according
to poor old emaciated Chang, what he called, —grinding


and gnashing his teeth as he uttered the words,- — Yentih-
Ji’han, “extremely stem and severe.” The compliment
paid them, by sending nearly half the circumference of
the globe a man of high rank from an independent, pow-
erful, and enlightened country, with rich presents,
prepared to use the most respectful language, and go
down on one knee to the Sovereign—is all rejected, and
a peremptory demand made that he shall perforn an act
of homage, such as they exact from the smallest, weak-
est, and most uncivilised state in the petty islands of the
Soo-100 Sea.
Such was the demand; compliance was refused ; and
the threat of rejection began to operate. During the
whole of the 16th we remained at Tsae-yuen; most of
the gentlemen walked on shore at a small distance from
the boats. In the mean time the government seemed
to have made up its mind to try the British Embassador
a little further.
August 17th. In the morning Chang, Yin, and the
young secretary mentioned above, waited on Lord Am-
herst and the two Commissioners, to say that the two
propositions made yesterday were such as they did not
dare to report to the Emperor, nor even to mention
when in his Majesty’s presence. However, they would
again write to Court and entreat his Majesty to accept
of the Le, or “ceremony” proposed by Lord Amherst, viz,
to kneel on one knee and bow the head three times;
which act, in compliance with the Emperor’s wish,
would be repeated thrice. An official note, promising
to do this, was required and given. It was however dis-
tinctly specified that this Ta-le “grand ceremony ” could
be performed no where but in the Emperor’s immediate
presence; that the Embassador did not like the idea of
Yin-le , “practising any ceremony,” as he had been
many years familiar with the forms of a Court. After
this arrangement, our boats again got under weigh to
ascend the stream, and proceeded towards Pe-kin.
During the 18th and 19th no business was transacted;
other men were now to take the lead, and to try what


rank higher than the Embassador’s, and a still more
haughty manner could effect on the Englishmen. In
taking this measure, the Tartars greatly misunderstood
the English character.
SECTION V.
Proceedings at Tung-Chow and Yuen-ming-ynen.
August 20th. In the evening, the boats of the Em-
bassy came to, at the distance of about two miles from
Tung-chow, near a temple at which the last Embassy
was lodged, but which was now to bo occupied by other
guests from Court. The boats lay together in a very
crowded manner, owing to the narrowness of the stream,
which ceases here to be navigable, at least to such boats
as those employed for the Embassy.
Here, according to the custom of China, Soo and
Kwang waited our arrival. It was too late to desire the
Embassador to leave his boat; but they requested that
Mr. Morrison would go and see the Kung-Kwan, or
house prepared by government for the reception of the
Embassador. It was a house which had been occupied
by trading people, and was fitted up for the present
occasion: within the gate was a small court-yard, next
a range of buildings with a passage in the centre to an-
other court-yard beyond, in which was the principal
apartment, designed for the Embassador. On the left
side of the court-yard there was a gate leading into another
yard, in which was an inferior apartment. The Em-
bassador’s was divided into three rooms; Soo and Kwang
were standing there when Mr. Morrison arrived on
horseback, accompanied by Gen. Yin. “You see”
said the Legate, “how gracious the great Emperor is,
in ordering so good an apartment to be prepared.” It
was replied, “No doubt the Embassador is fully sensible
of his Imperial Majesty’s goodness; many thanks to


film.” The Legate himself however thought the
apartments would not contain all the suite, some would
he obliged to remain in their boats; indeed when the
house was examined by the gentlemen, most of them
preferred remaining in their boats. The Legate pro-
posed pitching tents in the court, which he did, and
which were occupied by the officers of the guard.
The next morning, August 21st, the Embassador
himself went on shore to see the house. He determined on
remaining there during the day, and perhaps sleeping in
his boat at night. Chang and Yin were very importu-
nate that the principal persons should sleep on shore as
a compliment to the Emperor, and it was finally acced-
ed to. The Embassador and Mr. Amherst were in the
chief apartment. Sir George Staunton and Mr. Ellis
took possession of a large room near the gate, which they
divided by a curtain; Mr. Morrison tried to occupy the
apartment on the left of the court-yard, and remained
in it one night; but it was so close, and smelled so strong
of the incense which had been burnt in it to idols, ho
returned to his boat. These apartments had couches
built with brick, on which was laid a coarse felt cover-
ing, and underneath was a place to put fire, in order to
warm it in the winter season.
All the gentlemen of the Embassy dined and break-
fasted together under a mat-shed before the Embassador’s
apartments. Two of the guard stood sentry constantly,
and at meals the band played. The natives climbed up
to the middle of surrounding trees to see the table
laid, and to hear the band more distinctly: many officers,
and those of better condition, were admitted to the
court-yard. The collection of officers, civil and milita-
ry, wearing blue and red buttons, was considerable
through the whole course of the journey. The Je-naou ,
“ heat and bustle,” as the Chinese term it, was much
greater, they said, than when the King of Cochin China,
in person went to court. The weather was now very
warm, and their figurative expression for a great con-
course of people was also literally true.


August 21st. In the morning the active Tartar Se-
cretary came to announce the arrival at Tung-chow of
Ho Kung-yay, “Duke Ho:” his name in full is Ho-she-
tae, which ,if translated, would bo “ Ho, great in his ge-
neration.” He is brother to the Empress; was made a
Duke for his services during the attack on the Palace by
the rebels in 1813. He was about 35 years of age, of
the middle size; stout, and possessing apparently great
bodily strength and warmth of temper. Kwang after-
wards charged the Emperor’s barbarous conduct to the
Duke’s youth and self-confidence, supposing the English
■would yield to him. He then held several important
situations, the chief of which was Le-fan-ynen-shang-
shoo, “ President of the Board for Foreign Affairs; ”
principally the territories on the western part of the Em-
pire. With him came from court, Muh; the Le-poo
Shang-shoo, “ President of the Board of Rites,” a thin old
man, who never spoke a word at any conference, and
who was hence denominated by the English “ the silent
Muh.” Soo,the Kung-poo Shang-shoo, “President of
the Board of Public Works,” and Kwang still remained,
but now took the lowest place. There are in China but
seven of the Shang-shoo or Presidents, and three of the
seven were how to confer with the English Embassador,
and finally destined to be dismissed from their employ-
ments on his account.
These persons, as well as their Secretaries, were all
Tartars, who were, throughout, the responsible persons
to whose care the Embassy was committed; the lower
and laborious departments were generally filled by Chi-
nese. The term, which the first of these adopt to express
themselves, is Ke-jin, or, as they pronounce it, Che-jin,
“ A man of the Standard or Banner,” or Ke-hea-jin, “ A
man under the Standards.” The latter call themselves
Han-jin, “ Men of Han.”
The young Secretary being seated, said, that the Duke
had that moment arrived, and was then washing his
hands: this requiring no answer, a short pause ensued,
and he went on to give the Duke’s character; that he


was a man of few words; but with him it was a word
and an act; very different from the easy and little-mean-
ing loquacity of some persons. If he meant, as he pro-
bably did, that on his announcing Ho, the Embassador
should propose to pay him the first visit, this intimidating
speech wasnot the way to carry his point. The Embassa-
dor merely said, “Very well; lam informed of the
Duke’s arrival.” With that answer the messenger
went away.
It was next announced that several persons, five or six,
were coming from the Duke. It was of course intended
to give them a civil reception. Accordingly the second
Commissioner walked down the steps from the Embas-
sador’s apartment to meet them, and made a bow to one
of them, a very tall man, who appeared to be the princi-
Eal. They were all in their court dresses, and court
eads round their necks. The man to whom Mr. Ellis
bowed, so far from returning it, rushed past him with
large strides and an affected grave, stern look, bounced
up the steps into the chief apartment, and, followed by
his comrades, took the principal seats. During all this
not a word was spoken; but every person already felt
highly indignant, yet said nothing’. The Embassador
completely overturned the idea of giving them the pre-
cedence, by putting the English gentlemen above him,
and himself taking the lowest place. These persons
were afterwards nick-named, “ The Ladsof
and by that name we shall now denominate them.—
Two only spoke that day: The very tall rude man first;
and he who took the second place, a prim, thin-lipped,
shrill-voiced, pock-marked man. The tall man began,
Na yih ko she Ching hung she, “ Which one is the prin-
cipal tribute-bearer ?” The Embassador was pointed
out, with the reply, Na yih wei she Ching Wang Chae,
“ That person is the Royal Envoy.” He then proceeded
in atone affecting great sternness and dignity, “The ce-
remoniesof the Celestial Empire are of vast importance,
* MoDj.ien is the capital ofMatichow Tartary.


*md indispensably binding ; the Tribute-bearer is requir-
ed to attend to-morrow morning in order to practise.”
The Embassador replied, “ I am not prepared to attend
for any such purpose; when I see the Duke I will con-
verse with him on that subject.” The prim thin-lipped
lad then put in his word, and asserted the vast importance
and indispensably binding nature of the ceremonies of
the Celestial Empire. He received the same answer as
his haughty colleague. The English generally felt very
indignant at the Lads of Moogden for the insolence of
their manner.
These men, however, were merely acting a part. It
was expected that a stern haughty manner and lofty
pretensions would have awed the then unprotected fo-
reigners into submission. The Lads of Moogden would
have fawned and flattered if they had been told to do
so; as they smirked and cringed on a subsequent day,
when the policy was for a while altered.
Having received their answer, they rose and rushed
out of the room as they entered, without taking leave.
The tone of intimidation, however, was not yet given
up; it was to be tried again.
The next day, Angust 22nd, a request came to the
Embassador from the Duke to meet him, not at either of
their apartments, but at a third place, in the city of Tung-
chow. Lord Amherst and the Commissioners accord-
ingly consented to go thither. This' attempt to waive
the question of precedence was thought to augur w T ell.
In the mean time, however, it was deemed proper to
prepare in Chinese a sealed Memorial to the Emperor
himself, in case of an unfavourable issue of the Confer-
ence. In it was expressed the greatest respect and
veneration for the person of his Imperial Majesty, as
the Sovereign of so great an Empire. The ceremony with
which it w r as proposed on the part of the British Embas-
sador to enter his august presence w T as stated, and his
Majesty prayed to accept of it, or to signify his gracious
pleasure respecting its return. This document the
Embassador took in his pocket.


The day became overcast and rain fell: the party
waited some time, in the hope that it would clear up;
but, contrariwise, the rain increased- The Duke and
his party had already gone some time to the city; and
it became necessary at last to brave the weather. Four
or five persons went in chairs, and others in one-horse
carriages, in which they had foretaste of the distressing
jolting afterwards to be suffered on their journey to
Yuen-ming-yuen. The officers of the guard rode on
horseback, and got completely drenched. The road to
the town was dirty and slippery to a degree that could
be exceeded by nothing but the streets of Tung-chow,
where the poor creatures who carried the chairs were
up to the knees in water. The party finally arrived at
the Heo-yuen, or “Literary Hall ”of Tung-chow. There
was no antichamber in which a person could sit down;
and the Embassador had to stand a few minutes till our
arrival was announced. Four persons were invited into
the room in which the Duke was: its being small was
assigned as a reason for not more going. Mr. Amherst
bore his father’s train.
The Che-chow, or Magistrate of the town was in
waiting. He was a person who at first professed to be
very civil, but who, from the trouble that the public
service gave him, soon changed his tone and manner;
and his eyes, which at no time looked straight before
him, for he squinted much, indicated the utmost aversion.
He said that Sze ko jin, “four men” were to go in; old
Chang, who was also of the party, corrected him, and
said, Sze-wei, “ four gentlemen .”
A small court-yard, not defended from the rain, was
to be crossed. By the aid of umbrellas this was effected,
and a bamboo hanging screen being raised, discovered
the Duke, Muh and Kwang, standing, about three or
four feet from the door, with their faces towards it
The Embassador made an inclination of the head, which
the Duke did not return in any way, but began
m a loud stern tone : “We are especially sent here by
the G reat Emperor to see the ceremony properly perform


ed.” Mr. Morrison said, “Let the Embassador be‘
sealed, and then converse.” The Duke replied, his lip
quivering with anger, “We stand, and he also may
stand.” This was explained to the Embassador,
who said, “Very well; we will stand.” The Duke
was then desired to resume what he was about to
say. He began, Teen woo leang jih; Te-woo urh
Kwang; “‘As in heaven there are not two Suns,
so on earth there are not two Sovereigns.’ The Great
Emperor is Teen-tsze, ‘ the Son of Heaven; ’ before him
all Kings should bow down. You know it,” looking at
Mr. Morrison, who had been seen reading Confucius,
and which had reached the Duke’s ears, *“ the ceremony
insisted on was coeval with Kae-Kwo, ‘the com-
mencement of the dynasty.” ’ —Feelingthisto be no great
length of time, he added—“it has existed from the high-
est antiquity, and Kangkaepuh tih ‘cannot be altered.’
Without the performance of this ceremony, the Em-
bassador and his tribute will be forthwith rejected and
cast out;” throwing his hand from him as he pronounced
the last word.
The Embassador, instead of yielding to the impulse of
feelings such as this speech was calculated to produce,
took no notice of the Duke’s rhodomontade. but with self-
command and in a firm tone said, “ That he considered
the Emperor of China as one of the greatest Sovereigns
in the world; and from his Royal Highness the Prince
Regent also considering himin thesame point of view,he
had sent him to compliment his Imperial Majesty. The
ceremony which he proposed to perform, was the same
as was performed by the last British Embassador, Lord
Macartney, and which was graciously received by the
late Emperor.”
The Duke's face put on. a smile at the first part of this
speech, and he took a purse from his side and gave it to
Mr. Amherst; but when he heard the close, he replied
with warmth, “ The affairs of the last Embassy were its
own affairs; those of the present Embassy alone are
what we will converse about.” He turned to Chang,


who was standing by, and said, “Do you lead them oiit
and explain fully what 1 have said, and the reasons of
it.” The Embassador being informed of this, saw
plainly that nothing was to be done with the Duke
then, and of course could not submit to be referred to a
person of Chang’s rank to discuss the subject. He
therefore asked the Duke if he might expect to see
him again.
The Duke supposed that the Embassador considered
the meeting as partaking of the nature of a visit, and
said, “This is not a visit—it is an official meeting on
national affairs.” He was told the Embassador also consi-
dered it as such. He then said, “ Whether you see mo
again or not, depends upon the resolution you choose to
come to.” On hearing this the Embassador took the
Memorial from his pocket and presented it to the
Duke, saying, “I’ll trouble you to transmit that to his
Imperial Majesty.” The Duke, evidently disconcerted
at such an unexpected occurrence, took it, looked at the
address, turned it over, passed it to Muh, and said, “ It
is sealed!” The Duke was taken down a peg or two
by this reference to his master, and walked forward a
few steps to see the Embassador out. The whole
party immediately returned to the Embassador’s house.
A gratuity was given to the chair-bearers and drivers of
the carriages. Chang’s servant, old Blow-hard, undertook
to distribute it; and, according to Chinese usage, first
told his master, to have his permission. Chang could
not sanction it, in consequence, as he said, on several
occasions, of the Emperor’s taking the severest notice
of any thing that could be construed into the receiving
of money. One of the gentlemen of the Embassy
distributed with his own hand the dollars to the poor
men, who were thereby abundantly rewarded for the
labour gone through on account of the English.
The feelings of the English were this day a good deal
roused by the insolence of the Duke’s manner, and the
absurdity of his pretensions. At the first some were
angry, at the latter all laughed. -
D


We were now at a stand till we could hear what the
decision of his Imperial Majesty was. Express after
express went and came in the course of the next day.
Chang came to confer; but as he could not confer with
the Embassador, Mr. Morrison was the medium for the
English. Chang, no doubt, was fully instructed what
to say; but at the same time, it is probable he introduc-
ed ideas of his own; and to separate what was absolutely
official from what was his own, is not practicable. He
did not seem at heart favourable to submission; he
always called it “their Tartar ceremony,” and dis-
claimed the idea of its being Chinese. “ They were,”
ho said, “ most tenacious of it; so much so, that old
infirm people, who could no longer kneel or stand,
were caused to raise themselves from the seat on which
they sat, and fall down again with a bump, the number
of times that others knocked their head.”
He urged conformity, from our coming being volun-
tary ; we had embarrassed them, not they us; had we
not come, they would neither have sent for us nor
complained of our staying away; that what they valued
was the ceremony, not the presents; if they dispensed
with it with regard to us, what were they to do with
other nations?
It was argued on the other side, that they seemed to
err in applying ancient rules which were suitable enough
in respect of petty states around, which were really
tributary, to modern powerful nations with whom they
had heretofore had no intercourse; that now they
would do wisely to have different rules for different
nations, according as they were or were not tributary.
To apply the same rules to Russia and to Britain, which
they did to Eew-kew and Siam, was injudicious. As
our dress and features were different from theirs, so
our forms of polite intercourse were different. A
master in his own house with propriety dictated what
forms he pleased to his own servants; but when the
servants of another master came on business common
to both families, it was not incumbent on the one to


■■enforce the ceremonies of his house on the servants of
the other; it showed an enlarged mind to pass over
these slight varieties; and his Imperial Majesty, in
allowing the British Embassador to observe the cere-
monies of his own Court, would be still more and more
admired.
He was however urged to bring an official reply to
the note given. He finally brought in his hand the
note itself; and said that as the name of the Embassador
was not outside, it was contrary to rule to forward it;
every person sending a sealed document to the Emperor
must write withoutside his name. However, the Duke
had opened it. Some displeasure was expressed at this
.as a mere quibble, ns if, though the word “ Amherst”
was not there, the phrase “ British Embassador” was
not distinct enough. He acknowledged unofficially,
that he believed it a pretence. “If a sealed document
from the meanest subject was referred to the Emperor,”
said he, “ how would they venture to conceal a letter
from a foreign minister? ” ' -
He then said, if we would alter some expressions in
it, they would send it; —if, instead of saying “ the King
of England had cultivated amity with Keen-lung,” we
would sny that “ Keen-lung had treated the King of
England amicably.”—This was conceded. Then he
wanted the phrase taken away, in which our own
ceremony was proposed, and to have inserted that the
Embassador would kneel on both knees. This was
rejected, os a childish proposal ; for if that were done,
the memorial itself became useless.
After carrying it to the Duke again, he brought
it back and desired we would withdraw it, for it could
not, he affirmed in the name of the Duke, be sent to
his Majesty.
On the other side it was urged, that if the Embas-
sador could not be heard, negotiation was at an end.
With the note returned, Chang brought formulas of
the intended mode of reception at Court, which were
received from him, but not carefully read and translated
d 2


at the time, as it still remained quite uncertain whether
the Embassy would proceed to court or not.
Chang was now instructed to commence an attack
on some of the persons of the Embassy, by way of
intimidation. The gentlemen from Canton were con-
sidered as mere traders, and therefore the Embassy
was not properly tilled up. One of the commissioners,
it was said, had been appointed, according to advices
from Canton, by the government of England, in conse-
quence of his knowledge of the usages of the Celestial
Empire; but he, knowing those usages, failed in his
duty, inasmuch as he did not inform the Embassador of
flicm, and persuade him to comply with the ceremony.
It was insinuated that as far as regarded his future stay
in Canton, he would consult his own interest by giving
the advice suggested. All the idle stories which had
reached the court, of the aviaries, splendid apartments,
fine horses, &c. &c. possessed by Europeans living in
Macao, were now applied to the individual alluded to.
Various efforts were made to stop Chang in this very im-
proper harangue; and the Embassador made him under-
stand that he was much displeased at the present interfe-
rence with the persons of the Embassy: that as the Emperor
of China employed whom he pleased, so did the Go-
vernment of England. Chang mumbled a sentence, as
if obscurely asking if the King of England did not trade.
The general tone of the message seemed impertinent,
and it was dismissed with indications of displeasure.
Finally a paper was brought purporting to be an
edict from the Viceroy of Pekin. The name of one
of the Commissioners was introduced into it, and an
additional guard ordered to watch the Embassador’s
house, that no clandestine intercourse might take place
between the Natives and the English. There was ac-
cordingly a great show that evening of an additional
guard.
' Six days had now elapsed since the interview with the
Duke; and the Chinese, or rather Tartars, appeared to
be passing from one insult, to another: no answer had


Tieen returned from his Majesty—it was therefore de-
termined to write.an official note, and demand that we
should be informed of his Majesty’s pleasure respecting
our departure.
The note was written and carried to the Duke by
Messrs. Hayne and Davis.
This note appears to have done away with the hope
of our yielding, and therefore the Duke sent by Chang
to ask the Embassador to call once more, and also to
request that he would introduce the subject. The
Embassador agreed to go.
On arriving at the temple at which the Duke resided,
we found chairs placed on the left side of the court
yard. The Duke, Moo, Soo, and Kwang, walked
forward to receive the Embassador and Commissioners.
The chairs were placed in two rows. The left-hand
row was a little higher than the opposite. The Duke
took the upper seat on the left hand, and Lord Amherst
on the right.
The Duke commenced by a few remarks in the form
of question, as to the distance of England from China,
the time which the voyage occupied, and so on. He
then asked, if Chang had explained every thing respect-
ing the ceremony. The Embassador, on the other hand,
wished to know what answer the Duke had to give to
his former note. The Duke said, it would be of no use
to our cause to send it to his Majesty; and was proceed-
ing to reason the propriety of homage from the King
of England to the Emperor of China, as he did in the
former interview. It was therefore thought better to
wave the subject, and to ask him, what he thought could
be done to justify the Embassador to his own govern-
ment ; would it be given in the name of the Emperor
officially, that his Majesty affirmed on his own recol-
lection that Lord Macartney performed the ceremony,
and so on? To a question put respecting the probable
disposition of his Majesty, the Duke said “he could
gave no answer; it might as well be asked him, whether
he thought it would rain or thunder to-morrow. The
i) 3


ways of the Son of Heaven were, like those of Heaven
itself, inscrutable.” The Embassador said, “he could
not promise to comply; however, he would in tho
course of the day send him a final answer.” In the
afternoon an answer was sent, saying, the Embassador
could not comply with the Tartar ceremony.
Tho note had scarcely reached the Duke, when he
and his party came to the Embassador’s house to pay a
visit, and to say it was determined the Embassy should
proceed to Court, at Yuen-ming-yuen, the next day.
The Embassador and Commissioners, apprehensive
that their note had been misunderstood, asked the Duke
if he were aware that they had written to say they
could not perform the ceremony. He seemed to say
“yes,” and bowed his head; which all understood as
affirming “You are to be received according to the
forms you propose.” Kwang returned the same even-
ing in order to hasten the departure of the Embassy
early the next morning. He, when asked, if the Em-
bassador’s intention was fully understood, said, “ The
Emperor is of an enlarged and liberal mind, and hence
dispenses with your compliance.”
During that night several gentlemen attended to the
unloading of the presents; and the utmost exertion was
used to prepare the Embassador’s carriage.
During the above discussion Chang once said, “Do
not bo in haste; you will go to Court—there are wise
men amongst them.” He was not however a person in
whose judgment it was proper to place confidence.
Kwang also sent a man, during the discussion, to know
what presents required men’s shoulders to carry them,
in order to prevent their breaking, which would lead
a person to suppose that tho Duke and his party had
made up their minds some time before they acknow-
ledged it.
The following morning was a scene of bustle and
confusion. The weather was warm. The Local Offi-
cers began to number our packages, in order to prevent
their being lost; but they were so numerous, and some


of them so heavy, the people lost all patience, and gave
it up. The Legate was anxious to hasten our departure,
and came himself to the spot.
The carriage was ready sooner than the packages.
Should however another Embassy ever go to China, a
Bengal palanquin would ho much more convenient than
a carriage. The carriage has a fine appearance, but
there are rarely roads on which it can travel.
At 4 P. M. August 28, every thing was ready ex-
cept some conveyance for the men who were sick.
The Legate had promised that a proper conveyance
should be procured. One man died the day before, and
was interred in the neighbourhood. The same was the
case in the last Embassy: a man died, and was interred
at Tung-chow.—When the conveyance was brought, it
was found unfit for the purpose, and two chairs, ori-
ginally intended for the principal persons of the Em-
bassy, were finally given to the sick.
The Embassador, two Commissioners, and Mr.
Amherst, were in the carriage; several gentlemen
chose horses, and others were accommodated m Chinese
single-horse carriages. The guard and band were in
carts. There was a great number of Chinese officers
and troops in attendance, who, together with the bag-
gage and persons of the Embassy, made a vast cavalcade.
The weather was warm, and the road dusty. The
jolting of the Chinese carriages was extremely fatigu-
ing. Without constant effort to hold by the sides of the
carriage, a person’s head was thrown first on one side
and then on the other.
The Embassador’s carriage, though soiled much, was
an object admired by the natives. Crowds came on
purpose to see it. One remarked, it appeared proper
for the Emperor. The badness of the stone road between
Tung-chow and Pekin, as well as of other parts of the
way, made even the English carriage at once fatiguing
and dangerous.
About half-way we stopped at a place intended for
the refreshment of travellers; and found some food


prepared. But being an attempt at English cookery,
it was neither English nor Chinese. There were neither
knives nor forks, nor yet the small ivory sticks of the
Chinese.
At this place the Legate and Soo sent for a gentleman
of the Embassy, and said, “ His Majesty has given a
gracious intimation respecting the Embassador. He has
fixed to-morrow for seeing him.” This was communi-
cated to the Embassador, to whose apprehension it did
not appear to be very gracious to be in such a violent
haste. The Legate said, “ Whether the Embassador be
introduced or not to-morrow, let us settle when we get
there; but in the mean time we must endeavour to
arrive.”
Of course we could not remain where we were, nor
■was it ever intended to stop there. The party accord-
ingly again commenced its journey.
The Embassy passed withoutside the city of Pekin
.when it was dark, and arrived at Yuen-ming-yuen soon
after day-break on the morning of the 29th. Leading
down to the palace there is a paved path, along which
the wheels of the carriages, which were according to
usage driven fast, made a great rattling. Neither Soo
nor Kwang could be permitted to ride in chairs here.
Old Chang was on horseback.
Part of the gentlemen were conducted to the Embas-
sador’s house, about a mile from the palace. The Em-
bassador, the Commissioners, Mr. Morrison, Mr. Abel,
Mr. Griffith, Mr. Cooke, Mr. Abbot, and Mr. Somerset,
were led direct to the palace gate. The road leads round
the South-east corner of the court-yard before the
palace. Soo and Kwang were obliged to alight before
turning the corner.
Here Soo and Kwang came to the Embassador’s car-
riage door, and desired him to alight to take a cup of
tea. The two Commissioners got first out of the carriage.
None of the party knew certainly where they were,
but began to be apprehensive that some imposition was
intended. Lord Amherst, being really fatigued bytra


veiling all night a dangerous road,pleaded indisposition,
and said, he could neither see any person nor transact
any business till he had taken rest. After much impor-
tunity he alighted from his carriage, and was led round
the corner to a small unfurnished dirty apartment on
the right-hand side of the court-yard.
There was a bench in the room, covered with white
cotton felt, and which, in the manner of the Tartars,
serves for either a seat or a bed. The paper of the root
was old and torn. A crowd of persons of all ages and
ranks filled the room. The English gentlemen, disap-
pointed, vexed and weary, sat down on the bench. The
Embassador directed that the crowd should be desired
to withdraw, and leave him alone. The crowd of Chinese
and Tartar officers paid not the least attention, but con-
tinued to press forward to see the strangers. Chang was
desired to use his influence or authority; but here he
possessed neither the one nor the other: he endeavoured
to apologise for them from the novelty of the occurrence.
A few minutes after entering this room, an invitation
came from the Duke requesting the Embassador, Com-
missioners, and Mr. Morrison would go to his rooms.
The Embassador said he could not see him then, and
only begged to be led to the apartments intended for
him. The Duke then came himself, and said, he wanted
to introduce the Embassador to his Majesty, and added,
“Have you the letter?’’ The Embassador without
rising said, that he felt unwell, and begged his Imperial
Majesty would graciously decline requiring him to attend
that day. The Duke said, “You shall use your own
ceremony.” The Embassador requested the Duke to
supplicate his Majesty to decline requiring an audience.
The Duke became very anxious. The perspiration stood
on his face. He went out —came again—took the Em-
bassador by the arm to urge him away; and told an at-
tendant to help him. The Embassador shook them from
him, and said, he would not go so, repeating the request
to the Duke that he would report his case to the Empe-
i°r, and entreat his Majesty’s acquiescence. A messen


ger carao to the door of the room, and in a tone of high
.anger called away the Duke. Poor Chang struck his
thigh, and called out, “ Ah! now they are incensed! A
man who comes here should have no will of his own!”
from which we augured something had.
During the time that the Duke was going out and re-
turning, several persons of rank came, stared at the
English gentlemen, and went away. One old gentleman,
with a long silver beard, came and uttered the words,
Fa-lang-ke, With another Tartar-sounding word, which
the writer of this did not understand. It was said to
him, “We are not French but English.” Mr, Morrison
requested the old gentleman to turn out the crowd; it
was so rude for them to press into a small room in the
way they did. He gave no answer to this, but went his
■way. As soon as he had gone out, a gentleman present,
who knew the meaning of the round badge which he
wore on his breast, informed the party that he was a
Prince of the Blood. Others wearing the same badge
came in, took a rude stare, and went away again.
Towards the close of this strange scene, a part of the
rabble of officers left the room; the others said they
could not, they were ordei’ed to be there.
Chang now came in and said there was a favorable
reply from his Majesty. To announce it, the Dukecamc
and said, “His Majesty has graciously ordered his phy-
sician to wait on the Embassador. He may now go to
his apartments.” The Duke was moreover ordered to
see him thither. Men armed with swords then cleared
a path through the crowd, and the Embassador pro-
ceeded, walking through the court-yard, and round the
corner, to the carriage. In passing the court the Duke
accompanied us, and himself cuffed the crowd of Man-
darins of various ranks, and kicked them to open a
wider path. It is probable that the Emperor himself,
from some part of the palace, had a view of the party
walking across the court, and that the Duke was showing
off his activity and zeal; or that he was vexed, and
spent his rage on the first he dared to strike. He took


{ho writer of this by the arm, and squeezed it, saying
something which was not heard distinctly enough to be
remembered. When round the corner, he took a glance
at the Embassador’s carriage, got into his chair, and was
never seen again.
The Embassador, Commissioners, and Mr. Amherst,
again entered the carriage, and, attended by a large
retinue of Chinese officers, proceeded in slow state to
the house provided for his excellency. This house be-
longed to Sung Tajin, the amiable friend of the last
Embassy, who is now first Minister of State, and was'
then absent in Western Tartary. It was an exceedingly
handsome and spacious house.
His Majesty’s physician came; felt the Embassador’s
pulse; said he supposed the climate did not agree with
him, and took his leave. Soo and Kwang were both
present. Most of the gentlemen retired to sleep. Break-
fast was served up, at which four only were present.
His Lordship took something in his own room. He ob-
tained a few of his packages, but no part of his toilet.
In about two hours Chang brought the news that we
were to leave immediately. His Majesty was greatly
displeased, and had ordered our dismissal instantly. This
of course was quite unlooked for; but what could be
opposed to the caprice of a despot, surrounded by cour-
tiers, who, as afterwards appeared from the Emperor’s
own hand, did not dare to tell him that the Embassador
had travelled all night, and had not been at his own
apartments when ho was fraudulently brought to the
door of the palace ?
The writer of this was asleep when the message came.
Major-general Yin came and awoke him, saying, “All
has gone wrong! Kwang wishes to see you; you are to
go away directly.”
On going out half-dressed, Soo and Kwang were found
together. Kwang was generally the spokesman. He said
m a demure tone, “His Majesty is angry, and requires
you to go from this house to day! What is to be done?”
It was replied, “ His Majesty’s will must be obeyed.—


What do you say is to be done?” “ I know not; I also
am involved.”—was the answer. He added, “We will
send your things carefully back.”—“ Talk not about
things!” said the other, yet suffering under excessive
fatigue, “ throw them into the sea, if you like; but, re-
gard persons.”
At that moment the silent Moo came in, and Kwang
addressed him, “ Are they to go ? ” He replied, “ They
are to go.”
The decree it appears had gone forth, probably in a
lit of anger, or a panic of fear, on the part of the Em-
peror. His courtiers, who sat by, without opposing it,
or stating facts, were either afraid to risk his displeasure,
or secretly hoped this very strong measure would produce
intimidation and submission.
Some of the gentlemen obtained with difficulty a hand-
basin and a change of linen. The Embassador could
not. The Chinese would not permit abox to be brought
into the house. The carts which had not been unloaded
were driven off. The Embassador’s house and court-
yard were filled with officers of various ranks, and rude
inferiors, who kept staring in at the window, and thrust-
ing open the door to gaze on the foreigners.
The Embassador did not hurry his departure, in order
to give the Court time to think on the very harsh and
barbarous step which they had determined on. Chang
was told that we must dine ere we commenced another
journey. Yin said we should go but ten leagues that
evening; this, however, proved untrue ; perhaps he was
himself misinformed.
About two o’clock a large blustering man came into
the court-yard, and called out, “ Where is there an In-
terpreter?” On finding a person who understood him,
he began, and explained at great length from whom he
was deputed; how great the person was; greater than
the Viceroy of Chih-le; he was the Ketc-rnun-te-tuh,
“ Commander of the forces of the Nine Gates” of Pekin
He is the first and greatest military officer in the Empire.
Being informed that we knew who the Kcw-mun-tc-tuh


was, he proceeded, “My master, who commands a mil-
lion of men, requires that the Embassador leave the limits
of his command immediately. —-The Embassador is a
rude man, who does not know how to behave himself.
Your King - is respectful and obedient; hut the Embas-
sador is not. He has used disrespectful language. His
Majesty will write to the King to complain of him.” He
was interrupted, and told that the Embassador did not
use disrespectful language; that he said nothing more
than beg that his Majesty would graciously defer the
audience.
“The Ceremonies of the celestial Empire,” said the
large man, “are unalterably binding.” It was replied,
“ This is not a time to talk of ceremonies.”—“Well,” re-
joined he, “I am not sent to talk about that, but to require
your departure.” “Very well,” said the other, “we
shall go.”
About three o’clock, a dinner in the Chinese manner,
and in good style, was prepared in the Embassador’s
hall; Major-general Yin himself waited on the Embas-
sador at table in the most good-natured manner. Before
leaving, he stepped into the room in which the Embas-
sador was alone, and said, “They do not mean you to
go —only kneel on two knees,” putting, at the same
time, two knuckles on the table to represent the act
of kneeling. That, of course, was out of the question
then.
Chang kept urging our departure, but did not provide
porters to reload the carts; a few only of his Lordship’s
boxes were reloaded by the exertions of our own
people.
About 4 P. M. the Embassador, Commissioners and
Suite left the house. Four persons travelled in chairs,
the rest in the Chinese two-wheeled carriages. The fol-
lowing night was dark and rainy, The earliest of
the party arrived at Tung-chow about 4 A. M. of the
30lh of August.
On the road, one of the Embassador’s servants was
ovei turned in the cart in which he rode, and received a


contusion of the head, which for some time threatened to
terminate fatally.
It was yet dark when we arrived, and the hoat-men
asleep. The squinting Governor of Tung-chow nailed
up the door of the house which we had left the day be-
fore. Commodore Ko and the boat-men remained un-
altered by the displeasure of the despot.
On the evening of the same day, Soo and Kwang
called on the Embassador, and said, that his Majesty
had sent a Joo-e, or-emblem of prosperity, of the corun-
dum stone; a string of court beads, such as are worn
by the Emperor and ladies of the palace ; and, finally,
some ornamental purses. These he wished to be con-
veyed to the Prince Regent; and requested, in return,
the maps, the prints, and portraits of the King and
Queen, which were mentioned in the list of presents.
The Embassador complied with their request, but at
the same time took occasion to speak to them freely of
the treatment he had received.
Six days after this violent act, the Emperor published
one of his penitentiary papers, in which he said, he, Puh
jin, could not bear the idea of our having come so far,
and of being dismissed in the way we had been. He
had, he said, now found out what he did not know when
he took the harsh resolution, viz. that the Embassador
had travelled all night; had not been at his own apart-
ments; nor had with him his Court-dress; “Had I
known these circumstances,” said the Emperor, “I
would have changed the day of audience.” He then
proceeded in the same official document to reflect in the
strongest terms on the Princes and Courtiers, especially
the Duke; who were called to his presence that morn-
ing, to all of whom the truth was known, but to mention
winch none would step forward. He blamed the selfish
system which each seemed to have adopted, when they
sat before him, and said to themselves, “ The affair does
not concern me.” “Thus,” added he, “they ruined the.
affair.” The Duke he degraded by depriving him of
the high situation he held as President of the Foreign


Board; Moo and Soo, Presidents of the Boards of Rites
and Works, were also removed: Kwang was deprived
of his situation as Salt commissioner, and reduced to the
low rank of a gold button. He was granted the indulg-
ence of wearing his former one whilst with the Embassy.
He wrote also to the viceroys of provinces through
which the Embassy had to pass on its way to Canton, to
give orders toall connected with them to treat it with ci-
vility and respect. Yin gave it as his opinion that they
would have recalled it, but for what they conceived the
very undignified appearance of reversing the Imperial
decree.
SECTION VI.
Journey from Tung-chow to the Yang-tsze Keang.
The Emperor required in the Edict just referred to,
that the Embassador shoudbe treated civilly, and at the
sametimethat the Military should, wherever the English
passed, put on an imposing appearance; have their arms
and accoutrements well cleaned; —at once, said he, to
soothe and to awe. Under these circumstances wo had
now to commence a four months’journey. Some delay
was occasioned by the confusion and haste with which
the baggage was brought back from Yuen-ming Yuen.
A writing table, containing papers belonging to the Em-
bassador, was missing. It had been left behind in the
hurry, and was to be sent for the whole distance. One
bundle belonging to Lieut. Cooke was lost.
September 2nd. We began to move down the
stream. At Teen-tsin the Embassy remained two days,
whilst the Legate transferred the affairs of his office to
his successor.
On the 18th, we left Teen-tsin, and proceeded up the
xar-lamed Canal called her c Yun-leang Ho, “ the grain-
bearing or transporting river,” —also Yti-110, “the


Imperial river.” In other parts of its course it is called
Cha-Ho, “ the river with locks or flood-gates.” This
canal was commenced under Yuen, the first Tartar dy-
nasty. It received gradual additions and alterations in
the course of centuries. The Emperor Kang-he of the
present family paid particular attention to it. In Chih-
le and Shan-tung they have much low swampy ground,
liable to very serious inundations. To make a way for
the waters to pass oil’, was probably one object of the ca-
nal, as well as to make a road for the transportation of
goods.
September 18th. Entered Shan-tung province, and ar-
rived at Tih-chow [Te-chou], situated not far from the
borders of the province. Here Yin the Major-general,
Chang our conductor, and his two servants old Blow-
hard and his fellow-servant, left the Embassy. The Em-
bassador gave considerable presents to the principal
persons, and rewarded the inferiors. They were all
very desirous of what they received, but were afraid of
its reaching the ears of the Emperor.
Chang, before we left Teen-tsin, heard that he had
been named in the Gazette as Judge of Shan-tung. He
owed this promotion to the Duke, who was himself de-
graded. Chang set off for Jc-ho,in Tartary, to see his
Imperial Majesty, and return him thanks.
At Tung-chow we were joined by the Judge of Chih-
le province; Shing was his name —as vain and loquacious
a Tartar as ever lived. He had read various of the books
respecting Europe which have been published in China.
He professed, with a high degree of self-complacency,
that he knew all about the religion, geographical extent,
dependance on commerce, and so on, of England. “ Yo«
must not tell me,” saidhe, addressing himself to Mr. Mor-
rison, and giving a wink to Change who was sitting by,
“I know that the teachers of religion in England all
wear beards, and you have loaves of bread three or four
cubits in diameter. Your country is but small,” said
he, “my civil jurisdiction extends all the way to the
Gourkas.” Looking at Chang, he said, “ Our country


is too large; it is extremely difficult to govern.”—
When vapouring about England being a commercial
country, he was reminded that the Emperor monopoli-
zed the salt department, which nettled him a little. He
seemed to flatter himself that he could persuade the
English to submit to the ceremony, and so bring about
a reconciliation. He entered very fully into the subject
when he met the Embassador at Chang’s boat. Not
having been ordered by the Emperor to call on the
Embassador, he would not; but met him at a third place.
When he went away, he said, “ Heaven knows; we
may meet again.”
In every province the Embassy was put under the
care of a Tartar Judge or Treasurer; a Genex-al ora
Major-general also, for the most part Tartars. The
Legate was the constant Superintendant; under these
were various other inferior officers.
The Treasurer of Shan-tung, whose name was Ho,
** Concord,” was a very well-disposed man. He remem-
bered Mr. Morrison, having seen him at an interview,
with Mr. Elphinstone, the late chief of the Factory at
Canton. He sent his card when he joined the Embassy,
and called on the Embassador when he left it.
September 22nd. Arrived at Lin-tsin Chow, with-
outside of which is a lofty Pagoda, or, as the Chinese
call it and all such buildings, Ta. It was taken particu-
lar notice of by the gentlemen who gave an account of
the last Embassy. There is not now any appearance of
procelain withoutside. It is nine stories high. It seems
a rule in all such structures to make them nine, seven,
five, or three stories high. Over the door of this Pagoda
are the words,
ta paou le Shay
43 2 1
“A precious Monument to the Shay-le ;” i. e. “re-
iques of Fuh;” which last syllable is an abbreviation of
I,!°°’ le 9^ nese f° r Buddah. There are good
marble steps within, all the way to the top; several
gentlemen ascended it. In the various stories are idols
e


placed in niches; most of them broken and out of re-
pair. On a marble tablet inserted in the wall were the
words, ‘‘The 13th year of the Emperor Wan-leih, of
the Ming dynasty;”—which answers to 1584.
There are in the vicinity four Mohammedan Mosques,
The roofs of the places of worship, called in Chinese
Le-pae Sfce, were different from the usual Chinese tem-
ples. There was a centre roof rising from four equal
sides, and terminating in a point, on which was placed
a round hall. On each side were similar roofs, smaller
and lower than the centre one; these terminated by a
conical ornament.
September 28th. In the morning passed the river
called Wan-ho, erroneously called Luen-ho in the boob
of the last Embassy. It is said to arise from seventy-
two springs in the mountains called Tae shan, in Shang-
tung. It flows from the east, and arriving at this point
sends part of its waters to the north branch of the canal,
and part to the south. The land is high on each side at
its mouth; opposite to which on the other side of the
canal stands the temple called Lung Wang Meaon.
“The Temple of the Dragon King;” or, as he is other-
wise called, “the great King;” he is the God
of seas and rivers. This temple is sometimes called
Fun-shwuy Meaou, “The Temple at the division of wa-
ters;” from the circumstance already mentioned. Wt
had now the current of the canal with us; but it flowed
so gently as to be but slightly perceived. The Chinesf
books assert that from Lin-tsing to this place there art
seventy-two Cha, or locks.
The Cha, or locks, are gate-ways with stone abutment
on each side, in the middle of which are grooves to
receive the ends of planks, which being let down stop
the water’s egress or ingress. Whether placed on tb
sides of the canal to admit water into it, or prevent
its flowing out; or whether placed across the canal
where the descent is rapid; they are still called Cha.
The canal now passes through what are called Hoo,
or lakes; but they are frequently nothing more tha"


marshy swamps, with shrubs and trees growing out of
them. In dry seasons the waters retire to very narrow
limits, and the land is cultivated. The present was a
year of heavy rains: they fell during the fifth moon,
aud inundated the crops which were sown. Fishing-
boats were now and then seen on these lakes, and poor
people gathering the seeds of the water-lily, which
occasionally covered a space of a few acres extent. A
few miserable huts were scattered on the banks of the
canal, with the water up o to the very door; and in some
cases rendered uninhabitable by the water rising to the
top of the bank, and flowing into the hut. There \yere
spots left dry in the lakes on which were houses and
trees, which relieved the melancholy prospect of swamps,
in some points of the compass terminated only by the
distant horizon. The country we had hitli9rto travelled
through, had been an entire plain. We had not seen a
single hill, but the Tartarian hills north of Yuen-ming
Yuen. The willow had been almost the only tree
which was seen ; and the only grain, the Kagu-leang or
Barbadoes millet. It was from eight to twelve feet
high, and consisted of a tuft of grain on the top of a
stem, about the thickness of the sugar-cane.
Not far from where we were on the 28th of Septem-
ber was the town called Hwa-heen, which was occupied
some months, by the rebels in 1813. On taking the
town the Government troops put to the sword all the
inhabitants, men, women, and children, amounting to
between ten and twenty thousand souls. Other fami-
lies have been since sent to re-people it, and to cultivate
the land around.
Some of the gentlemen who had read Confucius, felt
interested in passing near Keuh-fow Keen, which was,
it is said, his birth-place, and is still in the possession of
his descendants.
September 30th. On the eastward saw a long range
of hills beyond the marshy lake.
October Ist. Early in the morning passed the village
Heachin. The houses were of brick, and presented a
r. 2


better appearance than any that we had seen in China ;
they had heretofore been almost always of mud, and in
an exceedingly bad state.
Near this place the canal runs through a corner of
Keang-nan; enters Shan-tung again for a short distance,
and finally enters Keang-nan a second time. On the
30th of September we were a short time in Keang-nan,
where the custom is, on state occasions, to give the track-
ers a uniform jacket and cap. Our trackers had them
on the 30th of September: they were deprived of them
oh the Ist and 2nd of October; but were put in posses-
sion of them again at Yaou-wan chin, which is within
the lilnits of Keang-nan, on the 3rd of October.
In the course of our journey on the first, the canal
was crossed by a stream from the western mountains.
The crossing stream was called Shih-tsze Ho, “ The letter
ten river;” ten,being two cross lines,thus+. Anew
temple was erecting on the coFner of the bank, almost
the only new building which has occurred in our
route.
October 2nd. From the lake Hoo-shan-yih a mass
of water passing through seventeen flood-gates enters
the canal, which, during the whole of the distance tra-
velled this forenoon, flowed at the rate of about three
miles and a half an hour.
October 3rd. Remained a few hours at Hwang-lin
chwang, in the borders of Keang-nan. Ho Tajin, the
Poochmg-sze of Shan-tung, waited on the Embassador
to take leave. He received from his Lordship’s own
hands a glass snuff bottle, and gave his own to Mr. Am-
herst in re turn. Ho was succeeded by Chin, the Poaching-
sze or Treasurer of Keang-nan. The military officer,
called Hee-tae, or Major-general, wearing a red button'
His own name was Wang; a Chinese who was exceed-
ingly civil as long as he remained with the Embassy-
He was rather tall, and a good figure. He wa*
upwards of 40 years of age; had been in the war ß
against the Gourkas in the last reign, and acted
against the rebels in the beginning of the present reign
eight years. He had been slightly wounded thirteen


times, and had received the distinction of a peacock s
feather together with a Tartar title, which was express-
ed in Chinese letters, Keang-yung-pa too-100, and
denoted “a brave and gallant officer.”
October sth. All the boat-men of our fleet brought
cards of congratulation on account of the Chung-tsew
Tsee, or Harvest-moon. Presents were given to them,
-agreeably to the usage of the country.
October 6th. In the morning saw the mast and sails of
boats navigating the Yellow river, which runs some dis-
tancenearlyonalinewiththe canal. Ourboatscametoan-
chor within a quarter of a mile from where the canal enters
the river, without our knowing it. The Legate intended
to remain there all night and cross the river the next
morning; but a favourable breeze springing up, he
changed his intention, and sent to inform the Embassador
that he purposed getting under weigh immediately, and
crossing the river. Knowing the great extent which
the river runs, and the destructive inundations which
frequently take place from the impetuosity of its current
acting on the loose alluvial soil which forms its banks,
the mind was worked up to expect something grand.
The expectation was, like all highly excited hopes and
•expectations, disappointed. The Yellow River was
here about three quarters of a mile broad; its waters
very muddy when agitated by a pole or an oar; its
current not running more than three miles an hour; in
the middle it was about five fathoms deep. It presented
to the view a large sheet of water as the western sun
fell on its surface. At the distance of a few miles above
and below, it turned aside and intercepted the view.
We entered it from the canal on the N. E. side, and
saw, not directly across, but in a slanting direction to
the S. W., the mouth of the passage destined to receive
us. Some of the boats had considerable difficulty in
working up against the stream to the entrance referred
to, even after they had reached the opposite shore of
n® e^ow Ri vei *. They finally, however, all reached
the mouth of the passage called by the boatmen, the
e 3


Tae-ping ho, where they anchored during the night.
Several of the gentlemen supplied themselves with bot-
tles full of the water of the Yellow River, as others had
done before with bits of the wall of Pekin.
October 7th. On the S. W. side of the river the
lake, called Hung-tsze-hoo, is situated. At some dis-
tance higher up the river than where’ we now lay, the
waters of the Yellow River are conducted into the lake,
and passing through it enter, part of them, the Hwae-ho,
“ river Hwae,” and part of them again enter by the
Tae-ping-ho, where we now lay, “the Yellow River.”
It appears from Chinese books that during inundations
of the river its waters forced themselves into the Hwae-
ho, and it became an object to give strength and impe-
tus to the current of the Hwae-ho, which, as they say,
was effected by bringing the waters of the river through
the lake, and down to the river again, at the point
where its waters could not be resisted; thus, as they
express it, they made the river oppose its own violence.
In books which treat of the large rivers of the Empire,
the Yellow River is called by way of eminence, “ The
River.” On the Hwae-ho, where the rush of water
was great, a plan like the above was often adopted. A
new channel was cut on one side of the river, and part
of the waters carried off, to be brought in again at the
distance of half a mile or a mile below.
From the Hung-tsze-hoo a great mass of water was
rushing through a gateway made by immense earthen
abutments, confined by the stem of the Kaou-leang and
ropes. These narrow flood-gates, made of earth, are
called Pa-tsze. The stone ones are called Cha as men-
tioned above.
We had, on the morning of the seventh, to pass the
first and most difficult flood-gate against the stream-
It was a task of some difficulty. The boats were drawn
through by ropes; a large concourse of officers attend-
ing in case of accidents. On the bank were perpen-
dicular windlasses, round which the end of the rope
was thrown.


On the same day we had to pass round the point
which divides the waters of the lake, part to enter the
Yellow river, and part to swell the current of the Hwae-
ho. We had ascended one flood-gate and had to descend,
another. The latter was formed of compact mason-work,
and called Teen-fei Cha, “ The lock of the celestial
Lady.” The water of the upper part is sometimes four
cubits higher than the lower surface of the water. It
had been opened some time in order to diminish the
fall. Chinese gentlemen, however, deem it safe to go
on shore whilst the boats pass the lock. An elegant
tent was provided on shore, and the Embassador invited
by the Legate to go to it. The boats were laid on one
side of the flood-gate, and gradually brought by ropes
within the influence of the falling stream, when the
rope was slipped, and the boat shot through. It had a
fine effect.
Kwang and the Treasurer were both there; the old
Legate was polite and cheerful, as usual. The Embas-
sador, in consequence of an explanation, conceded to
Kwang, as Imperial Commissioner, the first place. The
Treasurer was going to take the second, which he soon
perceived was not agreeable, and he said, “ I have some
little things to attend to, and will retire,” which he did
immediately.
Kwang, the evening before, affirmed that the usages
established by law required him to take precedence
of Foreign Ministers, and he neither could nor would
decline, even at a private meeting. He was late in ar-
riving at the spot. When he came, he said he had been
at the temple of the Queen of Heaven, burning incense,
and praying for a prosperous journey to us all.
October Bth. Early in the morning passed a large,
populous, unwalled town, called Tsing-keang-poo. In
the middle of the town there is a Cha, or lock, with an
Imperial Pavilion on each side of the abutment. Over
the gate is written Yu-she-ting, “ The Pavilion of the
Imperial Ode.” It is probable that some of Keen-lung’s
odes, made in the course of his journey to the South,


were cut on stone and deposited here. The use to which
they are now appropriated is to store up ropes necessary
for the repair of the lock. Below Tsing-keang-poo
the banks raised on each side of the river are so high,
and the land behind them so low, that the tops of
houses and trees appear from the boats passing down
the stream to be on a level with the banks.
General Wang remarked in the course of conversa-
tion, that the wars which preceded and accompanied
the ascendancy of the reigning family, thinned the po-
pulation so much, that the earth produced great abun-
dance for the wants of the people. Since that period
there has been a vast increase of population, the con-
sequences of which are scarcity and poverty. In the
General’s opinion, another war to dimmish the popula-
tion would be a good things
October 10th. Passed Yang-chow Foo during the
night; which was a great disappointment to several of
the gentlemen of the Embassy.
October 11th, 12th, 13th. Remained at the foot of a
very elegant Temple and Pagoda, called Kaou-ming-sze
and Wan-ming-ta. An old cheerful little man, who
acted as commissary, and whom we denominated the
little governor, from his holding the situation of Che-
chow, opened to the Embassador and Suite the gates of
the Temple and the doors of the Pagoda. The ascentto
the top was easy, and from the several stories a charming
prospect was enjoyed of the surrounding country. This
Temple and Pagoda were fitted up magnificently
for Keen-lung, and are still the property of Govern-
ment.
We were now to leave the boats in which we had
sailed ever since we entered China, and were to embark
on board larger and differently-constructed vessels, fitted
to navigate the Yang-tsze-Keang. Some of the gen-
tlemen here applied for horses to take an airing, but were
refused by the Legate, whose conduct was then blamed;
but, as afterwards appeared, was induced by an order
from the Emperor not to allow us to go on shore. This


the Legate never attempted to enforce, but, of course,
he could not himself furnish the means to violate the
order. Some of the gentlemen walked, without know-
ing it, in a direction for Yang-chow-Foo, which caused
some apprehension on the part of those whose duty it
was to prevent our straying. They sent a messenger
after them to say, we were going to get under way;
which was an untruth. It however answered the pur-
pose that time. The gentlemen immediately returned.
October 14th. We dropped down to Kwa-chow,
which is situated on the banks of the Yang-tsze Keang.
The fleet was detained till the 19th by contrary winds.
In dropping down, the wind blew very fresh, and sent
the Embassador’s boat with violence against the bank,
so as to cause it to leak a good deal. It was, however,
afterwards repaired so as to perform the voyage in safety.
Above Kwa-chow are situated the Woo-yuen, “ Five
Gardens,” which were in the last reign an Imperial resi-
dence. They have never been visited by Kea-king
since he ascended the throne, and are much out of re-
pair. Two years ago one of the sage Yu-she, i. e. “ public
Censors,” upbraided his Majesty with the needless’expense
of the Five Gardens. His Majesty told him he was a
great blockhead for not knowing that the Emperor paid
no attention to them, nor spent any money whatever
upon them. That no money has been laid out on them
for many years, is perfectly apparent.
Seen from Kwa-chow rising out of the Yang-tsze-
Keang, which here is nearly two miles broad, there is
an island like the conical top of a mountain standing
above the water. Its sides are clothed with trees, amongst
which are seen light airy buildings in the Chinese man-
ner, and on the summit is a handsome Pagoda. This
island is called Kin-shan, “The Golden Hill?’ The Kin-
shan was an object of admiration to all the gentlemen
of the Embassy; m!my wished much to visit it, but the
order alluded to above, prevented its being done. Be-
yond the Kin-shan, on the tops of the surrounding hills,
the white canvass tents of the soldiers produced an inter


estingeffect; and fartherstill to the S. E., in the valley
and up the sides of the hills, the populous town of Chin-
keang appeared. That town stands at the entrance of
the canal which passes to Hang-chow, in Che-keang.
Kwa-chow is now in a very declining state, and the
walls in ruins. To accommodate the late Emperor in
passing to the Golden Hill, a canal v/as cut through the
town, and a bridge made from its Southern point across
the Keangto the island. Since that period, as the Go-
vernor of the town informed Mr. Morrison, the Tung-
shwny, “ or fortune of the place,” has gradually declined.
SECTION VII.
From Kwa-chow on the Yang-tsze Keang, to KWang
chow Foo , or Canton.
At Kwa-chow were several pleasant walks through
country lanes shaded by the foliage of trees. In one of
these was situated a Gan or Temple occupied by three
widows, who had, having no human dependance, devot-
ed themselves to the worship of the God Chin-te. The
matron was eighty years of age, and the other two up-
wards of fifty. One went through her morning devotions
in my presence. She appeared sincere, and probably
was fully persuaded in her own mind of the real existence
of that Being to whom she burnt incense, knelt down,
and offered up prayers.
To amuse the Embassador, General Wang caused a
few of his men to go through their exercise, in shooting
with bows and arrows at a target, and firing their mus-
kets in quick succession. After the men had shot with
their bows, the old General wished some of his officers to
try, and, as is perhaps the usage in such cases, took a bow
and arrow, and smiling said to the Embassador, “ Do
not laugh at me,” he let fly his arrow, but it missed the
target. One of his officers who performed after him


sent his arrow through the target every shot. The
matchlocks performed better than it was supposed they
would, and eight or ten men, loading with powder only,
kept up in front of their party an unremitting fire.
The Legate, Treasurer, and other officers, went to the
Temple of the God of wind, to supplicate a favorable
breeze.
One of the gentlemen took out his gun and shot a crow.
The Legate sent to desire he would desist, lest he should
alarm the country people, and also because the Tartars
venerate the crow. The reason is the following"
The grandfather of the first Emperor of the present
dynasty was, when a lad, left by some accident in the
field of battle after the defeat of his own party. When
the enemy was advancing upon him, he crouched down
in a hole, the mouth of which was immediately sur-
rounded and covered by a flight of crows. The victo-
rious party, supposing there could be no human being
where the crows were sitting, passed on, and the lad was
saved. At the spot where this took place the Tartars
annually hang meat on a pole to feed the crows, and dis-
courage on all occasions putting them to death.
October 19th. At an early hour our fleet entered on
the Yang-tsze Keang, which at this place is a large and
rapid river. The wind was extremely light, and not
quite fair. The boat-men with much difficulty coasted
along the northern side, which was flat and marshy,
covered with long reeds, which are raised for fuel.
October 21st. Arrived at Kwan-yin Mun, “ The gate
of the Goddess Kwan-yin.” The arch of a bridge con-
necting two hills is so named. On one side of the gate is
situated a very picturesque rock, with shrubs hanging
from it over the river, which runs rapidly along at its
base. Its summit is crowned with trees and a Pavilion
called Yen-tsze Ke, perhaps, “The swallow rock.”
Further up the stream, on the opposite side of the gate,
was a romantic temple built against a perpendicular rock,
with verdure on its top. It was called “The iron-bound
solitary Hill.”


The Viceroy of Keang-nan, Gan-hwuy, and Keang-se,
came to Kwan-yin Man about twenty leagues from
Nan-kin to meet the Legate, to whom he appeared to
wish to be peronally civil. He invited the Legate to
breakfast. To the Embassador, gentlemen, guard, band
and servants, he sent presents and bestowments of sheep
and sweetmeats of various kinds, with a message, saying
he was happy to find the Embassador and the party had
been Gan-tsing, (( peaceable and quiet.” To this the
Embassador made no reply, but sent a present in return.
The Viceroy sent back the present; and it was said in
behalf of his Lordship, that the Viceroy’s present could
not be received unless he took a present in return. After
some discussion the Viceroy sent back for his Lordship’s
present. He did not call on the Embassador nor did the
Embassador propose to call on him, but sent his card to
say he hoped the Viceroy was well. The Viceroy whose
name was Pih, a man inimical to and disliked by the
English, sent back, according to Chinese usage, in civil
intercourse, the card, saying the Embassador was exces-
sively polite, and so on.
To-day, which proved to be the anniversary of the
battle of Trafalgar, the Embassador had the body-guard
drawn out, and examined the state of their accoutrements.
We got under way and arrived in the evening at the
western gate of the city of Nankin. The suburb was
called Hea-kwan. Here we remained till the 24th.
Without the wall of Nan-kin there are villages and
numerous gardens interspersed with fish-ponds. The
fiitchor moat is a considerable width, and full of water,
with paths nowand then across it. The streets are paved
with brick,and some paths are laid with rough slabs of
marble; which was in great abundance in many places
along the banks of the Keang.
The Embassador walked towards the gate of the city,
which the attending officers rudely shut in his face,
instead of desiring him not to enter. On a representation
being sent to Kwang, he dispatched General Wang up,
and had the gate opened before the Embassador left it.


The next day several of the gentlemen ascended a hill
within the gate, about a quarter of a mile high, and had
an extensive prospect all around. However, as far as
the eye could reach over the space enclosed by the walls,
the town did not appear, except lofty gateways and a
Pagoda, the famous Porcelain tower. The whole space
was occupied by gardens and fields, with now and then
a cluster of houses. Some of the gentlemen walked very
near what was judged to be the inhabited and populous
part of the town, and when the crowd began to collect,
returned.
The Porcelain Pagoda is called Lew-le paouTa. Lew-
ie is a kind of glassy substance. It is also called Keang-
nan paou-gan-sze, “ The Temple of G ratitude in Keang-
nan.” Large sheets, containing a print and a description
of it, are sold in the streets of Hea-kwan. It was begun
in the 16th year of the reign of Yung-10, of the last
dynasty, and finished in the 6th year of Seun-tih, being
19 years in building. It cost 2,485,484 taels of silver.
On the top were 48 catties of gold, 1400 catties of red
copper. Some superstitious stories are told of the God
of thunder pursuing demons to this spot, and there des-
troying them, the shock of which injured the tower:
The fact appears to have been, that it was struck by
lightning. Large grants of ground all around were
made to the Temple and Tower.
At a Temple in the suburbs, found three large bronze
vessels, cast at the expense of Ho-ching, a eunuch who
travelled to Bengal in the reign of Hung-he, about A.
D. 1424. There are in the suburbs of Nan-kin hot baths
for poor people. Admittance costs from four to ten
cash, equal to a halfpenny or a penny. The baths are in
a small room, which continues filled with steam. The
bathers are all together, and come out to dry themselves
and dress in a public room, in which are cupboards num-
bered to contain the clothes of the separate bathers. The
sign of one was in large characters painted against a
white wall, Heang shwuy yu Tang , “ The bath of fra-
gitiiu water.” Some of the gentlemen put their heads


into the bath, and found the fragrance any thing hut
agreeable.
October 24th. The squadron moved from the pleas-
ant situation which it occupied before the walls of the
ancient capital of China.
October 27th, 28th. Were at a small creek on the
left bank of the Keang, called Tseen-y u-tsuy, near which
place we entered the province of Gan-hwuy,and accord-
ingly changed officers.
Along the Yang-tsze Keang, at set distances, are ar-
tificial creeks for boats and large vessels which navigate
the river, to anchor in at nights, out of the influence of the
wind and current. This river was found to be much
more difficult to navigate, and more dangerous than
was at first supposed. The wind blowing against the
current made a very heavy swell. Some Chinese Gen-
tlemen were sick in consequence of the agitation.
October 30th. Passed Woo-hoo Keen. The country
on the left was diversified by gentle hills and rich culti-
vation. Thermometer at 56. We anchored at the foot
of a steep rugged hill, up the sides of which were small
temples placed fantastically; it was called Se-leang Shan.
On the other side of the river was a corresponding hill
called Tung-leang Shan. Fancy suggested that the two
hills had once formed one, but by some convulsion of na-
ture had been rent asunder.
October 31st. Had a fine northerly breeze through-
out the day. Thermometer at SG. The country on
the right bank of the river was extremely pleasant. A
hilly undulating ground, well wooded, and spots highly
cultivated. In the distance was a long range of moun-
tains.
At 5 P.M. reached a village called Teih Keang. The
scenery on approaching it, was very beautiful. A great
variety of foliage prevailed every where. The dark au-
tumnal tint of some trees blending with the green of
others, was exceedingly pleasing to the eye.
Near the left bank was a small woody island, called
Yih-ke. A temple adorned its summit, and rocks were


spread along at its base. A pleasant northerly breeze,
a clear sky, and cool temperature, made every person
feel delighted with the climate. Many a wish was ex-
pressed, that so fine a country were more accessible to
persons of every clime.
On the hill above Teih-keang was a Temple dedicated
to Newshin , “the God of Kine.” A figure of a black
cow, with a person sitting on it, stood in the Temple;
and by the side were several marble inscriptions, con-
taining the names of the founders, and the views and
feelings of the original proposer, who invited all the
farmers in the neighbourhood to join in the expense.
In the streets of the village, observed a proclamation
respecting the English Embassy. The purport was:
“ The English Embassador is about to pass this place
on his return. His Majesty’s pleasure on the subject
has been received. Through the whole of the Embassy
not a man of the Embassy is allowed to land. Their
language is not known to the natives, therefore no in-
tercourse is permitted ; no buying or selling; no books
to be sold to them. Natives are not permitted to crowd
about them, nor to make a clamorous noise. No females
are permitted to show their faces,” &c.
Throughout the whole of the province of Gan-hwuy,
similar papers were pasted up by Government, at the
same time that it sent its soldiers and police-officers to
accompany the gentlemen who chose to walk through
the towns or into the country for miles around.
November 1. Stopped at Ting-kea-chow, a small
island. Enjoyed an agreeable walk betwixt two rows
of trees, many of which were the tallow tree, of which
candles are made: it was called here Pe-yew-kwo-tsze,
and by others the La-shoo.
In this part of the country, ns well as lower down,
many of the soldiers were arrayed in the ancient Chinese
helmets and coats of mail. They are now considered
useless, but are yet occasionally worn for ornament.
November 2. At 10 A. M. arrived at Tung-ling
een. The country around is hilly and well wooded.


The oak and the fir were amongst the number of the
trees which adorned the hills and the dales.
Saw porpoises in the Yang-tsze Keang. The boat-
men called them “ River pigs.”
November 3. Remained at Ta-tung. From the
great number of public necessaries in the lanes and
streets, the place is very disagreeable. On the hills,
which are well wooded, there are pleasant walks.
From the book of a village-school extracted the
following couplet:
“To have good children and grand-chiidren, constitutes happiness:
“ Though large estates be not possessed, there is no occasion for sorrow.”
On the sides of the hills were numerous coffins un-
buried. Those in easy circumstances had a vault built
over them. Others had nothing but a mat laid over the
coffin, which mat the relations of the deceased replace
annually. It is probable that they are kept unburied,
only till the persons concerned can find a place for,
and perform the rites of sepulture agreeably to their
wishes, or till they can afford to purchase a burying-
place; for, except at large towns, there is no public
burying-ground open to the poor.
Crossed over from Ta-tung to an island on the oppos-
ite side of the river, on account of the offensive smell
when anchored at the village. The island was called
Ho-ye Chow. This island is sometimes overflown by
the Yang-tsze Keang: when that occurs, the people
remove to the hills on the opposite side. Was interest-
ed by the appearance of a family containing four gene-
rations, amounting to about twenty persons, in the same
house. The patriarch was only 70 years of age; at his
feet stood his great grand-child, whilst his son was
working at his father’s coffin. I asked the old man
why he now prepared his coffin. He said he felt his
health decline, and he wished to have a place ready, in
which to rest after death. An opportunity did not
offer to ascertain his views of a future state of existence-
When asked if the sijrht of his coffin did not excite


mournful ideas, he replied, a No.” A mandarin with
me remarked, “ His mouth says No, but it is not the
language of his heart.”
In the distance is seen a lofty mountain called Kew-
hwa Shs i, frbm the circumstance of a temple being
erected on it to the God Kew-hwa. The ascent is said
to be so difficult in some places, that in going up it is
judged necessary to attach a rope from above to the per-
sons ascending. At the temple are upwards of a thou-
sand priests. Their supplies of food are obtained from
the plains below.
Saturday 9th. About 2 P. M. arrived at Gan-king
Foo, the capital of Gan-hwuy. The gentlemen of the
Embassy had permission to go about the town without
interruption. The city is small; the people apparently
wealthy, and a degree of health and colour enjoyed
which did not appear in other places. There is a Pa-
goda in the suburbs nine stories high. It is called
Ying-Keang Sze. Mr. Pearson ascended to its top.
November 11th. Arrived at this village last evening:
it is called Hwa-yuen Chin, and is about 90 leagues
distant from Gan-king. Rain and wind prevent our
proceeding. About half past four P. M., Miilidge, a
marine, who was attached to Mr. Mor«'son for the
purposes of the Embassy, in passing along the outside
edge of the boat, fell overboard and was drowned.
The current was very strong, Griffith looked out
immediately on hearing splash: but the man was
gone. The same got into a boat, and had it
rowed down the sCteam, but could see nothing of
Miilidge. He returned and felt with poles at the spot
where the man fell in, but in vain. He went down in
a boat a second time, whilst some of the man’s comrades
grappled with hooked poles at the side of the boat; but
alf was ineffectual. Miilidge was a well-behaved man,
about 30 years of age. His parents were living when
he left England, The Chinese asked, whether having
iosf his life in this service, his parents would be
rewarded.
v


In the evening the Chinese found the body, which
was next morning interred with much decorum. The
guard and band attended. Mr. Griffith read the fu-
neral service. The Legate, who *behaved in the most
gentlemanly manner on this occasion, had a stone cut
during the night with this epitaph:
“THE TOMB OF MILLIDGE, ONE OF THE
BODY-GUARD
OF THE
BRITISH EMBASSADOR.
NOVEMBER 12th, 1816.”
The epitaph was in Chinese characters.
November 12th. About 3 P. M. passed a conical
rock about 200 feet high, situated in the middle of the
river. Superstition had reared, with much difficulty
and expense, a building upon its southern side and at
its summit. There are supported in it about a hundred
priests: it is called Seaou-koo Shan, “ The little orphan
rock, or hill.” This hill is within the limits of
Keang-se.
In a south-east direction were seen numerous wild
and precipitous mountains, whilst on the north-west
nothing appeared but a dreary plain, the effect of which
was increased by a black cloudy sky and a drizzling
rain.
A little above the little orphan rock is situated the
town called Pang-tsih Hecp ? which occupies the valley
next the river, whilst its wall passes over the tops of
the mountains which encircle tbe town towards the
South-east.
In the evening the trackers’ line broke,jand left our
boat, with only two men on board, to drift down the
stream, which is rapid, and, with the wind from the
westward, extremely dangerous. We lost one anchor ;
but brought up with a second.
November 14th. Arrived at Ta-koo Tang, opposite
an island called Heae Shan, “ Shoe-hill.” It stands in
the mouth of the Po-yang Lake. On both sides are


frills of varied height. In the distance on the north-
west side, a lofty and remarkably pointed mountain
extends its huge length. On this side there is a small
town, with several temples in it, and a few shops in
which provisions are sold.
On the sides of Shoe-hill there are temples with a
long range of steps, by which to ascend; and on the
summit is a Pagoda. During the 16th remained on
account of the rain.
November 16th. Proceeded up the lake, with a
little current against «s. On the top of the Leu-shan,
“ The Mountain of Retreat,” snow had fallen during
the night, and remained shedding a white glare around
the summit, which, contrasted with the green below,
made it appear like sun-shine on the top, although the
sun was quite obscured. Snow which falls now, does
not usually melt till the fourth or sixth moon of the
ensuing season. Each side of the lake is here hemmed
in by hills of varied height. Some on the north-east
side are entirely sand.
The Governor of Paug-tsih Heen called, and asked,
amongst other questions, whether we had any opium
with us. He says, it is used by persons even in his poor
district. “ There is,” he said, “ a preparation of lobacco
used as a substitute for opium, and which they call
Sze-yen.”
In the afternoon arrived at Nan-Kang Foo, situated
on the border of the Lake. The walls had been recently
repaired, which excited a favourable anticipation as to
the wealth of the place. It is, however, in a very ruin-
ous poor state withinside. Before the town there is a
stone pier running parallel with the beach, and from the
centre of the pier a passage at right angles leads to the
principal gate of the town. Boats pass in behind each
end of the pier, and are sheltered from the agitation of
the Lake when it blows hard.
Up the first street are a number of the stone arch-ways
called Pae-fang or Pae-100. There is on them a great
variety of curious sculpture, representing birds, animals,
v 2


men, horses, and so on. They bore the dates of Wan*
leih, and Kea-tsing, of the last dynasty. There are in
the town two Wan-Meaou, as the Temples of Confucius
are called; and a Woo-Meaou, as the Temples of Kwan-j
Te, the military dcmi-god of China, are denominated, j
Most of the party took extremely interesting walks
to the Leu-Shan, “ Mountain of Retreat.” A small
stream issued from the side of the mountain, and fell a
considerable height. It was seen distinctly from where
the boats lay.
November 19th. Visited the Pih-luh lung Shoo-
yuen, “College of the White Stag Valley,” which is
situated about six English miles to the north-west of
Nan-Kang Foo. It is a place famous in China. It was
anciently a national seminary, and in it Choo-foo-tsze,
the favourite commentator of Confucius, taught about
six hundred years ago. There is still bearing flowers a
Kwei-hwa-Shoo tree which he planted with his own
hand. Persons are prohibited from plucking its leaves
or flowers. Some of the gentlemen, however, who felt
interested by the name of Choo-foo-tsze brought away a
few small twigs.
The college is situat ed at the further end of a beau-
tifully wild ravine. A torrent of water runs over a
broken rocky bed, which, in passing up, it is necessary
to cross several times. The hills are high, and more or
less wooded on each side, whilst beyond the stupendous
“ Mountain of Retreat ” lifts its black and rocky summit
in rugged points, called “ The five old peaks.”
This place is visited by many Chinese Scholars of
eminence, and the inscriptions neatly cut on n black
stone are very numerous. About 200 yards from the Col-
lege, a rock hanging over the brook is pointed out as
the spot where Choo-foo-tsze angled at his leisure
hours.
The writer of this felt more interest and pleasure from
a sight of this place, than from any thing else that occur-
red during the whole journey.


Wednesday, November 19th. Reached Woo-ching-
Chin, situated on the left bank'of the Tan-ho, which
flows by the capital of Keang-se and enters the Po-
yang Lake.
Woo-ching-Chin is a great depot for the. commodities
of various provinces. There are in the town very ele-
gant Hvsuy Kwariy or “ halls of merchants,” from the
same province.
There is also a very spacious and elegant temple, dedi-
cated to a man whose name was Heu Chin Keun, who
is deified, and is called “The happy Lord of Keang-se.”
His temple was by some Emperor denominated Wan-
show Kung, which is the name by which it is now
known. Here the front is decorated with various devices
on porcelain, and with handsome masonry. A large
court is formed in front, and a fine building raised,
on the opposite side for the public performance of
plays.
November 21st. Arrived at Nan-chang Foo, the
capital of Keang-se, where we had to quit the boats
with which we had navigated the Yang-tsze Keang and
the Po-yanglake. The remaining part of the journey was
by the same road as the gentlemen of Lord Macartney’s
Embassy.
Whilst at Nan-chang Foo, an alarming fire broke out
in the evening in the suburbs, on the banks of the river.
Our fire engines were offered to the Legate, who, with
many professions of thanks, declined accepting them, as
it was the duty of the local officers to see the fire ex-
tinguished, not his. In about the space of two hours
they succeeded.
. November 27th. The Legate sent a covered boat to
take the Embassador, and any other gentlemen who
chose to accompany him, to see a temple called Hwa
Wang Meaou, “ The temple of the King of flowers.”
His Majesty is represented seated on a fantastic group
oi rocks, surrounded by gay divinities, male and female,
tor each month of the year. The figures were quite
n ew, and painted in the most lively colours. The
f 3


temple was supported by the salt merchants in the'
neighbourhood, who in an adjoining hall had placedanidol
denominated Tsae-shin , “ The God of wealth.” Before
him was a stage for theatrical exhibitions, which are
blended with the service of all the temples.
On the evening of the 27th reached a village called
She-chih. In front of the boats saw an instance of the
harsh usage to which the people in China are subjected
from the police runners, who are armed and dressed
like soldiers. A respectable-looking man, walking
quietly away, was seized by the tail and the beard, and
dragged away to receive Ta-pan-tsze, “ A bambooing.”
On enquiring the cause, it was affirmed that he had Ma-
kvcan, “ used insolent language to an officer of the
government.”
At Nan-chang Foo, three hundred boats had been
put in requisition for the Embassy, and had been detain-
ed two months. Having received no pay for a whole
month, they appealed to Government for support, and
had then to each boat 150 cash, that is about fourteen
pence daily, given them.
December 2nd. Mr. Hayne’s boat struck against a
rock and filled with water; the boatmen ran her on shore
and saved every thing; his clothes and books were,
however, much injured. In the evening the boat, al-
ready repaired, overtook the rest of the fleet, and was
again taken possession of by the gentlemen who had
been wrecked in her at nocm.
The fleet now consisted of about a hundred boats,
which, passing with their sails spread up the river Kan-
keang, whose stream, clear as crystal, meanders at the
foot of hills and mountains, formed a fine sight.
December sth. All the boatmen in our fleet sent a
petition to the Embassador, requesting a pecuniary gra-
tuity to enable them to perform the usual rites, before
passing the eighteen rocky rapids, called Shih-pa-tan.
The Legate sent a Tan-sze, “ Master of the Rapids,”or
pilot, and a soldier, to assist in each boat. The rivei
in this neighbourhood abounds with rocks just above


Water, the passage between which is frequently very-
narrow. The bed of the river is a ravine enclosed
by hills and mountains, generally barren, but now
and then clothed with firs, and occasionally a few trees
of other kinds along the shore. The morning of the
7th set in with a cheerful sun, but became overcast with
thick black clouds, which hung on the tops of the
mountains, and gave the whole a wild gloomy ap-
pearance.
December 10th. All the boats were provided with
new tow-ropes, to drag the boats up the “ Pillars of
Heaven,” which is the name of a dangerous rapid. We
saw the recent wreck of a fine boat as we ascended the
rapid. In the evening arrived at Kan-chow Foo, where
two streams unite. One comes from the province of Full-
Keen, and the other, called the “Western River,” from
the mountain Mei-ling, which divides Canton from
Keang-se.
Early the next morning walked half-way round the
ramparts to an elegant Pagoda nine stories high. The
external appearance was compared by De Guignes, but
with little propriety, to the bamboo bonnets of poor
Chinese piled on each other. Several gentlemen as-
cended the Pagoda to view the surrounding country.
December 15th. Passed some very beautiful spots
in the morning. The stream is clear as possible. The
bottom generally pebbly. The hills and plants on each
side throw a dark hue upon the surface of the water,
which runs a continually winding course. The nume-
rous water-wheels described by former travellers, in
constant motion and shaded by green foliage, along the
banks of the limpid stream, delighted the eye.
• The Legate has on two or three occasions of late or-
dered his own boatmen, and those of some other boats,
to be beaten with twenty stripes for not getting their
boats on with greater expedition. Those who dragged
the boats were exposed to the rain from heaven, and
walked a great part of the day up to the middle in
water. That in times of perfect tranquillity, —for a
state of rebellion and anarchy does not apply,—that in a


state of perfect tranquillity a poor man who has labour-
ed all day in the profession to which he is devoted,
shall be liable at the close of the day to twenty blows
upon his bare breast, a punishment at once ignominious
and painful, merely because he could not bring his
labours to the successful close which some others did, is
really detestable. The minds which can inflict, and the
minds which can bear such treatment, how different
from the minds of Englishmen!
December 18th. Arrived at Nan-gan Foo. Here
we had to disembark in order to pass the Mei-ling
Mountain: the first land-journey which we had to take
since leaving Tung-chow.
A Knng-Kwan, “ Public or Government lodging,”
Was provided on shore. There were three houses.
That intended for the Embassador was very good for a
Chinese house. One of the others was that in which
the Dutch Embassy had been lodged twenty years ago.
The Frenchman who was of that party, had written his
name on one of the wooden pannelsof the window, with
a black-lead pencil. The name is still perfectly legible:
thus,
“ de guines Tozy
1795.”
Mr. Tozy was a Dutchman, seen by the persons of the
present Embassy at Batavia. .It was remarked, on
seeing these names, “ How frequently the Chinese wash
their houses!”
On the 19th the presents were carried across the
mountain. The large glasses cost 120 taels to transport
them over it.
December 20lh. The Embassador and suite, some
in chairs and some on horseback, performed the journey.
The pass on the top of the mountain is about 30 Chinese
leagues from Nan-gan Foo, and 90 from Nan-heung
Foo on the Canton side. There is a paved path all
along the valley on each side of the hill. Towards the
top the difficulty of ascent is lessened by steps, distant
from each other about three or four feet. The path,


cut down through the solid black rock, was made du-
ring the dynasty Tang, about a thousand years ago, by
an individual who had retired from Court. A tablet
still remains, which, it is said, was erected at the time,
but it is now illegible. An arched gate-way of brick
stands in the middle of the pass. It had a tower on the
top of it, but it is now fallen down. On one side of the
gate it is Keang-se province, on the other the province
of Kwang-tung, Canton. The view towards Keang-se
is very wild and dreary. Towards Canton, the view is
intercepted by hills on each side of the passage, and a
few trees give it a pleasing effect just as you pass through
the gate; but none of the “ flourishing fields and gar-
dens” mentioned in the accounts of the last Embassy,
as “ laid at the feet ” of the traveller, are to be seen after
getting through the defile just mentioned; the prospect
is just as dreary and barren as on the Keang-se side of
the mountain.
On the sides of the rock in the pass are various in-
scriptions cut out. Teen lejin tsing, “ Heavenly prin-
ciples and humane feelings,” apparently applied to the
man who made the pass, appear in very large characters.
His image is placed in a Temple on the Canton side of
the gate, and is worshipped with divine honours. In
the Temple a Mei-hwa Shoo, “ Mei flower tree,” was in
full blossom. From this tree the name Mei-ling, “the
Mountain of the Mei-flower,” is derived.
Dec. 21st. At Nan-heung Foo the Embassy again
embarked in small boats, the river being extremely
shallow.
Dec. 26th. At Chaou-chow Foo removed to larger
boats, in which on the first of January 1817 we arrived
at Canton.
Captain Maxwell in his barge, attended by about
twenty ships’ boats, filled with officers and gentlemen,
came to meet the Embassador. The American Consul
. Wilcocks, Esquire, joined the party in a boat car-
rymg the American colours.
In the evening his Lordship landed in State at a Tem-
P e called Hae-chang-sze, situated on an islet opposite


the European factories at Canton. It had boon fitted up
in a most splendid manner, in a style partly Chinese and
partly English, under the direction of J. B. Urmston,
Esquire, of the Select Committee of Supra-cargoes. In
the evening his Lordship took his New-year’s dinner
with a large party of Englishmen at the Honorable Com-
pany’s Factory. The gentlemen of the Embassy were
delighted to meet againtheir countrymen, who had long
anxiously expected them. Every heart was glad.
January Ist. The Legate waited on the Embassador
to congratulate him on his arrival. Several days were
occupied in arranging the etiquette of an interview with
the Viceroy.
On the 7th he, the Foo-yuen, and the Hoppo, were
received by the Embassador and two Commissioners.
He brought, carried by thirty-six bearers, in a little
yellow sedan chair, a letter from the Emperor of China
to the Prince Regent. Lord Amherst, Sir George
Staunton, and Mr. Ellis, had the precedence resigned
to them by the Viceroy and other two officers.
The Viceroy mentioned that the duties of the Hewit
had been remitted in consideration of her bringing out
the presents. He next adverted to his Imperial Majes-
ty’s bounty in permitting the trade for so great a length
of time. The Embassador said, he believed it was a
mutual benefit to both countries. The Viceroy wished
that obligation and dependance should be acknow-
ledged ; but when he found that such a tone was un-
pleasant, he said, “Well, we will not speak on subjects
that may excite angry feelings—may amity long con-
tinue ! ” The Embassador wished him health and pros-
perity, and so took his leave. An entertainment was
presented in the name of the Emperor.
January 9th. The Embassador returned the Legate’s
visit. The old gentleman was cheerful and chatty as
usual. A few 7 days after, on the invitation of Sir George
Staunton, he met the Embassador at the Factory, and
sat dowm to an entertainment with a large party of
officers and gentlemen.


January 19th. He waited on Lord Amherst to take
his final leave, and expressed a hope that the Embassa-
dor would represent matters to his own Sovereign in a
way calculated to preserve peace and good-will between
the two countries.
. On the 20th the Embassy left Canton. His Lordship
and suite went to Whampoa in Captain Maxwell’s
barge. The band and guard preceded, and two lines
of boats followed. The Viceroy placed himself in a
boat on the river where his Lordship had to pass in
order to take leave of him. Numerous salutes were
fired all the way down the river.
January 23rd. The Embassador and suite landed at
Macao. Chinese troops were marched into the town
to receive his Lordship on the beach.
Before he sailed an interesting document was ob-
tained. It was a manifesto written by the Emperor’s
own hand, and addressed to the whole world, —to foreign
nations as well as to his Tartar and Chinese subjects.
In this he expresses regret and shame for what was
done: to take blame to himself was all that he could
suffer, but the courtiers who had deceived him he de-
livered to be tried by the proper tribunal: They decreed
that the Duke should have his title taken from him;
that Moo should be laid aside entirely; that Soo should
be degraded to the fifth rank, and that Kwang should
be made a subordinate secretary of the Bth rank, and
next spring, on his return, be sent to Tartary to offi-
ciate there. The Emperor pitied his brother-in-law
the Duke, and retained his title, but took from him all
his important situations. Soo, if he behaved well
eight years, might be permitted to supplicate restora-
tion to his dignities. This however was like adding
, mockery to degradation, for Soo is now nearly seventy
years of age, and will, should the grave not become his
habitation ere the period of probation be expired, be
unfitted by extreme old age to hold any important
public situation.
_ r^ le Duke and Moo reported from Tung-chow that the
Embassador was daily performing the Tartar ceremony


with a degree of veneration and respect that merited the
highest commendation; a statement founded on a posi-
tive untruth. Men, who can deliberately and officially
write an absolute falsehood, whatever their rank may
be, sink very low in the estimation of every well-regu-
lated mind. Their degradation can scarcely be regret-
ted. The most ludicrous occurrence is the case of the
loquacious Judge of Chih-le, who was introduced to the
reader in the preceding pages. He went to Court and
informed his Majesty of the lectures he had given, and
the questions which he had put to the English. The
answer he received was: “ I did not send you to lecture,
nor to ask questions, but to see the Embassy safely and
quietly out of the Province; for your officiousness you
shall suffer.” My Lord Judge was forthwith degrad-
ed and sent into banishment.
SECTION VIII.
Notices respecting Mohammedans and Jews.
Mohammedans were found in every part of our
journey. They frequently hold situations in the Go-
vernment.
On the evening of September 10th, whilst walking
on shore, at a village called Too-leaou, about fifty miles
from Teen-tsin, I observed written on the lantern of a
poor huckster’s shop Hwuy-Hwuy laou teen, “An old
Mohammedan Shop.” On stopping to ask the owner,
who was an old man, whence he came, he replied, from
Se-yang, “The Western ocean.” When urged to say,
from what country of the west, he said he did not know.
He understood his family had been in the place in which
he now was for five generations.
He informed me that there were many Mohammedans
in the neighbourhood; they had a Le-paeSze, “temple
for worship;” they observed every third and seventh


day, chiefly the seventh. They used for the Chinese
word Teen, “Heaven,” the word Choo, “Lord or Sove-
reign.”
The old man could not read: he did not cease to sell
commodities on the Sabbath.
October 13th. At a temple of Fuh, near Kwa-chow,
met with a gentleman who held a situation in the Go-
vernment : on entering into conversation with him, it
appeared that he was a Mohammedan.
He said he understood the Mohammedans came over
to China during the dynasty Tang, about 1200 years
ago.
In Chinese the Mohammedans express the Deity by
Choo, “ Lord,” and not by Shin, “ a god or spirit;” be-
cause, he said, “the gods, Shin, were included in things
created.”
“We,” said he, “ venerate the Lord, who is the true
Lord of what exists and what does not; the Creator of
all things. He is not like any thing; not to be com-
pared to any thing: the one only true Lord.” He
called the Sabbath by the name of“ Choo-ma-urhP
He informed me that at Kae-fung Foo, in Honan pro-
vince, theire were a few families denoted Teaou-kin
Keaou,“ the plucking-sinew sect,” because they take
away the sinews from all the flesh which they eat. They
also had a Le-pae Sze, or “ Temple of Worship.” They
observed the eighth day as a Sabbath. He regarded
theni the same as the Teen-chow Keaou, which is the
name by which the Christians are known in China.
The above statement exactly corresponds with what
is related in Grosier, on the authority of a Romish Mis-
sionary. That person saw and conversed with the peo-
ple of whom he spake, and he considered them as Jews.
gentleman felt a little unwilling to con verse on
the subject of religion; said it was not their custom to
do it; but to satisfy the curiosity of a stranger, and as
had been civil to his brother, he now did so. The
of Buddah was sitting by and handing tea all the


November 27. At Nang-chang Foo, the capital of
Keang-se, was visited by a young military Mohamme-
dan officer. He said that in Keang-nan they had 36
Mosques; where we then were, there were three. He
affirmed the same as the persons above-mentioned re-
specting the terms used for the Deity. Respecting the
Chinese word, “ Heaven,” and Shin, “ spirit,” he said,
“ Heaven was created by the Lord, so were the Shin,
‘ spirits.’ ”
Their Sabbath occurs on our Friday. In the Chinese
Calendar it falls on the days Kang, New, Low, Kwei,
which are four of seven characters applied to days suc-
cessively. The teachers or priests they call Laon-sze
Foo . There is one who expounds, sitting on the Sabbath.
Thirty or forty attend at Nan-chang Foo. Require the
people to pray five times a-day; the prayers are not
translated from the Arabic. There are no books in
Chinese containing the service or doctrines of the sect.
The term in Arabic answering to the Chinese Hwuy-
hwuy, he understands to be Moo-se-ne-ma-na, probably
Musselman, Return on Sabbath from the Mosque to
their usual avocations.
The young officer said many of the sect were not
very strict. He himself took a little wine to strengthen
Jiisarms for shooting with the bow.
SECTION IX.
Religion and Morals.
In passing through a country, secluded from general
intercourse with its inhabitants, little can be ascertained
as to the effect of religious or moral principles on the
human mind.
The very frequent decay and ruin in which the tem-
ples of superstition were found by the present travellers,


seemed to denote a decay of the sentiments which
prompted the rearing’ of those edifices.
What the prophet Isaiah said of Judea two thousand
years ago is still true of China, ‘ their land also is full of
idols ; they worship the work of their own hands —that
which their own fingers have made? —[ls. ii, B.]
The sect of Fuh or “ Buddah,” is more prevalent than
that of Taou. There are some temples of the latter
which appear occupied by the priests of the former.
One temple occurred to the writer of this, which seemed
to be of neither sect. Bloody sacrifices had been offer-
ed to the idol, the steps to whose altar were yet red
with gore. Time did not permit a fuller investigation,
as there was no person on the spot who could give any
satisfactory account of it. A calculator of the fates of
men sat at the gate, with his apparatus about him, but he
could not tell to whom the temple was dedicated. The
fortune-telling superstition seemed very prevalent in
some towns ; the professors of the art kept regular shops,
*Tis liberty alone that gives the flower
Of fleeting life its lustre and perfume ;
And we are weeds without it. All constraint
Except what wisdom lays on evil men,
Is evil ; hurts thefaculties ; impedes
Their progress in the road of Science ; Hinds
The eye-sight if discovery ; and begets.
In them that suffer it, a sordid mini
Bestial, a meagre intellect, unfit
To be the tenant of man’s noble form.
Coicpcr.
China does not enjoy liberty. Her government is a
military despotism. Her virtues and her vices are those
of slaves. Always artful, suspicious, intriguing, the
Chinese are complaisant and servile, or insolent and do-
mineering, according to circumstances. They affect
care to prevent irregular intercourse of the sexes ;
and yet are well known to be very debauched. Inde-
cent representations were found every where exposed


the same as at Canton. The strong arm of power inti-
midates them, and they acquire a habit of departing from
the truth. Of this numerous instances occurred in the
course of the journey.
The Tartars were generally more proud and haughty
than the Chinese.
If “barbarity” or being “barbarous” expresses some-
thing savage, rude and cruel, the present inhabitants of
China do not deserve the epithet; if it expresses a cun-
ning, selfish policy, endeavouring to deceive, to intimi-
date, or to brow-beat, as occasion may require, connect-
ed with an arrogant assumption of superiority on all
occasions, instead of cultivating a liberal, candid, friend-
ly intercourse with men of other nations, they are Bar-
barians.
FINIS.
JAMES NICHOLS, PRINTER, 2, WARWICK-SQUAUE, LONDON.
