



A Memorial to John Batman
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE:
Chairman.
Sir W. H. F. MITCHELL, President op the Legislative Council..
Joint Cnasums
GEORGE ME ARES, Esq. (The Right Worshipful the Mayor of Melbourne), and GEORGE COPPIN, Esq
A. C. MACDONALD, Esq., Dr. THOMAS EMBLING, The Hon. G. F. BELCHER,
R. W. E. MACTYOR, Esq., and J. A. PANTON, Esq.
JOHN J. SHILLINGLAW, Esq., Committee Rooms, Town Hall, Melbourne.
[a letter to the editors of the “argus,”
THE “AGE,’‘ AND THE “DAILY TELEGRAPH.”]
Sir,—By your courtesy this is an Appeal to
the people of Victoria to assist in removing
a national reproach by the erection of a
national monument. This day 41 years ago
—the 6th May, 1839—there died in Melbourne
a man who was among the first Pioneers of
the noble colony of Victoria, who selected
the site, and has very good claim to be called
the Founder of this city, and whose grave
remains to this day unmarked by a stone to
recall his merits and his services.
I do not propose to enter into the questions
of priority of settlement which have occasion-
ally disturbed the friends of other Pioneers.
It would lead us too far a-field. The books
of VVestgarth, Bon wick, Rusden, Labilliere,
and others are on everybody’s bookshelves,
and anyone can settle the claims for him-
self. Nor is it expedient to make glowing
comparisons between the little village of
Doutigalla and the wondrous Melbourne of
to-day. In our national progress, to quote
Burke, “ Fiction lags after fact, invention is
unfruitful, and imagination cold and barren.”
The simple truth remains that Batman has
not received justice at our hands. The man
who led the way in this astounding pro-
sperity, whose persistent endeavours, resolute
courage, and remarkable humanity towards
the aborigines, stands on official record, lies
in an unmarked grave in the Old Melbourne
Cemetery, in a spot which is perhaps known
but to half a dozen people.
This neglect, altogether unworthy of the
Colony, has been repeatedly noticed in letters
to the press for years past. Recently it was
prominently referred to in a speech by Sir W.
H. F. Mitchell, the President of the Legisla-
tive Council, who, to his honour, has not
stopped there. Sir William has accepted the
position of chairman of a committee—
already numbering some 70 gentlemen—who
propose to raise, by a shilling subscription
throughout Australia, a fund which shall
suffice to erect a National Memorial to John
Batman. What form it should take will
he a matter for discussion hereafter. The
Mayor of Melbourne has promised his cordial
support, and, by his leave, the preliminary
meeting of all who are willing to assist will
be held at noon on Tuesday next, the 11th
May, in a room which Mr. Meares has kindly
placed at the disposal of the committee.
The gathering and communications by
letter then expected will include all
classes and conditions of the citizens.
The working committee to be then
formed will make the further necessary
business arrangements. We hope to secure
the support of the Press, and the services of
every Mayor, of every President of a Shire, of
every Town Clerk and Public Official through-
out the colony Already, in the form of coin
and in postage stamps, the generous flood-
tide of sympathy is “making,” and it is con-
fidently expected that throughout the length
and breadth of the land for this national
effort in a good cause will be found among
rich and poor, old colonist and “new
chum ”
“ In silken or in leathern purse retain’d
A Splendid Shilling! ”
—Yours, &c.,
THE HONORARY SECRETARY.
Committee-room, Town-hall,
Melbourne, May 6.
[The object advocated by Mr. Shillinglaw is
an excellent one, but the limitation of the
subscription to Is. is, we think, ill-advised.
Let each subscriber be encouraged to give ac-
cording to his means and inclinations.—
Ed. Aegds.]
A meeting of gentlemen taking an interest
in the movement for erecting a fit memo-
rial to John Batman, the founder of Mel-
bourne, was held in the Town-hall, on
Tuesday, 11th May, 1880. In the ab-
sence of Sir W. H. F. Mitchell, Mr. George
Coppin occupied the chair. There were pre-
sent at the meeting several very old colonists,
among them being Mr. Joseph Solomon, who
arrived in Melbourne in 1835, and may fairly
claim to be the oldest colonist of Victoria ;
Mr. Gordon A. Thompson, a colonist of 1836,
who knew and lived with Batman ; and Mr.
W. Weire, Batman’s son-in-law.
Mr. Coppin stated that the meeting had
been called by Mr. J. J. Shillinglaw for a very
deserving object. He regretted that owing to
the shortness of the notice and other engage-
ments many old colonists were unable to
attend. Some objection had been made to
the low rate of the subscription, but those
who thought it too low could subscribe for
every member of their families.
Mr. Shillinglaw said the matter had been
alluded to by Sir W. H. F. Mitchell at a dinner
given to him at Kynetonlast month, when he
said it was a shame and a scandal that no
stone should mark the grave of the pioneer
and father of the colony. The same remark
had been made on many occasions previously,
and he had been induced to take the matter
in hand. He wrote to Sir W. H. F. Mitchell
on the subject, and that gentleman at once
promised his hearty co-operation, and agreed
to act as chairman to the movement. He
had received promises of assistance from
many gentlemen who were not only willing,
but anxious to assist in carrying out the ob-
ject. Those who thought Is. too little, could
easily send their cheques for larger amounts
to the editor of The Argus. He produced a
list of the names of 70 gentlemen who had
willingly promised to assist in any way. He
wanted authority to send out an appeal to the
inhabitants of Victoria, which might be very
appropriately headed with the sketch of Bat-
man’s grave, which had been kindly taken by
Mr. Pan ton.
Dr. Embling moved that those present and
the gentlemen named in Mr. Shillinglaw’s
list be elected a committee with power to
add to their number.
Mr. A. C. MacDonald seconded the motion,
which was carried.
On tha motion of Mr. MicDohxld
Mayor of Melbourne and Mr. G. Coppin were
appointed joint treasurers, and Mr. J. J.
Shillinglaw was appointed hon. secretary.
Mr. Fitzgibbon said he was a bad beggar,
but he would much rather ask a man for £1
than Is. He had been connected with one
Is. subscription, and he was quite certain
that had the subscription been left open a
very much larger sum would have been sub-
scribed. Many old colonists would be will-
ing to subscribe liberally to such a movement.
They would be glad to rescue the last rest-
ing place of John Batman from the con-
temptuous neglect in which it has been left.
One circumstance connected with Batman
should be borne in mind. Owing to the
absence of lawyers in the early days of the
colony, Batman was obliged to leave the
making of his will to incompetent hands, and
from the neglect of those whom he had left as
trustees the property which would have been
worth half a million was wasted, and nothing
came to his family. He moved that the sub-
scription be unlimited.
Mr. W. J. Hobbs seconded the motion.
Mr. MacDonald thought that the object
of limiting the amount to Is. was to bring
the subscription within the means of every
one in the colony. If every one subscribed
the sum realised would be ample. He moved,
as an amendment, that the subscription
be Is.
Mr. Shillinglaw said he had received
many letters from rich colonists who were
ready and willing to subscribe larger sums if
more money was wanted.
The amendment was then put and lost,
and the motion was carried by a large
majority.
On the motion of Mr. MacDonald, the
Mayor of Melbourne, Mr. G. Coppin, Dr.
Embling, The Hon. Mr. Belcher, Mr. Maclvor,
Mr. Panton, Mr. Shillinglaw, and the mover
were appointed a sub-committee to make all
necessary arrangements for carrying out the
object.
Mr. Weire produced the diary kept by Bat-
man when he left Tasmania on the 10th May,
1835, to come over to Victoria. This curious
relic of the first permanent settlement of
Victoria was an object of much interest to
those present.
[Argus, 12th May, 1880.]
JS T .B —In deference to the wishes of a large section of the public, the Subscription is unlimited;
but the principle of a Shilling Subscription will be practically adhered to. Subscription Lists will
be furnished on application to the Hon. Secretary, and payments may be made in Coin, Post Office
Order, Cheques, or postage stamps, to any of the Committee or to the Editors of the Melbourne Journals.
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, MELBOURNE.


BBatmim glemorial Jfmtfr.
Subscription List issued to Members of the Committee. To be returned by 30 th June , 1880.
