

,<f/
' y >
, friX-
-/ &a ...;
/ ky^<r
V-r-J—JtsW^L,
llopxrf' t /I)Tildas


A
MIDSHIPMAN'S
JOURNAL,
ON BOARD H.M.S. SERINGAPATAM,
DURING THE YEAR, 1830;
CONTAINING
BRIEF OBSERVATIONS ON PITCAIRN’S ISLAND,
AND
OTHER ISLANDS IN THE SOUTH SEA.
BY LIEUT. J. ORLEBAR, R. N.
LONDON:
WHITTAKER, TREACHER, AND CO.
1833.


Printed by Joseph Hill and Son, Booksellers, &c.
High Street, Bedford,


INTRODUCTION.
IF this Journal should give the Reader half
the pleasure in the perusal that I had in ivriting
it, I shall he content. What delight have I expe-
rienced, many thousand miles from home, in penning
all my remarks, fondly anticipating the time when
it tvoidd meet the eye of the fondest and dearest of
friends. —It has now been seen by her and many of
my other friends; and on their kind suggestion I
publish it, more tvith the idea of spreading it among
my numerous acquaintance than of becoming known
to the world as a scribbler.
Few are they who have not appeared one time
or other in print, and in these days, no man is safe.
The most idle and thoughtless, trusting in their
imagination ivrite novels, —the most sage and stupid
tvrite essays or political pamphlets. Such being the
case, I also join the crowd, and present to the Reader
this unpretending little book, trusting it may afford
some information and amusement.




CHAPTER I.
VALPARAISO,—THE ANDES,—EASTER ISLAND.
I have omitted my remarks on the coast of Brazil,
&c. as being trite and common-place; and at once
carry the reader to places and people that more
nearly interested me. On December 17th, 1829,
H. M. S. Seringapatam took her departure from Rio
de Janeiro, and proceeded withevery variety of wind
and weather for the coast of Chili. The passage
round Cape Horn has been described so frequently
as so terrific, that the good weather we experienced
will be received as something wonderful. We were
49 days from Rio de Janeiro to Valparaiso, and al-
though we had several stiff breezes, there was not one
we could dignify with the title of “a gale of wind.”
On February 3rd, 1830, we anchored at Valpa-
raiso ; our stay there was to be short, so I took every
opportunity of going ashore that the duty of the ship
would allow. How much do I feel my ignorance of
drawing, now that I wish to describe Valparaiso.
The talented draughtsman can in a moment infix
by the magic of his pencil the image and descrip-
tion of a scene, so as to present to the eye a living
picture and representation of Nature’s wildest beau-
ties : but the plodding writer, deprived of the aid of
that art, labors by language to communicate his own
sentiments on the appearance, and to construct by
words an image of the scene, in which he is sure
B


more or less to fail; for another eye may view it in a
very different light, and his mind would conse-
quently embody contrary ideas. What two men
can agree in their opinion of beauty ? the one ad-
mires a dark complexion, the other, a fair: even so
with the beauties of Nature; some prefer the regular
features of a rich well-cultivated country, watered
with navigable rivers, and alternate hill and dale ;
while others love the wild but striking features of
mountain scenery,—rocks piled on rocks—the dash
of torrents—thedarkgloom of forests liningthe deep
ravines, and their high summits lost amid the clouds.
In Valparaiso the latter scenery predominates,
but in a tamer style; the town built under the cliffs
that form the base of the high hills rising at the
back, has straggled in small ill-built houses up the
bottoms and sides of the ravines, and in some places
crowning the wild and rocky cliffs. It is connected
by a few houses to a suburb nearly its own equal
in size, consisting of low miserable huts, distin-
guished by the name of “Almandral,” and situated
on the low sandy plain at the foot of the hills which
form the eastern corner of the bay. With these
additions, Valparaiso has very much increased in
size, and may with justice rank as the second town
in Chili. The bay affords good but deep anchorage
and from the prevalence of southerly winds is safe
and smooth in the summer; but on the approach
of winter, it is not a desirable roadstead, being
without shelter from a northerly wind, which raging
with great fury, throws on its shore the whole force
of the vast Pacific. We lie at anchor about a quar-
ter of a mile from the shore; the view from seaward


throws the town into shade and insignificance, and
even the rounded barren summits of the hills in the
vicinity, partially clothed with low stunted bushes,
and rising some hundred feet above the sea, appear
mean and unprofitable to the eye which impatiently
glances to a more worthy object. What a rapturous
soul-engrossing prospect bursts upon the sight!
At the bottom of the bay to the N, E. towering
over all, and reposing in silence and majesty, we
see the venerable snow-capt Andes; asserting their
superiority to be gazed on and worshipped at the
immense distance of 110 miles. They seem part
of another world, so coldly, so lightly do they rest
on the deep blue vault of heaven : while dwelling
with delight on their beauteous grandeur, my fancy
has often compared them to the spirits of the de-
parted, who purified from the dross and contamina-
tion of humanity, still look down with an eye of pity
upon the children of men. It is a whimsical com-
parison and will not bear analysing; but lam sorry
I cannot do justice to my subject, for with the Andes
our admiration ceases; my acquaintance with the
country has detected no additional beauties, and
what is of more consequence, but little cultivation.
All over Chili agriculture is much neglected; along
the coast and on the hills round Valparaiso, the
soil is dry and sterile, but inland I am told there
is much good land lying waste : the corn grown in
the country is not sufficient even for themselves,
although it evidently possesses the capability of
supplying all the coast to the northward. The
country is still in such a troubled state, that there
is a material check on industry, and a few years of
b. 3


peace would make a great change in the face of it,
and would direct the energies that are now wasted
in civil broils, to the nobler purpose of improving
themselves and benefitting each other by the pur-
suits of agriculture and commerce. I must defer
drawing their character till I have had better op-
portunities and farther observation of them.
We left on the 13th of February, and on the 16th
anchored in Coquimbo Bay, where we found an
expedition commanded by General Freyre, on the
point of sailing it was supposed for Valparaiso.—
It cut a miserable, figure, five or six small craft,
crowded with soldiers, with one armed vessel was
their whole naval force, hut backed by a numerous
discontented party, Freyre aspires to overthrow
the existing Government, and raise himself on their
downfall. When we return Ave shall know how he
succeeded, as he sailed on the second day. Our
object at Coquimbo being accomplished, we left
the Sapphire, Avhich vessel arrived the same day
as ourselves, and proceeded on our cruise to the
South Sea Islands. Coquimbo Bay is very imper-
fectly sheltered from the northerly Avinds,but other-
wise is smooth and safe anchorage, and possesses
an advantage over Valparaiso, the water not being
so deep; the adjacent scenery is poor and common-
place, but retrieved by a splendid view of the Andes
at the distance of only 90 miles. The hills around
are clothed in dry sterility, but many contain val-
uable mines; the plains from their sandy soil, are
incapable of culture, except when watered by the
rivers, which are few and uncertain in their flow.
The town of Serena, situated about six miles along
8


the coast, north of the port, is watered by the Co-
quimbo, which overflowing at certain seasons has
enriched the neighbouring soil, and on a small scale
has imitated the beneficial influence of the Nile :
for many miles inland the banks of this river yield
a grateful increase to the labourer, either laid out
in meadows or sown with corn. The town, built in
squares, is partially defended by a ruinous wall; the
houses are mean, and many have suffered much from
the frequent earthquakes. Without trade and with-
out manufactures, only containing 800 inhabitants,
in England, Serena would now be properly called
a village, although once occupying the second rank
amongst the towns of the Presidency of Chili.—■
When off" the Horn, the captain had told us of the
intended trip to the islands of the South Sea, and
many of us at Valparaiso had purchased articles
for traffic : from an unfortunate deficiency in cash
I was obliged to be very sparing. We were led in-
deed to expect a fertile field of novelty and amuse-
ment, and while wafted by an easterly Trade Wind
into the bosom of the Pacific, our progress only
checked by partial calms, we were busied in imagi-
ning adventures with the savages, and gathering
from various voyages, some ideas of the people we
were likely to visit.
On March 6th, at five in the morning, we observed
Easter Island, and running down the eastern side
of it, at the distance of three or four miles, our spy-
glasses, which had for some time been eagerly di-
rected towards the island, discovered close to the
beach several low huts and three tall figures, which
we at once conjectured to be the statues spoken of
9


by the Dutchman who first discovered the island.
About ten o’clock we rounded the south point, a
high bluff cliff, and hauled our wind for the anchor-
age, an open roadstead, but sheltered from the
prevalent winds in this latitude. The shore was
lined with people, and long before we anchored, the
ship was surrounded by shoals of the swimming
naked natives. We were anxious for them to come
on board, but as there were nearly two hundred in the
water, the captain prudently would only allow forty
to be on board at a time, to effect which we were
obliged to use some harshness. Their surprize and
wonder was extreme, and their wild uncouth ges-
tures while saluting us, and their shrewdness and
discernment were both equally astonishing. As an
instance of which, directly they came on board,
parties of them proceeded to measure the length
and breadth of the ship by extending their arms
along the deck, the size of our fathom; —rothers
counted the number of officers and men, and each
as they finished, set up a wild cry of astonishment.'
Many robberies were attempted, some of which
amused us extremely: the corporal of marines lost
his cap off his head, and the thief was only dis-
covered, by the splash of water he made, as he
dashed overboard, and he eluded all our endeavours
to catch him, by dexterously diving, when our boat
came up to him, and among the multitudes around
we found it impossible to discern the thief. A
messmate of mine was pestered by the attention of
a native who wished to dance with him, and while
amused with his monkey tricks, found he had lost
every thing out of his pockets, among which a white


cambric handkerchief seemed the great favourite,
as it was displayed by the native to his admiring
countrymen at the moment he jumped overboard
to elude our grasp. Another native, after being
detected in one or two thefts, plunged overboard
with the end of a coil of rope, the topsail haulyards,
and was swimming away with it, but being fast in-
board, it checked him suddenly, and after a few
ineffectual struggles, he was obliged to relinquish
it. For some time, their noise, their eagerness to
barter every thing for iron or for clothes, their joy
at receiving presents, expressed by a rude awkwurd
dance, and their extreme animation and good hu-
mour, pleased every one; butsoon their mischievous
propensity to steal and pillage every thing became
so annoying, as to oblige us to turn them forcibly
out of the ship. For hours afterwards there were
hundreds swimming round the ship, and making
every good-tempered endeavour to get on board;
and it was not till sunset that they returned to the
shore. Captain Waldegrave made two attempts to
land, but could not succeed from the heavy surf
running on the rocky beach, and as we sailed the
same evening, we are obliged to remain satisfied
with the little we could observe of the island by the ,
aid of our spy-glasses and our acquaintance with
the natives on board.
The men are tall and large boned, their features
plain, but possessing much animation, , and shaded
with a quantity of long lank black hair; they are
of a dark brown color and some were much tatooed.
The women are very delicately made, of a lighter
color, pretty features, and elegantly tatooed, and


would be fascinating if there was not too great a
display of charms; both sexes are sans habit, but
the women have their persons adorned with one 1
narrow strip or girdle of leaves in front. We found
that chastity was not in their catalogue of virtues,
but certainly, proved with us, I am ashamed to say,
their best article of traffic. On shore we observed
the natives wore a loose sort of cloak or mantle,
made we conjectured from the paper mulberry tree,
thrown loosely over the shoulders and extending to
the hips. The island seems cultivated with some
attention, although their only tools are made of lava,
and produces yams, sugar canes, sweet potatoes,
and bananas ; water is very scarce and very bad,
and Perouse mentions that the only spring of fresh
water is made undrinkable, by their constantly
bathing in it and its exposure to the heat of the
sun. We could see no trees of any kind in the
island, and we believe there are none; although the
very few arms we saw were made of the iron wood;
perhaps floated to their shores, for of the whole
number that came on board, there were but two
short clubs and three small carved images.
We observed the houses on shore were low, of an
oblong shape, and seemingly built of stone ; Pe-
rouse mentions them as containing the inhabitants
of a whole village, being sometimes 310 feet long;
I think it not at all unlikely as they appeared of
that length from the ship, and were scattered all
over the country. Perouse also gives me some in-
formation about the statues we saw on the other
side of the island, which he found by measurement
to be 14 feet in height, but imperfect in all but the


features of the face, which are surprisingly well exe-
cuted. The island from its rugged appearance, and
from the lava we found amongst the natives is evi-
dently a volcanic production. Here I think, civi-
lization may perhaps never extend; so far from any
land, its inhospitable shores, without one secure
anchorage, and devoid of water or fuel, —its inhabi-
tants, the rudest of savages and hardly possessed
of the bare necessaries of life, hold out no tempta-
tion to polished money-seeking man, and may linger
in barbarism for ages.
Their food must be nearly confined to vegetables,
for foAvls are the only animals on the island, and
even their supply of fish which are abundant in
these seas must be very precarious, as their con-
trivance for catching them is awkward and they
possess only three canoes. The water seemed their
native element; the ease with which both sexes
swam, their swiftness, and their remaining in for
hours without being fatigued, astonished every
body; a few of the women had a bundle of rushes
which helped to buoy them up, but it was quite
confined to their sex. I should judge from the
little we saw of the natives that they were a quiet
inoffensive race, and although no one seemed pos-
sessed of exclusive authority, from the scarcity of
their offensive weapons, I should judge they were
peaceable amongst themselves. Of their religion
we know nothing, Perouse says they pay no wor-
ship to the statues; we observed all along the shore
piles of stones, surmounted by one white pebble,
and they had two or three small carved images, to
which however they paid no reverence.
13


The island was first discovered by Admiral Rog-
gewein, 1672, and is 35 miles in circumference, and
the number of inhabitants seems not to exceed 700,
of which I dare say we saw two-thirds, for the
shore was lined with them. Here I will gladly bid
them adieu, for although I would not have missed
seeing them, yet the picture of such men, so little
removed from the brute creation, is a painful and
disagreeable lesson to our pride, and our pity for
them is mingled more with disgust than love.


CHAPTER II.
PITCAIRN’S ISLAND—HOSPITABLE ENTERTAINMENT
—THE GRAVE OF JOHN ADAMS.
A continuance of the same fine weather brought ns
on Sunday night, March 14th, in sight of the inte-
resting island of Pitcairn’s, and the next morning
we hove to windward of it, distant about two miles.
This speck of land, only seven miles round, rises
abruptly from the sea covered with the greenest
foliage, peeping from the midst of which, here and
there, we saw the low huts of the natives; in the
middle the ground is much higher, and forms a sort
of wall extending the length of the island, and
ending in an abrupt cliff to the northward. Our
English colors soon attracted the natives, who were
observed coming toward us in a whaleboat; but one
man in a nutshell of a canoe was picked up by our
cutter and brought first on board. He was dressed
decently in a jacket andtrowsers, but withoutshoes,
and readily addressed us in English, and shook
each by the hand ; we somewhat overwhelmed him
with the multitude of our questions, nor could he
understand us when we spoke quick, as is our cus


tom aboard ship. His countrymen now arrived in
the whaleboat, and our attention was divided among
ten or eleven fine strapping, active looking young
men, all dressed in jacket and trowsers, and though
their skin was dark brown, some were really hand-
some ; their greeting was cordial, but the clergy-
man soon engrossed all their attention ; they had
never it seems seen one before, and the strict notions
of religion, instilled into their minds by John Adams,
made them most anxious to receive the blessing and
advice of so holy a character: and I have no doubt
but that Mr. W. who is a man truly religious, was
of the greatest service to them. We found our-
selves frequently at a loss to understand their
English, and they perhaps more so to comprehend
oursfor their wants and occupations are so con-
fined, and the simplicity of their ideas requires but
fewwords of expression, that only the most common
and simple seem known among them.
Questions on questions were put regarding the
crew of the Bounty, but we learnt nothing that we
had not heard of before, except that the last sur-
vivor, John Adams “ their father ” as he is univer-
sally called by them, died, full of years, twelve
months ago, and loaded with the prayers and bles-
sings of the natives : and at this moment, the per-
son that mentions his name has his eye moistened
with a tear of sad recollections.
There being no anchorage, the ship stood off and
on to windward of the island, and every opportu-
nity was given for us to go on shore; our visitors
left us about noon, and the captain and some of the
officers accompanied them, remaining all night:


on the morrow I had leave with many others, and
at an early hour left the ship. The weather be-
spoke a fine day; a light haze covered the waters
and the clear blue sky was unsullied by a cloud;
we approached the island, with hardly a breath of
wind, the sea was boiling and foaming, and the
heavy dash of billows against the rocks drowned
our voices; piloted by a young lad that belonged
to the island, we lay on ouf oars without the edge
of the surf, while with a peculiar shrill call, com-
mon I found to the other islands in the South Sea,
he gave them ashore to understand we were ar-
rived. We had remained in this way an hour,
watching a break or dent which he pointed out as
our landing place, when we observed several figures
among the trees which lined the shore, and presently
one of them diving dexterously through the surf,
came on board, and taking the tiller from the cox-
swain, desired us to pull in. The passage was
most intricate, leading as it were through the cen-
tre of the roaring surf; borne on the bosom of a
wave that topped so fearfully as to threaten each
moment to overwhelm us, his cry of “ Pull away,
pull away, boys,” shewed that even to them ’twas
a dangerous task : we spun with the rapidity of an
arrow among rocks covered with foam, and one
hard bump displayed us for a moment on the very
pinnacle of one, when half a dozen of the tall na-
tives, who were observing us, sprang to our assist-
ance, and watching the surf which again rolled
toward us, launched us onward and in a moment
we grounded on the beach, under the shade of a
large tree.


Assisted by the kind natives we soon! cleared the
boat, and partly hauled her up, not to be damaged
by the surf, which divested of its fury by the nume-
rous rocks, still boiled and bubbled to the very foot
of the tree. I hardly knew out visitors of yester-
day so differently were they clad; a scarf of dark
tappa tied round the waist and hanging down with
every attention to decency was their only clothing,
and displayed to much advantage their manly
height artd noble deportment, (few being less than
six feet); Several young boys were making a
game of what to us appeared destruction; they were
diving through the surf,—and then floating back
again, skilfully avoiding the rocks that threatened
us with so much danger. They now led the way
along the side of the hill through a grove of cocoa-
nut trees to their scattered cottages, six of which
being built nearer together were dignified with the
title of town ; all were anxious to shew attention
and hospitality to Us* and without much scruple we
quartered ourselves severally on them. My host was
just going to have his dinner, as he told me, altho’
then not nine o’clock ; for in this happy country
they have no stated time for meals, but “eat when
hungry, drink when dry;” and as this was a holi-
day with them on account of our arrival, they had
killed “ the fatted pig—he told me their usual
fare is nearly entirely vegetable food. I found
in a rough built hut, consisting of two stories and
one room on a floor, seated round a table replen-
ished with the baked pig and yams, a very aged
woman, one middle aged, and several youths of
both sexes.
18


After a cordial greeting, a long grace was re-
peated by our host, and their politeness giving to
me their only knife and fork, I was forced to take
upon myself the duties of carver, -Vrhicli did not
however interfere with my making a hiost hearty
breakfast: when concluded, grace was again said,
all the company listening with the Strictest atten-
tion : this I found td be always a particular Ob-
servance, and (phte in keeping with the fervor arid
simplicity of their religious character, which riiriCh
to thfeir credit is not, as with Us d name bnty, but
pervades their every action. But toi return,—My
host told me that the Old woman who I had re-
marked was one Of the four Trihitean worneri who
Crime with the crew of the Bounty from Tahiti; their
rige is unknown; but they cannot be less than 60,
yet they still bustle about, arid work as lirird as the
youngest: but ari Old woman, as Goldsmith SriyS,
has a world of prejudice to surmount before she can
become anything but an object of pity, and often
of disgust; fot frbrii our cradles we recall the stories
of witchcraft, malice, and cruelty iriiputed to the
old and infirm of the female sex, and though the
light of reason tells us it is most unjust, still this
bugbear of the iiriaginrition influences inOre than
the moiety Of mankind in their behriviOur to the
unfortunates. I confess that she looked so old arid
corpse-like, that I gladly escaped from her awk-
ward expressions of pleasure at the appearance of
my clothes, my gun, &c., and followed my host,
whose name I found was Young, to see their school
room. This was built with more attention to neat-
ness than any of their dwelling houses, and being


nearly new was not yet soiled by the careless habits
of the schoolboy; the master, whose name was
Nobbs, had not long been with them, and there was
a mystery that hung over his appearance and cha-
racter, which I think would hardly bear scrutini-
zing. However, he is married to one of the prettiest
natives, and professes that his only object in coming
amongst them, was to fly the cares of the busy
world, and impart any knowledge he possessed to
the furtherance of the great ends of Religion : but
there are some who already think that Nobbs being
tolerably well-informed and versed in the ways of
the world, affects a superiority over them, which is
extremely hurtful to their strict notions of inde-
pendence and liberty of action, and has created a
division amongst them, further fomented, I think
by the arts of two other Englishmen, who are jealous
of the new comer. “ May not this, I thought,”—
as I gleaned the information from one or other of
the natives, “ may not this be the means of spoiling
this simple and unaffected race, seemingly so hap-
py and contented, and make them forget what we
never I fear truly practice,—their duty towards
their neighbour.”
It was delightful to meet every-where with the
clear brow and smiling countenance of health and
content; their happiness centered in the bosom of
their families, and all the capabilities of living com-
fortable within their reach; —hallowed by religion,
their lives must be one continued stream of unin-
terrupted pleasures. “And is it for man, thought
I, —(while lingering lonely on the ridge, that as a
wall divides the island into two parts,)is it for Man,


civilized man, to dash this fair cup of joy from
their grasp I —and to give to them from their own
vile cup of sins and sorrows ?” But in soberness of
thought, and divested of all romance, I must say,
that such is most likely to follow, solely from the
visits of strangers, without any bad intentions on
their part. For our minds in civilized life are so
differently toned, our tastes so pampered and per-
verted, that though for a time novelty might please,
the order and simple regularity of such a life must
pall at last on minds so restless and so long accus-
tomed to the exciting, polished, but more deceitful
pleasures of the world: the discontent we ourselves
feel will soon he spread amongst them, and that
noxious weed once allowed to grow will over-run
and choak all the useful plants in their mental gar-
den ; it will cherish a love of distinction, which till
now had lain dormant on the soil, but at once
becomes of such importance, that to it they sacri-
fice willingly all their happiness, and
“What nothin" earthly gives, or can destroy:—
The soul’s calm sunshine, and the heartfelt joy.”
Pope.
But I am indulging myself by an excursion into
the future, without recalling to my mind my own
situation on the aforesaid ridge, from which I de-
scended after gazing around on the wide expanse
of waters and the one spot occupied by the gallant
and beautiful vessel, that had borne me so far and
so well: there she lay “like a thing of life,” —her
tall and tapering masts hid by her swelling sails,
and her low dark hull, dashing the sprey from her
bows, and circling her with a sheet of white foam;
but enough :—The path I had taken led me by
c


patches of luxuriant vegetation, here and there
betraying the hand of the native, by being turned
into the semblance of a garden, abounding with
bananas and sweet potatoes, and water melons, and
again abruptly terminated by the deep ravine,
whose bed though lined with stones, afforded nou-
rishment to the roots of a hundred tall trees. I
paused for a moment at the last dwelling-place of
the few mutineers, that had given to this island its
inhabitants; in this quiet spot o’ershadowed by
acacias, I recognized the lowly grave of John Adams,
—a humble slab of wood, some relic of the Bounty,
with his name rudely carved, was all that told of
the departed ; and while his early fame is sullied
by the daring act of mutiny, his latter days were
so usefully, so meritoriously employed, that he
richly deserves the converse of those lines of Shak-
speare—
“ The evil that men do, lives after them.
The good is oft interred with their bones.”
He indeed must have been a singular good and
worthy man, of strong mind and most unerring-
intentions; in the whole island, his praise and
sorrow for his loss were constant and never-tiring
themes.
Here some of the natives joined me, to them this
is a sacred spot, and the ready smile died on their
lips, as they murmured the name of the old patri-
arch, and a prayer mingled itself with a reply to
some foolish question I unthinkingly asked: I saw
my error and hurried away to some more genial
place. It was only now mid-day, and hearing the
sound of music, which in the tones of a violin and.


flute, from the ship, much pleased and astonished
them, I willingly joined myself in the task of
amusement, by dancing country dances and qua-
drilles. In so warm a country this could not last
long, and the remainder of the day was agreeably
spent in observing the manufacture of the “tappa,”
and many other things new and amusing to us.—
Tappa is a species of cloth, made from the bark of
a young plant, called the Chinese mulberry, as in
all the South Sea islands; they, I believe, steep the
barks when stripped from the tree in water for two
or three days, then with a short club beat them
into one another; in this pulpy state they adhere,
and after a very laborious operation, they become
of the thickness required. Here they make but
little, as they have European clothing, but at the
other islands, it becomes nearly the sole occupation
of the women, —who meet in parties and beat a sort
of tune with their clubs that may be heard for
miles ; —and is of so much the more consequence,
as all their clothing is a piece of tappa, and the
king or chiefs exact a tax of it yearly.
I saw on this island for the first time the banyan
tree, and although it did not equal the tales of
travellers, still was eminently curious, and I would
not have missed seeing it, for if it does grow in the
high lands of Tahiti, I had never the opportunity
of again observing it.
About five o’clock we took our leave, and again
the coolness, skill, and activity of the natives were
displayed in launching us through the breakers
into the open sea, and then shaking heartily the
hands of the brave swimmers that had followed us,
c 3
23


we made sail, and in the course of half-an-hour
were on board.
We remained off the island for six days, being
detained by the desertion of one of our men, who
however was discovered by the natives, and brought
on hoard by the first lieutenant. I did not go
ashore again, but gained some further information
from the natives that occasionally came on hoard. 1 '
The total number of the inhabitants is 81, but not
above one-third are adults; within the last few
years they have had several visits from merchant-
men, and some of the young men went a short time
back in a schooner to an island some hundred miles
off for pearls, and from their good diving obtained
for her 1 an excellent cargo; in return for which the
master of the schooner only gave them a check
shirt and trowsers apiece, so that here even they
are exposed to the roguery of man. But adieu to
Pitcairn’s Island, —as a subject dwelt on with
pleasure and only parted from with regret: its
outline traced on the utmost verge of the horizon
is fast fading from my sight, and it is not likely I
shall ever see it again, yet its innocent inhabitants
have awakened an interest in me which will ever
make me anxious to hear its future story. 1
24


CHAPTER III.
THE MARQUESAS—TAHITI.
Our course was directed to the Marquesas, a group
of islands lying to the northward, in 10° S. lat. and
on Friday the 26th of March, the southernmost of
them hove in sight and in the evening three islands
were on either hand of us : a light air wafted us
onward through the night and the next afternoon
we anchored in one of the many hays that intersect
the island of Nooaheeva. Not finding here all the
conveniences for watering that we expected, we
proceeded the next day to another bay farther to
windward, but we had only exchanged bad for
worse; we were anchored on a lee shore and the
little water we obtained was at the imminent risk
of losing all our boats. After struggling against
these disadvantages for two days, we discovered
that on the other side of the island, a few minutes
walk from the head of this bay, there was a smooth
and snug harbour, and very convenient for getting
water; there we at last arrived and staid till we had
completed our supply.


In appearance all the Marquesas much resemble
one another; rugged, steep, rocky hills, bare of all
verdure, rising nearly perpendicular from the sea, are
agreeably relieved and diversified by the wildness
and beauty of the glens that intersect them on
every hand, the depths of which were covered with
a profusion of magnificent trees, and among them
we occasionally distinguished the brown mud huts
of the natives. Our acquaintance is only with
Nooaheeva, which is the largest and most fertile of
the group and contains the most inhabitants. The
intercourse we had with the natives was free and
unrestrained, and only partially interrupted by one
solitary instance of theft; but the greatest good-
will existed throughout. One man amused me
much; we thought he was a person of some con-
sideration and treated him therefore "with distinction,
—we were anxious he should drink some wine, he
tasted it, but nothing could persuade him to drink;
but on tasting sugar and water he seemed delighted
and drank so much that it was fortunate there
really was no other ingredient. Their manners
were uncouth and savage, yet far removed from the
barbarism of the Easter Islanders, and although
they spoke of having seen other vessels, we still
surprised them exceedingly and every trifle was a
source of wonder and astonishment to them. Deeply
tainted by the besetting vice of these islands— the
extreme of sensual enjoyment, the women, who in
general are delicate, and if not pretty are finely and
gracefully made, crowded on board of us, and were
doubly gratified by reaping a harvest of presents as
well as embraces from good-tempered Jack. The


men are tall, handsome, and well-built, their mus-
cles prominent and limbs well-set, promising both
strength and activity; their color is naturally a
clear brown, but so partial are they to the “tatoo”
that they discolor the whole body with its punctures,
and many become quite black: there is a good deal
of attention paid to the dressing of the hair which
is sometimes formed into two bows on the crown of
the head, and at times different according to the
fancy of the wearer.
The natives use but little clothing, often none at
all: the tappa when worn is thrown as a mantle
over the shoulders, but very seldom for the purpose
of decency. In the few days we were amongst
them we could discern no one that exercised rule
or authority over them, and it seemed that in their
rude ideas of liberty they disdained to obey adespot,
king, or chieftain ; but their experience was too
narrow, their passions too headlong,—to compose
a system of equal law or general defence. Some
voluntary respect we observed was yielded to age
and valour, but each tribe or village existed as a
separate republic ; and in the full licence of their
passions, quarrels frequently arise, and blind to
their own interests war in the most horrid forms of
extermination or slavery to the defeated, constantly
exists among them. This it is that checks the
advance of civilization, for they have long been
known by the Europeans, and for many years have
been visited by their vessels ; indeed two Europe-
ans have been living among the islands for years,
yet the only advantage the natives have reaped
from these circumstances is an insatiable desire for


powder and muskets, not to expend in the defence
of their country, but to be turned against tbe bosoms
of their fellow-countrymen. It is a mournful truth,
that the missionaries of Tahiti who had extended
their labors to these islands have met with such
repulses, as to force them to give up the attempt
in despair. The natives indeed seem to prefer
the life they lead; and though they are always sub-
ject to surprise and death, in their desperate never-
ending hostilities, and often to long and protracted
pains of famine, the land is fertile and would yield
sufficiently for the population; but in war they en-
deavour mutually to destioy their nearly sole moans
of subsistence, by cutting down the bread-fruit and
cocoa nut trees and burning all before them.
I found while staying here some amusement in
shooting a pretty species of dove, which is very
numerous, and the sport led me from the entangled
thicket to the huts of the natives. The hospitality
that exists in rude uncivilized countries is pro
verbial. I was invited into the interior of a hut
to share their simple repast; the faint light that
stole in by the doorway shewed me a mat spread
in one corner, on which were laid one or two sleep-
ers, and the remainder of the floor covered with
cocoa nuts, piled up against the sides of the hut,
a few clubs, some sugar canes, and a gourd filled
with a sour substance, made by the fermenting of
the bread-fruit —a preparation which I could not
taste without feeling sick, but in some seasons their
principle article of food. The milk of the cocoa
nut is most refreshing in this warm climate, and
I pleased them by the awkward perseverance I


shewed in emptying the nut of its contained treas-
ure: a present of some old iron reconciled them
to my departure, as I felt the heat quite oppressive,
and retrod my path to the beach. Here I found
every thing wore the appearance of a gala; a hun-
dred or two of the natives were seated on the beach,
some with pigs, with fowls, yams, cocoa nuts, and
sugar cane; and others again with spears and darts,
made of a hard wood 2 which grows in great abun
dance in all the South Sea Islands : their eager-
ness to barter, —their strange but intelligent ges-
tures of intreaty, pleasure, and dislike, in driving
their bargains,—the quiet but intelligent lascivi-
ousness of their females, —all gave a spirit to the
scene, heightened as it was by the delicious cool-
ness of the evening breeze, and secured as we were
by the friendly shade of some noble trees at our back
from the fast-dying but still powerful rays of the
setting sun. But tired with the fatigues of the day,
I gladly found my way on board, and our sailing
the next deprived me of the opportunity of making
any more observations.
We left on the 2nd of April, and steered our
course for Tahiti; on the third day we passed several
groups of small islands, and on this immense ocean
where appearances are so different from the North-
ern Hemisphere, the stranger is agreeably gratified
at one time with the sight of hills thickly covered
with verdure rising abrupt from the sea, and at a-
nother with low sandy islands covered with a pro-
fusion of cocoa nuts, and treacherously surrounded
by reefs of coral. We perceived the mountains of
Tahiti at the distance of CO miles, which on ap


preaching we found barren and naked, —burnt as
it were by the intense heat of the sun, with the
exceptions of the deep ravines, which were thickly
clothed with the luxuriant growth of every species
of tree and fruit. We found at the bottom of these
hills what we indeed found to be common to many of
the islands in these seas, —a low and narrow girth
of land extending round the island and profusely
covered with the cocoa nut and bread-fruit trees.
Beyond this again was the formidable coral reef
over which broke a tremendous sea, and at first we
could see no passage through it to the Harbour of
Matavai, which having been the port where Cook
anchored, we intended visiting: on standing close
in shore we at length observed Point Venus, and a
few minutes with a commanding breeze brought us
to an anchor about a quarter of a mile to leeward
of it.
We were not long without visitors, and a brisk
traffic commenced for numerous delicious fruits,
amongwhichwe noticed the orange and pine-apple,
both foreign to the soil of Tahiti, but introduced by
Cook or subsequent voyagers. Their advance in
civilization already taught them to value a dollar,
and their love of finery and imitation of European
manners led them to the adoption of a singular
variety of costumes: many wore shirts alone, others
trowsers; here one appeared with the heavy fur
cap of a Russian, and another with the embroidered
waistcoat of a Frenchman; some few rich in the
possession of a whole though tattered suit looked
down with a laughable degree of contempt on their
less clothed neighbours, and perhaps feeling confi


dent their appearance commanded respect, distin-
guished the officers, and each claimed the once
honorable title of “ tio ” to some one among us.—
The universal reading of Cook’s voyages has made
every one acquainted with the office of “ tio in
English it may be rendered “ friend,” but in its
original sense implying a much wider sphere of
duties: at present we found it very different, being
only a shelter for rogues to practise impositions on
us; for our “ tios ” while devoting themselves to our
service, ingeniously reminded us of their wish to
wear any of our old clothes or even to receive a
dollar as a mark of our friendship. Before night
the captain had received a visit from the mission-
ary resident at Port Venus, and by his advice de-
termined to move the ship to a more secure harbour
further to leeward. In the morning we weighed
and made sail, but were prevented by calms and
variable winds from reaching Papeiti until the
third day, when we found it all that the missionary
had told us. An encircling reef of coral forms it
into a most perfect basin, small in size but possess-
ing all the requisites of a good port.
The following day, I went on shore, it was Sun-
day and numerous groups of well or rather tawdry
dressed natives, standing about a large tumble-down
wooden building directed me to the church. With
much interest I followed the crowd into the body
of the building, and Avas sheAvn into the only peAV,
belonging as I aftenvards found to the minister.
The floor of the church Avas covered Avith benches,
and I observed that the men and Avomen sat apart,
each taking one side of the church. The service
31


was performed in the native language and diversi-
fied by the singing of psalms to some of our most
popular tunes. The propriety of their behaviour
and the strict attention they paid to the prayers
and discourse of the minister, —several of them even
taking notes, preposessed me much in their favor,
and I was disposed to allow them every good quali-
ty : but in conversation with their minister, Mr.
Pritchard, I found the truth of the old adage, “all
is not gold that glitters,”—for he informed me that
although many of his congregation delighted him
by their desire to learn and the regularity of their
conduct, by far the greater part were cold and cal-
lous to the advancement of religion, and conformed
only so far to escape censure. My slight experi-
ence has led me to conclude that though they have
an outward shew of morality, they plunge as deep
into vice as before the introduction of Christianity,
and that it is only the authority of the missionaries
that has forced them to acknowledge even chastity
as a virtue, but all their power cannot lead them to
the practice of it.
I have mentioned the missionaries as possessing
power and authority; they derive it from the friend-
ship and confidence of the chiefs, and it is exerted
I believe to the most beneficial purposes. Through
patience and perseverance they have effected a con-
siderable alteration in a people so proverbially
sensual and initiated in the very acme of vice:—
to prove which, I need only mention the institution
of the “Arreois,” which has perhaps been too mi-
nutely described insome editions of Cook’s voyages.
Since that time its great extension has proved as
32


fatal to the lives of the inhabitants, as it had before
been to their morals. One of its most barbarous
and brutal rules, was the obligation of every Ar-
reoy to murder its progeny, and so effectually was
this outrage against Nature performed, that it la-
mentably decreased the population of the island;
and an intelligent missionary has calculated that
up to the general establishment of Christianity in
1818, not less than two-thirds of the children born
annually were destroyed at their birth.
Tahiti is the largest island in these latitudes,
but its population has always been so small in
comparison, that its interior has never been peo-
pled; the inhabitants finding the narrow girth of
land that encircles the island, quite sufficient for
their few and simple wants. The population has
been rated by Captain Cook at 30,000, at present
it is not 10,000: from having no correct data, it is
probable he erred considerably, but every thing
tends to prove that its population has been much
greater than it is at present. Wars, famines, to
which from their idleness and improvidence they
are constantly liable, and the cause above men-
tioned, have reduced them wonderfully. In the
finest island and climate in the world and perhaps
possessing the richest soil, to speak of the ravages
of famine, must strike one as singular and improb-
able, but it is too true : every two or three years
they encounter a particularly dry season that de-
stroys every fruit and vegetable; and although ex-
perience has taught them to expect a scarcity at this
certain period of the year, they lay up no store from
the super-abundance they generally possess, and are
33


consequently reduced to the greatest distress. It
is then they resort to the highlands of the interior,
whose rich soils produce untilled, plantains, yams,
&c.; but these are not obtained without much labor,
and while many die rather than so exert themselves,
others live miserably on these and the root of a
species of fern, called by them “ nahe,” the apples
of Noro (morindo citrofolia), and the stalks of the
pohur (convolvolus Brasiliensis.)
The natives are divided into three classes:—
“ hui arii,” the royal family and nobility,—“ bui
raatira,” the landed proprietors or gentry, —and
“ manakine,” the common people including the
“ titi ” and “ teuteu,” the slaves and servants. The
middle class, the landed proprietors, as in most
countries, constitute the strength and power of the
island; but the hereditary nohililty possess great
power and deserve some attention, from forming a
distinct class. It is singular that throughout the
Society Islands, this class is physically superior
both in size and stature to the other orders in the
state: a chief in Tahiti is better distinguished by
his height and gigantic proportions than any va-
riety of costume; of course there are some few
exceptions, but as far back as the missionaries can
trace there has existed this difference, and it would
almost lead to a conclusion that they spring from
a people who were the conquerors and masters of
the present lower class of Tahitians. Their tra-
ditions however are so imperfect of the time imme-
diately prior to Wallis’ arrival, that no light can be
thrown on this interesting point. Formerly the
distinction of classes was most punctiliously ob


served ; but the introduction of a new religion has
very much loosened the bands of order, and at
present there are no rigid forms kept up or points
of etiquette observed between the higher and lower
classes. However the force of custom and the
knowledge of dependence make the “ manahine ”
generally obedient to the will of their chiefs. The
government also has received a material change ;
it was an ill-digested chance-made monarchy, in
which despotism prevailed, but when Pomarre (the
third from the time of Cook,) was an ( infant, the
“hui arii ” or nobles, perhaps by the advice of the
missionaries, moulded it into a form that gave them
more power and left the shadow of authority in the
hands of the king. Queen Pomarre is the present
apparent possessor, but as she is said to be both
foolish and viciously inclined, they have excluded
her from any share in the government, and the “ hui
ariis ” who are generally well educated, keen, and
sensible men, have the sole direction of affairs.—
The mildest of climes has infused its spirit into
their criminal code; no crime is punished with death
and the severest infliction of their law is banish-
ment to a neighbouring island. The influence of
the missionaries in this case, some will say, has
been exerted wrongfully, for they persuaded the
“hui ariis” to punish treason capitally, but it was
so little tolerated, that a very short time after it was
instituted in 1820, it was altered to banishment for
life.
The present character of the Tahitians is distin-
guished by nothing good or great; excessive indo-
lence, a great love of ease and pleasure, even tem-
35


pered, possessed of a natural quickness, but con-
tented to remain in the profoundest ignorance,
adepts in cunning, and mean in spirit,—these are
the sum of qualities possessed in common by all
the lower classes: among the “hui arii ” there are
many honorable exceptions. It is perhaps wrong
to judge their neglect of chastity by our standard,
and I am tempted to make some excuse for the
poor creatures themselves; in such a climate their
blood must run in a warmer channel than the in-
habitants of a northern region, and besides, bred
up in the exercise and indulgence of every whim
and folly,— too debased yet to feel the force of the
deep truths of the Gospel,—they account the grati-
fication of their sensual appetites, as granting Na-
ture’s most innocent desires, and so affect not the
least restraint, except through fear of the mission-
aries. There is a punishment fixed to oblige those
ladies who wander from the paths of virtue, to re-
pair the public paths and roads about the village;
and as labor to the Tahitians is the worst of pun-
ishments it has I believe some good effect.
. The natives, before our discovery of them ad-
ventured more in navigation than we should give
them credit for, from their apparent poor means of
conveyance. They possessed indeed canoes of a
wonderful structure, some being 108 feet long, but
none decked over, and from their build, affording
little or no protection in an open sea, and liable to
fill in the least swell; yet it is certain, that they
held constant communication with all the islands
in the Society group, and at intervals, it is supposed,
with the Marquesas, Friendly, and even the Sand


wich Islands; for from the authority of a missionary
long resident here, they knew of their existence
before any foreign vessel had touched at Tahiti, and
their tradition had placed them and the Society
Islands enclosed by one and the same sky: but when
they became acquainted with us, rather than upset
their scheme of the Heavens, they insisted that we
and other foreigners came from behind this sky.
There is a variety of very excellent timber in this
island, among which the“tamanu” a species of
myrtle is very valuable : it is a very hard durable
wood, and susceptible of the highest polish. Several
large boats have been built lately of this tree, and
have answered extremely well; they are fitted with
sails, and one built by the missionaries half-decked,
could not be less than 25 tons. The natives have
seen the advantage they possess over canoes, and
a few years will see them generally adopted; even
now, several chiefs are building, and I think such
boats have superseded the building of large canoes,
for the largest I saw, was only GO feet long. There
is one thing that must materially assist the native
navigatorin these seas, —the constancy of thewinds:
it is only in the months of December, January, and
February, they ever have a change, when the North
or West winds blow with considerable violence, but
are of very short duration. All the year round, the
thermometer ranges between 70° and 80°.
We have all in our childhood been frightened
with nurses’ tales of the wild man of the woods, —
here, there are in reality such creatures, but deserv-
ing to be objects of pity instead of alarm. They
live in the mountains, not without any apparent
D


means of subsistence, (for as I have before said
there are abundance of fruit at most seasons of the
year,) but in solitary wretchedness, without dwell-
ings, without clothes, and without any association
with their fellow creatures whose sight they shun,
and whose comforts are apparently hateful to them.
It has been only chance that has given us the
knowledge of their existence : one had been seen
in 1821, but they were not able to secure him;—
some time after, one was caught and brought to
Border’s Point, but nothing could be made out of
him, he seemed unable to speak, and was so shy
and sulky as to oblige them to let him go again to
his wild hills for fear of his starving himself. A
missionary relates that he had seen one at “ Ate-
bum,” possessing more qualities in common with
mankind than the other, for he could speak, but all
their endeavours could not persuade him to take
any interest in what occurred, or answer any ques-
tions concerning his former abode, he would merely
ask for what food he wanted, and his look was so
quietly vacant that there could be but little doubt
that he was an idiot. It is generally supposed that
the wild men are the remainder of those poor un-
fortunates, that in the late war of extermination
fled to the hills to escape the certain deaths that
a\vaited the defeated in their savage battles. Thus
end my short and cursory observations on the Ta-
hitians.
You will be no doubt surprised at the very differ-
ent light in which I have viewed this people from
Cook, Bligh, &c.; I assure you my astonishment
exceeded yours, when after being prepared to meet


people Avhose courtesy and friendly disposition were
set off by the natural and intrinsic polish of their
manners, —by the beauties and elegant graces of
their females, and by the manly freedom of address
of the men; I met women distinguished but by the
rudeness and irregularity of their bronzed features
and lascivious' advances to familiarity, and men
awkward and clumsily built, and many, who from
indolence of habit, had acquired such a super-abun-
dance of flesh as must make life a burden, and
whose professions of civility are followed by the
grossest attempts at imposition.
d 3


CHAPTER IV.
TRIP TO EIMEO, —RAIATEA,—THE TONGA ISLANDS,
INFLUENCE OF MISSIONARIES.
While lying in this harbour, the captain sent the
barge to Eimeo, an island three or four leagues to
the westward, and the next in size to Tahiti, for
the purpose of surveying a harbour on the West
side of it. I was in her, and you will suppose that
as we stayed six days, I had a good opportunity of
observing the manners and customs of the natives;
but my time was so taken up that I am indebted
for any information I did gain to the missionaries.
Eimeo is subject to Tahiti, and is in every respect
similarly governed: it was here that the first royal
convert to Christianity was made, in the person of
Pomarre, king of Tahiti. I am sorry I know so
little of the national history as to be ignorant of the
date, but such was the zeal of the new convert
that the only stone building in these islands was
erected by him as a church for the mission, and the
influence of his example so worked on his subjects,
that in a year or two, Paganism and all its rites
were openly abolished. It was during this time


that a curious but well-authenticated circumstance
happened, which we might smile at now, but was
then of great importance:—the missionaries in their
arduous task of making proselytes used to hold
lectures frequently in the open air, in which they
invited and encouraged any of their hearers to
argue with them on the great truths of Religion;
at this time, one of their chiefs stood up and in the
course of a long and bitter speech asked them this
unanswerable question,—“How is it that you, who
daily bring the sun, moon, or stars, down to your
level, merely to know the exact spot you stand in,
cannot bring God down to decide this question
between us, and tell us whether we really do wrong
by following the religion of our forefathers ?”
Strange to say, this carried such conviction to this
simple people that for some time the missionaries
lost many of their followers.
I saw one of the moral, 3 which though inferior to
several in the island served to give me some idea
of those abodes of superstition and terror: they
are all falling into ruins, and while visited with
contempt, still, from their romantic situation and
the sombre shade of tamanu —a dark-leafed species
of myrtle, and other trees, impress the mind with
an indefinable awe. But mine was but a passing
glance, and I have not even preserved the name :
the next day we returned to the ship, and I was but
a few days aboard before we started from Tahiti.
It was a delightful morning when we weighed,
but in this climate it hardly deserves notice, for
it is seldom otherwise. Our log will shew us hove
to, off Eimeo, for some hours, and in five days


anchored in Raiatea, one of the cluster of the So-
ciety Islands, that were at various distances around
us. Here we remained for a week; our departure
being deferred till after the celebration of their
annual feast on the 11th of May, and I believe few
thought the time mispent. The harbour was formed
as at Tahiti by reefs of coral, but was more capa-
cious, and had the advantage of a weather and lee-
ward entrance. The huts of the natives straggled
along the beach, and as the ground afforded (for
the land rose high at their back,) collected them-
selves into the appearance of a village, and among
them the church was conspicuous from the large-
ness of its proportions. Trees of all kinds were
growing in tropical luxuriance, and the land ap-
peared rich and fertile. We had heard that the.
queen of Tahiti was residing here, and we were
proportionately anxious to see her Majesty:—.on
the second day, the captain went in a sort of state
to pay his respects; I was of his suite, and as she
had been forewarned of our coming, we found her
very inelegantly attired in a silk gown and leghorn
hat of the latest Parisian fashion, (a present we
afterwards heard 4 from the missionaries,) which
instead of diminishing the defects of a broad boun-
cing figure and copper-colored negro features, but
exposed them the more plainly, and made her an,
object of ridicule. I will not detain you with an
account of the presence chamber, &c. of the pal-
ace ; however I must say it was a nearer approach
to a house than I had seen in the islands, except-
ing of course the missionaries’. A few days after,
I saw the queen dressed in the country fashion, and


I gladly changed my opinion; a delicate piece of
the whitest tappa Avas throAvn loosely over her per-
son, and her unaffected movements Avere a strong
contrast to the aAvkward shuffling gait she had used
Avhen in state ; her eyes too instead of being con-
stantly fixed on the ground glanced on all indiffe-
rently, and bespoke much animation and expres-
sion. In conversation by an interpreter, she pre-
tended great offence at the character Ave had heard
of her, for Mr. Williams the resident missionary
had industriously informed her, with a vieAV of
shaming her into some propriety of behaviour. —
And during our stay here, the queen’s OAvn conduct
Avas very correct, but her female attendants (an
example, by the Avay, of “the iniquity of palaces ”
even in this secluded spot,) Avere the only seeming
prostitutes in the island.
The next day the feast took place, and all that
could be spared were on shore to witness it; avc
landed at 11 o’clock and passing through the vil-
lage, Avhere all Avere dressed in their gayest apparel
on motion for the church, Ave entered the simple
neat but capacious building bearing that name ;
high hack benches Avere ranged on all sides, and
the wooden floor neatly covered Avith mats. The
Avomen sat apart from the men, and all appeared
propriety and attention. I could not understand
the discourse of the missionary, but it seemed to
have much influence; and I left the church in good
humour Avith the people, and disposed to find them
both more religious and more civilized than their
neighbours the Tahitians. Such I found aftenvards
to be the case ; —possessed of the same kind, easy
43


and inoffensive disposition as the Tahitians, they
have fortunately not been subjected to the tempt-
ations, arising from the confluence of so many ves-
sels in their ports, bearing with them the vices of
every country, and introducing that worst of all—
the love of liquor. Missionaries have done much
there, but this evil, I am afraid, still gains ground in
spite of them : here, on the contrary, as I have my-
self observed, few will even touch spirits,—none take
them to excess. I have no doubt much of this, is
owing to the influence Mr. Williams individually
possesses over them; and he is so shrewd and sen-
sible that he will make it permanent, by continuing
the worthy and hitherto constant exertions of a mind
seemingly entirely devoted to the advancement of
religion. He is the mainspring to every movement,
and to mention a circumstance you would hardly
thinkcredible in the short time that Christianity has
been introduced here, he has organized a general
association of the chiefs of this and an adjacent
island, for the propagation of Christianity, and has
already sent missionaries to the neighbouring Pa-
gan islands.
But to return to my narrative:—From the church
we adjourned to the king’s house, before which we
beheld all the preparations for a grand feast; all
had brought hither their store, and every article of
food was piled up promiscuously on the numerous
rough hewn tables, that were placed on all sides of
the court yard. It was not intended that Ave should
taste this good fare ; a greater honour aAvaited us :
—Ave dined Avith the queen, king, and their suite.
The dinner Avas spread a V Anglais, it consisted of


roast beef, fowls, three baked pigs, yams, sweet
potatoes and tarro, 5 and two puddings, one made of
bananas, the other of arrow-root and cocoa nut, and
I can add we did justice to all. They have a strange
custom of never conversing while eating, which to
us appeared repulsive and disagreeable, but subse-
quent experience made us remark that it prevails
through all the South Sea Islands. After we had
loitered about the booths, and heard two or three
speeches recited from a three-legged stool, (which I
understood also to be a custom at their feasts, and
in which all sorts of subjects are introduced,) we
returned to the church and witnessed a highly ani-
mated scene, but which, from my not understanding
a word of the language, lost half its valueit was
a debate on some resolutions relating to the regu-
lation of their infant Society; —habited in their
native dress, consisting of a fine mat pauncho
thrown over their shoulders and another mat tied
round the middle, the chiefs formed a peculiar and
interesting sight: each rose in succession and spoke
for or against resolution, which from the vi-
vacity and quickness of their action and manner
could not fail to be interesting. The remainder of
the evening was consumed in loitering about the
village, bartering for tappa and other curiosities,
and at an early hour we went on board.
The natives of these islands are all very fond of
bathing, particularly in fresh water: here the sup-
ply of that essential comfort is constant but small,
and the only bathing place is formed by damming
the course of a rivulet. We strolled there one eve-
ning and found the queen and several young women


bathing; they were all dressed in tappa, and altho’
the water was extremely muddy and dirty, the
queen leading the way, plunged through it, and
they all continued this for more than ten minutes,
much to our amusement, and it seemed to their’s
also. Here we however left them, delicate of in-
truding too far.
I have made use of the term king as it is applied
here, but in reality it is a misnomer, for he possesses
no authority over any of the chiefs, and is himself
but the man possessed of the most property in the
island, and highest in their rank of chiefs. We
left this island on the 12th of May and “ onward
ploughed our western course ” to the Tonga Islands.
We had taken a native of these islands on board
at Tahiti, who we found extremely usefid in thread-
ing the dangerous shoals and coral reefs that lay
on all sides of us as we approached the islands,
and arrived safely at an anchorage on the 22nd of
May, off the village of Nicolofoa.
The island of Tonga itself is very low, the tops
of the cocoa nut trees were the first indications we
had of the land; in fact the hillock at Nicolofoa, the
highest spot in the island, is but 45 feet above the
level of the sea. Eoa, an island lying S. E. of
Tonga, on the contrary is a moderate height, for
which reason, vessels trading to this group always
endeavour to make it. We had hardly dropt our
anchor before we were surrounded by the natives
in canoes, bringing fruits and provisions. They
seemed to know the value of money, but having no
use for it, only required in exchange for their na-
tive productions a few beads, or at most a knife.


Their appearance was very striking, the wildness
of their eye, the vehemence of action, and loudness
of tone,—their long black hair streaming in the
wind, and only one strip of tappa round their
middle, —recalled to our minds the inhabitants of
Easter Island, in all the wildness of their untamed
savage character. Further acquaintance with them
proved how much we were mistaken, and how little
we ought to trust to first sight.
We found a whaler lying here, which sold us
some beads, as our stock was nearly exhausted; —•
and a brisk traffic was immediately commenced:
for the natives, blessed by Providence Avith all the
necessaries of life, set value only on the most tri-
fling articles. The missionaries are settled in
Nicolofoa, and although someAvhat different in their
principles to those at Tahiti, being Baptists, seem
steadily to pursue the same praise-Avorthy object.
Christianity Avas first propagated by the Tahitians
about six years ago; under their hands, its con-
verts fast increased, and although it has received
several severe checks, —Avith the assistance of the
two Englishmen sent by the Baptist Mission, it is
working its Avay silently but surely among the na-
tives, and can reckon more than 300 professed
adherents. The elected king of Tonga is a Chris-
tian, but his authority is so small, that our religion
will have to trust entirely to its intrinsic merit in
making converts.
Tonga is divided into several provinces, each of
which has its independent chieftain; but one, e-
lected by his felloAA r s, is nominally king of the Avhole
island. Nicolofoa, off which avc Avere anchored, is


the king’s hereditary province, and the greater
part of his subjects are Christians; but in the other
parts, Paganism takes precisely the form described
in “ Mariner’s Tonga Islands.” The island is said
to contain 16,000 inhabitants, therefore the Pagans
form an immense part of the community ; and to
their honor be it said, that they are divested of
bigotry and intolerance, escaping a Christian’s
most besetting sins. The greatest good-will exists
between the sects, and even an Englishman living
among the Pagans, and making no secret of his
horror at their bloody rites, is not noticed to his dis-
advantage. A young man, by name James Read,
the adopted son of the most powerful Pagan chief
in the island, called Patou, told me that they often
hold “ Molai ” or public assemblies in which our
religion forms frequently the engrossing topic.—
Patou, after railing at the absurdity of the Chris-
tian faith, turns to Read for his opinion: with the
hopes of converting his protector and friend, Read
commences with great earnestness and good-will;
but on all sides they pour on him such keen raillery,
that losing all command of his temper, he quarrels
with the chief and leaves the assembly. Perhaps
for one day or more he will not speak to Patou,
but the latter is however always so anxious to make
it up again, that he even visits him in his own house,
—explains the offence away, and shews such kind-
ness that it would be impossible to retain enmity.
I was on shore three or four times, and walked a
good deal, generally with a gun over my shoulder:
I fell in with a great variety of birds, such as pigeons,
doves, ducks, landrails, cuckoos, and the vampire


bat, which I had never before seen and is deserving
of some notice. Ido not pretend to give a descrip-
tion of it, but will note one or two singularities that
struck my attention. It is about eight inches in
length; the body emits a most unpleasant smell,
and is covered with fur of a reddish color; its head
is in miniature like that of a fox and its mouth well
furnished with sharp teeth; the wings are exactly
those of a bat, with claws at the extremity, by which
it suspends itself while sleeping in a most peculiar
manner from the branches of trees, looking like
dead leaves: they are very numerous in this island,
and live entirely on fruit, and desert the night-
strolling habits of the common bats for the more
genial one of basking in the sunshine. We shot
several, but I did not preserve a specimen.
I was much surprized, considering the length of
time this island must have been inhabited, and the
smallness of its size, that not more than half the
land was cultivated ; on every hand we met with
large woods, matted by innumerable creepers, and
impervious to the sun’s rays, flourishing in most
exuberant wildness and fairy like beauty of foliage,
only threaded by small footpaths winding amongst
the roots of trees, through which we were often
obliged to go on our hands and knees. Not the
semblance of a hill is to be seen, but here and there,
peeping through groves of cocoanut and bread-fruit,
we meet with the huts of the natives, scatteredirregu-
larly over the country in groups of three or four, —
a neat grass plot before their dwellings, and gardens
of bananas, fenced by a network of reeds adjoining.
Inside, the floor is covered by mats, and the prim


appearance of its pretty inmates, dressed modestly
in the tappa of the country, quite delighted us;
while the air of cleanliness and attention to com-
fort, perceivable in every house, more particularly
took our attention, as so different from all we had
before seen in the South Seas. The natives are
more ingenious and industrious thali the Tahitians,
and although so many are Pagans, on the whole
they are far more civilized. Their canoes shew
considerable knowledge of mechanics; indeed, one
that I saw, a double war canoe, shewed great skill.
I regret to say I did not take its dimensions, but
it was certainly more than 80 feet in length, and
the carpentering work was beautifully executed.
We left this island on the 2nd of June, with regret
at the necessary shortness of our acquaintance with
its inhabitants. Their character and dispositions
pleased us much:—with less levity than their
neighbours of Tahiti, they possess more simplicity,
and though blessed with the same delightful warmth
of climate, and a country yielding the finest fruit
without culture, they escape the enervating effects
of unlimited indulgence, and their energy and ac-
tivity direct them to various employments, among
which the cultivation of the ground and the embel-
lishment of their dwelling houses, stand first. I
have said before that there is much waste land,
but every hut has its garden and plantation, laid
out with taste, carefully inclosed, and from its pro-
ductiveness shewing the goodness of its culture.—
Everywhere we perceived the greatest attention to
neatness, cleanliness, and comfort—all so endearing
to an Englishman; and the modesty and gentle


behaviour of the women, —the independency and
uprightness of the men placed them far above the
other inhabitants of the South Seas.
One morning, three of us were on shore earlier
than usual; our steps were naturally directed to the
king’s house for a guide: our path led through a
narrow lane, from whose overhanging thickets we
brought the dew in showers, and startled from its
branches the little songsters that had but com-
menced their morning lay. We met groups of na-
tives bringing their little store of war clubs, spears,
&c. for traffic; our hearts were light, and our mirth
and admiration were not a little excited by the
beauty of their females, when at an abrupt turning
we came to the king’s house; being only an open
shed built for his war canoes, and temporarily oc-
cupied by himself to be near our ship, we were at
once in sight of the inmates. Instantly the ready
smile was checked and all looked grave as we ap-
proached the new and impressive scene that pre-
sented itself: —the king and four natives were
kneeling on the ground, with their hands clasped
before them, gravely and attentively listening (for
their eyes did not even wander when we appeared)
to the morning prayers, recited by the native who
had been our pilot. I stood on one side, but not
without reflection on the lesson here given by a
half-taught savage, and some painful sensations
arose from my neglect of a duty, which ought to me
to be so much more sacred. The prayer was done,
—the king, with native dignity, made us welcome,
gave us a guide, and we sallied forth to the amuse-
ments of the day.


CHAPTER V.
SHIPWRECK AND SUBSEQUENT ADVENTURES OF
JAMES READ.
Three days before we left this harbour, we dis-
covered the desertion of one of our men, and Cap-
tain Waldegrave not wishing to leave him behind,
was obliged to use Avhat appeared very harsh
measures to force the chiefs to interest themselves
sufficiently to have him brought back. Knowing
that James Read, Avhose name I have before men-
tioned, Avas much loved and respected by the chief
Fatou, —he sent for him, and told him he must be
detained on board till the deserter Avas restored.
The poor man declared solemnly he knew nothing
of it, and exclaimed bitterly against the injustice
of being forcibly kept from his Avife—his family—
and his home : seeing the captain determined, he
hoAvever sent immediately to inform Fatou of the
circumstance, and the old chief made such exertions
that on the third day the deserter Avas brought back
—and Fatou came instantly on board to claim his
son. The meeting Avas mutually affectionate, and
a handsome present from the captain healed all


sores, and they both left us in perfect good humour.
It was one of these nights, that I had the first
watch, and observing the young man walking the
deck in solitary wretchedness, I drew near and en-
tered into conversation with him, and he doubly
repaid me for the attention by frankly relating to
me the mournful tale of his shipwreck and subse-
quent history. It sped the watch away, and so
occupied my thoughts, that I entered it in my
journal the next morning, if not with the same
words,' at least with the same sentiments:—
In 1820, —being on board the Sirius whaler, Cap-
tain Lancaster, after some little success in fishing,
and touching at Navigator’s Islands, we directed
our course for some whaling ground to the south-
ward of Tongataboo ; beset with fogs and calms, on
the sixth day we had made but little progress, when
a breeze springing up from the eastward, we made
all sail, and the water foamed at our bows as we
sped swiftly before it. We had been deprived of
the advantage of an observation, from the dense-
ness of the fog, and were forced to trust entirely
to our dead reckoning, which gave us a distance of
more than a hundred miles from any of the Tonga
Islands. In the evening, the sun set in all that
burst of beauteous red so transient and so peculiar
to the tropics, and we had staid up late talking over
those recollections it so frequently awakens, when
we were roused by the deep voice of the “look out”
exclaiming—“A light a-head.” While puzzled
with conjectui’es as to the nature of it, being much
higher than the mast head of a ship, we were ap-
E


palled with the cry of—“ Breakers on the starboard
bow —-we hauled our wind instantly, and con-
ceiving from the continuance of the light that it
must he the volcano of Tofoa, one of the Tonga
Islands, around which were many reefs and shoals
of most dangerous character, not laid down in our
charts, we shortened all sail and hove to, trusting
to a good look out to avoid these various dangers.
We had been hove to hardly two hours, when
the cry of —“Breakers under our lee ” —roused all
hands to instant exertion: we made sail and tacked,
hoping to weather them, hut from the lightness of
the wind we found ourselves drifting silently to-
wards the danger, and our water shoaling suddenly,
we as a last resource let go our anchor. It most for-
tunately brought us up: after lowering the sails
and seeing all secure, for a few hours we indulged
in a sound repose; for—careless of life from con-
stant exposure to every peril, little recks the sailor
of the future, let him hut escape the present evil.—
When the day broke, we were roused, and found
ourselves everyway surrounded by reefs and shoals,
—our rudder not six inches from a sunken coral
rock, (though we had let go our anchor in sixteen
fathoms,) and a low island seemingly uninhabited
not more than a quarter of a mile from us. With
these dangers yawning around us, Ave did not Avaste
our time in idle repining, hut guided by the ex-
perienced hand of the captain, (a man much re-
spected by us all,) manfully tried to avoid them,
and better our condition. Our boats Avere got out,
and hands placed in them to keep them clear of the
ship; avc Avorked stoutly at the capstan, and in a


few minutes had the anchor “up and down,” when,
heaving with all our strength to rise it from its bed
of coral, the messenger parted and the cable ran
out to the clinch. The boats were manned, but
notwithstanding our exertions to tow our ship
a-head, she silently and rapidly went astern, aided
by a light breeze blowing directly on the reef: in
another minute we struck, and with such force as to
start our sternpost; the water rushed in in torrents,
and every succeeding wave beating over us bore
us farther on the reef. Water-logged as she was,
from this moment we gave up all hopes of saving
the vessel; —but the boats having, although with
much danger, come alongside, we proceeded to load
them with what provision we could get at, and the
stores requisite for our forlorn situation, among
which were cutlasses, muskets, pistols, and our
magazine of powder. Heaven seemed to view us
with a pitying eye, for it fell a start calm, and
although the constant heaving of the ship on the
reefs, —torn and trembling as she was, threatened
us with immediate destruction, we still cherished
hopes, as we had succeeded so far, of landing most
of our valuable stores.
We succeeded beyond our expectations, for on
landing we found the water so smooth, that every
thing was got ashore in safety and we made re-
peated trips to our poor stranded vessel. This oc-
cupied us till night, when having rigged a tent, we
consigned ourselves to slumber; —to me all appeared
a dream. Twenty-four hours back I had been en-
joying the comforts of Avhat was to me at sea from
my earliest childhood my home, and now I was a
e 3


shipwrecked boy—on a desert island, surrounded
by sad faces and sadder forebodings ; and yet so
perfectly reckless and careless was I, that I never
enjoyed a night’s rest more, and had kept up such
a ceaseless prattle of good humour, that was only
silenced by a good beating from one of my ship-
mates. The next morning, invigorated by our sleep,
harmony was soon restored, and although it had
blown so fresh that the ship which was still seen
among the breakers could not be approached, we
allowed not that to depress our spirits, but turned
our thoughts busily to remedy our evils. With the
wreck of the ship, the captain had lost all claim to
authority; although we were still much guided by
his wisdom and experience, all gave their opinion
and many plans were started, but to be abandoned:
however at last we resolved to open (if possible) a
communication with the natives of the surrounding
islands, who by all the previous voyagers were es-
teemed so highly as to receive the appellation of
“ the Friendly.” So sanguine were we all of the
success of this plan, that when two of the only three
boats we had were to be sent on the morrow, every
body wished to go; however, six only were allowed
in each boat with the second and third mate: I was
of the party in the same boat as the second mate.
At break of day we started, and favored with a
calm and beautiful morning we pulled for Anna-
mooka, the nearest of the islands that lay scattered
in groups on the horizon, in some places only appear-
ing as a wood of cocoa nut trees, rising as it were
from the bosom of the ocean. As we approached
the island we observed the beach crowded with


natives, and although their favorable deportment
and the accounts we heard previously of their hos-
pitality and kindness had prepossessed us so much
in their favor, it was resolved as a caution that one
boat should land first, —sound their feelings, and
act acordingly. Our boat pulled in, and from the
eagerness with which the inhabitants ran to receive
us, bearing all kinds of fruit and refreshment in
their hands, we hesitated not to land, and were
nigh overwhelmed with their noisy welcomes, —
expresed in a jargon unintelligible to us, but ac-
companied by an animation and sparkling of the
eye that could not be mistaken:—conceiving our-
selves quite safe, and that now at least there was no
farther occasion for a caution which might lead to
a decrease of their friendship and confidence, the
second mate made signs for the other boat to pull
in, and we were joined by them in a few minutes.
The natives assisted in hauling the boats on the
beach, and leaving a hand by each, we committed
ourselves to their guidance and were soon on our
way for the interior of the island, threading our
path through delightful groves of the cocoa nut and
bread-fruit, interwoven with thick bushes of ten or
twelve feet high, overhanging us on every side.—
Surrounded by natives, I found myself impercep-
tibly divided from my companions, and thinking
my own laziness to be the cause of it, I quickened
my pace : at the same moment my arm was siezed
by a hand of iron, and looking round I found those
faces that till now wore nought but smiles, —scowl-
ing in all the darkness and malignity of their savage
nature. The change was such, that horror-struck,


I felt all hope die within me ; and thinking of the
miseries of a death amongst cannibals, I answered
the withering glance of the dark gloomy man that
held me with the humblest obeisance, and following
his motions—walked slowly to a hut, which I now
descried peeping between the trees.
It was a delightful spot, and although at that
moment I was not able to remark its beauty, some
time after, when circumstances were altered, I used
fondly to dwell on every part of the scene. The
huts with their low thatch spreading to the ground,
—their neat inclosure of reed and the smooth patch
of grass in front of each might have only drawn
a passing remark on their attention to comfort and
cleanliness; but the very disorder in which they
were placed,—each peeping from its grove of rich
verdant foliage, while one spot was left alone to the
shadow and control of a magnificent wide-spreading
tree, that clothed in the sombre green of our English
oak stood majestically in the midst, —set a stamp of
grandeur and interest on the whole, to my eyes
hardly ever equalled.
Here my conductor let me stand, while consult-
ing with the surrounding natives, and I thought I
could distinguish some of my shipmates in like
manner surrounded, but on my offering to move I
was so unceremoniously dragged back, that I did
not repeat it. He now led the way into a neigh-
bouring hut, and following his example I squatted
on a mat which covered the whole floor ; and by
the doubtful light let in from under the low roof, I
found myself seated by an elderly woman, envel-
oped in the tappa of the country, who seemed to
58


view me with no less surprize than pleasure. After
some unintelligible conversation with my conductor
she took me by the hand, and placing some myoree
or bread-fruit before me, made signs for me to eat.
Now, though naturally possessed of a very good
appetite, so many disagreeable forebodings pressed
on my mind, that I with great difficulty managed
to swallow two or three small pieces; my conductor
who watched my every movement, when I had
finished, impatiently motioned me to follow him.
Feeling an anxiety that, little skilled in disguising
my sentiments at any time, must have appeared
outwardly, notwithstanding all my endeavours to
the contrary, I hesitated; he sprung towards me,
and was dragging me out of the hut, when my host-
ess interfered and in a few words seemed to entreat
a favor, —he refused, but at last tired with her im-
portunities seemed to consent: and I believe to her
I am indebted for my being now alive to relate this.
For some time afterwards I learnt, that from policy
or fear they had determined to put us all to death
immediately after our landing, and it was most
probable my conductor had intended that fate for
me, if he had not been prevented as I have just
informed you.
We proceeded through the same Avood to the
beach, where the first thing that struck my aston-
ished sight was the third mate, lying apparently
lifeless with a deep gash on his head and bathed in
blood: —horror-struck I sprang fonvards, and lean-
ing over him called his name. Roused from his stu-
por, his glazed eye partially lighted up as it rested
on my features, and struggling against the speedy
59


ebb of life, he murmured these few broken words,
—“ I am dying, give all you have—your clothes :
or you share my fate : —my—” A rattling was in
his throat, I watched, but he was gone : his kind
spirit had departed in this last endeavour to do me
service. I turned to my conductor, —his eye was
fixed on me in all the gloating of his diabolical
nature ; with a hideous grin he siezed my arm and
drew me forcibly away. With my poor shipmate’s
fate before my eyes, I began stripping my clothes
off and tendering them to him, but he motioned me
to put them on and follow.
We returned by the beach, and passing by the
boats, —my thoughts dwelling intently on the scene
just described, with most unpleasant forebodings
of my own likely fate, —I nearly stumbled over the
mangled dead bodies of two others of my shipmates.
I hurried by, expecting every moment to share
the same fate, but it did not seem his intention to
kill me: content with the horror I evidently showed
he led me direct to the “mooa” or village, and I
felt somewhat relieved when welcomed at his hut
by the smiling countenance of the old woman. I
now by signs expressed my earnest wish to get rid
of my clothes, which my protectress assisted me
in, and gave me in exchange a dress of tappa, which
consisted only of one large mantle, covering the
whole body, and tied round the waist with a neat
mat belt; at will, the upper part could be drawn
over the shoulders or turned back over the waist-
band, leaving the upper part of the body uncovered
and showing as it might be to advantage the manly
and fine-turned limbs of the wearer. Night now
60


came on, but with them it required no preparation:
the mat we sat on served for a bed, a log of polished
wood for a pillow, and the ample folds of the tappa
covering them entirely served as bed-clothes.—
Before lying down, some cold baked yam and cocoa
nut was produced, of which having eaten sparingly,
I gladly threw myself full length on the mat, and
harrassed and tired by the events of the day, soon
fell into a sound sleep, from which I was not roused
till the rays of the rising sun shone on me through
the sides of the house.
My host was out, and feeling myself under less
restraint in my new dress, I cautiously looked out
on the scene around the cottage ; all was life and
animation. I felt half-resigned to my fate, in wit-
nessing the many happy faces that passed before
me; it was but momentary, —and as the dread
thoughts of my hopeless situation,—the scenes of
yesterday,—the veil that hung over the fate of the
remainder of our devoted crew—flashed across my
mind, I sank on the ground overwhelmed with my
feelings.
From this stupor I was roused by my benevolent
hostess, who wished me to join her in a substantial
meal, consisting of yam, bread-fruit, and raw fish:
the latter she eat with the greatest relish, and dis-
gusted me so much that I made but a poor meal;
—although now, so tyrannical is custom, I eat it thus
in preference to any other way of cooking it, only
give me salt water as a sauce. My host now joined
us and signified his intention for me to follow him:
he led the way through a luxuriant labyrinth of
foliage, each intrusive step calling down a shower


of dew from the overhanging branches; when fall-
ing into a narrow path leading by a banana plant-
ation, he brought me to a clear space, where fol-
lowing the direction of his eye, I perceived under
a large tree apparently the dead body of one of my
own countrymen. Oppressed with anxiety, I sprang
towards it. What were my feelings ?—when in the
naked bleeding body before me I recognised the
friend of my youth and helplessness,—my second
father—the mate who had been so kind to me ever
since I came to sea. There was a rope round his
neck and his face was blackened as if from stran-
gling, but on examining attentively I thought he
breathed. In despair I turned to my conductor,
who was viewing me with something like compas-
sion, and made signs for water: to my surprise he
ran off for some and soon returned with a gourd
full; and even assisted me in bathing and washing
the wounds and begrimed features of the still sense-
less man. In a few seconds, he showed signs of
returning animation, and opening his eyes he per-
ceived me; it gave him new life:—a faint squeeze
of the hand and his raising himself partly from the
ground gave me hopes that it was only the loss of
blood that had weakened him so much, and that
soon I might possibly, by moving the pity of these
people, nurse him into health.
Whilst thus employed, some natives gathered
around and showed evidently by signs their wish
to assist me: necessity forced me to trust to them;
they raised my poor friend from the ground and
carried him to a neighbouring hut, —where, strange
to say, the people that had so lately tormented and


nearly killed him were the most attentive to his
wants, clothed him with tappa, gave him hoth to
eat and drink, and having his own strong constitu-
tion to back them, in six days made him quite a
new man. During that time I lived with my old
female friend who took every opportunity of teach-
ing me their language, and I already began to un-
derstand them, but with all my endeavours could
discover no traces of my unfortunate companions.
My enquiries were now met with kindness, but
constant refusal; the natives treated me as one of
themselves, and vied with each other in doing me
kind offices. My friend was now recovered, (he
also had picked up a little of the language,) and the
natives who had witnessed our first meeting called
us “father” and “son;” we favored the mistake,
and emboldened by the great difference observable
in their manner, we tried to make them understand
our wish to commmunicate with our shipmates we
had left oil the island.
They entered into our plans with great alacrity,
and two young men even offered with seeming de-
light to take one of us over in a canoe; the mate
agreed to go, and they started early the next morn-
ing and were not back till night, when I found fresh
cause to mourn the extreme duplicity of the natives.
In a few words he told me the horrid truth, —He
had arrived at the island and finding no one to
welcome him, he ran to the tent Avhich was still
standing; and pushing the screen on one side, —
What a sight presented itself!—the lifeless bodies
of the captain and two others lay drenched in blood
on the ground, partially stripped and shockingly
63


mutilated. Unable to account for this unlooked
for welcome, he turned to the natives who had fol-
lowed for an explanation, but encountered such a
sneer and smile of triumph that he could not mis-
take the authors. Feeling all the passion without
the power of revenge,—resigned to the worst that
might happen,—he commenced doing the last
honors to his departed shipmates : with a piece of
iron he found in one corner of the tent, he made
them a shallow grave, —and the two natives who
had observed him with interest, guessing his de-
signs, now brought the three bodies and placed
them therein, and following his example heaped
stones and dirt over them. His surprise was great
at such a contradiction in their behaviour, —but he
could not bring himself to speak to the supposed
murderers, and while they sat down to some cold
baked yam and pork, he sullenly betook himself
to search for the traces of the remainder of the un-
fortunate crew. He found that the remaining boat
was gone, but whether taken by themselves or the
natives he could not discover, although he was cer-
tain they were all off the island. It was now late,
and he returned to the canoe ; —the natives wel-
comed him with gladness and soon paddled him
back to Annamooka.
Lost in conjecture, with sad hearts we reflected
on the dreadful uncertainty of our own lives among
such barbarians : although now treated so well, —
the caprice of a moment might sacrifice us. This
led us to devise some means of escape, but it was
all in vain; for vwhile we were watching with eager-
ness every chance, some chiefs arrived from Le


fooga, a large neighbouring island, and after a stay
of two days took us back with them, and a great
quantity of provision which they exacted from the
islanders. I found out afterwards that theisland was
their estate, and the rent was paid to them in kind
at stated times, and by their laws the chiefs had a
right to all the prisoners made by their people.
On arriving at Lefooga, it was my hard lot to be
parted from my friend the mate; he was taken to
one of the neighbouring islands, and for months I
saw nothing of him. The chief into whose hands
I had fallen took a great liking to me, adopted me
as his son, and treated me with such attention, as
well nigh to reconcile me to my new mode of life.
In a month I had made great progress in speaking
the language, and my enquiries were anxiously
made to penetrate the mystery that hung over the
fate of my comrades on the desert island of Na-
mooka Hagi, which was the name of the island off
which we had been wrecked. A stout, well-built,
active young man, whose eye sparkled with unu-
sual fire, and about whose features there was a
compressed fierceness that at an earlier period
would have startled me, avowed himself as ac-
quainted with the whole affair, and to be one of the
attacking party on my poor shipmates. With little
difficulty I persuaded him to relate a circumstance
which reflected so much honor on himself and
raised him proportionahly high in the estimation
of his countrymen, the substance of which was as
follows: —
The day after the two boats landed onAnnamooka,
the natives it seems had discovered there were more


white men on Namooka Hagi; and conjecturing
they were in distress from picking up pieces of the
wreck of the vessel, —a crafty spirit of enterprise
tempted four daring young men to hazard their
lives on the chance of a dark, deep, and cruel
stratagem. Unknown to every one, —in the true
spirit of Indian warfare, they before the break of
day loaded a canoe with plantains and cocoa nuts
and paddled swiftly for the island: here they landed
quite unarmed, and loaded with the produce of their
canoe proceeded towards the tent. The captain
met them alone, —the crew being thus early repair-
ing the only remaining boat at another part of the
island, —and willingly accepted their offered yams
and plantains, from a wish to cultivate a good
understanding—so much his object in the present
state of affairs. At this time (as I learnt some
years after,) although anxious for the two boats he
had sent, he would not allow any suspicion of treach-
ery to cross his mind: for as he told every body
he was sure they would return to day, the appear-
ance of these natives confirmed him in his opinion
and raised his spirits. Desirous then of repaying
them for their fruit, he invited them into the tent,
gave them some trifling presents, and willingly
gratified their curiosity by showing and explaining
the use of the many different articles they saw
strewed about the floor.
While thus engaged, two of the four slipped out
and proceeded to manufacture arms by breaking
some branches from the trees in a neighbouring
jungle and shaping them into rude clubs. They
were observed doing this (as I heard many years


after,) by one of the crew—a cooper who had been
in these seas before, who guessed their intentions
from experience in their uniform duplicity; he in-
stantly informed the captain of his suspicions, and
earnestly begged him to arm himself and be on his
guard. It was to no purpose; the captain would
not listen to what he called such paltry counsel,
and pointing with a smile to the two natives who
with childish pleasure were beating an old drum in
one corner of the tent, —“ Has that (says he) the
appearance of treachery.” The cooper himself
half convinced, returned to his work ; as he left,
the other two natives returned. The captain now
proceeded to show a cutlass which he took from
its scabbard and flourished about, exposing the
brightness of its blade. To show, I suppose, his
entire confidence in them, he placed it in their
hands: it was most misplaced. The young savage
who told me the tale now had it, —although leaning
carelessly against a cask, his eye had Avatched every
motion of the captain : —springing Avith the speed
of an arrow from his lazy posture, he dealt a blow
that cleft his head nearly asunder: —one piercing
cry and all Avas over; the captain lay at their feet
Aveltering in his gore.
The Avork of destruction was commenced, and
they had no time to lose ; on leaving the tent they
surprised the cooper and cook, both of whom they
killed Avith their clubs; and leaving them ran to-
Avards the beach in search of the remainder of the
creAV. Here their daring Avas disappointed; —one
of the men, it seems, had escaped Avhile they Avere
murdering the poor cooper, and running to his ship


mates, told the dreadful tale, exaggerated by his
fears, of 20 or 30 savages being on the island, and
committing every enormity. It struck them with
horror and dismay, and consulting only their extreme
terror, on the instant they launched the boat and
all getting on board shoved her out to sea ;, com-
mitting themselves to the mercy of the waves with
no provisions or arms and only one oar. The
natives on their arrival immediately after added to
their alarm by frightful yells and showers of stones,
but favored by a breeze they were already out of
their reach. After watching the boat till it was
more than a mile from the land, the natives returned,
and according to the custom of the country muti-
lated the dead bodies; then, loading themselves
with the choicest of the spoil, earned by their
daring valour and treachery, they launched their
canoe and paddled hack to their friends. It was
late in the evening, but when their story was known
the whole island was alive, and welcomed their
young heroes with the dance and many a howl of
cava. 0 A 1 day-break the next morning, every ca-
noe was put into requisition and an indiscriminate
plunder took place of all the stores left on the island.
Four days afterwards, the boat with these unfor-
tunates was picked up at sea by some of the fishing
canoes: they were 14 in number, had suffered much
from hunger and were reduced to the greatest dis-
tress. The natives, satiated with the spoil that they
had obtained, treated them with humanity and sus-
tained them till able to leave the islands. Some-
what relieved by this account which I picked up,
I still found that out of our whole crew of 30 men,


including the captain and mates, 13 had met with
their death from the cruelty of the natives.
After this, you will readily suppose that I ear-
nestly endeavoured to get away: —I did so, but
months passed away Avithout any certain means
offering, and insensibly I became reconciled to my
new fortunes. Every day gave me a better insight
into their manners and customs, anil despite the
remembrance of my recent injuries, I saw so many
redeeming good qualities, as to Avork an entire
change in my opinions. In the course of tAA'elve
months, I had found many both to esteem and love,
among the first of AA r hom I Avould reckon my adop-
ted father, and I no longer (since I had acquired my
full liberty,) thought of leaving them. It is noAv
six years ago; and though I have tAvice left to in-
dulge a Avhim, I have most gladly returned to a
mode of life Avhich has become so natural and so
pleasant. lam now living in Tonga, patronized
by a chief called Fatou, Avho has adopted me as his
son, —married me to his daughter, and given me a
house to live in and land to cultivate : I have also
three children, to Avhose education my life is devo-
ted, and Avith God’s blessing I hope to bring them
up, a little removed from the Paganism in Avhich
all around are involved,—
Thus ended an account Avhich to me Avas replete
with interest, seeing as I did around me the scenes
and people of Avhich he spoke;—but to others it
may perhaps be dull and Avearisome.
I did not see James Read again ; —he had been
too much startled to make his appearance near our
F


ship: but the missionaries who knew him gave him
the character of being a useful and rather intelli -
gent young man. They mentioned that he con-
ducted the bartering between the whalers and the
natives, regulating the prices, &c. with much judg-
ment and honesty. His friend the mate left the
island, as soon as he had obtained his liberty, re-
fusing all their persuasion to remain and settle
among them.


CHAPTER V.
VAVAOO, —ENTERTAINMENT BY FENOU,—THE FIGI
DANCERS, ETC.
The captain having persuaded one of the king’s
near relatives to act as pilot, he determined on
visiting “Yavaoo,” another island of the Friendly
group ; and interesting to us as being the scene of
‘‘ Mariner’s” adventures. It perhaps has not fallen
to your lot to see the hook of which I speak, and
I cannot answer for its being worth reading, altho’
we have consulted it since we have been here fre-
quently with advantage. Our judgment has led us
to conclude it written with considerable exaggera-
tion and its characters coloured to the height of
Homer’s heroes, instead of the simple poor hut sa-
gacious savage, halting alternately between gran-
deur of soul and meanness of action. Yet let me
add, that his leading incidents are true, and the
only difference between our observation and his
narrative is, that our matter-of fact bareness pre-
cludes all colouring, while his subjects mellowed by
distance receive a warmth and richness of drapery
f 3


from Ihe impulse of an imagination glowing with
kindly feelings and recollections of the past.
On the 2nd of June Ave sailed from Tonga, and
passing by the volcanic island of Tofoa and other
small islands, on the third day Ave AA orked the ship,
by the assistance of our pilot Taboutoutai, into
a magnificent AA r ell-sheltered harbour, completely
land-locked; but so deep Avas the Avater, that Ave
Avere forced to anchor in 45 lathoms. At this place,
which had never been visited by a man of Avar be-
fore, —and Avhere only two years back, a Avhaler,
called the Elizabeth, had been forcibly taken pos-
session of, and only rescued by the valour of the
men after the captain and one mate had been
killed, —Captain W. had rather a difficult game to
play. The king Fenou Avas suspected, at least, of
having connived at the attack on the Elizabeth ;
for his crafty daring spirit and his unlimited
authority have given him power to do much harm.
However as it miscarried, Fenou has strenuously
denied having any concern in it.
The sight of our frigate evidently intimidated
them, but the captain whose wish Avas to conciliate,
succeeded to admiration in dispelling their fears,
and cementing Avith Fenou a cordial understanding.
Our pilot Taboutoutai, Avho is also a near relation to
this king, and BroAvn, an Englishman Avrecked in
the “ Port au Prince” 24 years ago, and hoav seem-
ingly primeminister to Fenou, Avere the chief persons
concerned; and as they could not persuade Fenou
to come on board first, Captain W. on Monday Avent
Avith all due form in the barge and attendant boats
op to the toAvn, —and giving BroAvn notice of his
72


intention, unarmed, paid the king a visit. He found
Fenou seated on his heels, surrounded by the prin-
cipal chiefs in a large open shed, and hundreds of
the people around:—the cava was ready mixed, 7
and a cup presented to the captain which he re-
fused, and desired, by Brown, that every thing
should be settled or he would not remain a moment.
This set them all to work, consulting one with
another, and a debate of a few moments brought it
to a conclusion that pleased all parties, and the cap-
tain no longer hesitated to share their hospitality,
although all his politeness could not persuade him
to drink the cava, the taste being so nauseous.
The captain having accepted Fenou’s invitation
to remain on shore that night sent all his boats a-
board with the exception of the cutter, the crew of
which with myself were ordered up to the fortress
or strong hold where Fenou resided. We followed
a guide up the steep side of a hill, whose only claim
to the name of a fortress, were several wide trenches
now half filled with earth, girting it around. On
its broad top stood the houses of the king and his
subjects, amid groves of the cocoa nut tree; Fenou’s
hut was small, and differed but from the rest in
having a very handsome mat the whole width of the
house, on which he received us and invited us to be
seated. Dressed in the tappa of his country, Fenou
struck me as possessing a countenance open and ex-
pressive of much sense, eyes large and animated, a
forehead high and expansive, and a mouth though
larger and thicker lipped than an European, not vul-
garly so, and often lighted by a really sweet smile
Avhich shewed to advantage an admirable set of.eeth:


—near him sat Brown, who was the interpreter to the
many complimentary and inquisitive questions made
by us to His Majesty. After sitting in this manner
some time, I took a stroll through the village, and
going into the king’s brother’s house was amused for
nearly an hour by the dance of a party of the Figis,
whose motions were ugly and uncouth, but in admi-
rable time to the clapping of the hands of all the
audience.
The Figis are inhabitants of a group of islands
surrounded by most dangerous reefs, to the westward
of the Friendly group, and are generally classed by
geographers among the offspring of the Ethiopians.
Those I saw were tall, large boned, but awkwardly
built, —nearly black, with short curly woollen hair,
and their features though large and irregular were
not charged with the prominent characteristics of
their negro brethren of Africa, Their dress was
singularly fantastic, for while they carefully blacked
every part of their body, they Avore round their head
in the manner of an elegant turban some of the
whitest and most delicate tappa I ever saw. It is
strange that this people, inferior in all but ingenuity
to the natives of the Friendly Islands, and addicted
to the most shocking vices,—among Avhom cannibal-
ism is openly professed, are so much respected and
valued by the latter, —that a young chief’s education
is not considered finished (if I may be allowed the
expression,) Avithout his having visited the Figis, and
engaged as a A r olunteer in some of the constant Avars
they have among themselves. The present king’s
brother is half a Figi man, and has passed much time
there: he brought over the natives I suav, and indeed


always keeps some about him; —maintaining them
in their idleness, till occasion serves to make use of
their fierce relentless dispositions. I saw several
curious specimens of the Figi pottery hut did not
succeed in collecting any ; I was more fortunate in
some of their war clubs, &c, but I doubt whether
they will ever reach England, as I have no conve-
nience for keeping them.
But to return from this digression,—-In the course
of an hour I found myself again at the king’s house,
and without any material alteration Ave had dinner
served, as it had been done to Captain Cook half a
century ago in these islands. First appeared the
worthy tribe of cooks avlio in solemn march brought
to our presence a baked pig and its accompaniment
of yams, &c.; —this placed before the king Avas soon
cut up by a person avlio by the flourishing of his
Aveapon seemed to take much pride in the office;
—it was then presented to us on clean green plan-
tain leaves to choose our portion, and after the same
ceremony had been observed to some of the chiefs,
Avas given to our men, and the many hangers-on
that haunt the door of princes’ palaces. Our ac-
quaintance Avith these islands and an appetite gained
by eight hours abstinence had not left us squeamish,
and Avithout- mustard and salt, with our fingers for
knives and forks, Ave did justice to the repast.—
After dinner I Avent on board, and late in the eve-
ning returned Avith a “ marine ” fully accoutred for
the amusement of Fenou. The king’s house was
deserted, but directed by the clapping of hands and
the beating of bamboo, I came to an open space
Avhere I found the house of assembly,—a low but


large shed, —crowded with people and resounding
to the wild song of the natives. With the odd
attendance of a soldier so tall and so singularly
dressed, I was soon noticed, and a lane being opened
through the crowd, by stooping low under the eaves
of the house, I found myself in the presence of the
king, and a sight broke in upon my delighted senses
not equalled by any thing I had before seen.
Fenou was seated, Avith the captain and company
on either hand, on a log of Avood at one end of the
shed, and Avith the exception of an open space or
stage in the centre, the Avhole floor Avas covered Avith
the bronzed handsome countenances of male and
female natives. The dancers came on in groups of
three or four, and governing their motions Avith the
exactest regularity and most pleasing elegance to
the varied tones of a band, formed by striking the
bamboo on the ground and the clapping of hands;
—they gradually advanced from the sloAvest and
most measured steps to the quickest and most intri-
cate, preserving throughout the same finished grace
and spirited action. The male dancers Avere nearly
naked, having only a girdle of “ chi ” leaves round
their middle, leaving all their limbs free and unre-
strained ; the females Avere more perfectly clothed,
the tappa being Avound round the Avaist, and hanging
to the knee. Both Avere liberally anointed with the
cocoa nut oil, and the red glare thnnvn on them and
all from the small fires lighted in each corner gave
a AA r ildness and romance to the scene, that excited
my most earnest attention. The marine I had in-
troduced, much to my annoyance, soon put a stop
to the dancing,—for all eyes Avere directed toAvards


him; even the dancers could not withstand the
general attraction, and when the captain told him
to go through his drill before Fenou, the stage was
all his own ; —the dancers became the eagerest spec-
tators, and so delighted were all that the place rung
again with their shouts. After this display we ad-
journed to the king’s house, —were treated with a
cava party and a supper, in which their cooking
shewed to much advantage, although their only
pots and stew pans are the broad leaves of the
plantain tree. The king told us to sleep when we
were inclined, and in this delightful climate we felt
it no decrease of comfort to lie down on the mats,
spread on the floor of his hut. The king himself
slept in the same posture, and I was much amused
to see one of his handsome wives busy shampooing
him till he went to sleep.
We rose at day-light. Fenou was already up, and
in pursuance of a bad practice, had joined a party
drinking “cava” at the house of a neighbouring
chief: anxious to see something more of the in-
habitants, I strolled with the lieutenant of our party
through the village. Our curiosity led us into
every house, and the good temper of the inmates
allowed us freely to ransack them for all we could
possibly want forbartering. My com panion pointed
me out the house in Avhich Captain W. was received
with so much state ; it was the same in which we
had seen the dance the night previous :—its situ-
ation was well chosen for a public building, and the
wide-spreading branches of a tree, whose trunk
imitated the size of our largest oaks, —threw a
sombre shade over the plot of grass spread before


the shed, and served much to heighten its effect.
It was now filled by bundles of yams, brought by
Fenou’s order to form a present for Captain W.—
We had been but a few minutes here, when Fenou
and the captain arrived : the former took his seat
on a mat placed under the shed, surrounded by his
chiefs, and uttered a long speech, in Avhich the
present of 800 yams was offered as a return for the
captain’s condescension and kindness. The cap-
tain accepted them in another speech, interpreted
by Brown, and they were taken to our boat; some
refreshment was then offered to us, and after a taste
of some yam and pork we proceeded on board.
The next day, Fenou and all his court came on
board, and though they behaved with great pro-
priety, I was not sorry when the time arrived for
landing them. Fenou’s cunning amused me much;
—for many reasons he was anxious to get some
powder, and he promised any thing I wished, if I
would procure him some. But the captain was as
anxious on the other hand to prevent him, and of
course I could not favor him; but to the last mo-
ment he persisted in his request, and tried every
means of enticement and persuasion.
In all however, my opinion is very much in favor
of the inhabitants in Yavaoo ; their appearance is
generally prepossessing and they excel us in strength,
shape, and activity of limb. Their manner of life
gives them a vivacity and quickness of eye I have
never seen equalled, and they seem intuitively to
possess a politeness and delicacy that prevents them
from running into extremes; and though from a real
wish to obtain information, they are curious and


inquisitive, they are never intrusive or impertinent.
—They are very cleanly both in their person and
apparel:—l remarked to the old man Brown that
the tappa I had seen in this island was much inferior
to that of Tahiti; —“lt is, I acknowledge, (replied
he,) but they have a very good reason for it; in this
island their ideas of cleanliness never allow them to
wear tappa more than five or six days, which the
poorer natives could hardly do, if they took as much
pains in the manufacture as the Tahitians.” “The
king (he added,) changes his dress every day which
he is enabled to do easily, as a princple part of his
taxes are levied in tappa.” Their intercourse with
the other sex also discovers a refinement quite
foreign to the other islands in the Pacific; for though
polygamy is allowed and practised, promiscuous
concubinage is not tolerated, and in a married
woman is punished with death. The consequence
is that the women, whose perfectly delicate hands
and feet have often excited my admiration, and
whose lively dark eye with its long fringe of black
eye-lashes have made a strong impression on my
memory,—are a perfect contrast to the uncouth
ugly figures of our friends at the court of Raiatea,
and are free hitherto from that dreadful scourge
which Europeans, in introducing to these islands
the knowledge of civilized life, have entailed on
them and their posterity for ever; and which al-
ready, from their ignorance of remedies and neglect
of cleanliness, has spread alarmingly, and like the
plague spreads but to destroy. How long the Tonga
Islands may escape I cannot say, for their inter-
course with strangers is now very great, and is


yearly increasing. One circumstance inclines me
to hope for the best: I observed the women gene-
rally show a dislike to foreigners and avoid as much
as possible receiving any attention from them.
Possessed of considerable ingenuity and energy
of character, I see nothing to prevent the natives of
Vavaoo —with an absolute king at their head, from
arriving quickly at the same point of civilization
with their neighbours at the Sandwich Islands.—
Many accounts have discovered them to be politi-
cally cruel and at times to commit the most wanton
outrages against stranger ships; but where their
interest does not interfere, they are kind and hos-
pitable. Thereare many Englishmen living amongst
them, and for years have been treated with the
greatest kindness ; some are married, and patron-
ized by Fenou or one of his chiefs, have settled, —
and accommodating themselves to their manners
and customs, have seemingly forgot their connec-
tions at home, and are likely to remain here the
rest of their lives.
Such was Brown of whom I have already spoken,
—he arrived here at the same time with Mariner,
and like him escaped the massacre of the “Port au
Prince.” Being possessed of some shrewdness,
joined with a perfect knowledge of the language,
he stood high in the opinion of Fenou’s father, and
at present holds a situation of great trust and influ-
ence with Fenou. I saw his house and his children
who were very pretty and interesting; and though
not knowing our language were taught by the
father both to read and write, and above all the
knowledge of a Supreme Being. His house exter-
80


nally appeared as the others, neatly surrounded
with a fence of netted reeds; hut I observed an
European’s caution in the appearance of a door and
latch, and inside a little cupboard furnished with
many little English comforts, such as a knife, fork,
cup, &c., which showed he had not lost all taste
for civilization.
On the Bth we bid adieu to Vavaoo, and shaped
our course to the southward, to take advantage of
the variable winds to be found in about 30° S.—
After very various winds and some heavy breezes,
on the 26th of July we anchored in Callao Roads.
Here I bid the reader farewell:—My travels
Avere not ended, but I fear my habits became some-
what changed; only active and busy after pleasure,
—idle and negligent in observation, —my time
passed often without improvement, and left but little
trace on my mind.
81


NOTES.
Note,
a. p.- 24. An anecdote has been communicated to me hy a friend
in the same ship, which illustrating still more their
character, I thought would be interesting. When
Captain Waldegrave told them he had brought
clothes, &c. as presents from King George; one of
the women said, —“You are very kind, but it is not
clothes we want; this tappa is quite sufficient for
that; but we want a clergyman to give us food for
our immortal souls.”
1. p. 24. Since writing the above, I have heard particulars of
the island that gave me much pain. It seems that
Government on the representation that the inhabi-
tants were not satisfied with their little home, from
its smallness and scarcity of water, had paid a ves-
sel to take them to any other island where they might
wish to form a settlement. The missionaries at
Tahiti, by some means unknown to me and flatter-
ing offers of spiritual help, persuaded them to put
themselves under their hands, and a district of land,
I believe, was given them. They however did not
remain long; the newspapers informing us that they
had lost four or five of their number by sickness,
and were so much disgusted with the immorality
and profligacy of the Tahitians, that they urgently
requested to be sent back to their old residence.—
They had reached Pitcairn’s again before I left the
coast of South America, which is now a year ago;
and I trust their travels have been of service, and
while it has given them severe and real experience,
has not robbed them of that guileless simplicity of
religion and warmth of heart by which they were so
distinguished.
2. p. 29. A hard wood: “Aito” or casuarina, a very ornamental
and useful tree; it seldom grows to any size as tim-


Note.
ber, but is so remarkably tougli and hard as to be a
substitute for iron in the formation of all their
weapons of warfare.
3. p, 41. Moral; Indian burial places, held sacred and in great
veneration by the natives. It was here that all
offerings were made to their Heathen Deities, and
not unfrequently have they been stained by the
blood of a human victim.
4. p. 42. It had always been the practice to give presents to the
kings and chieftains:—in fact it is found a power-
ful and never-failing auxiliary in moulding them to
the wishes of the transient visitor. Any thing curious
and singular is more prized by them, than a present
We should call handsome. Captain Waldegrave
never left an island without making many gifts to
the principal chiefs, and they generally would give
him some slight return.
5. p. 43. Tarro: a root somewhat resembling the yam, but
superior in delicacy and flavor, and requiring much
more care in the cultivation. The common potatoe
has been frequently tried but always failed, owing
we suppose to the richness of the soil and warmth
of the climate.
6. p. 68. Cava: a species of the pepper plant, cultivated with
attention in all these islands, from which they make
a most favorite intoxicating beverage in the follow-
ing manner. The root is dug up and when washed
clean divided among those assembled, who severally
chew it: the bowl is then carried round, and each
places his well-masticated piece in it, and the cava
hearer, with the fresh stalk of the plantain tree
bruised to shreds, gathers them together, and ex-
presses the juice into cups made of leaves, which are
presented to the guests, beginning with the man of
the highest rank.
7. p. 73. If a guest eats or drinks with the natives, they imme-
diately suppose there can be no subject of dispute.
83


