



Fl^s-C






RELIGION AND SOCIETY
TASMA A I A,
DURING THE YEARS 1857 AND 1858.
[A Pamphlet consisting of brief and miscellaneous Extracts from a Clergyman's Journal
in Van Diemen’s Land, tending to show the religious, moral, and social character of its
inhabitants; the want of permanent Christian ordinances in its Villages; the duty of
providing National or Denominational support to Religion in its Country Districts; the
advantages and disadvantages of State and Voluntary Aid to Religion, and the good and
evil effects of the existing Ecclesiastical Systems in the Colony; and suggesting a remedy
for the present difficulties and preventives against future obstruction.]
BY THE
REV. JOHN ROBERTS,
A CLERGYMAN OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND,
Formerly Curate of Lavenham; lately an itinerant Clergyman in the Australian Colonies.
Sjoftart Count:
PUBLISHED BY WALCH & SONS,
1 8 58.
PRICE EIGHTEEN PENCE.
GEORGE BEATLEY, PRINTER, HOBART TOWN.


PREFACE
The objects I have had in view in the publication of these
brief and miscellaneous extracts from my diary for the last
two years may be thus briefly stated :
First: I believe they give a correct idea of the social, moral,
and religious aspect of the colony, as far as they go. To do
this fully would require a volume, not a tract. Yet the candid
impressions of any observer are of value in the formation of
right opinions.
Secondly : They throw light upon certain vexed questions in
the economy of the colony, as State-aid, and exhibit the neces-
sity of providing some certain income for one class of ministers
at least.
Thirdly: I have been witness to some serious misapprehensions
in England as to the need of Clergymen for this colony, and
the.r prospects of support upon arrival here : I hope to do
something to correct them.
The extracts are necessarily brief: my journal, prepared
with a view to the publication of an Ecclesiastical History of
the Australlas and New Zealand, is copious; and I have
summarized only such portions of it as appeared indispensable
to effect a present object.
What I have done has been done with the best intentions,
and emanates from a desire to help forward the good work
doing in Tasmania. I beseech the reader to remember this
and give me credit for it while he reads.
JOHN ROBERTS.
129, Campbell-streef, Hobart Town ,
October , 1858.


A MIRROR OF
religion and society
TASMANIA.
Launceston, Decemler, 1857.—The northern capital of
Tasmania (not long since called Van Diemen’s Land) is a neat
town, and the climate I should think healthy, even for this
remarkably healthy island. Since presenting my letters of in-
troduction, I have visited all the establishments in it of any
note: the Churches, Schools, Court-house, Barracks, Jail,
Mechanics’ Institute, Temperance Hall, Cemeteries, &c.; pass-
ing in this way from place to place, I met several fellow pas-
sengers from England to Melbourne, and from Melbourne
hither. In the last few days, I have met with no less than
seven and twenty persons who have attended my ministrations
in England. Some of them reside in Launceston itself, others
at Emu Bay, Mersey River, Circular Head. Some are Welsh.
At the barracks I found three soldiers 1 had known at Castle-
maine; one of them was my bell-ringer. This gave me an
opening to introduce some religious tracts, which the Protestants
thankfully- received. 1 searched the ships for Welsh sailors,
distributing these silent messengers on my way. Several Welsh
families located in the town attracted my attention. One kind
friend, a member of the Church under the pastorate of the Rev.
Henry Dowling, invited the Welsh-speaking families into his
parlour and myself to address them, which I did upon Conver-
sion, Regeneration, Justification, Sanctification, and Everlast-
ing Glory. As some of them were much more readily con-
versant with English than with their own native tongue, 1
addressed them using both languages alternately. lam lodging
in Charles-street, with some fellow passengers from Victoria.
Good and comfortable lodgings I find to be quite as expensive
in Launceston as in Melbourne. Among these persons I met
some from within a few miles of my own birth-place at the foot
of Snowdon, with whose ministers and friends I also was inti-


mate. They put Welsh letters into my hands to read. The
Rev. Henry Dowling, an aged Baptist minister formerly at
Colchester, a good, faithful, and deservedly respected shepherd
of Christ’s flock, knew my first pastor in London (the Rev. W.
Howels of the Episcopalian Church in Long Acre), and treated
me with unaffected fatherly kindness. We agreed in our
views of the great doctrines of Scripture, such as the fall of man,
Original Sin, Atonement, Regeneration, Justification, Adop-
tion, Sanctification, &c., and were soon knit in friendship.
January B.—This week I have preached at the Bethel, de-
livered a lecture on Christian Union, at Mr. Dowling’s Chapel,
addressed the Sunday School children, &c. Have visited all
the places of worship in the town. The Rev. Mr. Hales offici-
ates at Trinity Church. He was formerly located at Heidel-
berg in Victoria and much respected there. He, together with
the Reverends Messrs. Trollope and Thomson having quarrelled
with the Bishop of Melbourne, came to this colony and were
courteously received by Bishop Nixon. The Rev. Dr. Browne
(St. John’s Church) is well spoken of; at St, Paul’s, 1 heard
the Rev, Mr. Smith, a gentleman considered by all denomina-
tions here as one rightly dividing the Word of God, and very
diligent in his calling. At the Scottish Established Church, I
beard the Rev. R. K. Ewing: he has the gift of speaking
instructively. There are two Independent Chapels here. At
one is the Rev. W. Law, a very earnest and impressive
preacher, with an attentive auditory. The Rev. C. Price con-
ducts worship at the other. He is a Welshman, coming from
my own county. I knew his connexions upwards of twenty
years ago. The Wesleyans are numerous. Their minister at
present is the Rev G. Cope. They have a large place of wor-
ship and it is well attended. The Free Presbyterian Church
holds its services in the Temperance Hall. The Rev. Mr.
Lindsay preaches correctly and clearly.
At Perth, Campbell Town, Ross, Green Ponds, &c. there
are numerous churches and chapels, variously attended. As
far as I could learn, in these townships the Church of England
fails to compete successfully with other denominations.
January 12.— Pontville. —I was well acquainted with
the Rev. Mr. Burrowes, the Church of England minister here,
many years ago in England, when he was Secretary to the “Euro-
pean Continental Missionary Society,” (now the “ Foreign
Aid Society.”) He is greatly altered since his arrival, is infirm,
and has seen much severe affliction. I was sorry to find his


church but poorly attended ; when he was in England he was
a diligent and thoroughly Evangelical Clergyman. I preached
twice in his beautiful church. He took me on a visit to his
churchyard, where I saw the grave of his eldest daughter,
struck down in the very flower of her age. Her death must
have deeply affected her parents’ health and spirits. I was
much struck with the large number of persons lying in this
churchyard who had come to an untimely end—some murdered,
some killed by accident, some found dead, some drowned, some
died drunk, &c., &c. Among other of his troubles, the en-
croachments of the Independents, who, having built a small
chapel here, supply it with ministers from Hobart Town, were
not the least. They have emptied his church.
February 27.— Hobart Town.— l have now been here
seven weeks, my time pretty fully occupied in various ways.
The Rev. Dr. Fry, about to proceed on a voyage to England,
expressed an intention to engage my services as his locum tenens,
but no arrangement was come to on the subject. I have had
several interviews with Dr. Nixon, the Bishop of the Diocese.
His Lordship informed me that he could not entertain any new
applications for clerical appointments—six clergymen he has
not yet been able to pay their six months’ salary. Finding
but little chance of employment from this quarter, it occurred
to me that I might be useful among the Welsh-speaking
people, of whom a few hundreds are located in the colony. Being
unable to find any suitable room, I rented the Baptist Chapel
in Harrington-street, and preached there for the first time on
the 17th January, on the preciousness of the Holy Scripture as
the word that gives intellectual, moral, and spiritual light. I
found a number of Welsh families scattered through the city,
and diligently visited and invited them to the Sabbath services.
The connexions of some I knew at home, but found many of
them in a condition which would shock their pious friends.
They would scarcely believe them to be suuk to such gross
depravity as that in which I found them. Several, now noto-
rious for lewdness and drunkenness, were when at home pro-
fessors of religion. With a view to concentrate energy upon
these people, I convened a meeting at the Chapel in Harrington-
street, on the 29th January, for the purpose of forming a Welsh
Missionary Society. The following resolutions were passed :
“1. That considering there are hundreds of Welsh-speaking
people in Tasmania, a Society should be formed, the object of
which shall be the preaching of the Gospel in Welsh.


** 2nd. That preaching; the Gospel, Prayer meetings, Sunday
schools, adult schools, conversational meetings, Bible classes,
and other religious services should be carried on in the colony
in Welsh and English, in connection with the Society.”
Other resolutions referring to the government of the infant
association, provision for public worship in the Welsh tongue,
the support of a minister, &c. were also passed ; but alas! a
missionary association cannot be sustained by resolutions only.
During the last seven weeks I have preached twenty-eight
sermons—on each Sunday since the opening of the Chapel
here, once in Welsh, and once in English : during the week
also, 1 have preached at least one sermon in each tongue, con-
ducting an adult school also in the Sabbath afternoon. Al-
though no self-supporting congregation of the Welsh can be
found here, it is not the less a privilege to have sown some
precious seed. My subjects have been such as the following :
the doctrines, precepts, promises and example of Christ, the
effectual calling and the spirit’s progressive work, the nature
and necessity of Holiness, the Covenant of Grace, the person
and offices of Christ, the character and conduct of a Christian,
sec., &c. Those among the Welsh really desiring religious
instruction in their own tongire are but few and poor. Such
good men as Mr. Perkins are identified with other congrega-
tions and do not need any other teaching
During these seven weeks too, I have been making myself
acquainted with the social and religious condition of the people
in this city. There is much which strikes a stranger forcibly,
to which the inhabitants themselves appear altogether insensible.
As far as the outward observance of the Sabbath goes, I have
found Hobart Town fully equal with the most orderly towns in
the neighboring colonies ; but penetrating the homes of the
lower classes—others are not equally accessible—there is soon
discoverable an awful amount of immorality. The language of
the streets is often fearful and discloses much matter for painful
thought. The passion for slander is remarkably strong. Some
of the Welsh are among the very worst of the bad. I found the
once popular minister of —, in a very degraded position. The
Rev. Christmas Evans’old friend and companion, Rev. ,
lives in a very humble way near the . Among the causes
of the failure of my attempt to create a Welsh interest must I
think be enumerated this, that when I began, many of this
class of persons came about me professing zeal and imposing
on my inexperience, the only effect being that some of the


worthier sort were either driven away or became reluctant to
perform their share of the duties of the hour.
I have met with several persons more or less known to me
in other places; some have recognized me as a preacher at All
Saints, Stepney ; Old Limehouse Church ; St. Bride’s, Fleet-
street; St Ann’s and St. John’s, Blackfriars (all in London), and
at Lavenham in Suffolk, as well as at Bishop’s Waltham in
Hampshire. I met with a physician, Dr. Bright, a nephew
of the late Bishop Burgess, of St. David’s. His father was
formerly the Rector of Grafton Regis in Northamptonshire,
where 1 served some time as a curate, and where I slept in the
room in which the Doctor was born. And one Sunday as I
came down from the pulpit, a gentleman followed me into the
vestry, having recognised me as one he had heard preach at
Southgate near Edmonton in Middlesex. I also remembered
him very well, having seen much of* him during the time I
acted as the curate of fhe Rev. T. Sale, now the Vicar of Shef-
field. He was then a very young man, following his profession
of an artist, and the Rev. Mr. Sale thought very highly of him.
The last I had heard of him on a subsequent visit to Southgate
was that he had abandoned his profession and was most usefully-
employed. I was glad to call upon him shortly and found him
married to a lady who was also living at Southgate when I was
there. Some years ago he came out to Tasmania as a Mission-
ary, accompanied by his family. His name is D’Emden.
I have been visiting the Government buildings and establish-
ments lately, such as the Government House (a new and hand-
some structure), Parliament House, Court House, Hospitals,
Barracks, Penitentiary, Gaol, and Female Factory. The
Rev. Mr. Eastman, of the Penitentiary and Gaol, and the
Rev. Mr. Seaman, (son of Dr. Seaman, of Colchester,) of the
Female Factory, are clergymen well spoken of for their diligent
attention to their peculiar charge. At the Gaol there is a com-
modious chapel, used alternately by the Roman Catholics and
Bishop Nixon and his clergy. When a Protestant Bishop can
occupy the same building with a Roman Catholic prelate, it
seems somewhat inconsistent to my mind, that he should be less
tolerant of his own Protestant brethren, though they do differ
with him upon points of minor importance.
A Conference of the Independents, attended by delegates
from all the neighbouring colonies, has just been held in Hobait
Town. I attended several of their meetings, and met some I
had known elsewhere. The Wesleyans have also just concluded


their customary Conference, similarly attended. I was "ratified
with what I was privileged to see and hear of them. Wesley-
anism has certainly taken deep root in these colonies, possibly
on account of a peculiar adaptation to the habits and modes of
thought of the people. The ministers are moral and active ;
but some of the members are very untruthful and dishonest,
with all their prayers, singing, and “experience.”
March. — In the early part ot this month I made another
visit to the Rev. Mr. Burrowes, and met with the Reverends
Messrs. Trollope and Ball. Mr. Trollope’s books were well
known to me during my career at the University of Cambridge.
Indeed, there is scarcely any student at that university to whom
his books are not more or less useful or necessary. I preached
at Pontville three times : vital religion is certainly at a low ebb.
I saw no indications of a hunger tor the bread of life. Visiting
Mr. Ball he gratified mfe by his evident hospitality, as much as
he astonished me by his opinions. He asserts prayer for the
dead to be a reasonable thing: that the Church of England
teaches Baptismal Regeneration in her Liturgy, along with
Transubstantiation and even Purgatory* He longs for an
union between the Chuiches of England and Rome, he says,
and sees no difficulty in the way so far as doctrines are con-
cerned. Burrowes said, “Well, Ball! I do not know how
you feel, but I know that I and many of my brother clergy
feel that we could not afford to part with our wives to get
admission into the Church of Rome.” Mr. Ball asserted that
that difficulty might be obviated by ecclesiastical provision. I
found it useless to argue.
Having seriously endeavoured to make myself acquainted
with the position occupied by the Church of England as an
engine for the conversion of sinners in this city, I am I believe
qualified for an expression of opinion. It is my own Church,
too—my forefathers have all been among her members. I was
baptized, educated, confirmed and ordained in her communion ;
and have served her, lay and clerical, abroad and at home, for
a quarter of a century, and am second to none in affection for
and devotion to her. In Hobait Town, St. David’s is the
Cathedral. The Bishop and Archdeacon Davies, assisted by
the Rev. Mr. Garnsey and the Rev. Mr. Quilter, officiate. The
Bishop is one of the best preachers in the colony, as far as
language and arrangement go. Archdeacon Davies is a moral
and diligent minister. The theology is of the kind called by
the Edinburgh Review the “ High and Dry,” with a mixture


of Sacramentalisrn or Tractarianism. Sometimes, however,
other ministers with “ Broad Church ” views occupy this pul-
pit. The consequence is that, though the congregation is large,
neither saints are edified nor sinners converted—no unction
accompanies the preaching. The topics dwelt on do not come
home to the heart. Young people are not brought to remember
the'ir Creator in the days of their youth. At Trinity Church the
Rev. Mr. Davenport, (a scrupulously diligent and very zealous
clergyman) is of theTractarian school, and is nnctionless.
Sr. George’s, Battery Point, (the Rev. Dr. Fry’s,) is esteemed
the Evangelical Church of the city, but when I visited it I
heard the most unaccountable conflict of doctrine. One minis-
ter preached baptismal, another supernatural iGgeneration—
another, apostolical succession—another, personal calling. The
result is, that the people become formalists. Many are worldly-
minded or worse. x)r. Fry himself may be imbued with Evan-
gelical sentiments, but having left his pulpit unprovided for
during his absence in England, “ High and Dry,” Tractarian,
“ Broad Church,” and Neologians occupy it in rapid succes-
sion. At St. John’s Church the Rev. N. O. Irwin—who is
gentlemanly and diligent, but a thorough Tractarian—officiates.
The congregation is very small, and of the most unspiritual
character. The Rev. Mr. Cox, lately the incumbent of this
church, is now in England, on leave of absence, and is one of
the few having a good report “of those without.'’ His
parishioners describe him as a good man and a diligent minis-
ter. At All Saints’ the Rev. Mr.Gellibrand preaches, unsalaried
by any. He is respected as a quiet, unassuming, diligent
minister. He belongs to the “Semi-Iligh and Semi-Low” school*
I have not discovered any instances of conversion under any
ministry in the country ; nor do I believe any occur at
St. David’s, St. George’s, St. John’s, Trinity, or All Saints in
town, where Tractarianism is preached
Passing through the streets, and from place to place, I have
met several persons knowing my old clerical friends in England,
such as the Reverends Messrs. Bickersteth, Pratt, Hovvels,
Wilcox, Mortimer, Brock, Falconer, Marsh, M‘Neile, M'Ghee,
Scholefield, Armstrong, and Jones of Creaton, and who remem-
bered myself as a preacher in Suffolk, London, North Wales,
and at Ryde, and Newport in the Isle of Wight, &c.
March. —On the 7th I preached at St. Stephen’s Church,
Sandy Bay. My subjects were —in the afternoon, the evils
which disfigure piety and impede godliness, in the evening, the


union of Christ with his people and the effects which follow it.
1 this day met with Mr. Shoobridge, a Wesleyan local preacher
nn«l an excellent man, A few days later 1 became acquainted
with an institution which Mr. and Mrs. Friend, the Managers
of it, represent to their neighbours as having for its object the
furtherance of Missions to the Jews and to the Heathen, which
would somewhat startle the friends of Missions in England. A
number of girls and young women are collected together at the
house of a lady named Friend, for the purpose of providing the
materials for a Bazaar. They meet about two p.m., and
work till about five—when (after singing, prayer, and the
benediction) tea is served, the names of those present re-
corded, and the younger girls are sent home. The elder
remain for music and dancing till a somewhat late hour (1 1 p.m.).
1 think I am right in saying, that the Church Missionary Society,
for whose benefit chiefly the funds arising from the sale of this
bazaar-work are said to be, would decline to receive any such
contributions if its Committee knew exactly how they were
raised. A little h ter, when I ventured to remonstrate against
these equivocal practices, to say the least of them, I received
a notice in the following terms —“ If you say one word against
our dancing and our little at-homes, we the ladies shall soon
send 3 r ou about your business—we shall make the place too
hot for you, we shall not collect any money towards your salary,
we'shall not go to hear you pieach. ’’ And yet these persons
are reputed to belong to the most evangelical congregation of
this city ! The so-called evavgelieals are the most ungodly in
Tasmania : they are gay, hypocritical, and ignorant.
Sandy Bay in the county of Queenborough is a district nearly
ten miles in length and very broad too—extending indefinitely
into the Bush on the right of the road from Hobart Town to
Brown’s River. A lew hundred peopleinhabit it chiefly along the
road just mentioned. There is no located minister of religion nor
any regular means of grace. 1 being about to leave the colony,
inv old friend the Rev. John Bnrrowes of Brighton, and some
others introduced me to some of the residents, and it was
arranged that I should remain and endeavour to make myself
useful in a place where rny ministrations might be expected to
prove acceptable. On the 11th 1 was invited to Ellington, (Mr.
Friend’s residence,) to meet a few friends to consider the pro-
priety of forming a local Missionary Society. I found among
their number, the Messrs. Watt (of the Customs’ department)
natives of Stromness, in the Orkneys. Twenty years ago I


was at the Orkneys for a short time, when on my way out to
the Hudson’s Bay territory. L heard of many mutual friends
through these gentlemen. It was arranged that we should
attempt the formation of such an association. Mr. Lipscombe,
Mr. Dickenson, and Mr. Friend were present.
On the Bth March, a public meeting was held in St.
Stephen’s Church for the purpose, Mr. Lipscombe in the chair.
Messrs, Friend, Davis, Heyward, Fspie, Large,'Dickenson, the
Chairman, and I addressed the meeting. My theme was the
principles and constitution of city, town and village missions.
Although the meeting, not a large one, was harmonious, I
feared—and the event has proved the correctness of my appre-
hensions—that it would not be possible to form any such associ-
ation which should be thoroughly self-supporting. The people
are too few, too poor, and too talkative—not more than about
i!2O per year could be promised as a certain salary fur a minis-
ter, and he who takes the office therefore must have some pri-
vate means. The meeting was adjourned for a few days, for
the preparation of rules, &c. On the 22nd VI arch, the “ Sandy
Bay Local Evangelical Missionary Society” was definitively
formed. Messrs. McPherson, M.L.A. (Chairman), Friend
(Secretary), Lipscombe (Treasurer), Roberts (Chaplain), Dick-
inson, Heyward, Espie, Large, Davis, Jackson and Barrett
were appointed to be the Executive Committee. The Society,
established on the broad and liberal principles of the Evangeli-
cal Alliance, City Mission and Bible Society, announced its
objects to be to Promote the Gospel in the Sandy Bay
District. The means to be used were the ‘Preaching of Christ
Crucified/ both in public and Pom house to house ; Sunday
Schools and Bible Classes ; the circulation of the Holy Scrip-
tures, Books and Tracts ; the visitation of those that may
be “ desolate, oppressed, and weak-hearted; those that may
have fallen ; those that may be in danger, necessity, and tribu-
lation ; and those who may be any ways afflicted, or distressed
in mind, body, or estate.” The Doctrines of this Society were
stated to be the Divine Inspiration of the Scriptures, the Trinity,
the Fall of Man, the Depravity of Human Nature, the Justifi-
cation of a Sinner by Faith in Christ, the Work of the Holy
Spirit in the Conversion, Regeneration, and Sanctification of
the Sinner, the Future Happiness of the Just, and the Misery
of the Unjust. Controversy was forbidden.
At the meeting of the 22nd, however, I deemed it necessary
to defend the principle upon which the institution was founded,


and did so : it had been objected, for Instance, that such socie-
ties—societies, I mean, upon this broad basis—often petmit
their agents to officiate in unconsecrated buildings, in conse-
quence of which neither a Bishop of the Church of England,
nor any strict clergyman can co-operate with them without a
compromise of principle. I explained that consecration (as it
is called) of a place of worship is not any essential act of the
Church of England. The act of consecration is that by which
private property is constituted the property of a corporation :
the act by which certain lands and buildings, from being the
peculiar possessions of a private individual, become national
property vested in the Church of England in trust for certain
definite uses. But where there is do national church, as in the
colonies of Australia, consecration becomes altogether a need-
less ceremony. Even in England, Consecration is chiefly the
work of the lawyers. The Bishop, as a public officer of the
body to whom the property is given, publicly examines the
documents, registers them—in person or by his Registrar—and
then, whether he afterwards reads prayers or preaches a ser-
mon, the act of consecration is complete. There is nothing in the
articles or rubric of the Church making the act of consecration
a religious ceremony. The Atchbishops and Bishops in the
United Kingdom, and the Bishops in the colonies are often
found preaching in places confessedly nnconsecrated. I know
very many Barracks, Mess-rooms, Hospitals, Town Halls,
Mechanics’ Institutes, Lecture-rooms, Court-houses, Gaols,
School-rooms, private houses and cottages, wherein the clergy of
the Church of England and some of her highest dignitaries are
accustomed frequently to preach Exeter Hall is an uncon-
secrated building, and yet the Bishop of London recently per-
mitted his clergy to preach there. The Bishops of Ripon,Salis-
bury, &c., preach on the high road, at railway stations, and even
in the open air. In New Zealand, the Bishop—(whom no one
will accuse of any laxity of churchmanship) preaches on the
sea-coast, and on the banks of the rivers. His journal
records his having made the bottom of a boat his pulpit and
communion table. The Bishops of Nova Scotia, Montreal,
Rupert’s Land, Jamaica, New Brunswick, Cape Town, Gra-
ham’s Town, Siena Leone, Calcutta, Madras, Bombay, Cey-
lon, Mauritius, Barbadoes, Demarara, Sydney, Melbourne, &c.
(as I learn from their journals) officiate in town halls, breweries,
bakeries, barns, cottages, and even in stables. The shrewd,
active, aealcus, conscientious and learned Bishop of Tasmania


travels the length and breadth of the colony, and preaches as he
goes in private houses, the cottages of labourers and miners ; and
when accommodation is not reaoily forthcoming from the mem-
bers of his own communion, he wdl a'ail himself of the kindness
of Roman Catholics, and even of infidels. Again, if the popu-
lar sense in which this act of consecration is regarded be the
true one, how unfortunate the condition of these colonies in
earlier days ! None but a Bishop can perform the act of conse-
cration, and it would therefore follow that all the services per-
formed during the years elapsing between the date of the foun-
dation of a colony and the arrival of a bishop must be ineffi-
cacious ; and the baptisms, marriages, and burials of these
earlier days wanting in something to make them perfect ordi-
nances ! And on their first arrival, the Bishops themselves
must of neccsssity officiate in unconsecrated places. Churches
cannot be consecrated till they are out of debt—but they are
often used for years, and even by Bishops, before that happens.
What the metropolitan and the Bishops do in these colonies is
surely not unlawful for the inferior clergy. In "V ictoria and
South Australia, I myself have seen the Bishops and their
clergy officiating in dancing and concert rooms, commercial
rooms, theatres, hotel dining-rooms, booths and circuses. I
have read advertisements announcing sermons by a prelate “in
the rooms of the Hotel.’’ I heard aßishop preach in the dining
room of an Hotel, and the landlord left the room at each avail-
able pause in the service to attend to his customers in the bar.
I once overheard a publican say to his customers, “ Don t swear
so loud, there is preaching in the dining-room.” A Jew
named Phillips retorted, “Is this the way, Wilson?—you get
fellows to teach folk the way to Heaven in the parlour, while
you, your wife, your sister-in-law, your barman, and your bar-
maids teach them the way to Hell in the barand tap-room ? ’ Is
it not foolish then, and wicked to object to preaching in unli-
censed or consecrated buildings which happen to be the abode of
the respectable poor? A bishop or minister consenting to officiate
in a tavern, the house of an infidel, or a heretic, or to occupy
the same pulpit, and use the same commuuion table with a
Roman Catholic—and yet refusing to use a building set apart
for public worship, because that building sometimes echoes to
the voice of a Wesleyan minister, or a local preacher, is guilty of
something more than the straining at gnats and swallowing
camels, of which our Lord spake reprovingly. Overtures of
union have been made by the dignitaries of the Church of Eng-


land to the Wesleyan Methodists in very recent years, and many
a minister from that and other bodies has been received into the
bosom of the Church of England with unfeigned cordiality
but the gulf which separates the Church of England from the
apostate Church of Rome is indeed immense. Consecration
however, after all is said, is nothing more than a civil act
by which certain private property is openly and officially con-
veyed to be the property of the Church of England.
Another objection I deemed it advisable to meet was this :
that no clergyman could properly officiate without a license
from the Bishop. But the clergy lists at home and abroad,
in Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, give the names of about
20,009 clergymen of the Protestant Episcopal Church. Only
about 13,000 of them (parochial and pastoral clergymen) have
Bishop’s licenses to officiate as ministers, the others officiate
without them, tor the reason that the Bishops have no control
over them (not in fact giving them employment) ; where the
Bishop does not employ, he has no jurisdiction. Are these men
the less ministers of Christ, or are they the less faithful mem-
bers of the Church of England ? Are the chaplains of ships,
iron and copper w r orks, coal mines, schools and colleges, alms-
houses, and public companies', the less ministers of the Church
of England because they act without a Bishop’s license ? But
they are never summoned to attend the Bishops’ visitations, nor
are they ever interfered with by the Bishops under any circum-
stances ; their ordination (without a licence) is everything. The
Bishops having no authority over the sphere of their operations
have no authority over them. As there was something per-
sonal in the objection thus urged against our proposed society,
I concluded my remarks by saying that for myself I am a son of
the Church of England by personal initiation and engraftment.
I was baptised, instructed, confirmed, and ordained, in the
Church of England. My ancestors for centuries have been
among her members. Recognised and sanctioned by the Arch-
bishop of Canterbury, I have been employed as a curate at
home, as a missionary abroad. I have laboured in my voca-
tion in the cold of the Arctic regions, at the Red River, North-
west America, and in the heat of the West Indies, till my health
failed. Having been frozen in the cold of the north, and fried
in the heat of the south, I returned to England, where I
laboured in numerous parishes. Year by year my testimonials
have been signed by the foremost clergymen in the Church’s
ranks. The death of two ol my relatives unsettled me, and I


was persuaded to < ome to these colonies. No Archbishop nor
Bishop can dislocate or excommunicate me—though he may
annoy, impede, or even injure me, by withholding his counte-
nance, patronage and protection. He cannot depose me Irom
the office to which 1 was solemnly ordained.
Soon after this I removed to miserable lodgings at Sandy
Bay with members of Dr. Fry’s congregation, and began my
work in good earnest. But my discouragements were neither
few nor far between. The people professing religion were un-
prepared for any due application of its precepts to themselves.
Dr. Fry, to whose congregation most of the “ professedly’’
Church of England persons in this district belonged while he
was here, appears to have paid much attention to the Puseyites
and Papists, neglecting his own people. Almost everywhere, I
witness habits and tastes which are altogether inconsistent
with spiritual-mindedness, if not with a modicum of truly reli-
gious sentiment. Two ladies managed to place a clergyman in
a serious difficulty between them. Mrs. Friend, a disciple of
Dr. Fry, is Jow-church, if she isof any church at all. Miss Hogan,
a devoted adherent of Bishop Nixon, is as ardently high-church.
They oppose each other in everything, and in every way. Miss
Hogan has very justly obtained the command of the Sunday
School in St. Stephen’s Church. Mrs Friend desires to obtain
the use of the building for the same purpose, her sunday-school
being held in her own residence, Mrs. Friend demands the
church and scholars. Miss Hogan refuses to part with either;
she established the school many years ago, and has hitherto
conducted it, and so long as the Trustees of the Church do not
disapprove of her teaching, or resume possession of the building,
she is entitled to its use. Mrs. Friend, therefore, is thrown
upon her own resources to supplant the present occupant of the
coveted ground in another way, and the consequence is a feud,
and the creation of opposing parties. One is of Mrs. Friend’s
faction —another of Miss Hogan’s party. “ Now I beseech you,
brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offences . . .
and by good words and fair speeches deceive, the hearts of the
simple,” Rom. xvi. 17-18. Mrs. Friend calls Miss Hogan a
Jesuit, who from interested motives has become a Protestant,
and so on. Miss Hogan’s adherents make invidious compari-
sons, Miss Hogan certainly does not require a clergyman
actively to embrace her cause, or to decide for either party.
Mrs. Friend is not equally forbearing; she stipulates that if a
clergyman expects her to contribute, or to collect the necessary


funds for his support, he must support her influence in the dis-
trict, suppress his own opinions on the merits of her sewing
schemes and mission-bazaar operations, and oppose Miss
Hogan’s school. Of course, as I could not consent to this
course of conduct she became an enemy. Iheiewasbut little
co-operation to be had with Miss Hogan on account of the
difference in our religious views. She is a Sacramentahst.
Lent is but little observed in the colony. Regularly attending
St. David ! s Cathedral on a week-day during the Lent season, I
heard some excellent sermons from the Bishop and Archdeacon.
At my own church 1 read the Athanasian creed on Easter Sun-
day in accordance with the Rubric, when some of the members
of our Local Evangelical Society complained of my doing so—
threatening that in consequence they would neither attend ray
ministrations, nor contribute to my support. The latter threat
invariably accompanies any fault finding. Voluntaries must
understand this principle better than clergymen do, if they
can make it work and be satisfied with it. My advice to a
clergyman settling at Sandy Bay (and the place is of sufficient
importance to attract attention), is not to trust to the voluntary
principle there at all events. The people, such as Lipscombe,
Espie, Davis, Friend, Large, &c., &c., do not give upon prin-
ciple, nor do they understand such gifts. Those who subscribe
will feel at liberty to give more than their money is worth in
“ good advice,” properly called insult and abuse. A clergy-
man of independent means might find enough to employ him,
and do much real good in this district; but he must be alto-
gether independent of his congregation, lam not an admirer
ofthe voluntary principle as it is practised.—that is, to make a
minister immediately dependent upon the good will of a mean
congregation ; but neither am 1 ofthe State-aid principle as it is
commonly carried out. It places the clergyman too directly
at the mercy of the dispenser of that aid. Any or either of the
other systems, the Permanent Endowment System, or the Pro-
visional Board of Missions System, or that adopted by the
Methodist Conference is preferable in ray eyes. It was a mis-
take unquestionably to attempt to derive my support from the
purely voluntary principle, in such a district as this is. The
Church in which 1 officiate, was built by certain persons called
Trustees, and at the expense of others, to “ complete the village”
and improve their own several properties. No village is com-
plete without a general store, a smithy, a tavern, and a church.
In this church, any one may officiate that will do so, without


offending them. The Dissenters may have it if they will locate
a minister here without any expense to the trustees; or the
Bishop of Tasmania may have it on the same terms. The
Trustees, James Moody, David Dunkley, Frederick Lipscombe,
who are old hands in the colony (one of them, Alderman Lips-
combe, is an old publican), do not feel their want of th«
Christian religion nor of any other religion. “ They do not care.’'
They themselves do not attend a place of worship. I have
been censured for opposing the introduction of ungodly men to
sit on the committee of our Christian Instruction Society. It
was argued against me that all contributors to the funds had
an equal right to supervise their appropriation. As an abstract
principle in reference to mere worldly objects this is certainly
correct; but it does not apply to Societies having such special
objects in view. Such persons as Lipscombe, Davis, Espie,
Friend, Moody, Large, Dunkley, cannot vote correctly upon
such points as the appointment of a missionary or a visitor, or
make a judicious selection of tracts for distribution, or teel an
interest in the circulation of the Scriptures.
I have now reached the end of May. During this month
we had a tea meeting in St. Stephen’s Church for the bene-
fit of our local mission. About a hundred and fifty friends
assembled to partake of refreshment, provided by our Ladies’
Committee—Mesdames Meade, Friend, Heyward, Edgoose,
Dickenson, F. Lipscombe, E. Lipscombe, Jackson, and the
Misses Fisher, Firth, Sarah Firth, Laidman, and Lipscombe.
Among the gentlemen were nearly all the principal inhabitants
of the neighbourhood, in addition to several friends and minis-
ters of various denominations from Hobart Town. D. M‘Pher-
son, Esq., M.H.A., occupied the chair. Captain Friend, the
Honorary Secretary, read a report and made some pertinent
remarks on the objects and necessity of our Mission. Mr.
Gray, an earnest and indefatigable City Missionary, the Rev.
Mr. Cope (Wesleyan), Rev. J. Downes (Free Church of Scot-
land), Messrs. Lipscombe, Dickenson, Davis, Heyward, and
some others, kindly addressed the meeting in support of the
objects of our new Association. Some of these lay speakers,
such as Captain Friend, Lipscombe, &c., give nothing but their
beautiful speeches, which are but very little worth towards the
support of the society. We cannot exist by speeches. We
want three things in a Missionary Society, viz.— I. Piety ;2.
Men to work; 3. Money to support them. My own remarks went
to remove certain mistakes from the minds of the misinformed or


prejudiced. Much misapprehension respecting the Canons of
the Church of England prevailing in the district, they formed
my first topic. As reported in the newspapers of the week, I
find my speech to have been much as follows :—“ There are no
canons in the Church of England. Those who speak of canons
manifest the greatest ignorance of ecclesiastical affairs. There
is an old book called Canons Ecclesiastical, containing certain
rules which a party, like the Puseyites now, drew up in the
17th Century and presented to Parliament for its sanction.
Parliament threw them out as worthless and contemptible
documents. These canons were dated from, and published in,
London in the year 1603, but they were intended to be en-
forced in England by the Court of Arches, But it is impossi-
ble to prove that they apply to the colonies, where there is no
ecclesiastical court established. They are not enforced in free
England, as the Parliament never sanctioned them. The
Municipal Law will not allow a subject of the British Crown
to obey them, because they are detrimental to the peace and
well-being of the community. The Toleration Act has made it
impossible that they should be obeyed. For instance, the
canons command that every parishioner who does not take
the sacrament at Easter, let him be what he may, is to be
fined and punished in the Ecclesiastical Court. Also, the
omission of the payment of the Easter offering is a punish-
able transgression. Can these canons be applied in the colonies?
It is absurd for persons to say that they stand aloof from any
society because its constitution is contrary to the canons.
Secondly—ln reference to the Episcopal license, I said there
were 20,000 c ! er£ynien now living in connection with the United
Churches of England and Ireland, at home and abroad. These
are employed in various occupations—some are Archbishops,
some Bishops, some Deans, some Rectors, some Vicars, some In-
cumbents, some Curates, some Deacons, and some Chaplains, in
England, Ireland. Scotland, the Colonies, and foreign kingdoms.
But above 7000 of these twenty thousand officiate without the
Bishop’s license, because Bishops have no authority over them,
nor over the places in which they minister; such as chaplains
to companies, noblemen, schools, commercial establishments,
the army, navy, and societies. Some are secretaries to differ-
ent societies, like the Rev. Mr. Becher who recently visited
Tasmania as secretary to the Bible Society. The Bishop’s
license is only wanted where a parochial constitution exists, or
where a congregation is formed.” The third point was—The


Consecration of Churches. “ Some people saul that the Society
was irregular, because its chaplain officiated in unconsecrated
churches, and cottages, but all the colonial bishops, even the
worthy bishop of Tasmania, preach in unconsecrated churches
and other buildings, such as cottages, houses, the assembly
rooms in taverns, concert-rooms, theatres, and other such places*
ordinarily used for the business of life. Recently the shrewd
and clever Bishop of this diocese officiated on the premises of
my countryman, Mr Williams, known as the chaitist. It is a
matter of notoriety, that Mr Williams disbelieves the Christian
religion altogether, but troin civility he lent his premises to the
Bishop. What is consecration ? Many people look upon it as a
part of the discipline of the Church of England, but it is not so.
It is an ecclesiastical act which does not extend beyond England,
Wales, and Ireland, where there is a national church. Dr.
Whalely, the learned Archbishop of Dublin —says that ‘ The
Act of Consecration is the act by which private or personal pro-
perty is conveyed and made over, and constituted national pro*
perty. It is the act by which a building, erected at the expense
of an individual, is made the property of the national establish-
ment. It is a civil and an ecclesiastical act, and not a spiritual,
a pastoral, or a religious act. As a proof of this, I remina you
that there is no provision made for the consecration of churches
in the Book of Common Prayer, where there are appointed
services for the Lord’s supper, baptism, confirmation, burial,
matriages, churching of women, the visiting of the sick, &c.,
but there is no service for the consecration of churches ; which
shows that it is not a part of the church discipline, because that
which is not in the prayer book is not required of any member
of the church.’ In England the chief business of the conse"*
oration is done by lawyers, who draw the conveyance j tha
bishop then, as a national agent, not as a sacred minister, accepts
the property and registers it in the national register. The law of
consecration, strictly speaking, does not extend to the colonies.
DrWhatelysometimes holds no religious serviceataconsecration,
but only attends it as a civil matter and contract. It should be
remembered also that the churches in the colony, such as St.
David’s and St. George’s in Hobart Town, St John sand Trinity
in Launceston, had feen used for years before any bishop came
to the colony to consecrate them. Would any one be so foolish
as to say, that the marriages solemnised, the baptisms performed,
the sermons preached, and the prayers offered up in these build-
ings, before they were consecrated , were irregular f* The fourth


point alluded to, was an objection made by some, because the
Society’s missionary and chaplain officiated in the same pulpits
as the Presbyterians, Methodists, Congregationalists, and other
Dissenters. So do the Bishops of Sydney,Melbourne, Adelaide,
New Zealand,theMauritius, Graham’s Town, Calcutta, Madras,
Bombay, Ceylon, Montreal, Nova Scotia, Rupert’s Land, and
other places. The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops of
London, Ripon, Carlisle, and others, preach in the same
school-rooms, and other rooms (for example, Exeter Hall), as
the Dissenters. “ There was nothing in the rules of the Church
of England in the colonies, to prevent the Episcopal and the
Presbyterian ministers from exchanging pulpits. Bishop
Nixon and Archdeacon Davies could go and preach in Mr,
Dowling’s pulpit, or Mr. Clarke’s, or Mr Nicholson’s, or Dr.
Lillie’s, or Mr Miller’s, or Mr Manton’s, without breaking any of
the rules of their church, and might admit Mr Nicholson, or
Dr. Lillie, &c., into their pulpits without being guilty of any
breach o( law. The laws by which the Established Church of
England in England,and the Protestant Episcopal Church in the
colonies are regulated, are very different. At home the church
is a national establishment, there she has the Court of Arches
to appeal to. In the colonies she is only a missionary church,
supported in any way, according to the circumstances of the
country. In future let those who talk about canons, episcopal
licenses, consecration of churches, association with dissenters,
remember that those old laws were made before the Act of Tole-
ration passed, when every baptized person was designated a
member of the national church, and where there was a Court of
Arches to enforce them ; but in the colonies no such laws ex-
ist.” Alluding to the Acts, viz., 39th George 3rd, chap.
20 & Bth William 4th, as Acts under which the colonial Bishops
are consecrated and the colonal clergy ordained and regulated,
he quoted the words of the late Bp. of Calcutta, Dr. Wilson, in
whose diocese Tasmania and all the Australian colonies were
formerly included—“ lam always ready to give the right hand
of fellowship to all those who love the Lord Jesus Christ in sin-
cerity, and to support any Society that teaches the great doc-
trines derivable from God s word—namely, the fall of man in
Adam the first, and his recovery by the redemption accomplished
by Adam the Second, the Lord from Heaven.”
I pieached regularly all this time in the church, and at
the Grange on Mr. Cartwright’s establishment. It seemed
necessary to keep the fundamental doctrines of Christianity


constantly before my two congregations. My discourses were
upon such topics as the following—The Trinity ; Free and Full
Pardon; Growth in Grace; the World, the Flesh, and the
Devil; the Person and Offices of Christ; the New Covenant;
Redemption by the Cross, &c. Ihe district was also carefully
visited and the people invited to attend public worship. A dying
man, too, occupied some of my time and attention. 1 distributed
a good manv tracts also, as useful adjuncts to oral teaching. It
is a feature of this place that, although my preaching was only
that which I believed to be suited to the condition of the people,
many of them think, or profess to think, my preaching to have
been personal arid offensively intended.
During the last six months I have attended many religious
meetings-—such as those of the Bible Society, the Sunday School
Union, the Bethel Union—several of the Church of England,
of the Congregationalists, Wesleyans, &c., and the periodical
meetings of the Evangelical Union. Ihere are plenty of minis-
ters and places of worship in Hobart '1 own, but the evidences
of unction are by no means so plentiful.
June. — I began this month with a visit to my friend Mr.
Lewis, at New Town: he was a Sub-Governor in Rupert’s Land
(North West America), when I was a missionary there 18
years ago. He is now settled here at New Town. What a
different climate! In Rupert’s Land it was often 35°, 40°, or
even 45° below Zero. Having long lived in the Arctic regions,
Mr. Lewis practices the hospitality of the “ far west in this
genial clime. Mrs. Lewis and family are very kind to me.
Visiting my district, I have found many of the residents
natives of Norfolk Island—formeily, and indeed until very
lately, a penal station. They are grossly ignorant of religious
things—do not know if they have been baptized or not. Few
can even read.
My troubles with the Society did not decrease during tins
month. Some of its professed friends (particularly the
Friends ) actively visited the people, not for the purpose of
promoting peace and good-will, but the contrary. For reasons
already sufficiently explained, I was often the object of attack.
I had much trouble to defend our Society; and did so in more
than one public address and private letter. The principles of
the Society are in perfect accordance with the Divine command,
“Go ye into all the world and preach the Gospel to every crea-
ture.” They are in perfect accordance with the New Testament
command to visit the sick, and the widows and fatherless in


their affliction, to comfort the distressed and reprove the un-
godly. They are harmonious with the Bible and with the
principles of the Church of England. And yet what opposition
is there not raised to it by those professedly friends to evan-
gelical progress ? lam not sure that there are not some un-
suspected Jesuits sowing dissension in the neighbourhood.
Some of the people—l will not name them—at least show
some symptoms which induce me to think there may be. Pro-
testants with Protestants, Papists with Papists, Dissenters with
Dissenters, Churchmen among Churchmen, these “ wolves in
sheep’s clothing” are in the worst sense “all things to all men.”
Re igious with the religious, gay with those indisposed to seri-
ousness, worldly with the worldly, they pervert many, and con-
firm more in error. Tractarianism and Puseyisra took their rise
in the fact that some thirty years ago, a number of Jesuits un-
der various disguises, were introduced into the University of
Oxford. When I was associated as a public controversialist
with the Revds Messrs. M‘Ghee, Bureess, Hobart, Seymour,
Howels, Evans, Thomas, and other champions of Protestantism,
T had an opportunity of learning their devices. 1 have learned
to look with much distrust upon professed converts from Popery
—most of them are Jesuits,-converted to pervert. One cannot
but sympathize with conscientious Romanists, and would treat
them with respect and kindness ; but the wiliness of the Jesuit
necessitates the exercise of extreme caution and provokes
endless suspicion. The eighty thousand Romani-t converts
reported at Exeter Hall are for the most part hypocrites and
mere Jesuits. They return to Romanism when they are dung. 1
saw thousands of them in Ireland in 1863. The Report of the
Baptist Irish Society, 1854, notes the following remarks from
the Rev. James Milligan, of Dublin ;
“ iN ot only was there this system (Popery) to contend with,
but there was also the injurious injluence of the Establishment t
and the impression that if a man became a Protestant he would
get something by it. A man with his wile came to him for
baptism ; upon enquiry, however, it turned out that they had
become Protestants, and the clergyman having failed in his bar-
gain with them, they resolved upon giving themselves up again
to the Priest, but upon seeing a Baptist chapel they determined
upon trying what the Baptists would do for them. If he had
received such men as the 4 Irish Church Mission ’ was in the
habit of receiving , he might have had his chapel full of con-
verts over and over again f


The Reverends Messrs. M‘Ghee, Dr. Daily, and M'Crie,
all ministers of the Church of England, have publicly declared
that they never met with a serious man among the many priests
they saw leaving the Church of Rome for that of England.
Much of their system consist in the practice “ Divide and con-
quer”—-they will sow dissension anywhere, in a nation, a parish,
a congregaiion, or a family, and reap some fruit from it. As a
missionary I have been intimately associated with spiritually
minded Methodists and other dissenters. I have learned to
love all who love the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity. But I
abhor a Jesuitical person and dread his company. My own
desire is to do my own work fairly and quietly, fearlessly and
actively, to live uprightly and consistently. Who are these
schemers against our Evangelical Society ? Some of them are
men professedly adhering to no church or sect, subscribing to no
religious objects. Old Billy Dawson, the Methodist preacher,
used to say that those who give least, talk most against
collections ; but these men give nothing. I could not but coun-
sel the people in such limes as these : “Be sincere in your mis-
sionary work, your classes, and your Sunday school ! Do not
take up with religious objects as an introduction to worldly plea-
sures. Be zealous in such pursuits from love for Christ. Be
not lovers of gaiety and dancing. It is inconsistent with a genuine
feeling for the work to preface a dance with labour for the mis-
sionary cause. The Missionary Societies do not want the money
which can be raised only in such a way. Do not mix up religion
and the world. If you work for Christ work for Him ; and not
for Him one hour, and tor Satan the next. Do not make the
missionary cause a cloak for your gaiety and love of worldly
pleasure. Remember them who neglect their own vineyards
to attend those of others ; but avoid following any such
example. Let your own souls be your first field of mission-
ary operations. Cast out first of ail your own disposition to con-
form to this world—then train your own children and servants
‘in the nurture and admonition of the Lord.’ You may then
turn your attention to your neighbours with some hope of
success and a decree of prosperity. Remember the words
‘ Other vineyards have 1 kept, but mine own have I not kept.’
There are some people at Sandy Bay, particularly about Elling-
ton, who neglect their own affairs and meddle with other men’s
matters, and are busybodies. They go about collecting money,
as they say, ‘ towards the conversion of the Jews and the-
Blacks/ they workfor missionary bazaars, and hold bazaars,


and neglect the cultivation of their own souls and those of their
children—who go about immoral, rude, bare-footed, dirty,
ragged, and ignorant, on Sundays as well as on week-days,
worse than the Pagans for whom they psetend to collect money.
Let such persons look at home. Let them not so awlully
neglect personal piety and family religion and education and
domestic Christianity : they are more ungodly than those to
whom they send, or profess to send, missionaries with the pro-
ceeds of the fiazaars Firstattend to yourselves, then your own
Village and Home Missions, and then consider the case of the
Heathen and the Jew. ‘Go ye’ (then) ‘ into all the world and
preach the Gospel to every creature/ The missionary prin-
ciple is of more value than the missionary society. Act out the
missionary principle, and you give the best possible aid to the
missionary cause. The principle is one thing, the Society
another ; the first is Dh ine, the othei human,” But this teach-
ing is held to be personal and to reflect designedly upon indivi-
duals. I grow sadly weary of the people. With such oppo-
nents among those to whom I must look for support it seems
impossible to do any good here. I continue to visit the poor
and sick persons, however, and they receive me with kindness.
I preach every Sunday on JMr Cartwright’s premises, at the
Grange; he and his family treat me with kindness.
Jl ly.—One evil-disposed person in a district can do an
alarming amount of mischief. I hear that one “ lady,” named
Friend, has been going about provoking others to make an evil
report of me, with the promise of repeating this for my annoy-
ance and injury. Had the Kev. Mr. Burrowes, the friend who
introduced me to this sphere of labour, made known to me in
March what he afterwards communicated in April—in reference
to the character of those to whom I was to look for support—
nothing would, I think, have induced me to venture upon the
expeiiment I have made here. In our Committee we have
three sorts of persons—the pious, the professedly pious, and
those who neither practice nor profess piety. It may easily be
imagined that such an association occasions certain disquiet,
and must interfere most prejudicially with my ministrations.
My sermons are a constant cause of complaint. If I preach
against inconsistency, the sermon is said to be intended for this
particular person ; if I denounce slander, lying, uncharitable-
ness (common propensities here) or irreligion generally, it is a
t{ hit at somebody else j if worldliness and unchristian
gaiety, or Sabbath pleasuring (a common thing here), then i


intend some other person: as though it was either consistent
with my duty as a faithful minister, or calculated to do the
congregation any service, to preach against vices which the
people have not, or against practices they do not use. It were
better not to preach at all than to preach idly. I believe my
stay in this place is fast drawing to its close. The discussions
in our local town-committee are enough to overset it. It cannot
live with so many antagonistic influences actively at work.
I hope never again to put myself in the power ol a committee
comprised as this one is, partly of religious, and partly of irre-
ligious men; never again will I willingly place myself in the
hands of a committee of persons of different creeds, rank, tem-
per, and character ; nor will I ever again attempt the strictly
voluntary principle ; nor ever again trust to any simply verbal
agreements. It had been better for all parties if our relations
had been more definite, and our contract made in writing. One
of the members of the committee invited me to take tea with him,
and I did so. He entertained me with his own history, and
with that of his neighbours. This, in his own house, I was
unable altogether to prevent. But he afterwards told these
very persons that I had informed him of the very things he so
retailed to me ! As he is one of Uie “ praying men” of the
Wesleyans, I did not suspect him of treachery : but the pos-
session of a Wesleyan “ class ticket” is no guarantee of respec-
tability, honesty, and truthfulness any more than the possession
of a “ tickec-of-leave” is a proof of holiness. There is as much
faith to be put in one “ ticket” as in the other ; good Wesley-
ans like Mr Shoobridge, Mr McCormack, Mr Smith, &c., are
good Christians ; but they are few and far between. A good
Wesleyan is an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile.
But where is he to be found ? Here and there—not in the heart,
nor in the house of Davis of Sandy Bay.
There was an interesting meeting at the Government School-
room here, about the middle of the month. The school is
under the able superintendence of Mr. J. Salier, and the occasion
was the annual examination of the pupils. After a very credi-
table examination, the scholars, their parents, and friends took
tea together, and Mr Salier delighted the little ones with the
wonders of the magip lantern. Mr Salier wished me to address
them, and I did so, on some national peculiarity of North and
South America. The ungrateful Sandy Bay people are not
worthy of such a schoolmaster as Mr Salier; let us hope that
he will be able to teach their children to depart from the evil


ways of their parents, and to keep their hands from picking and
stealing, and their tongues from evil speaking, cursing and
swearing.
At the request of the Committee through their secretary,
Mr. Murray Burgess 1 lectured at the Mechanics’ Institute on
the “ Manners and Customs of the North American Indians.”
The 1 Advertiser ’ gave a lengthy report of it at the time. To
judge from the expressions of the audience, they must have
been well pleased. The subject was sufficiently interesting to
myself, for I long dwelt and labored among these people, as a
missionary of the Church of England.
The Synod of the Church of England was appropriately
opened by the administration of the Eucharist to its members,
on the 20th July, at the Cathedral, by the Bishop and Arch-
deacon Davies, at 10 a.m. The Synod met daily during the
Session, at the Temperance Alliance Rooms in Macquarie-street,
The business of the Session was commenced with prayer
and an address from the Bishop. His Lordship, after indicat-
ing the necessity for the Synod, adverted to the anticipated
business, and exhorted to the cultivation of a fitting spirit, which
would avoid harsh words and improper conflict, and to the con-
sideration of natural infirmities. Much time, of course, was
occupied in mere preliminaries The Synod is certainly com-
posed of the most respectable classes. Some dishonest and
immoral persons however are members of it. I observed that
nearly all the clergy of the colony attended, and that the dele-
gates generally, were not injudiciously selected. Several are
members of parliament, some are medical men, some barristers
in good repute, and several were country gentlemen of good
standing. The Chief Justice, Captain Fenton, Mr. Hone,
Mr. Wedge, Dr. Bedford, Dr. Butler, Mr. Chapman, Mr.
Loch, and Henty, are among the lay members.
The most important business of the Synod appeared to be to
frame a Bill for submission to Parliament, conferring powers on
the Church of England, as such in the Colony, which it does
not at present possess. It is proposed to confer authority
upon the Bishop, to convene an annual synod, competent to
deal with the affairs of the Church, in matters of patronage,
discipline, endowment, registration of members, &c. One
fundamental fact appeal’s to me to have been overlooked.
The Parliament has no power to frame a law which
in many of these matters, shall in future bind the
Bishop and his successors; nor can any Bishop


bind his successors. The Bishop derives his authority
from the Queen’s Letters Patent, which give him an
unlimited authority. It appears to me simply absurd to ask
the Government to give the Synod such power in Church
patronage that virtually it would compel the Bishop to licence
whom it may please to nominate. The Government may give
what power it can, and the Synod may lawfully exercise such
derived authority; but to what extent would it go after all f .
By the constitution of the Church of England, and the
wording of the Letters Patent, whatever the Synod may
determine is nevertheless subject to the Bishop’s veto, or
approval. Suppose the Synod should appoint the Rev. Mr. A,
or Mr. B. to the cure of Evandale or St. George’s, that
appointment can, nevertheless, not be fully carried into effect
against the Bishop’s will. His Lordship may refuse to licence
the appointee without assigning any reason for the refusal, and
no Tasmanian power can bring him to account. Until the
Acts of the Home Government, under which Colonial Bishops
are appointed, shall be materially amended or repealed, such a
scheme as that of the Synod must be absolutely inoperative.
It should be remembered that the extent of the power possessed
by a Colonial Bishop over a Clergyman in his Diocese con-
ferred by the 39 Geo. 111., c. 20, and 8 Will. IV., c. 19, is
already very large. A Missionary Clergyman is entirely
dependent on the Bishop’s favor. I know of more than one
instance, too, in which that power has been sadly misused.
The Bishop’s agents in London advertise for Clergymen, and
some are persuaded to resign curacies for the purpose of
proceeding to the Colonies. Say, for instance, the Clergyman
determines to proceed to Nova Scotia or to Canada; New-
foundland or Barbadoes; the Cape or Australia; he is
asked by the Colonial Agent—“ Do you promise to place
yourself at the disposal of the Right Reverend the Lord
Bishop of N. or C. (as the case may be) as to location,
stipend, and all other ecclesiastical matters ?” The candidate
taking it for granted, probably, that every Bishop is a Christian
and a Gentleman, gives the requisite answer. The matters of
outfit, passage-money, and the time of departure are then
arranged. Meanwhile, the candidate’s testimonials are pre-
pared, signed, by the Clergy, and countersigned by the Bishop
or Bishops. He is then required to sign a Declaration to
the effect that he is willing to proceed to the Colony of N. or
C., to place himself entirely at the disposal of the Bishop of


that Diocese as to his location, stipend, &c., and to obey him
in all things. He leaves England, with a wife and family,
perhaps, and in due time arrives at his destination. Of
course the Bishop has heard of his coming, and is prepared
to receive him. He visits the Bishop, and is desired to lodge
in town for a little while until the Bishop can make up his
mind in reference to his sphere of labour. Further interviews
take place, in the course of which the Bishop naturally enough
satisfies himself, as to the temporal dependence or independence
of the individual, as to his clerical acquaintances in Europe, and
whether they agree with the Bishop in his views of divinity,
as to the nature and extent of the candidate’s reading and
what books he prefers. Is he a correspondent of any news-
paper or periodical publication ? What are his own view’s upon
primary doctrines ? In two or three cases I have known a
Tractarian Bishop deliver an address to this effect to the candi-
date, an evangelical or puritan churchman—“ Sir, —I have
decided upon giving you a license to labor as a missionary at
the Mission of B.D.V. Your income will be so much, paid
partly by the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel, partly
by myself. You are not at liberty to draw upon the Society
until I countersign your Bill of Exchange, and make a declara-
tion at the foot of it, 'that you have done all things to
my satisfaction. Without this declaration and counter-
signature on my part, the Treasurer of the the Society will not
honor your draft. You will now go to my Registrar and draw
your licence ; but first make the following Declaration to me.”
An oath is then administered, and the clergyman promises all
canonical obedience. The Registrar then issues the licence,
receiving his fee, and the clergyman is required again to attend
the Bishop before proceeding definitively to his station. To
his great astonishment, he then receives instructions to the
following effect. 1 have a copy of some such now by me—
“|Mr. So and So. 1 learned in our late interviews, that you
and I differ widely on some matters of doctrine and polity. I
am one of the last to require any of my clergy to preach, as his
own, any doctrines of which he disapproves or does not cordially
believe; but lam also a Bishop, and have promised to be faith-
ful to Gcd and the Church, and cannot allow doctrines I dis-
approve to be taught in my diocese by any of my clergy. 1
must have my own doctrines taught even hy those who privately
differ with me, as well as by those who do not . But you
cannot conscientiously preach ray doctrine as your own ;


1 will therefore relieve you of all responsibility in
reference to the subject matter of your preaching
by making you my own deputy. You will therefore regard
yourself as my Spokesman, delivering not your own message,
but the message of your master and Bishop I haye here two
volumes arid several miscellaneous sermons, which I have
marked for you. They contain my views, and not yours, and
you are consequently not responsible for them. You are to
deliver them to your congregation during Advent, at Christmas,
Epiphany and during Lent, as directed in the I able ot Rules I
now hand you. The following Rules you will also obey . In
your visitation of the sick, use only the service for such
occasions appointed in the Prayer Book. In your private
devotions you will use such or such a volume twice a day; reading
prayers in your Church every morning and evening, as directed
in the Book of Common Prayer, whether there be a congre-
gation present or not. There are certain alms and fees to be
collected at least four times a year, and remitted to the Bishop
within one month after their receipt. “As the Clergy in England,
so run these instructions —“ go forward and make their claim
to tithes in an emphatical manner, so I charge you to go to
your flock who receive the benefit of your functions, and
make your claims according to their circumstances, and
the number of their families. Ask from masters so much,
from servants so much, for children so much. As Surgeons
claim their fees for atttending to bodily ailment, 1 exhort
you to make like claim for attending to the things of
their souls—and as the Surgeons withhold their medicine and
attendance from those who refuse to pay, I advise you to follow
their example. * * * * This was in the year 1846. Ihe
Bishop s behaviour was considered tyrannical and even cruel,
but the clergyman was helpless. Some clergymen were punished
by the Bishop’s withholding his countersignature and declara-
tion to their bill, so that they could not get any salary ; with-
drawing their licence, so that they could not preach, and re u-
sing to countersign their testimonials, so that they could not
remove to another diocese. Mr Bouverie’s Clergy Relief Act,
1850, has limited the arbitrary power oj the Bishops in these
respects, but it leaves them yet enough and to spare. Before
the passing of that Act, the legal maxim was, “ Once a priest
always a priest j” and a priest of the Church of Englan , w a
ever his views might be, or have become, was corape e o
remain such. A Bishop then would refuse to give a clergyman


employment in the Church, or permit him to obtain
employment out of it. In the then barbarous state of
the law he could imprison his refractory clergy.
Such cases as those of Noel, Shore and others, however,
compelled an alteration. In the cases to which I have alluded
above, an appeal was made to the Society for the Propagation
of the Gospel, but could not be entertained ; a similar result
waited upon an attempt to move the Archbishop of Canter-
bury, and the Secretary of State for the Colonies. It is for-
tunate for Tasmania that no such extremes in divinity have
ever been practised by the Bishop: but it is, nevertheless, as
well to know, that no power conferred upon the Synod can re-
sult in a diminution of his power. No act of the Synod can
bind the Bishop or his successors, which is, or may be deemed
to be contrary to the spirit of any canon, or of any portion
of the rubric. The Bishop may justly say, in opposition to any
sub-act, that he only consented to recognise the acts of the
Synod, in so far as they accorded with the rules of the Church
of which he is a Guardian. In matters of patronage, it will be
found very difficult to abrogate the Episcopal authority. In
England, there are the Ecclesiastical Courts, and
an Appeal from them to the Privy Council, by
which the arbitrary power of the Bishop’s is con-
trollable, In the Colonies everything is subject to the
Bishops’ approval. In the one case, if a Bishop refuse to
licence a Clergyman presented by a Patron, there are means by
which his refusal can be overruled. In the Colonies, on the
contrary, there is no remedy, if the Bishop refuse to licence a
Clergyman presented by the Synod’s Committee of Patronage.
The Committee can only recommend, it cannot enforce.
To show the truth of this assertion of mine, I quote the
following passage from the printed report of a Meeting of the
Finance Committee of the Synod, held in Hobart Town,
October 11, 1858 : Mr. Chapman in the chair. A letter from
the Bishop was read, in which his Lordship expressed willing-
ness to give his provisional sanction to the action of the
Parochial Boards, viewing them as 4 recommending bodies,’ in
consonance with what is regarded as the spirit and intention of
the Synod. This is a deep expression of his Lordship. It
involves shrewd thought; it implies more than inexperienced
Laymen and young Clergymen are aware of.
But the due administration of the State Aid is perhaps after
all the most difficult pioblem. Among the abuses of the


Church of England, or the perplexities with which she is
environed, there is none greater than this. In Victoria, where
the State Aid is large, its administration entails numerous evils.
In 1855, in three districts of that Colony, there were no less
than twenty-three law suits in four months, instituted by the
inferior against the superior Clergy, for the recovery of salary.
Incumbents, in the receipt of handsome salaries from the
Government, in addition to a profitable surrogacy, employ
poorly paid Curates to do the greater portion of their
work. The Incumbent demanding from the Curate an
account of the trifling sums which he might receive from the
people in acknowledgement of his services, and to which the In-
cumbent could have no right, occasioned disputes about money
matters amongthe publishers of peace, requiring to be determined
by appeal to juries of publicans, labourers, and other coarse
persons. State-aid as there administered, fosters the growth of
the curate system, a cur se in England. Colonists might much
more profitably study to avoid old abuses. It encourages a
clerical pride. The State-paid minister arrogates a superiority
over those, even in his own communion, who derive their subsis-
tence from the Missionary Societies, or from the freewill offer-
ings of the people. Most certainly he does so, over his depen-
dant curate. It is the occasion of a sin very much resembling
simony. I knew of more than one instance of clergymen mort-
gaging their State-aid and pledging ante-dated abstracts. I
have known of such a thing as this too : A is a candidate for
Holy Orders and B an incumbent having the patronage of a
gaol in his gift worth about £2OO per anuum. Ais inoucted
and does all the duties, receiving say £l2O, while B nets £BO
per year for his friendly offices. In Victoria, it also leads to a
serious breach of the agreement under which a person enters
into Holy Orders. A clergyman duly ordained possessing the
requisite credentials, is properly eligible to any appointment
which may be offered him by any patron of livings at home or
abroad. In England, as a rule, when a clergyman is presented
to a living, he presents his certificates and testimonials to the
Bishop of the diocese, is licensed and inducted, performs
his duties and receives his emoluments. In Victoria this is
by no means the case. There the Bishop nominates the Clergy.
During the last week of the' month, I visited forty-three
houses and cottages in the different parts of the district for the
last time. As the mischievous dissensions sown among those
from whom alone I could derive support, have prevented any


temporal provision for me, I cannot any any longer labour here.
Hitherto having no stated salary, I have been drawing my sub-
sistence chiefly from my own limited means. I cannot do this
any longer. I have not received 40/. for my services during seven
months. The poor people seem to regret my departure, and
express themselves grateful to me for the preaching, visita-
tion and good advice they have had during my stay. They are
sadly ignorant. I have earnestly impressed on them the duty
ol sending their children to the school. However, I have
finished my course here, but not with joy. I shall continue to
preach at the Grange (Mr. Cartwright’s), where I have genuine
friends, until I leave the colony. “ A clergyman must be fool-
ish to remain idle to please a Bishop, whose caprice or prejudice
will not allow him to patronize him and give him employment,
when others are willing to employ him and hear his preaching.
When a clergyman gets hearers let him preach whether the
Bishop licenses him or not.” My testimonials from year to
year have been signed by well known clergymen among whom
were the Rev. William Howells, Rev. Edward Bickersteth,
Rev, Josiah Pratt, Rev. William Jowett, Rev. C. Smally, Rev.
W. Cams, Rev. W, Marsh, Rev. W. Cadman, Rev. G. Coul-
cher, Rev. William Morgan, Rev. R. P. Jones, Rev. Dr Cotton,
the Dean of Bangor and others. These various testimonials
were countersigned by the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishops
of Winchester, Oxford, Ely, London, Peterborough, Bangor,
and LlandaflT. The testimonials with which I came out to Aus
tralia, can be read by any person who has a right to know the
contents of them.
August. —Reviewing ray ministry in Tasmania. I find the
subjects of my sermons chiefly such as these. The nature and
necessity of an union with Christ ; the preciousness and excel-
lence of God’s word ; the characteristics of regeneration and
conversion ; justification only by faith ; the Law and the Gospel
contrasted; the necessity, duty, privilege and advantage of
prayer; Christ an all-sufficient saviour ; the suitableness of a
full Christ for empty souls ; the believer’s safety ; the duties of
Christianity ; Christ the good shepherd ; the Divine Temple;
growth in Grace; the history, doctrine, experience, and
practice of Paul; Lot’s wife; the fall of man and the
corruption of human nature ; Obadiah, an example to the
young; Christ’s second advent; Daniel as an example; the
characteristics of true piety ; the mischiefs of Sabbath desecra-
tion ; death ; the value of youthful piety ; grace, day by day ;


the sufficiency of Christ; the simplicity of Christianity ; the bar-
ren fie* tree ; filial duty; earthen vessels ; the house not made
with hands; Noah's sons; Cain and Abel; scripture characters;
&c., See., &c ~ besides many others on topics and texts suggested
by circumstances- . , c , ,
I close my extracts here : not that my journal of events and
thoughts occasioned by them is exhausted, but because I have
said my say. I wished to throw some light upon some of the
questions which have been touched upon, more or less, in these
pages, and I think I have done so. I hope I have said some-
thing which others may put to good account.
Perhaps I had also a personal motive in printing a record of
my history in this colony. If any such appear, I cheei fully
acknowledge it. Those who will the more easily attribute such
a motive as my chief one in this publication will, along with it,
I am sure, be sensible of one thing more ; the necessity laid upon
me to publish the facts of the case. As I have found it needful to
censure, my desire was to do so delicately, and not m any
manner calculated to rouse hostile feelings ; but this was im-
possible. I could not suppress the truth when it was needful
to tell it; but I have not said all I justly might have said, nor
have I unnecessarily obtruded any one’s faults upon the reader.
There are many incidents, the memory of which can never
pass from me, but which I do not purpose to divulge, since they
are personal offences. I carry no ill-will away with me. I wish
I could hope that I leave none behind.
To prevent mistakes as to the parties alluded to, 1 have
honestly published the names of the persons, as wed as the
dates of the deeds committed by them. I have done so in the
colony, in the place where the events recorded occurred ;
I have published them before leaving the neighborhood, tnat
the accused may have an opportunity to reply to them.
I reserve for a future publication, a Mirror of the scenes and
speeches in the Tasmanian Parliament House, the Law Courts,
the Government Offices, the City Corporation the lasmamaa
Magistrates, the Hobart Town Aldermen, (Lipscombe, &c.)
the”religious meetings at Sandy Bay, at which Lipscombe,
Friend, t)avis, Espie, Large, Dickenson, Jackson, Heyward,
Mrs. Friend, Mrs. Evans, Miss Evans, Miss Manning, and
Mrs. Salier took parts; Lipscombe’s apology for violence on the
“26th of July the history and manners of some of the las-
raanian Aldermen, the state of lodging-houses the bushrangers,
murderers, thieves and robbers captured m 185«, the debates


on the State-aid question, the convicts, the deaths and funerals
of prisoners, the public-houses in Tasmania, the immorality of
all classes, the'schoolmasters and the schoolmistresses in the
colony, the religious denominations in the town and country
districts, the fighting magistrates, the coarse members of Par-
liament, the sound and unsound, the moral and immoral clergy,
the offsprings of the old convicts, and of the Norfolk Islanders,
the state of the prisons and other matters. As my notes of
these matters may serve to shew the state of society in the colony,
I purpose to publish them in my intended work on Tasmania.
If a clergyman is so called tothe work of the ministry by Christ
Himself, and qualified by the Holy Ghost, no human power
can stop him, or prevent him from preaching the Gospel. The
sceptic may spurn, the world may scorn, bishops may inhibit
and censure, presbyteries may condemn, conferences may thwart,
but he will preach the Gospel if he ever received a commission
from God to do so. Every minister has a commission, or he
has not. If he has you may as well try to stop the sun in run-
ning its course, as to stop him from preaching the Gospel. A
Bishop’s endorsement, commonly called “ Licence,” is very
well as a matter of human recognition, but a minister moved by
the Holy Ghost, and called to the work of his master, can preach
without it. Whitfield, Wesley, Owen, Harris, Rowlands, Wil-
liams, Beridge and other reformers of the last century preached
as well without it as other clergymen did with it. Those
Ministers just named had no Licence from a Bishop,
yet they preached the Gospel, The Christian Ministry
is entirely a matter between God and the minister himself.
As a matter of secular or pecuniary arrangement, it may
also be a matter between a minister and his congrega-
tion. But the spiritual point of it is a matter entirely between
God and the preacher himself. It is the duty of the congre-
gation or the hearers to hear the gospel from his lips, and search
the scriptures to see whether his doctrine is correct. It is their
duty to name the precept that they consider him short in; and
also to prove by confronting witnesses and irresistible evidence
that he is short in it. The Australians often make assertions
without proofs. They assert that a clergyman is a bad man,
but they seldom prove that he is so.
Circumstances over which I had no control have obliged me
to defer entering on the above matters for the present; and to
issue this pamphlet as an introduction to my future volume.
Geo. Bcatley, Printer, 73 & 74, Collins street, Hobart Town, Tasmania.




jAfy ■
Bieuo
pi 4*\6C>
Ni c o^
/
/




