



JRINTID AT THE “ GAZBUb” CTfICI, GIOROE-lIIIBT, BYDNIY.


3Ml©f SUSIE 3 !! ©FfUBSHSf®
CHILDREN:
m ¥ a 3L a m
LONG RESIDENT IN
NEW SOUTH WALES.
.! r
i I
Every creature and every thing affords me an opportunity
to raise my thoughts to the Creator ; and excites me to bless
the goodness of him, who has given to earthly things, the
power to please and cheer my soul. If even in this world,
God is so admirable in his works, what will he be in a future
state?”— Sturm.
PRINTED AT THE “ GAZETTE” OFfICE, LOWER GEORGE-SIREET.


PREFACE
TO MASTER REGINALD GIPPS,
SON OF HIS EXCELLENCY SIB GEORGE GIPPS,
Governor of New Sowtl, Wales and its Dependencies,
AND OF LADY GIPPS,
This little work is dedicated by permis-
sion, and the author hopes the incidents it con-
tains may afford him some little entertainment
in the perusal: its principal merit is the truth of
the subjects narrated; the accounts of the melan-
choly shipwrecks being drawn from printed
sources; and perhaps it may claim some trifling
merit also from being the first work written in
the Colony expressly for Children.
The Author is fully aware how greatly the
value of these little Books will be enhanced by
the high and kind patronage of Master Regi-
nald Gipps, to whom she begs to subscribe
herself his
Truly obliged,
And most obedient humble servant,
And well-wislier,
THE AUTHOR.
Sydney , New South Wales, \
29 th October , j


CONTENTS.
Extraordinary Sounds 1
Wreck of the Charles Eaton r . 22
History of the Swallows 85
The Purple Beetle 91
Joseph Forbes 101
Port Essington 1 137
Timor 158
Sea Shells 161
Loss of the Stirling Castle 170
Visit to an Iron Mine 184-
Copper Mine 190
Anecdotes of the Aborigines of New South Wales.... 197"
Lines written during a Storm in the Bay of Biscay..,. 215


EXTRAORDINARY SOUNDS.
Mrs. Saville engaged at her needle.
Clara, \
Emma, f Amusing themselves by Draw-
Julius and ing.
Lucy, j
Emma. —How very extraordinary those tre-
mendous noises were Mamma, which we heard
at the Coolondal Mountain; while you and my
brother were from home. You cannot think
how alarmed we were! It sounded like the
loudest cannon: and then there was such a
splash in the River; it seemed as if some of the
rocks had given way: and yet, when you re-
turned home and went with us to examine the
place, there did not appear to be any change in
them.


Was it not very strange, Mamma ?
Mrs. s. —lt was my love. The rocks cer
tainly did not look as if they had been disturbed
for ages.
Clara —Did you ever hear of any similar
occurrence, Mamma ?
Mrs. S, —I have. And in this country such
sounds, have been heard several times.
Julius. —Oh ! do tell us all about it, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —What little I know about the matter
I shall be happy to relate to you, my love.
A Gentleman was telling me sometime ago,
of an extraordinary circumstance of the kind,
which took place at Yass. I will endeavour to
repeat it, in his own words.
“ On my way to our Sheep Stations, in the
year 1833, I passed a night at the residence of
the hospitable Mr. Hamilton liume, at Yass.
While we were engaged in conversation, in the
Evening, we were surprised by the apparent
report of musketry, as if a smart fire of
five-and-twenty guns was kept up, near the
house. We hastened out, supposing the Mounted
Police had come to the spot, and were engaged
with Bushrangers.
The evening was dark and we could discern
nothing, though the firing still continued; but,


it now appeared ascending into the air higher
and higher, till it gradually ceased, as if those
who were firing had ascended as they fired their
muskets.
We remained a short time listening with awe;
wondering what this strange Phenomenon could
protend.
All was still. After expressing our astonish-
ment, we withdrew within the door way; when
Mr. Hume related a similar Phenomenon, which
had occurred during an exploring journey
which he took with Capt. Sturt.”
They were on their return from an expedition
by the Castlereagh River, and had encamped.
Mr. Hume and Captain Sturt were tracing
the Chart, which was laid on the ground, when
they were startled by what appeared to be the
report of a cannon at, about four or five miles
distance.
They consulted, and all agreed that it was
the report of a gun ; but thej differed as to the
direction it came from. Captain Sturt and Mr.
Hume thought it came from the North-west;
but they had been so busily occupied with the
Map at the time, that they could not be certain.
They however sent a man up a tree immediately
but nothing unusual was to be seen;


Clara. —Do you know what description of
country it was, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —They described it as flat on all
sides, and thickly wooded.
Emma. — I'o you think there were Rocks
near, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —l can give no information on that
subject, my dear. But they relate as a remark-
able fact, that not a stone or pebble was picked
up during the expedition, on any of the plains
and after leaving Mount Harris for the Castle-
reagh, the only Rock-formation discovered, was
a small freestone tract near the Darling River.
There was not a pebble to be found, either in
the Castlereagh River, or in the Creeks leading
into it.
Julius. —How unlike the Shoalhaven: we
have pebbles of every size and description.
Lucy. —Oh, yes! Some are so large and flat
that you used to call them your Dampers, Julius.
Clara. —What time in the day did the report
occur, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —About three in the afternoon, my
dear.
The weather Mas remarkably fine. Not
breath of air was to be felt.


Clara. —The day when we heard similar
sounds was also free from wind ; but the weather
was misty and rainy.
I think it was about 2 o’Clock, when we
heard the nosie. It began with just such a
sound as is made by pulling the trigger of a gun*
only, of course, much louder. Then an explo-
sion, as if a mighty cannon had vent the rocks ;
and they actually seemed rolling into the River,
and forcibly falling on its pebbly bottom.
We were so terrified that we ran to Mrs.
Hefron, to ask her what it could be.
She could give us no information on the sub-
ject. Hefron thought some of the large Rocks
must have given way and hurled down others
in their fall into the River; but you know this
did not appear to be the case.
j Emma. —What did Captain Sturt and Mr.
Hume think when they heard the report,
Mamma?
Mrs. S.—At first they thought that Govern-
ment mindful of their too probable sufferings,
had sent a Vessel to their assistance, and this
was one of the Ship’s Guns; but when this was
found to be delusive, they confess, though it
made a deep impression on them, it must for
ever remain a mystery.


Julius. —Did you ever hear such sounds
accounted for, Mamma, in any way?
Mrs. S. —I have, my dear Boy. I can tell
you some of the causes; but it would be pre-
sumptuous in me, with my contracted knowledge
in these matters, to fix on any of them, as the
actual causes of the noises we have been des-
Clara. —Nevertheless, be so good as to tell
us some of them, if you please, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —You remember reading of the Statue
of Memnon ?
Julius. —Yes, yes! Mamma. Belzoni took
so much interest in it.
Mrs. S. —He did, my dear. At sunrise ex-
traordinary sounds were heard to proceed from
this Statue, and also from a Mountain in Car-
nac.
Emma. —l am glad you have told us of this,
dear Mamma, we took so much pleasure in
reading of poor Belzoni’s persevering discove-
ne%in Carnac.
Clara. —Can you describe the kind of sounds
heard there, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —They were snapping, twanging
sounds, like the breaking of a gigantic harp
string, and are supposed to proceed from ex-


pansion and contraction, the Mountain and
Statue being composed of a mixed kind of stone,
though they are generally called granite.
Emma. —Our Mountains contain a great
variety of stone, do they not, Mamma? How
often we thought we had discovered a vein of
marble!
Julius. —And how we tried to burn it into
lime!
Mrs. S. —Lime would be a treasure in that
quarter, where nothing but shell lime can be
procured, and that from a distance.
Clara. —What were the other causes of
strange sounds, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —Sir John Herschell (who has stu-
died the subject) considers where extensive
caverns exist which communicate with each
other, or with the atmosphere, by means of small
openings, considerable differences of tempera-
ture may occasion currents of air to pass through
these openings, with sufficient rapidity to pro-
duce loud vibrations. Sir John Herschell is
also of opinion that subterraneous steam may
be produced, which, in the process of forming
and condensing, would occasion loud noises;
but which, if either of these causes produced


the gun-like sounds that we have been describ-
ing, we, my dear children, must leave to wiser
s/s iJSlds to determine.
Julius. —So we must, dear Mamma, for they
are more difficult to understand than I thought
they would be.
Mrs S. —l lately read of a very extraordi-
nary circumstance which happened in England
not many years ago.
Lucy. —What was it, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —lt was at a Quarry belonging to
Dr. Hughes, in Toxteth Park.
Whilst the workmen were at their work they
saw a great mass of rock, with at least one hun-
dred tons of earth upon it, heave and rise at
least six inches, and then it immediately settled
down as it was before.
Clara. —Did any proofs remain of what had
occurred ?
Mrs. S. —Yes; the rocks were cracked in
many places ; and there were other signs of the
convulsions which had taken place.
Emma. —l am glad of that, or some people
would have doubted the truth of the workmen’s
report.
Mrs. S. —Most probably they would; but


the subject was to be investigated by a very
able geologist of Liverpool. /
Clara. —l suppose you have not heard what
his opinion was, Mamma?
Mrs. 8. —No, my dear, I have heard nothing
further about it.
Clara. —The country is very magnificent all
about those Mountain Ranges.
I dare say there are many wonderful things
yet undiscovered. I should like to spend many
w r eeks exploring in the neighbourhood.
Julius. —So should I ; I would take my
spears and try to spear some of those beautiful
birds for Mamma to have stuffed.
Mrs. S. —Thank you, my dear boy ; I have
no doubt, if it were possible for us to travel by
slow stages, about those Mountains, all the way
to Wollongong, it would afford us much delight,
as well as information. We should find abun-
dance of subjects for our pencils.
I have often thought that Mr. and Mrs. Gould,
the naturalists, must spend their time very plea-
santly ; though, of course, they must frequently
suffer from fatigue and bad weather.
Emma. —What beautiful flowers there are
that no one sees.


Mrs. S. —What does the poet Gray say on
that subject, Emma?
Emma. —Oh ! I remember, Mamma.
Full many a gem of purest ray serenp.
The dark unfathomed caves of ocean bear ;
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness in the desert ai:.'
Clara. —l really think a great deal of gold
could be collected in that part of the country ;
do not you, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —I do, indeed, my love. I feel con-
vinced that there is much, in a very pure state,
though in very sm >ll particles. How easily I
could bend it round the point of a penknife.
Julius. —Of course there is some way of
separating it from the sand, or pebbles, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —Yes, my dear, the process is well
known, though above our power.
Emma. —How sparkling it looked when the
sun shone npon it, Mamma.
Clara. —Those immense Rocks at the tops
of the Mountains fill the mind with wonder and
awe! the large round holes in them look just
as if cannons had perforated them.
Julius. — I do admire that fine scenery so
much! Look which way you will there is such
a mass of Mountains hovering one above the


other, and then the magnificent Bobbatoo Moun-
tain overtopping them all! I long to be a great
painter, to take a view of the scene.
Mrs. S. —That would certainly be very de-
lightful ; but very difficult, I should think, even
to a talented artist.
Emma. —l dare say Salvator Rosa would
have tried.
Mrs. S. —Very likely, dear Emma, and I
dare say he would have succeeded in making a
charming picture.
Julius. —Are not the Booroowangs a species
of palm, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —Yes, they are a dwarf palm, and
very handsome plants, I think. They bear a
beautiful fruit resembling the pine-apple inform,
but composed of a cluster of nuts: these nuts
have a husk, or covering of bright scarlet; they
grow in pairs supported on a solid stem of a
dark green color, which contrasts pleasingly
with the red; the whole grow around a thick
stalk, and hang drooping on either side the
palm.
Clara. —What a magnificent fruit it looks!
It is a pity that it is poisonous.
Julius. —It cannot be poisonous to animals,
Mamma. I have frequently found their little


sly hoards in small caves among the rocks, and
plenty of the shells after they had eaten the
nuts.
Mrs. S. —Providence has, no doubt, provided
them as the winter food of such animals as in-
habit those regions where they grow, there
being few berries when the Booroowang is in
perfection, which is about July. But the abo-
riginal inhabitants also make use of them as
food. Clara, oblige us with a description of
their mode of preparing them.
Clara. —They roast the nuts, which removes
the husks, and then place them on flat stones in
which they have hollowed out places to receive
them, and pound them with round stones, this
cracks the shells, which are not thick, or it re-
moves them as may happen ; it also bruises or
cracks the nuts; they next place them on bun-
dles of coarse grass, and put them in a running
stream for twenty-four hours, this removes the
poison and renders them a wholesome and
palatable food.
Mrs. S. —Thank you, my dear; you have
given us a very good description. Naturalists
call the Booroowang the Zunica Palm.
Emma. —Then there are the Cabbage Trees,
the Bangalees, the Tree Fern, and the Booroo-


wang, all Palms and all beautiful; but very
different from each other.
Julius. —The Natives find the Bangalee very
useful. You know their little baskets are bits
of bark of the Bangalee, tied up at each end;
and their canoes are just the same, only larger.
Lucy. How droll they look paddling along
so fast. Their little oars look like fishes’ fins.
Mrs. S. —So they do, Lucy.
Julius. —Mamma, we ought not to overlook
the fine Fig Tree.
Mrs. S . —lndeed, we ought not, Julius. It is
not only a splendid, but a very remarkable tree.
The stem, or trunk of the tree appears to be
enveloped in drapery. The Red Cedar is also
a handsome tree ; and so is the Sassafras. I
think the smell of the bark very agreeable ; and
you know it is used medicinally.
Clara. —What extraordinary trees the Nettle-
trees are, Mamma.
Julius. — Mamma and I were stung
by brushing the leaves, as we rode along.
Emma. —Was it very painful, Mamma?
Mrs. S. — Much more so than the common
Nettle; otherwise, just the same tingling sensa-
tion.
Clara . —l admire the Parasitical Plants grow-


ing on the rocks and trees so much ; they look
so Tropical.
Lucy , -Do you remember the beautiful deli-
cate white blossoms of one which grew on a
large Rock? It smelt so delightful.
Mrs. S. —lt did, my dear little Lucy. I re-
member we were unwilling to leave it in the
Wilds; but could not carry it.
Emma.— lt is very strange that Sea Shells
should be embedded in Stones, on these Moun-
tains, and in the Neighbourhood. Once when
we broke a bit of Sandstone Rock, there was a
Cockle Shell distinctly seen in the middle of
the Stone.
Lucy. —And I showed Mamma a Schollop-
shell in a Stone, as we came up the Worren-
derri Mountain.
Mrs, S, —In my opinion, every thing confirms
the Tradition of the Blacks, that these Moun-
tains have once been under water. No doubt
the Sea. The Rocks seem undermined and
crumbling away ; with evident marks of having,
at some distant period, been subject to the fric-
tion of tlie waves, iand all those extraordinary
excavations were most probably produced by
the same cause. The Shells we saw are called
Fossil Shells.


Clara.— l have seen Oyster Shells also in
the Stones.
Mrs. S. —The Bones of Animals no longer
inhabitants of this Country, have been found in
a Fossil State.
Emma.— Do you know where they were found,
Mamma ?
Mrs. S.— ln a Cavern, near Wellington
Valley.
Julius.— How I should have liked to have
found them.
Mrs. S.—lt required much perseverance and
courage I should imagine; for they were found
in a large deep Cavern by Mr. Rankin, of Bath-
urst, after he had penetrated through several
smaller Caverns.
Julius.— l should not have cared for that,
Mamma 1
Mrs. S.— Perhaps not, my dear. I know
Gentlemen are brave, and do not indulge in fears
like Ladies. I remember "a little Gentleman
whose name I will not mention, who bravely
rode his horse through a deep Salt Water River,
while his Mamma was afraid to venture, till this
little Gentleman had returned more than once,
to re-assure her.


Lucy.— Oh I know who it was, Mamma.
The Gentleman was about eight years old.
Aye, Mamma.
Mrs. S. —Nay. Lucy we will leave you to
guess who I mean.
Clara. —How did they know the Bones be-
longed to a description of Animals, no longer
in existence in this Island?
Mrs. S. —From their size. They had belonged
to Animals much larger then any ever seen in
this Country. Possibly they were Antideluvian
Remains. That is, existed before the Deluge.
Fossil or Petrified Woods, have been found
about the Hunter’s River Districts; some bear-
ing the exact appearance of the Stem of a
newly sawn off. In others the bark could be
distinctly seen.
Clara.— What kind of trees were they
Mamma ?
Mrs. Principally Pines and Cypresses.
These petrified portions of trees were found over
an extent of more than 80 miles.
Emma. —How extraordinary that is. Were
they all the same kind of stone, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. — No, my clear! they differed
greatly. Some were Slatey ; others Limestone ;
and some when broken, were found to contain


Chrystals or Spars; Iron pyrites; and Chal-
cedony of a blueish white colour.
Emma. —How beautiful! I should much like
to obtain a few specimens.
Mrs. S. —There is a great quantity of this
Petrified Wood found about the junction of the
Hunter, with the Goulburn River. Some of the
specimens were so hard as to admit of a beau-
tiful polish. Some were found in a perpendi-
cular position, and of great height; others em-
bedded in Sandstone.
Fossils are also found among the Coal.
Lucy. —What curious Stones we found on the
beach, at Swan Lake, Mamma. You told us to
try if they would float on the water; and they
did, just as if they had been cork, instead of
stone.
Mrs. S. Those were pieces of Pumice Stone,
and are volcanic productions.
Swan Lake appears to me to have been the
Crater of a volcano many years age. Its agi-
tated appearance, the desolation and barrenness
that reigns around, fill the mind with an indes-
cribable sensation of awe. At least, these were
my feelings.
Emma.—l felt just the same, Mamma; and


you know, Lucy, was so affected by sea sickness,
that she could not stand.
Julius. —What swamps there are at such dis-
ances from the Lake. Do you think it ever
overflows so far, Mamma 1
3lrs. S'. —I have no doubt that at times it is
greatly agitated, and boils and bubbles over
with violence. I account thus, for those immense
patches of land covered with large trees, all
dead; and that, not only close, but at a great
distance also, while others, evidently of later
growth,* are green and vigorous, not only near
the Lake, but in patches between the dead forest.
The salt water merely overflowing would not
cause this.
Clara. Oh! no Mamma. The Wannandian
which is a salt water River, overflows a great
deal; but the vegetation is not destroyed by it.
You know St. George’s Basin overflows and
makes it verv swampy in places, without however,
appearing to do any harm to the trees about.
Mrs. S. —The overflowing of Swan Lake*
when it causes such destruction, must I think,
be occasioned by some Volcanic eruption be-
neath, which forces it out of its usual bounds,
in a heated state; throwing it with force to a


considerable distance, and literally scalding the
trees. This would account for the barrenness,
which threw such a gloom over our spirits.
Julius. —What numbers of Ducks there were
on the Lake and flying about it.
Lucy.— I saw them keep flying out of the
Fresh Water Creek. I dare say they make
their nests among the reeds on the banks,
Mamma.
Mrs. S.~ Very likely, my love.
Emma. —'There were a great many Black
Swans too, and that lovely Pelican! was it not
beautiful, Mamma?
Mi's. S. —It was, dear! and so large, that at
first I thought it was the white sail of a little
Boat.
Julius.— (Laughing.) So did I, Mamma. I
think it must have been stretching and flapping
its great wings. It was at the opposite side of
the Lake when we saw it firsr.
Clara. —We had a better view of one at St-
George’s Basin. I saw its pouch distinctly.
Lucy. — I think it was fishing then.
Clara. —Are ther.e any Volcanoes in this
Country, Mamma, that are burning now?
Mrs. S. —That of Mount Wingen. The Rev.
Mr. Wilton has visited it several times, at dis-


tant periods ; and found it always burning.
He represents it as increasing greatly! He col-
lected sulphur, lava, &c. He also found pieces
of agate, on the burning Mountain.
Emma.— l should like to visit Mount Wingen;
Do you think we ever shall, Mamma?
Mrs. S.— At present there appears little proba-
bility of it, my love; but our future destiny is
so veiled in obscurity, that it is quite impossible
to say, with truth, what any of us will do at a
distant day. One of you may probably become
a resident of Newcastle, or its Neighbourhood;
and may form one of a party, to visit the Burn-
ing Mountain.
Clara.—l think the Grass-tree, of which the
Natives make their Spears very handsome, when
in full vigour, and that kind which grows with
a stem, still handsomer.
Julius. —Some of them have two or three
stems to them. How curiously they separate
in rings when they are decayed and you break
them; and they are so full of maggots. Ido
not like the Spear part though, they are so hard
and thick; and the blossom part so low down
that it leaves little besides, and they are so often
crooked.


Lucy. —Do you remember, Julius, how many
grew hooked round, and we used to play with
them for Shepherds’ crooks.
Julius. —Oh ! yes, when we are near where
they grow, I am always getting them for walk-
ing-sticks or something, they are so light and
pleasant to play with.
Emma. —Well, of all the trees, I still admire
the Tea Tree, with its little white blossoms,
and its delicate, though ragged, bark. 1 know
it is a great favorite with Mamma, too.
Mrs. S. —It is, Emma. There are several
kinds; some large trees, growing, perhaps, fifty
or sixty feet high, with large rambling branches,
but I prefer the smaller, more compact kind;
the bark is very soft and beautiful. The abo-
rigines lay their new-born infants in it. All the
kinds delight in moisture.


■ \
WRECK OF THE CHARLES EATON.
Emma. —How very melancholy an appear-
ance that ship bore which was towed in by the
steamer the day after the storm, with its
flag hanging so mournfully, and its ragged bits
of sails dangling. I fancied they had the dead
body of the Captain on board.
Mrs. S. —Death had, indeed, visited the
crew, but the Captain, I believe, was safe.
Emma. —Had they lost any of the sailors,
Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —Yes ; they were near the “ Heads”
during that awful storm of thunder and light-
ning.
Julius. —Were they struck with the lightning,
Mamma ?
Mrs. S.— No, my dear, they were, I believe,
taking in their sails, when four of the men were
carried away, with the fragments of broken
masts, &c.


Emma. —Poor things! Did they put out
a Boat to save them, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —That was quite impossible. You
know the night was unusually dark between
the flashes of lightning, which were indeed very
frequent. You may remember my dear Emma,
how we stood for a short time in awful admira-
lion of the power displayed by the Almighty.
What a magnificient scene it was ! and then
came a violent tempest of wind and rain. Well ;
was it for the survivors in the Vessel we have been
speaking of, that a Steamer came in sight of
them, for they had been beating about all night,
at the mercy of the winds and waves. Had
they been driven on the rocky coast, how terri-
ble must have been their fate. It is during such
awful scenes that we are made more particularly
to feel our own insignificance, and entire depen-
dence on the goodness of God.
Clara— Do you know the name of the
Ship, Mamma ?
Mrs. S.— l heard it was a whaler, called
“ 7 he Mary." .
Julius. —Gould you tell us about any Slup
that was wrecked, Manna ?
Mrs. S.-l could relate a small part of the


the sufferings endured by many of our fellow-
creatures, under the dreadful calamity of Ship*
wreck, my dear, if you would wish to hear
about them.
Julius. —Oh ! Thank you, Mamma.
Mrs. S. —Clara, do you remember hearing of
a little boy, of the name of D’Oyley, who had
been rescued from the Savages in Torres’ Straits?
Clara. —l remember the name, Mamma •
but I do not know any of the particulars.
Mrs S. —l will endeavour to recall to mind
what I have heard and read on the subject.
Narrative of the Shipwreck of the Charles
Eaton :
• The Charles Eaton , commanded by Captain
George Frederick Moore, sailed from the Downs
on the 25th December, 1533.
Clara. —Was it a Merchant Ship, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —lt was a fine Barque laden princi-
pally with Calicoes and Lead. They were
bound for Sydney, by the way of the Cape of
Good Hope.
Clara. —We will have our Maps before us,
Mamma.
Julius. —Did they have a pretty good passage
here, Mamma?


Mrs. S. —l did not hear, my dear. They
left Sydney on the 26th of July, 1834, for Ma-
dras, by the way of Torres’ Straits:
Emma. —Were there many passengers,
Mamma ?
Mrs. S. Captain D’Oyley of the artillery,
his wife, their infant son (about two years of
age), a little nephew (I believe about ten), their
female servant (a native of Bengal), and a gen-
tleman of the name of Armstrong.
Julius. —T suppose they had a good many
sailors to work the ship.
Mrs. S. —The crew consisted of 26 persons :
Mr. Grant, the Doctor, Mr. Robf. Clare, chief
officer; Mr. Wm. Mayor, second mate; Mr.
George Piggot, third mate ; two midshipmen of
die names of Clung and Perry; William Mont-
gomery, steward; Crant Doxtor and William
Williams, sailmakers; John Derry, Lawrens
Constantyn, George Lawn, James Millar, William
Grindale, James WTight, Samuel Moore, Richard
Quin, John Carr, Francis Howe, Wm. Jefferies,
Samuel Baylett, Charles Robertson, Francis
Ruail and James Price, seamen; and two appren"
ticed boys named John Sexton and John Ire-
land.


At 8 a. m. of the 15th of August, they saw
breakers a-head as they were making for what
appeared a reef, near Sir Charles Harding’s
Island. They endeavoured to tack but could
not succeed. They now let go both anchors,
which fell close to the reef.
Julius. —Oh! Mamma, what will they do
now ?
Mrs. S. —The ship struck violently on what
proved to be f * The Detached Reef,” at the
entrance of the Straits.
Clara. — Dreadful! Was the weather rough
at the time ?
Sirs. S. —lt was blowing hard. The Can-
tain had prudently avoided entering the Straits
till daylight; when the ship struck, the keel
and rudder were knocked off and immediately
carried away ; the sea made a clear breach over
her, and the Captain declared the vessel totally
lost.
Emma. —This is terrible ! flow were they
supplied with boats ?
Mt-s. S.— They had four, viz.: tile long-boat,
two cutters, and a small one called a dingy.
The Captain gave orders for the boats to be
got ready and furnished with provisions, in the
hopes of being able to reach Timor. Upon


lowering the long-boat it swamped; the smallest
of cutters also met the same fate, and
James Price was drowned.
Lucy. —Poor man! was he a sailor ?
Mrs. S. —Yes, my dear. The dingy was
broken to pieces when the ship struck and fell
on her side, so that there only remained the
largest of the two cutters—this was lowered
with difficulty, and the third mate, William
Grindall, and Lawrens Constantyn jumped into
her. The Captain and Officers thought it im-
possible the boat could be saved, and determined
to remain in the ship. The boat, however,
succeeded in getting.clear of the wreck and
across the reef. On the following morning
Richard Quin and James Wright reached the
cutter by swimming, at the risk of their lives.
Five others were also anxious to join them, but
they pulled away.
Emma. —That was very unfeeling, to leave
their poor comrades to perish.
Mrs. S. —To have taken more would have
endangered the lives of the whole party. The
boat could not carry more than five in safety.
Julius. —Had they a compass, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —No, my dear, nor any other nau-
tical instrument. The whole of the provisions


consisted of one ham, thirty pounds of hard
biscuit, and a keg containing four gallons of
water.
Clara. —That would not last long.
Mrs. S. They, however, got into the cur-
rent and pulled away, where we must leave
them, and return to the other sufferers.
Lucy.— Poor things! What will they do
now, without any boats?
Mrs. S.— They were crowded on the poop
when the boat left, feeling, no doubt, the utmost
distress of mind, but they did not give way to
despair. After putting all hands on an allow-
ance of two wine glasses of water a day, and a
small quantity of biscuit, about half of one,
which unfortunately was all damaged by sea
water, they set about making a raft: this occu-
pied six days. On the seventh they ventured
upon it, but found the weight of the whole
party too great, for it sank under water; conse-
quently many of them were obliged to return to
the wreck. The Captain and passengers pre-
ferred remaining on the raft, and it was made
fast to the ship for the night.
Clara. —How many were on the raft, Mam-
ma ?


Mrs . S. —Nine persons, viz : —Capt.
Capt. D’Oyley, Mrs. D’Oyley, the two children,
Mr. Armstrong, Mr. Grant, the Steward, and
the Bengal servant. In the morning the raft
could not be seen from the ship; it was thought
that the Captain had cut the rope in the night
and gone away.
Emma. —Oh! dear! poor things. How me-
lancholy to be left and no raft, nor any thing
to aid their escape.
Julius. —The carpenter was left behind, so l
suppose they would make another raft.
Mrs. S. —This was not easily effected in
their situation. Lawrens Constantyn was the
carpenter, and he went in the boat. However,
on the fourteenth day after the vessel struck,
they were enabled to launch a second raft; and
the whole of the party, fifteen in number, suc-
ceeded in getting on it, and pushed away from
the wreck. One poor man had been washed oft
the wreck.
For two days and nights they continued
making their way in the direction, as they sup-
posed, of Timor, immersed to their middles in
water, without food, and worn out with fatigue
and want of rest. On the third day they fell
in with some Blacks, in their canoes.


Lucy. —l hope they will be kind to the poor
shipwrecked people.
Mrs. S. —They appeared willing to assist
them. Took them, and the things they had
with them into their canoes, and then suffered
the raft to drift away. They then set their
sails, and reached the Island about 5 p. m.
Julius. —Where did they take them to, Mam-
ma ?
Mrs. S. —To the Island of Boydamy, of
which they were natives. When they landed
the treacherous savages pretended friendship,
and went with them to procure food and water.
Feeling great exhaustion from want of rest, and
apprehending no danger, they lay down to sleep
under some shady bushes. It was their last
sleep on this side the grave!
Emma —Oh! dear! were they all killed,
Mamma?
Mrs. S. —The two apprenticed boys were
saved. Ireland escaped most providentially.
Julius. —How was that, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —About an hour after they had laid
down to ropose, the natives came with clubs,
spears and knives, and commenced an indiscri-
minate slaughter. Thirteen of the unhappy
people lay lifeless corpses; when they cut ofl'


their heads and danced and shouted round them.
The two poor boys only remained : and one
of the savages shortly afterwards, seized hold of
Ireland to cut his throat with a large English
knife. Ireland tried to get the knife away, when
his fingers were dreadfully cut, one of the fore-
fingers quite to the bone. Poor Ireland strug-
gled violently. It was for his life; and suc-
ceeded in getting from the savage and fled to
the sea, which he reached; not however, till he
had been speared in his left side. Notwith-
standing, he swam out to sea as far as he was
able, when he was again obliged to return to the
beach. The same man was there awaiting his
coming, and caught hold of the poor exhausted
boy, who must have expected instant death; but
the savage did not now ill-treat him ; he gave him
food and water, and made him understand that
he was safe. He then took him up the beach
to where the natives were sitting round a large
fire. John Sexton was also sitting there.
The heads of the murdered people were ar-
ranged in a row.
Clara. —What a truly distressing situation
for the poor boys!
Mrs, S. —The next morning the Natives took


the two boys with them, in their canoes, to an
Island where they usually lived. Here they saw
the dog from the ship running along the beach.
Julius. —l am in hopes the Captain and the
rest of the passengers were there.
Mrs. S. —No doubt the poor melancholy boys
hoped so too. They presently saw the two little
D’Oyley’s, and asked what had become of their
father and mother. George, the eldest child,
replied, that the blacks had murdered them, and
every body else, but himself and little cousin.
He said, just as they landed at the terrible Island
of Boydamy, the natives assembled on the beach
and struck the people down with clubs, and
then cut off their heads. Poor Mrs. D’Oyley
had the little child in her arms when she was
struck by a ruthless savage on the temple and
knocked down. The child dropped from her
arms and was picked up by a woman called
Duppah, who carried it away and adopted it.
Ireland saw the watches and clothes of the
Captain and passengers in possession of the
natives.
Emma. —Poor boys! they were completely
in the power of the natives, without any hope
of escape. I suppose ships very seldom came
near.


Mrs. S. —One came in sight, about a week
after they landed. Ireland saw it passing
the island, and told the natives, and asked them
to take them on board, but these unfeeling
people turned their backs and would not listen
to them.
A fortnight after, two vessels in company,
came within lour miles of the Island, sailing
with a fine breeze, and studding sails set.
Ireland entreated to go with them, but the
natives took them into the bush, carrying the
heads of their murdered shipmates with them
One of the natives then fired at Ireland, and hit
him on the breast, from which the blood flowed,
profusely. Another native now shot at him,
but fortunately missed.
Emma. —Poor things! Their situation was
truly deplorable.
Mrs. S. —Soon after this, they went to ano-
ther island, and stopped a week. Then they
sailed to another, when they remained a few
clays.
Julius. —What a number of islands there
seems to be!
Mis. S. —Boydamy is one of a group, called
the Six Sisters. The natives are a migratory


race, always travelling about like the natives of
this country.
They continued sailing about from one island
to another. They also went to a large island
where there were yams, and staid a week, and
then went back to the small island again.
A native from Murray’s Island now came and
took Ireland and little William D’Oyley to his
own island.
Julius. —What became of George D’Oyley
and George Sexton, Mamma?
Mrs. S. They remained at Boydamy with
the cruel natives about three months, when these
bad people added to their crimes by murdering
the defenceless boys. Master D’Oyley was a
very handsome child, and they cut off his head
to adorn the front of a canoe,
Emma. —This is monstrous ! How could
such thoughts enter their heads ?
Clara. —Were they cannibals, Mamma?
Mi's. S. —Yes, my dear. They ate the eyes
and cheeks of the shipwrecked people; this they
do with the idea that it increases their desire for
the blood of white people.
Clara. What dreadful sanguinary creatures.
It makes one shudder even to hear of it.


Lucy." -Was Duppah kind to little William,
Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —Yes, my love. She treated both
the boys kindly; they called Ireland “ Wawkai,”
and poor little D’Oyley, “ Ewass.”
The whole of them were, from the first, de-
prived of their clothing, which kept them in a
continual state of suffering, under such a scorch-
ing sun, besides the annoyance of insects.
Julius. —The musquitoes especially. I think
the Murray Islanders do not appear so ferocious
as their neighbours of Boydamy.
Mrs. S. They do not; at least, in their
treatment of the boys they shewed themselves
very superior.
Julius. —Did Ireland know that his fellow
sufferers were killed ?
Mrs. S.— Upon enquiring after them, of a
native belonging to Boydamy, he informed him
of their fate. Though the natives of Murray’s
Island had ransomed Ireland and poor little
William D’Oyley, their old enemies of Boydamy
wanted sadly to get Ireland back again, and
then no doubt they would have killed him also ;
but in this they did not succeed.
Julius. — I am glad of that. Did any more
ships come near, Mamma?


jf rSt S. The Mangles , commanded by
Captain Carr, came close to the island of
Murray some considerable time after. They
put a boat out from the ship, and remained there
two hours. The Captain says he could see
through his spyglass a great number of natives
on the beach, and many more concealed behind
the bamboos. There was also a large canoe
ready for launching.
They beckoned to him to land, but he was
fearful of treachery.
A man held up an European child to him, but
he would not let him touch it- He could not
see a white man, but felt certain, a boat which
was building under a shed, was done by Euro-
pean hands. Captain Carr says, he watched
them with his glass the remainder of the day,
and remained at anchor all night, thinking if
there were any white people'on the island, they
might perhaps be able to escape.
The next morning they weighed anchor and
sailed through the straits.
Emma. —The child the man held up must
have been poor little William, Mamma. What a
pity Captain Carr left without getting him!
Clara. Did Ireland see Captain Carr
Mamma ?


Mrs. S. —Poor boy he was along side the
ship in a canoe, with the natives, but dared not
make himself known. He, as well as the natives,
were wholly without clothing.
Emma. —Surely, Mamma, he must have looked
whiter than the natives, if he were ever so much
tanned.
Mrs. S. —No notice was taken of Ireland
from the ship, and he was compelled to return
quite in despair. No other vessel came in sight
for some time; but we must leave them here.
To-morrow I will give you an account of the
adventures of the party who left the wreck in
the boat.
Julius. —We have been so occupied with the
poor boys, that I really had forgotten the sai-
lors. Were they saved, Mamma? Where did
they go to ? Was it Timor?
Mrs. (S'.—Nay, Julius, your questions are too
numerous to be answered to-night. I will only
inform you that they were saved.
Julius. —Dear Mamma, could you tell us
about the shipwrecked people this evening ?
Mrs. S. —l think I promised to begin with
£


an account of the five sailors who escaped in the
boat.
Julius. —They were in the current you know,
and pulling away as hard as they could when
we heard of them last.
Emma. —There were George Piggott, the
third mate ; Lawrens Constantyn, the carpenter;
and three sailors, whose names I have forgot-
ten.
Julius. —Could you tell us, Mamma? I
should like to know their names, and what
country they belonged to, if you please?
Mrs. S. —George Piggott, third male, who
acted as boatswain on this occasion, was, 1
believe, an Englishman; Lawrens Constantyn,
a native of Charlestown, N. America, about 35
years of age; William Grindall, aged 23, was
a native of Whitehaven in England; Richard
Quin, aged 30, a native of Wexford, Ireland ;
and James Wright, of Edinburgh, Scotland,
about 20 years of age. These two last, you
may remember, swam out to the boat the next
morning.
Julius. -Yes, Mamma; go on, if you please.
Mrs. S. —After striving about fifteen days,
steering by the sun by day and the stars by


night, in hopes of reaching Coupang, the capital
of Timor, they saw land, which they thought
was the so much desired island of Timor; they
went on shore, succeeded in finding some cocoa-
nuts and water, and then continued along the
coast in the boat. Unfortunately they fell in
with a number of natives in their praaws, who
attacked our poor sailors; the poor men were
so worn out with fatigue that they could make
but a feeble resistance, and at last were obliged
to surrender.
The inhuman natives upset their boat, stripped
them of their clothing, and brought them on
shore. At first they seemed determined to kill
them, and the poor fellows gave themselves up
for lost, but two Chiefs interposed and succeeded
in saving their lives.
Emma. Kind men! Do you know what
they were called, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —Their names were Pabok and
Lomba. These Chiefs took the sailors under
their protection, and they were pretty well
treated after this. The natives were even pre-
vailed on to give them back part of their clothing.
Emma.— That must have been a comfort to
them. What did they give them to eat, Mamma ?
e 2


Mrs. B.— lndian corn, yams, a little rice
occasionally, and fish, but in such small quan-
tities they could barely exist.
Julius. —Poor things! and I dare say they
had to work hard.
Mrs. S. —No ; the natives did not make them
do any work.
Clara. —That was surprising. What island
were they on, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —Timor Laut. They remained prin-
cipally at Oilliett, which is the principal settle-
ment. The houses of the natives are almost
like beehives, with an entrance about a foot and
a half high.
The sailors remained thirteen months at Timor
Laut, and then a trading praaw arrived from
Amboyna; they pressed the Chiefs to permi t
them to depart in this vessel, promising to return
with great quantities of English guns, cannon
and ammunition, to assist them in overcoming
their enemies.
The Chiefs at last agreed to their going on
these terms; and they arrived at Amboyna on
the 7th of October, 1835, after a voyage of five
days.
Julius. —l should like to see where Araboyna
is.


Clara. —Here it is. One of the Molacca, or
spice, islands.
Mrs. S. —They belong to the Dutch. Am-
boyna contains about 5,000 inhabitants.
From hence they reached Batavia on the 3rd
of December, in the Dutch brig Patriot, com-
manded by Captain T. Clunies: here they un-
derwent a rigid scrutiny, on oath, as to all the
circumstances of the shipwreck ; and His Ex-
cellency the Governor of Batavia sent all the
particulars of the inquiry to His Excellency the
Governor General of India.
Clara. —Why did the Governor of Batavia
send to the Governor of India about the men’s
arrival, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —You may remember the unfortu-
nate Charles Eaton was bound to Madras, and
a report had reached there that the vessel was
lying “ high and dry” on the Barrier Reefs.
The Governor therefore thought very probable
that some of the passengers and crew might have
escaped and be detained on some of the numerous
islands in the Straits. He therefore sent to
request the Governor of Batavia to institute all
possible inquiries respecting any person who
might have survived. The despatch was dated
sth of August, 1835. His Excellency of Bata-
e 3


via had made unsuccessful inquiries in the July
previous. In consequence of the receipt of
another despatch from the Governor of India,
dated November 20th, 1835, llis Excellency of
Batavia sent to request the Governor of the
Molaccas to dispatch a small vessel to Timor
Laut, Marabella, and the neighbouring isles,
in search of the supposed survivors from the
wreck, and further intimated his intention of
sending a ship of war should he find they were
detained by force. Whether the little Indian
coasting barque that took them away from Timor
Laut came there in consequence of this cor-
respondence, I am not prepared to say.
Clara. —Were they all well when they reached
Batavia, Mamma?
Mi's. S. —The mate was seriously ill, and
obliged to be taken to the Hospital.
Julius. —l suppose there would be more cor-
respondence between the two Governors.
Mrs. S. —Yes; an official report was drawn
up by Daniel Fransois Willem Pietermaat, Bar-
rister at Law, resident of Batavia, assisted by
Cornelis Heije, Post Captain in the Dutch
Navy and Master Attendant, and Frederick
Jacobus Stoetman, sworn translator for the
English language at Batavia. It contained a


formal account of the arrival of the seamen, the
particulars they had related of the shipwreck,
their escape in the boat, and all that occurred
up to their arrival at Batavia. As I have related
these events to you, we need not repeat them.
Clara. —What a pity they did not know of
the two poor boys being at Murray’s Island >
I dare say they would have sent a ship of war
and soon made the natives give them up.
Mrs. S. —lt was, indeed, a great pity, my
dear. The sailors said, while they were at
Timor Laut, they heard that there was a white
person at a neighbouring settlement at war with
the one on which they lived—that this white
person had belonged to an English brig, which
had been wrecked several years before, and all
the people murdered but two boys. One had
died there, and the other was the white person
in question. The natives gave them to under-
stand that he had adopted the habits of the
blacks, was quite reconciled, and did not wish
to leave the island.
Emma. —l can scarcely believe that, Mamma ?
Mrs. S.— I should, indeed, doubt it, my dear
Emma.
At some future time, I will endeavour to tell


you more about him; our conversation must
cease for this evening.
Lucy. —Can you tell us about the shipwrecked
people to-night, Mamma? I want to get poor
little William and John Ireland away from those
terrible people.
Mrs. S. —lt is, indeed, time they were in
safer hands, Lucy. In consequence of vague
rumours which reached this country, India and
England, that some of the ill-fated survivors of
the Charles Eaton were still living among the
islands, Sir Richard Bourke, then Governor of
this country (New South Wales), dispatched
the Government schooner Isabella , commanded
by Captain Lewis ; they left Sydney on the 3rd
of June, 1836, and on the 18th of the same
month arrived off Murray’s Island.
The natives came off to the vessel in fine
large canoes, and were soon brought to confess
that there was one white man on the island.
Captain Lewis easily persuaded them to bring
him in a canoe. This, as you may conclude,
was Ireland; he related the circumstances of
the distressing shipwreck, the murder of all but


himself and poor little Master D’Oyley, who,
he said, was still on the island.
The dear little boy was soon sent for, but it
was long before Duppah and he could be
brought to part. The woman had become at-
tached to the helpless little boy, and the inno-
cent child had so long looked up to her for
protection and food, insufficient as it was, that
he could not easily be torn from her, and cried
long and bitterly at leaving her.
Emma. —That appears strange to us; and
yet it is very natural to love those who are kind
to us, even in the shape of a black savage ap-
parently.
Lucy. —And you know poor little William
was such a very little boy when she first had
him, that I dare say he had forgotten how his
own dear Mamma was killed.
Mrs. S. —No, my dear Lucy, he had not
forgotten this melancholy event, for he fre-
quently amused the people on board the Isabella
in describing how his dear parents and the others
were killed by the savages. This he pould do
by signs and vehement gestures, striking his
temple, and then shewing how they cut off their
heads.


He spoke the language of the natives very
fluently, but could not speak his own.
Clara. —l should suppose, then, Ireland had
not much opportunity of talking to him.
Mrs. S. —On the 24th, the Captain and a
party, accompanied by Ireland, went on shore
! n a boat, /fn an island called by the natives
Wyer. They intended to search the island, in
hopes of finding something belonging to the
Charles Eaton. On landing, the Captain and
one of the sailors entered a hut; in the inside
they saw a number of skulls hanging. strung on
they saw a number of skulls hanging, strung on
a string. There were many conjectures and
much examination of them, but they could come
to no satisfactory conclusion about them. Ire-
land said he did not know of any white people
being killed on that island.
Julius. —Did they leave the skulls, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —l believe they did, my dear.
Clara. —The entrances to the houses being
so low, made it perilous to enter. I should
have been fearful of a blow from a club when I
put my head in.
Mrs. S. —Very true ; nevertheless, they ven-
tured into many.
On the 28th, which was Sunday, Ireland told
the Captain there was part of a ship’s boat on


shore; two boats’ crews were sent to look for
it; after being away for about half an hour, one
of the sailors found a piece of a stern of a boat
with a copper ring-bolt in it.
Clara.— They had not left Murray’s Island
Mrs. In some of the huts on that island
they saw the skins of hands hanging up ; these,
the natives wear as ornaments on days of re-
joicing. About 8 a m. of Tuesday, 28th June,
they left Murray’s Island, and steered for Darn-
tey’s'lsland. About 4 o’clock, as they were
running down for the island, they struck on the
Canoe Key Reef, which was only six feet under
water, and looked like a ripple from the tide.
Fortunately the weather was fine when she
struck, and the shock was not violent, They
got the stream-anchor out, and succeeded in
getting off and brought to in twenty fathoms
water. 7t was extremely fortunate for them
that they managed to get the vessel cle.;r of the
reef, for it began to blow hard almost directly.
Emma. — 1 Had they been wrecked there,
Mamma, it would, indeed, have been terrible.
I dare say they would all have been murdered,
it’ they had fallen into the hands of the natives,


from revenge for their having taken the boys
away.
Mrs. s. —Very probable ; but a happier fate
awaited them. A week after this, namely, on
Tuesday, sth July, they weighed anchor and
sailed for Darnley’s Island, where they an-
chored. Shortly after, ten or twelve natives
came off to them in a canoe. Soon they ap-
peared to be alarmed!
Julius. —What at, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —lt could not be ascertained; some
thought at the fire arms; others believed their
fears proceeded from seeing the white boys on
board.
As soon as they saw the little boy, they set
up a shont, calling out Ewass. One of the
natives in the front of the canoe came forward
and shook hands with him, and then kissed his
own hands, in token of friendship it was sup-
posed.
Julius. —Did they not notice Ireland, Mam-
Mrs, S. —Yes; they called out to Wawkai
The natives are much more numerous here
than at Murray’s Island. On the 17th, two


boats, well armed and manned, were sent on
shore.
The natives were very uneasy at this visit;
they said they were tired of them, and wanted
them to go away.
Julius. —What sort of people were they,
Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —Very ferocious. Their shoulders
were scarified, and the cartilage of their
perforated like the aborigines of this country;
their ears were also extended like the natives of
Murray’s Island.
Lucy . —You did not tell us what the natives
were like there, Mamma.
Mrs. S . —The men were a fine race; but the
women were very inferior, both in beauty and
make. The latter alone shave their heads, al-
lowing only a small tuft of hair at the top ;
they wear a bundle of coai se grass tied to the
waist, which reaches down to the knee.
Julius. —What did the people say when the
natives told them they were tired of them ?
Mrs. S. — Ido not know what they said, but
they did not leave for some days after.
Ireland told the Captain that the treachery
and cruelty of the natives was not confined to


white people, for they used each other no better
when offended. They suffer their thumb nail
to grow very long and sharp, and when offended
will seize their victim by the throat and press
the nail into it till it meet their fingers, thus
destroying them. Sometimes they will lie in
wait in the bush for their victim, knock him
down with a stone, and then pour poison into
the wounds they have made.
On the 21st they left Darnley’s Island, and
sailed N. W. to an island thickly wooded. The
Captain ordered two whale boats to be well
armed and manned, to pull to southward, and
search two islands which the natives call Crad-
dow and Masseed. As they neared the beach,
the natives came down with branches and leaves
in their hands.
Julius. —That was to shew they wished for
peace, I suppose.
Mrs. S. —They appeared greatly alarmed.
Ireland told the Captain that they had the
skulls of some white people hid away in the
bush. When accused, they persisted in deny-
ing it, and wanted to run away. The Captain
told them he would fire upon them if they at-
tempted to escape. Still they tried to do so,
and at last succeeded in running into the bush.


The sailors dragged one of the boats over a very
broad fiat, and then gave chase to a canoe, but
it was too far distant to overtake before dark,
so they were obliged to give it up, and return
on board about 9 p. M.
Julius. —I am sorry they could not be sure
about the skulls, Mamma. I suppose their
light canoes scud along so briskly that there is
no overtaking them when they get the start of
an English boat.
Mrs. S.—On Monday, 25th, they anchored
off the island of Aureed.
Julius. —Did they go on shore, Mamma?
Mrs. S.— Yes; Ireland thought the white
people’s skulls were on one 4 of these islands,
and they determined to search as many of the
islands as possible till they found them.
They saw native dogs, but none of the blacks
seemed there. After searching the bush for
about half an hour, they came to an avenue
lined on both sides with shells painted red. At
the top of the avenue was a hut much out of
repair: on entering it, they were greatly sur-
prised to find a number of skulls fastened to a
tortoiseshell figure. Ireland said the natives
had a dance round the figure on feast days.
The skulls were fastened to the figure by a


piece of European rope, and shewed marks of
violence on them.
Emma. —These are the skulls ot the poor
murdered people. Do not you think so,
Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —I think there could be no doubt
I must here go back to tell you that a brig of
war called the Tigris, commanded by Captain
William Ingleston, left Sydney on the 10th July,
1836. I believe on the same expedition as the
Isabella, but this I am not sure of, probably they
were dispatched by the Indian Government.
The weather was very wet and blowing strong
from the southward when they left Sydney, but
they went on pretty well till they reached the
neighbourhood of Cato’s Bank, where they had
a gale, and remained under close reefed topsails.
It however moderated after a while, but the wea-
ther was so thick they could get no observation
therefore thought it prudent to lay to for the
night, as they judged they were near the bank.
On the 261 h they made the Eastern Fields,
and the next day the Barriers. The weather was
still squally, and so hazy they could not take the
meridian altitude. When within two miles of the
reef, the weather cleared a little, and they could


see Murray’s Island. They anchored for the
night, and the next morning reached the island
a little after 7 o’clock. Long before they reached
the anchorage, by the aid of their glasses they
could perceive the natives in a state of grea
excitement, waving branches, shouting and
launching their canoes. Before the sails could
be furled half a dozen canoes were alongside.
The Captain was provided with boarding
nettings.
Julius. —Please to tell us what these are,
Mamma?
Mrs. S. —They are used to prevent people
rushing on deck. By putting up boarding
nettings they prevented more coming on board
than they chose.
Emma. —l am glad they had these nettings
Mamma, or these dreadful savages might have
overpowered them, as the New Zealanders, and
many other savage people have done to ships.
Go on, if you please, Mamma.
Clara. — Before you continue, will you be so
good to tell us how long it was since the
Isabella had sailed with the boys ?
Mrs. S. —The Isabella left the island on the
28th June, and the Tigris arrived the 28th
July.


Clara. Exactly one month between.
Mrs. S.— Captain Inglesdon admitted a few
of the natives, and barter was carried on with
great eagerness. The Isabella having so lately
traded with them, there was little worth having
The Captain invited three of the men to break-
fast with him. Before they came to table, they
were dressed in shirts and trousers; they ate
and drank of every thing that was given them ;
but a boy (son of one of the men) stole a silver
spoon and put it into the bosom of his shirt.
The Captain’s servant suspected who had the
spoon—searched the boy and found the spoon
upon him. The Captain tried, by signs, to
make both father and son understand how
wrong it was ; he repeated “No good,” which
they appeared to understand. However, the
Captain’s penknife, which was a very handsome
one, disappeared also.
Emma. —How provoking! What very bad
ungrateful people they were.
Mrs, S. —Whilst they were at breakfast, an
old man named Guppar brought a letter from
Captain Lewis, of the Isabella , informing Cap-
tain Inglesdon that he had recovered the two
boys, the only survivors of the Charles Eaton.


Captain Inglesdon gave Guppar an axe, cloth-
ing, and plenty to eat and drink, for his faithful
delivery of the letter entrusted to him. The
Captain then exchanged names with Him, in
token of eternal friendship, and the old man
went away highly delighted, and loud in his
praise of Inglese.
Julius. - I think the Captain was too good to
such bad, wicked, creatures. If I had been
Captain Inglesdon, when I had read the letter
informing me how they had destroyed the poor
shipwrecked people, I am almost sure that I
should have ordered them out of my ship im-
mediately, telling them I could not eat with,
nor take notice of, such cruel wicked people.
Mrs. S. —ln dealing with savages, my dear
boy, it is necessary to be very cautious; you
know the dreadful system of retaliation practiced
by all uncivilized nations. Had they met with
anything to offend, they were sure to avenge
themselves on the first white person that fell in
their power. The navigation of Torres’ Straits
is so very difficult and dangerous, that ship-
wrecks are frequently occurring. 11 is therefore
desirable to conciliate these wretched blacks,
as it is quite impossible to civilize them.
“ Vengeance is mine, I will repay, saith the


Lord.” Acting in this spirit, the Captain of
the Tigris thought it expedient to leave the
islanders with a good impression of white peo-
The reception which the old man reported he
had met with, soon brought plenty alongside.
There were women among them, who came
on board without hesitation. They were not
remarkable for youth nor beauty. Being without
clothing, the officers undertook to dress out
one, and the boatswain another.
Emma. —Had they women’s clothes, Mamma 1
Mrs. S. —They had nothing but male attire;
but the ladies were not fastidious. The old
lady the boatswain had undertaken to adorn was
unfortunately somewhat stout, and being en-
cumbered with a huge bunch of strong coarse
grass, there was some difficulty in getting her
into the dress; she could not be prevailed on
to part with the grass, so the boatswain was
obliged to pipe for more hands, and by dint of
squeezing and shaking, she was fairly crushed
into the trousers, which not being intended, as
the boatswain said, to carry much stowage, had
a most ridiculous effect.
Julius. —Ha! ha! ha! How I should have
laughed to have seen the horrid old creature.


Mrs. S. —I have no doubt of it; you appear
pretty well amused even at this distance of time
and place.
Julius .—Yes, Mamma, and Lucy looks so
grave, it makes me laugh more.
Lucy. —Yes, Julius, because I cannot laugh
at such naughty, bad, people.
Julius. —Only conceive, Lucy,'an old fat crea-
ture, like one of our old black women, stuffed
into a tight pair of trousers. It would make a
Judge laugh.
Clara. —How did they manage with the other
lady, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —The dressing did not prove so diffi.
cult a task; she was neither so stout, nor so
determined to retain her equipment of grass. It
was therefore thrown aside, and she was not a
little proud of her new dress; to which was
added an Union Jack, for a head dress.
Lucy. —Dear! how gay she must have looked.
I suppose this would make them all wish to
have a turban.
Mrs. S. —They could uot spare any more.
This was an old boat’s color, belonging to one
of the officers. The natives, were very anxious
for the Captain to go on shore. After breakfast


he accepted their invitation, and went loaded
with presents, instead of firearms.
Clara. —l should not like to trust to any
savages, Mamma, they are so very treacherous.
Poor Captain Cook, and many others, have felt
the consequences of putting faith in unprincipled
savages.
Mrs. S. —Very true; I think it was impru-
dent. However, the captain, surgeon, and
mates went; the purser and second lieutenant
taking passage in one of their canoes directly
afterwards.
The Captain walked away arm in arm with
the blacks (upon landing) to a hut, and began
to distribute his gifts. The women were most
extravagant in wanting everything they saw,
and very difficult to satisfy.
Lucy.- How greedy!
Mrs. S. —They would attempt to snatch,
and then the Captain closed up the canvas bag
which held the treasures till silence and order
was restored, when he began again. At last
they became so vociferous, and crowded the
Captain so much, in their eagerness to grasp
the things, that he was almost suffocated. Some
old women in particular, actually screeching in


their anxiety to be heard above the rest, so that
he hastily emptied the contents of his bag.
Emma. —Did they give the Captain anything
in return, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —Some took off their necklaces and
offered them to him, but he made them to un-
derstand by signs that he did not want anything
in return.
Julius. —What did his gifts consist of,
Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —Of axes, knives, fishing-hooks,
spike and small nails, for the men; glass beads,
small looking-glasses, scissors and handkerchiefs
for the women. He also gave the men some
cigars and lucifer-boxes.
Julius. — I dare say they were delighted with
them.
Mrs. S. —They were so stupid that the Captain
could not make them understand how to get a
light ; and they teazed him sadly, by their
childish plaguing, to have their cigars lighted
by him.
Julius. Did they like cigars, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —Yes; they appeared to relish them
very much; one, after smoking part of his, stuck
it through the cartilage of his nose.
When the Captain returned to the ship lie


invited two of the men to dine with him.
Emma. —l hope they will refrain from steal-
ing, after all the captain’s kindness.
Mrs. S. —One of them had been dressed out
by the officers, in some of their old clothes, an
old hat, and a pair of doeskin gloves.
They gave him a stick to walk with, and he
strutted about to their great amusement, aping
the manners of the white people very cleverly.
He sat down to dinner with his gloves on, and
upon the captain giving him leave to help him-
self to some stewed fowl, he thrust his hands
into the gravy, gloves and all, and then sucked
the tips.
Lucy. —Dirty man! what did the captain say,
M amnia ?
Mrs. S. —His visitor soon discovered that this
was contrary to custom, and took off his gloves.
They seemed to enjoy their dinner much, and
soon managed a knife and fork very well—and
they seemed to relish their beer and wine as if
they had always been used to such things.
Julius. —l hope they did not take too much;
for I dare say they would be terrible creatures
then.
Mrs. S . —They were not allowed to do so.


After dinner the captain went on shore again,
accompanied by his two guests, taking with him
more presents. He went more southerly this
time, that the people on that part of the island
might have their share.
The inhabitants were not so numerous, nor
did they behave so well as the others.
After distributing his gifts, it being near sun-
set, the captain was about to return on board,
when a fine powerful man said he wished to go
with him, and to stay on board all night.
Julius. —I do not like the look of that,
Mamma ; I think there was some treachery in it.
Mrs. S. —No; I believe it was in conse-
quence of the captain’s kindness. The man
had been on board in the morning and behaved
well, so the captain allowed him to go.
Lucy. —What was his name, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —Madoo.
Emma. —Did he behave well ?
Mrs. S.— Yes, very well; they were much
pleased with him. The captain took him ov r
the ship, which he admired much, but the armory
he seemed most delighted with.
Coffee was then served, and a round of beef
and biscuit. Madoo ate of every thing, using
a knife and fork, and behaving very properly.


They shewed him many pictures and prints; and
then the captain played some tunes on his
double flageolet. After this, the second lieu-
tenant played the flute ; then they set a musical
snuffbox playing; but kept it out of sight at
first. He was all wonder and delight.
The captain made him understand that he
wished to take his likeness; and he sat very
patiently while his profile was taken.
They then showed him some of the lower
parts of the ship which he had not seen; and
then Madoo and the captain sat down to tea.
Lucy. —I thought they had taken tea.
Mamma.
Mrs. S. —This was in lieu of supper, I sup-
pose. About 9 o’clock (the usual time for
retiring on ship board) the captain had a carpet
spread on the quarter deck for Madoo’s bed,
and lent him his carpet bag for a pillow; he
slept soundly ; and in the morning the captain
awoke him ; and they took coffee and biscuit
together.
The carpet was very handsome ; purchased
by the captain at Alexandria; the colors were
very bright; and took the fancy of Madoo, who
wanted the captain to give it to him ; but the
captain did not like to part with it; he therefore


gave him several trifles instead, such as an axe,
a knife, and a few other little things; and Madoo
was X satisfied. Just at this time, some of his
friends came alongside; and he requested the
captain to give them some presents also.
Clara.—' The captain required a large stock
of presents to supply so many.
Mrs. B.— No doubt he went well provided
with such things as all savage people prize.
You remember the captain exchanged names
with Guppar, who brought him the letter.
Julius. —Yes, Mamma.
Mrs. S. —Captain Inglesdon was aware that
his surname would be too difficult for the
natives to pronounce, he therefore gave Guppar
his Christian name. They were now heard
vociferating William, William, as loud as pos-
sible.
Lncy. —Were they calling the captain,
Mamma?
Mr's. S. —Yes, my dear; and to those who
know the respect which is paid by officers and
crew to the captain of a ship, will imagine the
amusement it must afford. They kept up this
shouting and hallooing till out of sight. Poor
old Madoo was greatly affected at taking leave,
and shook hands again and again with the cap-


tain and officers, as if quite sorry to part with
them.
The captain was in hopes, from the impression
they had received from the two ships, they
would have a kindly feeling towards white peo-
ple and treat them better, should any unhappily
fall into their hands.
At 7 a. m. they weighed anchor, and the
natives took leave and departed.
Emma. —l hope they will have a good pas-
sage. Where are they going now, Mamma ?
Mrs. —To Timor. And soon after leaving
the anchorage they got so among the reefs with
which these Straits abound, that it was with
difficulty they escaped shipwreck.
They found the chart they had with them a
very imperfect guide, though the captain had
part of it at the mast head, by mistake they bore
away too soon, and got to the southward of
Cumberland Passage. They had shoals on both
sides of them, with the outer barrier beyond.
Emma. —l tremble for their safety now.
Mrs. S. —The captain soon found, from the
bearing of the islands, that they were not in the
channel, and that the reefs to the southward of


them were not laid down in the chart. I hey
found it would be dangerous to attempt to work
back, as the sun shone full in their faces.
Nothing could be done, but to keep a vigilent
“ look out,” but they were soon among such a
quantity of rocks, some above, some just below
the water, that they were in great danger. At
noon they took an observation which gave them
9 ° 59”. The two largest islands in sight were
about eight or nine miles distant.
Clara. —Will you be so good to wait a little,
Mamma ? I should like to find the exact spot
where they are.
Sirs. S.— Do so, my dear.
Clara. —It is here; I will keep my pencil
on the spot till we have extricated them from
this labyrinth ol shoals and rocks.
Mrs. S.— ln the afternoon, finding thei 1
difficulties still great, they thought it advisable
to look out for a place where they might anchor
in safety.
Emma.—l am glad they have come to that
determination. lam sure they must be sadly
fatigued, by constant watchfulness, and tacking
to avoid dangers.
Mrs. S. —They were indeed fatigued, and
most anxious. However, they anchored under


the lee of an extensive reef, about half a cable’s
length from it; having rocks under them at 26
fathoms.
Julius, —Let me see, 26 fathoms are 156 feet.
Pretty well as to depth, Mamma; but too near
the reef, I fear.
Mrs. S. —So it proved: for it blew hard in
the night, with strong irregular tides, or eddies,
and the ship drove so that they had to let go
another anchor. In the morning they had great
difficulty in extricating their anchors. After
much trouble, they succeeded in getting one of
the two to the bows. The other they reluctantly
left behind, with 60 fathoms of chain, every
purchase in the ship being unequal to raise it.
Julius. It must surely have got under some
of the rocks. What a pity! I hope they did
not feel the want of it. Go on, if you please,
Mamma.
Mrs. S.—M half-past 9 a. m., they made
sail, and continued working through this puz-
zling labyrnith till 2 P . M „ w h en they sighted
Half-way Island, bearing W. by N. They
expressed their thanks to Almighty God, who
had brought them this far in their perilous
voyage. They reached the island about half.


past 3, and let down the quarter gigs for a
ramble on shore.
Emma.- —I am quite delighted ! poor things,
it must be such a relief to their minds after so
much anxiety.
Mrs. S. —As they were walking, they saw a
tree with the words “ Dig under” cut out of it.
Through the kindness of His Excellency Sir
Richard Bourke, the captain had been fur-
nished with a copy of the Isabella's instructions
and he knew that a letter would be thereabouts.
They therefore dug as directed, and in a short
time found a bottle containing the wished-for
letter which the captain read aloud, having
assembled the officers and boat’s crew. It gave
an account of Captain Lewis having searched
the island where the victims were murdered;
of his having found their skulls; and that he
had burnt down the huts and destroyed all the
plantain trees on tne island He said the natives
had left the island in their canoes on the
approach of the schooner.
Captain Inglesdon and his party concluded
it would be quite impossible to surprise them,
as they knew the intricate navigation so well,
and were one day on one island, and the next
on another. Aureed, where the skulls were


found, was named by Captain Lewis, Skull
Island. It is one of the Six Sisters.
The next morning they left Half-way Island
for Mount Adolphus, skirting the York Islands
at a distance, to endeavour to discover if inha-
bitants or habitations were visible. They could
not see any, and bore away for Double Island,
where, happily, they saw the Isabella at anchor,
and at 4- o’clock came to, in company with her,
in nine fathoms.
Lucy.— Oh ! Mamma, how glad lam now,
it will be so much pleasanter for them.
Julius —And safer also, for they can help
each other if they get into any difficulties.
Clara. —The two captains will meet and talk
over what they have done.
Julius. —How I should have liked to have
been there. Which ship put off a boat, Mamma 1
JMrs, S. —The Tigris sent a boat on board
the Isabella , and learnt that the Thomas Har-
rison had passed but a few hours before. Cap-
tain Lewis having gone on board of her, had
not yet returned, he found it impossible to pull
up against the tide, and had brought his boat to
a grapnel about four miles off.
Lucy (to Julius ). —What does that mean ?
Julius,'— Oh! just throwing out a kind of


small anchor, called a grapnel. I suppose it
fastened to some of the rocks.
Lucy. —I undsrstand.
JV f rs . S. —They sent a boat from the Isabella
for him, and soon after sunset he reached the
Tigris. The two captains now proceeded on
board the Isabella, taking Dr. Hughes, surgeon
of the Tigris, with them to examine the skulls.
Emma.— How many were there, Mamma?
Mrs. S.— Forty. They were strung round
a rude resemblance of the human face, made of
tortoiseshell.
Clara.- Did the doctor think they had be-
longed to white people, Mamma ?
Mrs. S.-He pronounced that _ seventeen of
them had belonged to Europeans. The others
were evidently skulls of savages, most likely of
enemies, whom they had killed; these seemed
much older, and in a decaying state. These
they had concluded as belonging to Europeans,
were comparatively more fresh, and shewed
marks of great violence. One of these had a
lock of auburn hair forced into the skull, and still
adhering.
Emma. —What a distressing sight!
Mrs. S.— The Isabella’s crew had picked up
part of an old mast at Double Island, which


had evidently been exposed to the elements for
several years—it was of teak, and caulked with
coir; all, probably, that remains to mark that
another distressing shipwreck had taken place*
Who can tell the fate of the poor people who
sailed in her?—But to return to our vessels.
They sailed from hence to Wednesday's Island.
The people were terrible ferocious-looking folks.
They sent two boats, well manned and armed:
As soon as Captain Inglesdon and his men
landed, the natives scampered off into the bush.
The captain gave his gun to one of his men,
and walked up to the place where they had
disappeared behind the trees, calling out Ma-
bouse, Warragee, and other friendly words.
Julius. —How did they learn them, Mamma?
Did Ireland know anything of their language?
Mrs. S.-Dr. Wilson, of Braidwood (a friend
of the captain), had written a clever work about
these islands, I understand, and collected what
he could of the language of the natives. I have
not met with the work, therefore cannot give
you any account of it. Captain Inglesdon held
out some beads in his hands, when one of the
savages advanced, looking very distrustful; he
snatched the beads and ran hastily away. As
the captain did not wish to press his acquaint-


ance upon them, they sat down under the shade
of a tree, when the natives soon began to peep
out of their lurking places.
One came up to Captain Inglesdon and tied
a small branch to his wrist, which he allnwed
to remain.
Clara. —They are wishing to become friendly,
I see.
Mrs. S. —Yes; they soon became more
friendly from a few presents which had been
given them, and allowed the people to wander
round the S. W. point of the island, shooting
birds. Captain Inglesdon endeavoured to in-
gratiate himself into their good opinion, parti-
cularly with a monstrous large fierce-looking
man, who seemed as if he could eat him at a
meal.
Julius. —l like Captain Ingleston very much,
Mamma; he seems so cheerful, just the right
sort of man for this expedition.
Mrs. S. —I am of your opinion Julius. The
captain persuaded this savage to give him his
mother of pearl oyster shell; which was sus-
pended round his neck ; and to tie it round his
own. He then sang to them ; and amused them
in various ways.


Lucy. —l dare say the natives liked them after
that.
Mrs. S. —No; they were still suspicious;
and as the sun declined, gave them to under-
stand they wished them to leave. Captain
Lewis had brought Ireland on shore, and the
latter endeavoured to learn if they knew any
thing of white people, but the language which
he had learned differed so materially from theirs,
that they could comprehend only now and then
a word.
This seemed to be a wandering tribe, like
most of the natives of these islands, and subsist
on fish, roots, and a species of fruit which, when
roasted, ate very like a mealy potatoe. It was
about the size of a hen’s egg.
Prom this island they skirted Hammond’s isle,
but saw no signs of inhabitants. They then
sailed to Booby Island. Seeing a pole erected,
with a piece of cloth fluttering on it, they sent
two gigs, with two officers, to call at the post
for letters, while the ships lay to.
Julius. —l like this fashion of posting
Mamma.
Mrs. S.—lt was the only way the captains had
of assuring those who followed of their safety.
hen they reached the pole they saw a board


fastened to it, and soon found a bottle as before,
with the expected letters. They proved to be
reports of the safe arrival of the Recovery,
Clyde , Alexander , Lockerby , Henry Tanner ,
Surry , and Camden . The ships drifted so
much, that the distance was too great to send a
boat on shore again after they had returned, so
they could leave no letters.
Emma. —That was a pity.
Mrs. S. —They now stood for Cape Wessel,
distance from Booby Island about fifteen miles.
They passed some shoal patches not noticed in
their charts.
On Saturday. 6th August, they made New
Year’s Island and Cape Croker. Captain In-
glesdon stationed himself aloft—he was anxious
to anchor for the night, therefore pushed on
ahead of the schooner; seeing only a line of
breakers to the southward of their track, lying
N. W. of Oxley’s Isle, he wished to come to
an anchor under the lee of Cape Croker. He
was carrying regular soundings till the Cape
bore S. three or four miles distant. It was
now past sunset, and getting dark fast. All
hands were busily employed to bring the ship
to anchor, take in sails, and heave the deep


sea-lead; it gave but seven fathoms; they
hauled out to northward, and had but four
fathoms three feet, and struck hard and fast on
a bank of sand and coral.
Lucy.-' De ar ! what can be done ?
Mrs. S. —It was quite dark by this time, and
they felt very anxious about the Isabella .
It was thought advisable to fire minute guns,
and burn a blue light, to apprise her of their
situation. This was soon replied to by lights
and a rocket to the N. E. of them. The Isa-
bella had seen them haul up to the northward,
which enabled them to escape the danger. It
was about 7 o’clock when the Isabellb. heard
the first gun fired; and shortly after five'
minute-guns. This convinced them the Tigris
was on shore, or in some kind of danger; they
therefore tacked, and stood towards her. Cap-
tain Lewis thought it prudent to bring up; and
run down to the brig in* the boats ; they there-
fore hoisted lights; fired a gun and let off a
signal rocket: then hastened with all speed
towards her. The Tigris rolled so heavily
when they came along-side that they had great
difficulty in boarding. The gunner informed
them that the brig had struck violently; and
that the rudder had been carried away.


Clara.— l suppose there was no possibility of
recovering it.
Mrs. s.— Oh! no. The rudder had been
wrenched off; and its head forced through the
poop-deck. It was fortunate for them that the
vessel was a particularly strong built one: or
or it could never have borne the shocks A
received. She was at length forced over
the banks by the united force of sail and the
lifting swell; having only 9 feet water under
the fore chains; and the vessel drawing 12 feet
forward. The shocks she received were dread-
ful : through the mercy of Providence, they
succeeded in getting her once more afloat; and
anchored in three and a quarter fathoms, having
ascertained that the water deeped to the N. W.
They had begun to run the guns forward; as
the stern hung: when she was lifted by a heavy
swell, which made every mast tremble. As
soon as Captain Lewis had provided for the
safety of his own vessel, he went on board the
Tigris: but happily by that time, they were
saved; and the vessel afloat. They got under
weigh; and stood out about a mile; and then
anchored for the night, in company of the
schooner.


£> /z
76
Emma. —How thankful they must have felt.
I suppose they were in safety now?
Mrs. S. —Captain Inglisdon describes the
night as most wretched: and passed by all hands
in the greatest anxiety: hoping for morning
which seemed as if it would never show its much
wished-for light.
Julius. —Was it blowing, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —From the time of the accident, the
wind continued to encrease; and the tide was
setting all night with great velocity to the E. S.
E. and caused such a heavy swell, that the
vessel rolled terribly. They were obliged to
take in the guns and altogether they were in a
deplorable situation.
In the morning they took bearings of Cape
Croker; had found instead of terminating in
a point, as represented in the chart, it embraced
4 points; at the distance of 4 miles.
They now weighed anchor, for Raffles Bay.
Julius. —How did the Tigris manage, with-
out a rudder Mamma?
Mis. S. They got on surprisingly well:
keeping along shore: in company of the schooner.
It was about 10 a. m. when they entered the
Bay. There was not much wind, which caused
them a good deal of trouble in tacking: but


they anchored in safety about 3 in the afternoon;
a mile and a half from the old Settlement.
Clara. —What settlement was that Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —The Government formerly had a
Settlement there; which not succeeding to their
satisfaction, it had been abandoned.
Emma. —Did they go on shore Mamma ? I
should like to know what kind of people the
natives were,
Mrs. S.—Both Captains went on shore,
about 4 o’clock; accompanied by some of their
officers. They were met by 6 of the
two were known as Wellington and Waterloo.
The names of two others were Argeddie and
Alleah. The Captains had taken presents with
them; such as knives, handkerchiefs, axes, &c.
and received in return barbed spears and a throw-
ing stick.
mg auiA..
They then returned on board taking four ot
the natives with them; to whom they gave some-
thing to eat; which, from the voraciousness of
their appetites, they seemed much in need ef.
After they had shown their visitors about the
two ships; and exhibited the guns; Captain
Inglesdon put one of the 1 Sib. shot into Wel-
lingtons hands; which alarmed him greatly;
he exclaimed no, no, no.


Lucy (Laughing).—l dare say he thought it
would shoot him.
Mrs. S. —Very likely. The Captain then
took Wellington with him, into his cabin; and
showed him the accident which had happened
to the ship: but he did not appear to see
that any thing was amiss.
Julius. —l think he was rather a stupid
fellow.
Mrs , S. —The next morning the crew went on
shore to fall some trees, for making a new'
rudder. The officers amused themselves in
looking for kangaroos.
Clara. — Did the men succeed in getting tim-
ber fit for their purpose ?
Mrs. S. —The trees whieh they cut down
were without exception decayed at the heart,
and swarmed with white ants. They managed
however to procure sufficient to make a rudder.
The carpenter of the Isabella was a very power-
ful man, and assisted them greatly: with an
assistant; the carpenter of the Tigris; and the
caulker; they were a strong party.
Clara. —Was there any remains of the set-
tlement, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —They felt much regret in finding
scarcely a vestage, of all the labour, fatigue and


expence, which had been bestowed upon it.
Some of the strong palisading of the fort; a
little fencing; and the pole of the marine
weathercock, alone remained. Captain Ingles-
don tried to discover some of the many exotic
trees and plants, which had been brought there.
Half a dozen plantain trees were all they found
alive; which from growing in a swamp, had
escaped the conflagrations caused by the natives
setting fire to the dry grass.
Emma. —What a pity! It reminds me of
the fate of all the useful things planted by Cap-
tain Cook in New Zealand and other islands.
Mis. S. —lt is difficult to make uncivilized
people attach value to any thing, not growing
spontaneously. Raffles Bay was considered an
ill-chosen spot for a settlement. Croker Island
was preferred by some people capable ofjudging.
The atmosphere of Raffles Bay is very op-
pressive. They remained there ten days; and
though Captain Lewis and the officers made
many excursions, they never met with more
than a few straggling natives at a time: but
they could see fires burning all around them,
for several miles distant.
The people from the ships brought their
clothes on shore to wash; when they had pro-


cured sufficient wood and water for their vessels
Wellington’s party stole some of the gunner’s
clothes; and he retaliated by stealing some of
Mr. Wellington’s spears.
Julius. —l hope that will teach him to be
honest in future.
Mrs. S. —He was a covetous, dissatisfied
fellow; wanting all the presents; and conti-
nually whining and complaining; till he quite
wearied them all. Indeed the impression re-
ceived of the natives of Raffles Bay in generals
was very unfavourable. They appeared to have
little intellect, courage, or gratitude: while
their habits were very disgusting. They were
greatly inferior to the iuhabitants of Murray’s,
or even the ferocious Darnley, islanders. They
manage to cross Bowen’s Straits, in the frailest
of canoes. While at Croker Island,the purser
shot the largest wild duck they had ever seen.
Captain Inglesdon preserved it, as a stuffed
specimen.
One day when the boat’s crew were going on
shore, to fill their water casks, they saw several
large animals on the beach; about fifteen feet
long. which plunged into the water, as soon as
they went towards them.
Lucy. —What could they have been I wonder ?


Mrs. s.—The men supposed they were alli-
gators: but I must leave you to form your own
conjectures on the subject: as I must be other-
wise engaged.
Emma.— Could you tell us any thing about
Master D’Oyley this evening, dear Mamma ?
Wrs. V.—lt is indeed time we returned to
him and his companion in suffering, John Ire-
land. We have been so busied among the
islands, we appear to have nearly forgotten them.
However, I am happy to be able to tell you
they reached Sydney in safety: when a lady who
was acquainted with the relatives of Master
D’Oyley, took him to live with her. It was
well for him that he met with such a friend, or
he might probably never have lived to have seen
his friends in England. He was troubled with
a sad cough; was very thin; and unusually tall
for his age. The lady and gentleman with
whom he now resided, had been intimately ac-
quainted with his poor papa and mamma: who
were very amiable people. Captain D Oyley
had been much esteemed, as an officer and a
gentleman.
Julius. —What became of Ireland, Mamma!


Mrs. s.—Poor lad! he had no kind friend to
take care of him; for, though he was capable of
earning his living, he was sadly out of health*
from want of sufficient nutriment far so long a
time : constant anxiety of mind; exposure to the
burning sun, &c.; and he was quite pennyless.
He very much wished to return to England*
where he hoped to find his father and mother
still living. It was long before this wish was
gratified : he sailed however at last; and I have
never heard any thing further of him.
Lucy.— What was the name of the lady and
gentleman, who took such kind care of Master
D’Oyley Mama ?
Mrs. S. —Their names were Slade my dear.
Lucy. —Did they send him to England Mama,
to his relations ?
Mrs. S. —When his health was restored;
and he could speak his own language tolerably;
he went under the care of Captain Lewis, who
had rescued him from the Murray Islanders.
They sailed in the Buffalo; and had a very
dangerous voyage; very narrowly escaping ship-
wreck.
Emma. —Poor little boy! this would indeed
have been terrible.


Mrs. S. —Lieutenant Thomas D Oyley, his
eldest brother, whom he had never seen, was on
his passage to Calcutta, and must have passed
them on the voyage.
Emma.—l am sorry for that; many years may
,’JJ pass, before they meet. How eventful his life
I>t has been. .
Mi's. S.—-It has indeed. May the remainder
' fcs!l be as happy, as the former has been unfortunate;
**! and above all my dear children, we should pray,
a;c that the uncertainty and fleeting natuie of all
worldly happiness, may be so fixed in his mind,
f■M as to ensure him a happy eternity 1
itrfl Clara. What became of the skulls Mamma ?
Mrs. S.— Governor Bourke caused them to
4-i be interred in the Sydney burial ground, and a
0., monument to be erected, to the memory of the
unfortunate sufferers. It stands near the en-
trance. at the north end ; and is a square tomb,
with a raised top; very chaste. It has the fol-
■ah]:' .
lowing inscription :
Witbin this tomb were interred, on XVII November,
jliltt MDCCCXXXVI,
the remains of seventeen human bodies, discovered, after the
most diligent research, in the island of Aureed.
in Torres’ Straits,
BY MR, C. M. LEWI S,
it Commander of 11. M. Colonial Schooner Isabella,
O‘T'l- JZstQ
L 4U> </


and by satisfactory evidence identified as the mortal remains
of certain of the officers, crew, and passengers of the
barque Charles Eaton, who, after escaping from the
total wreck of that vessel, on the
XV August, MDCCCXXXIV,
were savagely massacred by the natives of the island on which
they landed.
His Excellency Sir Richard Bourke, K.C. B.
Governor in Chief of this Colony, by whose command the
expedition to ascertain the fate of these unhappy persons
was undertaken, caused the fc|st offices of piety
to be discharged towards them, by directing
the interment of their remains with the rites of Christian
burial, and the erection of this Monument to record
the cstastrophe by which they perished.
And they told David, saying, that the men of Jabesh-Gilead
were they that buried Saul. And David sent messengers
to the men of Jabesh-Gilead, and said unto them, blessed be
ye of the Lord, that ye have showed this kindness.” 2 Sam.
2 chap. 4, 5.
Clara. Very affecting and appropriate,
Mamma.
Mrs. S. Particularly so, I think, my dear.
I will take an early opportunity of shewing you
the tomb. And now my narrative must con-
clude : it has been longer than I had intended.
Clara.— Thank you, Mamma, we have been
greatly interested in it.


How short is life’s uncertain space,
Alas ! how swiftly run.
Emma. —Mamma, could you relate anything
to us this evening?
Mrs. S.—' The evening is already far ad.
vanced.
Emma. —l fear there will not be time.
Julius. ~Tell us some little story then, if
you please Mamma?
Lncy. Yes, do tell us a short tale, Mamma?
I like tales very much.
Mrs. S.—l suppose I must think of some-
thing then : but seat yourselves quietly.
Clara —We are quite ready now, Mamma.
Mi's. S. then began
THE HISTORY OF THE SWALLOWS.
In the spring of 1829 a pair of Swallows
which I Shflll distinguish by the names of Rapid
and Lightning, anxious to procure a safe retreat


lor the residence of their expected little ones
accidently flew into the verandah of a rustic
little white cottage, whose pillars overgrown and
shaded by sweetbriar, greatly charmed the little
wanderers: who chaunted many a merry lay,
as they skimmed to and fro; now mounting
high in air ; and again, diving into the further-
most corner of the verandah. Nor were these
excursions made, with a view to pleasure only ;
the quick eyes of the little strangers, were ex-
amining every nook; in the hopes that further
search would prove unnecessary: by their being
enabled to build a warm and snug little nest, on
one of the numerous ledges, formed by the rough
materials of which the roof was composed.
Before, however, they had commenced the ardu-
ous task of building their little nest, a circum-
stance occurred which induced them to change
their plan.
It was one of those lovely days so frequent
in spring, when the sun shines forth in all its
splendour; and all nature seems enjoying the
blessings which a bountiful Providence has
showered upon us. Under these impressions,
the lady who inhabited the white cottage (the
parlour of which opened into the verandah) sat
busying herself with her needle; while her


darling baby lay wrapt in soft slumber, in her
little cot. All seemed peace and serenity ; and
the little swallows emboldened by the quiet
which reigned within, flew into the parlour;
now peering into this recess; and then chirping
with approbation, in the opposite corner of the
room.
At length, they evidently fixed on a nook
formed by the chimney, as a secure and pleasant
place of shelter ; and by degrees, finding them-
selves undisturbed, seemed regardless of the
presence of the lady; who watched their little
movements with much delight.
The mighty task now commenced: and with
quick and undulating notions, each little bird
flew in search of the necessary materials; which
instict pointed out to them as suited to their
purpose; and soon the white wall bore signs
of the clay, or mortar with which the active
little masons compose their nest: lining it with
soft feathers; in order to make it warm for their
tender little ones:
Thus far all had prospered: but alas! what
a fate awaited them !
When fatigued by their frequent rambles in
search of building materials, the little birds were
accustomed to alight on the window of a sleep-


ing apartment, which opened into the verandah;
and there with loud warblings, pour forth the
gratitude which glowed in their little hearts.
Whilst thus engaged, poor Lightning was one
day suddenly seized by the remorseless cat;
which had long watched the familiarity of the
feathered songsters; and marked them for her
The shrill shriek of the helpless bird warned
the friendly lady of its sad fate ; who instantly
calling to a servant for assistance, flew to rescue
her little favorite; which after much buffeting
and chasing of the cat, was happily effected;
and the little sufferer with palpitating heart and
trembling limbs, was caressed and examined by
its preservers; who pronounced it but little
tajured.
After taking the precaution to drive the cat
to a distance, poor Lightning was taken to the
back of the house; and upon the servant who
held it opening his hands, it instantly darted
down the hill. But sad to tell! a greedy mag-
pie which no doubt had been watching its cap-
tivity, with fell swoop darted upon and caught
the defenceless trembler in its talons; whose
piteous cries, at again finding itself in the power


of a terrible foe, filled the eyes of its compas-
sionating friend with tears.
To save it now was impossible; though the
magpie flew on the garden fence; and com_
menced pecking the poor little prisoner.
The man again ran to its assistance : but ere
he could reach the spot, the cruel magpie flew
swiftly into the adjoining forest; and poor, ten-
der little Lightning, was lost sight of for ever!
Of the fate of Rapid the lady never could
learn. Whether he was a witness to the said
end of his affectionate mate, and shunned the
spot ever after ; or missing Lightning, in his
search after her, met an untimely end himself.
However, from that time the building ceased;
and after a short interval, the unfinished nest
was removed as unsightly.
Lucy. —Thank you, dear Mamma. What a
pretty story. Is it true, Mamma? Did it
r eally happen ?
Mrs. S. —lt is quite true, ray dear. And
really happened, just as I have described.
Emma . —Poor little things! what a pity to
be thus cut off by such a painful death : when
so busily making its nest for its young.
Mrs. S. —Nothing can be more ingenious
i 3


“ It wins my admiration,
than the nest of a bird: so carefully and beau-
tifully woven. Hurdis says—
To view the structure of that little work,
A bird’s nest. Mark it well within, without,
No fool had he that wrought, no knife to cut,
No nail to fix, no bodkin to insert.
No glue to join: Lis little beak was all,
And yet how neatly finished ! what nice hand
With every implement and means of art,
And twenty years apprenticeship to boot,
Could make me such another. Fondly then
We boast of excellence, whose noblest
Instinctive genius foils.’'


THE PURPLE BEETLE.
See the proud giant of the beetle race ;
What shining arms his polished limbs enchase !
Like some stern warrior formidably bright
His steely sides reflect a gleaming light:
On his large forehead spreading horns he wears.
And high in air the branching antlers bears :
O’er many an inch extends his wide domein,
And his rich treasury swells with hoarded grain.
Barbauld.
Lucy. —Could you be so very good, as to
tell us of something amusing this evening, if
you are not too busy, dear Mamma?
Mrs. S. —My business is not of a nature to
be interrupted by conversation, my dear.
Emma. — lam glad of that, Mamma.
Mrs. S. —What do you wish me to converse
about, Lucy?


Lucy. —lf you could tell us of something
about insects. Something that you saw in Eng-
land, if you please, Mamma: and then it will
be quite new to us.
Mrs. S. — Smiled; and after a short pause,
said, suppose I tell you ofa strange circumstance
which I observed, respecting a beetle.
Julius. —A beetle! It is an insect that we
do not like at all, Mamma.
Emma. —But you know there may be pretty
stories about ugly things : besides, some beetles
are very handsome; for instance, the spotted
ones, which we call elephant beetles ; and those
lovely green ones. So do tell it us, if you please,
dear Mamma? and Julius do not interrupt
M amma; we like her to tell it, in her own way.
So will you begin, dear Mamma?
Thus solicited Mrs. S. began.
During a sojourn which I made in the north
of England some years ago, I was very fond of
rambling about in the woods, or forests ; which
consist chiefly of fir trees; and aretfiere called
mosses. Probably, from the numerous mosses
of every shade and variety, which clothe the
ground : while the trees are frequently covered
with beautilul lichens. There is also an end-
less variety of beautiful little plants, and wild


native fruits; such as the wortleberry; the bil-
berry ; the English cranberry, &c: Some of
these curiosities I delighted to draw; others I
dried, and thus made a pleasing addition to my
herbal. I will draw you a little sprig of the
cranberry. It is a pretty little plant, and trails
along the ground. The flower is very much the
form and color of the autumnal cyclamen ; and
the berry is about the size of a pea; and the
color of a ripe apricot.
In one of these botanizing excursions, I saw
a beetle of a large size; and beautiful purple
color: apparently in great pain ; and unable to
walk. I immediately took it in my hand to
examine if it were hurt, and perceived that it
was entirely covered underneath with small
spiders of a drab, or fawn color; which appeared
in a great bustle. I have no doubt they were
feeding on the poor beetle. And hard as the
skin of the beetle appears, the parent spider
most likely laid its eggs within it; that its future
progeny might thus find warmth and food.
Lucy. —Oh! how very painful it must have
been to the poor thing. Would it not die ?
Mrs. S. —1 dare say it would my love.
Lucy.— What did you do for it, Mamma ?


Mrs. S. —l took a little twig and pushed all
the little spiders away; to go seek some other
food. This I had some difficulty in effecting;
for they ran about very briskly; and frequently
returned before I could make them fall to the
ground. I did at last succeed; and carried the
suffering beetle to a little distance; and placed
it out of the reach of its little tormentors; and
1 dare say it recovered.
I frequently met with the same kind of beetle
afterwards; and always in the same predicament:
when I invariably proved their friend and cham-
pion.
'One day when I was walking in a park, I
perceived a purple beetle, apparently very angry
and struggling violently with (as I supposed)
a new enemy. I ran to defend it: but found
the beetle was the aggressor this time. It was
tugging along a poor little white slug which
kept spitting a milky liquid over its enemy’s
lace. I felt quite vexed with the beetle, for I
was young at the time, and imagined that this
description of beetle, having such powerful ene-
mies to contend with itself, should be the more
merciful to other insects; having experienced
the want of it. I did not consider that a wise


Lucy. —What the good little busy bee,
Mamma ?
I am sorry for that: then he could not go
about to gather his honey, I am afraid.
Mrs. S . — It was the industrious honey-bee,
dear Lucy. I was looking into a melon frame,
which was placed upon a hot bed.
Lucy. —A hot bed, Mamma! What is that ?
Mrs. S. —It is manure made into a heap;
which fermenting, keeps up a continual warmth;
for you may remember I have told you, that
England is much colder than this climate ; con.
sequently melons would not ripen in the open
air: so they place a frame, without any bottom
to it, on the hot bed. It has a top composed
of panes of glass; and as it is sloping like a
desk, the sun shines upon it very strongly.
Emma. —Oh ! yes Mamma; we have often
found glass quite burning hot, when the sun
has been shining upon it.
Mrs . S. —And glass decanters and other
bottles formed like these, have actually set fire
to such things as paper, or rag; and many fatal
accidents have occurred from bottles of this
description being left in a window exposed to
the sun.
Clara. —l could not have thought it possible


that it could have set fire to anything ; though
it might have burned any one’s hand who touched
it. Will you continue your account of the bee
if you please, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —l heard the buzzing of a bee in
pain, and found it whirling round and round.
I caught it at last; and found one of its wings
so full of these little spiders, that it looked just
as if a pea was inside it,
Lucy. —Oh ! Mamma, how could you get
them out ?
Mrs. S. l was a good deal puzzled; for it
struggled so, that I was fearful of hurting it;
and I had no needle with me to open the wing.
I however reluctantly made use of a pin for
that purpose ; and succeeded in ridding it of its
tormentors; and then placed it on the melon
frame. It appeared weak, but I dare say it
recovered.
Julius. —l wonder it did not sting you,
Mamma.
Mrs. S. —I had on kid gloves, and perhaps
that prevented it, my love.
Clara. —l should like to see the purple beetle,
Mamma. How big was it ?
Mrs. S. —l think about an inch or more in
length, and thick, and strongly made. Some-


what larger than those beetles which we find
with bronzed wings. They are sadly tormented
by the little black ants.
Emma.— Oh! yes Mamma; and we have
carried many of them away from the ants and
placed them on the boughs of small trees.
Clara. —Do you like the brown beetles,
Mamma ?
Mrs. S.—l cannot say I do, Clara. When
I was a little girl about your age, I had the
measles severely. I was a little better; and was
sitting in an easy chair, propped up by pillows ;
when the servant threw some coals from a skut-
tle on the fire ; and with them a poor brown
beetle: which endeavouring to escape from the
smoke and heat, ran into the fire. I was a
tender-hearted child; and tried to tell the ser-
vant to take it out; but was too weak; and
seeing it drop into the fire, it turned me sick;
and I fainted: much to the alarm of my kind
friends, who anxiously endeavoured to under-
stand what 1 wanted to say to them. If I had
not been very ill, this could not have occurred!
for I think it exceedingly wrong to feel so much
for animals, as to make ourselves uncomfortable
about them : though it is right to save them


from being hurt, when we have an opportunity
of doing so.
Since I have been in New South Wales, I
saw a particularly large flat-made beetle; of a
(lark brown color : running about in great dis-
tress, upon a log of wood, which was upon the
fire. I took a small piece of stick and held it
so, that the beetle could get upon it; which it
instantly did; and ran up the sleeve of my dress,
to my great annoyance; and clung so perse-
veringly, that I could not get rid of it for some
time.
We should be careful how we touch insects,
they may sting, or otherwise hurt us.
Some people have a sad cruel habit of throw-
ing insects into the fire! I always consider it
not only a sure proof of want of feeling: but of
having had a neglected education also: for
The poor beetle, that we tread upon,
In corporal suffrance feels as great a pang,
As when a giant dies.”


JOSEPH FORBES
Clara. —When the sailors who had escaped
from the wreck of the Charles Eaton were at
Oleillet in Timor Laut, they heard that there
was a white boy in a neighbouring settlement;
did you hear who he was, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —His name was Joseph Forbes : he
was the only survivor of the Stedcombe: for-
merly commanded by Captain Barnes ; who you
may remember died in Sydney about two years
Emma. —Were they wrecked on the coast,
Mamma 1
Mrs. S. —No, my dear; they were over-
powered by the natives of Laoura in 1 imor
Laut; and all but Forbes and another boy were
cruelly murdered.
Julius. —Oh! be so good as to tell us all the
particulars, dear Mother ?


Mrs. S. —In 1821 Forbes, who was then
quite a little boy, sailed from London in the
btedcombe , as cabin boy : he had a brother on
board ; who was one of the sailors. The vessel
was commanded by Captain Barnes ; and bound
on a trading voyage among the islands of Torres’
Straits.
In 1822 upon their reaching Melville Island,
where there was a settlement, Captain Barnes
and two or three others landed.
The chief officer now took command of the
schooner; and proceeded on their voyage.
They arrived off Timor Laut in the night;
and cast anchor. The following morning the
captain and boat’s crew went on shore : leaving
only the steward; Forbes; and another boy
named John Edwards, on board. As the time
for dinner drew nigh, the boys became anxious
for their return. Forbes took a telescope to
see what they were doing; and perceived with
horror that the natives were busied in slaughter-
ing their poor companions. The captain and
most of them were already murdered. Forbes
ran to inform the steward of their situation :
but I suppose the man did not give credit to
his assertion ; for he bid him go about his busi-
ness. Forbes begged him to help to slip the


cable; but he would not. The two boys there-
fore with all haste endeavoured to do so ; think-
ing the savages would be sure to come on board.
The wind was favorable; but the poor boys
had not strength: and before they could effect
any thing, the inhuman savages were alongside,
and the vessel surrounded by canoes. They
immediately boarded her ; and began the work
of slaughter, by knocking out the brains of the
steward; who was then thrown overboard.
Lucy. —Poor boys! now they are quite alone.
What did they do, Mamma ?
Mrs. S.— They ran up the rigging; and
sprang from one part to the other so nimbly,
that the natives could not catch them. The
savages discharged arrows at them, but still the
poor boys dared not venture down, till the
natives assured them by signs that they would
not hurt them if they did. Tired out by their
exertions; and the terror which they felt, it
was impossible to contend longer; and they
accordingly surrendered : when they were im-
mediately bound ; and dragged on shore.
The first sight that presented itself, was the
bodies of their murdered captain and shipmates.
Their heads had been cut off’and ranged on the
heach.


Emma. —How dreadful!
Mrs. S. —These monsters in human form
made the defenceless boys walk over the bodies.
One over which Forbes was forced to walk, he
recognized as his brother !
Lucy.- Oh! poor little boy! how sorry I
am for him.
Mrs. S. —The savages threw the bodies into
the sea: but the heads were strung together
and hung on a tree; and the natives amused
themselves by dancing round them, with hideous
yells, for several hours at a time, night and day,
for some days. When the heads became very
offensive, the natives again arranged them on
the beach. The two boys watched an oppor-
tunity and buried them ; unknown to the natives.
Clara. What did they do with the ship,
Mamma?
Mrs. S. —They fastened a rope to her;
slipped the cable; and hauled her on shore:
they then stripped it of every thing they thought
of value, and burned it.
Julius. —What a pity !
Emma.— What did they do with the boys ?
ilrs. S. —They made slaves of them.
Julius. What work did they make them do,
Mamma?


Mrs. S.—They employed them in fishing,
planting cocoa-nuts and tobacco.
The food of the natives was principally fish and
yams.
Emma.— Did the natives treat them kindly’
except making them work hard?
Mrs. S. —They treated them with great bar-
barity. Poor boys! they endured much suffer-
ing- , .
The natives bored large holes in their ears;
into which they put such heavy ornaments, as
to produce great torture, from the constant stiain
upon the ears. They burned their arms; tat-
tooed their bodies; and filed their teeth down
to the gums.
When they had been about three months on
the island poor Edwards died, His remains
were placed in a basket by the natives, and hung
on a tree; and afterwards buried secretly by
poor melancholy Forbes.
Clara. —Did not any vessel touch at the
island dui'ing all that time, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —Forbes says several Dutch vessels
called at the island; to whom he appealed to
rescue him : but they would not interfere.
Emma. —What could be their motive for such
inhumanity?


Mrs. S. —Fear of offending the natives pro-
bably, with whom they wished to trade. I
know of no other motive that could impel them
to such upardonable cruelty. When avarice
gets the better of people, they seem to lose all
feeling for their fellow creatures.
For a considerable time before Forbes was
rescued, whenever a vessel came in sight, they
would seize him; bind him hand and foot; and
remove him from all chance of observation:
where they kept him guarded till it had sailed.
About four years before he was removed from
the island, two vessels touched there : the com-
manders had heard there was a white person
there; they offered to ransom him, but it was
finally refused. About a month before his
rescue Forbes says a Dutch man of war an-
chored aube p but although the natives
the b r 6 edMmf ° r a triflin S ™som,
Dutchmen refused, and sailed
"» — «•
Mrs S.—The Dutch captain who so cruelly
refused to ransom Forbes, fell in afterwards with


the Essinyton , commanded by Captain Watson
and informed him of the circumstance of rf there
being a white man at Timor Laut.
The Essinyton had sailed from Sydney about
September, 1838, for the new settlement, which
Government was forming at the Coburg Penin-
sula. They carried with them the church, which
had been purchased in Sydney.
Lucy. —A church ! Mamma. How could
church be put in a ship?
Mrs. S. —Not such a church as you have
been accustomed to see, my dear little girl. I
suppose this was the wooden frame of a church.
Julius. — Like putting together some of our
toy buildings, Lucy.
Lucy. —Oh ! yes, I understand.
Mrs, S. —Several ships sailed from Sydney
for the new settlement: among the rest the
Brittomart. On the 18th March, 1839, the
Brittomart left Victoria, the capital of the set-
tlement, and proceeded to Timor Laut. It was
dark and squally when they reached it, so they
stood off and on till daylight.
Julius. —What part were they near, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —Oleillet. At daylight on the 21st
they worked up for the island; and at 9 a. m.


saw two large canoes under sail, coming towards
their vessel. They shortened sail several timeSj
as if afraid to venture: but at last came along-
side : when several of the natives came on board,
and told them there was good anchorage. The
Brittomart therefore stood in for it; taking the
two canoes in tow. An elderly man, who seemed
to be the head of the party, whose name sounded
like Gamble, handed them a small basket, con-
taining several odd leaves of an old remark
book, written in pencil; a torn leaf of a navi-
gation book ; and two small pieces of black lead
pencil. On examination, it appeared that they
must have been taken from one of the men who
left the Charles Eaton in a boat: you know
that they were at Oleillet thirteen months. They
were further confirmed in this opinion, by this
Gamble having on a blue striped shirt, marked
J. P. Clung: who you may remember was one
of the midshipmen of the Charles Eaton.
Julius.— But he was murdered with those
who were on Ireland’s raft, you know, Mamma:
how could his shirt come there I wonder.
Mrs. S. —After the wreck I suppose little
respect was paid to individual property : most
probably each appropriated to himself whatever


answered the necessity of the moment: thus,
one of the sailors might have worn one of Mr!
Clung’s shirts when he left the ship.
Emma. Most likely, Mamma. Did the cap-
tain of the Brittomart get those things from
the natives ?
Mrs. S.-No ; he could not prevail on the
old man to part with them, for any thing he had
to offer. So a copy was taken of such of the
contents as could be decyphered.
At half-past 1 p. m. they anchored in twelve
fathoms, sand and coral; about half a mile from
the nearest land. While they were getting in
numbers of natives came off; and by the time’
they had anchored, at least one hundred were
on board.
Julius. How did they behave, Mamma.
ihey wanted Captain Inglesdon’s nettings I
think. °
Mrs. s.— They were very friendly; and
appeared to take great pleasure in assisting to
work the ship. Numbers went aloft, some even
to the truck; out to the flying-jib, &c., with the
greatest activity. One took the wheel; which
he appeared to know the use of. They soon
landed m a sandy bay ; near which was the vil-
iageflm natives told them. Two of the head


men who had come off to them in their canoes,
landed with them ; and offered to show the way
to the town; of which nothing could yet be
seen : it being quite over their heads.
On their landing, several hundred men and
boys were waiting to receive them; who all
paid them the greatest respect.
They began the ascent to the village by a
long flight of steep rough steps; close to the
place they had landed; partly cut out of the
rocks ; and partly formed of logs of wood, laid
across; for about two-thirds oi the way up.
after this, they had to climb up two wide and
perpendicular ladders; which were very long
and apparently very old; curiously carved ; and
made of hard red wood. Under the top step
of the upper ladder, in a hollow, cut out of a
rock, were two little wooden figures ; like the
idols of the south sea islanders.
Clara. —What a deal of trouble the natives
must have, every time they wish to leave or
enter this town : what could induce them to
live on such a precipice ?
Mrs. S. —The difficulty of getting to their
town, rendered it the more secure from their
enemies. And when our sailors had ascended,


they found themselves on a considerable level;
perfectly impregnable from the sea.
Emma. —What kind of houses had they ?
Mrs. S.— They were neatly built on piles;
about six or eight feet from the ground ; and
were well thatched with palm or cocoa-nut
leaves. The walls were upright; but seldom
more than four feet deep ; some thatched; others
formed of bamboo. The gables project at the
top four or five feet; at the end of which are
two crooked pieces of wood, like stags’ horns,
pointing upwards; and three lines hanging
down, within a few feet of the ground; taste-
fully ornamented with shells. Having no door,
they enter by a trap in the floor, by means of a
ladder. The windows are small; and few in
number: but one or two had them neatly
finished.
The houses are in rows, very elose together ;
on the side of a tolerably wide street. About
half way up the street, they were introduced to
an old man; who appeared a chief: they were
invited to sit on each side of him; on a wicker
bench. Two or three hundred natives formed
a semicircle in front. The space thus left open,
appeared to be much respected: several little
dogs from time to time intruded into it; and


were kicked out without any ceremony. The
natives kept a profound silence. As the visitors
could not converse with the old chief, they soon
took leave : they forebore to examine the vil-
lage, for fear of giving offence.
Emma. —l am not surprised at that. lam
very uneasy for them : surely they were very
imprudent to put themselves in the power of so
many savages; though they might appear
friendly for a time: the least thing might give
offence; and I suppose, if they chose, they could
have taken the ship while the officers were
away.
Clara. —Did they see any women, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —None made their appearance. One
of the officers on going under one of the houses
to make a bargain for some birds, saw two
women; but they ran away directly. They had
many ornaments on their ankles and wrists ; but
no other dress than a wrapper which reached
from the waist to the knees.
Julius, What were the men like. I suppose
they were black ?
Mrs. S.—No; they were of a light copper
color; well made; and strikingly handsome
when young. Their hair is naturally black;
which they allow to grow very long; and dye


the tips for four or five inches of a bright sandy
yellow. They dress it in a fastidious manner ;
fastening it on their heads with clumsy wooden
combs. One or two had fine semicirculai tor-
toiseshell combs; which appeared to exceed
their powers of workmanship.
Almost all the boys and some of the young
men had their hair cut very close ; and smeared
over with a white paste.
Emma. —What taste !
Mrs. S.— I This was supposed to produce the
yellow color, which I mentioned before.
Clara. —Did the men ornament themselves?
Mrs. S.— Yes; they wore rings on their
arms of ebony, ivory, or tortoiseshell. They
had immense holes in their ears, some both in
the lower and upper part; in which they wore
enormous ear rings ; in the shape of a padlock.
Clara. —What were they made of?
Mrs. S. —Mostly of ivory, or ebony: but
some wore massive ear rings of apparently pure
gold : though of rough workmanship. Several
of them had two of these in one ear.
Julius. —What clothing had they, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —Simply the serce or waist cloth i
which was very neatly ornamented with small
white shells.


Julius. —What weapons did they use,
Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —Spears; and bows and arrows :
many of these had iron heads, and were very
sharp; and neatly made. There were also a
few creeses, or dirks among them.
Julius. —Did they make good canoes, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —They were about twenty-five feet
long; and much deeper than they were broad ;
with large clumsy outriggers on each side.
They build over the centre a sort of deck, with
split bamboo: which enables them to carry a
number of men.
Julius. What are their sails like, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —They have large mat sails, bent to
two bamboo yards : one of which is triced to the
mast-head by a coir rope, rove through a very
roughly made block.
Julius.— -They do not seem stupid people. I
wonder they could make a block at all Mamma.
But I suppose it was copied from one they had
seen.
Mrs. S.—l think that is very likely. They
came off with Dutch colors flying; and there
was also a Dutch flag flying in the Fort.
Emma. They seem on very good terms with
the Dutch;


Mrs. S. —ln the bay were several small
islands, on which they place their dead. One
or two of them were covered with bones and
human bodies, in a state of decomposition, in
light shells, or boxes : the effluvia was scarcely
bearable ; there were several little flags on a long
bamboo staff over them.
On a little rock close to the beach, were two
or three upright bamboos, from one of which
was suspended a human hand and wrist; the
meaning of which they could not understand.
Lucy.— Do you think it was the hand of a
white person Mamma?
Mrs. S. —They could not tell my dear. The
sun had completely blackened it.
Clara. —Was any trade carried on Mama?
Mrs. S. —The visitors would gladly have
purchased some of their numerous pigs and
fowls : but, though they repeatedly offered them
their most tempting articles of barter, they
would not part with any: and offered them
cocoanuts, of which they had abundance. They
seemed to set a great value on ornamental things ;
and wanted the uniform buttons off the officers’
jackets ; for which they sold several of their bows
and arrows.
Julius —Foolish creatures !


Mrs. S. —From the numbers they saw, they
concluded the population could not be less than
1000. The men were mostly athletic ; and not
at all tatooed, or scarified on the skin.
Clara. I am surprised at that; when their
neighbours where poor Forbes was, tatooed them-
selves so much.
Mrs. S. —At sunset they returned on board
their ship. The natives promised to bring them
some vegetables off the next morning.
Soon after 7 the next morning, about 300
natives came in 27 canoes, bringing numerous
trifles to barter. There was little worth having,
except cocoanuts and Indian corn: some of
which they bought; for beads, buttons, needles s
pins, nails, empty bottles, &e.
Lucy. —Did not they bring the vegetables they
promised M ama ?
Mrs. S. —They brought a few yams and
pumpkins; but asked so much for them, that
they were not worth having.
They learnt from the natives that Laoura was
in a bay, about two miles further northward.
1 hey also told them, that the inhabitants were
hostile to themselves and to the English.


The captain weighed anchor about 9 a. m.,
and ran along the coast under easy sail.
The coast of Timor Laut is very picturesque
and beautiful; they perceived two other villages
similarly situated to Oleillet; but did uot put in.
The coast abounded with numerous coral
rocks, and they did not think it right to keep
too close to the shore. By the aid of their
glasses, they could see canoes on the beach;
but they could not see any natives: there were
abundance of cocoanut- trees in all directions.
They ran as near the coast as they could ven-
ture, till sunset; when the wind having gradu-
ally headed them, when they were 4 miles from
land, they saw rocks and shoals ; some with
very little water over them ; they therefore
thought it prudent to tack; and bear to the east-
ward ; intending to visit some of the numerous
islands in the vicinity: where we will leave them
to prosecute the object of the voy age, while we
enquire after the Essington.
Julius. —l remember the captain’s name was
Watson: he fell in with the good-for-nothing
Dutchman who would not ransom poor Forbes.
Mrs . S.— Yes. This Dutch man-of-war was
at the island the beginning of March 1839, and
soon after met Captain Watson; who upon


hearing that a white person was detained among
the savages, humanely determined to rescue him.
He therefore sailed immediately for Timor Laut;
and arrived there on the 30th of the same month.’
Captain Watson found the Brittomart had been
there ; but had not taken the white person; he
was determined, if possible, not to leave the
island till he did get him. He had not been off
the island long, before he was surrounded by 11
armed canoes; which came to attack him. The
chief wished the captain to go in and anchor;
but this he refused; and shewed the chief that
they were ready and willing, to defend them-
selves, should they attack them. The cunniri*
chief nou-pretended friendship: thinking toentrap
'hem. Captain Watson allowed him and his
crew to come on board. The chief told him
Jr TV Whlte man and tried to
P ade Captain Watson to go and fetch him :
ouanft eC f' ned; but he s P read out an immense
quantity of tempting things; which he said he
wou ( give for the white man; and told the chief
o send Ins canoe f or him . adding (hat hfi
e arn him, till the white man was brought; and
f 'hat was not as soon as possible, he would
n ' J ’ ° r shoot tbe chief; for which purpose he
ordered a rope and a gun to be laid ready


Julius (Clapping his hands) well done cap-
tain ; you’ll get him now.
Mrs. S.—' This appeared the right course to
take, for the chief immediately dispatched his
canoe to the shore: but they did not bring off
Forbes that day nor the next.
Lucy.—l am afraid they have killed him.
Julius.- Oh! It was only a trick. Do not
you know that they did get him at last?
Lucy . —l forgot. So they did.
Mrs. S.— The captain kept cruising oft* the
island for two uights and days, with the prisoner
chief on board; towards the close of the third
day, however, they sent off the boy; but would
not put him on board; till Captain Watson
placed the rope round the chief’s neck ; as they
came alongside. This had the desired effect.
As the crew of the Essihgton were hoisting
Forbes up into the ship, the active chief jumped
overboard into his canoe. Captain Watson,
however, made the chief come on board again ;
and then told him, that, although he had be-
haved so badly ; and had wished to entrap him .
still he would show him, that white people were
as good as their words. lit; therefore, not only
gave the chief all he had promised him; but


. !
H I
likewise distributod presents, among the cresw
of the other 10 canoes. They seemed highly
delighted; declared they would never harm ano-
ther Englishman, and bound themselves to keep
their word, after their custom, by one person
cutting the arm of another, so as to produce
blood: a little of which was dropped upon a
sword; and tasted thereon by the chief and
Emma. Poor wretched Forbes! lam glad
he is taken away from such horrid people and
customs. I suppose he was in a terrible state.
Mt-s. S. —Deplorable indeed ! my love. He
bad forgotten his own language ; and appeared
quite a savage. The effects of sixteen years of
suffering such as his, must of necessity give a
wild and haggard expression to the finest coun-
tenance. How different is the expression of
the face when the heart feels happy and buoyant.
The countenance is then open, the eye spark-
ling, the mouth decked with smiles. Behold
the contrary picture: when the sufferer is op-
pressed by continual care; and bodily pain •
with the dread of more direful evils to come'’
the brow is then contracted; the eye wild, or


heavy; the corners of the mouth drooping; as
if in sympathy with the sinking, aching heart!
Poor Forbes’ hair was so long, that it reached
to his knees; his ears were sadly disfigured
from the clumsy ornaments he had been com-
pelled to wear in them ; his feet were dreadfully
diseased from the effects of the burning sands
he had so long walked on, barefooted. The
sinews of his legs were much contracted; and
his body and legs covered with ulcers. Indeed
he was altogether so emaciated ; and in so bad
a state of health; that the surgeon, (whom they
fortunately had on board the Essington t ) de-
clared that he could not long have survived : he
was however put under a regular course of me-
dicine ; and he was enabled after a while to
recover his native language, sufficiently to give
them the account I have related : of the capture
of the Stedcombe ; the massacre of the crew;
his own sufferings; &c. He told them also,
that the savages of Oleilet in Timor Laut, had
seized a Dutch vessel about three years before,
when they murdered the crew and burned the
ship.
Julius.— That is the place where (he sailors
who escaped from the wreck of the Charles
Eaton were. What a narrow escape they had!


Mrs. S. —When the Dutch Government at
Coupang heard of it, they dispatched an armed
vessel to the place; destroyed the village, plan-
tations, and growing crops. Most of the natives
escaped by hurrying into the interior, on the
first alarm ; so that the aged, or such as could
not leave the huts, alone perished.
Clara. —I trust this will teach them that
punishment may follow their wicked practices ;
and may account for the scarcity of vegetables
when the Brittomarl was there. Perhaps they
had not recovered the loss of their growing
Mrs. S. —Very likely.
Julius. —Stay, Mamma, if you please. Is
not Coupang the capital of Timor?
Mrs. S. —It is, my love. I will at my
leisure give you a short account of Timor : now
we will continue our narrative. Forbes told
Captain Watson that four other ships besides
the Steclcombe had been taken at Timor Laut:
when they murdered the people, and destroyed
the vessels.
Emma. —There may still be while people
among the savages, in some of these islands.
Mrs. S. —l fear there are several. Forbes
spoke of three, he had heard were among the


natives of the neighbouring islands. And some
missionaries told Captain Watson of two men,
who were on Bala Island: who had formerly
belonged to the Lady Nelsoti: which vessel
had been missing some years. The missionaries
had endeavoured to buy the men of the savages ;
but could not succeed.
Julius. —I suppose Captain Watson would
go to get them ?
Mrs. S , —He would gladly have done so :
but the winds were contrary; and he was obliged
to hasten to the settlement; and from thence to
Sydney.
He arrived at the latter place on the 18th
of July, 1839, and poor Forbes who was still
ill, was placed in the hospital: where he gra-
dually recovered his health in great measure:
and felt great anxiety to inform his relatives of
his situation.
Lucy.— Had he a mother and a father,
Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —He hoped they were living, my
dear: but in seventeen or eighteen years we
lose so many dear friends that I fear there was
not much chance of it. He left home so young,
that he could only recollect that his father was
shoemaker; and lived at Deptford in Kent *
m 2


where he worked about the Military Barracks.
I have not heard whether he found his parents :
but he sailed for England in October last, 1840.
A subscription having been previously made for
him and a passage taken.
Emma.— Oh ! Have you finished, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —For to-night, my dear. Besides I
have told you all I know about Forbes.
Julius. —I wish you could have told us all
about his getting to England, finding his mother
and father; and so on.
Mrs, S, —It would be very satisfactory to
bear all this : but there has not yet been time :
possibly we may, at some future period. You
know mine are true narratives. lam not at
liberty to invent.*
* Since this little work was in course of publication, I learn
that Forbes reached England in safety; and was brought
before Alderman Pirie, as a fit object of charity, by Mr.
Brooks, shipowner of Broad-street. It appears that poor
Forbes was in a hopelessly ill state of health; and still quite
crippled. His case excited much commisseration ; and a
subscription was raised for him ; and they add “ ihe tears
trickled down the pale and withered face” of poor Forbes on
the occasion.
Alderman Pirie remarked, that it was a singular fact, that
he was the very person who sold the schooner Stedcon.bz just
before it spt out on its fatal expedition: and it would give
him sincere gratification to receive subscriptions for the poor
Alderman Pirie and Mr. Brooks each subscribed £o
1 lie Committee of Lloyd’s sent the following complimentary
letter to Captain Watson


Emma. —That makes me like to hear them so
much, Mamma. I like to hear of things that
really happened; they are always much more
interesting than imaginary tales.
Mrs. S, —May you always be an admirer of
truth, my dear Emma ! If you feel any interest
in the return of the Brittomart to the settle-
ment, we can accompany them there to-morrow
evening if you please. You may remember we
left them to trade among the islands.
Lloyd’s, 4th May, 1841.
The Committee for managing the affairs of Lloyd’s bavin*'
had their attention called to your highly praiseworthy pro*-
ceeuings in so skilfully rescuing an unfortunate fellow-subiect
et the name ofi-orbes, from the savages, at the island of I‘iinor
.La'jt, after a captivity of 16 years, lam directed to acquaint
you, that they have unanimously resolved, in token of their
estimation of the humanity shown by you on the occasion, to
recommend the Subscribers, at the next general meeting to
vote to you the honorary Silver Medal of that Establishment
in order to mark the sense entertained of your kind and one-
rous conduct. 6
I beg to assure you, that upon the concurrence of the Sub-
scribers being obtained—which it is expected will be readily
accOTded-I shall hare great pleasure in transmitting the
Medal to S. A. Donaldson. Esq., the Agent fqr this Istab.
ment at Sydney. h.. S. W„ in order to its being delivered
I am. Sir,
Your obedient servant,
Captain Tbos. Watson. DOUSON ' S “-
Schooner Estington,
Sydney, N S. \V.
M 3


Julius. —Yes, dear mother, I should like to
hear about what they saw there. And then be
so good as to tell us about the settlement.
And you said you would tell us about Timor.
Mrs. S. —You have plenty of subjects in store
for me I think.
Mrs. S.— You are all seated with your maps
before you, waiting the fulfilment of my promise
I see.
Clara. —Yes, Mamma. You know we left
the Brittomart sailing away from Timor Laut,
as they thought it unwise to continue longer
near its rocky coast.
Mrs. S. —They afterwards visited several
islands : but were able to do very little in the
way of trade among them : and as nothing re-
markable occurred, until they arrived at the Ki
Islands, I think we had better join them there :
we will suppose them come to an anchor, at 8
a. m., in sight of numerous shoals and rocks.
The captain’s intention was to visit Doulla, for
which they started after breakfast in their gig.
They pulled along a sandy beach, the land was
low, thickly wooded and abounding every where
with cocoanut trees. They found Doulla but


an insignificant place; though it had the ap-
pearance of being very old: there were very
antique ornaments, carved on the principal gate
to the village ; and on some small oblong build-
ing ; in which they deposit their dead.
Like all the villages they had seen in these
islands, it was surrounded by a wall; which
enclosed a large space of ground: but there
were few houses in it. There were six or seven
entrances to these enclosures; after the fashion
of Robinson Cruesoe, viz : by short ladders both
outside and inside.
Clara. —What were the natives like, Mamma ?
Mi's. S. —They were a dark, dirty people;
many of them covered with leprous diseases;
possibly the consequence of their want of clean-
liness. Their only dress was the waist cloth.
They did not appear very numerous. Their
houses were built on piles; and every way
similar to Oleillet. Their weapons were also
the same.
I hey build a vast number of boats and canoes,
of various forms and sizes; with much inge-
nuity. Our voyagers purchased several of them ;
and admired them greatly.
There were two Macasser prauhs hauled into
dock, on the beach; where they were undergoing


repair. One was a fine large vessel, gaily de-
corated. The crews were living in houses, close
to the beach; which were fitted up for the pur-
poses of trade.
Doulla is very prettily situated ; the country
all round it looks like a garden.
Julius. —They got vegetables here I dare say.
Mrs. S. —No. Though the natives appeared
to possess abundance, they did not care to part
with any: so they could neither obtain vege-
tables, nor stock. They however bought some
cocoanuts and a few fowls, from a small village
near where the Brittomart was anchored. And
then sailed round the island to the westward.
They were all day passing a numerous group of
small islands, attached to the Ki Islands. They
then stood southward and saw the Nuda Tillo
Group to the westward. All night they kept
southward, under easy sail; and fresh breezes,
from the S. E.
At half past 8 a. m. they saw the Island of
Vordate a-head; and Mula to leeward. They
stood into the anchorage of the former island;
and at 8 p. m. they came to, in 20 fathoms;
pretty close to the shore. On Tuesday, 9tli
April, they landed with their articles for barter,
in hopes to procure stock. They were received


on the beach by a great number of natives, who
were mostly unarmed; and ornamented with
very curious head-dresses of feathers, of various
colours.
A very old man, one of the chiefs, came down
to them; making the most humblesalam; touch-
ing their feet with both his hands; and bowing
low several times, to each of them.
Lticy.— How droll it must have looked.
Julius. —l think he is too polite. I fear it
will not last: but go on if you please Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —This courteous old chief produced
a certificate in Dutch, from Mr. Kolff; which as
far as they could make out, gave him the highest
character fcr honesty and integrity ; during Mr.
Kolff’s stay among the islands: where this old
man acted as his interpreter, with the natives.
The captain gave the old chief and his son, each
a handkerchief.
Julius. —Did the natives seem inclined to
trade Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —There appeared a good deal of
excitement among them, and while the captain
and people from the Brittomart were on the
beach, the numbers rapidly increased; every
fresh comer being armed; and sticking his spear
upright in the sand: within a few yards of the


circle. Our voyagers gave them to understand,
that they wanted to purchase pigs, poultry, &c.
but the natives made them plainly perceive, that
they were unwelcome visitors.
Emma. —Dear me ! I wish they were safe
away.
Mrs. S. —They began to wish so themselves;
for the numbers of the natives now increased
so fast, that they thought it advisable to return
on board. The old chief promising to send the
things they required.
Julius.— What could make them behave in
this way, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —The captain supposed it proceeded
from fear, or doubt of the meaning of their
visit. It appears, that some months previous
to this, the Dutch Government had sent three
men-of-war, viz., the Diana frigate, Nakuling
brig, and the Hoake frigate, to the neighbour-
ing island of Laerat to punish them for the
murder of the captain and greater part of the
crew, of the English barque Alexander. The
Dutch vessels destroyed their village; and took
several of the natives, who had acted as ring-
leaders, to Amboyna; where it is supposed they
were executed.


Julius. —Did the natives keep their word
about sending off the things Mamma?
Mrs. S. —As soon as the captain shoved off
the whole of the natives crowded together; and
continued deliberating for about half an hour:
after which, one of the chiefs brought off a pig
and a he goat.
Julius (laughing).—Did they buy old Billy
Mamma? He could not be a very pleasant
companion, on board ship.
Mrs. S. —Quite the contrary, I should think;
and of little use : nevertheless they bought him ;
as the chief had had the trouble of bringing
him. Upon the chief’s return, the natives again
crowded together for a short time; and then
dispersed.
When the captain and crew landed the natives
saluted them with a swivel, from a prow on the
beach: so the captain thought it might please
them to receive a salute in return; they there-
fore fired 3 guns, on leaving.
The Brittomart was unwilling to depart
without obtaining more stock; but good reasons
presented themselves why they should. In the
first place the impossibility of making the natives
understand that they did not come with hostile
intentions, would prevent them from being able


to trade; the anchorage was also unsafe ; and
the weather unsettled: they therefore weighed ;
and ran round to the N. E end of the island.
Julius, — What were the natives like Mamma?
I hope they were more cleanly than their neigh-
hours of Doulla.
Mrs. S.-They were very like the inhabitants
of Oleillet: but not so robust; and apparently
more troubled with leprosy. Their arms ap-
peared the same. One man had a large breast-
plate, apparently made of hide. Dutch colors
were flying in several directions. As they sailed
round the island, they could see pat:hes of
cleared and cultivated land.
It was very rainy and squally during the
night; but moderated towards morning. They
made Timor Laut in the afternoon of the 10th*
On Thursday the 11th they arrived off Oleillet,
at Ir. m. As they passed Laoura they saw a
long line of breakers.
At 2 o’clock a large canoe with 35 natives
came off to them ; among whom was their old
friend the chief; who had brought them the
manuscripts, &c. formerly belonging to the sai-
lors of the Charles Eaton. He now showed
them two papers from Captain Watson, of the
Essington ; who had touched there it appeared,


only two days after the Brittomart had left.
One was dated the 31st March .1839, and slated
Captain Watson’s determination to cruize round
the island, in the hope of finding the survivors,
if any remained, of the Stedcombe; who were
captured by the natives of Laoura. The other
paper was dated a few days later; and informed
them, that he had rescued an English lad from
the natives.
The captain landed in the afternoon; and the
natives appeared delighted at his paying them
another visit. The women now shewed them-
selves ; and among them, they saw several very
pretty girls ; with bright brass ornaments round
their wrists and ankles. Young and old alp
wore a dark colored wrapper; which reached
from the waist to the knees.
Clara. Did they invite them into their
houses this time, Mamma?
Mrs. S. The visitors took advantage of
their friendly feeling, to look into one of their
houses: it was very clean and neat. The floor
consisted of a beautifully made bamboo mat.
The bamboo was split; and sufficiently thin for
every thing that was passing underneath to be
seen.


Emma. —l suppose they were able to get
vegetables and stock now, Mamma ?
Mrs. •S'.—Excepting a few cocoanuts, they
could procure nothing ; so they retired on board,
the natives promising to bring down a great
quantity of things the next morning.
They stood off and on all night, and landed
in two boats at 10 in the morning. As they
approached, they could see numbers of the
natives coming down from the village, with
vegetables, and many others coming armed.
When they landed they found all the chiefs
and a considerable number of natives waiting
for them. They had not been on shore more
than ten minutes, when a very powerful man in
a state of intoxication, came rushing down from
the village; armed with a strong iron-headed
spear.
Lucy.— l am afraid they will all be killed
Mrs. S. —There seemed every reason to fear
so, for the man made towards them, apparently
with a view to attack them. This several of
the natives prevented, by struggling with him ;
and getting the spear away. After which he
rushed unarmed among them, purposely running


against them; insulting them; and with violent
gestures, pointing to them to be off. No doubt
with a view to produce a quarrel: the strangers
however were upon their guard. There was a
great deal of scuffling among the natives on the
beach ; and it was thought some were wounded:
but it was quite impossible to understand what
was taking place distinctly: the noise, crowd
and confusion, was so great. Finding that
nothing advantageous could be done, under such
circumstances; and that the least thing would
be sufficient, as a pretence for attacking them,
the party from the Brittomart determined on
returning on board. When the chiefs under-
stood their intention, they were very eager to
induce them to stay; professing much friend-
ship : but not being satisfied with them; and
their vessel being a good way off, they insisted
on leaving; and at half-past 11 reached the
ship; hoisted up the boats ; and made sail for
Port Essington; with fine weather.
Clara.-—I am quite relieved at their escape ;
it is more than I expected. Surely, that ex-
citement must have been on their account. I
should think some wished to kill them; and
others objected.
Mrs. S.— lt is impossible to be certain, my


dear. It certainly looked very like it. All the
party were of the same opinion; from seeing
all the old chiefs on the beach : which it appears
was unusual; the great number of armed na-
tives ; and excitement that prevailed. Probably
they were cautious of immediately attacking
them; as they landed with two boats’ crews
that day: had they delayed leaving, I fear none
would have survived to tell the catastrophe.
The natives of all those islands, are considered
by the persons who trade with them, as a very
treacherous people, that ought not to be trusted ;
though they should appear friendly.
On Sunday, the 14th, they saw the coast of
Australia to the westward of Trepang Bay.
The next morning they were offVashon Head,
and in working up touched lightly on the edge
of Orontes Shoal: but did not sustain any
damage; and at 2p. m. anchored off Victoria.
Emma. —Thank you, Mamma. I think they
have had at least two very narrow escapes. I
am glad we have brought them safely to an
anchor. To-morrow, if it is not too much
trouble, will you tell us a little about Victoria
and the new settlement ?
Mrs. S. —lt is not at all troublesome, my
Emma. It gives me pleasure to see you take
so much interest in our little conversations.


PORT ESSINGTON.
Mrs. S. —You may remember I told you
there had been a settlement at Raffles Bay
some years ago. The new settlement was not
many miles from that, in the Coburg Peninsula.
Clara. —What a pity they did not remove all
the things, from the one to the other.
Mrs. S. —lt was, my dear: but I suppose at
that time, there was no idea of forming another
establishment so near. One of the inducements
I believe has been, that in the event of ship-
wreck, which too often happens in these parts;
Europeans would have a safe retreat.
On the 27th September, 1838, the expedition
started. It was commanded by Sir J. J. Gor-
don Bremer, C. B. & K. C. H. of the Alligator:
accompanied by the Brittomart , the Orontes,
which took the stores, provisions, &c., and the '
Lady Kennaiuay . The latter vessel was going
n 3


to India: but sailed in company with them.
The Canton was also to have accompanied
them: but was detained :so the Brittomart
was sent back for her ; and was to join them off
Smokey Cape.
Julius. —Quite a fleet, Mamma. How did
they get on?
Mrs. S. — But slowly. The Orontes was
very deep in the water; and sailed very badly :
the winds were strong from the north ; and the
current rapid from the south: all these things
combined, rendered the passage very tedious.
They however entered the Straits with fail-
winds and beautiful weather; which continued
all the rest of the voyage.
Going slowly, they had time to admire the
picturesque scenery of the Straits: which is of
a mountainous description ; extremely magni-
ficent; and greatly resembling the finest parts
of the coast of South America. On the 19th
October they anchored off the largest of the
Albany Islands, and found after a careful exami-
nation, that the anchorage was very good, two
miles from the main land, at Cape York. For-
mal possession was taken of the Cape and
adjoining territory. British colors hoisted, on
a rise, under a salute from the guard on shore,


and three cheers; which was answered by a
royal salute from the ship.
Emma.— lt is just at the point, Mamma.
Was it a pretty place ?
Mrs. S. —Extremely so; and the land good,
and covered with fine trees.
On the eastern side of Prince of Wales Island
they saw the wide openings put down on the
maps; and thought it must be an extensive
port.
Julius.— Did they see any inhabitants,
Mamma?
Mrs. S. —As they were coasting along in their
boats, they saw fifty or sixty, who tried to induce
them to land, but they did not think it prudent.
They reached Port Essington on the 27th,
and found the Essington schooner off Point
Record, watering. It had sailed from Sydney
before them.
Lncy. —lt took the church I remember,
Mamma.
Mrs. S. —Yes, my love. It also brought
from the islands afterwards, pigs ; Timor ponies ;
buffaloes; and many other useful things; for
the settlement.
Clara. —Did the Brittomart join them off
Smokey Cape ?


Mrs. S. —No. It arrived at the settlement
about a week after the Alligator and Orontes;
and anchored off Middle Head. They were
employed many days in search of a good site for
the town. It was requisite to combine so many
advantages, that due consideration was neces-
sary. For instance, it should be of easy access
for the shipping; possess good fresh water;
with a fruitful soil. All these they at length
found; and fixed on a spot for the township :
which they called Victoria, in honor of the
Queen.
Julius. —They will be very busy now.
Mrs. S. —All hands were employed in put-
ting up houses; digging wells; &c. Very
excellent water was found about twenty feet
from the surface.
The North Point which is seventy feet high,
Sir G. Bremer named Minto Heads.
Emma. —Why, Mamma ?
Mrs. S . —After the First Lord of the Admi-
ralty. They intended to make this a battery;
and place plenty of cannon on it. The South
Head was a perpendicular cliff, fifty feet high ;
they named it Adam Head; this also was well
supplied with cannon. So woe to the enemy
who should venture inside of Point Record.


They made a pier for the convenience of
landing: it was 150 feet long; 15 broad; and
8 high. Indeed, it we include the road that
was cut to it, the length was 280 feet. It was
built of black sandstone; and erected under the
direction of Lieutenant Stewart, of the Alliga-
tor.
Julius. —That must have been very useful.
I suppose they made gardens too, Mamma. I
dare say they brought trees and seeds with
them ; and you know the land is pretty good.
Mrs. S. —Yes; they laid out several gar-
dens; and the trees and plants which they
brought from Sydney and elsewhere, did well.
Tropical productions flourished best: such as
bananas, pine apples, water melons, island beans,
lemons, oranges, guavas, yams, arrow-root,
sugar canes, maize, cotton, tamarinds, tomatoes,
sweet potatoes, &c. Pumpkins did not seem
to do well; neither did cocoanut trees: but I
dare say they would after a time.
Lucy. —You know cocoanut trees are grow-
ing on all the islands about.
3Trs. S. —So they are Lucy, and no doubt
will become accustomed to the soil of Port
Essington. It was thought that rice would do
well, on some of the low lands, that were flooded.


The soil on the high lands, was mostly covered
with iron-stone: but the low lands were very
rich and good. They were of opinion, that
coffee and spice might grow well: also that
sugar plantations might be cultivated with ad-
vantage : indeed they found one species of wild
sugar cane, growing in sandy soils. The nut-
meg was also found indigenous; and of a fine
flavour; though of a different species to those
at the Molaccas. A species of cotton was also
found.
The principal trees were (as elsewhere in this
island) the eucalyptus or gum trees ; the casua-
l-ina or swamp oak, growing on the coast and
banks of rivers; and the banksia or honey-
suckle.
There appeared to be few herbs; and the
grasses did not afford much variety: they grew
long and coarse*
Clara.— l suppose it was very hot?
Mrs. S.— Extremely so: but particularly
healthy. Its salubrity was put to the trial; for
the surveying parties frequently slept out for
more than a week at a time: either in the boats,
or m the bush; exposed to the open air: with-
out feeling any inconvenience from climate. I


cannot say as much for mosquitoes and sand-
flies ; they were sad torments to them.
Emma. —Did they see any natives, Mamma ?
Mrs. Oh! yes; they appeared an inof-
fensive friendly people; and not very numerous.
It was thought there might be about 200 on
the whole Peninsula.
They once gave a convincing proof of their
friendly feeling towards the white people. One
of the sailors rambled into the bush and could
not find his way back. He was there four days;
and was found by the natives in a dying state.
They took him carefully to their encampment;
washed his feet; gave him food ; and then kindly
and carefully took him to the settlement.
Lucy. —That was very kind of them.
Mrs. S. —lt was. They appear a simple
wandering race, entirely without clothing; but
a much finer people than our natives of New
South Wales. They found them very useful at
the settlement; for they would assist as la-
borers ; and bring them fish and honey.
Julius. Is Port Essington a good habour,
Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —A particularly fine one; and pos-
sesses numerous delightful bays. It extends
for nineteen miles; The entrance is seven miles,


with ten fathoms water. The settlement is
about midway between the entrance and the
head; in what is called the Middle Harbour:
this is about six miles long; and from two to
five wide.
They discovered several streams of fresh
water running into the harbour; in which were
excellent fish: they caught some very much like
trout.
Julius. —Did they see any kangaroos,
Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —Plenty. And a surveying party
fell in with a herd of buffalos, feeding on the
banks of a fine river; about five miles S. S. E.
of Raffles Bay.
Clara.— Could they have belonged to the old
settlements ?
Mrs. S. —lt was supposed so.
Julius. —When the Tigris stopped at Raffles
Bay to get a new rudder made, they found most
of the trees swarmed with white ants; was it
the same at Port Essington ?
Mrs. S.— Yes; about the coast: but they
disappeared inland.
Julius. —That was fortunate: did they pay a
visit to the old place, Mamma ?
Mrs - s■— Yes; Lieutenant Stewart went in


the decked boat, to ascertain its exact condition.
And on his return, he discovered between Point
Smith and the West Point of Raffles Bay, a
very fine harbour ; to which he gave the name
of Port Bremer: the west side is a mile and a
half from Berkley Bay, in Port Essington.
Mr. Macarthur discovered a small fresh water
river, about three miles inland. They also
found an excellent bed of brick clay, which an-
swered well for their buildings; and iron stone,
which worked well into blocks ; these also were
very valuable for building purposes.
Emma. —How favored the place seems,
Mamma; as if Providence had designed it for a
settlement,
Mrs, S. —It might indeed have been so or-
dained, my dear : you know nothing happens
without God’s knowledge : the party might have
been under His especial providence, when they
selected it.
The French discovery ships Astrolabe and
Zelee, arrived at Raffles Bay.
Clara . —Did they, Mamma? You know we
saw the officers in Sydney.
Mrs. S. —Yes. They were under the com-
mand of Commodore D’Urville.


Julius.—Did they go to Port Essington,
Mamma 1
Mrs. S.— Lieutenant Stewart wentin a decked
boat to visit them : and to invite them to enter
the harbour: which they did; and distributed
some medals; and after exchanging civilities
with the officers, they took leave.
Emma. —That made a pleasant change for
them.
Mrs. S. —Sir G. Bremer was anxious to have
a personal knowledge of the islands to the north ;
he therefore sailed in the Brittomart , on the
loth February, 1839. When he visited the
Island of Kissa; and the Portuguese settlement
of Dellie in Timor, where he was received with
much respect; and great attention shown him
by the Governor, Colonel Cabrera. Sir G.
Bremer was enabled to open a channel of com-
munication cf great value to the expedition,
during the N. W. Monsoon. At Dellie they
took much interest in the New Settlement at
Port Essington.
A schooner was just starting for Macao,
which would convey the intelligence to China.
So they expected that they should soon be able
to carry on a good deal of trade.


The Island of Kissa is small: but it is thickly
peopled: containing more than 7000 persons,
150 of whom are Christians; and the rest
Pagans. The Rajah and principal men are
Christians ; and under the spiritual charge of a
worthy Missionary of the name of Bier.
Clara. Did Sir G. Bremer trade at all
Mamma ?
Mrs ♦ S. —Yes. They found plenty of stock
at Kissa; which they sold very cheap; viz.: a
pair of fowls for a cotton handkerchief; a pig
for 4 yards of calico ; a pumpkin for 4 inches
of brass wire; and a melon for 6.
Lucy. —What a curious way of buying things
Mamma!
Mrs. S. —The Island of Moa is the largest
of the group: but the people did not appear so
intelligent, as those at Kissa. They had nume-
rous herds of cattle.
While they were there, Sir G. Bremer heard
that there was a man still living at Timor Laut s
who was one of the survivors from the Stecl-
combe.
Emma.— lt must have been poor Forbes,
Mrs. S. —lt was. Sir G. Bremer hastened
back to the Settlement; and dispatched the
Brittomart on the voyage which we have in


imagination taken with them. Lieut. Kuper I
believe had the command.
Clara. —How kind it was of Sir G. Bremer
to send the Brittomart so promptly.
Mrs. S.— lt was. While they were away, G
Malay prahus paid the Settlement a visit, each
containing 25 men; 14 others were seen and
heard of in the immediate neighbourhood.
Julius. —We do not care if there were 500 of
their frippery vessels : our roaring cannon will
soon teach them to keep among their islands;
and let white people alone. I wish I had been
there, I would have helped to fire away upon
them; leaving only a few to go back ; and tell
the rest, how we will treat such bad people in
future.
Mi's. S. Stay Julius. You have brought
your roaring cannon into use too soon: these
Malays are only come to ask the English to let
them be under their protection, while they col-
lect and cure the Trepang.
They had heard of the Establishment; and
now came on the beach about 110 yards from
the Government Garden; and asked permission
to erect houses, for curing and dressing their
articles of trade: as they would be secure from
the attacks of the natives. The Malays had an


establishment at some distance; but were obliged
always to keep half their party to guard it:
while the other half were fishing. Under the
protection of the English, they could employ
all the people fishing.
Clara. —Did they promise protection; and
allow them to build?
Mrs. S. —Yes. It was thought that numbers
of the Malays would come in consequence, and
that a very lucrative trade might be carried on
with them.
Emma. —What did they trade in Mamma?
Mrs. S. —The Malays would bring bees’-
wax, pearls, tortoiseshell, and perhaps sandall
wood. When the Essington returned to Syd-
ney with Forbes, she brought 5 cases of tortoise-
shell, 30 cwt. of bees’-wax, 10 cwt. of sandal
wood, &c. The Malays were very anxious to
exchange these things for English calicoes,
knives, &c.
Clara. —They must have a vast number of
bees to be able to sell so much wax: do they
ever part with any of their honey ?
Mrs. S. —Yes. That is another article of
traffic.
A party of 9 persons was formed to explore
the interior of the Cobourg Peninsula; it con-


sisted of Lieut. Stewart, Mr. Drury, Mate ; Mr.
Sharp, Assistant Surgeon; Mr. Meynell, Mid-
shipman ; Mr. Armstrong, Botanist; 2 seamen,
and 2 marines. They started on the Ist May;
and carried with them a week’s provision, on 2
ponies. They were each well armed. It was
4 o’clock when they started; and being unac-
customed to pack* their baggage was very trou-
blesome to them ; frequently slipping from the
ponies’ backs. This hindered them so much,
that they only went 2 miles that afternoon; and
then encamped : making a snug hut, or gunyah,
with boughs.
They greatly admired the country as they
proceeded; comparing it to the fine forests of
South America; it did not possess that same-
ness, so much complained of, in most parts of
Australia. They saw plenty of magnificent
cedar trees; and a kind of reddish wood, of
which the natives make their canoes : it is as
buoyant as cork ; and grows to a very large size.
Fresh running water abounded every where.
Near a pond they found the bleached bones of a
buffalo; the bones'of a turtle; and also the bones
of an animal which they thought must be a seal.
There were tracks of the natives about that part.
Some miles further Mr, Drury saw a large black


buffalo, very wild; and their tracks were nu-
merous.
They did not see any natives ; but could hear
their calls to each other. This was their third
day of travelling; in the night a serious
accident had nearly occurred. They encamped
about 5 o’clock; and lighted a fire, at the foot
of an old tree: the fire burned freely; and gra-
dually undermined it: so that about midnight,
when all but the watch had fallen asleep, down
it came. Just as it was falling, an alarm was
given. Mr. Meynell had scarcely time to
scramble out of the way, when it fell, just where
he had been sleeping! Had it fallen three feet
more to the right, Lieut. Stewart and three
others, perhaps more, would have been killed :
as it was, only Mr. Armstrong received any
injury: one of his hands was struck by a branch ;
but he was not severely hurt.
Clara. — How very fortunate. We have
known so many shocking accidents, from the
falling of trees, that we can imagine they must
have been much alarmed. My heart always
beats so fast; and I tremble from head to foot,
when I hear a tree fall: though it may not be
near me. It sounds like cannon.
Mrs. S. —In the course of the next day they


saw two native encampments ; but the people
were not there : their nets, &c. were lying about.
In the second encampments were two large
huts, in one of which they found a bundle of
human bones, carefully bound round with a net;
and secured with a small line. Ihe bones were
not at all offensive; the flesh had been quite
removed; and the bones probably dried in the
Emma.— l should have been fearful of the
natives coming.
Mrs. S.— Some of the party thought the
natives were yelling, because they were examin-
ing the bones: but Lieutenant Stewart did not
think it possible they could see; so their yells
must have proceeded from some other cause.
Lucy.— Oh ! they were near then?
Mrs. S. —Yes ; but they did not see them.
Clara. —What was in the other hut, Mamma?
Mi's. S. —They saw a Malay axe: but they
did not disturb the contents of the huts: for
fear of giving offence ; as it might have cost
them their lives. They could see large fires
about Alligators’ River; and on the beach,
about two miles to the eastward. The mosqui-
toes had been very troublesome hitherto; this


night they did not annoy them : but a native
dog kept prowling about all night.
Lucy. -That was very unpleasant: whatcould
he want I wonder ?
Mrs. S. —Perhaps he smelled their provi-
sions. They found the mangroves thick and
troublesome to travel through ; every where near
the beach ; and they got into a bog, over which
their horses could not travel: they had to unload
them; and to carry the packs for half a mile :
when they rested for breakfast.
After which they started again; but were
greatly embarrassed to extricate themselves from
a succession of swamps: they however succeeded
at last; and came to a salt water river : there
fortunately was a canoe on the other side; and
one of the party swam over to get it. They
found in it proofs, that honesty, was not among
the good qualities of their black friends.
Julius. —What did they see there, Mother ?
Mrs. S. —A Canadian axe, with the Queen’s
mark upon it; two bars of rod iron ; and several
pieces of old iron hoop. On the opposite side
in a hut, they found an iron dog, which had
b een made lor the pier: another piece of rod
iron : which they had sharpened into a point:


several handkerchiefs; old canvas; and pieces
of red cloth.
Julius. —How did they get over ?
Mrs. S. —They all managed well, except the
two last: who were clumsy; and upset the
canoe; and out fell the stolen things : they were
all sorry for this : though they were stolen : so
they left them some bread instead.
After walking for some miles, they fell in
with a party of natives; consisting of seven
men, three women and two children. They
had a canoe with them. Several were recog-
nised as old friends, whom they had seen in the
Settlement: one was called Alanget; another
Arradunga; none of them showed the least fear :
but came forward with great confidence. They
asked for bread ; of which they gave as much
as could be spared. There was a poor blind
man, who had been to the Settlement. They
all expressed surprise, at seeing them so far
from the Settlement: they took our travellers
about a mile inland, to a river; where they
encamped for the night; quite tired with the
adventures of the day. The natives brought
them plenty of fish ; and left them at sunset;
and did not come near them all night.
Our travellers had prevailed on two of them,


to act as pilots : who promised to join the party
on the morrow. Numerous tracks of buffaloes
were seen during the day; and the natives told
them there were plenty, close to them. Lieut,
Stewart felt convinced there were hundreds of
them; certainly far more, than could have es-
caped from the old Settlement.
The next morning at daybreak Alanget and
Arradunga came to act as guides; they started
soon after : but would not take them exactly, in
the direction they wished: probably there were
impassable rivers: however, they took them
across a beautiful plain, with scarcely a tree
upon it; having plenty of fine water holes.
They saw three buffaloes lying in one of them
which they felt convinced were not landed from
the Essington: they were much larger; and
they thought they had never seen finer, nor
fatter cattle: one was a reddish cow. They
would have shot one; but none of their guns
were loaded with balls.
Emma. —l am glad of it: why should they
kill the poor things : they could not have carried
one away; and it would have been much more
than they could have eaten.
Mi's. S. —You are right, my dear Emma.
We should never destroy any thing wantonly.


The natives then took them to a very nice well;
which they could never have found without
them : here they encamped for the night. They
were surprised next morning to make the coast,
at Cape Croker : they wished to have gone much
farther to the southward; but their guides would
not understand them. They marked the spot;
and then began their journey homewards.
They found abundance of cabbage trees, on
their return; extending over about fourteen
miles. The country was not nearly so fine;
nor the land so good; as that on the south side
of the Peninsula : which seemed in every way
more highly favored: there being a greater
abundance of fresh water; and it appeared quite
free from the ravages of the white ant.
They greatly regretted that the cabbage tree
did not grow in the neighbourhood of the
Settlement: they ate some of it and greatly
admired it, as a vegetable.
Lucy. —We all like it very much Mamma.
Emma. —Yes: but I think it is a great pity
to cut down the tree, for so small a portion of it.
Mrs. S. 11 is. The natives were very use-
ful, in taking them to fresh water ; and it was
quite surprising to our travellers, to find how


exactley they brought them out to Middle Har-
bour ; where they wished to arrive at. How
they effected it, over an extent of twenty or
thirty miles, was incomprehensible to them:
who could not have steered so exactly with the
best compass.
It was sunset when they arrived at Middle
Harbour: where they soon procured a boat, to
take them over. They returned on the Btb,
and had travelled over an extent of about 90
miles.
They saw few kangaroos, perhaps the buffa-
los might disturb them. The native companion
was seen on most of the plains, where there was
fresh water.
We have now brought our party in safety to
the settlement; and it is time my narrative was
concluded. When the Alligator left, the har-
bour had the appearance of a considerable vil-
lage. There was the government cottage ; the
public buildings; the officers’ quarters; and
numerous neat cottages and gardens.
Captain Macarthur was left in charge.
At some future day I may tell you further
particulars of the settlement.
All the Children. —Thank you, dear Mamma,
it is a very delightful account.
p


TIMOR,
Clara. —Could you indulge us with the ac-
count of Timor this evening Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —Willingly, my dear.
Emma. —You know Sir G. Bremei went there.
How far is it from Port Essington?
Mrs. S. —Between four and five hundred
miles.
Julius. —Timor Laut does not appear half
the distance.
Mrs. S. —No. With a fair wind it is about
a day’s sail. The people who inhabit the two
islands differ greatly from each other.
Dellie, where Sir G. Bremer went, is under
the Portuguese Government; and is situated at
the north side of Timor.
Emma . —What kind of town is it Mamma?


J/rs. S. —lt has a pretty appearance from
the bay; the houses being whitewashed; and
standing in the midst of groves of cocoanut
trees; lemon ; orange; and banana trees. The
inside of the houses are miserable ; having only
ground floors and bare rafters. The inhabi-
tants are some of the most kind and hospitable
people in the world, to strangers ; from the
Governor downwards.
There are four or five Portuguese ladies,
residing in the town: but they appear in indif-
ferent health. The natives are a well-made
hardy people ; honorable in their dealings.
Julius. —What do they sell their ponies for
Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —Twenty-five shillings. Their buf-
faloes twenty-eight shillings; fowls eight shil-
lings per dozen ; pigs and sheep four shillings
each : and as they are for barter, of course it
makes them much cheaper.
Clara. —What are the productions of the
island, Mamma?
Mr&k S. —Rice, maize, sugar cane, coffee
(growing wild), beeswax, turmeric, cocoanut oil,
sandal wood in abundance, rosewood, and a
species of cotton. All kinds of fruits in abun-
dance ; besides those I have named, they have


pomegranites, pine apples, tamarinds, plantains,
yams, sweet potatoes, &c.
Clara. —It is a valuable island.
Mrs. S. —They have beside plenty of copper
in the mountains, and gold in the beds of rivers.
Emma.— What do they take in exchange, for
their property ?
Mrs. S. —Chiefly muskets, fowling pieces,
powder, all kinds of handkerchiefs, iron and
lead.
Clara. —l suppose as the ladies are so unwell*
the climate is sickly ?
Mrs. S. —It is considered healthy; but you
know it is very hot. Agues and intermittant
fevers prevail part of the year: but it is thought
these may easily be guarded against. Coupang
is considered the capital of the island; it was
formerly in possession of the Portuguese; but
the Dutch drove them out in 1613. In the hands
of the English it would be a very valuable
place.
Julius.— How large is it, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —About 120 miles in length, and 37
in breadth.


LUCY ENTERING THE ROOM IN HASTE,
CARRYING A BASKET.
Mrs. S. —What have you there my dear?
Lucy. —Oh! Mamma, such pretty shells : we
have had such a delightful walk upon the beach.
See what a number of pretty shells I have
picked up, after the storm. Can you tell me the
names of any of them ?
Mrs. S. —My knowledge in conchology is
not very extensive my dear: though I used to
take much pleasure in a collection of shells,
iossils, ores, &c. which I had when in England;
and which was lost in their way out to me, in
the Columbia.
Lucy. —What a pity Mamma !
Mrs. S. —Yes. I regretted it much;-
p 3


but change your shoes my dear, and tell Tho-
mas to bring a tray, to spread the curiosities
upon.
Lucy returning.—Now Mamma are you at
leisure ?
Mrs. S . —Yes. Now we will examine
them.
This is a trochus: the fish which inhabits
this shell, is said to be most voracious. It
hesitates not to attack any inhabitant of the
deep, however large. The enormous though
peaceful whale, remains not unmolested by this
scourge of the ocean: which fastens firmly to
its huge sides; and sucks its flesh, until it is
satiated. All the efforts of the defenceless
whale, to rid itself of its tormentor, prove un-
availing. In vain does it lash the waves; and
dive about in agony; spouting rivers of water
from its nostrils: its enemy remains unshaken.
Nor do the testaceous, or shelly kinds escape
its ravages : to them it also adheres ; perforates
the shell; and destroys the defenceless inhabi-
tant.
Emma. —I often see shells with holes in
them. Do you think they are made by tro-
chu&es, Mamma?
Mrs. S . —Very frequently they are ; though


probably there are other fish and worms, which
also pierce holes in the shells.
Lucy.—What is this, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —A very different description of
fish, Lucy. It is a pinna marina. This some-
what resembles the muscle; though it greatly
exceeds it in size: frequently measuring 18
inches : how unlike are its propensities, to those
of the trochus. The pinna marina like the mus-
cle, suspends itselfto rocks, 20 or 30 feet beneath
the surface of the water; by fibrous threads:
which it spins at pleasure; in the same manner
as the spider. These fibres, which are long,
silky and numerous, are spun into various arti-
cles of dress ; by the ingenuity of man; parti-
cularly by the inhabitants of Palermo, the capital
of Sicily. Thus firmly fastened to the rocks,
the pinna escapes being thrown forward, by the
impetuosity of the waves ; which might other-
wise dash it to pieces, against the many hard
substances, at the bottom of the sea: but it
would inevitably fall a sacrifice, to the eight-
footed poiypus, were it not for the pinnophylax,
a spec : es of crab, which has been aptly termed
by poets its “ Cancer Friend.” This little ani-
mal which is entirely destitute of shell, or hard
covering to protect it; seeks shelter in the


strong abode of the pinna: from whence it
issues in search of food. It returns loaded ; and
upon reaching its friend, it makes a motion that
is instantly understood, by the pinna which opens
its shell; and closes it as soon as the cancer is
within, to secure itself from its enemy the poly-
pus. The pinna then partakes of part of the
booty, as a recompence for the security which it
affords, to its foraging friend.
Lucy. —Dear ! kind little friends! I like them
very much, Mamma.
Julius.— What do you call this, Mamma.
Mrs. S.— A conch, or volute. This is a
small one of the kind. I have seen some a foot
long. They are used by savage nations, as a
trumpet in time of war. The noise produced
from blowing through it, is loud, harsh and
powerful.
Julius. —Thank you, Mamma, now l shall
know what is meant by ** Sounding the Conch.”
Lucy. —ls not this a beauty, Mamma? All
mother of pearl inside ?
Mrs. S. —That is a haliotus or ear-shell.
Clara. —lt is a good deal the shape of an ear.
How curious that it should have a row of holes
in it.


Emma. —What is that brown shell called,
that was given to us the other day ?
Mrs, S. —A nautilus. It is said that man
learnt the art of sailing from the little animal
that inhabits this species of shell. Its dwelling
is so formed, that the fish can compress, or dis-
tend itself as it pleases. Thus, when it would
inhale or perhaps feed on the insects
which are on the surface of the sea, it distends
its body so as to fill every compartment of its
elegant abode; and by excluding the water, it
is rendered sufficiently light to float on the sea*
These little animals are frequently seen thrust
far out of their shells; making use of certain
membranes, which may perhaps be called legs*
in the manner of oars. When any thing alarms
them, or they wish to return to the bottom, they
contract their body, so as to admit the water;
which increasing their weight, sinks them in-
stantly.
There are several kinds of nautili; among
these the paper nautilus is most admired ; for
the delicacy of its texture. It is of a pure
white, excepting a little brown on the back part
of the shell. The more common kind is much
larger, stronger, and less delicate in appearance;
though these possess many beauties. When


the eperdermis or outer coat is taken off, it is
then prettily streaked with light brown, or
orange. When a still deeper coating is removed;
it is a beautiful white mother of pearl. The
Chinese frequently carve the shells in this state;
with much ingenuity; and use them as vases,
to contain flowers, &c. This would no doubt
appear a great want of taste, to a conchologist;
but it is nevertheless extremely delicate and
pretty.
Lucy. —Here, dear Mamma, is a fine rubber
out shell. It is for you.
Mrs. S. Thank you, my dear, I dare say I
shall find it very useful. It is the bone of a
cuttle fish.
Lucy. —How curious!
Mrs. S.—You remember Clara’s attack on a
cuttle fish at Bondi Bay.
Clara. ~ I was most anxious to secure it: but
was afraid to take hold of it with my hands, as
you thought it would sting me.
Mrs. S. It is capable of inflicting great
pain, by its feelers; which continues many hours.
It is represented as the same kind of sensation,
as a nettle causes: only much more severe;
and leaves an itching, irritable feeling.
Clara. It had immense eyes; and two rows


of spots along its legs, or feelers; and when I
pressed my stick upon it, to prevent it from re-
turning to the sea, it grasped the stick with great
strength; and apparent anger. It came in with
the waves; and was washed between the rocks :
but the water kept thickening so, that at last it
escaped.
Mrs. S. —lt contains a dark colored liquid,
which it discharges when in danger, in order to
thicken the water, so as to elude pursuit. This
liquid when dried, becomes a hard substance ;
and is supposed to be used in the preparation cf
Indian ink ; which you so frequently use.
Your paint [called sepia , is also made of this
liquid ; it takes its name from the fish, which is
called the sepia or cuttle fish.
Emma. —It looks like a mass of jelly.
Clara. —lts skin must have been very tough ;
for I pressed the stick strongly on it; to hold
it down.
Mrs. S. —Yes. The skin is like leather;
very coarse and strong. The kind you saw is
destitute of bone, or other hard substance. Some
are furnished externally, with a spiral shell;
others have that kind of bone, of which Lucy
has made me a present: that is like a backbone.
It has a horny parrot-shaped mouth; and is


furnished with a gizzard like a bird. These
animals grow to a large size, within the Tropics;
and have been known to seize a large dog; or
a man, when bathing. They possess a great
deal of cunning; and usually place themselves
in holes in the rocks; putting out their long
feelers, ready to catch their prey. They are
very voracious; and notwithstanding their lea-
thery skin, are extremely sensible of pain.
These spots on its legs, are called suckers; by
these it is enabled to fix itself to its prey.
Clara.—l tVish I had snatched the stick
hastily up, when it was holding it, so passion-
ately. I might have drawn it out and secured
it. I should consider it the greatest curiosity
our museum could boast. There would be much
difficulty in preserving it. It would be neces-
sary, I should imagine, to put it in spirits.
Mrs. S.—l think that would be the only
way we could keep it; and even then I fear it
would contract greatly. We may find another
some time hence.
Lucy. —l shall like shells better than ever,
Mamina, now I find there are such pretty little
histories about them.


Mrs. S —When I meet with a little work on
Conchology (as the study of shells is called)
suited to your understanding, I will.purchase it
for you.
Lucy. Good, kind Mamma.


~
Mrs. S. —What are
the evening ?
Clara. —Could you
of something entertain:
Julius. —Of shipwrt
Mrs. S. —You app<
in shipwrecks I think.
Emma. —We are v
poor people who suffer
but it is very interes
things that occur in a
LOSS OF THE STIRLING CASTLE.
Mrs. S. —What are to be the amusements of
the evening ?
Clara. —Could you favour us with the recital
of something entertaining, Mamma?
Julius. —Of shipwreck, please Mamma?
Mrs. S. —You appear to take great interest
Emma. —We are very, very sorry for the
poor people who suffer through them, Mamma ;
but it is very interesting to hear of so many
things that occur in consequence, quite new to
us, you know.
Mrs, S. —True my love. A very calamitous
shipwreck occurred on this coast, to the north.
Julius. —What was the name of the ship
Mamma ?


Mrs. S. —The Stirling Castle.
Julius . —Who commanded it Mamma?
Mrs. S. —Captain Fraser.
Clara. —Julius let Mamma tell it without
interrupting her so often: we shall understand
it so much better.
Mrs. S. —l can only recollect a few of the
disasters, occasioned by the loss of the vessel:
but I will endeavour to relate them in as con-
nected a manner as possible.
It was on a Saturday evening on the 21st of
May, in the year 1836, that the brig struck on
Eliza Reef; and became a total wreck,
Clara.— Eliza Reef is not marked on our
maps, Mamma*
Mrs. S— It is in lat. 24 °, and long. 155 °
12’ E. They were sailing very steadily at the
time it struck; at about 71 knots an hour, under
the captain’s orders. They were obliged to
leave the vessel on the following day, which
was Sunday; and take to the boats. These
consisted of the pinnace ; and long boat. In
the latter were the captain, his wife, Mr. Brown
the chief officer, Mr. Baxter, second mate, Jo-
seph Corallis, steward, Robert Drag, Henry
Gouldin, Robert Draymer, and Robert Carey,
seamen; and perhaps a few others. In the


pinnace were Edward Stone the boatswain,
James Major, Robert Hodge, John Copeland,
seamen, Jacob Allen, cook, a boy named John
Fraser, and the carpenter.
They reached an unknown island on the 30th,
when they landed; and turned over the boats
to repair them, as well as they could; for they
were in a leaky state. On the third day from
their landing, they left the island, intending to
steer for Repulse Bay.
Clara. —Here is Repulse Bay, Mamma. It
is in about 20 ° of lat. and 148 ° of long.
Mrs. S. —The remainder of the stores and
baggage were again placed in the boats ; but the
pinnace afterwards parted company with them;
leaving in the long boat 4 lbs. of beef; 13 gal-
lons of beer and water mixed; 1 gallon of
brandy; and 7 lbs. of biscuit: but it was unfor-
tunately all wetted by the salt water.
Clara. —Their provisions were very unfit for
a long voyage.
Mi s. S. —Mrs, Fraser had a dear little ten-
der infant in the boat with her!
Emma. Poor little thing! How did they
manage to preserve it ? -
Mis. S. —That was impossible! The dear
baby perished; and its little lifeless body was


carried on Mr. Brown’s lap for some time ; in
the hope of being able to bury it on shore: but
I believe they were obliged at last, to consign
it to the deep 1
Clara. —How distressing to its parents.
Mrs. S. —None but a parent can tell all its
bitterness. Mrs. Fraser was very ill; exhausted
by sorrow, fatigue, and famine. Captain Fraser
was also quite worn out; when in the morning
of the 26th June, they reached land. It proved
to be some miles from Moreton Bay.
Emma. —Oh, I hope they will be able to get
relief from the settlement.
Mrs. S. —When they had been a short time
on shore, they saw a number of natives coming
down to them. Captain Fraser advised them
all to give themselves up to them quietly, as
they were in their power; and could not help
themselves. He scarcely had time to make this
proposal, before the savages rushed upon them;
and seized all the men: each tribe taking one.
Lucy.— Did any of them take Mrs. Fraser,
Mamina?
Mrs. S.—No. She wished to go with her
husband; but they drove her away; and went
without her.


Lucy. —Oh dear, dear! poor lady ! what will
Mrs. S. —She remained all day on the beach
in the utmost distress of mind. Evening came,
bnt it brought no relief to her sufferings; for
her husband did not return. She passed that
dreadful night in the utmost alarm, trembling at
at every sound. Morning dawned, still there
was no sound of human being. An awful soli-
tude reigned around; and her state of anxious
suspense was dreadful. At last a number of
wnmpn anrl pmlrlrAn (n tlio
women and children came to the beach ; and made
her understand by signs, that she must go with
them; and carry one of the children on her
shoulders : dreadfully exhausted as she was,
she took the child; and did as they directed.
Emma.- I hope she will soon see Captain
Fraser; which will be a great comfort to her.
Mrs. S. —She travelled many miles thus
burdened; frequently nearly fainting by the
way. When they stopped, her cruel compa-
nions made her chop down trees ; fetch wood
and water; and frequently employed her to
fish. One, two, three, long weeks passed away ;
and still no tidings of the Captain reached her.
At length as she was struggling under a heavy


load of wood, which the women forced her to
carry; she fell in with her husband, who had
sunk exhausted, under a similar burden. He
was very ill from anxiety of mind; want of
food; and the hard labour he had been sub-
jected to. He implored Mrs. Fraser to help
him to drag his load. This she would gladly
have done : but dared not; as the blacks were
watching her: she was therefore obliged to
leave him ; and hurry on with her load.
Emma. —Poor man ! lam very sorry Mrs.
Fraser could not stay with him.
Mrs. S. —She deposited her load; and re-
turned to him in a short time: when she found
he had been speared through the back of the
shoulder.
Julius. —Who had done it, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —A cruel black man; because the
poor captain made no progress with his load.
Lucy. —l hope Mrs. Fraser was not obliged
to leave him now, poor man ?
Mrs. S. —She remained with him till sun*
down; when death put an end to his suffering.
Emma. —Did he die, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —He did my dear. The savages
immediately dragged Mrs. Fraser from his body;
dug a hole ; and buried the poor captain. It


would be quite impossible to describe the dis-
tress of his poor widow; at this mournful be-
reavement !
Clara. —lt is wonderful that her reason did
not forsake her.
Mrs. S. —We should never, my dear chil-
dren, say we cannot bear this, or that. It is
impossible to set bounds to human endurance.
Who can tell how much misery may be borne,
and yet the sufferer live to tell it! —May a mer-
ciful God, graciously spare us, my children,
from such trials!—To return to Mrs. Fraser and
the rest of the afflicted party. Mr. Brown was
much attached to Captain Fraser; and un-
guardedly expressed his indignation, at the
shameful manner in which he had been treated.
Emma. —He appears a kind hearted man,
Mamma?
Mrs. S.— He was, my love: but his attach-
ment cost him his life !
Lucy. —l hope they did not spear him,
Mamma ?
Mrs. s.—His death was still more terrible,
some of the inhuman savages seized him; while
others held lighted brands to his legs. The
pain and his struggles in consequence were
dreadful: he at last succeeded in throwing him-


self on the ground: but they held his feet and
legs in the fire. Poor man in his terrible agony,
he tried to suffocate himself, by burying his face
and head in the sand. But it is far too painful
to dwell on. The monsters succeeded in de-
stroying-*hem. This happened eight days after
the death of Captain Fraser.
Clara. —Such wanton barbarities fill one
with horror and indignation; and a wish to
exterminate the perpetrators, of such dreadful
cruelties. Of course Mr. Baxter dared not
interfere. What must have been his, and poor
Mrs. Fraser’s feelings, during such a scene.
Mrs. S. —Too terrible to conceive.
Emma, —Did they keep the white people to-
gether now ?
Mrs. s. —No. Mrs. Fraser remained as
usual with the women: and Mr. Baxter was
many miles away: separated from her, by a
large river.
Julius. —Did the men who went in the pin-
nace, fall into the hands of the natives ?
Mrs. s. —l am not clear on that point: but
I think they did not. The carpenter and boat-
wain set off along the coast, in hopes of coming
to one of the settlements. Another of the men
swam across the river and made himself a hut,


which he unfortunately set fire to; and was
burnt to death.
Lucy. —What terrible things happened.
Mrs. S . —They remained thus situated for
two months longer. The natives allowing them
no other food, than the entrails of snakes, fish
bones, and such like disgusting things; and
treating them with great barbarity; when Joseph
Gorallis contrived to reach the settlement at
Moreton Bay ; where he gave information of the
situation of Mrs. Fraser, and her companions in
suffering.
A party was immediately dispatched, under
the command of Lieut. Otter, to the assistance
of the shipwrecked people. A man of the name
of Graham, who was well acquainted with the
bush, volunteered to lead the party; and pledged
himself to rescue the sufferers, from the blacks.
Permission was granted him ; and they departed
on the 15th of August.
Lucy. —l hope they may find them all, poor
things.
Mrs. S. —After a long search, they fell in
with the blacks, who were assembled in great
numbers; having a grand corrobera, or native
dance. The poor captives were placed in the
middle ; and the black were dancing and shout-


ing round them. Lieut. Otter and his party
managed to come near, unperceived by them;
when Graham, (who I believe was known to
some of the blacks,) went into the midst of them;
snatched up Mrs. Fraser; and ran away with
her.
Lucy. —Oh! I am so glad.
Mrs. S. —He afterwards rescued Mr. Baxter
in the same courageous manner; and finally,
they succeeded in liberating five of the seamen
also ; and reached Brisbane Town, Moreton
Bay, on Monday the 22nd, with the grateful,
but exhausted sufferers. The kindest attention
was paid to Mrs. Fraser and the rest of the
shipwrecked people, by the Commandant; Lieut.
Otter; Commissary Owen; and several others.
Clara. They must indeed have required
every care, to restore them to health; particu-
larly Mrs. Fraser. lam astonished that she
survived.
Mrs. S. —She had almost lost the use of her
right arm ; and of one of her eyes: from ex-
posure to the weather, for so long a time.
Julius. —For three months ! How did they
get to Sydney Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —Accounts of the loss of the vessel,
had reached the Governor, Sir Richard Bourke,


who dispatched Captain Roach in the Revenue
Cutter Prince George, to search the coast to the
northward for the survivors, from the wreck.
His arrival at Moreton Bay was after the events
I have been describing; he therefore went in
search of the carpenter and boatswain; but
unfortunately could not fall in with them.
They were supposed to be on the coast to the
northward of the M'Leay River: he came upon
their footsteps; and could occasionally see places
where they had encamped, for a long distance.
He found in a hut which appeared to have been
deserted some time, the remains of dried fish,
&c. He concluded they had taken a southerly
direction ; and would probably reach Port Mac-
quarie, or the M'Leay River.
Julius. —l hope they will poor fellows.
Mrs. S. —Captain Roach made enquiries at
Port Macquarie, but nothing had been heard
there of them; and all were fearful they would
not survive, to reach any of the settlements.
These two men were the only persons missing,
from the Stirling Castle.
Captain Roach found the remains of the man
who had been burnt to death in his hut: and
caused them to be buried.


Emma.- —I am quite sorry those two men
were not found; to come to Sydney with the rest.
Mrs. S.— lt is to be regretted much. They
reached Sydney on Saturday the 15th Oct.
Clara. —Poor things! I am glad they are
fairly away from that horrid Moreton Bay. I
hope Graham was well rewarded for his coura-
geous conduct.
Mrs. S.—l hope so too, my dear: but I
never heard that he was. He most assuredly
ought to have been.
Emma. —Who was he Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —A prisoner of the crown.
Emma. —Then the least they could do, was
to give him a free pardon.
Mrs. S. —From the well known humanity
and kindness of His Excellency Sir Richard
Bourke, I think his good conduct would not be
overlooked.
Clara. —Did Mrs. Fraser return to England
Mamma ?
Mrs. S. She was a Scotch lady my dear ;
she returned as soon as she could, to her native
country ; where she had a large family.
Emma. —Oh! how sorry they would be, when
they heard all about her sufferings ; their dear
R


father’s death: and the loss of his ship. I sup-
pose they would be quite poor now Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —Previous to Mrs. Fraser’s depar-
ture from Sydney, a subscription of several
hundred pounds was raised for her; and as soon
as she arrived in England, she was married to
the captain in whose ship she had been a pas-
senger home. He took her to the Mansion
House, which is the large Court House, where
the Lord Mayor sits as a Magistrate ; and the
captain told him of all Mrs. Fraser’s sufferings,
before she became his wife. The Lord Mayor
was very sorry ; and the English people, who
are very charitable, immediately subscribed one
thousand pounds; so I do not think she would
be poor.
Julius.— Well it ends much happier than I
expected.
Emma. — Or than Mrs. Fraser could have
expected, at one time.
Mrs. S, —Yes. When she was groaning in
captivity among those terrible savages, she could
have anticipated only a frightful, violent death ;
as a termination of her sufferings ! This my
loves, should teach us never to despond; how-
ever painfully we may be situated : God can
when he sees fit extricate us from the greatest


of calamities ; and He no doubt frequently sends
us a terrible reverse of fortune, loss of friends,
&c., to prove to us how very, very fleeting are
all earthly possessions. These trials are in-
tended as a punishment to some and a lesson to
all!


A VISIT TO AN IRON MINE.
Julius. —Guess what this is, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —A clinker I suppose.
Julius. —What of, Mamma?
Mrs. S. I should say of melted iron.
Julius (laughing). —Does not it look like iron,
Mamma? And it is a bit of that old iron bark
tree, which has been burning so long.
Clara. —They really do contain a good deal
of iron. I used to think the tree acquired its
name from the hardness of the wood ; and the
black iron-like look which its bark has: but I
am convinced they contain a great deal of iron;
for there is a great appearance of rust, like iron
causes, all about where an iron bark tree is
burned.


Julius. —There is a great deal of iron in this
country, I think.
Emma.—On our own place there is; and
further up the country. Do you think mines
will ever be opened, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —Not for many years I should ima-
gine : the first expences attending the opening
of a mine are so great; that it is not likely peo-
ple would venture to open an iron mine, in our
time ■ but such wonderful progress is making
in the improvement of the country, that it is
difficult to determine, what will, or what will
not, be done. I heard lately that a company had
been formed, to work something of a mine in
South Australia; where among other valuable
things, silver was discoverd.
Julius. —Could you tell us a little about mines
Mamma ? It will be quite new to us.
Mrs. S. —l read when in England, of the
descent of two gentlemen into the iron mine of
Danamora, in Sweden : which is considered the
largest in the world. What I remember of the
circumstance, I think will entertain you.
The visitors arrived just at the time when the
workmen were blasting the mine. That is tear
ing up the ore by means of gunpowder,
it 3


Julius. —Like they blast the rocks in this
country Mamma?
Mrs. S.— Yes. This operation was performed
every day at noon ; and produced an awful and
deafening noise; which can only be compared
to subterraneous thunder, or vollies of artillery
discharged in the bowels of the earth: throwing
up stones to an astonishing height; and causing
the ground on which they stood to rock and
tremble.
As soon as silence was restored, they prepared
for their descent; and placed themselves as the
guide directed, in a spacious bucket; capable
of containing four persons ; and fastened by a
chain, to a rope. Thus suspended, they at first
felt much alarm: but soon regained sufficient
composure, to survey the abyss. They minutely
observed the time when they began to descend ;
and found they were nearly ten minutes in
reaching the bottom: when they were struck
with awe at the sublimity of the scene before
them. At some places a faint glimmering of
light was perceptable; at others, flambeaux
supplied the more cheerful light of day.
They viewed with astonishment the compo-
sure of the workmen, employed in boring holes;
for the admission of gunpowder, seated on beams


of wood, placed f or the purpose. The least
giddiness must have been inevitable destruction
to them ; as rocks surrounded them in every
direction; and beneath, in huge piles lay large
masses of ore; separated from the mine by the
explosion.
In these gloomy caverns they remained more
than an hour; surveying every part where it was
possible to penetrate: conducted by the guides.
Clara. Was it not very cold Mamma ? The
sun could never penetrate into those deep
caverns.
Mrs. S. —lt was excessively cold. Above,
the weather was fair and warm: but in these
abysses, eternal winter reigns: freezing every
thing around.
Emma. —How terrible for the workmen.
Mrs. S. —They were, surprised to find above
1300 workmen employed in these terrible caverns.
They entered a long chasm beneath a rock;
which seemed but the vestibule to the grave; and
were struck with surprise and horror, on be-
holding nine wretched beings, crouching round
a little fire of charcoal; endeavouring to warm
their half frozen limbs, over the glowing embers :
while they ate their scanty fare; earned by their
painful labours.


Julius— Why were those nine separated from
the rest Mamma ?
Mrs. s. —They were criminals, my dear :
doomed to pass the remainder of their days far
from friends and home ,* in those melancholy
abysses : to them living tombs!
Emma. —Poor men ! whatever might have
been their crimes, they have my commisseration:
their punishment was so terrible !
Clara. -1 dare say they were glad to see the
visitors. Ido not suppose people often ventured
down. Do you think they did, Mamma?
Mrs. S. — I should imagine they did not; for
it appears the poor men eyed the visitors with
surprise; as they arose to make room for them,
at the fire : which they were glad to approach;
in order to dry their feet; which were wet and
cold ; from the melted ice.
Thus engaged, they had leisure to examine
the group near them ; and were shocked at the
pallid and emaciated appearance of the poor
men: thus doomed to drag out a miserable exis-
tence : to whom the light of day was never seen:
nor cheering sun to enliven their drooping
Lucy. —l hope the gentlemen were kind to
them, Mamma ?


Mrs. S. —They appear to have been humane
men, my love : they spoke kindly to them; gave
them each a portion of some brandy, which they
had brought down; and purchased some speci-
mens of ore, which the men had collected.
“ Hail to all those, who other’s sufFrings feel,
And ills they pity, nobly strive to heal!
Whether they rear the felon’s orphan child.
Or sooth the stranger from his home exil’d,
Or helpless foundlings to their care receive,
Or bid the captive’s heart no longer grieve !”
Clara. —Those lines are very beautiful and
appropriate Mamma. Are they your own ?
Mrs . S. — No my dear girl: they were written
by Mrs. Opie : but our subject recalled them to
my mind.
Our travellers being anxious to breathe the
fresh air again, took leave of the poor men;
whom they left loud in thanks; and proceeded
to that part of the mine into which they had
descended : where they found the workmen
busily employed as before. Here they staid
awhile, to converse with the Inspector ; who
informed them that these valuable mines were
discovered in 1488, and that there were no less
than 25,000 persons employed, in the iron mines
of Sweden : from which more than 57,000 tons
of metal were annually obtained; and abou(


2,400,000 loads of charcoal were burnt in the
furnaces and forges ; before the iron could be
rendered fit for use.
Julius. —Oh! Mamma, I must give up all
thoughts of an iron mine I see. How did the
gentlemen get up? I suppose they had to jump
into the bucket again.
Mrs. S. —Yes: but they thought much less
of its unpleasantness. So much less terrible, do
difficulties and dangers appear, when we have
essayed their extent.
Clara. —l suppose the air felt very warm
when they arrived at top ?
Mrs. S. —Yes, they felt quite incommoded by
the sudden transition; but it soon wore off.
COPPER MINE.
Emma. —Oh! Mamma have you finished ?
Mrs. S. —Yes. I have told you all that I
recollect: but if you wish it, I will relate some
particulars of a visit, made by a party of gentle-
men to a copper mine, near Delecarlia.


Clara.— lf you please Mamma. This is in
Sweden also. It appears rich in mines.
Mrs. S. Particularly so. The great copper
mine we are about to visit, lies eastward of the
town of Fahlun, or Coppersburg. We may, I
think, imagine our party of four gentlemen start-
ing from Stockholm ; mounted on little horses
peculiar to the country.
Julius. Like our little Timor I dare say.
Mrs. S.—‘ Their mode of travelling was both
fatiguing and tedious ; and their accommodations
on the road generally very indifferent. On the
evening of the fourth day from their leaving
Stockholm, they reached Fahlun: where they
slept; and on the following day repaired to the
When arrived at its entrance, they beheld
with amazement the wonderful depth and extent
of the chasm, which presented itself to their
view. Machines for conveying water to the dif-
ferent parts first attracted their attention; and
a wheel of prodigious size was employed in
raising ore in a bucket; from the mine to the
surface of the earth.
They were told the mine had been worked
upwards of a thousand years; and that the first
opening was made, where they now saw a vast


chasm; which was caused by the neglect or
ignorance of the workmen ; who excavated the
mine to a great extent; which giving way, left
the scene of desolation that now presented itself
of precipitated rocks and yawning abysses.
But the miners assured them, that every possible
precaution was now taken to prevent a similar
a ccident: foi whenever there appeared the least
reason to apprehend danger, orders were imme-
diately issued, for the miners to proceed no
further; and an iron crown fixed on the spot;
to prohibit for ever, the working of that part of
the mine.
Our travellers now descended the enormous
opening; by means of wooden steps ; that cross
in various directions; supported by huge masses
of rocks. Before they could even approach the
entrance of the cavern, they were obliged to de-
scend thirty toises (or fathoms); and then to
proceed horizontally a considerable distance
within.
They now lost even the least glimmering of
light and pure air; and saw with dismay huge
columns of oppressive vapours rolling towards
them. The heat was excessive ; and the effluvia
arising from these pestilential fumes, suffocating
in the extreme. They almost sunk under the


pressure of it, as they proceeded along the rough
and rocky descent; where steaming sulphur and
deadly stenches surrounded them on every side.
Litcy. —They had better not go down any
lower Mamma; for the air is as bad as Belzoni
found it in the caves.
Mrs. S t —lt was very bad indeed my love ;
and they felt unwilling to venture further; till
assured by their guides that there was less dan-
ger than they apprehended. They added by
way of encouragement, that they would soon see
men who were destined to pass the remainder
of their days there.
While they were still speaking, they entered
a melancholy cavern; when several wretched
beings more like spectres than human creatures,
presented themselves to their view.
Julius. —Poor fellows ! I suppose they were
criminals, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —Yes. The guides when questioned
as to how it was possible for these poor crea-
tures to exist amid such sulphurous vapours and
excessive heat; owned they did not live long:
but being criminals, they were sent to the worst
part of the mine. A little way beyond where
they were, the steam was so great that it was
impossible to go near it. In consequence of a


volcano having burst out there not long before,
walls had been birlt, to prevent the whole mine
from suffering, should it occur again.
The travellers now expressed a wish to breathe
a purer atmosphere; and were accordingly con-
ducted along winding galleries and vaulted
caverns, where many workmen were employed;
who owing to the excessive heat; and the great
fatigue of their employment, were almost with-
out clothing; and looked haggard and ex-
hausted. Some were hewing the rocks ; other,
making fissures for the admission of gunpowders
Some were wheeling the brazen ore to the dark
abysses; where buckets were suspended to re-
ceive it.
The various groups busily employed, almost
in a state of primeval nakedness, upon whom the
dim light of lamps, or trembling rays of torches
shed an uncertain light; appeared a mournfully
interesting spectacle!
The feeling visitors viewed them with com-
passion, as they implored the beneficent and
merciful father of all men, to lighten their trou-
bles; and if it seemed fit to his Divine Wisdom,
to restore them to their families and friends.
Or, should they be destined to finish their
earthly career in this abode of woe, to grant


them resignation to his Almighty will; and the
cheering hope of a happy hereafter 1
Julius. —How many men were there, Mamma.'’
Mrs. 5. —1,200. They heard with pleasure,
that women were not permitted to work in the
mine : on account of the suffocating vapours.
Lucy. —l am glad of that, Mamma. Did the
gentlemen come up out of the bad air, Mamma?
Mrs. /S.-They left the most unhealthy part
of the mine; and were shown a large saloon,
formed among the rocks, near the bottom of the
mine. This they were told was the “ Hall of
Senate.” So called from having been the rest-
ing place of many of the Swedish kings and
their senators : when they came to inspect the
mines.
It was here, said their guide, that the re-
nowned Gustavus Vasa laboured for his bread ;
disguised as a poor man, after having been
robbed by a peasant, who had served him as
a guide.
Clara. —Who was Gustavus Vasa Mamma ?
Mrs. S.— A very brave Swede; who delivered
his country from the tyranny of Christiern, king
of Denmark. His countrymen in gratitude for
his great services, elected him their king ; and
he reigned well; and was honored and respected
s 2


so much, that he was enabled to render the mo-
narchy hereditary.
To return to our travellers whom we are de-
taining in the mine-
Lucy (laughing).—Really I think they would
be wrong to stay there any longer.
Mrs. s. —So they thought; and accordingly
began their ascent, as quickly as their tottering
limbs and the tedious windings of the steep and
rocky eminences would permit; and mounting
their horses, retraced their steps to Fahlun ; but
business detains us elsewhere ; so we must here
take leave.
Julius.—Oh no Mamma; tell us more. You
did not say how long they were going down.
Mrs. S.— More than an hour. The mouth
of the mine was 3960 feet across !
Emma, —Thank you Mamma.


ANECDOTES OF THE ABORIGINES
OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Mrs. S. —Little Sally the black child has
been accidentally killed,
Clara. —Oh! Mamma, do you know how ?
Mrs. S. —She was playing in the barn, which
is only a temporary one; and pulled down a
heavy prop of wood upon herself. It fell on
her temple; and killed her immediately.
Emma. —Do you not think her mother will
be very sorry, when she hears of it ?
Mrs. S. —Alas! my dear children, her mother
also met with an untimely death. These poor
uncivilized people, most frequently meet with
some deplorable end through giving way to un-
restrained passions.
Julius. —Oh! do tell us all you know abcut
s 3


little Sally and her mother; if you please,
Mamma? It will make the evening pass so
pleasantly; and I will be drawing plenty of
animals, to fill the little managerie I am making.
Lucy (kissing her Mamma). —Do tell us dear
Mamma ? My sisters are going to work ; and
may I set your work-box in order; and then we
shall all be so happy.
Mrs . S. warmly returned the fond embrace
of her little Lucy; and after they were all
seated, began the following narrative :
HISTORY OF NANNY AND HER CHILDREN.
The mother of the poor little black girl, who
has lately met with so dreadful a death, was
called Nanny. Ido not know her native name.
She was a remarkably fine, well-formed young
woman.
Surely Clara and Emma you must remember
Nanny coming occasionally, with other blacks?
Thelast time I saw her she had this same little
Sally with her; who could just then run alone.
Clara. —Oh yes, Mamma! it was a pretty,
fat, little brown girl, quite naked.
Emma. —And I remember we asked you to
give her a little frock : but before you could get
one they were gone.
Mrs. S. —That was the last time I saw the


mother. The child was a half-cast, or brown
child, as you call them ; and soon after the time
you speak of, Jane D n, a young married
woman, who had lost her only child sometime
before, took a fancy to little Sally. And her
mother agreed to leave the child; as soon as it
was weaned. You know the black children are not
weaned so soon as white children : most proba-
bly from the uncertainty and difficulty in pro-
curing proper food. Though I have remarked
that the babies will eat voraciously, at an age
when a tender white babe would not touch such
food.
Clara. —Mamma, I am sure some of the
black children are more than four years old,
when they are weaned.
Mrs. S. —They are my love. But we will
continue our narrative.
When little Sally was about two years old, she
was weaned ; and taken to her future home. It
was evening when the child was left; and she
was naturally much distressed, when she found
herself deserted by her mother. Jane was soon
after, going to put her to bed: but she was
greatly alarmed at the idea of being put into a
bed; and said with much eagerness, “ Bail
nangarrie waddie” {not sleep in a bed) pointing


to the bed. Nangarrie like-a-that," (sleep like
that,) curling her little body round on the ground
floor of the hut. To please her, Jane spread a
blanket for her on the floor; and poor little sor-
rowing Sally covered it about her.
Several times during the night, Jane and her
husband heard the poor little girl moaning; as
if she were lying lamenting her deserted state.
The man, as was usual, opened the door of
the hut very early; and little Sally went and
stood outside; looking in all directions; and
uttering the most piercing coo-ee-es imaginable.
Jane assured me, that she was astonished that
such a baby could utter such loud and piercing
sounds. The forest echoed and rang with them;
and Jane who is a kind-hearted young woman,
felt her heart thrill with pity and fear.
Lucy. —Oh! Mamma that is just what I
should do, if I lost you: cry as loud as ever I
could ; and be so very, very sorry ! What did
they do for the poor little girl ?
Mrs. S. —They tried to console her ; for she
was very much distressed, when she found her
mother did not reply to her coo-ee-es. She
would frequently wander about; and call in this
wild way; so peculiar to the aborigines: but
her mother was far away.


At length time in some degree reconciled
poor little Sally to her new parents and altered
state of life: when the tribe came again; and
with them her mother.
The child immediately recognised her; and
you my dear children, can judge, better than I
can describe, the joy she felt at again seeing her.
The poor little babe rushed into its mother’s
arms; but the unnatural mother sent her child
from her. Poor little Sally screamed and was
refractory; when her mother whipt her severely,
and left her.
Emma.— Oh! Mamma, this is too shocking!
to leave her little child among strangers; and
then whip it for being so glad to see her again;
and for wishing to go with her. Ah ! Mamma,
lam very sorry for the poor little thing. I wish
you had taken it from such a bad mother; and
then we would have done all we could to have
made it forget, it ever had such a naughty, cruel
mother. Why did she go near, to teaze her
poor little girl ?
Mrs. S. —l quite agree with you Emma,
that she was very blamable to go near the place ;
to unsettle her child; but she was not in many
respects a bad mother; as I will tell you more
about soon.


Jane treated her adopted child very kindly.
and tenderly ; dressed it well; and kept it very
clean. I saw it when it was about four year*
old; and it was an interesting child; with large
black eyes, black curling hair, a pleasant laugh-
ing countenance, fat, and had all the appearance
of being happy. Perhaps her mother considered
that she was better situated with Jane, than she
could be wandering about the forests, in search
of precarious food. You know at the best, the
women and children are badly off.
Clara. —Notwithstanding, Mamma, it seems
unnatural for a mother to part with her child.
Though I know there is a little boy, who his
parents wish you to take: but I think if I were
ever so poor, I would not part with my children.
Did Nanny ever go again, Mamma?
Mrs. S, —More than once, my dear: when
the same scenes took place: affection and tears
on the part of the child; and severity on that of
the mother.
One time when the blacks were encamped in
the neighbourhood of Mrs. D n’s hut, they
heard a dreadful screaming in the night; and
the husband arose and opened the door: lie
could not see any thing; and concluded the
blacks had been drinking; and were fighting.


Not wishing to interfere with them, while in that
state; he closed the door; and the noise soon
ceased : but in the morning they found poor
Nanny had been murdered !
It appeared a black man named Woorabj
(Nanny’s half brother) had been quarrelling with
her, and was beating her : she fled for protection
near the hut; when he threw a spear after her;
which entered the back of her neck ; she con-
tinued to run, with the spear in her neck: but
was soon overtaken by the furious Woombi;
who struck her on the head with his tomahawk;
and soon dispatched her. I was told she was a
dreadful sight in the morning!
Clara . —Poor thing! what became of her?
Mrs. S. —The blacks dug a grave near the
spot; and buried her in a sitting posture : put-
ting her tomahawk, pannikin, net, bangalee, and
indeed, all her little possessions, with her in the
grave.
Lucy. How strange to bury all her things !
Mrs. S. —lt is their custom, and they appear
much shocked at the idea of the clothes, &c., of
a deceased person being kept, after their inter-
ment. The tribe belonging to the neighbour-
hood where our property is situated, were very
much attached to your dear lamented father.


You know they never mention the name of a
deceased person; but they were giving me to
understand, the regret and sympathy they felt
at his loss. I had the locket with me at the
time, which has a lock of all our hair in it. I
showed this to them, pointing out his (to us)
much valued brown curl; when they uttered a
piercing cry; and all turned away; holding
down their heads a short time : when they looked
up I saw they were in tears. One of the women
stepped aside ; and whispered to me ** Bail you
show that to blacks ebber any more missus.’’
This of course I promised to refrain from. I
was much surprised and effected at their manner;
having wished to give them pleasure. It was
six years after our bereavement.
In a savage state they bury the living infant
with its deceased mother : sometimes when seve-
ral months old!
Emma. —How terrible!
Mrs. S. —Yes. They place the living child
in the grave, by the side of its dead mother; and
after covering it with earth, lay heavy stones
upon it!
Clara t —Poor little creatures, how cruel! Do
you think it is ever clone now Mamma ?


Mrs, S. —No doubt it is, far in the interior-
where their ancient customs are still kept up.
The poor babies, appear to be thought very
little about.
Clara. —You know Jenny has left three in-
fants to perish in the bush ; because, she said,
it was too much trouble to rear them: and when
our cook asked her if native dogs had eaten
them, she replied, “ I believe.” And lam al-
most sure she killed that little black baby girl,
»he had sometime ago; for it suddenly disap-
peared; and when we questioned her about it,
she hung down her head and looked very foolish;
and at last said, “Tumble down,” It was
buried in one of our paddocks ; and some stones
laid over the grave : when we were taking a
walk, with our nurse, we met one of our men,
who opened the grave; and it was evident the
body had been burned; for there were remains
of burnt bones, ashes, and hair.
Emma. —Billy the black man killed one of
his little babies.
Mrs. S. —Yes, he took it by its feet and
clashed its brains out against a tree. Some
however, are very kind parents : but I do not
think they are in general, to their infants. I
remember a tall woman, quite a stranger, coming


with a black infant, of less than a month old.
It was so ugly and covered with long hair, as
not to look like any thing human : but worse
than all, the poor little creature had been terribly
burned, by the mother putting it too near the
fire; and falling asleep. From the ankle to the
hip, on one side, it was nearly burned to the
bone. It had been done some days; and the
fire seemed out. I therefore had it dressed with
lard spread on rags : soon after, I heard the
bandages were off. The negligent mother had
left it; and one of their hungry dogs, attracted
by the smell of the lard, had torn off the rags;
and dragged them away ; notwithstanding they
had been tied on carefully. They were replaced;
but the cruel mother appeared quite indifferent
to the sufferings of her tender babe.
About a week after, I understood it was dead :
probably made away with.
Emma. —What tribe did she belong to,
Mamma?
Mi's. S. —l do not recollect: there were a
great many tribes collecting; to the number
of perhaps ,*3OO blacks on our estate: they were
assembling o fight; and we found it a great
nuisance. Bullocks and horses are very much


Lightened at them; and the men found it almost
impossible to continue their ploughing.
Emma.— lt is very odd, that animals should
know the difference between black and white
people.
Mrs. S. —I do not suppose that it is their
color altogether. It may be the unpleasant
smell which they have; from want of cleanliness ;
and constantly rubbing themselves with the fat
of the animals which they kill.
Julius. —Did they fight, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. —Yes; but their battle will furnish
a subject for another evening: we will return to
poor Nanny.
Emma. —Do you think the women were sorry
for poor Nanny, Mamma 1
Mrs. S. —Yes; I think they are kind to each
other.
The son of a cottager residing at Wingelo,
saw the ground had been lately dug up in the
bush, not far from where they lived: curiosity
led him to examine into the cause: when he
found the body of a little black infant: he ran
home with it, saying, “ Look, mother, I have
found a little black baby.” His mother made
him take it back instantly; and bury it, as it


was before. She then went to look for its
mother; she soon found her, sitting with her
chin resting between her knees; crouching
before a fire : another woman sat near her;
who was (according to their ideas on the subject)
endeavouring to draw away the pain her friend
felt. This was done, by laying a string across
the body of the sick woman, where the pain was
most violent; the other end was held by her
friend ; who kept drawing it across her lips,
they were sadly cut; and bled very profusely :
while she was doing this, she kept up a mournful
monotonous chaunt. The cottager left her to
prepare some tea; she returned with it in about
a quarter of an hour; when she found the
woman was dead; and several black women
were preparing her body for interment. They
tied her knees to her chest; and her arms to her
sides; by passing strips of stringy bark round
her. A hole was then dug; and she was put
into it; and her dead baby by her side.
Clara. —Poor woman! how very soon they
buried her. Did they carve the trees about?
Mrs. S.-l do not know: but I think th e
blacks in the civilised parts ot the country, are
too indolent now to take so much trouble.
The grave on the side of our hill, must have


been made at least 23 years ago; and yet the
carving in many of the trees is quite visible:
though we can only from that circumstance, con-
jecture where the grave was.
Lucy. —Did poor little Sally know her Mother
was killed, Mamma ?
Mrs. S. I do not think she did my love.
I believe it happened about a year after Mrs. D.
had adopted her.
Emma. —lt was very unnatural for her bro-
ther to kill her, Mamma: what do you think
t hey quarrelled about?
Mrs. S. —The blacks have a great objection
to their women living among white people,
ftanny was particularly fond of this; and it
made the blacks angry. Indeed Nanny would
have married an overseer to a Mrs. J. several
years ago. The man was very anxious to marry
her : but Governor Darling would not allow it.
At this time she had a little brown boy, whom
she called George. He was a fine little boy;
some months older than you, Clara. One day
she brought him for me to look at. I admired
him very much; and gave her a few clothes for
him. Clara was in long petticoats. Nanny
asked me to let her see “ piccaninnie’s” head:
accordingly the cap was put back and the little
t 3


golden locks exhibited. Nanny was in exsta-
cies; she clapped her hands and exclaimed
<s All same Georgey Missus.”
Evima. —How droll. I dare say the babies
heads were not at all alike: most likely Clara
looked like a wax doll beside Georgey.
Julius. —What became of him, Mamma?
Mrs. S. —When he was about three or four
years old, Nanny came one day without him;
and told me Mrs. J. had sent for him to Sydney,
to put him to school: he remained there some
time.
Afterwards, I heard he was acting as a little
shepherd at Bombarlowah ; over a flock of sheep
belonging to the person his mother would have
married.
I believe he still lives with the same person ;
and I heard he had given George some sheep
and cattle of his own.
Nanny was very fond and proud of her little
Gecrge, before he went to school she used to
wash him and comb his hair; which was light
and curly.
Julius.- -Where did she get a comb from,
Mamma 1
Mrs. S. —She used to carry a broken ctomb,


which had probably been used to comb a horse’s
mane.
Clara. —Not a very fine one then : but better
than none; and shewed she wished to keep her
little boy clean.
Mrs. S. One day when the tribe was en-
camped near the house; and Nanny and her
child nearer than any of the rest: I went into
the store at the back of the house, with the cook
and your nurse. Suddenly little George gave a
piercing shriek. I sent the nurse to see #what
had happened; and found Nanny had bitten the
child severely on the back of his arm. She
looked very much ashamed, when we reproved
her for it; and said, piccaninnie wanted to suck.
Lucy. —Mamma, that is just what pussy does,
when she wishes to wean her kittens.
Mrs. S. —lt reminded me of a cat Lucy; and
I felt quite disgusted with Nanny : but upon the
whole her children bore evident signs of her
affection and care.
Clara. —How curious it is that the black
children do not change their teeth, Mamma.
Mrs. S, — 11 is very remarkable. I have
taken a great deal of pains to question both
parents and ch ldren; and they all have told
me that they do not. This may account for


(he large size of their babies’ teeth : which
have thought so extraordinary.
Some of the half caste children change their
teeth ; others do not.
Emma. —Jane must have been sadly distressed
at poor little Sally’s death ; she was so much
attached to her.
Mrs. S . —She was, my dear. She told me
she would never take another child. Sally for
some time had given her a good deal of trouble
and additional work: but for the last few years
her love for the child, who was very docile and
affectionate, had quite overbalanced any trouble
she might have had with her ; and she found her
a great comfort. I suppose the child was about
six years old when the accident happened. Jane
was from home; and her husband ran immedi-
ately for Dr. A., who told me the man was as
much distressed, as if it had been his own child.
Emma. —Where was it buried, Mamma?
Mr Sr- S. —They opened poor Nanny’s grave?
and placed her by her mother.
Clara, — If the blacks had been about, they
would have been very much terrified at this :
you know they are fearful of even going -near
any place, where anyone has been buried.
Mrs, S. —Yes, we had an instance of that,


when Dr. F. wanted one of the blacks to dig up
the bones of a black; who had been interred
on our land many years before. The black man
looked dreadfully shocked ; and exclaimed “Too
much gerun me (meaning frightened) “jump
up white fellow long time ago.” You know they
think the white people have once been black.
Clara. —Yes ; I have heard of two people,
whom they think they recognise as their departed
black friends; and call them by their names,
when speaking of them.
Emma. —How odd : perhaps they think white
people have once been black, because they see
those who die look pale.
Mrs. S. —It would be difficult to ascertain
what gave rise to such an idea.
Julius. —I wonder Sally was not buried in
the Church Yard.
Mrs. S. —She was not a Christian, my dear.
J ane had neglected to have her christened;
though she told me she had intended it.
Another melancholy instance of. procrastina-
tion. Oh !my children! how very, very fatal
is this habit of putting off from day to day, what
should be done immediately; for we know not
the day, nor the hour, when time may cease for
us ; and we be summoned into eternity Let us


dear children, endeavour to profit by the frequent
warnings we have, of the uncertainty of life.
“ For here we have no abiding place,” but, “In
the midst of life we are in death.” May we be
found watching! and may God in his mercy so
renew a right spirit within us, through Jesus
Christ, that in our anxiety to acquire temporal
knowledge, we may not forget that “ one thing
is needful,” and so pass through this life that we
gain a knowledge of the things which belong to
our peace; and become at last heirs of immor-
tality !
" Tben when tbe last, the closing hour draws nigh,
.And earth recedes before our swimming eye ;
When trembling on the doubiful verge of fate,
We stand and stretch our view to either state,
leach us to quit this trnnsitory scene,
With decent triumph and a look serene ;
'l each us to fix our ardent hopes on high,
And having lived to God, in Him to die."


LINES WRITTEN DURING A STORM IN THE
BAY OF BISCAY.
Almighty God, by whose command,
The winds and tempests rise ;
Whose pow’r can still the raging 6ea,
And clear the low’ring skies.
We, thine enfeebled creatures bend.
Prostrate in humble pray’r,
Pity and save us Lord we cry.
Our lives O ! Father spare.
Lo trembling on the verge of fate,
What horrors meet our ear;
Is it the thunder’s awful sound,
Or angry waves we hear ?
Unaided by thy pow’r O Lord !
Our barque we cannot save ;
Thou only can the tempest hush,
And check each rising wave.
Thy mercy Lord we would implore,
Ob ! hear us when we cry ;
Speak comfort to our drooping souls,
Lord cheer us, or we die !
Not (or our merits Lord we pray,
To have our sins forgiv’n ;
But through the merits of thy son,
Our advocate in Heav’n,


From his example Lord we would,
Unfeignediy become,
Resign’d, submissive, pious, just;
And say, “ Thy will be done.”
Unworthy though we feel we are,
Oh hear us when we pray ;
*' Forsake us not, though worn with care
Our spirits fade away. ’
But should thy wise, unerring hand,
Our grave e’en now have spread,
And we be doom’d to enter soon,
The mansions of the dead.
May we with thoughts on Heav’n above,
To present mis’ries bend ;
And place our hopes on 1 bee alone,
Our God, our judge, our friend.


00074738


l&s • v- ■•
HKv
■9s g»--TrlsffWi
J9IN
y%* f
I _ J gra& I
•-M’l
, ■
Sfl
v .■£•*■> SfP'SSgL ■■ ' **■£*& W
