

F/ZBBs'




MONTH IN FIJI.
A RECENT VISITOR.
Z/ . (f-
IT^fUjouruf:
SAMUEL MULLEN, 66, COLLINS STHEET EAST,
AND ALL BOOKSELLERS.


HENRY CORDELL,
riiiiini uvni/cjuu,
PRINTER,
MELBOURNE.
30, FLINDERS LANE WEST,
MELBOURNE.
•>ocrxnc;o


NOTICE.
The following Letters, on the Condition and Prospects
of Fiji, were published in the u Otago Daily Times,” on
the 11th, 16th, 19th and 21st of last month (September),
and are reprinted in the present form with the view of
offering to the public a lucid and evidently impartial
account of a New Settlement, which is attracting con-
siderable attention here and elsewhere.
The concluding Letters are expected by the “Gothenburg,”
and will appear in a Second Edition,
Melbourne,
October tyth, 1868.




A MONTH IN FIJI.
In putting- into print the substance of notes taken during
a recent visit to the Fiji Islands, I wish to state that they
were originally made for the information of friends anxious
like myself, to know something- of the capabilities of these
Islands as a field of settlement. Finding-, on my return to
Otago, that constant applications are made to me, and a
wide interest felt in the subject, I have arranged the notes
as carefully as scanty intervals of leisure permit.
LETTER I
We left Port Chalmers on the evening of Saturday, the
30th May, 1868, in the “Banshee” —a fine little schooner of
70 tons. Having on board 27 passengers (including tw r o
ladies and two children), it may be supposed we were
somewhat cramped for room, but to some extent this w r as
counterbalanced by incidents, amusing and otherwise, con-
stantly occurring in our crowded little world. After a short
passage of 14 days, we sighted the Island of Matuka, and
had our first distant glimpse of the Coral Islands, about
which most of us had read and dreamt in days gone by.
Passing Moala, Totoya, and Agau, we were lying becalmed
early on the following morning about 20 miles from Ovalau,
an island 30 or 35 miles in circumference. In the afternoon
a pleasant breeze sprung up, and entering through the reef
which is there less than a mile from the shore, we dropped
anchor after dusk in the port of Levuka. The view jn
approaching the port was charming. The day was bright,
and the ocean around us studded with islands fringed and
crested with the tall and graceful cocoanut tree, while the
mountains of Viti Levu formed a noble background to the
picturesque scene. The islands in sight were of widely
varying heights and size, but all of them clothed to the
summit with the richest tropical vegetation. The town of


Levuka is built along: a narrow strip of beach lying at the
eastern base of the lofty green hills which form the backbone
of Ovalau. It is the' only town of white settlers in the
group, and its supremacy as the capital of Fiji has not
hitherto been disputed. How far that supremacy will be
maintained when population is settled on the large Islands
of Yiti Levu and Vanua Levu with their fine harbors, is a
question keenly debated; but there can be no doubt Levuka
will possess, for many years at least, the trade of the
numerous windward islands of which it is the natural centre.
It also, in a great degree, owes its present position to the
uniform support which the Chief of Ovalau (Tui Levuka)
gave to the whites in olden times, when his protection
involved him, it is said, in imminent risk of collision with
Cako Bau and other great chiefs whose feelings towards
foreigners were not then of the most friendly description.
The white population of Levuka is now about 150. Two
churches, a literary institution, two very good hotels and
three of a less pretentious character, two steam cotton gins,
and powerful machinery in course of erection for extracting
oil from cotton seed, testifying to its civilisation and to the
enterprise of its people.
15th June —The morning’ fine, and the view of Levuka,
flanked on either side by native villages embowered in
groves of cocoanut and bread fruit, very beautiful. Some
of the new arrivals were this morning doomed to their first
disappointment in Fiji, Having been told by a gentleman
less than three years absent from the place, that empty
bottles were capital “ trade,” and would exchange with the
natives for any quantity of fruit, they had, in the absence
of room elsewhere, stored in their bunks all the bottles that
could be saved on the voyage. When the canoes came
alongside, these valuables were unearthed, but found to be
in no demand among the children of nature, who had learnt
to appreciate shillings much but dollars more, and who
laughed at offers of the most gorgeously labelled of the
empty treasures so carefully preserved. The natives who
came alongside were a fair specimen of the race. They
wear nothing but a “ sulu,” a species of kilt, round the
waist. The sulu is sometimes made of coloured grass, and
sometimes of a large banana leaf, but more frequently of a
common kind of cotton print imported for the purpose.
They use a fathom of this print for each sulu; and I may
here observe that in Fiji everything is measured and sold by


the fathom instead of the yard. The natives are very
cleanly and take particular pains with their hair, which is
carefully combed and pomatumed with a lime wash, leaving
it when the dressing was complete, very much in style, color,
and look like a barrister’s wig. They are a stout athletic
race, very intelligent, and pleasing in appearance, and it is
difficult to reconcile their good humored faces and light
hearted manner with the frightful cannibalism from which
they have just emerged. They are evidently apt to learn,
and the contact with civilisation which has in a few years
made so great a change in their estimate of the value of empty'
bottles, is no doubt quietly producing a like effect in
matters of great moment to their own interests and to those
of the whites settling in increasing numbers among them.
[Landed after breakfast, and found Otago summer jackets
unpleasantly warm in a Fiji winter, while what some of us
had supposed to be summer waistcoats were quite unbear-
able.] Loud but unavailing regrets were expressed on all sides
at the delusion under which our portmanteaus had been
packed, and a determination to sacrifice appearances for the
time, and discard both coat and waistcoat, was afterwards
adopted by a large majority'. On landing, found Levuka —
looking so pretty from the sea —in reality a very confined
place, offering little attraction beyond a visit to the native
towns and to the water fall, where native boys jump from
the rocks some 15 or 20 feet into the pool below, and
dive for sixpences very expertly and with great success. We
were here much embarrassed by the conflicting accounts given
of the country by recent arrivals and by settlers who happened
to be in town. On this point no two people were agreed—
“ The Rewa was too wet for Sea Island cotton, and a hot bed
of mosquitos. All the settlers there were anxious to sell out.
No small islands were to be bought now as heretofore. On
the big land, the best places were the Nandy and Nandroga
Coasts, while, according to others, they were too dry and no
good land to be got upon them. Eye complaints and dysentery
were prevalent here—and natives and low whites troublesome
there. This place was sickly because deprived of the sea
breeze —and that place had no water.” In short, it would be
impossible to describe the conflicting opinions and advice
with which we were met. To those who remembered how
every Province in New Zealand once held the same bad
opinion of the chmate and capabilities of its neighbours there
was but one course open, and that was, to see as soon as
possible for ourselves. With a last look at the greatest


curiosity in Levuka—a venerable and highly respectable pair
of stocks, for the pillorying, I presume, of native offenders—
we returned on board, after being kindly offered a couple of
seats in his boat by a gentleman engaged in cotton planting
on the Rewa, with whom we decided to leave next day.
June 16 —Again visited the native towns, prior to starting
for the Rewa. At Tonga Town we were suddenly surrounded
by natives, armed with axes, knives, clubs, and muskets.
The assembly looked warlike, but we soon learnt that their
object was to sell some of the clubs, and that it is their
invariable practice to go armed. Heard a curious story to-day
respecting Tui Levuka. He had offended against the laws of
the Bau dominions and had been taken by Cako Bau in his
canoe, a prisoner, to Bau. By some it is asserted the capture
was effected treacherously, but I was assured on the best
authority, that this was not the case. At Bau, the Tui was
to have been summarily hanged, but was saved by the urgent
appeals of the Hev. Mr. Tait, the resident missionary, and his
sentence commuted to banishment in the hills of the upper
Rewa. A Mr. Heffernan, a planter there, taking pity on the
forlorn condition of one who had for many years been so good
a friend to the whites, assisted him in escaping to the lower
Rewa, whence he was conveyed in the regular passenger boat
to Levuka and received with great rejoicings by his attached
followers. Once on his own heath—or perhaps it would be
more correct to say among his own cocoanuts—the chief
defied Cako Bau, and talked of making open war upon his
majesty. All this occurred only a few weeks before our
arrival, and we were informed that Tui Levuka, in his wrath,
had taken the singular revenge of changing his religion in
order that even in that respect he might not be like Cako
Bau. He had therefore become a Catholic, and walked about
the beach of Levuka with a gilt cross on his neck, while his
followers were decorated with small medals of St. Francis
B’Assis, which is the outward sign of a Catholic Fiji man.
Some said that the step was also taken to spite the Wesleyan
missionaries, whom he in some unaccountable way connected
with his capture, although it was by one of their number he
had been saved from an ignominious death. Called on Tui
Levuka. Saw an elderly man, clad in pure native costume,
with considerable dignity of manner in his better movements,
an d left him with great regret at the fondness for gin which
made him haunt the public houses of Levuka, and which was
evidently lowering the character of one whose face indicated


the kindness and good nature that had made him a favorite
both with the whites and with his own people. Started from
Levuka at two p.m., but tide and wind being contrary, were
compelled to put back and make a new attempt at five. At
half-past seven got to a small island (Sautaba), and slept there
for the night. Sautaba (pronounced Sowtamba ), is only about
200 yards in circumference, with a small clump of trees and
bush growing in the centre. There is no water on the island;
and to any one in search of a new sensation I would
recommend a week’s stay on this or some other lonely little
islet in the midst of the Pacific Ocean. In the boat I spent a
portion of the time in learning the Fiji alphabet, and as it
will be useful in enabling others to understand the pronuncia-
tion of Fiji names, transcribe it here for their benefit:—
There is no h, x, or z, in Fiji, and the other letters are
pronounced like our own, with the exception of a (pronounced
ah), b (mfe),_ c (th), d (nd), e (a), g (nr/), i ( e ), q {nr/;/), u (oo).
As illustrations I may quote the words, Turaga (a chief,)
Turahmjha ; Yadi (a queen), Yahndee ; Cata (to hate),
Thahtah ; Qai (then), Enggvy. The accent is generally on
the penultimate syllable, and the language as a rule, is phonetic,
every letter being pronouncd with its Fiji sound. Thus,
“Gako Ban” is pronounced Thahkombow, the meaning of the
word being “founder of Ban.” The diphthong sounds are, as
nearly as possible, ai, i j an, ow ; ei, ee; ou, 00. A little
attention will soon enable the learner to overcome the pecu-
liarities of the written language in this respect, while a
vocabulary of useful phrases by Rev. Mr. Moore, an exposition
of the Gospels and a translation of Bunyan’s Pilgrim’s
Progress by the same gentleman, with a Dictionary by the
late Rev. Mr. Hazlewood, can be bought in Levuka, and will
be found invaluable to those who desire to be independent of
interpreters, and to hold free intercourse with the natives.
The Scriptures are, of course, translated, but the diction is
not good, and Mr. Moore is engaged on a re-translation into
more pure Fiji, which is better understood now than formerly.
17th June.—Started from Sautaba’soon after daylight.
Passed Bau at 11 a.m., and the island of Tabarua (Tambarua)
at 12. Met on the way by a splendid double war-canoe,
with Ratu Abel, one of Cako Ban’s sons, on board, going on
a mission to Tui Cakau (King of the Beefs) to seek assistance
in resuming the war with the murderers of poor Baker last
year. The canoe, with its huge leg of mutton sail, crowded
decks, streamers flying, and native drums beating, bore down


on us with great speed, and in its way looked every inch a
man-of-war. Two smaller canoes, with another of Cako
Ban’s sons as an ambassador, followed. Near Tabarua the
water shoaled, and being beautifully clear gave us a view of
the reef with its brilliant variety of color and form, enlivened
by numbers of small fish, yellow, blue, green, and red, darting
about in the little pools, and among the many-colored coral
pinnacles. Entering the Nakello Creek, and passing through
a canal (cut by the Ban natives to connect the Nakello with
the Rewa River,) we stopped at Morrells at Nakellomus, at
half-past two. Had there a good dinner of well cooked pork
and poultry, for which, with water-melons, boiled maize, and
grenadillas, we were charged one shilling. Poultry of all
kinds appear to thrive well, while pigs promise to be a perfect
nuisance. At 4, resumed our journey, and met several
mission boats returning from a festival up the river. The
boats were rowed by natives clothed in white shirts and
robes, and were followed by numerous canoes, each with its
merry crowd of holiday-makers in charge of a native teacher.
The canoes were laden with contributions to the revenue of
the Missionary Society, as the natives, having no money,
contribute liberally in cocoa-nut oil, cotton, and other produce,
which is sent by the Society’s vessels to Sydney. The Rewa,
as we entered it from the Nakello, is about 500 yards broad—
the current slow and the banks not much above the general
river level. Lower down towards the sea its breadth is much
increased, and the delta, fringed with mangrove swamps, is a
nest of mosquitoes, gaining for the whole stream an evil
reputation which, higher up, we did not find it deserve. At
Spiers, about seven miles only from the mouth of the main
stream, we slept with little annoyance from these pests, and
on rising in the morning at 5, found the air pleasantly cool,
and the cocoanut oil congealed. The house in which Ave slept
may be taken as a fair specimen of native architecture.
Strong wooden uprights support bamboo rafters, attached to
a heavy ridgepole. The roof is thatched, the walls are
formed of reeds or basket work, and the whole fastened
neatly and effectively by rope made from cocoanut fibre
(sinnet), and by dried native vines. The beds are on raised
dais constructed of reeds, filled with leaves, and covered
Avith mats of the cleanest and finest description. These beds,
or “ vatas” as they are called, are both cool and comfortable,
while square curtains or u screens” are suspended from the
roof and protect the sleeper from the annoying attacks of the
mosquito. Called at Nuku Moto, a small island beautifully


cultivated and containing fine specimens of cotton and young
coffee trees. Thence proceeded up the river, and at 3 p.m.
arrived opposite the Mission House lately occupied by the
Rev. Mr. Baker, whose murder by the mountain natives on
the Upper Rewa last year, when he attempted to cross the
island, is so well known. For some distance below this, the
banks of the river had begun to increase rapidly in heigh-
and the character of the vegetation became changed. Cocoat
nut trees grow scantily, and do not bear. They are replaced
in the prospect by delicate and graceful tree ferns, which
grow to a height of 30 feet, singly, or in groves, along the
banks. Banana trees are numerous, and from this point the
settlement of cotton and coffee planters on both sides of the
river, is, with the exception of a few native towns, continuous
for miles. Proceeding up the river, we stopped at the
houses of several settlers on the way ; and finally, at half-
past ten at night, arriving at Mr. Payne’s—about 25 miles
from the entrance of the Rewa —were received with the frank
hospitality characteristic of the Rewa planters generally.
letter ii.
19th June. —I should have mentioned that at Spiers’ we
met Messrs. Evans and Brewer, the delegates to Cako Bau
from the Fiji Banking Company projected in Melbourne.
They were then on their way to Bau, after inspecting the
country about the Rewa, with which they seemed much
pleased. Their project had been in its main features warmly
supported by the Rewa Planters’ Association, a meeting of
which was called specially for its consideration. On the
other hand, there was a‘strong protest from the British
Consul, and Cako Bau had decided to take no further action
till the arrival of the Commodore in the “ Challenger,” then
daily expected. As this Melbourne Company may yetv
exercise a considerable influence over the future of Fiji, and
fill in its history a similar position to that of the New
Zealand Company here, a short account of its origin and
proceedings may not be out of place. As the story is told
in Fiji, some years ago certain American citizens were
celebrating the fourth of July, and during the night their


extensive establishments for curing’ beche de mer, and for
other purposes, were by fire. They declared
that the fire was the work of incendiaries. The Fijimen,
on the other hand, maintained that it was accidental. At
all events the fire led to a rigid investigation by the U. S.
naval Commander, who shortly afterwards visited the
Islands—not only to look into this, but into other cases in
which U. S. citizens had been grossly injured in person and
property. It must be remembered that the natives, in those
days, were less civilised than they are now, and had been
in the habit of doing pretty well as they liked with white
men cast upon their shores. Having finished his inquiry,
and having- had the damages assessed, the American
commander desired to know who was king in this country.
Proud Cako Bau claimed the honour, and was told at once
that to him the U. S. Government would look for payment
of the compensation awarded in various sums to the
sufferers. This is the story current in Levuka. There are
many stories, I am bound to say, current in that rather
monotonous little place which are somewhat contradictory,
and in which implicit confidence cannot, therefore, be
placed. This, as to the origin of the American debt, and
with it the origin of Cako Ban’s title of King of Fiji, I
can only give as it was told to me by more than one settler
in the group. There can be no doubt that the title, however
originating, is new, and has never been recognised by the
chiefs of a very large portion of the Islands. To return
to the debt—as years went by and it remained unpaid, the
IJ. S. authorities became pressing, and eventually took
from King Cako Bau a mortgage of Moturiki, Goro, and
Nairai, three of his most fertile and beautiful Islands, forming
an ancestral property with which it might well break the
heart of a more humble individual to part. Of late the
claim has been more pressingly made, and is said, with
interest, to amount now to £9OOO. In default of payment,
the Islands were to be sold to the highest bidder, but
whether the title was to be an Act of Congress, or what
other document, I could not ascertain, and am puzzled to
say. It was to relieve Cako Bau from this difficulty that
the Fiji Company was projected. The Company proposed
to pay off the mortgage —to give Cako Bau £*2oo a year —
the same allowance to his successor—to each of his chiefs
£ per annum, and to assist him in upholding and
defending- his kingdom. In return they were to have
200,000 acres of land—the sole right of levying duties on


imports and exports, with wharfage and harbour dues—the
sole right of hanking and issuing hank notes—a pre-emptive
right over all land which Cako Ban might hereafter wish
to sell, and full power to make laws for the good govern-
ment and welfare of natives and settlers at any time
occupying the Company’s lands, as well as for regulating
trade and commerce in “my said kingdom.” The Company
was also to establish courts of justice, and to appoint judges,
magistrates, and other officers to administer their laws,
which Cako Ban, on his part, solemnly pledged himself to
uphold and defend, and to protect settlers on the Company’s
lands. By another clause, Cako Ban was to clear and plant
with Sea island cotton, for jhe Company, without delay or
charg*e acres “of the said scheduled lands, at such
places and times as the Company shall direct.” This little
document was signed (blanks and all, the Levuka people
say,) on board the “ Albion,” and duly sealed by Ebenezer
Cako Ban (his x mark) on the 23rd May, 1868.
As a further concession, the Company agreed to supply
his Majesty with an armed steamer “whenever he may
require one,” and to take one of his sons to Melbourne to be
educated. The story in Levuka runs, that when Cako Ban
returned that day from the “Albion,” an old and experienced
settler asked him what he had been doing, and was told in
reply that he had signed a long paper, but had forgotten
its exact nature or contents. The settler who—being an
old settler—could take liberties with his Majesty, told him
in plain English that he had always thought him a long-
headed fellow, but now considered him a d d fool to
sign a paper he did not understand. To this proposition
His Majesty assented, but was considerably startled when
further told by the said old settler that he at all events
knew what had been done—that Cako Ban was no longer
King of Fiji, but the man in the white hat, meaning one
of the delegates, was now King instead. It was no part of
the American Consul’s duty to object to any course that
ensured payment of his Government’s claim; but the
British Consul, taking another view of the matter, protested
against the cession, and against the political powers which
the Company were to assume. He warned Cako Bau to
take no further steps till the English Commodore arrived;
and his majesty appearing only too glad to accept and act
upon the warning of his friend the Consul, declined for the
present to take any further action in the matter. Affairs
were in this condition when I met the delegates at Spiers’.


It will be better to bring the narrative to a conclusion here,
by stating that on the Commodore’s arrival the delegates
abandoned all claim to political privileges, and that on the
24th July, after many meetings at the office of the U. b.
Consul in Levuka, they finally agreed to pay £9OOO, and
to allow Cako Bau £2OO a year. In return, they were to
have the right of selecting 200,000 acres of land within
certain blocks then specified—the selection to be made and
the land surveyed within twelve months. The Company
was further to have the exclusive right for 21 years, and
freedom from taxation for ever. Now as to the land, the
right extends over blocks which include valuable harbors,
and, if any one may venture an opinion, it would be dirt
cheap at the money. But the banking monopoly and the
freedom from taxation, not being accorded deliberately by a
properly constituted Legislature, and Fiji, moreover, being
without Courts of Law to enforce King Cako Bau’s decrees,
do not, to an ordinary understanding, appear of much
value. My own impression is that the same eternal freedom
from taxation (for> there is no taxation of any kind
whatever in Fiji) may be purchased from King Cako Bau
by any venturesome settler for a five pound note. Is the
investment worth the money ? Apart from these outre
privileges, one cannot but wish the Company success, and
a speedy settlement of the valuable property thus at their
disposal— a property so valuable that it would be probably
well worth their while to add to the purchase an additional
thousand pounds to satisfy the claims of lesser chiefs and
small landholders. By this course they would avoid the
grievous disputes with the natives in which the New
Zealand Company were involved, as from all I could learn
there is no “ tribal right” in Fiji. There the people are
divided into two distinct classes —free men ( or chiefs) and
slaves. The slaves are so despotically governed that they
dare not approach a chief standing, or enter his house
except upon their hands and knees. In the land they
cannot therefore have a shadow of title; but among’ the
chiefs the “Mata ni Vanua,” or hereditary holders, are
easily found out, and for a very small amount their title to
superfluous land, of which they can make no use, is satisfied.
To this it is worth adding that the natives live in towns
containing from seventy or eighty to a couple of hundred
people, that their plantations are always near the towns,
and that every small plantation, with the land adjacent, has
a name and well known history of its own. The boundaries


of purchases are thus easily defined, and with ordinary care
there is little probability of future trouble in this respect.
Another gentleman who went with us up the river was a
Mr. Pfiuger, then involved in troublesome disputes with
the natives, which culminated in the attack on Duka by the
« Challenger’s” boats a few weeks after. Mr.Pfiuger was an
active, bold, and successful cotton planter on the upper
Rewa, but opposite his place the town of Duka contained a
saucy and troublesome population, which rendered his
position very disagreeable. The people ot this town were
formerly refugees from the mountain tribes, and being
without hereditary chiefs there was no one whose authority
they respected, or through wfiom they could be satisfactorily
dealt with. To get rid of them, Mr. Pfiuger felt compelled
to buy the land on which the town was built. This he did
from Cako Ban, who claimed the ownership by conquest,
and, I presume, as the titular King of Fiji. But the con-
tumacious residents of Duka refused to leave, and when
the king’s orders were made known to them, impudently
wanted to know who was Cako Bau ! So the quarrel waxed
hotter and hotter, and when Mr. Pfiuger complained to
Cako Bau, the king told him he could give no redress.
The “ white men ” by assisting Tui Levuka to escape from
the hills to which he had been banished, had lowered the
authority of the king' in the eyes of the mountaineers, of
whom the Duka people were a part! Astute old chief! Pew
men, according to all accounts, are more clever at excuses,
or greater adepts in word fencing than King Cako Bau.
When pushed into a corner, they say it is worth seeing
with how diplomatic and innocent an air he can tell his
opponents : “ Oh, you white people are so clever—you know
so much—but I am only a Fijiman!” He was shrewd
enough in this case to shelter his want of power to give
possession of the land—for which he had taken the hard
cash—behind the act of “ the white men,” whom he thought
fit to make a single white settler represent. So time went
on, and the rebellious people of Duka continued to refuse
obedience to the mandate of their king. By-and-bye y
H.M.S. “ Challenger” arrived, and at the request of many
of the settlers, the Commodore sent up four boats, with
eighty-seven men and two Armstrong guns, to see into
the matter —with what calamitous result, I shall have, in
proper time, to relate.
Resuming the course of my narrative:—On the morning
of the 19th June, got up early, and took the opportunity of


looking- at Mr. Payne’s plantation, consisting- of 70 acres of
cotton and sof coffee. The cotton was of the kidney and
short stapled single seed varieties. It looked remarkably
well, and so did the coffee trees, although the latter were
too young yet to be in bearing. For the information of my
readers it will be well to state that the cotton growth in
Fiji is broadly known as kidney, single seed, and Bea Island.
As we go on, I shall have to give in greater detail the
information obtained from planters as to the growth and
produce of each kind in different parts ot the group. It is
sufficient here to say that the cotton question, like most
others in Fiji, is still in its experimental stage. The Rewa,
for example, is scarcely three years settled, and the first
experiment there was made in the short stapled varieties,
which take eleven months to grow, and are worth only Bd.
to 18d, per lb. in the London market. The result was so
good that the river lands were quickly taken up and settled.
But the short stapled varieties can only be planted from
July to September. They give two regular crops in the
year, and it is nejcessai’y that those crops should come in
during the dry season. Many of the settlers did not get
on their land until the time for planting had passed, and
thus a season was lost. Subsequently the Sea Island cotton
was introduced into the Islands. It grows as a bush the
other kinds grow into a tree. It takes only five months
before beginning to yield, and the picking, once begun, is
continuous throughout the year. The price of the cotton
is also much greater, and picked samples have been quoted
as worth 4s. per lb. in the London market. But as the
particular kind of land on which it can be grown to
advantage, there is still much debate, although the general
belief is that the Rewa soil is too rich and deep, and the
Kewa climate too moist for this purpose. The lower
branches of Sea Island cotton, which bear the best pods,
grow there too rankly, and being borne down to the ground
by the weig'ht of the crop, are liable to have the cotton
spoilt by the wet. Some hold that this may be remedied
by pruning, but from what I saw, it appears to me the Sea
Island does best in a dry sandy soil. Whether the increased
yield of the short staple in rich soil does not atone for its
low price, as compared with the fine cotton produced on
poorer sandy soils and in a drier air, is still unsettled.
iVor can this be wondered at, when we consider over how
short a time the experiments range, and that the busy
pioneers have had their hands too full, so far, to make


definite measurements of the land under cultivation, or
to keep accurate statistical returns as to the crop
produced. At all events, the cultivation of cotton on the
Kewa has been sufficiently successful to produce nearly
uninterrupted settlement on both banks of the river for
25 miles, while some half-dozen adventurous planters are
scattered among- the turbulent mountaineers for 30 miles
higher. When the day comes— as come it assuredly must
—that the Fiji Islands possess capital sufficient to develope
their great sugar producing capabilities, the rich valley of
the Rewa ( and it is only one of many similar valleys in the
group) will, no doubt, acquire a high reputation. Mean-
while the coffee plants now growing both on its flats and
hill sides, give promise of a more immediate, less costly,
and almost equally valuable crop. But coffee trees take
five years before they are in full bearing-, and until then it
is to cotton the planters look for more speedy, though at
the same time less rich returns. In short—from what I
could see and learn—cotton is likely bye-and-bye, as capital
increases, to occupy a secondary position among the exports
of Fiji, and to be confined to those dry districts and more
sandy soils which cannot produce the richer crops of coffee,
sugar, and tobacco, for which the greater portion of the
Islands seem so well adapted.
LETTER IXX.
The course of the river now became very circuitous, and
it required a pull of six or seven miles to get to the planta-
tion of the Messrs. Smith, who had kindly invited us to
spend a few days with them. They hold some 2,000 acres
of which nearly a hundred are planted with cotton in
various stages of growth, blossoming beautifully, and with
a few experimental acres of Sea Island looking equally
well. The cotton had been planted at various times between
the previous September and February, the latter being the
month in which the Sea Island, coming- so much earlier to
maturity, was put in. The long rows of trees bright with
blossom, and the clear well-weeded avenues between them,
make a cotton plantation a very pretty and promising sight.
When the pods have burst and the trees are white with


cotton, the sight is still prettier to the planter’s eye. Fine
dry picking weather and the labor wherewithal to pick, are
then his constant prayer. Of the two, the weather is far
the more to be relied upon —the labor is a sore subject which
will require boldly facing before long, if the rich resources
of the country are to be properly developed. At present,
cultivation is of the rudest kind/ The bush being cut down
and burnt, sticks are placed at proper intervals to indicate
where the seeds are to be planted, and the men set to work
with knives fourteen or sixteen inches long. With these
they scrape a small hole in the surface and deposit the seed.
The planting is then complete. Fourteen feet by ten is the
space generally allowed for each tree of the single seed or
kidney kind. The Sea Island being a smaller bush is planted
much more closely. In each case one of the chief objects
is to keep the trees or bush sufficiently close to cover the
ground, and thus check the growth of weeds in the rows.
Between the plants and rows the ground remains untouched,
and the weeding is confined to constant surface cutting, leaving
the roots intact. .This system is applied only to bush land.
In open country, of which a great deal has of late been
purchased from the natives, the plough is used, and from
the nature of the climate can be worked with little inter-
ruption throughout the year. The introduction of the plough
is so recent that I could get little reliable information as to
the profit attending its use. It undoubtedly works both
better and faster, but as the extent of planting is always
limited by the power of picking, and as the labor for this is
very uncertain, many of the settlers prefer the rough
system of bush planting to the outlay on horses and
necessary implements, fin the Kewa River there is little
doubt that an improved system must be adopted in the
event of a very probable rise in the present low price of
labor, for which extending settlement is already creating a
much greater demand. As to the time when cotton, once
planted, may be left standing', there are various opinions.
Some consider that it does not want renewing for several
years ; others that the quality after the first year is not so
good; and one experienced planter told me he was inclined
to think that eventually Sea Island would be found most
profitable when planted annually. r ihe same gentleman,
who has a plantation favorably situated, and one of the
largest in the group, makes it a practice already to renew*
every two vears with Sea Island cotton. Others point to
kidnev or single seed, in isolated cases, five or six years old,


and still in fair bearing-. At Mr. Smith’s we spent one
very wet and a couple of very pleasant days visiting the
different plantations in the neighbourhood. In all the
mode of working was the same, while the absence of stock
or stables puts rural life in Fiji in striking contrast with
that of New Zealand or Australia. Here and there a few
cows are kept for milking, but goats are generally kept for
that purpose. The cows look remarkably well. Sheep
thrive only on the open grass lands, and in situations where
the food is less rank than on the Rewa. Maize is cultivated
but only as an article of diet. It is said to yield HO
bushels to the acre —a tremendous estimate, which one must
take leave to accept with considerable doubt. Be the yield
what it may, there are three'crops taken during the year,
and with improved cultivation maize will probably figure
largely as a product. Tobacco is also grown and smoked
by white settlers as well as by natives. The leaves are
roughly dried and made into very pleasant cigarettes
prepared banana leaf being used as a substitute for the
usual wrapping paper. The natives grow considerable
quantities of this tobacco, but sell it as soon as picked, and
are for the greater portion of the year compelled to work
for their own supply, which is generally native grown,
though sometimes imported. At this season of the year the
country grown tobacco was scarce and worth a shilling- per
pound. Curiously enough the price of tobacco was always
quoted to me in Hnglish currency, while most other articles
—cotton especially —are quoted in cents, of which 100
make the dollar, equal to four shillings of our money. Not
less curious is the multitude of foreign coins in circulation,
and the arbitrary value placed upon them regulated
apparently by size rather than by intrinsic bullion worth.
Thus the franc passes for a shilling, and the Q-franc piece
for a dollar, while all dollars, be they American, Mexican,
or Spanish pillar, are alike. The price of cotton in Levuka
at the time of which I am writing", was 3 cents for kidney
or single seed, and 6 cents for Sea Island. In
cotton, it requires in round numbers, 4 lb. to g-ive 1 lb. of
clean kidney, and 3 lbs. for one of clean single seed or Sea
Island. The charge for “saw” ginning and baling is
1 cent per lb., and the freight and charges for shipping
via Sydney, and selling in Liverpool, are estimated at 3fd.
At the prices above quoted the clean cotton to cover cost
and charges, should sell at llfd, for kidney, 9|d. for
single seed, and 14£d. for Sea Island. Now, in Liverpool,


the prices quoted by the Economist on 7th June, were, for
Brazilian (kidney) lid. to Is. 2d., Egyptian (single seed) Bd.
to Is. 6d., Sea island Is. lid. to 2s. Bd., and the finer kinds
ss. Gd. per lb. Tahitian cotton, which must be very much
in quality like the greater part of that grown in Fiji, is
quoted in the same paper at Is. 6d. to 3s. 2d. I give these
figures space to show how indefinite all calculations as to
the future value of the cotton crop must be The indis-
criminate manner in which different qualities are packed in
the same bale is sufficient of itself to render such calcu-
lations impossible, while the use of the saw gin, which tears
the fibre of the long stapled qualities, is said to greatly
depreciate their value. The knife, or roller gin, used in
other countries for this purpose, is much slower in action,
and therefore more expensive, but will doubtless be considered
indispensable when the present rough modes for preparing
for market pass away.
It is encouraging to think how much room there is for
improvements likely to counteract the difficulties which
would result from any large advance on the present low
price of labor ; but I hope that those who are uninterested
or dislike dry calculations, have skipped the last few
paragraphs. My excuse must be the object with which my
visit was undertaken —not for amusement —but to make
inquiry into the prospects which the country held out of
profitable settlement. It would be more pleasant to
describe the glorious scenery, the noble river, and the rich
luxuriant vegetation, but a hard necessity compels me to
turn aside from the beauties of nature, and to ask myself
the very matter of fact question—will it pay ?As an
important consideration from that point of view, let us take
a glance at the labor, which, next to the native, is the most
important question in Fiji. It must be at once understood
that European labor is not to be thought of. The superior
strength and energy of white men are wasted when the
competition with their colored brethren is merely as to
who can best scrape a hole in the ground and drop a few
seeds therein. Nor does the peculiar kind of field labor
offer any opportunity for superior skill, while white men
could not live with the food, clothing, and wages which
make a native comparatively comfortable and wealthy.
Of colored labor there are three distinct kinds—lst, the
Fijimen, who make capital bushmen, and are the best in
the island at clearing land, while the women and children
are very good at cotton picking and similar light work.


2nd, the Rotomah men, from the island of that name, who
have more 11 savoir faire,” are excellent sailors or boatmen,
dress in European clothes, have long- straight hair and
almond eyes, seem to know nothing 1 of the slavery in which
the mass of Fijimen live, talk to the chiefs as equals, and
altogether in appearance and manner very much resemble
the Maoris. 3rd, the natives imported from Tanna and
other New Hebrides Islands, or from islands near the Line.
Now, the Fijimen are not to be relied upon. They work when
they like and leave it alone when they don’t. They are
brought up in a state of unmitigated slavery, and have all
the vices of slaves. There is the additional inconvenience,
that if one offend a chief and become “tabooed,” no Fijiman
dare work for him. Their pay, when they do work, is from
Is. 6d to 2s. per week, payable in prints or other trade;
they finding themselves in food. Frequently the work is
done by piece or contract in dealing with them. The
Rotomah men, on the other hand, rather despise field labor,
but will work in boats or stores at prices ranging from 20s
per month. The Fiji half-casts are a separate class —skilful
boatmen—and generally earn £3 to £4 per month. As
laborers they are not to be thought of, and, like the white
men, being free, move among the Fiji chiefs without
servility or any sign of inferiority. It is the imported
laborers who form the settler’s chief reliance, and in obtain-
ing them is his principal cash outlay, as it is necessary to
pay their passages —at present 90s. each. The ordinary
course is to arrange for the passage with some captain who
understands these people, and leave him to make arrange-
ments as to wages, which are now from 50s. to 60s.
per annum. The laborers so obtained are under contract
for three years At the end of the time they are paid in
trade and money, and have free passages back. The consul
keeps a register of all imported labor, and sees that the
contracts entered into are properly performed and the men
returned to their homes in due course. Some time since a
vessel came to Levuka loaded with these natives, and the
captain offered to let them out to those planters who would
pay him the largest sum for passage money, io guard
against this in future, the Consul refuses to give sailing
letters until the captain produces an agreement with planters
to take a certain number at a fixed rate of passage-money.
The men are well treated by the planters, better fed and
better cared for than in their own country, and go back
comparatively rich at the end of their time. They speak-


or try to speak—English, and have little sympathy and less
association with the Fiji people. Of late it has been the
practice to bring- with them a proportion of women, and
some of the planters who employ these people purpose
having- them taught as much as they can during’ the short
time they have them on the plantations. When this is
done, there can be no doubt a g-reat civilising- process,
beneficial to both sides, will have been begun, and the
labourers returning home be the means of gradually
enlightening their countrymen. Hitherto there has been
no difficulty in getting imported men, but as the demand
for labour increases, it is doubtful how far the population
available will be sufficient for its supply. A difficulty—
technical perhaps, but practically serious—consists of the
inability of the Consul of Levuka to give sailing orders for
vessels sailing beyond his jurisdiction. This narrows
materially the field from which labour can be obtained, but
it is hard to believe such an obstacle will not be overcome
by agreement between the Consuls concerned. Without a
sailing letter, the vessel carrying natives is, if a man-of-war
meet her, liable to seizure, and the captain to heavy
penalties under the Passenger Act of the Imperial
Parliament. No doubt, Chinese or Indian Coolies will also
be required hereafter. Their passage money will be heavier
and food more costly, and their respective Governments are
not likely to agree to emigration until there be some
recognised Government or authority on whom they can rely
to see their immigrants properly treated. Herein rests the
chief—l had almost said the only serious—difficulty which,
even when the natives are friendly, must be faced by all
new arrivals in Fiji, They can do nothing without labour,
and any hasty, rapid influx of intending planters before the
country is prepared for them will not be successful. With
labour anything can be done, but without it, nothing.
Intending settlers should never lose sight of this, and will
do well to take, in all cases, a preliminary trip, and see
their way before abandoning the position and prospects
which they may have at home. To those who settle among
the natives —be they Christians or devils (as all who are
not Christians are called) —labour is generally available at
very low rates. But it must not be forgotten that the
labour of these people is not to be relied upon. They are
children in caprice, and can only be looked to as a temporary
help. It is on imported labour—and on that only—that the
welfare of Fiji, and of those who settle in it as planters,


will in all human probability depend. It must take many
years, under the most favourable circumstances, before the
habits engendered in the Fijian by ages of abject slavery
are overcome, and meanwhile their number is decreasing so
rapidly that they will then be a far less important element
for consideration. The cause of this decrease I cannot
pretend to give, but the proof is to be seen in ruined towns,
and in the comparative absence of young’ children every-
where, The Consul in his report for 1867, instances the
island of Ovalau, which “ a very few years ago could send
out 3000 flighting men, and can now only muster 500, br
including the lads and old men.” The same authority
states that at Tai—a town in Ovalau—the deaths during
the year were 41, while- the births and deaths of
children were equal, being in each case 7. At Losi,
another town of Ban, the births were only 7, of which 4
died, while the total deaths during the year were 27. At
Ba, on the north-west coast of Viti Levu, there were 60
deaths, and no births during the year. There is no marked
disease to account for this strange decrease in the population,
and one hears theories varying with the fancy of each man
who forms them. The present population of the whole
group is estimated at 100,000, but this, as in the early
estimates of the Maori and other native populations, is
probably in excess of the real number.
1 have now given the information which the short time
at my disposal enabled me to pick up on the Rewa. The
“Banshee” meanwhile was lying at Levuka, and we had
arranged with the captain to be back by Wednesday, and
proceed in her to Nadroga, a new district on Viti Levu,
only just opened for sale. We had managed to see the
Rewa to the junction of the Waidina, about 40 miles from
the mouth, where it is still 200 to 250 yards broad. We
should gladly have gone higher, but feared missing the
“Banshee,” and decided on returning to Levuka.
22nd June.—Called at Capt. Morton’s in going down the
river, and spent a pleasant day at his plantation. Cotton—
about 80 acres—looking remarkably well, and Sea Island
promising a good return Heard to our chagrin here and at
Morrell’s, that by the latest news from Levuka the
“ Banshee ” was to have sailed on the previous Saturday
for Nadroga. Our plans were thus entirely deranged, and
although we afterwards found that the schooner did not


actually leave till the following Thursday, our missing her
was so far a gain, that we saw more both of natives and
country than would otherwise have been possible. Accept-
ing seats, kindly offered to us by Mr. T. Morton, who was
going* to Ban and thence to his plantation at Wai Moro on
the Tai Levu coast, we started after dusk, and arrived about
midnig’ht at Ratu Timothy’s town, built at the junction of
the Wai Manou with the Rewa. With us was a Bau chief,
Ratu Jonah, who had charge of Mr. Morton’s boat. The
people of the town were apparently asleep, with the ex-
ception of one native policeman, and it was with difficulty
we roused some of them up, and got lights in the strangers’
BurS —a large house provided in all Fiji towns for the
accommodation of travellers. Here we were joined by
Ratu Timothy, Governor-General of the Rewa district, a
great man in rank, and greater, if possible, in size and
figure. He is the “ Vasururu,” who figures as a handsome
frontispiece in Seeman’s “ Mission to Viti.” When young,
and, I presume from the name, not yet a Christian. Vasururu
(better known among the settlers by another of his heathen
names, “Uliwap,”) captivated the tender fancy of Adi
Kuila, one ofCako Bau’s favourite daughters. But Uliwap
was only a small Rewa chief—his acres were neither rich
nor broad, and the prudent parents declined to countenance
his addresses. An elopement was the result, and for years
Cako Bau declined holding communication with his wilful
daughter. In the course of events the obdurate father found
himself master by conquest of the Lower Rewa, and casting
about for a Governor of the district, his heart appears to have
relented. At all events he determined that so valuable a
bit of preferment should not be thrown away, or go out of
the family. A reconciliation was effected, and Ratu
Timothy appointed to the office. In Seeman’s day Ratu
Timothy was a tall, thin, and decidedly good looking young
man. Like most of the native chiefs, he has with age
grown much stouter, but take him altogether, is as fine a
specimen of humanity as one could often meet. Yet some-
how or other, Ratu Timothy, whose face and manners are to
a stranger so prepossessing, is not liked by the settlers.
They say he is fickle and his word not to be trusted, but of
his wife Adi Kuila (anglice Ladv Flag), one hears nothing
hut good on every side. In the Bure we were provided with
mosquito curtains and soft mats, and enjoyed a, comfort-
able night’s rest.


23rd June.—Up at six and looked over the native town.
The houses are built very close to each other with some
appearance of order, but without regular streets. Absence
of dirt and of foul smells are characteristic of this and of all
the towns we afterwards visited, and in so far they are by no
means behind towns of a similar size in more civilised com-
munities. This is the more remarkable as the natives are
great fish eaters, and it must require constant care to keep
the offal from becoming a nuisance in so warm a climate.
But, stop ! I must take exception in this respect to one scent
to which not even the least fastidious can become accustomed.
The bread fruit is a valuable article of food, but being only a
few months in season, has to be preserved. For that purpose
it is buried in pits until decayed and well fermented. The
pits are then opened, and the mass made into small cakes,
which are considered a very wholesome article of food,
especially for children. The smell, when the pits are opened,
is detestable, and once experienced, it requires considerable
nerve to taste the cakes, which look like rye biscuits, and—
done up in plantain leaves—are generally to be seen hanging
in bunches from the rafters of every native house. I met
many white men who could drink the “ yagona or kava,”
which is said to taste like soap suds slightly flavored with
rhubarb and jalap, but never one who could face the
“mandrai” or native bread. When fresh picked and roasted
the bread fruit is insipid, but not disagreeable to the taste,
although much below the idea one forms of it from reading
and tradition. At half-past seven the people were assembled
in the Bure by beat of drum to prayers. The drum or “lali”
is made of the hollowed half of a thick tree trunk—is in
appearance not unlike a deep pig trough with rounded bottom,
and produces loud sounds when the edges are beat with sticks.
At prayers the behaviour of all present was exemplary. One
could not look at the kneeling dusky forms with heads bent
reverently to the ground, without feeling that, if only in
changing old customs and giving a new and higher direction
to the devotional instincts common to all mankind, the time
and labor of the Missionaries had certainly not been lost.
The service was Wesleyan, and the prayers apparently
extempore and fervent. After prayers, breakfast was served.
Yams and very fine crabs, thoroughly cooked, were not to be
despised; while the tea was excellent. The natives do not
like tea, and seldom use it. Instead of it lam sorry to say
that we afterwards found amongst too many of them an
intense thirst for spirits, which they drink in tumblers, taking


a sip of water after each glass. Half a dozen chiefs sitting
down to a case of gin, seem to consider it de rigueur not to
move till the case is empty, and then lapse into a state of
sleepiness very different to the noisy drunkenness of their
more civilised brethren. When thrown among them it often
struck me that they looked with scarce concealed contempt at
the mild manner in which white men take their grog; but
probably the white men from whom they got their first
drinking lessons had stronger stomachs than those with whom
they have of late been brought into contact. In eating, their
practice is to squat (in tailor style), and to use fingers in pre-
ference to knives and forks, but for us, as strangers, Hatu
Timothy considerately provided chairs, knives and forks and
a very handsome breakfast service of green and gold, with a
large China bowl as a substitute for finger glasses after the
meal. The Governor-General took a great fancy to a small
indiarubber self-closing tobacco pouch which I used, and
expressed a strong desire to have it. I left the pouch with
him as a present, and a few weeks after, when again visiting
the Rewa, heard that Adi Kuila was using it as a porte-
monnaie, and seemed remarkably proud of her new
acquisition.
LETTER IV
24th June. —After breakfast proceeded down the river,
and again through the Nakello branch to Bau —the native
metropolis and seat of Government in Fiji, or, at all events,
of that portion of it which pays allegiance to King Cako
Bau. We arrived at eight in the evening, and slept in a
fine large house belonging to Ratu Abel, who had not yet
returned from his mission to Tui Cakau. Bau is a small
island, less than a mile in circumference and a couple of
miles from the main land of Yiti Levu, from which it is
separated by a coral patch, dry at low tide. The population
is estimated at 1500, all natives, and with the exception of
the central hill, the rest of the little island has been
reclaimed by manual labor from the Sea. Thickly covered
with houses, and without gardens, Bau is, I should imagine,
one of the least agreeable places as a residence in Fijb A
few years ago it was noted for the extent to which cannibal-


ism was carried on, being* then, as now, mainly occupied by
chiefs to whom this luxury, under ordinary circumstances,
was confined. It abounds in traditions, and has occupied a
conspicuous place in Fijian history. From its position it is
impregnable to native assault, and for some generations the
chiefs of Ban have been the terror of adjacent islands, and
their large war canoes the rulers of Fijian seas. Its head
chiefs have always been the most powerful in the group,
and this applies to their present representative, Cako Ban,
lately called King, but better known by his old Ban title of
Vu ni Valu, or, “Root of War” For a long while the
missionaries were refused access to this island, and when
admitted, cannibalism and other atrocities were openly and
defiantlv practised before them. The Rev. Mr. Waterhouse
has lately published a very interesting book, under the title
of “The King and People of Fiji.” In it he describes his
long experience in Ban, and gives a very full account of
the Vu ni Valu’s conversion to Christianity. He tells us
that Cako Bau about nine years ago was one of the most
bigoted of heathens, and by a series of bold, unscrupulous,
and ruthless measures, had gained great power and made
his name dreaded wherever his war canoes could go or his
cunning entrap his enemies. But trouble came upon the
Yu ni Valu. He was ambitious to own a couple of
schooners, and undertook to pay for them in beche de mer.
The schooners came, but the oppressive labor imposed upon
his subjects to pay for them was the last straw added to their
already too numerous burdens, making them heavier than
they could bear. Secret discontent was followed by open
insurrection, and his power was fast fading away. To add
to his troubles, Cako Bau had quarrelled with the white
men at Levuka, and found his supplies of ammunition
stopped. For a long time his heart continued obdurate,
but under the influence of continued trouble, appeared to
soften at last. Mr, Waterhouse tells us the several stages
of his conversion at some length, and how the final blow
was struck by Mr. Williams, the U.S. Consul. Being in
Melbourne on a visit, the Consul took the opportunity of
denouncing in the papers there, the atrocities practised at
Ban, and wound up by an earnest hope that America and
England would unite to put them down. In that case he
would undertake with a single man-of-war, to destroy Ban
from the face of the earth as easily and as quickly “ as one
could smoke a cigar.” There is no doubt that Bau—so
strong in the native eye—is wonderfully open to a man-of-


war, and Cako Ban’s heart appears to have been still further
softened when the letter of Consul Williams was read to
him. Evidently, however, Mr. Waterhouse and Mr,
Williams had not in their day pulled very well together, for
the reverend gentleman sarcastically observes, that the
Consul, when writing his formidable epistle, little thought
how well he was playing- the part of a poor missionary, and
how large a share his letter had in the final conversion of
Cako Bau. The Yu ni Yalu having once made up his mind,
is not a man to do things by halves, and when he decided
to leave his old ways, did so thoroughly. He has since
been a regular attendant at Christian worship, and his
great influence has been used to give consistent and strong
support to the missionaries in their earnest efforts to convert
his people. He is, however, an elderly man, and his
education was completely Fijian. At the age of five, fhe
was then called Seru) one of the captured slaves, as Mr.
Waterhouse relates, was brought in after a fight and held
down until the boy king had clubbed him to death. An
education of this sort may probably, as it was intended,
harden the nerves, but is certainly not calculated to form a
character such as white men usually look on with respect.
We are bound to hope that Cako Bau’s conversion is as
thorough and sincere as it was important; but white men
sav his character is too hard, and his views are too decidedly
Fijian still, to make him a favorite with them. This is
politically speaking- a great misfortune, as it deprives him
of much of the support he would otherwise get to con-
solidate his position and to strengthen his hands in maintain-
ing order throughout the country. He has sons brought up
under better influences—fine, bold and apparently kindly
young men. It will be a happy thing for both races in
Fiji, if hereafter these sons are enabled to maintain with
the white men the friendly relations so necessary for the
peace and progress of the country. Cako Bau is himself
very temperate, and it is to be hoped his sons will be saved
from the bitter curse of gin, for which, as I have before
observed, so many of the chiefs—quitting their own simple
and comparatively harmless yaquona—have acquired an
insatiable thirst. The chances, however, are sadly against
them in the absence of intellectual amusement inseparable
from ignorance of any but their own language—an
ignorance which locks up from their use the literature of
the civilized world. If this could be overcome a great
problem would be solved, and religious teaching be


rendered far more effective than, one cannot but fear, it
is likely to be while unaided by the worldly knowledge
necessary to enable them to occupy their abundant idle
time—at present devoted to the game of draughts, which
they play with extraordinary quickness and skill. It is
unfortunate too, that they as well as (Jako Bau, are, from
the peculiar position of the island in which they live,
deprived of that intercourse with the whites which would
be calculated to promote a good understanding, and to
induce them more readily to adopt what there is of good in
the white man’s habits and mode of life.
So much for the chiefs of Bau. The place itself is full of
interest to visitors. Close to the Church there is the mound
on which the old heathen temple used to stand. The large
stone on which the human victims were killed is still in its
place, and near it an old tree, marked with innumerable
notches, each notch being said to represent a slaughtered
man. The Church is a large native building, 100 leet by
40, and about 60 feet high. The Court-house and Bure
near it are longer, narrower, and not quite so high. There
is a battery, too, of five old ship’s cannonades of different
sizes. Each cannonade is placed between two Hag-stones
about three inches thick, stood on end to form the embra-
sures ; but there are no signs of shot or magazine, nor could
1 ascertain when the guns were last discharged. At 10 a.m.
called on the Kev. Mr. Tait, the Wesleyan Missionary
stationed at Bau, whose house is built on the crest of the
hill. While there Cako Bau came up, attended by a body-
guard of two. At one time, he must have been a very active
and athletic man. He is now about 00 years old, over Oft.
in height, tall and erect, and with a countenance indicating
intelligence and force of character of no ordinary kind. A
hard eye and rigid mouth somewhat spoil a face which
would otherwise, from the regularity of the features, be de-
cidedly handsome. In complexion, (Jako Bau is much darker
than the Bau chiefs generally, who are copper-coloured and
not black. His carnage is dignified, and in despite of the
simplicity of his dress, which consisted only of a large shawl
wrapped round him from the waist, his appearance would be
striking to the most cursory observer. On being introduced
to him and learning we were from New Zealand, his first
questions were how many Maoris were left, and how the
war was going on ! Among other things, 1 mentioned the
confiscation of the five millions of acres of native land, so
that the Maoris, as they would have war, might be made to


•
pay for it. As the whole extent of the Fiji group is nut
more than five millions of acres, and as the chief is probably
under the impression that they are the largest islands in the
world, he had at first some difficulty in understanding what
I said, and Mr. Tait, who kindly interpreted, had to repeat
it several times. I afterwards took the opportunity of also
telling’ him that the white men had no desire whatever to
quarrel with the Maoris, and had just given them an oppor-
tunity of taking part in making the laws of the country by
sending four members to the Assembly. The chief seemed
surprised at this and asked if I did not think he would do
well for one; from which I inferred—perhaps wrongly—that
he doubted the fact, but was too polite to say so. After-
wards met the chief at dinner, where he used Ins knife and
fork with an ease that showed that, in this respect at all
events, the white man’s habits were not strange or new to
him. In the afternoon, we went to his house—a large
native building 60ft. by 30ft.—during the erection of which,
we were told, an enemy was killed as each post was put into
the g’round. The decorations were peculiar. Against one
post hung a double-barrelled fowling-piece and naval
officer’s sword. On the only table lay a large Bible, another
sword, a revolver in a holster, a glass candlestick and a
stereoscope; while, in the corner, stood a large broken mirror
frame, evidently forming at one time part of the furniture of
a ship’s saloon, and strongly suggestive of the wrecking
weaknesses for which Fiji men were formerly too well known.
Art was represented by likenesses of the Princess Koyal of
England and King George of Hanover, by a few highly color-
ed daubs of ships, and by other smaller pictures. Our next
visit was to the Queen, who was graciously dressed in a sheet
of calico and received us sitting on her bed of mats, having
apparently just risen from her afternoon’s siesta. “ Marama,”
ormadame'(as all Fiji ladies are styled) is now very fat, and
though not fair, certainly forty. Her face is handsome and
pleasing, and indicates a temper and disposition so exactly
opposite to that of her liege lord that one can readily under-
stand the influence—always exercised for good—which she
has maintained over him. As divine service is held daily
at Bau, we attended at half-past five. The church was
without furniture, with the exception of a small enclosed
space round the pulpit fitted with seats, and just outside of
which an arm-chair was placed for the King. Sixty men
were soon assembled on one side of the church, and about
seventy women on the other. Then entered the King with


his two body guards. His Majesty had changed the shawl
for a “sulu ”of tappa or native cloth. Cako Ban’s gait is
at all times stately in spite of an old wound which has with-
ered his left leg, and the eyes of the congregation were low-
ered respectfully as he walked through them to his arm-chair.
After kneeling and devoutly praying, the King took his
seat, put on a pair of spectacles, and deliberately untying a
cotton pocket handkerchief, took from it a large and well-
used bible and hymn-book. I mention these details, trivial
as they may seem, because I really see no other way of
giving a clear idea of things and people in Fiji. In a
country where Governor-Generals do not think it derogatory
to ask for your tobacco pouch —where a King’s full dress on
going to church consists of a fathom of tappa and a pair of
spectacles, and where a King’s son may be seen (as I saw a
bright handsome boy of Cako Bau’s on the beach at Levuka)
with an old glove on the right hand and an old castaway
boot on his left foot, amusing himself and the half dozen
obsequious attendants whom he always has about him—the
unavoidable use of words and titles similar to those current
among ourselves is likely to create false impressions, which
I am very anxious to avoid. Let me, however, guard
against error in the opposite direction, for although, in their
surroundings, these dignitaries are not like kings and gov-
ernors with us, they are courteous and dignified, proud of
birth, rigid observers of etiquette, and have, in their own
way, abundant self respect. On the surface, things appear
incongruous enough, but look deeper, and there is undoubt-
edly in many of these chiefs, a gentleman “in the ore.”
How the metal is to be extracted without their having
access to wider fields of information than their own language
can give, is a great and grave question not to be lightly
approached by any man.
Of the congregation, I can only say they were attentive
and devout. The preacher was a native, and his sermon, as
I was afterwards informed, a farewell address. prior to his
removal to another district. Both prayers and sermon were
highly effective, if one might judge by the frequent
ejaculation of “ Dina, dina” (true, true), and similar signs of
approval from members of the congregation during the ser-
vice. From the church, went to what must I suppose be
called the dock yard. Saw there two large war canoes
undergoing repair. These war canoes are wonders of con-
struction, for while capable of carrying on their deck a
couple of hundred men, not a nail or vestige of iron is to be


seen about them. The fastenings are all of sinnet, and the
holes through which it is drawn plugged with wood, while
the interstices are filled with a gum obtained from the
bread-fruit tree, fast being superseded, however, by pitch
and tar. War canoes are always double, that is to say, two
of different lengths are united by a strong deck thrown
across the centre. On the deck, picture a house, and
round the house a gallery, and the reader will have
a fair idea of the appearance of a war canoe in dock.
Of its appearance at sea, I have already spoken. In heathen
times the launching of one of these canoes was an affair of
great and peculiar state. Enemies taken in battle, or, in
their absence, slaves, were laid down as ‘‘ways ” for the
launch, and crushed to death in its honor. This and many
other atrocities the Missionaries may justly be proud of
having abolished, for they had from long habit become part
of the every day life of Fiji, and were warmly cherished
as good old customs by the conservatives of the country, of
whom Cako Bau was for many years the aknowledged
head. From the dockyard went to the house of Ratu Rambaka
—brother of the Yu ni Valu—where we had fresh fish,
pork, and yams, good and well cooked—then again to Ratu
Abel’s house—played draughts with one of the chiefs, got
beaten, and watched them afterwards playing till late at
night.


T he f OLYNESIA pOyVIPANY
(LIMITED).
MELBOURNE AND FIJI.
Capital, in 50,000 Shares of £5 each.
First Issue—2s,ooo Shares. Deposit—los. on Application,
10s. on Allotment.
Further Calls will not be made for Six Months, nor exceed 10s, per
Share, at intervals of not less than three months, with
one month’s noticed
A limited number of Shares will be reserved for the neighbouring Colonies and Fiji.
The Company to be Registered under “The Companies’ Statute,” 1864.
Business to be commenced upon
12,500 Shares being allotted.
Provisional
J. S. Butters, Esq., Mayor of Melbourne.
T. Davey, Esq., Mayor of Ballarat.
General Latham, United States Consul.
H. Cuthbert, Esq., Ballarat.
W. C. Smith, Esq., J.P., Ballarat.
Thomas Reed, Esq., Melbourne.
G. Mott, Esq., J.P., Mayor of Albury.
Andrew Lyell, Esq., Melbourne.
F. B. Franklyn, Esq., Melbourne.
111 rectors.
W. B. Jones, Esq., Melbourne.
Henry Hoyt, Esq., Melbourne.
Fredk. Cook, Esq., Melbourne.
Samuel Amess, Esq., Melbourne.
W. H. O’H. Brewer, Esq., Melbourne.
J. L. Evans, Esq., Melbourne.
Barnard Mathews, Esq., Melbourne.
W. Crooke, Esq., Fitzroy.
William Burnes, Esq., Albury, N.S.W.
General Manager and Inspector.
Frederick Cook, Esq., J.P., formerly Manager of the Union Bank of Australia,
Melbourne, and late Manager of the Melbourne Banking Company.
Bankers.
Commercial Banking Company Limited.
Solicitors.
Messrs. Crisp and Lewis.
The object of the Polynesia Company is to utilise the vast and hitherto unde-
veloped resources of the Islands of the South Pacific, by forming an institution
upon principles somewhat similar to those so successfully adopted by the old East


India Company. Its operations will comprise both banking and trading, and it is
intended to make a commencement in the Fiji Group, where extraordinary
facilities are presented for European settlement, and where a limited but thriving
white population already exists. The beauty, fertility and great natural resources
of these islands are so well know that a lengthened description would be
unnecessary. Situated within the tropics, but only 10 or 12 days’ steam from
Melbourne, they enjoy, owing to tbe prevalence of the south-east winds, a
temperate and healthy climate, the thermometer throughout the year ranging
between 65 and 92, the mean being 80.
To justify the projectors’ confident expectation of valuable results accruing to the
shareholders, it may be pointed out that, in addition to the usual large profits
attending colonial banking operations, the company will have material advantages,
not, only in its possessions of land, but in its exclusive privilege of issuing bank
notes. This in itself is of great value, as in addition to the Fijis, other Polynesian
Islands, which are numerous, will be opened up by the Bank’s operations. The
Company’s immunity from taxation is also of great monetary importance.
Sugar, cotton, coffee, tobacco, spices, maize and numberless other valuable
products are most easily cultivated. Cocoanut oil is largely produced, beche le-
mer, mother of pearl, and tortoise-shell abound on the coast, and cement (equal to
Portland), black lead, copper ore, and gold, have been discovered on the various
islands.
. The Fijis are also well wooded with many kinds of superior timber, easily
obtainable, and also plentifully watered by several rivers, the principal one, the
Eewa, being navigable for above 100 miles—6o miles by vessels drawing four to
five feet of water, and the remainder by boats of lighter draught.
The geographical position of the group, in close proximity to Australia and New
Zealand, assures the ultimate importance of Fiji; and the following extract
demonstrates the fact that the value of the Polynesian Islands to Australia is already
clearly perceived by the political economists of Great Britain. The Hon. H. L.
Corry, First Lord of the Admirality, at the Australian dinner recently given in
London, expressed himself as follows :
“ Victoria will want a navy, should it ever bo her destiny— as we believe it will
—to conquer and utilise the islands of the Indian Archipelago, and the islands
of the Pacific, dependencies which may be worth more to her than India has been
to us, and which no other nation can hold,”
From its general advantages, combining all the requisites of a productive soil,
a genial climate, cheap labour, cheap land and a capacity for producing so great a
variety of the leading staples of commerce, Fiji offers peculiar inducements to men
of industry and some capital.
Bearing in mind the above facts, and being desirous of attracting to Victoria the
nucleus of a large and inportant trade which would otherwise be diverted else-
where, the promoters of the Polynesia Company have gone to considerable expense
and responsibility in despatching delegates to treat with King Thakombau, the
recognised head of all the chiefs in the Fiji group, and also in providing for all
the necessary expenses, incidental to that expedition. The result has been the
signing of a charter by which the king, with the consent of his chiefs, in consider-
ation of the Company liquidating a debt of about £9OOO due to the United States
Government, and also in consideration of an annuity of £2OO per annum to be
paid to him, has ceded to the projectors 200,000 acres of the best land in his
territory ; has granted them exclusive banking privileges for twenty-one years,
w ith the sole right of issuing bank notes, to be proclaimed a legal tender through-
out the islands; and has granted them exemption from all taxation or
imposts on the importation into, or exportation from, any of the lands, harbors.


virers, See., that now or hereafter shall form part of the Company’s property or
acquisitions. Having secured these valuable concessions, the promoters have
resolved to throw open the enterprise to the public, reserving to themselves as
compensation for their outlay, labour, and success, one fifth of the land concessions,
and 4000 paid-up shares in the undertaking (not transferable for twelve months.)
The value of land in Fiji ten years ago was merely nominal, and while some
parcels sold for several dollars per acre, a fraction of one penny per acre was often
accepted as full consideration for large blocks for which the natives had no
particular or immediate use. But a perfectly new state of affairs now exists.
Band is comparatively scarce and difficult to obtain, and the minimum pi ice lor
suitable areas is certainly not less than ss. per acre, while choice parcels have been
paid for at a much higher rate, and frontages in the small seaport of Levuka have
realised as much as <£4 perfect. The establishment of the Company is certain to
lead to a large influx of settlers ; and it may safely be calculated that the rich and
undeveloped alluviums of Fiji will, when properly occupied, be worth not less
than the exhausted sugar grounds of the Mauritius, the best of which, though
poor indeed compared to the Fiji lands, are still worth £2O per acre. It is therefore
not too much to say, that the sales from the Company’s lands, town lots and
farms, will alone, in any cause, profitably repay the shareholders the whole of
their original investment. If the Company were to do nothing more than quietly
and gradually dispose of their territory at the lowest rate ruling m the locality,
the dividends from this source alone would amply compensate the shareholders
for their risk and outlay. But, in addition to this* the certainty ot the steadily
increasin'* value of the land, the important privileges and various advantages
previously alluded to, and the exceptionally favourable opportunity of the present
moment for such an enterprise, fairly claim to be taken into consideration. The
success of this undertaking is now, also, clearly appreciated by many residents in
the group, who would gladly have secured to themselves the valuable oppor-
tunities which they had failed to perceive, until the operations of the Company s
delegates opened their eye.
The Company will, from time to time, determine the minimum upset
price at which their lands shall be placed upon the market, but
shareholders shall have the privilege of purchasing at a rate 25 per cent, below
such price, in the proportion of one acre of agricultural land to every £1 sterling
on capital paid, and one quarter acre of town land to every £IOO sterl ng of capital
paid on shares held by such selector. In the latter case the purchase must be
made in cash; but for agricultural lands, one and two years credit will be given
for two-thirds of the purchase money, at eight per cent. This preferential right,
however, to cease on the 31st December, 1860.
The Company, in the conduct of its banking business, will afford liberal
accommodation to resident shareholders on security of their land and scrip
certificates, will purchase and make advances upon produce, and transport
the same to Australian and other markets for sale. Their vessels will return
freighted with suitable merchandise.
As opportunity offers, and demand arises, adjacent land will from time to time
be purchased from the native authorities, and resold at enchanced prices ; and it
may here be observed, that the benefit which the new settler will derive by purchas-
ing from the Company, instead of from native owners, will be very considerable.
Hitherto the custom has been to make the round of the islands in search of
suitable land at so much cost and trouble that the preliminary expenses have often
exceeded the price of the land itself; strangers have been entrapped into purchases
which have afterwards proved valueless, from defective title or obstiuctiveness on
the~part of rival interests; and it has frequently happened that blocks repre-
sented to measure thousands of acres have actually comprised but a few hundreds.
Against all such difficulties the company will afford its protection. Its lands, well
selected and held by the clearest titles, will be sold in defined blocks, ready for
occupation, without the slightest trouble or uncertainty.


On the occupation of the territory by the Company application will at once be
made to the Imperial Government to accept the sovereignty of Fiji, with due
recognition of the rights acquired by the Company and the original settlers. It is
understood that no objection will be offered to this by the native king and chiefs,
although a similar request made by King Thakombau, when Colonel Smythe visited
the island was refused. The history of other colonies affords conclusive evidence
that a similar demand coming from British subjects would not be rejected.
The above outline of the project proposed by “The Polynesia Company” is
confidently submitted to the public, in the full assurance that its perfect
practicability cannot be denied, and that its importance, both to the commercial
classes of the colony of Victoria and to the future settlers of Fiji, will be generally
admitted.
Applications for shares, sent either to the provisional directors, at the temporary
offices of the Company, 82, Collins-street, or through the brokers named, will be
received up to the 15th instant.
Full Prospectuses and other information may be obtained by application to the
Company’s Offices.
Melbourne, 82, Collins-street west,
Bth October, 1868.
The Polynesia Company (Limited).
FKEE GRANTS.
In order to encourage early occupation of the Company’s Lands in Fiji,
the Provisional Directors of the Polynesia Company have decided upon
giving Free Grants of Land (for which transferable warrants will be
issued), to Shareholders under the first issue, in the proportion of forty
acres to every twenty shares subscribed for, and one town lot of halt an
acre to every subscriber for fifty shares. They have further fixed the price
at which land may be taken up by Shareholders, under the Credit Clause
of the Prospectus, at 7s. Od. per acre.
The land under Free Grant to be selected not later than 80th June, 186!),
within the areas first thrown open for settlement in the neighbourhood of
Suva Harbour, and purchases under the Credit Clause of the Prospectus to
Be made not later than 31st December, 1860, after which date no distinction
Between purchasers will be made.
It is proposed that the first steamer under the Company’s auspices shall
leave Melbourne about the end of November.
The share list will close on the 14th October prox. In the event of
shares not being allotted, deposits will be returned without deduction.
By order of the Provisional Directors,
FREDK. COOK.
Melbourne, September 23, 1868.
H. Cordell, Printer, 80, Flinders I.sne West.
