

A MODLUN LYDIA
AN ABBESS
HTO+V
Young Women in Business.
B "ST
REV. J. EWEN.
±. O 9. O o^.
TO OUR SISTERS,
Who have boldly faced the world, and who in
spite of selfish men and public prejudice, have
forced their way into the ranks of the legiti-
mate wage-earner, this address is respectfully
inscribed,




A MODERN LYDIA
VT 11 EV
Young Woman in Business.
-«-Q- ± -«.Q ."k± ,±. 2^.
PREFARATORY.
\\THEN the Author decided to deal with
I this subject he invited correspondence
from those interested. The invita-
tion was heartily responded to, and is here
gratefully acknowledged. The address pre-
tends to nothing more than “ a word in
season,” practical and evangelical.


A Modern Lydia: The Young Woman in
Business.
Acts r 6, xir
“ A certain woman named Lydia, a seller
of purple.”
In her newly found freedom and indepen-
dence woman has made her way into almost
every branch of science, art and industry. You
find her in the consulting room, in the editor’s
chair, in the pulpit, in the studio, and the ware-
house, quite capable of holding her own along-
side her big brother. Further, with ourselves,
women take their fair share in the business life
of the colonies. Recent figures show that one of
the finest stations on the Darling Downs is
owned and managed by a woman ; 293 women
carry oa sheep farming on a scale that can
scarcely be imagined. In all, there are about
4000 engaged in the cultivation of flowers,
fruit and vegetables. Of our educational
and nursing establishments, I need not speak;
in these spheres she has long held undis-
puted sway. On this occasion I intend to
confine myself almost exclusively to young
women in business; much of what I have already
said to young men might bear repetition, but I
forbear.
In the Word of Ood we have examples of all
kinds and conditions of men and women. You
have Miriam, the sweet singer of Israel, thrilling
the multitudes with harp and song; Ruth, the
gleaner, going out to the fields to toil for bread;
Martha, the bustling housekeeper, cumbered


with much serving ; Mary, the student, quiet
and thoughtful, sitting at the feet of the Great
Teacher; and here you have Lydia, the business
woman, a seller of purple. It seems to me that
in this last, we have one who may form a fitting
type of that great host of toiling womanhood
who earn their bread by the sweat of their brow.
Several of my correspondents lay great stress on
“woman’s place being in the home, attending
to home duties, and that she is altogether out of
her element anywhere else.” This statement is, I
think, by far too sweeping. Of course there
are women forcing themselves into positions in
society ; and indeed in some cases, occupying
positions, that neither God nor nature over inten-
ded them for—as for example, running a steam
ship and driving a stage coach. But withal, while
not forgetting womanhood’s true goal, she
may yet find a perfectly legitimate sphere among
the world of workers. The exigencies of the
age have created the necessity for a broader and
more generous view of woman’s place in the
world. There are positions, not a few, in
business, into which it seems to me an intelli-
gent young woman fits much more appropriately
than six feet of muscularity—even when it is pro-
portionately balanced, and dressed out in shining
black. lean remember a few years ago a question
that created great public discussion was, “What to
do with our boys ?” The daughters would seem,
so far as they themselves are concerned, to have
taken the matter into their own hands and to
have answered it for themselves. They have
boldly faced the world, and in spite of selfish
men and public prejudice, have forced their
way into the ranks of the legitimate wage-
earner—modern Lydias, sellers of purple. If
in this address I can say anything that will in
the smallest measure strengthen and- lighten
your life in its daily task—anything“tqkt'-will
help you in the development of what is
womanly, good and Christlike—anything that
will help you to serve your day and generation


here, and when life’s fitful dream, is o’er, to fit
you for the home beyond ; if in the smallest
degree I succeed in this I shall feel myself
amply rewarded.
There are certain initiatory difficulties the young
business woman has to overcome. Ido not think
young women enter upon this life as a rule so
early as young men. With the former it is
often an accident, and consequently they
may feel the change from their home life much
more irksome. At home the rule was very
much “go as you please,” but here you must
go according to rule—regularity and punctuality
reign supreme. At home, if tired or feeling
wearied, you could curl yourself up on the
couch for half an-hour, with a volume of the
latest—well, sermons; but now you have literally
to “ stand it,” and, I am sorry to say, stand it
for the whole day. At home you could pick and
choose your work ; if there was some one thing
you didn’t much care to do, you could leave it
to the girl, or perhaps you might get mother to
do it, but in business the law of proxy doesn’t
hold—you must do it yourself. At home, when
you met your present employer at So-and-so’s
party, he was wonderfully polite and treated
you as if you were somebody, but now be seems
even to forget your personality, for he speaks of
youonlyas “ahand.” At home, it used to be such
fine fun to go down town shopping with your
cousins from the country, but now that you
stand on the other side of the counter there does
not seem to be very much fun in it. This
business life seemed to you a kind of ideal life
with its apparent freedom from restraint, its
showy wardrobe, its independence and so forth,
but the actuality was a rude awakening. Work
trying to temper and patience, soul and body,
has to be faced, and many a time when you
have dragged yourself home, tired and dispirited,
you have felt as if it were not altogether poetic
fancy that penned that parody—“ The Sons:
of the Shop.


With eyelids weary and worn,
With limbs as heavy as lead,
A shop-girl sat in her chill, bare room,
Holding her aching head.
And over her pale, thin face,
The tears were beginning to drop,
As, checking a sigh that became a sob,
She sang the “ Song of the Shop!”
“ Oh, it’s work—work—work !
Till the brain begins to swim;
And work—work—work !
Till I ache in every limb ;
Compelled through the live-long day
Behind the counter to stand,
Till the heart grows sick and the brain
benumbed,
As well as the weary hand.
But this feeling of repulsion may nay,
must —be got over. A sensible girl
will determine, God helping her, to make
the best of it. Look upon nothing as menial
or degrading that belongs to your course
of training ; take the appointed stages as
they come; determine to meet weariness,
chagrin and disappointment with a bold
front—Grod will help you. Through His grace
you will find the bittt rest cup has its drop of
sweetness, the darkest cloud its silver lining, the
keenest trial its part of triumph.
There are some dangers incidental to your
position I wish you to guard against. Young
men in business know that if they are to succeed
in after life they must “ bear the yoke in their
youth;” if they are to build a lasting super
structure, they must lay a solid foundation. In
a word they must be thorough. But with young
women it is different. “ They do not look for-
ward to business as their great life-work.” says
a lady correspondent well qualified to speak on
the subject; “I fully believe that all women
look forward to the day when they will be able
to leave business for a home of their own,”


Perfectly natural and right that they should do
so. But is there not just here a danger that she
may simply regard her business life simply as a
means to an end—that, as she intends to leave
it at the earliest opportunity, she need not give
to it the care and attention she would otherwise
do, or that may be necessary to a thorough
mastery of details. Let me remind you, my
sisters, that apart altogether from a question of
duty, you are just now forming character,
and, if you allow yourself to get into a slipshod
way of doing things in the workroom or ware-
house, the chances are that you will carry the
same habits into the kitchen or the drawingroom
— i.e,, if with such habits you ever happen to get
there. Aim at being thorough in everything
“Whatsoever your hand findeth to do, do it
with your might; not with eye service as men
pleasers, but with singleness of heart, fearing
God.” Another danger suggested by a corres-
pondent is that of becoming unwomanly. I
■tfas not at first inclined to attach much impor-
tance to this, but on looking at it a little more
closely there appears to be something in it. In
a home paper I received the other week, I read an
article —an extract from an address to
young women—complaining most bitterly of
“ their pertness and incivility.” This, of
course, does not apply to Sydney (?) It is
readily admitted that men associated whh women
are thereby benefited and ennobled. Does this
rule work both ways ? Are young women made
more womanly by their close association with
men, or do they, in overcoming their natuial
timidity", gain a masculine assertiveness not so
pleasing to contemplate ? These are questions I
cannot answer, so much will depend upon the
individual. It may serve a good end to have
noticed the point. I leave it to you, my sisters,
for further consideration. “Solong as woman’s
ambition is the sovereignty of the heart, so long
will she command man’s homage with dignity to
herself and without loss to him.” Another


danger suggested is that her business life unfits
her for the duties of home. A girl who toils for
a whole day down town can hardly in the very
nature of things be expected to do much in the
way of housework when she returns home in the
evening. One writer admits that when ‘‘ a girl
leaves business for a home of her own she will
have much to learn that can only be learned
practically.” Perfectly true, but I have the
idea that if a young woman can adapt herself
year in and year out to please a fastidious pub-
lic, she may very soon adapt herself to new sur-
roundings, and be able to please at least one
specimen of the genus homo, even were he a
veritable John Grumley.
Let me warn you of certain tempta-
tions that may lie in your path. It may almost
seem impertinent on my part to speak to you
young ladies on the subject of dress, and yet
the Apostle did not consider it beneath his dig-
nity to advise on this subject. One of my cor-
respondents says, “It it useless to deny that
there is in the female breast an inherent love of
dress.” If this be so I can easily imagine that
in the position some of you hold, surrounded
by all that appeals to the pride of life, you have
temptations to which those who remain at home
are utter strangers. As a missionary I once
made the acquaintance of some in a condition
in which I should be sorry to see any of you,
who sadly confessed that their fatal love of dross
was the rock upon which they had made moral
shipwreck: Let your adorning not be that out-
ward adorning—let it rather be “the hidden man
of the heart, the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit, which is in the sight of God of threat
price.” Look at the society in which Lydia
found herself—good, Christian, praying people.
They were not the kind of people to take her for
a sail on the beautiful harbour, nor for a drive
to the Heads, nor yet for a picnic in the bush on
the Sabbath Day—in fact, the girl of the period
would I fear haye yoted them “slow.” But


Lydia felt at home with them, and in their so-
ciety she met with the greatest blessing that
had ever come to her in her life. Take care of
your company and remember that in choosing a
situation something more has to be considered
than wages. In business you are in a measure
forced to associate and to be on friendly terms
with, not only your fellow workers, but also with
those who frequent the establishment. It is
this that makes the position of a barmaid so unde-
sirable. The Brisbane press of late made some
fearful disclosures with regard to female em-
ployees in tobacconists’ shops, and young wo-
men will do well to think twice before taking
their stand there. With regard to female em-
ployment in our public dram-shops, we have
not one word of sympathy. They have no busi-
ness there. I can imagine nothing so horribly
corrupting and demoralizing to a young wo-
man as to stand there all day and no small part
of the night, listening to the foul talk and horrid
blasphemy of a guzzling crowd. But even when
surrounded by the most favourable environment
the temptations of City life especially to those
whose only home is the boarding house, are very
great; lam informed that it is next to impos-
sible for a young girl to wait even a few mo-
ments for a bus. without being accosted in the
streets. A young lady was followed night after
night from her place of business to the street
corner by one of those knock-about-town young
men with more money than brains. While
waiting for her tram he accosted her, offering
ultimately to carry her cloak or handbag. She
never answered him. He then bogan to twit
her about the size of her umbrella—it was one
of those very serviceable articles that lately
came into fashion. He was anxious to secure
some hold upon her presence and made as if to
take the umbrella. “Why,” said he, “the
thing must be quite a burden to carry, let me at
least feel the weight of it.” —He felt the weight
of it, but was under the necessity of making a


visit to the nearest hatter for repairs. It is not
every young woman that is so capable of look-
ing after herself, —more’s the pity. The church
is often blamed for not looking after its young
men ; it is to me a far more serious matter that
we do not look after our young women. Ido
not know whether Lydia found the church or
the church found her, but we have around us to-
day a goodly number of friendless girls who
should find a place of shelter in the church, but
who don’t, and for whom the church should
care—but it doesn’t. They come and go, and
few have a word for “the stranger within the
gates.” I appeal to you my fellow Christians
who profess to be animated by the spirit of the
Master, I appeal to you parents who may have
children of your own, fighting the battle of life
among strangers, I appeal to you daughters who
have all the advantages of a happy home—think
on those less favourably circumstanced and
Tend a hand” to shield the honor and brighten
the life of the homeless Lydia.
There are certain decided advantages to he
gained by young women engaging in business. It
serves I am convinced to develop any natural
capacities with which they may be endowed. It
trains them to habits of order, promptitude, and
regularity ; it gives them confidence and self-re-
liance. It widens woman’s outlook, broadens
her world, and gives her such a general and
practical knowledge of life as cannot but be of
incalculable advantage whatever the position,
she occupies. The age is past in which it was
considered infra dig. for a woman to earn her
own living; every girl, whatever her position,
should be so trained or educated as to be able
to “find herself” should the need arise. And
there are contingencies in the future we may
not ignore. When a husband dies or is inva-
lided the usual resort for the mother is simply
the needle, charing, a small shop, the
boarding house, or teaching. If she be a wo-
man who has had some business training she


will find it stand her in good stead in her hour
of trial. It will enable her to make the best of
her resources, and to succeed where hundreds
have failed. We haye our heroines of history :
women whose names will thrill the national
heart while the world lasts -Elizabeth Fry
among the prisons, Florence Nightingale on the
field of battle, Grace Darling on the stormy
deep —but I am persuaded that there are hero-
ines not a few, stitching away with their
needles, bending over the washing tub, standing
behind the counter, toiling in the boarding
house, teaching in the schools, nursing in the
hospitals,—heroines of whom the world has
never heard, and never will hear, —yet there
they are : the daughter toiling for her aged
parents, the sister for her orphaned brothers, the
wife for her invalid husband, the mother for her
fatherless children —heroines the truest, noblest
and most self-sacrificing the world has ever
seen. God bless them—our toiling Lydias.
You will have noticed bow Solomon joins an ac-
tive life to vital godliness. The woman “whose
works praised her” was “a woman that feared the
Lord.” Lydia was a “seller of purple”—yes, and
she was also one whose ‘heart the Lord opened.”
I have been speaking much of your life in this
world, but as Christ’s ambassador I may not
allow this opportunity to slip without speaking
a word to you about the life to come. It is told
of John Knox that, ordered from the audience
chamber of Queen Mary, he retired to the draw-
ing room which was filled with an assembly of
court ladies gorgeously attired. The reformer
at once addressed them :—“0 fair ladies, how
pleasing were this life of yours, if it should ever
abide, and then in the end that we might pass
to Heaven with all this gay gear! But fie
upon that knave Death that will come whether
we will or not.” Were this life with its round
of fashion, gay gear and pleasure to last, I might
leave the rest unsaid, but it won’t—“ That
knave Death will come whether we will or no.”


We spend our years as a tale that is told. The
days of your girlhood—bright, careless, and
happy—are over and goa.e ; as another chapter
in the book of life, your business career may
soon be closed; home-life with all its joys and
sorrows will by and bye reach a period. What
then F lam reminded of the following incident:
A lady had written on a card and placed on the
top of an hour-glass in her garden-house, the
following simple verse from the poems of J.
Chare. It was when the flowers were in their
highest glory :
“ To think of summers yet to come
That I am not to see;
To think a weed is yet to bloom
From dust that I shall be !”
The next morning she found the following
lines in pencil, on the back of the same card :
“ To think when heaven and earth are fled,
And times and seasons o’er,
When all that can die shall be dead,
That I must die no more !
O where will then my portion be ?
Where shall I spend eternity ?”
Try for a moment to bring yourself face to face
with the realities of Death, judgment and Eter-
nity. There is much in this world to oc-
cupy your thoughts, engross your attention, and
claim your affections ; but after all, life’s fitful
fever will soon be over and the great question
for us all is, “ Where shall I spend Eternity ?”
Some of you are familiar with the festivities of
the ball room—the music has ceased, the lights
are turned low, the gay hangings are already
being taken down, the company fast dispersing:
Standing on the threshold, you lookout into the
dreary nignt, you await your escort, and you
long for home. My dear sisters, when the ear
becomes heavy that it cannot hear, when the
light of life fades in the distance, when lover


friend and acquaintance bid us a last Good-
night, when we stand upon the threshold of
Eternity and look out into the darkness, will
there be One to meet us with the cheering words
“Let me see you Some”; or shall we stand
alone, friendless, homeless ? It need not be so.
Eyen now our blessed Lord seeks your trust,
your love, your service—can you say Him nay ?
I appeal to you as women, with your pitying,
clinging, sensitive natures, can you remain in-
different to the claims of a waiting Christ. It is
bad enough that men should cry—“ Away with
Him !” but 0, it seems to me inexpressibly sad
that woman —she who in the days of His wan-
derings, His weariness, His unpopularity, a,nd
His death, never failed Him—l say it is sad,
inexpressibly sad, that she should now turn a
listless ear to His earnest pleadings. I pray
you act no longer so blindly to your highest
interests but now, even now take ycur place
with Lydia whose heart the Lord opened and re-
ceive Him as Saviour and Friend.
Oh come to my heart, Lord Jesus,
There’s room in my heart for Thee,
’Tis empty and cold, Lord Jesus,
Oh fill it and dwell with me.
lEiirumofr:
Moss & Boitkcicault, Steam Printers,
Burwood Eoad.
1893.




