

■
i %
fiiy
' 1i i
1M
«-*«L -3/i s
- -lib
* ■ak
f y
w
A NARRATIVE
OF THE
WRECK
0
OF THE SHIP
“ALL SERENE,”
ONE OF THE SURVIVORS;
WITH A PREFACE BY THE
Eev. THOMAS SMITH, St. Barnabas’, Sydney.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
%
t
%
i
T
v -\
SYDNEY : ’V
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY A. W. DOUGLAS, *
ATLAS OFFICE, 40, HUNTER STREET. %/
1864. \




OF THE
WRECK
OF THE SHIP
“ALL SERENE,’
ONE OF THE SURVIVORS;
WITH A PREFACE BY THE
Bev. THOMAS SMITH, St. Barnabas’, Sydney,
SYDNEY :
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY ALEXANDER W. DOUGL
ATLAS OFFICE, HUNTER STREET.




PREFACE.
I have complied with the request to write a short introduction to the
Narrative of the wreck of the ill-fated vessel “ All Serene,” in the hope
that I may render some slight aid in alleviating the pecuniary difficulty
to which many of the survivors have been subjected, by having lost
their all.
The Narrative itself, —written by one of the survivors, carries us
into the midst of the heart-rending scene; every incident told with
unaffected simplicity, comes home with a terrible vividness; the pro-
tracted misery, the madness, the intolerable thirst, the cry for help,
the wishful looking out for land, the illusive dreams, the fight with
death, the heroism of brave hearts battling with famine and despair,
the deliverance, the conduct of the natives, —presents pictures which
will not soon be forgotten.
It seems almost incredible that a punt made of a few boards
insecurely nailed together, in which were crowded thirty-one
persons, should have contested successfully with the waves and winds
for nearly twenty days. But so it did, and we cannot but join with
these men in thanking Almighty God for the miraculous deliverance
afforded them in the hour of danger.
The conclusion of the Narrative teaches us a lesson which we
ought ever to remember; it has been the desire of many to subject
HTS 3 rrs jrE rJ
w-vn ,
<*
r


Missionary enterprize to ridicule, to sneer at the endeavours of
men to reclaim the savage from heathenism, to affirm that
the “ Black ” is so debased, that his mental organisation does not
allow of any display of the finer feelings of our humanity, that if
seemingly affected he will suddenly relapse; in fact, that he is
incapable of anything like appreciation of the Deity. Let the conduct
of the poor Fijians to these shipwrecked men give the lie to
calumnies so base !!
We are told that at first sight the natives secreted them*
selves, and tried to evade the men, telling them afterwards they
thought they were slavers; (it will he remembered that last year a
number of miscreants cruising in the South Seas stole away hundreds of
unoffending natives from their homes, to work in the Peruvian mines ;
and we see by recent dates that a resident of Sydney has been the
means of decoying nearly Two hundred natives from Ellis’s
Group for a similar purpose.) As soon as they ascertained that the men
upon the beach had been shipwrecked, they came forth and evidenced
by every conceivable kindness, by carrying the weak, dressing the
wounds of the bruised, feeding the hungry, that at all events they were
possessed of Christian feelings. What more could they do ? They did
all the most civilized European could have done under similar circum-
stances. The only English word they could utter was “ Missionary.’’
Aye, Missionary taught us to be kind ! Missionary taught the message,
which, received into the heart, caused the poor dark savage to become
the kind and beneficent Christian. The word “ Missionary” carried joy
to the heart of the poor sufferers; it was as a star of promise shedding
its pure soft light upon their sinking spirits, chasing away the accumu-
lated grief, assuring them that they were within reach of the am-
bassadors of mercy. “Missionary!” at that word life came back
again, and hope with attendant gladness touched the heart strings of
their human souls.
They were speedily lodged in the kind homes of two Wesleyan
Missionaries, where they were watched and tended with affectionate
regard, until able to resume their voyage to Sydney.
Away then with theorizing about the utility of Christian Missions *


here is the practical exhibition by these poor dark-skinned natives of what
Christian influence can do. Here in the love shown to the perishing crew
is the highest manifestation of the teaching of Him who came to seek
and save the lost —frightened, poor creatures, of the white men who
prey upon their coasts, with the shackles of slavery ready to place upon
their wrists; outraging humanity; bartering all the affections and
rights of man for the sake of gold; selling what God has declared an
unmarketable commodity; man stealing man, because he has a darker
skin. What wonder if they had wreaked a summary vengeance on the
crew and passengers, thinking, as they did, they were slavers. No !
they ran away, and only came from their hiding places when they knew
that poor distressed humanity appealed to them for help—the appeal
was not in vain—they had been taught from the page of life the loving
kindness of their own Saviour, his readiness to help the poor and
suffering ; and professing to be saved by Him they acted like Him—
teaching us this lesson, to bless that God “ who has made of one blood
all the nations of the earth,” and speaking to us, by deeds of mercy, to
Stretch out the hand of Christian sympathy to the needy and the
helpless.
The true nobility of life, is shewn in kindness;
It has its blessed parentage above :
It means a care for all—the poor and helpless—
The spelling life, in syllables of love.
Let’s prove that we have caught the inspiration,
And reach forth help, in this a time of need;
We will not grudge what Heaven has kindly given,
We’ll clothe the naked, and the hungry feed.
THOMAS SMITH.
St. Barnabas’ Parsonage, June 14 th, 1864.


The passengers, many of them, are in Sydney greatly embarrassed
having lost their all, —pecuniary aid will be gladly received by John
Caldwell, Esq., M.L.A., Pitt Street; and by the Rev. Thomas
Smith, St. Barnabas’ Parsonage, Glebe, Sydney.
The profits derived from the sale of the pamphlet will be equally
divided among them.


A NARRATIVE
OP THE
WRECK OP THE “ALL SERENE,”
ONE OF THE SURVIVORS.
The Ship “ All Serene” sailed from Victoria, Vancouver’s
Island, for Sydney, on Sunday, November 29th, 1868. The
principal part of her cargo consisted of light pine lumber, but
her deck was loaded with heavy spars, and these were piled up
to the height of six or seven feet.
There were eighteen passengers on board, besides the
Captain’s family, comprising his wife and two children.
Owing to the unequal stowing of the Ship, she had a very
visible list to starboard, and this, together with the great
weight of her deck load, made her very tender and dangerous,
and even in a light breeze she laid over considerably; and
before we had been out to sea many hours, the officers and
seamen became fully aware that it required great watchfulness
and skill to manage her. After gettingclear of Puget Sound,
we had almost one continuous gale of wind for four weeks in
succession. The ship being under close-reefed topsails more
than half that time, and more than once “ laying to,” unable
to carry any canvas whatever. When in this condition, the
ship would lay over so much that the lee side of the cabin was
often under water.
On the evening of Friday, the 11th of December, a heavy
squall struck us so suddenly, and in such an unprepared state,
that before any of the officers could issue an order, the ship
was carried nearly over. The lee deck-load was all afloat,
and every one expected to see the masts go, or the ship
capsize each moment. But the squall ceased as suddenly as
it had come, and the ship righted immediately, having sus-
tained jio damage, with the exception of an increase of


leakage, and the loss of two small sails. The Captain
would have run the ship before the wind, during the heaviest
of these gales, had it been possible: but it was not so, as we
had no sea room, and the wind was blowing towards the
American coast all the time.
After an almost unprecedented long passage of seven weeks,
we arrived at Honolulu, Sandwich Islands, on Sunday, January
17th, 1864. We remained in that port eight days, having the
ship caulked, and taking in a fresh supply of water and pro-
visions.
We sailed from Honolulu on the 25th of January, leaving
four of our passengers there, they being afraid to go any
farther, on account of the dangerous state of the ship.
We now had four weeks of fine weather, and steady, favor-
able winds, and (during that time) nothing occurred worth
mentioning here; but on the afternoon of Saturday, the 20th.
of February, it looked gloomy and threatening, and during
the night the wind kept steadily increasing. At three o’clock
on Sunday morning, the ship was put under close-reefed top-
sails, and foresail. About this time it commenced to rain
heavily, and continued so until late in the afternoon of this
day. The ship was running before the wind at a great speed.
About ten o’clock in the forenoon (the wind in the mean
time having increased to a gale) the mizen top-sail was taken
in. Violent squalls now commenced to strike us. About half-
past twelve o’clock the Captain called all the seamen aft,
telling them that he expected to have a hurricane, and that he
wanted the royal and top-gallant yards and masts sent on
deck, and urged them to do their best, and send them down
as quickly as possible.
Every man sprung up the shrouds, in the face of the angry
elements, and each went to his particular post, evidently de-
termined to do all that men could do, they knowing well the
critical position in which the ship then lay. But, owing to the
stupidity of those on deck, there was no one to second the efforts
of the gallant fellows aloft. And while they were calling for
the assistance that ought to have been rendered by those on
deck, the precious moments were lost. They were only able
to send down the three royal yards, and fore-top-gallant yard,
it being impossible to remain any longer up aloft.
The ship still ran before the wind, but the sea was now
lashed into such a fury, that it broke continually over her
stern, and the water thus shipped had no chance to run out,


the deck being so completely blocked up with timber. It was
also impossible to get rid of the deck load at this time, each
spar weighing from five to six tons. The pent-up water
caused two large iron tanks (which before leaving Victoria
were placed abaft the wheel, one on each side of the rudder-
head,) to float, and, breaking adrift, one of them knocked
away the after-hatch companion, and after breaking in the
atter part ot the cabin, it floated against the lee bulwarks,
breaking a large hole therein, which admitted the free ingress
of the water. The Captain now gave orders to stave them in.,
fools were brought, and holes cut in the tanks, but it was
found to be impossible to get them over the side, on account
of the depth and force of the water on deck. It was also
found to be impossible to repair the damage done to the after-
hatch, so that the ship was fast filling with water.
Ihe fore-top-sail and fore-sail now tore completely away,
the wind at this time veering round to the South East, and
blowing with terrific violence. One of the floating tanks now
struck against the wheel, breaking several spokes, and smashing
it so that it w r as useless.
Ihe ship came round to the wind in an instant, bringing
the main-top-sail aback, an effort was made to clew it up, but
the clews had been lashed down to the yard some time before,
which rendered the attempt unavailing.
The ship was now laying over very much, the lee deck-load
being all afloat, and the cabin half full of water.
Every man on board (with the exception of three) was now
on deck, clinging to the weather rigging. One of these three
was the mate, and he was supposed to have been trying to get
the Captain’s wife and children out of the cabin. The other
two are supposed to have remained in the passengers’ houses,
and were never seen afterwards. Extreme terror was depicted
on almost every countenance. The Captain seemed paralysed,
and for a while he stood viewing the terrible scene, without
speaking a word ; at last he gave orders to cut away the
mizen mast, but the axes were not at hand, neither did any
one know where to find them. After a long search one was
found, and brought to the Captain. He struck but one blow,
and paused, seemingly unresolved whether to strike again or
not; but while he paused the crisis had come, and the doomed
ship (already laid down to her bearings) could stand no more,
and the howling tempest and the maddened sea seemed at
that moment to have united their force and combined their fury


for her destruction, and every one felt that all efforts of human
skill were then too late to save her. Too late i Too late 1
over, over went the stately ship, till her tall masts disappeared
from sight, beneath the angry waters.
Ah ! who shall tell the unutterable anguish of that moment.
Then was heard the wailings of despair. Then was heard the
earnest appeal of poor, suffering, helpless humanity, in prayer
to Him who holds the ocean in the hollow of His hand. And
there also might be seen the truly brave, whose lips gave
utterance to no sound of fear, but who looked their expected:
fate calmly in the face, and silently prepared their souls to
meet their God.
The ship went over so gently, that all of us had time to get
on her weather side, and every one was now clinging either
to the fore, main, or mizen chains.
While the ship was laying in this position, three tremendous
seas swept over us, tearing many from their hold, and washing
them in among the floating timber, but most of them managed
to get hold again, although many were badly bruised. The
ship must have laid in this state nearly half an hour, and the
force of the waves, and the furious pelting of the rain, had all
but exhausted our strength, when she showed signs of righting.
But she only rose partially, what was left of her starboard bul-
warks being on a level with the water.
We now got in on deck; a dismal scene there met our gaze,
almost everything had been swept away. The main and mizer&
masts were gone, and the fore-top mast was broke by the cap.
The deck load was all gone, and had taken, with it the pas-
sengers’ houses, the cabin, and the top-gallant forecastle. Ifc
had also carried away the starboard bow and most of the
starboard bulwarks, so that the sea swept along the deck
unopposed.
We lashed ourselves to the weather rail and counted our
number; there were thirty-one remaining, and eight had been
drowned. The captain’s wife and children had never left the
cabin, and it is very likely that they were drowned even before
the ship went over.
Mr. Pettit (the mate), was seen once struggling among the
floating spars, but he soon disappeared to rise no more. The
death of this officer was much regretted by all the survivors,
he was greatly respected by every one. The mild geniality
of his disposition cannot be easily forgotten by those who knew
him. it was sickening to look along the bare deck; the boats.


had been all swept away, and we could not get even a piece of
canvas to shelter our shivering bodies from the pitiless storm.
Many then abandoned themselves to feelings of despair, and
gave up all hopes of life. Yet even then in the midst of this
dire calamity, “sweet hope” had not deserted all of our
number, for while we cowered behind the bulwarks the cheer-
ing words of encouragement would occasionally greet the ear,
as comrade whispered to more desponding comrade.
As the shades of darkness closed around us, our terrors
increased ; then followed a night of horrors. Although the
weather had moderated greatly during the afternoon, the sea
still ran very high, and the heavy spray and the water that
swept the deck from for’ard, kept us cold, wet, and miserable
all that never-to-be-forgotten night.
At length the morning dawned upon our misery. Cheerful
morning, bringing God’s own blessed light,
“ Offspring of Heaven’s first-born,”
which must awaken brighterTthoughts even in the minds of
those condemned to die.
All this day and night we had a stiff breeze, and the star-
board, unprotected side of the ship, was laying to the wind,
from which position it was impossible for us to change her;
we were all again compelled to leave the deck, and take to the
rail and fore'rigging 1 . In the evening, as darkness again drew
near, several of our number erected a temporary platform“[by
laying some scantling from the stump of the main mast to the
rail, on this they managed to pass the night; while others
lashed themselves to the fore-rigging, and passed the nip-ln tli ere.
On Tuesday morning the weather was fine, and we were
all again enabled to get down on the deck. Hunger and thirst
now began to be felt, and we agreed to try and break up part
of the deck to get at the water casks in the fore-peak, this we
accomplished with an old gouge and some broken chisels that
were picked up on deck. It was a laborious undertaking, but
before evening we had tried every cask, and had the mortifi-
cation of finding every one of them salt.
Some of our number had also been trying with a pole and
hook to reach some provisions by the after hatch, but they
were unsuccessful. On this evening we extended onr plat-
form to the stump of the mizen mast, making room for every
one to lie down.
On Wednesday morning the weather was still very fine,
and the sea was quite smooth. Our thirst had now become
i


tormenting, and water was almost the only theme of onr con-
versation. There were still two iron tanks in the fore-peak
that we had not disturbed on the previous day, we could see*
that one of them was spoiled, as the lid of it was gone ; but
the other to all appearance was in good order, the lid being
screwed on and the white lead round its edges seemingly
unbroken, but it was impossible to get it out without cutting
one of the ships beams ; this was a work of considerable dif-
ficulty, on account of the unsuitable tools with which we had
to work. Our parched lips and tongues, however, were suffi-
cient incentives to renewed exertion, and again we went to
work with the chisels and gouge. But during the forenoon,
the cook’s chopper was fortunately found, and this tool, although
in very bad order, was a great help to us, both at this time and
afterwards.
By noon we had the beam cut through in two places, and
the tank floated ; we soon had it on deck, every one of us was
pressing around it, and regarding it with longing and envious
eyes, expecting soon to have our raging thirst allayed. The
lid of the tank being downwards, we had to cut a hole in its
bottom, then the second mate took the first drink, and to our
dismay pronounced it salt; none, however, would believe it,
until each had tasted for himself, and even .then some drank
several ladles full, which tended only to increase their suffer-
ings. After this disappointment many again relapsed into
despondency, from which state all attempts to cheer them
were unavailing.
But the eye of God was upon us, and His watchful pro-
vidence was made manifest to us that evening in a plenteous
shower of rain, which He sent to relieve us in this dark hour,,
when despair was clouding our hearts.
We caught the sweet cooling water in oilskin jackets, which
two or three of the seamen had the good fortune to save, and
in small pieces of canvass that we had cut from the wreck
during the two preceding fine days; we drank it as fast as it
was caught, and we saved none, as the rain ceased before our
inordinate cravings were satisfied I ought to have mentioned
that the sharks had become bold and numerous around the
wreck, and that we had caught one on the previous day. We
hauled it in on deck, but as we had no means of making a
Are to cook it by, it tasted so nauseous that none of us could
eat more than a mouthful.
On Thursday morning the weather was still very fine, and


it was resolved that we should try to cut away the dragging
wreck, and get rid of the anchors, which were both hanging in
the water on the starboard side, under the ship’s fore-foot.
The Captain said that about noon on the day we capsized we
were no more than fifty or sixty miles from one of the Friendly
Islands, and we now determined to make an effort to get
the ship to obey her helm, and try to run her in amongst that
group of islands. We filed through the chain cables, and the
anchors dropped. We also managed to get rid of most of
the dragging wreck. Tins lightened the starboard side so
much that the deck was above water most of the time. The
carpenter had also repaired the broken wheel, and we thought
that all we required now was a sail or two, but there lay the
difficulty. The only sail we had was an old top-gallant stay-
sail which some of the seamen had discovered in the lazarette.
We then got up a studding-sail boom for a fore-top-mast, and
hoisted the sail, but it had no effect on her whatever, and we
no longer entertained a hope of getting her to sail.
While most of us had been engaged in these operations, one
or two of our number still continued to search the lazarette
with pole and hook, in the expectation of finding some pro-
visions, at last their perseverance was rewarded by the dis-
covery of five small bags of flour. They succeeded in getting
it on deck, and we husbanded it with great care, and again our
hearts acknowledged the gracious providence of God in thus
giving us the means of prolonging our lives. We mixed the
flour thin with salt water, and drank it thus. We also agreed
to make an allowance of about two ounces of flour daily to
each man.
The expediency of building some kind of boat or punt to
carry all of our number had been frequently spoken of, but
the Captain and carpenter discouraged the idea on account of
having no instruments wherewith to direct our course, and they
thought that under these circumstances the chances of being
picked up were more favourable on the wreck than in a punt.
Eight of our number now formed a Company, with the in-
tention of building a small punt to carry that number only.
The captain gave us permission to use any loose pieces of
lumber on deck for that purpose, but he would not allow any
of the cargo between decks to be disturbed, We found four
suitable boards for the bottom of our punt, and piled them on
the after deck, intending to commence building it on the
following morning.


1 have now a most painful circumstance to narrate, would
that I could pass it by unrecorded, but I have imposed upon
myself the responsibility of giving a true and faithful account
of all the incidents that transpired, so far as my memory will
serve me, and I cannot pass by .such an instance of moral
turpitude in silence. During the afternoon of this day the
starboard side of the deck being above water for the first time
since the wreck; a leather bag filled with gold coin was found
—no money or valuables of any kind were saved, with this
exception. The bag and its contents were immediately
claimed by a Jew; he identified it, and the money was counted
and given over to him by the captain. During the night
some ' one was heard at the bag, and next morning it was
discovered that a considerable amount had been abstracted
from it. The thief was soon found out, the missing money
was discovered in his boot, he was one of the crew, an Italian.
This crime, committed by one of our number at such a time,
had a most dispiriting effect on our minds. 1 here we lay in
a helpless condition, far from all human aid, on a shattered,
and rapidly weakening wreck, the only thing between us and
eternity, likely to be destroyed by the first commotion of the
elements. Yet even in this extremity some were found
willing to risk their never dying souls for the transient pos-
session of paltry gold; and we felt that such depravity might
grieve the Spirit of God away, and that he might now
abandon us to our justly merited fate.
During this night the wind and sea arose again, and on Friday
morning we found that the boards which we had collected on
the previous night were all gone; we could not replace them,
as there were no more on deck, and the captain’s order was
imperative, that nothing should be taken from between decks.
But our continued importunities had the effect of changing
his mind, especially as we succeeded in inducing the carpenter
to favour our plans, and on the afternoon of this day he told
us to take all the lumber we wanted, but at the same time, he
said he would not leave the wreck.
On the morning of Saturday we commenced to make pre-
parations for building a punt. We had to tear up some of
the after deck, and cut two of the beams to enable us to get
out the necessary material. On the previous day we had been
very fortunate in picking up a good many old nails, we alsa
found an old saw blade, it was very weak, and half eaten
through with rust, but it proved to be of great service to us.


;as without it, it must have taken us several days longer t®
build the punt, and this would have been ruin, as we had
not a minute of time to spare.
We were now compelled to adopt the semblance of harsh
measures towards the listless, by threatening to stop their
allowance of flour unless they would assist in the work. This
had the effect of rousing most of them for a little while, but
they soon resumed their prostrate position on the platform,
and relapsed again into dreamy indifference, angry if re-
monstrated with, and desiring only to be let alone. The
carpenter was one amongst this number; after helping us
about two hours his energies failed him, and he left us to do
as best we might.
There were only eight of our number who took a prominent
part in the building of the punt; the rest evinced no anxiety
or wish to have it built. And I believe, that had any of
those eight men given Way to discouragement at this time,
not one of us would have left the wreck alive. I have been
prompted to write these words in justice to their memories;
for some of them are now dead. On this evening, before
{retiring to our cold and comfortless bed, we had the satisfaction
of seeing the bottom of our punt nearly completed. The next
day being Sabbath some objected to work on that account, but
the well timed representation of the extreme urgency of our
case had the effect of overcoming their scruples, and we worked
all day- It was well we did so, because, during the|night, the
wind arose, and continued to blow hard all Monday, the sea
washing over the wreck so much that it was impossible for
us to pursue our labours. We also had cause to fear that the
labour we had already done would prove in vain, as our halt-
built punt was in great danger of being destroyed by the sea.
All of this day was passed by us on the platform, where we
lay entirely prostrated in body and spirit, lamenting the hard-
ness of our fate. It was a heartrending scene, and even the
consuming thoughts of our own miseries were forgotten as the
wandering eye scanned the wan and haggard countenances
of our comrades, who were slowly dying from cold and
hunger and agonizing thirst. During this night the wind
continued to blow with unabated violence, and the cold spray
showering over us added greatly to our wretchedness ; at the
same time we were conscious that our perils were increasing
■every hour, as the hull was visibly weakening very fast.
The light of morning revealed a sight that awakened us to


renewed exertion. The bows of the ship were swaying to
and fro, opening and dosing again like two massive portals.
And the deck was showing unmistakable signs of breaking up
along its whole length. The weather had moderated but a
very little, but we could see that to remain inactive one day
more would be certain death. We worked under every dis-
advantage on this day. We had the punt laid from rail to
rail, just abaft the fore mast, and it was very difficult to keep
it propped under the middle, on account of the rising and ever
moving deck, and the sweeping waves that washed the props
away continually. Exerting ourselves to the utmost of our
strength increased our thirst to an almost intolerable degree.
We worked all this day without resting a moment, and ceased
not until the darkness of night compelled us to desist. We
knew that we must have the punt ready for launching this night,
or never, as the bows of the ship were now gone, and the
cargo was leaving her fast, and floating away, forming one
unbroken line upon the water.
We could not build the punt near so strong as we wished
as our nails ran short before we had it half completed. The
ends being particularly ill fastened, two nails only being drove
in each board. Neither had we time to caulk it properly.
Thus, you may judge of the frailty of the bark to which we
were going to trust ourselves. Although it was now quite
dark, the Captain advised the immediate launching of the
punt, but it was well for us that his counsel was over-ruled,
as the experience of the following day taught us, because we
had made no preparation for baling it out, and the water
would certainly have overcome us in the darkness of night.
Most of us passed the night in the punt, but to sleep was
impossible. The creaking of the weakening timbers of the
ship, the noisy dash of the waves, and the saddening dread of
the immediate future, banished repose, and we longed in
anxiety for the light of morning. In the early morning,
while it was yet dark, the alarming cry was he#rd that the
fore mast was failing. It was the carpenter, who was on his
feet all the night, that gave the alarm. We started up, and
there immediately above our heads hung the swaying mast,
liable to fall each moment, and destroy our only means of
escape from death. We jumped out in haste. The lashings
were cast loose, and before the threatening ruin had fallen we
had the punt in the water.
A hurried scramble to get into it now ensued.


The sea was running very high, and it was with difficulty
that we kept the punt from striking and breaking up against
the wreck.
There were several amongst our number still suffering from
severe bruises. There was also one man in a state of madness,
caused by drinking salt water during the past night. The
getting of these men off the wreck was a work of great difficulty
and danger, as they could do nothing to help themselves.
But we all got in without an accident, and were now crowded
together with little more than room to stand.
Our vessel resembled a huge open box ; it was twenty-four
feet in length, eight in breadth, and the sides and ends were
four and a half feet in height.
It took us a long time to get clear of the wreck, as we had
no time to make oars, and all we had to pull with was some
pieces of heavy scantling, with which we could make but very
little progress.
The punt also leaked to an alarming degree, requiring the
greatest exertion to prevent it from filling, and caps, and boots,
and every available article was now used for baling. But
in the course of the day we succeeded in stopping several of the
worst leaks. And in the afternoon we divided ourselves into
separate watches of two hours each, so that half of our number
could rest whilst the others were baling; we also got up a
mast and a small sail.
You may know well that the position we now occupied was
one of extreme hazard. Here were thirty-one human beings
floating almost helpless on the bosom of the pathless ocean.
Cooped up in a frail and narrow box, that worked and
twisted with every wave; without a nautical instrument of
any description to guide us; without a single drop of fresh
water; and going we knew not whither.
When the ship capsized we were supposed to be in about
24° South latitude, and 176 West longitude, but no one
knew bow far, or in what direction we had drifted since.
We intended to steer North-west, or as nearly in that
direction as possible, but we were entirely dependent on the
caprice of the wind, as the punt would run no other way
except right before it. But fortunately during the first two
days in the punt we had a strong south-easterly breeze, which
was directly in our favour, and we must have come a good
many miles during that time. When busily engaged in
baling, our minds were, for a while, diverted from brooding


over our miseries. But during the alternate periods of release
from physical exertion, the mind would again revert to, and
dwell upon its own sorrows. At such times as these each
particular event in our past lives would rise up with truthful
vividness before the eye, and every past action, good or had,
was seriously weighed, and pondered over. But such reviews
as this tended only to sink the spirit in deeper gloom; and
we found that nothing could restore peace to the troubled soul
except a full and perfect reliance on the mercy and goodness
of God. The nights we passed in the punt were truly horrible.
During the first two nights we had nowhere to lie down, but
had to sit on the bottom amongst the water, which was several
inches deep all the time.
The man whom I have already mentioned as being in a state
of insanity never recovered his senses, and after three days
spent in maniacal ravings, he died. We soon consigned his
body to the deep, and this melancholy spectacle awakened
fearful forebodings in the minds of all who witnessed it, as
each one thought that he himself might be the next partaker
of the same sad fate. And, strange to tell, those who assisted
to put the body over the side were all afterwards thrown over.
The dawn of the third day brought disappointment to many,
as we had felt almost sure of seeing land before this time.
The wind, on this day, was also unfavourable, we were making
no progress, and hope was again dying within our hearts.
This was now the ninth day since we had any water, and
the pain of our never-ceasing thirst was most intense. Our
bodies were also covered with boils, and our feet (from the
burning rays of the sun and the action of the salt water) were
covered with ulcerous sores, which caused us much pain. On
this day we put up a kind of bed amidships, to enable some
of us to lie down above the water; we only had one board
to make it of. This we split in four pieces; we laid the
separate pieces about a foot apart, and slept across them. But
it only gave room for eight of us to lie down, and this
miserable couch afterwards proved to be the cause of much
contention between the strong and the weak, as selfishness
and envy in their most hideous aspect were here openly dis-
played. On the afternoon of this day we caught a shark, out
of the many that were following like bloodhounds on our
track. This, in our now famishing condition, afforded us a
sumptuous feast; a few drops of the blood being particularly
relished.


But the catching 1 of one of these monsters was accompanied
with great danger, on account of the frailty of our punt, that
we were afraid to try it any more, except with the smallest
among their number.
Day now succeeded saddening day, and night fol-
lowed dreadful night, but no land was visible to our straining
and anxious eyes, and the impress of despair was becoming
stamped on every countenance. The wind was baffling, the
sky was overclouded, and sometimes (when for a moment we
caught a glimpse of the sun) we would discover that we were
sailing in the same direction from which we had come; at
such times as these we had to take down the sail, and wait
for a change of wind.
Several more of our number had now gone raving mad, and
laid themselves down on the bottom of the punt, drinking
greedily of the salt water.
Many rain-clouds had passed within a few miles of us,
showering down the precious element, for the want of which
we were dying; and the sight of this added greatly to our
already excruciating torments. Our tongues were now swollen
to such a degree that we could scarcely articulate a word, and
the wish would sometimes prevail in our hearts, that death
would speedily come, and release us from our agonies. Two
of our number sought to take their fate in their own hands, and
threw themselves into the sea; we succeeded in getting one
of them into the punt again, but he only lingered in torment
three or four days and died miserably.
On the afternoon of Sunday, the twelfth day since we had
any water, we were again mercifully relieved from this
eternity of suffering. We had several showers of rain, and
every one had a good drink. Oh ! how delicious the pure
cooling water tasted, and how soothing its effect on the fevered
brain; it seemed as though it was a draught from the bright
waters of paradise, re-awakening in our hearts implicit trust in
the will of Him whose power is omnipotent to save.
But relief came too late for some, and on this evening the
bodies of two more of our number were given to the hungry
sharks, who still followed us with unerring instinct, and
continually regarding us with longing and wistful eyes.
But the presence of these monsters of the deep had now
ceased to annoy us. The mind had become accustomed to
the thought that the body would be devoured by them, and the
very familiarity of the thought had divested it of all its terrors.


We had now light, and sometimes baffling winds, for
several days in succession, and made little headway. Thirst
again assailed us. Madness seized daily on fresh victims.
All of these lingered on for several days, after being stricken
with insanity, before death came to claim them for his own;
none of them ever recovered their consciousness, but a few
hours before they died they generally became quite tranquil,
their spirits passing peacefully away.
There were, however, several exceptions to this rule.
Some, in their madness, threatened to break up the punt,
and others displayed the most fiend-like hatred towards each
other even in the dying hour, and in one instance, two of
them were seen striking at each other with pieces of iron.
Another hour passed, and -the angel of death had clasped
them both in his cold embrace.
Each one of us now felt weakness of mind and body steadily
increasing, and the spring current of life slowly, sadly, ebbing
away. Each day seemed lengthened into a year of agony,
and the dark hours of night were spent in cruelly tantalizing
dreams of gushing springs of water, and the shadiest groves
of trees bending to the earth under their load of luscious fruit.
But such reveries as these were suddenly ended each watch
by fearful wakings to the terrible realities of our position.
We were often deceived now by the illusive appearances of
land. These appearances were generally visible in the light
of the early morning, they were the cause of many disputes
amongst us, as some were always wanting to follow the illusion,
which invariably vanished with the advance of day.
■ Still many appearances tended to strengthen the belief that
land was near. The birds that visited us daily, the fishes that
sported in the wave, and every withered leaf and piece of sea
weed that floated past us were considered as unmistakable
evidence of the immediate neighbourhood of the much desired
shore. One of our number also picked up a small crab that
had attached itself to a little piece of pumice stone, and floated
out to sea. But in the midst of all these encouraging signs
we felt that our position was desperate, as we knew not in what
direction to go.
The weather during all of this week was cloudy, and we
could see neither sun, moon, nor stars; we were also so low
on the water that land must have been very close before we
could have seen it. Another Sabbath came and passed. The
depressing influences of “hope deferred” were settling around,


and darkening the very soul. Still we baled away, more like
mechanical automatons than living breathing creatures, and
kept afloat.
All was silence now, hours would pass by without a word
being exchanged between any of ns; but Monday morning
dawned and brought us a renewal of life and hope, rain again
descended in refreshing showers. It was a piteous sight to
see the swollen and burning tongues stretched out to catch
the first cooling drops. But this rain had nearly proved fatal
to us all, as in our eagerness to drink the baling was neglected,
all order was lost, and we were in imminent danger of being
swamped. On this day we caught another small shark. This
appeased the gnawing pangs of our hunger, and again our
hearts were filled with gratitude to our Almighty preserver.
This food was timely sent, as on this very morning a pro-
posal had been made to feed the living on the bodies of the
dead. I have much pleasure in remembering that this horrid
proposal was almost unanimously rejected, and called forth
expressions of loathing and abhorrence, and those who made
it were for some time regarded with peculiar dislike.
It now became the general impression that we were keeping
too far to the North, and it was resolved that should we not
see land in one dav more we should alter our course, and try
to keep more to the west. The weather continued gloomy,
no land was seen, and on Wednesday we kept off a little more
to the west; but in the course of the afternoon the clouds,
which during the preceding ten days had enveloped the whole
face of the sky, rolled and there in bold relief, and in
the very direction from which we were trying to turn away,
stood a majestic mountain, clothed in deepest green. Land !
land ! welcome, welcome sound; our hearts bounded with joy.
But this gladdening prospect of deliverance elicited not the
noisy demonstration wdiich it would have done had it occurred
during an earlier stage of our sufferings. No shouting was
heard; scarcely a word was spoken ; each heart was in com-
munion with God, and our hands were clasped in the fervency
of prayer.
This was a bright and lovely evening. The moon, which
nearly approached the entrance of her third quarter, and seen
by us for the first time, shone in unclouded splendour.
The morning dawned, and again our gladdened eyes could
feast on the emerald beauties of the island to which, borne by
a gentle breeze, we were gradually approaching. The day


was particularly fine. Already we could fancy ourselves
reposing beneath the lofty cocoa-nut and spreading banana
trees, eating of their delicious fruits; and drinking at our
pleasure —without even moving from our recumbent po-
sition—from the crystal streamlet that murmured at our
feet. And new joys seemed already returning to our ex-
hausted hearts.
On this day the Captain died ; he had lingered long in pain,
and suffered greatly. He seemed to be broken-hearted from
the first, as ever since the wreck he had evinced no desire to
save his life; indeed he was several times heard to say that he
had no longer any wish to live. He overheard us speaking
of the land, he raised himself and gazed in the direction of
the shore, but the film of death was on his eyes, and he could
not see it.
As the day wore away, we came nearer and nearer to the
desired haven. And now the tracery of the luxuriant vegeta-
tion on the shores became distinctly visible; but it was evident
that we could not reach the land in the light of day. Already
the shades of night w ? ere falling, but as on the previous night
the sky was without a cloud, and the cheering moon relieved
us from the dread of darkness.
We could see the white surf as it glistened in the moon-
beam, and heard its angry roar as the sea broke over the reefs
of coral which environed the shore, and which seemed to
threaten us with destruction should we attempt to pass. But
we determined to run ashore at all hazards, as we knew that
death in a worse shape would speedily overtake us if we now
turned back. We succeeded in wearing the punt round a
steep rocky promontory, and gained the mouth of a small bay,
at the head of wdiich we could discern a faint flickering
light. We tried hard to pull the punt up this bay, but the
current was too strong for us, and we drifted to leeward,
straight on to the reef. Fortunately for us there was little or
no wind at the time, if there had we must inevitably have died
here, as none of us had sufficient strength remaining to swim
ashore.
As soon as the punt struck on the reef we all left it, many
fell down at the first step they took on the uneven surface, of
the coral. The Jew forsook his gold, and left it in the punt,
but it was afterwards recovered, and again the glittering dross
awakened the cupidity of him who handled it. A foul robbery
was committed, at tne recital of which the feelings of humanity


must revolt; the perpetrator of this detestable crime was a
Portuguese sailor. He is now in this city.
We were only about three hundred yards from the beach,
but a terrible ordeal lay between to be passed in our exhausted
state ; and while I write, the remembrance of that passage
makes me shudder with horror. The sharp lacerating coral
pierced our unprotected feet. Everything seemed running
around before the eye in one giddy whirlpool; we kept falling
at almost every step; some tried to crawl on their hands and
knees, but they were continually getting into deep holes, from
which with difficulty they extricated themselves. But in the
midst of this trying scene there was one touching instance of
kindness occurred which must not be allowed to be forgotten.
It was where three of our number, although nearly exhausted
and in the last extremity of suffering themselves, still toile,d
and were successful in their endeavours to save another that
was more helpless than they; and the remembrance ol this
generous action will leave a bright spot in their memories only
to be erased by death.
At last we all stood on the dry sandy shore. We were
saved, saved from the very jaws of death; and only those who
have been in peril, and preserved miraculously, can fully
understand what were then our feelings. Tears of gratitude
fell from our eyes. Ah ! it is at such a time as this that the
human heart is full of love to God. Twelve had died in the
punt, nineteen were spared to reach the shore, but the young
man who had been got on shore with such difficulty died two
days afterwards. Six or eight of the strongest now went up
the beach, in the hopes of meeting with some natives. We
knew not in what island we were, nor whether the natives
were civilized or savage, but our urgent necessities forced us
to seek them, although we knew that if they were in a savage
state we could make no resistance. All our doubts were,
however, soon dispelled. After we had gone about a mile we
came to a native house. The inmates seemed very shy at
first, and gave no answer to our repeated calls, but we after-
wards discovered that their timidity arose from a suspicion,
that we were slavers. At last we succeeded in attracting the
attention of one of them as he was leaving the house by the
back door. He saw our helpless condition at a glance, and in
a few minutes many more came from their places of conceal-
ment and gathered around us. ISone of us could speak a
word of their language, neither could we understand anything


they said, with the exception of one word, it was the word
“ missionary,” but this word made us feel perfectly safe. They
conducted us to a small village, leading and supporting us all
the way, and seeming to vie with each other in their unre-
mitting attentions to us. The kindness of these natives was
remarkable. They took us into their houses, and they seemed
to anticipate our every wish; and evinced the greatest delight
in being allowed to minister to our wants, holding the reviving
cup to our lips, and supplying us with abundance of food.
We succeeded in making them understand that there were
more of our comrades still on the beach, and many of them-
went with torches (as the moon had now gone down), and
brought them to the village.
On the following morning some of the natives went to inform
Mr. Nettleton, a gentleman belonging to the Wesleyan Mis-
sion, and residing twelve miles from the village. He came to
see us on the next day, this was a happy meeting; he prayed
with us, and we cried like children. We learned from him
that we were on the island of Kandavu, one of the Fiji group,
and that we must have come between four and five hundred
miles in the punt. He also told us that had we not made this
island we must have perished, as this is the outer island of the
group, and we had struck on the most southern point of it.
The natives showed great reluctance to part with us, but Mr.
Nettleton took us all away in boats to the mission stations,
and afterwards sent them presents in return for their kindness
to us. He left half of our number with his brother mis-
sionary, Mr. William Fletcher, about eight miles from where
we had landed, and took the others to his own place.
We remained nearly two months under the care of these
gentlemen. Would that I could speak in terms of praise
equal to the merits of these two gentlemen and their most
amiable ladies. All 1 can say is this—they administered
solace to our wearied spirits; they supplied us with many
temporal comforts; they clothed our nakedness and healed our
wounds. It is but justice to the few other white inhabitants of
those islands to say that they treated us with uniform kindness.
May God bless them all.




,.y
. 1
,u>
0
*
' %
o
.
