

A NARRATIVE
WRECK OF THE MERIDIAN.
ISLAND OF AMSTERDAM.
ALFRED J. P. LUTWYCHE, Esq., M.A.,
fitRRISTEK XT Law,
Our hint of woe
Is comuion; every day, some sailor’s wife,
The master of some merchant, and the merchant,
Have just our theme of woe ; but for the miracle,
1 mean our preservation, few in millions
Can speak like us.
SYDNEY:
PUBLISHED BY WAUGH AND COX, AH, GEORGE STREET
PRINTED BY BEADING AND WBLLBANK,
12, bridge sxreei.




A NARRATIVE
OP THE
WRECK OE THE MERIDIAN,
ON THE
ISLAND OF AMSTERDAM.
ALFRED J. P. LUTWYCHE, Esq., M.A.,
Baebisteb at Law.
SYDNEY:
PUBLISHED BY WAUGH AND COX, 554, GEORGE STREET;
PRINTED HY READING AND WELLBANK,
12, EBIDGE STREET.




PREFACE.
The following narrative is made public in accordance with a
pledge to that effect given by the writer, when a shipwrecked
outcast on the Island of Amsterdam. The reasons which
impelled him to give such a pledge at such a juncture, will
probably suggest themselves to the mind of the reader before
he has turned over many pages.
“ Si natura negat, facit indignatio.”
But the compiler of this narrative feels also that the gal-
lantry and perseverance of Capt. Ludlow and his crew, and
the large-hearted benevolence displayed by the inhabitants of
the Mauritius, deserve something like a permanent record,
and he has turned gladly from the ungrateful themes furnished
by the peddling cupidity of British shipowners, and the mis-
conduct of British seamen to assist in perpetuating, as far as
his humble efforts will go, the memory of heroism which has
not often found a parallel, and of generosity almost unex-
ampled.
The account of the wreck of the Meridian, which is
contained in the subsequent pages, is the same in substance as
one already published by the writer in the French language.*
In the present instance, however, the narrative enters
more into detail. In every material particular it is be-
lieved to be a correct statement of what took place;
at least the writer can safely assert that he spared no
* Recifc du Naufrage da Meridian sur Tile d’ Amsterdam, par, M. Alfred Lut-
wyche, Arocat. He Maurice, Imprimeriedo L. Channell, Chauaaee, 1853.


pains to arrive at the truth. The position which he himself
filled while on the island of Amsterdam, gave him oppor-
tunities of observation which did not pass unheeded, and
he was engaged nearly the whole of the three weeks which
he passed on board of the Monmouth, in collecting and com-
paring the accounts which the officers, crew, and passengers
of the Meridian gave of the events which they had personally
witnessed. The results of this investigation were committed
to writing before the Monmouth anchored in Port Louis, but
many particulars oozed out afterwards, all tending to fortify,
in a remarkable degree, the general conclusion at which the
writer had arrived. This will be apparent to any one who
will take the trouble of collating this more detailed version
of the wreck with the account which was published in Mau-
ritius.
The lithographed drawings executed by a French artist, after
sketches made by Mr. Newbold, one of the passengers, repre-
sent with fidelity the three principal scenes in the “ strange
eventful history” here commemorated. The lounger who
gazes at them listlessly through the windows of the stationers’
shops in Sydney, and the connoiseur who critically scans their
pictorial deficiencies, can form no idea of the emotions which
a glance at them awakens in the bosoms of others, who have
been snatched, by what may almost be termed a series of
miracles, from the jaws of a triple death—drowning, cold,
nd starvation.
202, Elizabeth-street North,
Sydney, Feb. 1854.


A NAUR ATI YE,
The Meridian, a barque of 579 tons register, in which
I sailed from Gravesend on the 4th of June, 1853, w*is
totally wrecked, a few minutes after 7 o’clock in the
evening of Wednesday, the 24th of August following,
on the south-western point of the Island of Amsterdam,
in the Indian Ocean.
The Meridian was one of a line of packets engaged
in the Australian passenger trade, belonging to Messrs.
Carter and Co., of Leadenhall- street, London, and was
a remarkably fine vessel of her class. She was built
by Messrs. Hall, of Sunderland; her timbers and fittings
were of live oak and teak, and her iron-work was of a
very superior description. She was, indeed, as strong
as wood and iron could make her, and she was classed
at Lloyd’s A. 1. for 13 years. She could carry with
safety a great breadth of canvass, her spars being of un-
usual size and strength, large enough, indeed, for a ship
of 900 tons. Being thus rather overmasted, the Meridian
was very crank, and was consequently uncomfortable as a
passenger ship, but this defect of overmasting was pro-
videntially converted, as the sequel will show, into one
of the principal means of our deliverance. The vessel was
only a year old, having made her first voyage to Moreton
Bay in 1852, with Government emigrants, under the
charge of the same commander, Captain Richard Her-
naman, an able and experienced navigator, who had


himself made the voyage to Sydney four times, and who
was in every respect qualified to win the confidence and
esteem both of his passengers and crew. Courteous
and attentive to the wants and wishes of all, he was at
the same time ever alive to the working of the ship, and
his watchfulness, for he relied on himself alone, might
by some have been deemed to be excessive. For fifteen
years he had been in the command of different vessels,
and it was his frequent boast that during that time he
had never lost a single spar, nor a man overboard. But
one rash impulse made him tempt his good fortune too
far, lulled his usual vigilance to sleep, and exposed to
the risks of a most horrible death upwards of a hundred
of his fellow-creatures, among whom were his own wife
and child. Peace be with him! He has paid a heavy
penalty for his deplorable error, and although it is im-
possible for the victims of his imprudence to acquit him
of blame, they still speak of him in terms of affection
and respect, and deeply regret his untimely end.
The Meridian did not carry so many passengers as she
could have accommodated, for at the time when she was
on the berth for Sydney freights were high, £4 10s, Od.
a ton, and her managing owner, Mr. Temperly, was
more anxious to obtain cargo than any thing else. So
intent, indeed, was he upon this object that, when we
got to sea, we found that the most contemptuous indif-
ference to the comfort and safety of the passengers had
been manifested in loading the ship, and it required all
the tact and good humour which Captain Hernaman
eminently possessed, to prevent an open declaration of
the discontent which generally prevailed on board. It
was determined, however, it the Meridian had ever
reached Sydney, to have published in the newspapers
of the colony a strong protest against the manner in
which she had been fitted out, provisioned, and manned,
but it is unnecessary now to advert further to the first
two heads of our complaint against the owners. The


third, deficient manning of the vessel, deserves, how-
ever, all the prominence that can be given to it.
The Meridian, as has been already stated, was a large
barque of 579 tons register. She had 26 chief cabin
and 58 steerage passengers, in all 84, of whom 26 were
men, 17 women, and 41 children under 16 years of age.
Her crew nominally consisted of 23 persons, but, ex-
clusive of the captain and the three mates, there were
only ten able seamen on board. In this list there were
three boys, one of whom was chiefly employed in look-
ing after the live stock, two cooks, and three stewards,
as well as a former clerk in Somerset House, who had
never before handled a rope in his life, but who worked
as a sailor, in consideration of his paying £lO only as
passage money. It seems superfluous to add that, in a
ship so manned, no allowance was made for contingen-
cies, and it so happened that our complement of able
seamen, already too small, was further diminished by
one of them being on the sick list nearly the whole of
the voyage, and by another being taken away to supply
the place of the chief cabin cook, whom age and infir-
mity had rendered incompetent. With a vessel so short
of hands it was impossible to keep a regular watch for-
ward, for, with one man at the wheel, and another on
the forecastle, there would have been only two able
seamen in each watch to work the ship, and accordingly,
when any manoeuvre was to be executed, the look-out
was called away from his post to assist. We had no
boatswain; and the mates, whose business it ought to be
to stand by and see that the work of the ship is properly
done, had to pull at the ropes throughout the voyage
like common sailors, besides discharging their own pe-
culiar duties .as officers of the ship. It is true that the
passengers frequently assisted the crew in hauling, but
of course this kind of aid was not given at night, nor
in very bad weather, when it was most required.
We were favored, however, with one of the finest


passages that ever -was made, outsailing every thing but
a Spanish man-of-war schooner, till we reached the 20th
degree of south latitude. After that we met with
baffling winds, calms, and squalls, and soon afterwards
a smart gale, which, however, did not last long. But
on the night of the 23rd of August last, when we were
running for St. Paul’s Island, which the captain wished
to sight, in order to correct a suspected error in his
chronometer, we encountered a strong gale, which in-
duced him to alter his course and bear up for Amster-
dam, an island in the same meridian of longitude as St.
Paul’s, but 50 miles to the northward of it.* The gale
continued all night and the following day, in the course
of which we passed the barque John Sugars, of London,
bound for Sydney, and which we ascertained by a print-
ed list of departures to have left Gravesend fourteen
days before us. We had spoken several vessels in the
course of the voyage, and had invariably found that we
had made a quicker passage than any of them, but Cap-
tain Hernaman, who had a very lively feeling of pro-
fessional emulation, not at all uncommon among sailors,
was not satisfied with defeating the John Sugars by a
fortnight. Accordingly, soon after we had passed her,
he ordered the course of the Meridian to be altered a
point, steering E. by S., so as to let his own vessel go
more freely before the wind, though the weather was
very thick, the gale increasing in severity, and he
himself believed that his chronometer—the only chro-
nometer on board—required correction. He told his
passengers in the morning that he expected to
make Amsterdam about 12 o’clock at night, and
he contented himself by directing Mr. Laraburd,
the first mate, whose watch on deck commenced at
six o’clock, to keep a good look-out. It is but justice
• St. Paul’s island is in lat. 38° 42’ S , long. 77° 52’ E ; Amster-
dam is in lat. 37° 52’ S. t Jsng. 77° 52* E.


to that officer to state, that he, as well as the rest of
the officers and crew, had been up all the preceding
night, and was no doubt much fatigued ; but it is
equally due to truth to add, that he placed no look out
on the forecastle, and that he and the whole of his
watch were engaged, a little before seven o’clock, in
baling the water out of his cabin, which had been par-
tially flooded by a sea which broke over the vessel, and
which induced the Captain to alter her course another
point, and steer due East.
The tea-things in the cuddy had just been cleared
away, and I was looking for something or other in my
cabin, which was on the port side, when suddenly a
smart shock made the ship quiver from stem to stern,
and nearly threw me down on the floor. At first I was
under the impression that we had run foul of another
vessel, but after the lapse of a few seconds, five or six
more violent shocks made the Meridian stagger from
side to side like a drunken man, and obliged me to
cling fast to my cabin, grasping with one hand the bed-
place and with the other the door-frame, lest I should
be thrown into the saloon. The piercing screams of the
children testified the extremity of their alarm, though
they knew not, poor things, the nature of the calamity
which had befallen them, but the peculiar grating
sound of the bottom by which the shocks were accom-
panied left little room for doubt, in my mind, that the
vessel was striking against rocks. Mr. Tulloch, the
second mate, who came shortly afterwards into the cabin
for an instant, told me plainly, on my desiring to know
the worst, that the vessel was on shore; and for a time
all was confusion, terror, and despair.
The moment that the ship struck, Captain Hernaman,
who was standing close by the door of the saloon,
rushed up the poop stairs, exclaiming vehemently three
times, “ where is Mr. Lamburd ? (Mr. Laraburd, as
he himself told me afterwards, was going at the time


towards the galley fire, on the main-deck, for the pur-
pose of lighting his pipe). As the Captain gained the
quarter-deck, the terrible truth flashed upon him, and
with another exclamation of “my God ! it is the island,”
he seized the wheel, and tried to put the helm a-star-
board. The vessel again struck violently, and he then
shouted, “ now, every man for himself,” stripped off his
coat, waistcoat, and trowsers, and bade one of the hands,
named Snow, assist him in casting oif one of the hen-
coops. While they were thus engaged, a heavy sea
burst over the poop and swept him and Snow over-
board, but Snow caught a rope as he fell, and climbed
up again into the mizen rigging on the port side, and
then over to the starboard side of the poop, where he
descended to the main-deck, and sought safety for a
time in the main rigging. The captain was never seen
again. Mr. Lamburd and some of the crew climbed
into the main-top ; others held on to other parts of the
rigging, exposed, of course, to the full fury of the waves,
which repeatedly washed over them. The carpenter
got his axe ready to cut away the masts, but when Mr.
Tulloch asked Mr. Lamburd, who was then in the
main-top, what was to be done, the answer returned
was, “I do not know ; do what you like.” It was
clear that the ship must go to pieces, unless she was
lightened of her spars, but Sir. Tulloch could not super-
sede his superior officer, and as Mr. Lamburd did not
know what orders to give, nothing was done to relieve
the vessel, which was now fast upon the rocks, and the
sport of the breakers.
Meanwhile, the situation of the passengers in the
’tween decks was awful in the extreme. The vessel
lay very much over on her port side, which was
that nearest the land, and every sea that swept over her
decks, deluged the second cabin with water. In less
than five minutes after she had struck, the cabins on the
port side of the ’tween decks were broken in, the


water rose so rapidly, that in a few minutes afterwards
it reached the waists of those whose cabins were on that
side, and some were even immersed up to their necks
before they succeeded in getting their families across
the tables, and placing them on the weather (starboard)
side of the vessel. Several of the passengers in the
’tween decks of the Meridian had large families of young
children, many of whom had already been put to bed.
The anguish of the parents may be conceived, when it
was innocently asked “ whether the voyage was over
and a hope was expressed that “ Aunt Sarah would have
a good fire, as it was very wet.” Alas ! the voyage was,
indeed, at an end, but the portals of Death alone
were open to receive the voyagers. Every instant
the dreadful summons was expected, but in the mean-
while, clinging to every projection that offered itself;
the second cabin families remained in the ’tween decks,
comforting one another with the assurance that they
would soon be in a better place, and that when death did
come, they would at least die together. They continued
in this state of suspense till about half-past nine o’clock,
when Mr. Worthington, the third mate, and Snow, the
sailor already mentioned, directed and assisted by Mr.
Tulloch, came down at the risk of their lives, to rescue
the wretched beings from their perilous position. With
great difficulty and danger—for the cargo had by
this time broken loose, and was floating about in
the ’tween decks, threatening destruction to all
with whom it came in contact, this object was
accomplished, after the lapse of about an hour,
when the breaking up of the vessel seemed im-
minent. The lower deck had given way, and one poor
woman, the last who escaped, fell into the hold among
the preserved provision tins, but was dragged out after
a time, dreadfully bruised, by two of her children. So
hazardous, however, appeared any attempt to rescue
them, that Mr. Worthington refused point-blank to


run the risk, but Snow gallantly descended, and suc-
ceeded in bringing them all to the companion ladder,
passing them along by the door-frames of the cabins
on the starboard side, which still stood firm. The
mother had hardly placed her foot on the deck, when
the companion was washed away by a sea ; another in-
stant, and she must have perished.
As the second-cabin passengers were got up from the
’tween decks, they were passed into the cuddy, where
the chief cabin passengers were nearly all assembled, or
they huddled together in groups by the steward’s pantry,
opposite the cuddy door, presenting a most pitiable spec-
tacle. Many of them, the younger children particularly,
were still in their night dresses, and all were drenched
to the skin, and shivering with cold. They were rather
excited at first, but soon, however, became calmer, and
seemed prepared to meet the fate which they felt await-
ed them, sooner or later, with becoming resignation to
the will of God.
In the chief cabin the situation of most of the passen-
gers, though equally alarming, was yet, in a physical
sense, comparatively comfortable. To explain, how-
ever, the nature of their position, and the means by
which the lives of almost all of us were eventually pre-
served, it is necessary to go back a little, and to retrace
the course of events.
Almost at the very first shock the ship’s rudder was
forced up in the case, and the water-closets connected
with the stern cabins were broken away. Most fortu-
nately, the deadlights in the starboard stern cabin,
occupied by Mr. and Mrs. Guyton, had been secured
in the morning ; otherwise neither the cuddy nor the
cabins on the starboard side would have been tenable
for many minutes, for the sea would have made a clean
breach through- The central sky-light of the saloon,
though protected outside by strong brass rails, was
broken by the force of the concussion almost immedi-


ately after the ship had struck, and tons of water came
pouring through the aperture, deluging the cabins on
the port side as they fell, but almost immediately find-
ing an exit somewhere, probably either through the
port stern cabin windows, where the deadlights had
not been put up, or through the surgeon’s cabin, which
was also on the port side, and which was only separated
by a thin partition from a water-closet in the vestibule
of the cuddy. A large hole was broken in the
partition adjoining this water-closet, which gave way,
most likely, being slightly put together, at the first
shock ; at all events, no trace of it was left by daylight.
My attention was speedily directed to the fact, that the
water must have a free escape in some direction, be-
cause it was evident, that unless this were the case, we
should all be drowned where we stood, and ever and
anon I cast an anxious eye to scan the level at which
the water ran on the port side of the cuddy. The
principal lamp in the cuddy, lighted with oil, was ex-
tinguished by the first sea which broke in, but there
was a candle-lamp at the after-part of the cabin, which
it was desirable to keep alight as long as possible. A
sudden dive into my cabin, enabled me to secure my
own candle-lamp, which I handed, when I emerged, to
Mr. Baxter, whose cabin was on the starboard side, and
who had a store of candles within reach which were
perfectly dry. By these means we were in a position
to relight the cabin lamp if it should be put out —a con-
tingency which did occur three or four times in the
course of the evening.
The major portion of the chief cabin passengers, both
ladies and gentlemen, after the violence of the first
shocks had subsided, and the ship seemed to have
settled down on her port side, stationed themselves on
the weather side of the cabin, and thus escaped the
heavy seas which poured every other minute through
the sky-light- But though most of us, for a time at


least, contrived to keep ourselves tolerably dry, our posi-
tion was scarcely more enviable than that of our unfor-
tunate fellow-passengers in the ’tween decks. W e could
gain little or no information about what was passing
outside, and all inquiries respecting the captain and the
officers were met by an ominous silence. No eye could
pierce the surrounding darkness, and nothing was heard
without but the roar of the tempest and the groaning of
the ill-fated vessel. Under these circumstances, being
appealed to for my advice, I recommended that no at-
tempt should be made to leave the ship, but that we
should remain by the wreck as long as she would hold
together, and endeavor, when she broke up, to reach
the shore, as each might best, on the floating pieces of
timber. Mr. Guyton, who joined us about half an hour
afterwards, and who had considerable nautical expe -
rience, gave the same counsel.* Our situation, however,
appeared so desperate, that I believe very few cherished
the hope of escape, and for my own part, I exhorted
* This gentleman, as well as his wife and children, had a very-
narrow escape from immediate death before they were enabled to
join us in the saloon. Mrs. Guyton, who occupied, as has been
already stated, the stern cabin on the starboard side, had been in
bed for some time before the vessel struck, with her infant daughter,
who was born in the course of the voyage, and who was then only
a month old. The concussion which broke away the water-closets,
lifted the deck at the same time, so as to displace the stanchions
which upheld her bed. Her husband, who was standing by, endea-
vored to hold the bed in its place, but the third or fourth shock lifted
it from the floor, and striking against the deck above it became in-
verted, and descended upon Mr. and Mrs. Guyton and their baby.
AH three remained for nearly half an hour in this position, the bed-
stead being a very heavy one, but at last Mr. Guyton contrived to
extricate himself, and to disentangle his wife and child, neither of
whom, strange to say, were seriously hurt, though Mrs. Guyton’s
right hand was much torn, and the thumb severely sprained. Their
two infant children in the adjoining side-cabin also escaped unin-
jured, notwithstanding that their bed-place was shattered into
fragments.
Several accidents happened at the time of the first collision to
others of the chief cabin passengers and their children, but not of
so much account as to require specific mention.


all around me to think no more of this life, but to im-
plore God’s mercy and forgiveness, while there was yet
time vouchsafed for repentance. The Uev. Mr. Voiler,
a Baptist Minister on board, prayed aloud at intervals
in the same spirit, and most of the passengers were en-
gaged the greater part of the time with their devotions,
and conducted themselves with a degree of calmness
and composure which showed that they were prepared
to meet death, if it was the will of Providence that they
must die. Two or three disgraceful exceptions there
were, it is true —the more disgraceful on account of the
noble contrast presented by the conduct of what is fre-
quently called the weaker sex—but it was not until the
arrival of the second cabin passengers from the ’tween
decks that the sympathies of human nature became too
strong to be repressed, and tears and lamentations were
freely exchanged under the pressure of the common
calamity. These lamentations, however, were soon
hushed; prayer was offered up to the Throne of Grace,
without ceasing, and we awaited submissively the mo-
ment when it might please God to summon us to his
presence.
Hitherto the mizen, which passed through the centre
of the cuddy, had remained firm, but soon after 11
o’clock it began to surge up and down, loosening the
rafters which formed the roof of the cuddy, and ad-
mitting still more freely the seas which swept over the
poop. We had ascertained, as has been already men-
tioned, that there was some outlet, which carried off the
water almost as fast as it poured in, but the immediate
danger to be apprehened was that the mizen would go
by the board, and carrying the tables (to which we were
clinging for support) with it in its fall, hurl us all to
destruction. But about half-past one o’clock the main-
mast fell, and the vessel parted in two, close to the after-
hatchway on the main deck, thereby lessening, no doubt,
the strain upon the after-part of the vessel. The fall


of the main-mast was a gradual one, and it descended,
with all the rigging standing, athwart the breakers, till
it touched the houlders above, thus forming a means of
communication with the shore, of which the sailors
were not slow to avail themselves. Several of the
younger men among the passengers traversed this rude
bridge in safety, and in a short time their example was
followed by two or three of the married couples, b 7
one of whom, at the request of Mrs. Nutt, the wife of
the ship’s surgeon, a rope which had been previously
secured in the steward’s pantry was fastened to the top
of the mast. Still, with all this, no effort whatever was
made by the seamen generally to get the women and
children on shore. Mr. Worthington, however, the
third mate, assured the passengers that the poop would
hold together till morning, and that he would not leave
the vessel till every woman and child had quitted it;
and he kept his word. He and the sailor, Charles Snow,
already referred to, repeatedly passed over from the
ship to the shore, and back again, although knocked
down several times by heavy seas, to conduct and assist
those who would venture over. Mr. Tulloch also,
though he did not cross over to the ship after he had
got on ashore, was very active in assisting the passen-
gers from the land side. The passage across occupied
a considerable time, for it was necessary to watch for
a favorable moment, and it was difficult to induce the
women to expose themselves to unknown dangers. But
finding about three o’clock in the morning that the water
in the saloon was beginning to rise—coming in, in fact,
faster than it went out—l warned all who were willing
to make an effort to save life that the time was come
when they must quit the cuddy. The women and
children now pressed towards the door, and it was not
till 4 a.m. that I was enabled to leave the cuddy my-
self. Though overtaken by a heavy sea in my transit,
I reached the shore without much difficulty.


The dawn was just breaking, and oh! what an ap-
palling sight presented itself! Before me lay huge
boulders, piled up irregularly till they reached an alti-
tude of 40 or 50 feet, where they were hemmed in by
a perpendicular wall of black ferruginous rock, render-
ing a further advance from the sea in that direction
impossible. Turning round, and facing the sea, a small
portion of the forecastle of the Meridian was still visi-
ble above water to the left, while on the right lay the
after-part of the vessel, with the mizen still standing,
pointing towards the shore. The rest of the vessel was
completely broken up, and pieces of the wreck were
dashed by every sea on the rocks. The violence of the
gale had much abated, but the breakers occasionally
rose to a terrific height. The passengers who had al-
ready landed were disrobing themselves of portions of
their wet clothing, and trying to restore warmth to their
limbs, almost paralyzed with cold. As to the sailors,
although, with the exceptions already mentioned, they
had done little or nothing to assist our escape, they had
not been idle since they reached the shore. They had
lighted a fire, and had opened several bales of clothing,
part of the cargo which had been cast on shore, which
was shared freely among all as they set foot on the rocks.
Hundreds of yards of excellent new flannel, perfectly
dry, and some hundreds of red and blue serge shirts
were distributed at once, and it is certainly not going
too far to say that, but for this providential supply, half
of the women and children, and probably some of the
men, must have perished from wet and cold the very
first night. But by God’s mercy we escaped that
calamity, and before sunrise every soul on board had
been saved from the wreck, with the exception of the
'unfortunate captain of the Meridian , the old cook,
Thomas George, and a Swiss steerage passenger named
Pfau, all of whom were washed off the deck soon after
the vessel struck.


Rescued almost by a miracle from certain death, we
yet were placed in a situation, to contemplate which
would have made the stoutest heart quail, if its horrors
had then been fully known to us. But we were merci-
fully spared that knowledge. The Island of Amsterdam
is of volcanic formation, and it is about 24 miles in cir-
cumference. It lies quite out of the track of vessels going
to Australia, which usually shape their course at least
two or three degrees more to the southward, in order to
take advantage of the westerly winds which generally
prevail in the higher latitudes. Formerly it was much
resorted to in the whaling season by whalers, but the
whales having been gradually scared away from their
accustomed haunts by the havoc which was committed
amongst them, it has ceased to be considered good
whaling ground, and in the season of 1852 only two
whalers sought their gigantic game in its vicinity. . The
island is uninhabited, and produces nothing fit for the
food of man, except some wild cabbages in the north-
eastern part of it, originally planted there by the ship-
wrecked crew of a French vessel. When the surf is not
too high, a fewlimpets may be gathered among the boulders
on the shore, and there are plenty of sea-fowl, as well
as an abundance of some of the finest fish in the world,
which may easily be caught off the coast. But we had
a very scanty supply of powder and shot, we had no
tools with which we could build a boat, and even if we
could have built one, it would have been impossible to
launch it where we then were. As far as is known the
island is inaccessible to any boats but such as are used
by whalers, and can only be approached even by them
on the north-eastern side of the island, near the cabbage
garden already referred to, and that only in moderate
weather. But the weather which prevails, except in the
month of October and part of November, is generally
very bad, there being usually five or, six days of rain
and tempest for one calm sunshiny day. Happily for


us we were ignorant that’ nothing but a special interpo-
sition of Providence on our behalf could again save our
lives. Our situation was wretched enough, but it did
not appear to be altogether desperate, and a moderate
exertion of energy and tact would have enabled us to
face, for a time at least, the difficulties by which we
were surrounded. But Mr. Lamburd, the chief mate
of the Meridian, was quite unequal to the emergency.
He was not popular among the seamen, and he seemed
the first day to be perfectly stupefied by what had
occurred. He had taken no part in the rescue of the
women and children from the wreck, though requested
to do so, alleging indisposition as the reason for his
inactivity. Moreover, he neither attempted to direct
the seamen what to do, nor to encourage them or
the passengers by his example or counsels. There
were several strong young men among the passen-
gers, and much might have been done on the first
day towards securing a stock of provisions which would
have lasted a considerable time, for the Meridian was
victualled for a two years’ voyage. But in the ab-
sence of any directing mind or controlling authority
every one did just what he pleased. Some of the
seamen even commenced plundering the cabins as
soon as the passengers had quitted the vessel; others,'
in whom the instinct of self-preservation was stronger
than their love of gain, made desultory efforts to secure
provisions. Unfortunately there was a large stock of
wine and spirits on board, and several of the crew, as
well as some of the passengers, gave way to a temptation
which they found irresistible. I saw two of the seamen,
myself, in a state of beastly intoxication before 12 o’clock
had arrived, and many, both seamen and passengers,
were much the worse for liquor. Depressed and dis-
gusted with what I saw, I left the scene, and crawled
along the rocks, painfully and slowly, for half a mile to
the westward, in the hope of finding some path by which


we could ascend the face of the cliff, but as far as the
eye could reach, I could discern nothing but a beetling
precipice, which not even a goat or a monkey could have
scaled. On my return I found that, yielding to the
suggestions of some of the principal passengers, Mr.
Lamburd had nominated me to the office of store-keeper
and distributor of provisions, and in the hope of doing
some good, I accepted this invidious post, though I fore-
saw that an impartial discharge of the duties which it
imposed would probably cause me more pain than any
act of my past life. I endeavoured, therefore, to prevail
on the seamen and passengers with whom I came in con-
tact, to gather together as many stores as they could col-
lect, as fast as possible, while I employed my own time
in storing, in small cavities under the overarching
rocks, the few provisions that had been already found.
By the evening we had got two bags of biscuits, one of
them a good deal damaged by salt water, several tins of
salt herrings, two or three pieces of salt beef, and a few
bottles of port wine. A biscuit for every adult, and
half a biscuit for each of the children, were served out
as rations for the day, and herrings to those who chose
to take them, but as no fresh water had yet been found
there were but few applicants for the herrings. Half a
glass of port wine per head was also served out among
the women and children, and I was reluctantly compelled
to refuse many applications which were made to me
during the night, on their behalf, for more. None what-
ever could be spared for the men, some of whom wanted
it badly enough, though many had drank sufficient
spirits in the course of the day to render such a stimu-
lus superfluous. That night all of us, except a few of
the women and children, for whom a sort of tent had
been prepared, with the help of a few boards and a sail,
lay down on the rocks; a hard couch for people who
had probably never passed a night in the open air in
their lives, except on the top of a stage-coach, well
wrapped up in shawls or overcoats.


The morning of the following day, (Friday, August
26,) found most of us on the alert, for it was almost
impossible for any one to get even an hours’ sleep during
the night, in spite of fatigue. The space which could
be made available for repose was so small that we were
obliged to lie huddled together like sheep in a pen, and
the heavy dews which fell penetrated the thickest cover-
ing that flannel and serge shirts could supply. The
men were therefore willing enough to quicken the circu-
lation in their veins, and much more activity was dis-
played than was shown the day before. A party went
out to the westward in quest of fresh water, which was
found at a distance of about a mile and a-half from the
the wreck. Another party went to the eastward for the
purpose of discovering some practicable ascent to the
top of the cliff. The seamen appeared to be a little
ashamed of their conduct the day before, and exerted
themselves successfully to save provisions from the
wreck. Mr Lamburd himself was roused from his
lethargy, and though he made no attempt to assume a
command over the men, he was personally active and
went on board the wreck several times, but as subse ■
quently appeared not with the sole object of promoting
the general welfare. The second and third mates,
Mr. Tulloch and Mr. Worthington, were also very
active throughout the day in securing provisions, and
in seeing that they were brought up to me at the
the stores. Nearly the whole of the stock that
was ultimately collected, was the result of this day’s
labour. In the afternoon news arrived that an ascent
to the top of the cliff had been made by the party which
had gone out in the morning to reconnoitre eastward.
The credit of the discovery is due to Mr. Scoltock, a
London whitesmith, but how he got up remains a mys-
tery. At the point of ascent, about a third of a mile to
the eastward of the wreck, the cliff rises 200 feet above
the level of the debris which opposes itself as a break-


Water to the advancing waves. About 15 feet from the
top of the cliff a perpendicular mass of rock hangs over
the path, and it is a matter of astonishment that any-
one, unaided, should have scaled it. When the ascent,
however, was once made, the sailors found it compara-
tively easy to follow, and they passed down two guide
ropes to assist the men, and a third for hauling up the
women and children. They reported that they had
found a good stream of fresh water near the top of the
cliff, and in the evening they all set out to form an en-
campment there, accompanied by Mrs. Hernaman and
her daughter, and a few of the other passengers. The
majority of the passengers, however, passed the night,
as before, upon the rocks. Ere it was well dark our
attention was drawn to the lurid appearance of the sky
above our heads, and as the darkness increased the
fiery aspect of the heavens showed that we were not
very far distant from the scene of some extensive con-
flagration. We did not learn till the following day that
Mrs. Hernaman and her companions were at that time
flying for their lives, running about from place to place
as the wind shifted, lest they should be scorched to
death by the burning reeds, which one of the sailors,
in a half-drunken fit, had set on fire, “in order to clear
the ground a little !”
On the day following (Saturday, August 27) it was
determined that a general removal to the new encamp-
ment on the cliff should take place without delay, lest
the women and children, cramped and chilled as they
were by cold, exposure, and want of exercise, should
lose the use of their limbs, for the sharp and jagged
edges of the rocks made walking both difficult and dan-
gerous, especially to those, as was the case with many,
who were altogether without shoes. Accordingly, with
the exception of Mr. Lamburd and myself, who remained
below to take charge of the stores, all the passengers
ascended the cliff in the course of the day, and very


little addition was made to the scanty stock of provisions
which we had in hand. A sow, however, which had
swam ashore on the Thursday morning was dragged up
the cliff alive, and two small casks of brandy and some
Tarragona wine were brought up to the general stores
from the wreck, as well as half a bag of good biscuits,
which I resolved to keep to the last, serving out in the
meantime that which was damaged. The stock of this
important article of food was so small, that it was deemed
expedient on this day—the third day after the wreck—
to reduce the allowance to half a biscuit a day to all
hands, children included. This, with a ration of brandy
and a herring, was all that prudence permitted issuing.
We had now only enough biscuit for a week’s consump-
tion, even on this meagre scale, a canister half full of
preserved potatoes, a few cases of preserved meats, a
large canister of very good tea, five or six pieces of salt
beef, two hams, about 25 cases of herrings, the brandy
and wine already mentioned, and a few bottles of port,
claret, and champagne; a box of raisins, two dozen or
so of candles, 5 boxes of lucifer matches, two double-
barrelled guns, a six-shot revolver, two ship’s pistols, 5
flasks of gunpowder. These were all the means and
appliances we possessed for the sustenance, of 105 per-
sons, a large portion of whom were women and young
children, incapable of doing any thing for themselves.
While on the subject of provisions, however, it must be
added, that the people on the cliff picked up and stewed
about six or seven dozen of whale-birds, which had been
half roasted in their nests in consequence of the insane
attempt made to fire the jungle on the Friday night.
On the Sunday also, Mr. Newbold, one of the passen-
gers, came up to the stores, and informed Mr. Lamburd,
that if he would help him, he believed he should be able
to get out of the water tbe carcass of an old boar-pig,
which had been floating about since the morning after
the wreck, but which till then, had not come within


reach. With Mr. Lamhurd’s aid the thing was done,
and this addition to our stock we looked upon as a
veritable godsend. It enabled me to issue on the Mon-
day and Tuesday a ration of half a pound of pork, over
and above what otherwise would have been each day’s
allowance, viz., a small handfull of raisins, half a mouldy
biscuit, a little tea, and some brandy.*
* The list of stores above enumerated did not comprise all that
were saved from the wreck. It came to my knowledge, while in
the Mauritius, that some of the passengers, who are now in Sydney,
were base enough to secrete for their private use some of the ship’s
provisions. The difficulty of proving a plea of justification in an
action for libel alone restrains me from publishing to the world their
names, which, however, are perfectly well known to their fellow-
passengers. “ Bread of deceit is sweet to a man ; but afterwards
his mouth shall be filled with gravel.” I must not omit to mention
in this place that I was informed by Mr. Guyton, while on our way
in the 3mma Colvin from Mauritius to Port Phillip, that he delivered
to Mr. Lamburd thirty tins of sardines, taken from his own private
stock, in a carpet bag. These Mr. Lamburd promised Mr. Guyton
to deliver to me at the stores, but not one of them ever came into
my custody. Another circumstance may be referred to in connexion
with this matter, though it savours somewhat of the ludicrous.
Among the passengers was a person whose conduct on the night of
the wreck presented one of the “ disgraceful exceptions” alluded to
in a former part of this narrative. It was then passed over in
silence, for indignation finds no place in the bosoms of men on the
verge of eternity. But while human beings have human feelings, it
will be impossible to recall, without exciting emotions of measure-
less contempt, the figure of a man in the prime of life, six feet
high, and stout in proportion, with an air-bed fastened round his
middle, shouting out that “ he mttst be saved,” and forcing his way
first to this part of the ship and then to that, through the throng
of helpless women and children, in order to find some moans of
escape for himself. Some time after the mainmast had fallen, he
went out of the cuddy to reconnoitre, and created no little con-
sternation by returning shortly afterwards, wringing his hands, and
exclaiming that it was impossible to get to the shore. However,
he ultimately found himself there, and contrived to get possession of
a double barrelled gun, as well as some powder and shot. With
these he shot three sea-hens, and reserving one of them for the
general stores, lest he should be called to account for wasting the
gunpowder which was of so much consequence to us, he betook
himself, with the rest of his booty, to the fire of a gentleman who,
I am happy to say, is now advantageously established in business
in Sydney. Both of them happened to be Freemasons, and our


A review of our position on the Sunday compelled
me to represent to Mr. Lamburd the absolute necessity
that existed for removing the stores to the new encamp-
ment on the cliff at once, and getting all hands to come
down and search for more provisions, for it was evident
that large quantities of stores must be buried under the
huge pile of broken pieces of wood which lay between
the hull of the wreck and the shore. Mr. Lamburd,
however, declined the mission which I wished to impose
upon him, remarking that it was his duty to remain
where he was and protect me and the stores —he had a
double- barreled gun with him—as well as some treasure
which had been committed to my charge. I did not
myself believe that any one out of the whole ship’s com-
pany would have hurt a hair of my head, but he might
honestly have entertained a different opinion, as the
seamen were for the most part either roaming about the
shore and looking for booty there, or ransacking the
cabins on the starboard side of the poop, with the most
profound contempt for the laws of property. It is
hardly necessary to add that, at such a juncture, it was
not deemed prudent to argue with them the abstract
question of ownership. As to the passengers in general,
they employed themselves in erecting tents or huts and
making flannel bonnets and other articles of clothing.
Some amused themselves by going out shooting, and
others attempted to acquaint themselves with the bear-
hero, he of the air-bed, having made the mystic sign, gravely proposed
to his brother in the craft that he should be at liberty to cook the
birds at his fire, and then that they should eat them together “ in
fraternity.” The gentleman applied to, however, entertained
different views on the subject of "fraternity,” and declined the
selfish indulgence, so that our hero was obliged to look out for a fire
somewhere else. This he could only find at the common cooking
place, where the whale birds which had been picked up were just
then being stewed for the whole of the party on the cliff. Of course
ho could not roast his sea-hens unobserved, and as he turned his
back for a moment, a bystander whipped up the sca-hens, and
dropped them into the stew.


ings of their new position by ascending the mountain—
an effort which the thick jungle, formed by a sort of
cane, standing from five to eight feet high, rendered
abortive.
The Sunday night I passed again with Mr. Lamburd
on the rocks by the stores, in no very buoyant frame of
mind, but still not without an humble hope that the All-
Powerful Being who had so mercifully preserved us
from death by drowning and cold, might still point out
some means for our deliverance. I need not attempt to
express, therefore, what were the emotions which I felt
when I received on the following morning the unlooked
for intelligence that a Ship was rounding the point, and
that she had twice answered our signal flags on the cliff,
consisting of two red shirts with some yards of while
flannel, by lowering her ensign. The effect produced
on my fellow-passengers on the cliff by the first cry of
“ a ship ” is stated by an eye-witness, the Eev. Mr.
Voller, to be “ entirely indescribable.” He goes on,
however, to say “ she who raised the cry, with wild and
eager gestures, seemed to be absolutely frantic, and for a
moment all seemed to believe she was so. There she
stood, surrounded by five or six children, her hands ex-
tended towards the coming vessel, her eyes glaring
eagerly on it, and repeating her cries. The sound spread
like wildfire. Signals were raised in every quarter, and
by the aid of a glass, which had been saved from the
wreck, the speck in the horizon was soon ascertained to
be a vessel making way to the island. Where but a
few moments before despair had reigned, all now was
tumult and excitement. The grass, wherever it could
be found, was again set fire to, and as the wind was
setting off the island, it was hoped that the smoke so
carried would form a signal to guide the approaching
vessel to us. The series of signals displayed by every
one would, under other circumstances, have appeared
absolutely ludicrous. Every child had one ; the red


shirts which had been so useful to us were torn off and
waved in the air in hopes of attracting the notice which
■would be to us salvation. ' Gradually the ship came
down upon us, and at length we saw her answering our
signals and sending up her own colours.”
Very soon after the heart-stirring intelligence had
reached me, I saw the vessel myself. She was a whaler
apparently of about 300 tons, and still kept her ensign
flying. After a time she tacked and tried to stand in,
but the wind blew so hard from the land that she was
compelled again to stand out to sea. She made another
tack, but was again obliged to stand out to sea, and we
saw her no more. We were sanguine, however, in our
anticipations that she would assist us in some way,
either by taking us off 1 the island, or by suplying us with
provisions. Unfortunately this impression had the
effect of inducing the crew and the able-bodied among
the passengers to abstain from further exertions ; they
expected immediate relief, and they neither would search
among the wreck for more provisions, nor carry to the
top of the cliff those which had already been collected.
The sole addition to our stores on the Sunday (before
the ship had been seen,) was two baskets of dried
apples, and Monday night closed in without any greater
augmentation of our supplies than four tins of smoked
herrings. Nevertheless the hope of relief rendered our
situation much less gloomy than it otherwise would
have appeared, and Mr, Lamburd was in prodigious
spirits, and amused himself by playing several airs on
an accordion. I was obliged at last to request him to
desist, as I wished to get a little repose before it
became my turn to watch. I had not been asleep
above half an hour when Mr. Lamburd roused me
with the news that the wind was blowing strongly
towards the land, and that the sea was rising fast; and
he intimated that it would be advisable to look out for
some place of greater security, where we might pass


the night. His views on the expediency of a removal
seemed justified by a heavy fall of spray, which soon
afterwards dashed up the rocks, and nearly extinguished
our watch-fire* However, we resolved not to quit our
post unless it should become absolutely necessary, and,
after making up the fire again, we lighted a lanthorn,
and searched for the highest bit of rock we could find
in the neighbouroood. About 20 feet above the place
where the stores were kept there was a small projecting
ledge of rock, upon which there was room for two per-
sons to sit, with their legs hanging over, and having
removed thither the biscuit, and some other perishable
stores, we again descended to the fire, which was now
blazing away merrily, and we began to hope that, after
all, our apprehensions might prove unfounded. But a
second shower of spray, followed soon afterwards by a
third, and then by a heavy sea-top which completely
extinguished the whole mass of burning timbers at
once, drove us away in all haste to our place of refuge,
and with an aching heart I watched the onward pro-
gress of the waves, which threatened to deprive us in
one night of our only means of subsistence. The rollers
swept on towards the shore in one immense continuous
wall, far as the eye could reach on either side, till they
touched the reef, which was about half a mile distant
from the land, and then broke in incessant thunder, the
boiling surf rushing furiously onward towards the wreck,
scattering right and left the huge pile of broken timber
which had been cast between the hull of the vessel and
the shore, and with it all hope of further supplies from
that source. The gale increased, and the sea repeated-
ly washed up to the holes in the rock in which the her-
ring tins and other heavy stores had been deposited,
and for about an hour there was every reason to appre-
hend that we should ourselves be washed off from our
narrow resting-place. Five times did a sea break over
a huge mass of rock, which lay a little below us, and


which from its immense size and position we hoped
would have proved an impassable barrier. Once a sea-
top actually washed Mr. Lamburd’s feet, but by God’s
infinite goodness the gale abated a little towards morn-
ing, and when day broke we had the unspeakable hap-
piness to find that none of the stores were carried away
or even damaged to any serious extent, though the sea
had broken over all those which we had been obliged to
leave below. But nothing remained of the accumulated
mass of drift wood which had been forced up by the
power of the waves between the vessel and the shore ;
nor of the stores which for five days had doubtless been
preserved under it. On casting a glance at the wreck
it was seen that the mizen had given way, and all that
remained of the once proud Meridian was the mere
outer-planking, or skin, as I believe it is called, of the
poop, which had been driven nearly end on towards
the rock, and lifted at least ten feet higher than it was
on the Wednesday evening (Aug. 24). If the sea had
been as high on the night of the wreck, not ten persons
could have escaped with their lives. *On the top of the
cliff nearly all the tents were blown down in the course
of the night, and great anxiety was felt about our fate,
but I did not wait for inquiries, for 1 had resolved now,
as our last chance of escape from immediate starvation, to
assume an authority which I admit did not belong to me.
Mr. Lamburd was now easily prevailed upon to proceed
at once to the cliff, and summon all hands to the rescue
of the provisions, with a message from me that not a
single ration should be issued for the day, until the
stores were deposited in safety at the encampment.
* The danger which all of us incurred by remaining under the
cliff may he estimated from the fact, communicated to me after-
wards by a sailor who went down in quest of some brandy on
Thursday (Sept. 1), that the storm of the previous night (Wednesday,
Aug. 31), swept away the heavy brandy casks which were left behind
at the stores, and every vestige of the wreck itself.


Accordingly he departed on his mission, taking with
him the double-barreled gun, which he was afterwards
ill-advised enough to level at two or three boys and
young men, threatening to shoot them if they did not
go down to assist in the removal of the provisions. The
object which I had in view, however, was accomplished;
nearly all the men came down in double-quick time,
every one was provided with a burden, and in two
hours the whole of the stores were safe on the top of
the cliff, with the exception of the brandy and a box of
silver coin and other treasure which had been saved
from the wreck, and which I left in Mr. Lamburd’s
charge, in order to resume at once my own duty of dis-
tributing rations. This part of my functions I had been
obliged to delegate to another on the Sunday and Mon-
day, and many complaints were made to me, whether
well-founded or not I am unable to say, of the partial
manner in which he discharged the requirements of the
office. I met, therefore, with a very cordial welcome on
my arrival, and was fortunate enough to settle the question
of jurisdiction in a few minutes. I peremptorily told
all who had excused themselves from labour on the plea
of ill health or weakness that those who had not worked
should not eat, unless the surgeon certified that they
were unable to perform any labour. Two of the pas-
sengers were refused such a certificate, and accordingly
they got no rations that day. A few sentences addressed
to the passengers generally, in the hearing of the crew,
and which I thought might tend to promote a better
understanding, were taken in very good part on all sides.
I represented to the passengers that it was foolish to
expect that the seamen, whose contract with the owners
was terminated by the wreck of the vessel, and who
would not afterwards receive one farthing of wages,
would work for them unless they did something for
the seamen in return. That night (Tuesday, Aug. 30)
I lay down under cover for the first time since the


wreck, exhausted in body, as much from want of sleep
as want of food, but fresh and hopeful in spirit, and es-
pecially thankful that no resistance had been offered to
an authority which I had been compelled by the force of
circumstances to usurp, but which I certainly could not
have maintained by physical force.
The encampment on the cliff presented an aspect of
something like comfort, when contrasted with the un-
even surfaces of the craggy bed on which the majority
of the passengers had passed the first two nights. A
good stream of water ran through the encampment, on
the farther side of which a tent had been erected for
their own accommodation by the sailors, who repelled,
for reasons which I afterwards fully understood, any
attempt on the part of the passengers to come near
them. On the other side of the stream, accordingly,
several tents and huts had been erected by the passen-
gers, but at a distance from each other, which showed at a
glance that no forecast or spirit of combination had been
exercised. Some had most injudiciously pitched their
tents among the scorched and blackened reeds, which
still bore testimony to the mad freak of the Friday
night, and their occupants were consequently begrimed
almost as much as chimney-sweeps. Others had moved
further off, and lay amongst the still green reeds. An
abundance of excellent fuel was furnished by peat,
which was close at hand, but cooking utensils were
scarce. We were not worth a kettle, but a large tin
foot-bath, covered with a cloth, served as a cauldron for
the whole camp. An empty tin case, which had once
held sardines, took the place of a ladle. Pocket knives
there were but few; we had about a dozen of table-
knives, and five or six cups and saucers, so that sardine
tins and herring tins were our chief drinking utensils
when a little tea was issued among the day’s rations.
The following day (Wednesday, August 31,) I rose
with the dawn, much refreshed by a long and uninter-


rupted sleep, and paid a visit to the several tents. We
had now seen nothing of the whaler since the Monday,
but as we expected that she would return as soon as
possible, it was arranged that an expedition should be
sent to make a circuit of the island, and find out some
place where a boat could land to take us off, so that no
time might be lost when she reappeared. Three of the
best seamen and one of the most respected of the second
cabin passengers, Mr. Henderson, were selected for this
important duty. While trying a pistol, however, which
they were to take with them, the weapon burst, and
wounded Mr. Henderson severely in the shoulder.
His place was now supplied by the carpenter, and I
distributed to the four double rations for two days,
which it was calculated would enable the exploring
party to ascertain what we wanted to know. While
they wore getting ready, the morning’s rations for the
rest of the ship’s company were issued, consisting of a
handful of mouldy biscuit-crumbs, a baked apple, half
a small handful of tea, and a glass of Tarragona wine.
This business was hardly got through, when I was
startled by a shout of “ A boat! a boat!” and running
to the point on the cliff where the flag-staff was erected,
I distinctly saw a whale-boat rowing near the shore, at
a safe distance from the surf. The steersman waved a
flag in his hand, and pointed it two or three times to-
wards the quarter from which the boat had come; a
loud shout from the top of the cliff, and a pointing of
hands in the same direction, showed those below that
the signal was understood; and then the boat, turning
its head round, pursued its way back again.
All was now hope, joy, and activity. Many audibly
returned thanks to God for their deliverance, which
they expected to be immediate, and preparations were
made for instant departure. It was quite clear, we
thought, that the ship to which the boat belonged could
not be far off. Alas! neither we who were on the cliff.


nor those who were in the boat below, were at all aware
of the dangers and difficulties of the road which we had
to traverse, nor of the sufferings which we had to under-
go before our final rescue. The captain of the vessel,
who was himself steering the boat, fully calculated, as
he told us afterwards, upon our arrival that same even-
ing, at the point where his ship was waiting to receive
us, and we ourselves, though we did not know what the
distance was, entertained the same impression. But a
heavy gale of wind sprang up soon after the boat left
us, and it was with great difficulty that the captain and
his boat’s crew were enabled to regain their ship. The
vessel was obliged to stand out to sea immediately, and
when the gale ceased, which was not till 48 hours after-
wards, the brave fellows were 80 miles from the island of
Amsterdam. Happily for us we were spared the know-
ledge of this misfortune, for I doubt that otherwise many
would have laid down on the road to die, before they
had half accomplished that terrible journey of twelve
miles.
The exploring party, who were already equipped,
started first, but the rest of the seamen, with the excep-
tion of Snow and another, hastened after them with so
much precipitation, and showed so little consideration
for the feeble state to which the women and children were
reduced, that I suspected them, perhaps unjustly, of an
intention to represent that they were the only persons
who had been shipwrecked, with the view of getting off
from the island as soon as possible, I therefore instruc-
ted Mr. Henry Dehan, a French gentleman, who had
previously placed his services at my disposal, to follow
them with all speed, and let the captain of the vessel
know that there were many women and children, as well
as men, behind. Distributing some herring-tins among a
a few of the passengers, and leaving directions that
the other portable provisions should be forwarded
as opportunity offered, I then set forward myself.


taking with me a little girl and two elder children.
There was a book in my possession, in which had been
inserted, for the purpose of checking the rations as they
were distributed, the names of all the passengers and the
crew, with their description as “adults” or “half-
adults.” It was judged expedient, therefore, that I
should have a personal communication with the captain
as early as might be, and show him the names and ages of
those who had survived the wreck, in order that he might
form a correct judgment upon the extent of the assistance
and accommodation that would be required. I had not
gone far with the children whom I had taken under my
charge, when we were overtaken by a young man who,
having no such incumbrances, was striding rapidly
along, and as I knew that some of the passengers had
preceded us without taking any thought about provi-
sions, I handed him a herring-tin, with a request that
he would share the contents with the other passengers
when he came up with them. It will hardly be cre-
dited, but it is nevertheless true, that this active able-
bodied stripling had not gone a quarter of a mile further
when he threw the herring-tin down among the rocks,
where I found it. He lived long enough, however, to
feel the want of it.
The passengers in general were badly equipped for
a journey on foot over any roads, but especially for the
wild and dangerous path which it was our lot to tra-
verse. The boots and shoes of the men were for the
most part nearly cut to pieces by walking to and from
the rocks near the stores ; most of the younger children,
and several of the elder, had either no shoes at all, or
only one shoe, and the only protection they had for
their feet was a piece of flannel tied over them. As we
were to follow the boat, it was necessary to keep the
sea constantly in view, and the route taken, therefore,
lay along the tops of the cliffs on the eastern part of the
island. At first the path was comparatively good,


though steep, as we could walk abreast of each other,
and pick our way over the sharp crags and yawning
fissures which met us at every other step* But after a
short time this condition of affairs was changed for the
worse, and we were compelled to pursue a beaten track,
following one another in Indian file. The greater por-
tion of the whole route ran through a thick jungle of
green cane, generally much higher than a man’s head,
and occasionally insterspersed with patches of sharp-
pointed rushes. In making this track, the seamen who
had been our pioneers had kept so close to the edge of
the cliff, that the utmost vigilance was necessary to avoid
a false step, which would have been followed by certain
destruction. In some instances, indeed, the path was
actually over the edge of the cliff, and the foot had
nothing to rest upon but the canes which had been
crushed aside by the first comers. "Wherever this was
the case, the route always took a sudden bend to the
left, as if the seaman who for the time being was the
leader of the advance party, had been suddenly awakened
to a sense of the danger which he had incurred. To
make another path was impossible. It required the
whole weight of the body to force a single step through
the dense jungle, which was so high and strong, and
closed up again so rapidly, that nothing but a number
of men trampling close upon one another’s heels could
ever have made a track. Besides, it was necessary to
keep the eye constantly on the ground, in order to avoid
the chasms and sharp-pointed pieces of rock which ever
and anon lay in wait for the unwary, and which were
the occasion, even to the most cautious, of many a fall.
The difficulty of the route may be estimated from the
fact that the seamen themselves were two days in accom-
plishing this journey, and the reader, therefore, will
hardly be surprised to learn that it took a train of half-
famished, footsore, shoeless women and children, assisted
by a few men, three days to travel a distance of 13 miles.


Some were four days, and two did not reach their destina-
tion till even the Monday morning, though we set out
on the Wednesday afternoon. Frequent rests were in-
dispensable to fathers and mothers with infant children
tied behind their backs, and having nothing but a
herring a day to eat. Some had only two herrings for
three days, and the last day’s journey was performed
almost entirely without water. Nor was this their only
trial, for they were compelled to pass the night without
any other covering than the clothes in which they stood
upright, and they were exposed on the first night of the
journey to the inclemency of the severest weather which
we had encountered during our stay upon the island,
I have already referred to the severe gale which sprung
up on Wednesday, (August 31), and drove the whaler
out to sea, but though the wind was very high, the
weather remained fine till night set in. Then, indeed,
the travellers endured an amount of bodily suffering
which few of them will ever forget. All night long it
blew a hurricane, the wind pierced to the very marrow
of one’s bones, and showers of hail burst upon our de-
voted heads in pitiless succession. When dawn broke,
the tops and sides of the mountains above us were covered
with hailstones as with a sheet, and nothing, I believe,
but the representation that the journey could not exceed
three or four miles further, infused sufficient courage
into some of the exhausted and half-frozen wayfarers to
induce them to proceed. A second night, however, was
passed on the road, in the midst of heavy showers of
rain, and some, as has been already stated, camped out
the third night before they were enabled to reach their
destination, though on this occasion they enjoyed the
blessing of a fire.
It may here be mentioned that on the second evening
of the journey, just as the large party with which I
had travelled for the greater portion of that day had
taken up their ground for the night, a tall, powerful


man, in a sailor’s garb, appeared on the brow of a hill
which we had just descended, and hailed us. He told
us that he was the mate of the boat which we had seen
the day before, and that he had been landed by Captain
Ludlow for the express purpose of looking after us.
He had made his way across the mountain to our encamp-
ment on the cliff, and having slept there on the "Wednes-
day night, he was now on his return to the cabbage-
garden already alluded to,wherewewere to be embarked.
He informed us also that the cabbage-garden was only
a mile further on, and that if we could but contrive to
walk that distance, we should find there plenty of bread
and plenty of meat. The whole party sprang up at this
announcement as if they had simultaneously received an
electric shock ; the sense of exhaustion disappeared in
the excitement of the moment, and every one struggled
on as far as he could, till darkness fell upon the wan-
derers, now widely separated from each other, and
made a further advance for the night impossible. And
here, although it must be owned that our informant had
miscalculated the distance, and thereby exposed some
of us to rather severe mischances, it will be but just to
acknowledge the obligations which the passengers in
general incurred to the seaman in question, William
Smith by name, and an Englishman by birth. On their
arrival at the encampment ground on the following
evening, he did every thing in his power to cheer and en-
courage the jaded travellers; he pointed out the locality
of the cabbage garden, assisted in the search for water,
which was very scarce, and assured them that Captain
Ludlow would make every exertion in his power to
take every man, woman, and child from the island. We
had never doubted, from the first moment that the
whaler answered our signals, that she would assist us
in some way or other, and the circumstance of Captain
Ludlow having landed one of his own men inspired us
with additional confidence. But our hopes of escape


from famine were greatly dashed by Smith’s declaration
that neither biscuit nor beef could be found in the
cabbage garden where Captain Ludlow had promised
to deposit it. The statement, however, which he made
to us on the Thursday evening, (Sept. 1,) was made in
perfect good faith, for it had been arranged that Capt.
Ludlow should leave on the Wednesday, (Aug. 31,) at
a spot in the cabbage garden known to Smith, a hag of
biscuit and a barrel of pork ; but he was prevented from
doing so by the gale which sprung up, and drove him
out to sea. Meanwhile, the supplies which we had
brought with us were exhausted, and all hands, espe-
cially the women and younger children, were reduced
to such a state of weakness that it was evident to all
who thought about the matter, that it was next to im-
possible for agreat many of us to hold out until the middle
of the following week. There was nothing but raw
cabbages for us to eat, for after hearing Smith’s statement
on the Thursday evening about bread and meat, we had
thrown away our empty herring-tins as useless lumber,
and now had nothing to boil the cabbage in. There
were but two herring-tins in the new encampment, one
of which belonged to the sailors, who were cooking cab-
bages for themselves all day. Once indeed, but only
once, the party with which I encamped, comprising 22
persons, obtained the loan of their tin for half an hour.
They still held aloof from the passengers, principally,
no doubt, in order to keep from their knowledge the
nature and amount of the plunder which they had col-
lected, which I may just as well state in this place con-
sisted of gold chains and other articles of jewellery, as
well as silver coin, forming a portion of the Meridian's
cargo,* besides bank notes and gold belonging to the
* I wish I were not obliged to add that the sailors were not the
only persons who plundered the wreck, and robbed the insurers of
the cargo. There was a general notion prevalent at the time of the
disaster, that the island of Amsterdam belonged to the Dutch, and it


chief cabin passengers. But the intensity of their sel-
fishness, which had induced me to dispatch M. Dehan
in their wake when they started off from the encamp-
ment on the cliff, was made manifest in the most revolt-
ing manner by their refusal to give any information
about the places where Avater was to be found, or by
giving false information on the subject.
The Saturday and the Sunday (3rd and 4th Septem-
ber) passed away, and still no signs of the ship ; the raw
cabbage did not agree with some of the women and
children, whose enfeebled stomachs rejected it, and the
surf was too high to enable us to gather many limpets.
Our situation on the Sunday night was indeed critical.
The water-hole from which we had hitherto derived our
supply of water had just failed, and there was no water
to be had within less than the distance of nearly a mile,
which was far too great for us to walk more than once a
day, in order to fill the few wine-bottles or boots—
drinking vessels were scarce—that we possessed. There
was but a day’s supply of cabbage remaining, and unless
God should send us immediate aid, It was clear that two
or three days would put an end to the sufferings of
of many amongst us. But at day-break on Monday
morning our deliverers were at hand. A long and tre-
mendous shout of “ ship, ship,” from the stentorian
lungs of Smith, aroused the whole encampment, and
fervent thanks were offered up to Almighty God lor
was supposed that the property on board might he appropriated with
impunity. Four or five of the passengers, therefore, helped them-
selves without scruple to the contents of cases consigned to jewellers
in Sydney, and one of them, I am sorry to say, was one who made a
profession of religion. It may somewhat mar the pleasure with
which these worthies are now counting over the proceeds of their
stolen goods to learn, what was not clearly ascertained until we had
left the Mauritius—that the island of Amsterdam "is a dependency of
the Isle of Franco (Mauritius), and that on a requisition from the
Governor of that island, if ho should think fit to make it, the colonial
authorities of Australia would seize them and send them to Mauritius
to be tried for the felony which they have committed.


tHs renewed proof of His mercy. The Monmouth was
seen standing in towards the shore, with a fair wind,
but as we could not tell when she would be able to send
her boats, we again betook ourselves to our allotted occu-
pations of collecting fuel, fetching water, gathering
cabbages, &c. I myself, with Mr. Scoltock, and three or
four others of our party, went down to the sea-shore, and
thought ourselves very fortunate—for we were certainly
much more successful than any body else—in having
collected, before the tide obliged us to leave off, about
two quarts of limpets, and fourteen small rock-fish,
which Mr. Scoltock, a veteran angler, caught with a
crooked pin and a bit of string. This we considered a
magnificent provision for the day, though it was to be
apportioned out among twenty-two persons, and we had
just boiled and eaten the first sardine-tin-full, when a
shout from below arrested our attention. Casting my
eyes in the direction from which the noise proceeded, I
saw Smith talking to a tall, commanding-looking man,
the latter of whom had enough to do to shake hands
with the people who thronged around him. It proved
to be Captain Ludlow, of the barque Monmouth, from
Coldspring, in the State of New York, who had come
ashore in his own boat to bring us off at once. He was
followed by the second mate of the vessel, Mr. Brower,
who brought with him some biscuits and a piece of pork,
which were hastily distributed among the famishing
multitude. Captain Ludlow, however, allowed no one
to sit down and eat, for telling us that not a moment’s
time was to be lost, and that it was but a quarter of a
mile to the place where the boat lay, he led the way
rapidly down, and was followed, but with unequal steps,
for the route was rough and craggy, by all but three,
(who will be referred to hereafter) of the survivors of
the wreck. On our arrival at the place indicated, we
found that the spot selected for embarkation—the day
being fine and the water remarkably smooth—was a


ledge of rocks jutting out into the sea at a point
where the surface of the island is more than usually de-
pressed. It forms, in fact, a natural wharf, but so rare-
ly (owing to the surf) is it available for the purpose to
which it was that day applied, that Captain Ludlow was
the only person on board of the Monmouth who was
aware of its existence. More biscuits and pork were
distributed here, and were devoured with a relish which
famine only can impart. Never shall I forget the
flavour of that biscuit, or the juicy savour of that morsel
of raw pork. It gave new strength to the limbs, and
added fresh volume to the voice; and, although, in
the course of a tolerably long experience, acquired
in different countries of the world, I have partaken of
many recherche dishes, I can safely say that I never
tasted any one of them with half the gusto with which I
devoured this first instalment of the Monmouth’s stores.
There were four whale-boats employed in taking us off.
The women and children went first, and by noon all
those who had escaped from the wreck of the Meridian
were treading the deck of the Monmouth, with the ex-
ception of the chief cabin steward, and a little girl,
whom he carried on his back, (both of whom were
brought off on the following day) and a steerage
passenger named Pell. This man, while in a state of
intoxication, had severely injured his foot among the
rocks on the first day after the wreck, and had been left
behind, he being utterly unable to travel. A good
stock of provisions, however, had been left near him at
the encampment on the cliff, and for the purpose of
saving him. Captain Ludlow despatched four of his own
men, including Smith, to the encampment, with in-
structions to bring him off as soon as possible, for he
declared that until he had him on board he should look
upon his work as incomplete, and that he would not
think of leaving one man on the island as long as a pound
of bread remained in the ship. And yet, while Captain


Ludlow paced the deck of his staunch old vessel, and
gazed upon the haggard countenances and emaciated
frames of more than a hundred of his fellow-creatures,
almost reduced to the last extremity, he might well be
anxious respecting the possible completion of an achieve-
ment which an indomitable resolution had enabled him
so far to accomplish. Twice already had he been driven
from the island by bad weather, and he was quite aware
that it might be some days, or even weeks, before the
enterprise could be consummated. And it seemed as
if the constancy of his purpose was to be still further
tried, for on the afternoon of Tuesday, (September 6th),
after we had taken on board the chief-cabin steward and
the little girl before referred to, another gale sprang up,
and obliged us again to stand out to sea. Nor could we
approach near enough to the island to take the man off
until the afternoon of the Friday following, (September
9th), when the captain manned his own boat, and with
some difficulty took off Pell and the four men of the
Monmouth at a point near the cabbage-garden. These
men had carried Pell on their backs by turns the whole
of the distance, and had only reached the cabbage-
garden on the Thursday night. With three hearty
cheers for Captain Ludlow and his brave crew, we now
left Amsterdam, and made all sail for the Mauritius.
During the voyage, our treatment on board of the
Monfnouth was exactly what might have been anticipa-
ted from the generous heroism already displayed by our
hosts. All that could be done by respectful sympathy
and unobtrusive kindness was done for us, in order to
make us forget, as far as possible, the hardships which
we had undergone ; and that, not merely on the part of
Captain Ludlow and his officers, but by all hands in the
whaler, down to the cook’s mate. And here 1 must re-
mark, that every man in the Monmouth's crew incurred
a considerable pecuniary loss by seconding their captain
in his persevering efforts to save our lives. No wages


are paid in a whale ship, but every one takes a certain
share, called a lay, in the profits of the voyage, accord-
ing to his rating in the ship. The Monmouth had been
out two years, hut had not been very successful, she
being only half full of oil at the time when she arrived
at the fishing station off the island of Amsterdam. There
they might have filled the ship in a few days. I my-
self saw several whales sporting about close to the shore
near the cabbage garden, and one monstrous fellow
shoved his black back above the water, within an-eighth
of a mile from the boat which conveyed me to the ship.
But not a murmur was heard from the lips of the gallant
Monmouth’s at the loss of their whaling season, and
the consequent sacrifice of their livelihood, though they
took the bread out of their own mouths to feed us. As
to the food with which we were supplied, I should be
heartily glad to see its quality emulated in English
passenger ships. The best of biscuit, salt beef, pork,
fresh rice from Java, abundance of pure water from the
living rock, yams, sweet potatoes, and molasses, were
placed at our disposal without stint. We had also two
novel and unexpected luxuries, viz., half a boat full of
St. Paul’s fish, which are equal, if not superior, in fla-
vour to the finest salmon, and a couple of porpoises, which
even the ladies admitted, when they had overcome their
prejudices against tasting the flesh, to be excellent and
palatable food. The passengers of the Meridian soon
profited by the hospitality which was so liberally be-
stowed upon them, and the children especially. The
latter gained flesh rapidly, and before the voyage was
half over were as noisy and as troublesome as ever.
But the limited accommodation which the Monmouth
could afford, exposed all of us, and particularly the
women, to severe privations of another kind. There
was no privacy for any one, two of the ladies excepted,
for whose use Captain Ludlow gave up his own state-
room, sleeping himself upon the floor. Many of the


■women, therefore, found it impossible to take off their
clothes even once in the whole period which intervened
between the night of the wreck and the arrival of the
Monmouth at Port Louis. The majority of the passen-
gers slept either in the hold, where some old sails had
been laid down, or on the deck; room was found for a
few in berths or hammocks in the chief cabin, while
others unfolded their length on the floor. These ar-
rangements were certainly a wonderful improvement
upon the hard rocks or wet reeds of Amsterdam, but
much was yet wanting to restore us to the same measure
of health and strength which we enjoyed before the
wreck. All that our kind hosts could bestow they gave
cheerfully, but they could not convert a vessel of 300
tons into one of 600 tons, nor could they supply us
either with separate berths, bedding, or change of linen.
Moreover, although, with two exceptions, none of the
passengers had suffered from any serious accident, crip-
pling, or endangering a limb, nearly every one was a
martyr, more or less, to swelled hands and feet, rheuma-
tism, ulcerated legs and hands, &c., nor did we get rid
of these unpleasant souvenirs of Amsterdam, till some
time after our arrival at the Mauritius.
After a fine, but rather long voyage of 17 days from
Amsterdam, we anchored off the Bell-buoy at Port
Louis, at four o’clock in the afternoon of Monday,
September 26th. We had some misgivings, I confess,
about the reception which we should experience when
we got on shore, and we had, therefore, made all the
necessary arrangements beforehand for calling the at-
tention of the Government to our case, and for holding
a public meeting of the passengers, in order to enlist the
sympathy of the inhabitants in our behalf. Accordingly,
the next morning, the Captain’s boat took a deputation
from the passengers on shore, and we proceeded at once
to the office of the Colonial Secretary. Here, in spite
of a good deal of confusion, occasioned by the return of


the Governor from a three weeks’ visit to the Seychelles
Islands, we were received with the greatest possible
kindness and attention, every gentleman in the office,
from Mr. Bayley and Mr. Cummins downwards, seem-
ing to vie with one another in their efforts to make
us forget our misfortunes. An order was immediately
made out for the admission of the two disabled passen-
gers into the hospital. The Government steamer was
sent to the Monmouth to bring off all the passengers, and
place them in the lazarette (quarantine station), and
bread, butter, tea, cheese, and sugar, were sent down
for the supply of their immediate necessities. In the
meantime private benevolence was actively exerted in
our behalf. The gentlemen connected with the Colonial
Secretary’s office were zealous in collecting clothing
from their personal friends, and before the evening closed
a large bundle of wearing apparel was brought down to
the lazarette by Mr. Cummins for immediate distribution.
The powerful aid of the press was instantly afforded.
Mr Channell, the editor of the Commercial Gazette ,
drew up an account of the wreck from the statements
with which we furnished him, and added a heart-stirring
appeal from his own pen to the kindly sympathies
and generous emotions of his countrymen. And most
promptly, as well as most liberally, was that appeal re-
sponded to. Several gentlemen in the town took charge
of whole families, and provided them with lodgings and
every necessary at their own expense. Ladies and
gentlemen hurried about collecting clothing as fast as
they could, and sent down whole bales of clothes to the
lazarette. Numerous presents of different articles of
dress were also made to individual passengers, and at
the very lowest estimate the money value of these much-
needed gifts amounted to £4OO. Subscription lists were
also immediately opened for the sufferers, the Chamber
of Commerce setting the example which was emulously
followed by the Governor, the Colonial Secretary, and


other ■ gentlemen employed in the public service, the
officers of the garrison, the two Masonic Lodges, and
numerous private individuals, without distinction of
origin—French and English, Indian and Creole. Even
the coolies employed upon the sugar estates contributed
their hard-earned dollars, and it should be stated that
the passengers of the steam-ship Bengal, touching at
Port Louis for coal, subscribed £2O towards the relief
fund. In all, a sum exceeding £I3OO was ultimately
collected; an enormous amount for so small a place as
the island of Mauritius, and larger, I firmly believe, than
would have been raised under similar circumstances in
any other part of the British empire. A committee was
appointed to regulate the distribution of this fund, and
in the meanwhile subsistence money, at the rate of two
shillings for each adult, was allowed to the passengers
by the Government.
If I were writing a romance, and not a plain narrative
of facts as they occurred, I would go on to say that all
this goodness, all this liberality, was bestowed in every
instance upon a worthy object. I would assert that the
conduct of all the passengers, during a residence of six
weeks in the Isle of France, showed that they had never
for a moment forgotten their providential deliverance, nor
the state of abject misery and destitution in which they
arrived at Port Louis. But it is a humiliating reflec-
tion that prosperity is a truer touchstone to some natures
than adversity itself.
“ It is the bright day that brings forth the adder.
And that craves wary walking.”
Let me return, however, to a more agreeable subject.
The passengers held a public meeting on the Monday
after their arrival, and passed a series of resolutions ex-
pressing their obligations to Captain Ludlow, and the
officers and crew, “ as the instruments, under Almighty
God, of their deliverance from a dreadful death,” as


well as to the second and third mates of the Meridian,
and Charles Snow. A resolution also was passed,
thanking the Governor and inhabitants of the Mauritius
for the sympathy shown towards us in our distress, and
the- prompitude with which they had come forward
to relieve it. As a testimonial of our gratitude to
Captain Ludlow, we contrived to scrape together £27,
to be laid out in London in the purchase of a watch,
with a suitable inscription, and forwarded through the
house of Blyth Brothers, to New York. The Colonial
Secretary addressed a letter to him, couched in very
handsome terms, stating the confident expectation of the
Governor that he would be authorised by Her Majesty’s
Government, not only to indemnify him for the loss which
he incurredby quitting his whaling station, but also to pre-
sent him with a testimonial “ which may endure to record
exertions of which it could not pretend to be a recom-
pense.” The Chamber of Commerce subscribed £l3O
for a service of plate for him, but the Captain preferred
the money, designing to form an accumulating fund with
it for the benefit of his children. I wish I could add that
notice was taken of the gallant and generous conduct
of the crew of the Monmouth, who sacrificed so much
for our sakes, but they were permitted to leave Port
Louis without any other recognition of their merits than
that conveyed in the resolution psssed by the passengers.
Mr. Tulloch and Mr. Worthington were each presented
with a gold medal, and £25 by the Committee of Dis-
tribution, out of the funds subscribed for the relief of
the passengers, but poor Snow got nothing. He did
not swagger about Port Louis for weeks together, vaunt-
ing that the safety of the passengers on the night of the
wreck was due to the prowess of his single arm. He
did not plunder the wreck, and then, with 20 sovereigns
in his pocket, practise by a simulated poverty upon the
credulity of the generous Mauritians. As modest as he
was brave, he seemed to think that he had done nothing


extraordinary, and finding a ship going to Port Phillip,
he sailed in her two or three days after our arrival at
Mauritius. But he was deeply hurt on learning from
us, as he did afterwards in Hobson’s Bay, on board the
Emma Colvin, that the mates had been rewarded, while
his own conduct had been passed over without notice on
the part of the committee. I can only attribute their
inaction in the matter to the vis inertice induced by a
tropical climate, for when I waited upon the committee,
at the request of the passengers, to urge upon them the
propriety of bestowing some testimonial upon the only
three men who had done their duty. Snow’s claims to
consideration were freely admitted. However, I am
happy in being able to say that his gallantry is not likely
to be passed over without some tangible acknowledg-
ment. At a public meeting of the inhabitants of Sydney,
convened on the invitation of the Chamber of Commerce,
for the purpose of offering a testimonial to Captain
Ludlow, a very general feeling was expressed that Snow,
as well as the mates and crew of the Monmouth, de-
served to be publicly rewarded, and as the subscription
now on foot has nearly reached the sum of £450, there
will be ample funds to carry out these objects.
The majority of the passengers embarked on the 10th
of November, in the Emma Colvin, which ship was
taken up by the Government for the purpose of forward-
ing us to our destination. I will only add that very
many of the passengers left Port Louis much better
provided, both with clothes and money, than they were
when they departed from London; that the losses sus-
tained by others were materially alleviated; and that all,
whether they received pecuniary assistance or not, have
abundant reason to remember for the rest of their lives
with grateful hearts, the delicacy of the attention, and
the warmth of the hospitality which they experienced
in the Isle of Prance.
Reading and Wellbank, Printers, 12, Bridge Street, Sydney.


<=UP.
L^74-
& f
