



A NARRATIVE
OF THE
LOSS OF THE SHIP HARRIET,
(Whaler) of Lohdoh,
WHICH WAS WRECKED ON A BEEF OF CORAL ROCKS
OFF THE
jfejee Jalan&a,
IN THB
SOUTH PACIFIC OCEAN,
ON THE SIXTEENTH OF JULY, 1837.
BY
CHARLES SPARSHATT,
OF STOKE NEWINGTON,
ONE OF THB CBBW.
Together with some account of their providential escape in the boats,
and their landing on Wallis’s Island, after eight days of intense suffering.
There they remained among savages for three months, when he, with six
of his fellow sufferers, was taken on board a Sydney Whaler, and left at
Port Jackson in August, 1838.
This Narrative is published from his own .dictation, almost verbatim,
with the view of raising,' by its sale, a small sum to meet bis expenses
while under medical treatment for deafness, and also to provide an outfit
for a future voyage.
HonBon:
PRINTED BY THE PHILANTHROPIC SOCIETY,
ST. oeoegb’s fields.
1839.




NARRATIVE, &c.
My Dear little Brother,
As you are old enough to remember for
life the distressing anxiety of our parents previous to my
return, (owing to the uncertainty of my fate) and as you
witnessed the arrival of your shipwrecked and spirit-broken
brother, perhaps I cannot render you a greater service than
by giving you a written account of the disasters that have
befallen me. Endeared to each other by long absences,
as well as by inequality of age, my warnings will, I trust,
make a deep impression on you; and your welfare cannot but
be earnestly desired by me. If you would live a peaceable
and useful life, put your trust in God, respect and obey your
parents, never depart from truth, be honest, sober, indus-
trious, and learn some trade. Now to my narrative, which
I desire you will frequently peruse. You will recollect that
I sailed from the London Docks in the Harriet, south sea-
man, on the Ist June, 1836, as able seaman; (it being my
second voyage to the Pacific) a fine ship as ever left the
River Thames for a whaling voyage, fully stored and
provisioned for four years, commanded by Captain Christie,
an experienced officer in that trade, and manned by as fine a
crew as ever left the river; with seven boats for the purpose
of the fishery,* she being what is technically termed, a five-
boat ship. It is customary to take two spare boats in case
• Description of a boat when fully manned and equipped on leaving the
ship in pursuit of a whale.
The length 23 feet, breadth 4 feet, 6 inches, five pulling oars and a
steer oar, five harpoons, three lances, one spade, two tubs of line, each
130 fathoms; two flags, a buoy, lanthorn, keg, compass, and several
warps, bucket and piggin, water keg, keg with tinder box, &c., candles,
lanthorn, and two blue lights for signals. The boat with her tackle will
weigh about half a ton, exclusive of the crew.


of accident, her measurement being about 400 tons. We ex-
perienced some rough weather in going down Channel, which
displayed the good qualities of the Harriet to advantage, so
that we commenced our voyage under favourable auspices.
Off the Cape of Good Hope our first misfortune befel us.
It being very rough weather we had our larboard waste boat
rendered completely useless, being struck by a heavy sea:
poor Captain Christie about the same time had an accident
by falling down on the cabin deck and breaking some of his
ribs : our Doctor, Mr. Dollman, a very clever young man in
his profession, attended him with the greatest care; but the
Captain, not strictly complying with his directions, got
gradually worse, and was unable to come on deck to attend
to his duty. After leaving the vicinity of the Cape we made
the two small Islands of St. Paul and Amsterdam, and in-
tended to have sent our boats in to catch some fish, with
which those islands, or rather rocks, abound, but were pre-
vented by blowing weather coming on. We then proceeded
round the south end of New Holland towards our intended
fishing ground, but, the Captain gradually getting worse, we
were obliged to bear up for New Zealand, off the North
Cape of which Island we sent a boat ashore in hopes to
obtain some fresh provision for our poor invalid, but we
found the place, where was formerly a small settlement of
natives, completely deserted, and the village destroyed by
fire. We then made sail for the Bay of Islands, the princi-
pal harbour in New Zealand, where we anchored about the
middle of November: we found a number of ships, both
English and American, lying there. Before going into our
anchorage Captain Christie had a letter written, addressed
generally to the officers and crew, stating that we came into
that port for the express purpose of leaving him on shore,
attended by the Surgeon, during our first whaling cruize, in
hopes that he might recover from his accident; and, that the


command of the ship was to devolve on Mr. Ridout, the
chief mate, directing us all to obey his orders in every res-
pect as the Captain of the ship—to which I was deputed by
the crew to return an answer expressive of the ship’s com-
pany’s acquiescence in his directions: he sent a message to
me particularly to say that he was quite satisfied ; a few days
after which he went ashore, attended by Mr. Dollman.
When he was brought on deck to leave the ship I was very
much shocked to see the alteration a few weeks had made in
his appearance —from being a stout, hearty looking man, he
had become a complete skeleton—so weak that he could
not lift his hand to his head; indeed, all the crew were
equally grieved, for it might with great truth be said of him,
in the words of Falconer, in the beautiful poem of the Ship-
wreck,
“ Each joy of wedded love at home he knew,
Abroad confess’d the father of his crew.”
When he was carried to the gangway in his bed, to be
lowered into the boat which was to convey him on shore, he
had all hands mustered round him to bid them adieu, saying,
he feared he should never see them more; again enjoining
us strictly to follow his injunctions with regard to Mr.
Ridout, who was for the present our Commander. When
the boat’s crew had pulled a few strokes from the Harriet, he
desired the men to heave up, that he might have a last look
at his fine ship. We were all with our hats off, intending to
cheer him, but the poor Captain slightly raised his hand to
check us, as he could not bear it; we then turned sorrow-
fully away, and silently commended him to the mercy of his
God. I have not before mentioned that he had a son on
board, a boy of fourteen years old—his first voyage. After
taking in a supply of wood, water, live pigs, and potatoes,
we weighed anchor and proceeded on our cruize. A few
days after we left the Bay we fell in with the wreck of a


small schooner, about 70 or 80 tons, which had apparently
been capsized in a squall, and most probably the crew
drowned ; although fine weather we did not attempt to get
any thing out of her, which we might have done, or even
have righted her and towed her into port; Captain Ridout
might perhaps have had some private reasons of his own for
not nearing her. We cruized between the coasts of New
Holland and New Zealand for whales with very indifferent
success, having procured only about 250 barrels of oil, till
the month of May, 1837. When we returned to our
anchorage in the Bay of Islands, and found poor Captain
Christie had died a few days after we left, and was interred
in the English burying ground in Kororadicco Beach, we
went on shore to visit his grave, which we found railed in,
and paid his memory the only mark of respect in our power,
by firing a musket over it. On our going into the anchorage
on this occasion I had the misfortune to dislocate my knee,
which was at first taken for a common sprain, and paid little
attention to; when the Doctor came to see it he discovered
the nature of the accident, and tried to put it in its place by
main strength, but could not succeed for two or three days;
at the expiration of this time it slipped in of its own accord,
but left me of course very lame, and in a weak state; and
going on board another ship which lay there, in trusting too
much to my leg, I fell down and injured my chest. After
again replenishing our stock of wood, water, and fresh pro-
visions, we left the Bay with the intent of cruizing among
the various groups of islands to the north east —my health
being in a very weakly state I was of course under the
Doctor’s care, who had joined the ship again. On the 16th
July, 1837, at 2 o’clock in the morning, while standing on
the larboard tack, with a light breeze and smooth water, the
fatal catastrophe occurred. Our fine ship instantaneously
struck on a reef of coral rocks, off the Fejee Islands, in lati


tude about 16 degrees south of the Equator, and longitude
179 degrees east of Greenwich, called Providence Shoals,
which had not been accurately laid down in the charts. The
natives of the islands, near to which our ship was wrecked,
were particularly noted for their savage disposition and hos-
tility towards Europeans. The day previous I had re-
turned to my duty, although in a very weak state, and at
the time the ship struck it was my watch below, and I asleep
in my berth ; my first impression was, on being awoke by
the shock, that the sea had struck her in the bow, but, on
the ship’s striking a second time, a man came running down
the hatchway and said the ship was on shore, which I could
scarcely believe, but soon found that it was a dreadful cer-
tainty. Now you may make a pause, and just take a view
of our perilous situation. It was at the top of high water
when the ship struck, and we could see no rocks projecting
above the water, nor surf to indicate their presence; the
depth on which we grounded was 16 feet, the ship drawing
no more than 16§ feet; but as the tide fell we saw a reef of
rocks on every side, which, at low water, were nearly dry:
the nearest islands were the Fejee’s, about 40 miles distant,
but whose inhabitants were known to be inveterately hostile
to all strangers; where, if we attempted to land, there was
ever) - probability of all our crew being massacred and eaten—
a very pleasant prospect to anticipate. The next, in point
of distance, was a group of islands, called the Vavaos, dis-
tant between 3 and 400 miles, where was a Missionary
station, and where ships sometimes anchored to procure re-
freshment. The ship meanwhile thumping more violently
as the tide fell, and we expecting every moment the masts to
go over the side, and the ship to be knocked to pieces, we
used every means in our power to endeavour to get her off,
by throwing all our sails aback, &c. &c. We fancied once
we had succeeded, for she shifted her position in a slight


degree, but the next moment struck with greater violence
than before; she then began to roll very heavily, and at
length settled down on her broadside: about the same time
the rudder was unshipped, and the tiller broken. My
shipmates seing no possible chance of saving the ship,
went below, and gathered together whatever was portable,
and likely to be useful, either in the boats, or on land if we
could reach it, and stuffed them into whatever bags they
could find, taking them on deck in readiness to be removed.
This was about 3 o'clock in the morning, and the surf was
beginning to break very heavily; we cleared away and
lowered three boats, sending three hands in each to keep
them clear of the surf, and at a short distance from the ship,
to prevent our only means of escape from being utterly
destroyed. When they had got clear of the wreck, we col-
lected together the various nautical instruments, such as
compasses, sextant, chronometer, &c. &c., a bag of biscuit,
and other useful things, which we put into a fourth boat, and
sent her away with a full crew; after which we got out a
fifth boat, and also dispatched her under charge of the second
mate to join the others. Captain Ridout determined to stay
by the ship till the next day if she should hold together so
long. The surf was now beginning to break very furiously,
washing completely over the deck in every part, we made a
signal to the boats for one of them to come alongside to try
to save some of our lives. The second mate left the boat he
was in, having the valuables on board, and gallantly took
charge of one of the others, but found difficulty in getting
the men to venture near the ship; but by dint of persuasion
and threats he at last succeeded. He came alongside in safety
several times, taking two or three hands each time; once, as he
approached the ship, the carpenter and myself were standing
in the main-chains, waiting for our turn, a surf caught the
boat in rising, which threw her with violence against us


both; the blow made me insensible at the time, and when I
came round I found myself on the deck again. The Car-
penter was seriously injured, but was not fully sensible of
it at the time. The surf was now breaking over the ship
so furiously that we could hardly cling to the rigging, and
could not venture for a moment to let go our hold. As.the boat
neared the ship again, a heavy roller took her, and threw her
completely over the reef. The second mate, being an ex-
cellent swimmer, got clear of her, and caught hold of a rope
that was hanging over the starboard bow. The remainder
of the boat’s crew went with the boat, which, as we could
neither see nor hear her, we supposed was dashed to pieces,
and all hands perished. We then got one of the spare boats
out, and, as she was hanging alongside, getting some oars in
with three hands in her, she was also dashed over the reef.
This was about 4 o’clock. The moon being set and quite
dark we did not venture to risk another boat then, thinking
that when daylight appeared there would be more chance
of safety. When day broke we saw the second mate’s
boat about a quarter of a mile ahead of the ship, scarcely
injured, and the crew standing by her as she was lying dry
on the reef. It was some time before we could discern the
other boat, but at length we saw her about three miles on
our starboard bow, swimming very deep in the water, and
the men in her waving for assistance, which it was impos-
sible to render, either from the other boats or from the ship;
at length they began to pull with their oars and got into
shoal water, where they could walk on the reef and join the
other boat, leaving their shattered boat (whose nose and
stern had been both knocked of) to her fate. The preserva-
tion of these three men was most miraculous, as, had they
been any other seamen but a whaler’s crew, it would have
been almost impossible to keep the few shattered boards of
their boat together till they reached their shipmates on the
B


reef. We then got the anchor buoy over the bows of the
wreck, to which we made fast a whale line, which, being
drifted by the surf, got pretty near the sailors as they stood
on the reef; but none of them having courage to swim to
the buoy, the second mate, at the imminent risk of being
dashed to pieces by the surf, jumped off the bow, swam
to the buoy, and, casting off the whale line, carried the end
to them; by which means we established a communication
with our distressed comrades. The line was then made fast
to each individual singly, and they were got safe again on
board the wreck, leaving the boat high and dry on the reef.
We then had a glass of wine each, for refreshment, after our
severe toil, and, although there was plenty of ardent spirits
on board, we forebore tasting a drop, to prevent any of our
people getting incapable of using their best energies for the
preservation of life. I then set to, made a fire, and cooked
part of a pig which had been killed for our Sunday’s dinner,
together with some pancakes, made of flour, water, and fat,
of which all that were on board made a hearty meal. Find-
ing that the ship was bilged on the starboard quarter, and
all hope of any other method of escape, but by the boats,
entirely destroyed, we laid down to take some rest, to refresh
us for further exertion ; and 1 assure you, my dear Henry,
that I slept as soundly as ever I did in my life. This was
about noon ; the land just discernible from the mast-head,
about 40 miles distant. After having had a comfortable
sleep we got our last boat on deck, and put many things
into her which we thought would be useful, such as rockets,
blue lights, candles, tinder-box, a few carpenter’s tools, and
two small pillow-cases of my own stuffed with biscuits, the
remains of the fresh pork, and about two dozen bottles of wine.
About 3 or half-past, it being again high water, and the
surf consequently more quiet, we went down for the poof
carpenter, who had gradually got worse, and wished to get


him up to send him away in the boat, but he prayed to be
left to die on the wreck rather than undergo the exertion of
being moved: finding him determined in his refusal, we
launched the boat; we then sent her away with five of the
strongest seamen, headed by the second mate, as there was
now no time to lose, the sun getting low, and the ship
striking very violently with eleven feet water in her hold.
Meantime I got a cask containing 40 gallons, which had
been used for oil, and had still 2 or 3 gallons remaining
in it, and filled it with water. The last boat having re-
moved most of the things into the other two, which were
under sail a short distance from the wreck, came as close
alongside as she could venture; we then threw a deep sea-
line into her, with which they pulled away towards the other
two boats again, and on the inner end of it we bent a whale-
line, some length of which they hauled in; we then made
fast the cask of water, some boat planks, and many other
articles, which we launched, and they hauled into the boat.
The third mate then went below, and fetched up the poor
carpenter; (there were now about eight or nine of us left on
board) when we got him to the gangway he still persisted in
his desire to be left to die on the wreck: to this of course
we could not agree, so we gave him a glass of wine, made a
short piece of line fast round his body, attached to the line
that communicated with the boats, and threw him overboard,
as he would not jump. When he was hauled about half
the distance (the whole being 250 fathoms, or 500 yards)
he gave a deadly struggle, which I remarked at the time
was poor 'Pom’s last plunge. When they had got him into
the boat he was in a dying state. Each of us that remained
then made ourselves fast to the line in rotation, the chief
mate and the Captain being the two last men who left the
wreck, and were hauled into the boats, during which opera-
tion I swallowed a large quantity of sea-water, and was so


exhausted that I could not sit up for more than an hour
afterwards. Being now all safe in the boats, we pulled away
for a short time to get clear of the breakers, when we hove
up, and began to overhaul our stores to see what we had to
depend on to sustain life; when, to our utter dismay, we dis-
covered that the large bag of bread was missing; the boat it
was put in having got on the reef and been stove, the people
in her removed to the other boats, and the bread forgotten ;
thus our stock of provision was as follows: about 251bs. of
biscuit—the remainder of the pig, about lOlbs. weight—a
few bottles of wine—about 50 gallons of water —and a few
spermaceti candles. We were in all thirty-two souls, viz.—
eight in each of the four boats; the other three boats having
been knocked to pieces by the reef. We divided the pro-
visions as equally as we could, and then held a consultation
as in what direction to shape our course. In the situation
of extreme peril in which we were now placed, exposed to
the dangers of the broad ocean in open boats deeply laden,
and our lives depending on the issue of the debate, every
man had an equal right to give his opinion; some were for
venturing at once to land on the Fejee’s, being the nearest
place of refuge, notwithstanding we were aware of the savage
disposition, and, particularly, the hostile intention of the
natives towards all Europeans ; others for the Vavaos; and
in fact almost every one had a plan of his own to propose.
After a good deal of debate it was unanimously agreed to
put ourselves under the guidance of Captain Ridout, con-
sidering he was best qualified to conduct us in safety. We
then all turned to take a last look at the wreck of the unfor-
tunate Harriet, as she lay on the rocks in the horizon. The
sun was just setting, and, under any other circumstances, the
scene would have been thought beautiful, but our own im-
mediate safety engrossed all attention. We then, under our
Captain’s direction, made sail to the north east, to endeavour


to reach Vavao, which was to windward of us, and, trusting
to Providence for the wind’s favoring us, determining at all
events to keep company with each other if possible. On
the morning of the 17th July we took our first meal in the
boat, the allowance being a quarter of a ship’s biscuit with
a gill of water, and the same quantity in the evening. I
think it right to add here, there was no despondence in the
boats generally—we were all tolerably cheerful; to which
disposition, under Divine Providence, may be attributed our
eventual rescue from the perils that surrounded us. During
the day the wind increased, and, towards evening, blew a
strong breeze with a heavy sea; we found it necessary to
use all our watchfulness to keep near each other, as, even if
the boats were only a few fathoms asunder, a sea would inter-
vene, which would prevent us from seeing each other; and
when the morning of the 18th broke, the boat which the
second mate had charge of was missing, and we saw her no
more. We were now reduced to three Doats, containing 24
men. The wind increasing to a gale we were obliged to
heave the boats to, by throwing over the oars rafted together,
and holding on by a tow-line; this broke the force of the
sea and kept our boats’ head to wind. The wind having
continued unfavorable for reaching Vavao, the boats had
drifted towards Wallis’s Island, a distance of 700 or 800
miles from the rock on which we were cast away; which
island we made on the morning of the 23rd, bearing due
west, distant 25 to 30 miles. Our bread was now all gone
as well as the small piece of pork. The only addition we
had to our food during the week was three or four flying
fish, about half a pound weight each, which lodged in the
boats at night, and, as soon as caught, were divided equally,
and eaten raw. On seeing the land we all gave three
hearty cheers; we then ran in for it, but, as we approach-
ed, we found it was surrounded by a reef at a distance of


from 4 to 7 miles: we got near the reef about 10 in the
forenoon, on which there was a heavy surf; it blowing at
the time half a gale of wind. We ran on the edge of the
surf nearly round the island in search of an opening, but for
some hours could not discover one. We several times hove
up our oars, determining at all hazards to dash the boats
right through the surf, which would have been almost certain
destruction. At one time we had resolved to run the boats
on a low sandy islet, which was on the edge of the reef, and,
hauling them across, launched them on the other side, but
found upon inspection that the reefs were wider than we
expected. Every now and then We fancied we had found an
opening, but were as often disappointed. We saw no sign
of houses on the large island till about 2 o’clock, when we
discovered what appeared to be a town ; almost at the same
time the natives must have discovered us, as we saw them
soon after launching some small canoes, which they pushed
off and paddled towards us. We then took in sail and lay to
for them. When they got to the inner edge of the reef, the
greater part jumped overboard and waded towards us, waving
a piece of white cloth as a token of peace. Our boats at
this time were half a mile apart. The natives paddled along
inside the reef till they came to narrow passages, through
which their canoes could pass easily, but which we should
never have discovered, the two ends of the reef, as it
were, overlapping each other, and so prevented the opening
from being seen. The natives swam out to the boats and
invited us to enter, which we were glad enough to do, being
quite exhausted with hunger and fatigue. All our three
boats then went through the reef by different passages, and
so soon as we were in, we made way towards the houses.
Our boat, having several natives in, was the sternmost. As the
Captain's boat passed the town we saw about a dozen canoes
endeavour to surround her, which they could not effect, the


boat being too fast for them. The chief mate’s boat was the
next which they surrounded, and forced to heave up; many
of the natives got into her, and we could see them from our
boat plundering her of every thing moveable. They soon
boarded us, and served us in the same manner; after which
they began to strip us of our clothes. I had on at the time
a jacket, two shirts, and a pair of trowsers. One of the
natives attempted to pull off my jacket, which I naturally
resisted, when he took up a small hatchet he had got out of
our boat, and made a blow at me, which wounded me on the
head, but, fortunately, not dangerously: I was then forced
to submit to have my jacket taken, and one of my shirts, they
with great liberality leaving me a shirt and trowsers. When
they had plundered us of every thing they could lay their
hands on, they left us and went on shore. The Captain
made a signal to us from his boat to pull away towards a
small island that lay between the reef and shore; on which
we landed about 4 o’clock. It was covered entirely with
cocoa nut trees, but nothing else eatable. We climbed the
trees for the nuts to satisfy our hunger. We then hauled
two of the boats on shore, and left the third at anchor off
the beach, having laid down to take some rest. A black
man, who had lived on the island eight or nine years, came
over and invited us to the main island, where he said he
would provide us some food: we civilly declined his offer,
being fearful, if we went, of being murdered. He assured
us there was no danger, but if we did not choose to go, there
was a house on the small island we were then upon which
would afford us shelter : we proceeded thither, and again
laid down to rest. At about 9 o’clock we heard a strange
voice calling to us in English to get up immediately or we
should be all massacred. We directly ran towards our boats,
where we found the two that had been hauled up had been
filled with water, to prevent our launching them. We got


the water out as soon as we could, and launching them,
jumped in and pulled off. We had not pulled far from the
beach when a musquet ball came whizzing past us, and im-
mediately after another fell short of us. By this time we
were out of their reach. On overtaking the Captain’s boat
we found he had a white man on board (an American) who
had given us the warning, and who had come from the
opposite side of the island, so soon as they heard of the boats
appearing, to invite us to go thither to one of the head
chiefs, who was the white man’s friend. Far different was
the conduct of a Frenchman who resided on the island, for
when the boats first appeared, the natives wished him to
come off in a canoe for that purpose, but he refused, and
went away to a distant part that we might not see him when
we landed. We made the best of our way towards the
friendly Chiefs abode, the rain descending in torrents.
When we got on shore it was about 2 o’clock in the morning
of the 24th. We hauled up our boats on the beach, and
secured them, then went into the Chief’s house to lie down
and rest, (wet as we were) of which we were much in need.
At daybreak we awoke and walked out to dry ourselves, and
see if we could get anything to eat. At a house near, we
saw three or four white men, who told us there was to be a
feast during the day, at a short distance off, where the King
lived, on account of the death of a Chief; it being the custom
of the island to feast for five days on the birth or death
of an individual of the lower classes, but on that of a Chief
or rich man the feasting is renewed at intervals of fifteen or
twenty days. To this feast accordingly we all went When we
arrived, the natives were very eager in proffering their solicita-
tions to each of us to go and live with them. I accepted the
offer of a young man who had been to sea sometime, and
went with him to his house. For about a fortnight we re-
mained in the village where the feast was held, as at the end


of ten days there was to be another day’s feasting, of which
we remained to partake. We then removed to a house of
his about 5 miles off, where I lived with him ten or twelve
days longer, but did not altogether like my place of residence,
being too often reduced to short allowance of provision, and
sometimes none at all. At the end of that time we went
to an uncle of his, a short distance off, when, after stopping
a few days, he left me, and I became a member of his
uncle’s family. About this time two of our boats left us
with those who chose to go in them, for an island to leeward,
called Horn Island, where there was more probability of
ships touching. The third boat also left next day with the
Captain, who purposed attempting to reach an island above
200 miles to windward; but was eventually compelled to
bear up and run down to the same place with the others.
After their departure there were ten of the Harriet’s crew
left, viz.—nine white men, and a Friendly Island native.
In my new abode I found my situation very much improved,
being treated with great kindness, and having abundance of
food. I conformed immediately as nearly as possible to all the
native customs, which, as my wardrobe was so slender, con-
sisting only of a shirt and trowsers, was very convenient as
regarded dress, they wearing in common only a white native
cloth wrapped round their waist, called tappa. After a short
time I could drink kava* and smoke the green tobacco, which
grows there, with the best of them ; more with the view of
complying with their customs than any liking I had to it.
To give you an idea of the mode of living in this island, it
will be as well perhaps to describe the routine of a single
Description of making Kara.
* The root itself is not dissimilar to horse-radish. It is chewed by
persons appointed fur that purpose, mostly young females ; after which
the juice is expressed, and mixed with water, to drink. If taken to
excess it causes stupor; but, moderately, causes rather pleasing sensa-
tions.
c


day. We generally rose at daj break, about half-past
five; the first thing was to drink kava, and smoke till Bor 9
o’clock; if there was any thing cold left from the day before,
we had it; after which the old man and myself went out to
our plantation, employing ourselves either in clearing ground
for planting, or in weeding it, and keeping it in order; we
returned to the house about 3 o’clock, and began to prepare
our dinner, consisting of yams, tarroo, bread-fruit, bananas,
&c.; sometimes a little shell or other fish, but more often
without any thing but vegetable food. By the time the
dinner was cooked and eaten it was nearly dark. After which
we went to sleep as it suited us, generally in the house,
which is merely a roof, thatched with the palm leaf, supported
on posts; but sometimes, when very warm outside, on the
grass, with a mat to lie on, and the cloth we wore round our
middle by day spread over us. At a grand festival, which
sometimes occurred, as was mentioned before, on the occasion
of a death or birth, we fared more plentifully, if not better,
being a continued succession of eating, drinking kava, and
smoking all day long, and dancing the greater part of the
night to most discordant music, which is produced by a
split bamboo beat upon by small sticks. The females decor-
ate themselves very gaily on such occasions, dressed in the
native cloth stained with various patterns. The younger
ones daub themselves all over with a preparation of red ochre
and cocoa nut oil, and their mode of friendly salutation is
by rubbing noses; it is not always very agreeable to be
selected as the object of their regards. During my leisure
hours I had amused myself by clearing the brushwood from
a small plot of ground, about an acre and half, in which I
planted yams and tobacco: it was quickly in a very flourish-
ing state. When the friendly old man discovered what I
had been about, he said the crop it might produce should foe
saved for my exclusive benefit, and when a ship arrived, what


ever it produced by trading was to be my own property. In
the early part of October I was present at a feast on occasion
of a death, when I received the agreeable intelligence of the
arrival of an English vessel; the next morning I left my old
friend to go round to the ship, promising him I would
return in three days, but this was not in my power. When I
left him he said he knew he should never see me again, and
was very much affected at parting with me, as indeed were
all the members of the family. When I arrived at the
harbour I found she was a whaling brig, belonging to Sydney,
called the Guide, out about five months, having met with
very few whales; they were glad to ship me, with six others,
in the room of men who wished to leave the vessel. After I
had joined her, my friendly old host came round with two
large baskets of yams as a present, and to give me his parting
benediction; but as they had no canoes, he could not get an
opportunity of coming on board, so unfortunately I did not
see him to bid him adieu, nor did I receive the intended
present, though he left them for me. On joining the brig, I
was compelled to take the place of a man who had received
an advance of £A at Sydney, and had drawn about the same
amount in slops from the Captain, whereas his share of oil
on board, to which I became entitled, was not worth more
than two pounds. My wardrobe consisted of a shirt and
trowsers, all I saved from the wreck of the unfortunate
Harriet. The contrast between my present situation and
when I joined that ship on the Ist of June last year was
sufficiently disheartening, but I had still great reason to
thank God that my life had been spared, though the con.
tinued exposure and hardships I had endured, added to my
state of extreme debility, arising from the dislocation of my
knee previous to the wreck, had, amongst other effects, in-
creased a deafness, to which I had been subject for some
years, to a very painful degree, and the loss of my chest and


bedding (the want of which I had not so much regarded
while on Wallis’s Island) I now felt very sensible of, for
when I left home, I had (through the kind assistance of
friends) a sea-chest full of all sorts of useful clothes, navigation
and other books, particularly my Bible, mathematical instru-
ments, bed, blankets, &c., together with a considerable ven-
ture in articles for the purpose of bartering for shells and
other curiosities, that would have turned to a profitable
account when I reached England, beside my expected profits
of the voyage, being engaged on an able seaman’s lay, or a
certain proportion of whatever oil might have been obtained.
Had the issue been prosperous, I had every reason to expect
to realize a considerable sum, together with almost a certainty
of promotion—now I was almost naked, penniless, and in ill-
health, and as I was already in debt on board the Guide for
another man’s score, the Captain would not supply me with
any clothes or bedding out of the slop chest till we had
caught whales enough to warrant him in so doing. Of a
night, when it was our time to turn in, three of us used to
huddle together in a sleeping berth to keep each other warm,
without either bed or bedding, the weather none of the
mildest, and the water pouring down in streams through a
leaky deck. In this miserable condition, and indeed in all
my disasters, I consoled myself with thoughts of home,
being assured that my parents, you my dear little brother,
and other friends, were anxiously praying for my welfare,
and would receive me home with joy in spite of my destitute
condition. About two months after I had joined the Guide
we had two whales alongside, cutting in, and one of our
boats was towing, or rather, laying astern, blowing almost a
gale of wind, and a heavy sea running; the man in charge
of her was one of the Harriet’s crew, and he had been in her
some hours, when I offered to relieve him, but he preferred
remaining in the boat. We had been at work cutting up till


late, about 10 o’clock, and quite dark; when we were all
below at our supper, one, who went on deck by chance, heard
a voice calling out over the stern, but took no particular
notice, thinking it was the man calling out to be relieved;
shortly afterwards the mate came running forward, and sung
out down the scuttle, “ Jump up here for God’s sake, there’s the
boat capsized and the man drowned.” We lowered the second
mate’s boat at the imminent hazard of losing her and the
crew—pulled about round the boat that was upset —picked
up the oars and other things belonging to her—but could see
nothing of the poor fellow, who we supposed had been drawn
under by the sharks which swarmed in numbers round the
ship. We continued cruizing in the Guide, with very in-
different'success, until the month of August, 1838, when we
arrived at Sydney : it was three weeks before the cargo was
discharged; and when I came to receive the balance due to
me for my share of oil, after deducting my slop bill, &c.,
amounted to £1 13s. 9d., with my wardrobe very little im-
proved from what it was when I joined her at Wallis’s
Island. The day after I was discharged from the Guide I
went on board a ship in the harbour to work as a labourer
at 3s. 6d. per day, with my provisions and grog, and procured
a lodging on shore for 6s, 6d. a week for bed and Sunday
board. I worked on board one ship for ten days, and was
defrauded of my wages through the roguery of my employer;
after which I went on board another, where I worked for
nine days, and got paid. During my stay at Sydney I saw
a man belonging to a vessel that had brought part of the
Harriet’s crew there, who had left Wallis’s Island in the
boats, and who told me that the Captain and a part of them
had gone to England ; I also heard that the second mate’s
boat’s crew, which had parted from us the second night
after leaving the wreck, had gone back to the Fejee’s, and
from thence got a passage to New Zealand in a schooner.


The Chieftain, London whaler, arrived from a whaling
cruize with 1700 barrels of oil, about half a cargo, and, after
refitting and taking in a supply of provisions, intended going
another cruize for about five months, and then to proceed
home; she was in want of hands, and, thinking it a good
opportunity, I engaged with Captain Howey for £2 a month
wages, and a proportionate share of what oil might be ob-
tained, otherwise the wages direct to England would have
been £3 to £3 ss. On passing the heads of Port Jackson
Harbour we found that the Captain had altered his intention,
and was only going to touch at New Zealand with a mail be
had for that island, and then proceed direct round Cape
Horn to England; this to me was another sore disappoint-
ment, as I had been obliged to get an advance from the
Captain in money, and slops, to provide actual necessaries
for the voyage, and, consequently, should have very little
to receive when I arrived at borne out of the low wages I
had engaged for. We had on the whole a favorable passage,
encountering, as is generally the case, some heavy weather
off Cape Horn, and arrived in the London Docks on Tues-
day, the 19th February, 1839, by shore reckoning; but by
our own (having circumnavigated the globe) on the 20tb,
at 4 o’clock in the morning. Not having any money, and
no means of getting my chest on shore, and of course very
anxious to see my friends, I left it on board with the few
things I had collected at Sydney, and some slop clothing I
had from the Captain, not very valuable certainly, but still
useful as a foundation for an outfit for another voyage;
when I returned on board, Wednesday, February 20tb, to
get it out of the ship, I found the box emptied of all its
contents, and nothing whatever left but an old blanket,
which I suppose they did not think it worth their while to
steal: as there was then no one on board but some Custom
House officers and lumpers, I could get no redress. I re


ceived my balance of wages, £4 9«., from Mr. Crichton, the
owner of the Chieftain, and with it purchased clothing to
wear on shore, which is literally all I have in the world. *1 his
termination of my disastrous voyage has thus left me almost
destitute; and you, my dear Henry, well know the inability
of our parents to provide me with an outfit, and to meet the
expenses attendant on my deafness, which at present dis-
qualifies me for sea-service; but, after having passed through
so many perils by the protecting care of the Almighty, it
would be sinful in me to doubt His power to support me in
my present forlorn condition; therefore, humbly looking
forward with hope for the future,
I am,
My dear Henry,
Your affectionate Brother,
CHARLES SPARSHATT.


It hat been thought advisable to insert the two following lettert (the
originals being open to inspection) at they throw considerable light
on part of the foregoing.
New Zealand, November 11, 1836.
My dear Father and Mother,
I take this opportunity of writing to let you
know that I am well in health and spirits, hoping that it will find
you, little Harry, and all my friends, as well as I left you- We
have been staying here this last week, and put in only on account
of our Captain, who has been laid up for the last three months
from a fall which broke two of his ribs, and, as he would not take
any medicine, it began to assume a very serious aspect. He is
going to stop on shore during this next cruize, which will last
about four or five months, and the Doctor is gone to attend upon
him. We should be all very sorry to lose the poor old man, for
he has acted like a father to the whole of us; and, indeed, he says
that he considers we are all his children, and should look up to
him as to a father; and it is a true saying, that a good captain
makes good officers, for we are all comfortable together as it is
possible to be, more like brothers than any thing else, for what
one has is shared amongst the whole of us, and we have plenty of
good provisions; but the only thing that damps our pleasure is,
that we have not yet got any oil, not even any to burn in our
lamps, but are in good hopes of picking it up this next season, as
our officers are all experienced hands. You must tell little Harry
that I do not forget him when I lie down on my bed, for the
flocks are not half picked, but are all in lumps, and as hard as stones;
but hard sleeping is good for the constitution. We have had a
very rough passage, but we have got a good ship under our feet,
although she gives us a wet shirt now and again ; but most fast
sailing vessels do, so we must not complain. As I am going to
send this on shore in charge of the Doctor, (as there are no


homeward bound English ships in the harbour) to be lorwarded
the first opportunity, I know not when it is likely to reach you,
but I think it is likely to do so before myself, although we are
all in hopes of making a quick voyage: (what would life be
without hope to cheer us up ?) I am sorry that there are no
curiosities to get anywhere hereabouts, and I think it likely that
we shall return this time without any, always cruizing about the
same ground, that is, between the coasts of New Holland and
New Zealand, where the weather is generally very rough, though
sometimes there is a little fine weather, and there are plenty of
whales to be seen, and when we do happen to get one it fills a few
casks, for they are mostly large, and lazy, and fat old gentlemen.
I am in all the luck of having no shoes when they are most needful,
for we have had some very cold weather, and I forgot to get any
when I bought my clothes, and I have been obliged to weather
it the best way I could, though it nipped my poor feet sadly at
first; but lam now pretty well snow proof, and able to weather
it as well as the best of them. I had the misfortune to cut my
leg with a rusty old harpoon three or four days ago, and it is now
very painful, and has disabled me from doing any work for a few
days, but I am in good hopes of its soon getting better ; but I can go
in the boat, and I had yesterday a small pull of about 45 or 4 6
miles after a French Doctor to attend upon the Captain, and
have now got very sore hands in consequence, not having been used
to it now for a few months, therefore you must excuse the writing,
and as for mistakes, they all come uninvited. As I have got no-
thing more to say, but that I hope you will let me hear from
you often, as there are plenty of chances by vessels coming on
this coast, please to remember me to all my relations and friends,
and with love to all,
1 remain.
My dear Father and Mother,
Your affectionate Son,
CHARLES SPARSHATT.
D


Kororadicco Bay of Islands, New Zealand,
May 16th, 1837.
My dear Father and Mother,
I take this opportunity of writing to-
let you know that I am in excellent health, but rather depressed
in spirits; hoping that it will find you, as well as all my friends
and relations, in as good health but rather better spirits. In my last
I stated that the Captain was to be left on shore on account of
sickness during the first cruize of the whaling season, but he will
never more be seen by us, for he survived but a few days after
the ship’s departure, and left Mr. Ridout in command, who, from
what I can see at present, will be likely to treat us all as well as
Captain Christie did, if every thing goes right, but as there are
several malcontents in the ship, who, I believe, are going to leave-
ns, and join some vessels which are lying here homeward bound,
and in want of hands, offering almost any wages, it is uncertain
what will be done. The cause of discontent is bad luck, as for
any thing else I am sure nothing can be said, for we have more
allowed us than we can eat, and, as to grumbling, I have not
heard an angry word pass between officers and men of any con-
sequence ; but the third mate could not agree with Mr. Ridout,
and on that account he has left the ship, and a young man who
joined us when we were last here has taken his place, and seems
to be likely to suit well; but as others are going to leave, Ido not
know that they will be so well replaced, as there are no white-
men to be got here at present, and the natives are all fighting,
and they are not likely to give up the hopes of a rich repast of
human flesh, as they eat all their prisoners, for one of salt beef
and biscuit bread. They are gone to-day to make a beginning,
and there is hardly any thing to be heard but muskets firing in
all directions, and canoes of war filled with men brandishing their
muskets, tomahawks, and clubs, and singing the war song, to be
seen all over the harbour. As I said, we have had but very ill luck.


having got only 230 barrels of oil, but I can assure you it is not
for want of striving to obtain it, for I dare venture to say,
that not a ship in the fleet has sailed farther, or used more means
than ourselves, although some have got four or five times as much
during this last season. I had the misfortune the other day to
put my leg bone out of its place, and it has been very painful,
but is now nearly recovered, and I have had nothing else of any
consequence ail me during the voyage. You must tell little
Harry that I have not as yet got any curiosities, having been no-
where to obtain them, but I am in hopes of getting some before
long, as we are going to take the next season round the islands.
You must excuse my saying any more at present, as there is a ship
called the Pusey Hall now getting under weigh, which was not
expected to sail for several days ; so, with best love to you and
little Harry, as well as all my friends and relations.
Believe me ever to be.
Your affectionate Son,
CHARLES SPARSHATT.
s3* I cannot be too thankful to Sir George Carroll, one of the
Governors, for his prompt benevolence in giving me an order for the
Soho Dispensary for Diseases of the Ear, and also a letter to the resident
Surgeon, thereby securing his immediate attention, and preventing the
delay of a week, which would otherwise have occurred.
Printed by the Philanthropic Society, St. George’s Fields.
