

REPERENCES TO THE PLATE.
The bottom figure is the Mariner's Compass.
The two side ones are a representation of a Native*
King throwing his spear at the Kangaroo.
THE SHIP “PRINCE GEORGE OF BRISTOL."
BEE ERBNCEB TO THE SHIP.
1 Fore sail
2 Fore top sail
3 Fore top gallant sail
4 Fore royal
5 Main sail
6 Main top sail
7 Main top gallant sail
8 Main royal
g Mizzen top sail
10 M izzen top gallant sail
11 Mizzen royal
12 Mizzen
13 Flying jib
14 Jib
15 Fore top mast stay sail
16 Fore royal stay
17 Flying jib stay
18 Top gallant stay
19 Jib stay
20 Fore top mast stay
21 Fore stay
22 Main royal stay
23 Main top gallant stay
24 Main top mast stay
25 Main stay
26 Mizzen royal stay
27 Mizzen topgallant stay
28 Mizzen top mast stay
29 Mizzen stay
30 Gaft
31 F.nsign
32 Varby's
33 Mizzen boom
34 Main brace
35 Mizzen top sail brace
36 M izzeii top gallant brace
37 Mizzen top royal brace
3d Main royal brace
39 Main top gallant brace
40 Main top sail brace
41 Fore royal brace
42 Fore top gallant brace
43 Fore top sail brace
44 Fore brace
4$ Main top bowline
46 Fore bowline
47 Flying jib sheet
| Martingale stay*
50 Martingale
51 Flying jib boom,
52 Jib boom
53 Bowsprit
54 Fore mast
55 Main Mast
56 Mizzen mast
57 Bumplins
58 Reef earings
69 Reef points
60 Dog vain
61 Buntlines
62 [<each lines
63 Hull
6t Cutwater
65 Head
66 Stem
X Yards
f Tope.






A NARRATIVE
OF THE JOURNEY TO AND FROM
NEW
SOUTH WALES,
INCLUDING. A
SEVEN YEARS RESIDENCE IN THAT
COUNTRY.
BY
JOSEPH LINGARD.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
J. TAYLOR, PRINTER, &C., CHAPEL-EN-LE-FRITH.
(1846)


TO THE READER.
I think it necessary before any Person attempts
to publish a Narrative of his Adventures, to inform
his Readers who and what he is; for much depends
on his credit, whether he is worthy of belief or not;
as some circumstances in such a Life as mine may
astonish almost any Person, and make him doubt
the truth ; but Ido assure my Readers, that Ido
not intend to say one word in this Rook, that is not
strictly true, to the best of my remembrance. I, was
born at Chapel Milton, a small Villaye in the
Parish of Glossop, in the County of Derby; about
the year, 1789. My Father, Joseph Linyard, was
the Clerk and Sexton of Chinley Chapel, and very
hiyhly respected in his situation; he maintained
his family very creditably, until about the year
1800, when a very violent Fever visited our little
Villaye, and proved fatal to no less than fourteen
or fifteen heads of Families; amongst whom was
my lamented Father, (my Mother having died
about tivo years and a half before, as well as two
Brothers d' two Sisters, J by this calamitous event;
fve of us were now cast on the World, to yet our
livelihood as best we could. We were instructed
in the weaving of Cotton Cloth, which went well in
those days, and tve made our living by it. I did
not think it would have been my luckless lot, to
be sent to New South Wales, nor do I think that
those ivho read this little Book would have thought
so, but as it has so happened, I here present to the
world a small account ofwhatlhave gone through.
JOSEPH LINGARD .
Apeil 9th, 1810.


A NARRATIVE
OF THE JOURNEY TO AND FROM
NEW SOUTH WALES,
INCLUDING A SEVEN YEARS’ RESIDENCE
IN THAT COUDNTRY,
BY JOSEPH LINGARD.
On the 31st of December, 1834, being near home,
I saw my Prosecutor, and two Constables, William
Ashton and William Porritt; they entered my bouse in
order to search it: as my Prosecutor had removed in
a clandestine manner, all the machinery out of the
Bridgeholme Green Mill,, (as a kind of blind,) for he
sent his mechanics in the day time and they were
locked up in the Mill, to pull down the machinery,
and in the night sent his cart to fetch it away. This
I have sufficient witness of, —therefore to throw the
suspicion off himself, several neighbours’ houses were
searched, as well as mine; in order thereby to gain
belief that the Mill had been robbed. He with the
Constables, turned the things over in my house, and
took many articles away which I had bought five years
before, they were my own property. He took a drop
latch off my door, and swore it was his. —This drop
latch was valued at 6 Jd. when new. —In consequence
of this, I was doomed to be transported beyond the


seas, for the term of seven years. It seems a small
matter, and 1 will truly say how I became possessed
of it. James Goddard, Jim. and myself were fishing
down hy the Mill with two rod nets, I caught a large
fish, James said he had got something ; he drew his
net up, and he produced the said drop latch, —I said
I will take it home and put it on my door, little think-
ing what the result might be. James Walton could
tell after I was sent off, how it happened that this latch
was in the river. My Prosecutor's son pulled the
latch off the door in the Mill, and he, J. W. threw it
into the river.
I was committed at Hayfield, by Simpson, the
Magistrate, on New Year’s day, 1835. From Hay-
field I was taken to New Mills the same night, and
remained at Joseph Heginbottom's, the Dog and
Partridge Inn. —Next morning took the Coach at
Soldier Dick’s, for Derby. I was there tried on the
6th, and sentenced to be transported to New South
Wales, for the term of seven years.
I was informed that my Prosecutor after sentence
had been passed, sent home to inform his friends vvhnt
he had done, and ordered them to get a Goose ready
for dinner on his return, but poor entertainment in
my opinion, when his best sauce would be, the great
exploit he had achieved in transporting au innocent
man.
On the 14th I got breakfast at Derby, dinner at
Northampton, and supper in Newgate Gaol, London,


I vras almost starved to death on the top of the Coach,
it being a very cold day, and I being heavily ironed.
On the 15th I was taken to Woolwich in a Van,
and plit on board the Hulk, Justicia, a three decker.
On arriving, I found six-hundred prisoners in the same
condition as myself. My own clothes were immedi-
ately taken from me and others given to me, not very
warm oues, as one might very well see through the
cloth ; and as a still further accommodation, each
prisoner had a pair of irons rivitted on to the left leg,
and the links came up to the knee. These were com-
panions in the day time, and at night we called them
“Old Wives,” as we wore them night and day. I was
in the sixth class bottom deck, which was supposed
to hold forty-two men when filled, it was eight yards
long and five wide There were seventeen classes in
the Ship, eight bottom, six middle, and the remainder
in the top deck. There was a passage through the
centre of the Ship of iron rails, three inches wide
and half-inch thick.—The doors were made of the
same material. This passage was for the Guards to
walk through at night to keep all quiet.—There was
a passage through every deck. The classes were on
each side of the passage. The Captain, Mate and
families lived in the Cabin of the Ship. The Ship’s
Cooking was done in one part of the top deck.
in the morning we had about four ounces of bis-
cuit, and a pint of Smiggius to each man; the Smig


gins ought to be made of oat meal; it was boiled in
a boiler, and drawn out through a brass tap ; it was
made of sweepings, hut of what hind of Corn it was
impossible to tell. We had to seeth it through our
teeth, and then to wipe away the dirt and rubbish
from our mouths, to make way for another spoonful;
and sometimes it stank so, that we were obliged to
hold our noses whilst we swallowed. We had this
allowance from the Cook-house, in Kits, six men to
each Kit. —We measured it out into our individual
cans with our spoons, as carefully as they weigh out
their gold at the mint in London. The allowance
given to a farmer’s pig, would then have been a dainty
to us. —We had our breakfast before we went out in
the Winter; we came in at twelve at noon to dinner;
four days a week, we had a little beef boiled; each
man had about a pint of soup, one pound of bread as
heavy as lead, and the colour of a brick, three quar-
ters of a pound of beef, (that is to say,) beef and bone;
many times I had a piece not the size of my thumb ;
no “Bagging” as they say in Derbyshire ; but Smig-
gins of the same stamp as that in the morning, but no
bread at all except you chanced to save a little at noon,
and that you must not have left in the Buttery, but
have kept safe in your pocket. The other three days,
wo had our portion of bread, and a little cheese to din-
ner, with half a pint of small beer.
We had no fire to warm ourselves at, but had
sufficient of the keen cutting wind from the North,


through the ports. —We were mustered on the deck
in the morning, and gangs sent out into the Arsenal,
to different kinds of work. —The Soldiers were drawn
up to die Arsenal Gate, and a certain number of Sol-
diers, and a guard go out with each gang ; dieir guns
loaden with ball, and bayonet at the end ; they walk-
ed as guard over them dll noon, then guarded them
back into the yard to dinner. There was a stage
made out of the yard into the Ship. My occupation
at the Hulks, for the first twelve months, was to he in
the wash house, assisting to wash the prisoners’ shirts
&c ; an occupation which had nearly cost me my life,
owing to my being continually wet, and in that state
leaving the place to go to my lodgings in the ship,
with no fire whatever to dry my clothes at, hut had
to pull them off wet, and put them on again in the
same condition in the morning. At the end of twelve
months I was afflicted with the Black Scurvy, from
the toe-end up to the hip, quite swollen and black, and
unable to walk at all. I was then taken to the Hos-
pital, that is, an old Man of War Ship, used for that
purpose, and moored down the river. I was put in
bed for three weeks, and attended by two Doctors
every day. I was not alone in this affliction, I had
two hundred companions labouring under various
ills, and dying on every hand. I was in this truly
dismal place, for five weeks, then brought back to the
Ship again, quite recovered. I got into the situation
then of assisting to work theMudßarges down the river.


and through the Canal, Tide time. Two months after
I had an attack of the Ague, but did not leave my
work.—Misfortunes however seemed to haunt me.
It is against the rules of the ship, for any letter
to go out, or come in, without the knowledge of the
Captain. A comrade of mine, in the same class,
named Oxley, wrote a letter as I supposed to his
friends, but in fact forged another prisoner’s name,
to whose friends he wrote for the sum of two pounds.
I was not able to read writing, (more the pity,) and
here I would take the liberty to impress upon the
minds of the young, the great advantage of even a
little learning, and beg of them not to neglect the op-
portunity of attaining it. Out of real kindness, not
being aware of any imposition, I took the letter un-
known to the Captain, and the money was obtained
through the assistance of a Soldier named Thomas
Benny, he had ten shillings for his trouble, the re-
mainder- I gave to Oxley.—Both the soldier and
myself were quite innocent in the matter, with the ex-
ception of deceiving the Captain, which is a small
thing when a person is in real distress, as many of the
prisoners wore. In two days after, Benny asked me
whether Hill was satisfied that he, (Benny,) had re-
ceived ten shillings, for getting the money in ; I said
the money was not for Hill, but for Oxley. —Benny
replied the money had been sent for to Hill’s friends.
I thensaw thcdeception; had I been able to read writing
1 should not have been Unis entrapped. One of my


companions persuaded Benny to report it to one of the
guards, in order to get mo into trouble.—The guard
reported it to the first Mate of the Ship, as big a
scoundrel, and as noted a liar as ever walked. At
dinner time I was taken into a place, stripped naked
and searched, but no money found on me.
The Captain being gone on a visit to Sheerness, I
was put into the Black Hole till his return, which was
a fortnight. In this hole I had about a yard and a
half of room to move in, it was winter time, the wind
which came through the stern ports, was ready to cut
me through ; I had no light but through a small iron
grid over my head; my victuals were reached down
at it three times a day, and but poor fare indeed. 1
remained in this miserable place, day and night till
the Captain returned. I was then brought out on
the quarter deck, for examination before the Captain
and first Mate. Oxley and Hill were also brought up;
Oxley denied that ever he had given me a letter, and
said he knew nothing about the matter. Hill said he
should not have cared if they had sent for all the
money his father had. —The first Mato said I had
forged the letter myself; and the Captain said the
same, and called me a scoundrel. The Captain wrote
to Hill’s friends, for the letter to be sent back, but
they pretended to have lost it, being afraid of getting
into trouble. I was taken back to the Black Hole
again, but with this difference, I had a fellow com-
panion, in the person of a man named Mason, who


had scaled the Arsenal walls and made his escape, but
was re-taken on Friday at noon. We were both
brought on deck and sentenced to receive live dozen
lashes each, —Mason for riming away, and me for
forging, (so called. ) We were broughtinto the yard,
as the custom was to ling while all hands were on
deck.—Mason was stripped and tied up to the trian-
gles. hands and feet. The Captain, the first Mate, the
Doctor, two Guards and a Flogger close by.—The
Flogger stripped, commenced, and gave Mason five
dozen. I was standing by, and saw the flesh cut
through till I could see the shoulder blades as white
as a tobacco pipe ! Mason never made the least com-
plaint, he was then untied, taken down, and his clothes
put on. —I was then ordered to strip, though so bad
of the Ague I could hardly stand.
I was taken to the triangles, and tied up, and the
Captain said to the Flogger “do your duty !”
This was a command not much needed, ns the
Flogger had told the prisoners he would cut me
through.
The Doctor exclaimed “stay your hand Flogger,”
and walking up to me, said, “my good old man, let
me look into your mouth," which I did ; then the
Doctor turning to the Captain, said “if this man is
flogged he will die at the triangles !”
The Captain said “he shall be flogged !”
The Doctor said, “he shall not be flogged !”
The Captain said, “1 say he shall be flogged T


The Doctor said “lie shall not/’ and turning to
Captain Hatton said to him, “are you the master, or
mu I the master ? I’ll let you know that I am the
master.” —Turning to the two guards he ordered them
to take mo down immediately, and to put on my
clothes, and take me into the ironing house where it
was warm, and to take care of me. Then turning to the
Captain again, said, “this old man has had the Ague
for four months and not been fit for any work at all.
I have in the course of that time asked Lingard more
than once to go into the hospital, but he refused, say-
ing he was afraid to loose his work.”
I was then sent into the ship again to my class.
Next morning I was brought out on deck, the Cap-
tain ordered one of the guards to take me down to the
blacksmith's shop, and to look me out a pair of irons.
The mate followed and he looked out a pair which
weighed in all, eighteen pounds, these wore rivitted on
to each leg, a chain from each wentacross a ring in the
middle, to which a rope was fastened mid tied round
my waist to keep them up. I was sent out to work in
the Arsenal, with as muohraftle about me as a timber
carriage has. I remained ironed in this condition for
throe weeks, night and day. I was obliged to get aman
to lift my irons into my hammock, I was not able to
do it myself. —These were very cold bed-fellows.
When three weeks were expired, there came down
a Bay Ship, to take prisoners to New South Wales;


sliecame from Bristol her name was “Prince George."
The next morning after breakfast, in every class of
the Ship the word of command was given. “Stand
round to muster." —The prisoners then stand in the
greatest suspence, with each his can, spoon and
hammock in readiness. —The Guard unlocks the gate
with a Bay Book in his hand, calls over those prison-
ers names who are appointed to go abroad. No man
knows till the moment his name is called, who is to
go. —I proved to be one. As soon as called the per-
son goes on deck, with his can, spoon and hammock,
then to the blacksmith to have his irons struck off,
and have a pair of Bay Irons put on ; he is stripped,
washed, and a fresh suit of clothes put on. One
hundred prisoners were called upon and sent off.
This was the twenty-third Ship which had called on
the same business since I came here. In the after-
noon we were marched down to the launch, by the
first Mate and Guards.—We all went on board of the
Boat, and rowed down to the Ship, and embarked for
Now South Wales.
In conclusion, I would remark that many persons
are apt to imagine transportation to the Hulks but a
light thing, but however, were thev to trv, they would
find themselves much mistaken. —For instance, on the
Sabbath, the ears of the poor prisoner are not greeted
by the sound of the “Church-going bell.” Vv e had
a Chapel, to be sure, in the stern of the Ship which
would hold six hundred persons, this number we


often had of prisoners. Wo had service (if it nmy bo
so called) once every Sunday. We had a Minister
from'Woolwich. I was informed he had <£2so per
annum I was a kind of leader of the singing de-
partment. The Minister after repenting the prayers,
would take a text, but alas! he soon lost it, for ho
commenced blackguarding us all, and continued to the
very end of his Sermon, which generally lasted about
half-»n-hour, except on occasions when be was drunk,
then the service was over immediately And also, I
would not here omit warming the young females of
my own country, bow heart-rending it is, to see so
many lovely creatures tom from their homes and
friends, to be transported to New South Wales.
Often have I seen ns many as fifty at a time brought
down to be sent olf I myself have assisted them
down from the van with their bits of luggage to go
aboaid. One time in particular there were twenty-
five Gentlemens’ servants, from 10 to 25 years of age.
They had robbed their masters —They had been led
off by a set of most profligate young men acting
in the capacity of sweethearts. These poor deluded
creatures laid gone from one extravagance to another,
till in order to carry on,they were obliged to rob; for
which, some of them were leaving there native coun-
try and friends for ever. Some of these, were ns
beautiful young women as ever 1 saw in my life, but
it was most pitiful to hear their screams, and moans,
and to see their teal’s. Such scenes would almost


have broken a heart of stone. Whilst I was at the
Hulks, eight vessels had gone to New South Wales
with female prisoners only,—the ninth vessel was
loading when I left.
On the 10th of December, 183 G, we were all sent
down below, to take our situations in the Ship. Wo
then sailed to Portsmouth, and received the remainder
of our Cargo, that is, 15Q. prisoners more. We lay
at this place some time, and then set sail with our
Pilot on board, and all in readiness. We sailed till
we came to the Downs, there a storm arose in the
night, we let three Anchors out, wo were driven back
to Sheemees, we broke a Cable and lost an Anchor.
The prisoners were locked down below. Our Captain
and Doctor got their money into their pockets, and
ordered the Life Boat to be lowered to go ashore;
the Pilot said “there are more lives than yours in the
Ship, I shall not leave her as long ns there is a plank
in her.” —-This was on Christmas Eve. When day
light appeared wo were witliin a few yards of a sand
bank, the water coming into the ship by tons; our
beds were swimming up and down between decks;
we hoisted a flag of distress, we were visited again
by the Bomb Boat with provisions; and a Steamer
with Anchor and Cable. We lay hero a week. One
night that half-rocked fool of a Doctor, a North of
Ireland Man, fired two signal Guns. The Natives
of Sheerness thought that we prisoners were all break-
ing out, and immediately came with two Gun Boats,


loaded ready to fire into us, in order to sink the Ship,
had not the Captain very opportunely seen them,
turd demanded of them what they wanted. They said
'they expected the prisoners were breaking out, as the
signal had been given. The next momingwe weighed
Anchor and sailed for Torbay ; we lay there till the
14th of January, our Captain and Doctor were gone
on shore.
At eight o’Clock in the evening we got a fair wind,
they immediately came on board again, we weighed
Anchor with all in readiness once more forNewSouth
"Wales.
We were all now going to take a farewell view of
dear Old England, as it regarded many, for ever.—
Oh! what “lingering looks” were cast towards the
shore, —many times did we come on deck to catch
another glimpse at our native land! Many were the
tears shed, and many were tire thoughts of those we
were leaving behind.
“Adieu ! adieu ! my native shore
Fades o’er the waters blue ;
The night-winds sigh, the breakers roar,
And shrieks the wild sea mew.
Yon sun that sets upon the sea,
We follow in his flight
Farewell awhile to him and thee.
My Native Land, good night!”
We had many a clumsy thump in crossing the Bey
"of Biscay, our voyage was very rough for some weeks,
many heavy squalls and gales we had ; most of the


Ship’s crew were sea-sick. With being kept so low be-
fore going on board, many were dying daily, these
were thrown overboard.
Our Doctor was a tyrant, he was flogging by nine
or ten every day on the main deck.
We earned on in this way till we got to the Line,
which happened on the 20th of February.—The sun
shone so hot that we could not abide on deck. About
twelve o’Clock at night our Captain with his Speak-
ing Trumpet, called Old Neptune and his Lady on
hoard, Old Neptune repeated in answer, that they would
wait upon the Captain early in the morning. A tar bar-
rel was lowered down nearly empty, and set on fire to
give Old Neptune and his Lady a light to get on the
vessel. At eight o’Clock nextiuoming they appeared
on deck in their Carriage, which was drawn four times
round the deck by two sailors. All was got in readi-
ness for shaving. There was a stage between the
main and quarter decks. Old Neptune and his
Lady, sat there, one on each hand.—On the
quarter deck there was a sail drawn up at the four
comers which held about one hundred buckets of
water, the Bear was in this place. Thirty-seven were
shaved; there was a ladder, which reached up to the
stage, all who were on board (except prisoners,) who
had not crossed the line before, must be shaved or
pay. The person to be shaved ascended the ladder
and sat down ; a Barber's Clerk, tied a handkerchief


round his eyes, and then with a bucket full of grease,
tar and soot, with the aid of a good large brush gave
him a famous lathering, with this mixture; then came
the Barber with Ins razor made out of an old iron
hoop, about a foot long, with teeth in like a saw, and
a handle made of wood. Ho began to scrape, and
every scrape brought blood in copious streams. The
cries of the poor“chap” under operation were of no avail,
he kept scraping away till he had finished. This be-
ing done the handkerchief was taken off, and the poor
fellow was thrown backward into the sail full of water,
to be roughly received by the Bear, (a strong sailor,)
who gave him a good ducking, and after having half
drowned him set him at liberty, for which he no doubt
was very thankful.
This pleasant amusement was carried on through
the day,ns well as throwing buckets of water at each
other, wherever or whenever they had an opportunity.
The prisoners were all brought on deck to see the
sport; some on the long boat, others on the fore-
castle and bulwarks of the ship.
The day being very fine and hot, the flying fish
were moving about in all directions, by thousands.
The dolphin with beautiful colours was sporting about.
The sperm whale was rising, and blowing, on every
side. The shark too was on the lookout for his prey.
The porpoise fish might be seen by hundreds. So
upon the whole we had a very pleasant day of amuse


ment, and observation. At night we were taken be-
low, a light supper given to us and ordered to bed.
On the 22nd we sailed along in our former dole-
ful condition, on many occasions suffering privations;
for small offences, such as our provisions being with-
held, and also occasional flogging. Our regular diet
was in the morning, a pint of Cocoa, and a little bis-
cuit ; the same in the evening. Three days a week
we had a little pudding, and a piece of Salt Junck,
about die size of one’s thumb ; other three days wo
had a little pork and peas-soup.
Thus we came to the Cape of Good Hope, but did
not put in there. The weather here was sometimes
cold, and a litde snow on deck. We here commenced
having for each man a small portion of Port Wine
and Lime Juice allowed. Through abuse and tyranny
most of us were suffering from the Black Scurvy,
many not able to walk, attending the Hospital every
day. I was black from the foot to the hip, and all
my teeth loose in my headand many more were in
the same condition.. We came in sight of vessels
almost every day. The weather was very rough, the
sea often running mountains high. We were tossed
up and down the ship till (as the saying in Derby-
shire is) we were almost “dateless.”
On the 4th of May, we had a sudden squall com-
menced about 4 o’Clock in the afternoon, taking us
at unawares, with all our sails and stinsails set, also
our flying jib, and main jib set. Before we could


take in sail, a storm arose of wind and rain, ripped up
all our sails, like so many ribbons, broke our main-
yard and fore-yard, took our flying main jib, and jib
boom away: wc were quite disabled. About 8 o’Clock
in the evening we were going to bed in our lower
births, and in ten minutes there came another terrible
blast, and carried away the starboard side of the bul-
warks of the ship. The sentries were in the hatch-
ways, and were near being drowned ; the water came
down between decks in torrents, before we could
put on onr clothes. Our beds and bedding were
swimming a yard deep .in our births ; our hatches were
covered and nailed down, the storm roaring like thun-
der, the sea like a mass of fire. Those who were able
to work were getting the water out in the cocoa kits.
The pumps were going as fast as possible all night.
We crept were we could for fear of being knocked to
pieces. The Ship's Carpenter came below and said,
“now men for lives apiece ; do all that lies in your
power, or we go to the bottom.'" We stuffed the ports
with our beds and blankets. Some were crying, some
praying, and some cursing and swearing. At mid-
night wc supposed we were going down, but thc-
provideutial baud of the Almighty preserved us.
Next morning at day light the storm was very little
abated ; our main deck was strewed over with yards.
»iils f blocks, ropes and broken timber. The women, the
Soldiers’ wives were in a deplorable condition. We
spent the whole of this day, nearly in the same mmmet.


as the former, and till about 4 o’Clbck next morning;
when the storm was very much abated. One of the
Sailors went aloft as high as he could get, and gave
the pleasing intelligence, that he saw the Light House
at Sidney Heads. There was now a calm, Oh ! how
applicable here are the words of the Psalmist. “They
that go down to the sea in Ships, that do business in-
great waters; these see the works of the Lord, and
his wonders in the deep. For he commandeth, and
raiseth the stormy winds, which lifteth up the waves,
thereof. They mount up to- the heavens, they go,
down again to the depths : their soul is melted be-
cause of trouble. They reel to and fro, and stagger
like a drunken man, and are at their wits end. Then
they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he bring-
eth them out of their distress He maketh the
storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are- still:
Then are they glad because they be quiet, so he bring-
eth them to their desired haven.”
But Oh ! how many, are, as well as sailors too apt
to forget the manifold mercies of God; “Oh ! that
men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and: for
his ■wonderful works to the children of men.”
We had escaped through this storm without loss
of life! The Sailor before mentioned came down on
deck, and the Captain made him a present of a bottle
of Brandy for his good news. lam sure it was de-
lightful nows to us poor prisoners, for we were most
heartily tired of our present situations. We made for


the Harbour that day as well as we could, consider-
ing the distressed state we were in.
The next morning we got a Pilot on board ;■ it
proved a fine day, beautifully calm ; a gentle breeze
blowing into the harbour ; we made our way in with
difficulty, and dropped Anchor opposite-the town, on
the Bth of May.
On the Oth, twenty-seven of us went on shore, the
people had to meet us with hand-carts, to convey us
to the Hospital, we were so weak and bad of tho
Scurvy, through hard usage. We were washed and
put to bed for three weeks ; John Simpson, was one
of the twenty-seven, the remainder- of the Ship's
company went to the Barracks; they began to bring
them from there to the-Hospital every day, the people
were dying on every hand, as near as I can think, we
lost in our voyage from England, and on arriving
at Sydney, about one hundred. I remained in the
Hospital five weeks, and was then removed to the
Barracks and put to work; I was not half well then.
We went out to work in gangs with two or three
overseers to superintend, our employment was form-
ing new streets, and any other improvements. Wo
were called up in tho morning at 5 o’Clock to break-
fast, we had a large room in the yard, called the mess-
house, kits were provided that would hold six pints
of Harmony; it was made of Indian corn, ground
and boiled in a Copper. We were called in by six
at a time, one of the six had a kit given to him, round


•which; the six persons stand, those who happened to
havono spoon must eat with their lingers, or be with-
out. At six o'Clock we went out to work, and kept
at it till half-past three in the afternoon, then wo had
dinner at four; six men to a kit again,—about half
a pint of soup, and a little beef to each man, with
three loaves to be divided, as sour as a crab, as thodden
as clay, and the very colour of a new-born brick ; this
was our regular food every day, without any change.
Two meals a day, no more! We went to bed at nine.
The Barracks is like a large factory, wc lay two
rows breach room, up the wall side on the floor, we
had plenty of company, in the night rats came by
hundreds ;: they even came into the bed, crept in at
our breast, under the bcd-clothes, and out at the feet,
like a pack of hounds, .and biting at our noses and
ears all the night through. If we had had the least
bit of bread under our pillows, (and this was seldom
the case,) the ■ rats would have had it. There were
seventeen, hundred of us in the Barracks ; two flog-
gers, and a counter, which did no other work, but
regularly to attend the,flogging department; and yet
they had full work. There was a yard and two pair
of triangles on purpose. Flogging went on every day
except Sunday ; I have known as many as twenty-nine
flogged on one single morning, till their backs were
as red as a round of beef; boys nine or ten years of
ago I have seen flogged o’er the breech, till I could
have laid the side of my hand in the wound; the chili


dren crying out for their mothers, but alas! they were
seventeen thousand'.miles off/ I have seen men come
in from, their work, and bathe each other’s shirt out
of the wounds on their backs, the shirt having grown
in whilst at work.
These kind of proceedings went on for the whole
of the time I was there, which was about a mouth.
Simpson came from the Hospital two days before
I left the Barracks, since that day I have never
seen him.
I was signed out to one Mr. Hannah, Quarter
Master of the 4th Regiment, “The King’s Own.’’
Seven of us were sent up to Parramatta to Captain
Mofi’elt’s, we stopt there three weeks, whilst some
cattle came up from Port Stephen.
On the 17th of August we made our way, for
Manara, a distance of three hundred miles with the
cattle: we had to carry our beds and blankets on our
backs, ns well as a week’s provisions, and the cattle to
drive; we lay out of door every night, the weather
was very cold, we thought it would have killed us all,
it being early in the Spring; the cattle were much
tired when we received them.
We were twenty-soven days in going the journey,
we had to bake our bread on the road, we got a sheet
of bark from a tree, to knead our dough in ; we made
a large fire at night, in the morning the ashes were
red and hot; we made a cuke and it was soon nicely
baked ; we carried a kettle, frying-pan, pint and


quart pots, a bag with beef in, and another with flour
in; we had orders with us to draw our victuals at
different stations on the road every week. Each man
had 101 b. of flour, 81b. of beef, 11b. of sugar, and
2 ounces of tea per week. We arrived at Manara at
Captain Camel’s; our master was there.
With the fatigue of the journey, I appeared quite
a done man. The next day we were examined, some
were made Shepherds, some Watchmen, all were put
to something; I was sot to thrashing some corn which
lasted about three months; then came on shearing time,
harvest and sheep shearing. When all this work was
done, the man who attended in the kitchen was ap-
pointed to go to Sydney, with the wool; three dray
loads were sent, weighing about six tons. Through
my good behaviour, I was put in the kitchen during
his absence, to wash, bake, cook, milk &c., for the
master. The wool journey lasted upwards of three
months.
I had managed so well during the man’s absence,
and to the entire satisfaction of my master, that I was
ordered to continue in the kitchen.
Four months after this my master gave me the key
of the stores, to give out Rations to all the men ; I
had nothing locked from me whatever. I continued
in tliis situation until I had the whole charge of the
men on the farm, to put them to such work as I thought
proper. In consequence of my good behaviour, I
gained the esteem of both master and men.


The Blacks, natives of Australia often visited me in
the kitchen, they go aboutin Tribes, and in summer time
they all go naked; men, women and children. They
have no names among them, only, the Black man
calls his wife Jen, and she calls him Black fellow;
the children they call Pickaninnies. When a child is
bom near any of the stations, whatever name any
white man gives to it, in future it is known by that
name.
The Blacks ramble about from one station to ano-
ther, and into the Bush; they have no system of
labour, neither any habitation, but at night make a
fire and sleep round it ; their stature is low, in general
the women are very light and straight, and some of
them very comely, with beautiful black hair: they
are thick-lipped ; their complexion is not really black,
but a shade or two lighter than copper. In winter
(but the winter there is not so severe as in England,
having never fewer than ten houres of sun, and in
summer not more than fourteen,) they would come in
large numbers to the kitchen. I have had as many
as twenty women in at once, all as naked as ever they
were bom, and men too, scores of times; and I have
had what cannot be said by any person living in Old
England, that is, I have had four Kings & four Queens
all in the kitchen at the same time. The Kings have
some one, some two, and others more Queens each,
all living; every Tribe has a King or Chief.
Those who have been a little cultivated, and been


often near the stations, have a King, the others who
are more wild, have a Chief. They have all a custom
of wearing a medal. The Chiefs of the wild Blacks
generally wear a dead man’s hand, or a jaw bono
hung round their necks, by a string made from the
bark of a tree; the medal rested against the breast.
For some of the Tribes that came near the stations,
the settlers occasionally got for the King, a plate from
Sydney, with his name engraven thereon, and a brass
chain attached to go round his neck. They are not
like the Kings and Queens of England, they must get
and cook their own provisions, or else go without.
When in the Bush, the women at a convenient place,
make a fire, (and if the weather is wet, they get a few
sheets of bark and fix them on a few forked sticks,
to cover them from the rain, but in fine weather they
have nothing to cover them, night or day,) in the
mean time the men are employed, if near a river,
spearing fish, ducks or wild fowls; others up in the trees,
catching opossoms, squirrels, & ring-tailed opossoms ;
others on the ground, collecting grubs, ant eggs, yams,
roots, kangaroos, or any thing else they can meet
with. When the men have obtained a sufficient quan-
tity, they bring them to the fire on which the women
and children withdraw, whilst the men roast and eat
till they are satisfied. They roast skins, feathers, and
all together.
When the men, (not till then,) have eat their fill,
the women and children draw up and feast on the


fragments, should auy be left. What would ye think
t)f such treatment as this, yc high-mettled dames of
Old England ? Their form of marriage is, a father or
mother can give a daughter away to w'hom they think
proper, (whether the damsel be willing or not,) to a
man who has a previous wife, or to one who) has
none. A brother can give a sister away in like man-
ner. I knew a black man who had five wives, two of
them sisters, (not sisters to the husband.)
If a brother and sister are known to cohabit to-
gether, they are immediately put to death. When
on travel the woman has to carry all the luggage, be-
sides her infant; as the man will cany nothing but
his implements of war. If a black man kills his wife,
they have no law to punish him. I scarcely ever saw
a married woman, Ivit she had got six or seven cuts
in her head, given by her husband with a tomahawk,
several inches in length and very deep. lam sorry
to say that the women will often murder their own
children.
One instance I saw with one of the Queens; she
was delivered of a -child, within a few yards of the
kitchen corner, she was quite naked, sat on the ground
with a yam stick in her hand; she was then a pale
white with pain, the tribe was then camped round the
kitchen, no one seemed to take any notice of her, ex-
cept a black fellow, who acted as a doctor I suppose;
he had a calabash made of bark, and gathered in at
the ends, till it would hold about two gallons of water;


he had a bush in his hand off a gum tree ; lie dipped
the bush in the water and sprinkled her belly with it
repeatedly. At this'stage of the proceedings, I was
called into the kitchen : but in ten minutes, news was
brought, that I must go and look at the little Pick-
aninny ; I went, and it was wrapped up in an opossom
skin ; I then returned and made her some tea, and
some bread and butter, which she ate heartily; I con-
tinued this daily, for about a fortnight; as the camp
staid in the neighbourhood ; she then went away with
the tribe.
In about two months they all returned. I asked
the woman where her little Pickaninny was; she
gave me to understand she had killed it, it was cross
and she would not keep it.
About two years after she was delivered of another
child, but that happened at the mens’ hut, her sister-
in-law was with her, but this was in the night. When
the men got up in the morning they wanted to know
where the Pickaninny was, the women told the men
it was dead ; the men asked to look at it, the women
said they had buried it; the men went and found ft
about three inches deep in the ground ; they pulled it
up, and strange to relate, the women had struck their
tomahawks into its head in three or four places.
I knew another Queen called Jenny, who took her
child and dashed its brains out against a gum tree ;
then threw it into the fire ! This barbarous and cruel
act was perpetrated to make way for two whelps !!
The Queen suckled the two dogs, the old bitch being
dead. I make these two remarks of the two Queens,
but instances of the same nature among the tribes
are quite common.
If a black woman loaves her husband, and goes off
with another man, she is fetched back again, (if she
can be found,) all the women hi the tribe make a ring


round Lor, every one gives her a certain number ot
strokes with her yam stick ; this is for the first of-
fence. If she goes a second time,she is fetched again,
they then double the punishment. If she goes a thin!
time, she is taken into the bush, and put to death ;
by running spears through her, or killing her with
their weapons of win - .
The laws of England differ, from those of New
South Wales, among the blacks. In England, a man
can marry the woman he loves provided he can get
her in the humour; but not so in Australia, the wo-
man must be given away by her parents, or brother.
A circumstance happened were I was, with regard
to a young girl named Charlotte, she was given away
to an old man named Trying Pan, who had five
wives; these were given to him in order to maintain
him. This girl was a very pretty one. She had run
away three times from her husband, the old man:
the last time she was found at llock Elatt, with a
stock keeper, a white man ; she was brought back to
the place where I was; the tribe was encamped round
the kitchen, she came into the kitchen in the evening,
sat down and began to cry: I would know tbe reason;
she was some time before she would tell me.
She at last said, “one nangre ( niyht ) black fellow
yiui along a bush and piem (kill) me.”
I said, “who yabber {talk) like o’ that ?”
She said “black follow all about yabber.”
“Where Billy Goat (the Kin;/) sit down ?” said I.
“Along a camp I believe,” said Charlotte.
In the mean time there came a Pickaninny into
the kitchen. “You van along a camp," I said to tho
Pickaninny, “yabber along a Billy Goat, me want him
along a kitchen ; me gib it bread and bullock, bulla-
-pri'! {make haste !)”
Billy Goat came down to the kitchen, and said,
■“name wanted ?”


1 said, “you mmgre, (sit down,)" giving the boy
lire ad and bullock, and sending him away; “Charlotte
yahber along a me one nangre you yan along a bush,
and piem her.”
“Hah! ha! Charlotte yahber like o’that ?” said
Billy Goat.
Hah! ah ! Charlotte yahber,” said I.
“I believe so,” said he, at the same time looking
earnestly at Charlotte, being angry she had told me.
I said to him, “you yan along a camp, yabber all
about black fellow, piem black Jen; hale (not)
white fellow piem white Jen ; cobbono ( much ) cooler
(vexed) me along black fellow all about, hale gib it
patter, ( victuals ,) halo let em nangre along a kitchen,
hale gib it tea or sugar, tobacco or bullock, any more ;
shoot em along a musket and Pickaninny musket,
and putdingos (days,) on em, and cobbone cooler me.”
Billy went and told them how angry I was ; and
said the white fellows in England never killed their
Jens. Billy came back and said “hale piem Char-
lotte this time.” So I got her off that time, and she
was living when I came away.
This old Frying Pan, was a great favourite, so he
had these five Jens given to him,' to support him;
but in case a black fellow becomes unable to support
himself and is not a favourite he is often taken into the
bush and killed. The women are scarcer than the
men because the mothers destroy so many females.
When a young man has arrived at maturity, he is
not allowed to have a wife until the front tooth of his
top jaw is knocked out. They take a number of young
men into the bush, and have a day fixed for knocking
out the front tooth; it is accomplished by fixing a
tomahawk on the tooth, and hit with another, and the
tooth is knocked out: the young man is then ready
for a wife, when ho can get one given to him. There


are no grant scholarrs amongst them, they can but
count lour in their own language, —‘my-tougue’ is
one, —‘bulla’ is two —‘bulla-my-tonguo’ is three, —
‘bulla-bulla' is four. Then they count their fingers,
and if they wish to express a large number, they then
say ‘thousand’, —this expression they have picked up
among the white people.
If they wish to tell you something which happened
twelve or eighteen months back, they count by the
moon; showing you their fingers, —their two open
hands lm- ten, and a linger for one Ac. ; but you must
count them yourself.
They notice the moon most, because it appears and
disappears; a full moon, they call‘a cobbone-fellow,
(biff one,)' —half-a-moon, they call ‘in-arrang-fel-
iow,’ —when about two days old, they call it ‘a Picka-
ninny-fellow,’—when its changed, they say ‘its vend
away, but will jump up again by and by.’
They take little notice of the sun, because it rises
every day;—when it rises, they say ‘jump up sun,’ —
when it sets, they say ‘tumble down sun,’ these seem
to be the highest ideas they have of the wonderful
works of God.
I was with my master Captain Camel, in the kitch-
en, three years at this place, we had a sheep station,
about seven miles from the head station. There was
a river between that place and us about five miles off,
(.ailed Bun-barlow river. Every year at washing
time the master and the men met at that river with th«
sheep to wash them; they took a cart and horse, and
tarpuuling, with victuals for three or four days ; the
sheep were washed, then brought to the head station
to be shorn.
The second year I was left by myself to take care
of all; the blacks were helping them, (the samel used
to feed,) in the best wav thev could, lor a little meat.


Three of them took it into their heads to come to the
head station to murder me and rob the place, as they
knew I had the keys of all the stores. One of them
was King Billy Goat’s son Harry; the other two Char-
ley and Tommy: they came into the kitchen, in tlreir
war uniform, that is, —their hair tied up in a bunch
at the top of their heads, and their bodies tatooed with
pipe-clay and raddle, with their implements of war
under their arms, and their tomahawks in their hands;
staring at me like mad bulls. I had just takeh a dam-
per, (a cake,) out of the ashes, and wiped the lust off
and laid it on the table; I said, “name wanted ?”
They said, “wanted tea, and sugar, and tobacco,
and bullock.”
I said, “hah! ah! master yabber like o’ that ?”
They said, “bale master yabber, we yabber.”
I thought perhaps the master had sent them as ho
had done occasionally, when he was short; but I soon
found it out they had come with intent to murder me,
and rob the place. I never took my eyes off them,
if I had they would have sunken their tomahawks into
my head.
I said, “me always gib it in arrang {bits) black
fellow, black Jen, and Pickaninny.
“Bale wanted in arrang,” they said, “cobbom
thousand we wanted!”
“I believe you cooler along a white fellow.” said I.
“Thousand cooler we,” they said.
Charley runiug up to me says, “you yan along a
stores, and fetch em tea, and sugar, and tobacco, and
bullock, and grog, and gib it damper like it moon,”
turning his eyes towards the cake, “bulla-pri!”
stamping his foot, and his eyes blazing like fire, “we
merry hungry^”
“Hah ! ah !” said I.
I now saw what my doom was, no person within five
miles, nor any dog at the place. I kept my eye on them,


nnd walked backwards to the fire; I took up the
immdle, a good two-handed weapon, which I used to
turn the logs on the fire with, made of wood, —I raised
it up instantly and said, “me gih it you.” I took the
mundle and hit the first man between the head and
shoulder, and knocked him down; jumped over him,
the next was turning round, I took him over the hack
of the shoulder, and brought him down ; I made a
bolt at the other, hut he ran upon a rock, shipped one
of his spears to throw through me ; I threw the mun-
dle down and ran to the house, (which was about fif-
teen yards off,) went into the master's bed-room for
a double-barrel’d piece, which was loaded with heavy
shot; when I came hack, Tommy was swimming the
river, nnd Hairy and Charley had got out of the
kitchen; Charley stood on the rock with his back to-
wards me, holding his neck which was bleeding;
Harry a little below him in the same position. I took
aim at Charley, and hit him over the hack-side;
he made a scream and jumped two or three yards ;
I then served Hairy the same; with the other barrel.
J ran back for the powder flask and shot bolt, but
they all swam the river and were mounting a high
range on the other side. I was loading my piece at
the door, and calling to them, “you van back, nnd
me gib it tea, sugar, tobacco, and bullock, and grog,
and damper, like it moon,” —but they turning round
answered, “hah ! ha! no good you,”—and away
they went.
I did not see them again of five months, at the end
of which time one of them popped his head up at
the kitchen door and said, “cooler ynnd away yet ?"
I said, “bale cooler ynnd away,” I nipped the mun-
dle up and after him. Ho went away and I saw him
no more of some time.
One tribe is very much afraid of another, and they
have sometimes great wars amongst each other.


I have seen several of their battles, near to the place
where I was. When they go to war, they are dressed
in their uniform, —their bodies tatooed all over with
pipe-clay and raddle, their hair tied up in a bunch
on the lop of their heads, to keep the blows off. The
first signal after the parties meet each other, is, to
throw a spear by one party, into the camp of the
other; then that party rises, and a spear is thrown in
return; then they all commence throwing spears at
each other, and guarding them off with their shields ;
the next thing is throwing the bum-rings, which will
take a leg or arm off instantly; then they come to
close quarters, with nulla-nulla and heelamau, that
is, a weapon to strike with, and another to guard off
the blows. Sometimes they use the tomahawks aud
heelamau, but the wild blacks have nothing but a
stone rubbed sharp, as they have no blacksmiths to
make any other sort. This is the way they go on till
one side gives in, and then the battle is over, Should
any of the black men be killed, the winning side takes
the women belonging to them. If the women refuse
to go, they kill them.
Any that tire killed in war they open, and take the
fat out of them ; and lumps of flesh from where they
think proper, that they broil and cat. The fat they
rub themselves all over with, and then call themselves
‘my-tougue-fellow,’ or that is, as good as two men.
The women have come occasionlly into the kitchen,
with lumps of flesh, and black mens’ hands in their
nets; but on these occasions I drove them off.
1 have brought to England with me such imple-
ments of war as they use, as well as nets used by the
women to carry their luggage in.
After a battle, the winning side has a rejoicing,
which is celebrated in the night. Two or three tribes
which are at peace with each other meet together at


a certain place, and make a ring of fires round a cou-
ple of acres of land ; the fires are made of wood, that
will make a good light. They are all tatooed, and
in their uniform, their bodies painted all over. They
will then get a sheet of bark, as tall as themselves,
and draw an image or sometimes two, with pipe-clay
and raddle ; they have this to look at while the play
goes on. Then the young men commence with all
kinds of gestures possible, up and down the ring
they are quite naked; the old men will sit round in-
structing them how to proceed. The women will sit
with their opossom clonks doubled up on their
knees, striking them to beat time ; —at the same
time singing in their way. This amusement lasts
about four hours; then they all sit down, and in turns,
recount what great exploits they have done since last
they met on such an occasion.—This is what they
call a Onrrobbery. A ball or play in London, is no-
thing to be compared to one of these Carrobberies.
The next day, or on some occasions not of a few days,
the tribes break up, and each retires to its own
district.
As I said before, I remained with Mr. Camel about
three years, but my own real master, Mr. Hannah, had
a grant of land given him at Malongla ; about two
hundred miles lower down ; he sold it to one Mr.
Hoskin, of Sydney, (he having some land close to it,)
for the sum of live hundred pounds; then he returned
with his lady to England. All the men belonging
to Mr. Hannah were then drawn from Mr. Camel’s,
and sent to the station of Mr. Hoskins, five miles
nearer this way, than were I was, called Cambelong.
I was the last man that went away, Mr. Camel would
have paid for a free man in my place ; hut the over-
seer and he were not on good terms ; so he- took me
away for revenge. I left Mr. Camel with a very sor-
rowful heart, it was on the Sunday.—l was jobbing


about for a week ; but on the Monday following, my
new master, (or overseer,) put me in the kitchen, the
same situation I had been accustomed to.
The person whom I now succeeded in the kitchen,
was a Mr. Oldgrave, a native of Woolwich near Lon-
don. After being in the kitchen a week I gave such
satisfaction, that my master delivered me the keys of
all the stores; to give out rations to the men ; I re-
fused them, but he said, “you must do it, for I have
no one that I can trust when I am from home, —
through the character that your last master give you,
I can trust you with all I have got.” I carried on
for about three months, and all things went on well.
At this period, there came two gentlemen, brothers,
named Sparks, they were from Devonshire, England;
they brought a farmer, or superintendent with them,
of the name of Buckrel. These gentlemen bought the
good-will of three stations, (Government land,) with
all their then improvements, aud cuttle. The breeding
station was about twenty miles off, on the snowy
river, near to the snowy mountains ; a range of moun-
tains covered with snow the whole year round. The
heifer station was twenty-five miles off, in another
direction, at a place called the Boggy Creek. The
head station, were I resided, Cambelong, was called
the bullock station.
We had three thousand head of cattle, at the three
stations,-t-one thousand wore sold off to aMr. Hunter,
a Scotchman ; he took them round the snowy moun-
tains, to Port Philip, aud sold them there. —Mr.
Sparks bought the other two thousand head, and the
improvements, for the sura of seventeen thousand
pounds; then the men were drawn again, and sent
down to Malongla, to Mr. Hoskins’ farm.
Mr. Sparks wrote down to Mr. Hoskins, to prevail
on him to let me stop in the kitchen with him, the


remainder of my time out; as I had but about fifteen
months to serve ; lie gave consent, so I remained still
in my old situation, till my time was out, which was
on the 7th of January, 1812.
Then I left the kitchen and my master, who was
very sorry at having to part.
I then took a journey to visit my old master, Mr.
Camel; and stopt with him three days, and returned
back for a few things, I had left behind me. Mr.
Sparks wanted me to return to my old employment,
I made answer, “no sir, I must now make prepara-
tions to return again to UldEngland.” He said, “you
Mill be so kind as to help us through the harvest."
I was with them eleven days, reaping the corn, I had
six shillings per day and my victuals.
I then returned to my old master, Mr. Camel again.
I borrowed a team of bullocks and a dray, to fetch
from Cambelong; two large boxes, two hundred-
weight of shot, eighteen cans of gunpowder, twenty-
four boxes of caps, a duck gun, and a fowling piece.
I gave ten guineas for the fowling piece.
On my return Mr. Camel made me welcome, found
me room in the kitchen, and told me to stop us long
as I liked, free of expense.
A man of the name of Edwards, agreed to go with
me a shooting, he was a Devonshire man. We were
then to come home to England together, and join at
the spoil. I bought a cart and harness, with every
thing convenient to go into the bush, from my master.
Edwards bought a horse for which he gave thirty-five
pounds. —He had to go before we commenced our
intended journey, to his shoe-maker’s, a distance of
twenty-one miles, for a pair of shoes. He mounted
his horse on the Monday morning, with about two
hundred and fifty pounds of his own money, and
seventeen pounds of mine, in his possession ; he said


on starting, “I shall not be back to day, but I shall
be back to morrow,” and he bid me good-morning.
He went away, I never saw or heard of him more; he
must have been murdered by the bush rangers, for his
•money; or else killed by the blacks, for he, nor his
horse were ever heard of afterwards! This disaster fell
heavily on me, as we should have been pleasant com-
pany, and he had waited entirely on my account for
twelve months.
I waited for Edwards a fortnight, but henever return-
ed. I went over to Qua-dong to a sheep station be-
longing to my old master, about seven miles from the
head station, and stopped there seven weeks, bird
shooting in the day, and opossom shooting on moon-
light nights, and taking a journey of pleasure in that
part of the country ; as I had never been there before.
My old master was gone to Golboum, and I was
waiting his return to obtain his consent for a person
of the name of Ashmore, to go with me into the bush.
I was much delighted with the place, it was a beau-
tiful plain on the lime stone, about two and a half
miles square ; bound on one side by a winding river,
which on leaving Qua-dong, it enterred a narrow pas-
sage, bounded by almost perpendicular rocks to a
very great height; these rocks were of lime stone ;
under one of them, I could get as good alum as ever
I saw in my life. Hawks of all descriptions harbour-
ed here. The river was covered with all kinds of
water-fowl. I could take my gun in a morning and
shoot just as many as I liked, without any molestation
whatever. Our hut stood near a mile from the river.
My master had one flock of sheep about a thousand ;
one shepherd and his dogs with them in the day, and
a watchman and his dogs with them in the night.
The sheep were hurdled up every night, the watch-
man remained in a watch-box all night, the hurdles
were removed every day to fresh ground.


The watchman had four dogs, when the sheep were
hurdled, every dog knew its proper place, and each
would immediately take its station at one comer of the
hurdle, without any bidding; and would be employed
all night in driving off the wild native dogs, which are
more ferocious than the wolf, and I have known as
many as seventy fat sheep tore in pieces in the course
of one single night; and I think it will be almost
impossible to destroy them, they are so sheltered by
the rocks, which are inaccessible to man.
It was a delightful journey to me, some days shoot-
ing wild fowls, others shooting hawks in the rocks,
and parrots in the bush ; there was not any snakes
stirring then, they were retired for the winter, but
however there are great numbers there in the summer
months; such os the carpet snake, the diamond snake,
the lead-coloured snake, the brown snake, the blue
snake, the green snake, the black snake, which lives
a deal in the water; and the death adder; a bite from
any of these snakes is death, (without present help,)
but a bite from the death adder is always fatal, tho
poison lies in their teeth.
Some of the snakes are very large ones, at Para-
matta we had one killed which measured thirty-seven
feet.
There are many kinds of lizards, some of them
very harmless; the goanna, which climbs the trees,
it is about five feet long, with a body as thick as a
man’s thigh, and four legs, and a large tail; they are
sometimes brought to England and exhibited as the
crocodile or aligator.
There is to be met with here, the wallaroo, and the
kangaroo, the wild pig, which burrows in the ground ;
the native bear, winch is always in the trees ; it is
of small size and lives upon the bark ; the opossom,
the ring-tail’d opossom, and the flying squirrel; these
live upon bark, gum, and leaves of trees.


Here may be seen also the kangaroo rat, the han-
dy-coot, the wild ferret or native cat; the flying fox,
and the flying mouse; these last-mentioned are all
night animals, they harbour in the hollow trees and
are never seen in the day time.
At the expiration of seven weeks, my old master
returned home. Ashmore went with me to the head
station, and from there he accompanied me along with
two blacks, to the Snowy River; after having prepared
beef, bread, tea, and sugar, sufficient for the journey ;
and two guns, powder and shot, and a large hull-and-
rnastiff dog, we had to return the same way and cross
Qua-dong plain.
After travelling two miles in the hush, we arrived
at the deep creek, a place where the depth is so great,
(though the breadth is only about four yards at the
bottom,) the descent down and the ascent up the other
side, is a mile ; and I think I could almost throw a
stone across the top. The blacks gave us the slip
here, and we lost them; we were going a rock-wal-
laby hunting, a species of the kangaroo, but much
smaller; they harbour in the rocks in the day time,
and in the night go out to feed.
We kept on our journey through the bush, until
we came to a large slope, which terminated in the
Snowy River; here were thousands of acres, nothing
but barren rocks piled upon each other, and large ca-
verns beneath : plenty of rock-wallabies there, had we
known how to have got them out; the blacks having
left us, our journey was lost; night was approaching,
we had travelled about eighteen miles; I made a
search for some water. Ashmore got timber and made
a fire, we got some tea, beef, and bread ; —then we got
some boughs and made ourselves a little sheltered
place,—the night being cold and very dark; as it
was winter, we durst not stir out lor fear of being


dashed to pieces, the Snowy River below made a tre-
mendous roar. We lay down with our big coats on,
both guns loaden, and the dog at our side, being both
well tired, we fell asleep. Some time in the night the
dog awoke us by barking, he ran down the creek
towards the river, something kept making attempts to
come to us, but what it was, we could never find out;
I held the dog thinking to bring it nearer, but I could
never manage ; the dog was ferocious past any thing
I had seen before, and Ashmore was almost frighten-
ed to death.
At day-break we refreshed ourselves and returned
home, after reviewing this dismal and doleful place.
John Ashmore before-mentioned, was of Harting-
ton, in the High Peak, Derbyshire, about thirty years
of age ; lie had some money in the hands of his mas-
ter, he had hired for a year; I got him off two months
before his year was up. I bought him a horse with
his own money, for thirty-five pounds, he was a great
strapping fellow, and determined on returning to Old
England, but he had not a heart in him the size of
a gooseberry, when difficulties came in the way.
My master had tw T o men going into the bush, to
split timber for their own use; this was in June or
the depth of winter there. I took their tools along
with my implements of war, and plenty of provisions,
and this gooseberry-liearted High Peak man went with
us. I called the two men, bush men, as they had
been before, they informed me there was plenty of
gome there; fine flying squirrels, &c., as the timber
was so large.
We arrived in the bush on the second day, a littlo
before dark. We took our horse out of the cart,
tethered him with sixteen yards of new rope to a troe,
and also hoppled him, he had to get his supper from
the grass which grew mound, though the snow was
falling very fast. We made a fire of the dead timber


which lay around us, then got our cross-cut saw and
axes and fell, two trees, then we had them to bark,
and to build a house. We bored a hole in a large tree,
put our ridge pole in, at the other end we had two
forked sticks to hold it up, then we reared the sheets
of bark on either side, and two for the ridge at the
top, and covered the floor with the same; then we
put down our beds: the fire was in the front, thus we
got our suppers very comfortable, on tea, beef, and
bread; but with all this comfort, I could not help
remembering the happy fire side of Old England, to
which no other place on the face of the globe can be
compared.
*’Twere rain to seek on foreign shores the comforts of a “home,”
That name is less familiar as farther on we roam;
No other clime can boast the peace, the calm and tranquil pride,.
A Briton feels where all is mirth around his fire side!
’Tis there the old forget their age, and gambol with the young,
To mingle in the merry dance, or join the socialsong; [thou’d’sthide,
Oh! if from thought thou’d’st turn away, some rankling care,
Co, imitate the Briton’s lot, and learn his fire side.
Yet not alone in gayer hours this social peace is known,
It lives and blooms when all the sweets of passing mirth have flown;
Yes! there the father mildly checks the faults he cannot chide,
And chains the feelings of his child to that dear fire side !
Say, who can view the happy few, in innocence and mirth,
Assembled round the very hearth which sparkled at their birth;
Who launched upon life’s troubled sea,have struggled with her tide,
And not proclaim the blessings of a Briton’s fire side ?
Long may the hand which guards our Isle avert the luckless day,
When from her shores such happy scenes must fade and die away;
Long still may Britons boast their peace, and feel an honest prido,
.That they alone of all the earth possess a fire side!”
We bad a large dog, a very good one, lay at the fire
all night; we went to bed with two loaden guns at our
side; the tarpauling in front for a curtain. We lay
very comfortable and warm, as we had three good wool
beds, five blankets and three coverlids, but I could
not sleep much on account of the screaming of the
squirrels, opossoms, and other animals whose names


I was not acquainted with ; ns well as the howling of
the native wild dogs, which kept on the whole of the
night, our own dog often driving them away. We
got up next morning, made a lire with great glee, and
got our breakfast, ns comfortable as the richest man
in the laud. Three of us set off with a cross-cut saw,
and two axes in search of squirrels and left our nota-
ble High Peak man, and the dog, in care of the horse,
and our stores.
We went about a mile examining the trees, where
we thought the squirrels and opossoms were. The
timber in that country always fades at the heart first,
both in hall and in branch. These animals lodge in
the hollow places of the faded trees, there they sleep
in the day time. The first hollow tree we fell, we run
up each side as it was falling,—a hollow branch burst
and there lay two fine squirrels asleep. We snatched
them up by the tails, they were not hurt but we were
obliged to kill them. We worked hard and fell
several more before noon, hut found no more squir-
rels. We went home to dinner expecting to find it
ready, but alas ! instead of our High Peak man hav-
ing the dinner ready, he had lost the horse, he had
loosed him from one tree to tie him to another, the
horse twitched the rope out of his hands, mid aw ay he
gallopped —away our cook went after the horse, and
we got our dinner ready ourselves. He was tw T 0 days
before he returned, and that was sooner than he would
have done had not the horse got the rope fast round
a tree, about seventeen miles off our hut. He secur-
ed him and brought him back. We w’ent to our work
in the afternoon again, and came back at night with
other two squirrels. We found the provisions &c.
we had left, safe on our return. Moonlight nights,
are the best times to shoot them, but the weather was
stormy, the moon was overcast, and the trees so high,
we could not see to shoot them.


The next day I was skinning and drying my ani-
mals. In the afternoon this High Peak man came
hack with his horse, I tied the horse to a tree, whilst
the man got something to eat; then he took the horse
to a place where there was some grass to tether him,
hut instead of doing that, he sat down on a log with
the end of the rope in his hand, smoking his pipe ;
the horse knowing what sort of a customer he had to
deal with, twitched the rope out of his hand, and away
he goes again and the man after him, he had fifteen
miles to go to a station before he could lodge; he
stopped there all night. The next day he was after
the horse all day, hut could not find him, also the
day following. On the third day a stock-keeper,
found the horse with the rope completely fastened
round a tree, in such a manner that the horse was
not able to get anything to eat. This man took him
to a stock-keeper, (who lived with one Mr. May, at
Marratta,) whose name was Thomas Warhurton, he
once lived at Stockport, near Brinksway Bridge; he
asked Warhurton if he knew the horse, he said he did,
it belonged to Joseph Lingard, who was in the hush
shooting squirrels, and he said he .would take care of
it. The same night this High Peak man came there,
he stopped all night, and the next day arrived once
more at our hut; I then took charge of the horse,
and having now shot what I wanted in this place, we
next morning loaded our furniture &c. and set off,
and arrived at Warhurton’s that day, where we stopped
two days. I was invited before this, to go to Mr.
Liscome’s, a distance of fifteen miles another way, at
the foot of the mountain, he was a Devonshire man,
he often came to my last master’s ; he said there were
very fine birds near his place. I went down the next
day, when I got there he was not at home, hut he
came at night, and a gentleman with him named
Stephenson, a Captain of a Whaler, a Dundee man.


Stephenson had formed a station near Cape Howe,
between Two-fold hay and the Ninety-mile beach; he
and his family had been there about three months.
Mr. Stephenson invited me down there also, he said
it was the finest place he had ever seen in his life for
sea birds. I told him I would accept of his invitation.
I stopped with Liscome a month, the High Peak
man was working for Liscome, whilst I was shooting
and collecting. The country was so full of wood,
that I could not get my cart any further than this
place. Having provided provisions, powder, shot,
&c. all in readiness for our journey, next morning we
loaded our horse and set off for Mr. Stephenson’s.
Wo had nothing to go by but a mark-tree line for the
whole ninety miles, that is, here and there a chip of
bark taken out of the trees in the direction we -were
to travel in. There was nothing but mountains all
the way, and so full of timber that we could scarcely
get through. The first of these mountains we came
to was Morris’s Mountain, it was twelve miles of a
journey over it. When we got about five miles from
Bunch, we got lost, and were obliged to turn again.
This soft High Peak man sat down and actually cried.
We made the best of our way back and in the evening
arrived safe where we had started from in the morning.
We stopped a day, and in the morning commenced
our journey again.
John Ashmore said he would not go again, how-
ever I prevailed upon him to try again. With diffi-
culty we got over Morris’s Mountain that day. There
was timber here of an almost incredible size. We
reached a small river, we had been informed that if
we followed its margin we should find a station, as
there was one on its banks, lower down; about half-
an-hour before sun-down, we came in sight of it. I
was very much tired, I had thirty pounds weight on


my back, and two heavy guns to carry. One Wea-
therhead kept this station as overseer, he was a
Northumberland man, he was not at home, but there
was the mistress and children, a servant girl, and man;
it was a cattle station. I asked if we might stay all
night, the mistress said we might. We went to the
men’s hut and unloaded the horse, and turned him
into a paddock, then we went to our supper; the
mistress brought us some butter, milk, tea, sugar, beef
and bread, there was great plenty, and we made a
hearty meal. The mistress enquired if we were the
two men that were going a shooting down to Captain
Stephenson’s? I told her we were. She said “he stop-
ped here the other night, he is gone to Browley; he
said he expected you down very soon, and he left word
that he had brought two blacks with each an axe to
mark the way from his own homo to Genore stock-
yard corner.” We staid all night, and being much
I’atigued we slept very comfortably. Wien we arose
next morning the horse was safe, we thought of start-
ing immediately, but the mistress came to the hut and
said we had better stay another day, and rest ourselves,
as the way we had to go was a very rough one, and
in the morning she would send a man with us, as it
was fifteen miles to the next station, and seven of them
very bud, but the man she said should put us into the
track, so we concluded to stop ; and I got my guu
and took a walk up the river imd shot a few ducks for
the mistress.
I saw trees there, I should think one hundred and
twenty yards high, and twenty-five feet through the
ball; the natives call the trees stringy-bark or mess-
mate. I saw logs tumbled down on their sides and
mouldering, sunk perhaps two feet in the ground, yet
I could not touch the height of the ball with my
stretched-out arm. I was coming down by the pad-
dock, in one corner I saw there had been something


interred, I inquired what it was; the mistress told me,
her husband had had the misfortune to shoot their
eldest daughter, they had a dog that had been running
the cattle as it was given to doing, without orders:
he had one day been out with his gun, and on return-
ing he saw the dog after the cattle, he followed it
home, it ran under the sofa in the house, in driving
it from under with the stock of his gun, the daughter
and the servant girl being iu the house at the same
time, the gun went off, and shot the daughter dead
upon the place! she never spoke afterwards, both
mother and father fainted away.
Now, there, beneath the shady trees,
la solitude she sleeps;
And often near her mouldering dust.
Her mother sits and weeps 1
Next morning we loaded and commenced our jour-
ney, the mistress sent the man with us about seven
miles, through great forests of timber,, with ranges
of mountains on each side; he got us on the
mark-tree line and then left us. The timber was
so thick on, that we had something to do, to get
through. We came down to the river ; there were
fowls of all descriptions on it. I was surprised most
to hear the bell-bird here, in such quantities; the
sound resembling a lot of bells ringing. I also saw
the whip-bird which makes as great a noise and ex-
actly similar to what a coachman does when cracking
his whip. Neither of these birds are much larger
than a robin.
We kept the margin of the river till our line took
us to the ranges again, we travelled on till about noon
as we thought; we unloaded our horse and tied him
to a tree, to feed for about an hour. We here made
a fire, and with our quart pots prepared some tea, and
got some bread and beef; then rested ourselves with
our valuable dog by our side, and both guns loaden.


Whilst eating, a large lot of kangaroos came by; our
dog made after them, he was the nearest to them when
he started, for they soon left him in the distance.
We packed up our things and set off again, about an
hour before sun-down, we came to a high hill. At
the distance of two miles down the valley, I saw two
men ploughing with a couple of bullocks, in a pad-
dock. This was the station they call Wong-a-ra-bar.
We had travelled about seventeen miles, we jogged
down the hill; when about a mile off the station I
fired a gun, it made such a roar in the valley among
the timber, I was quite struck. The men left the
plough on the report of the gun reaching them, and
went towards home, to make preparations, they had
an old soldier’s gun which they loaded, they thought
the bush-rangers were upon them. We made towards
the station, the whole of the family were collected at
the end of the house, a finer family I never saw;
father, mother, five sons and two daughters : The
name of this family was Donald, from the Highlands,
of Scotland. I saluted them, and asked if we could
stop all night with them, they answered, “yes”—but
said, “we hope you are not come to do us any harm,”
I said, no we are not bush-rangers, we me going to
Captain Stephenson’s, a bird shooting. Then there
was a pleasant look from them all. “Oh” they said,
“are you the men that are going down ? Captain Ste-
phenson called here the other day, and told us there
were two men coming down to his place.” They
helped us to unload our horse, took our things into
the house, set victuals before us, and made us wel-
come ; so we spent a very pleasant evening together.
At bed time the old man had family worship, we sang
two hymns, the old man made prayer, we then retired
to rest.
Pure devotion is sweet, though in the deepest soli-
tude, and the good old man no doubt often thought of


the bard of his native Isle; who had so sweetly sung
of family devotion, where he says
Compared with this, how poor religion's pride,
Id all the pomp of method and of art,
When men display to congregations wide,
Devotion’s every grace except the heart!
The power incensed the pageant will desert,
The pompous strain, the sacerdotal stole;
But happy in some cottage far apart,
Way hear, well pleased, the language of the soul;
And in his book of life the inmates poor enrol.
BURNS.
The next day was Saturday, we first looked after
our horse which we had tethered to a tree on the fiat
to feed. These good people urged us to stop another
day with them as they seldom had company; I thanked
them, hut said, as the weather was fine, 1 wished to
make my way to Genore about fifteen miles further.
One of the boys said, “we have some wild ducks in the
creek, will you be so kind as to shoot my mother a
brace, as our old gun is not worth much ? and then
I will go with you three or four miles to put you on
your way.” I took my gun, shot a brace of ducks,
returned back to the house, got breakfast, loaded our
horse and we again commenced our journey.
"Shortly we had a river to cross, we made our way
through what they called grass-tree flats. We soon
came to some ranges, the timber was very thick on
and very huge, the parrots were flying about in all
directions. We now came down to the river again,
we had the mark-U'ee line before us and a little track,
the boy now left us.
We had the company of the bell-bird and the whip-
bird on every side. We now left the river and mount-
ed the ranges again, passing through very large
timber. About noon, as we thought, we came to a
little water and put up our horse, and got some tea &c.
After refreshing ourselves wc started again.


About an hour before sun-down, we came to the
top of a high range, we could see a station below us
■on a distant flat, which proved to be Genore; coming
to the bottom, we met with a river again, with very
high timber on its banks; the tide from the sea came
up to this place; we fired a gun as a signal of our
approach; there was a station on each side of the
river. The stock-keeper was at home when we got
up to the hut, he gave us the time of the evening and
said, “take down your luggage and bring it into the
hut, you can turn your horse out with mine, you shall
then have tea, I have no beef,” said he, “but I have
bread, tea, and sugar.”
Whilst we were talking two men came from the
other station, across the river; the report of the gun
had alarmed them, they thought the bush-rangers
were come ; but on finding out their mistake, they
returned and soon brought us plenty of beef, stopped
with us till bed time, then returned home. We went
to bed and made our ourselves as comfortable as
circumstances would admit.
The next day being Sunday, we rested; the men
from the other station came to see us. On Monday
morning we made a sort of start, but the High Peak
man turned rusty, and said he would go no further ;
so I had to turn master, and compel him to proceed.
We set off, nothing but mountains and ranges, no
track except here and there a chip taken out of the
trees. I had as before, tliirty pounds weight to carry
on my back, and two guns; my High Peak man led
the horse, with a tomahawk in his hand to cut the
saplings down, to make way for the horse. At noon
We came to the top of a high mountain, where we
met, still, with rocks and high timber ; from this place
we could see the wide ocean and ships sailing on it.
We went down into the valley where we could get
some water ; we here unloaded, sat down for an hour


nnd partook of some refreshment; but amidst a deal
of grumbling and growling from my fellow traveller;
however we had no interference of neighbours in this
.secluded spot. We again proceeded, but had not gone
far before we hod to unload the horse, to get him
across a creek ; we carried our luggage over ns well
as we could, to the top of the hill ; we travelled on,
having loaded and unloaded five times in the course
of the day. Night overtook us in a large tint,
covered with high timber, and wild vines creeping
among the trees like net-work •; it was now got too
dark to find the mark-line. I came up to a largo
dead log of timber about two yards high ; I said, I
will go no farther to night.
I unloaded myself & then the home, I fastened him
to a tree nnd hoppled him, the High Peak man was
sadly in the dumps & would do nothing. It came on
a little rain; I put my luggage in one end of the
hollow' tree, nnd made a fire at the other, then set off
with two quint pots, to letch some water in order to
prepare some tea, but did not know' where to find it. I
went blundering on through the thicket, after having
proceeded about one hundred yards, Ifell down apreci-
pice of the height of three yards; up to the middle in
water ; so of course I soon filled my pots, and had
to return another way: the light of the fire gave mo
directions. We made some tea, got our suppers, made
our bed and went to rest, with loaden guns, and our
faithful dog by our side.
In the night the howding of the animals, and
screaming of the night birds was truly terrific ; I
arose at day-break,renewed my fire, nnd went again to
the well, but took care not to fall into it this time ;
1 tied the horse to another tree, we then got breakfast
and proceeded on our journey, but had not gone more
than a quarter of a mile before we had to unload again.
Through vines and shrubs, and boggy land, a most


sad journey we had. We came to a very soft creek,
we could not get the horse over. The High Teak
man would do nothing, we had words, he said lie
would cleave my brains with his tomahawk. I stood
with the gun loaded, my finger on the trigger, and
said if he made any attempt, I would shoot liim dead,
and throw him into the creek, and there leave him.
In a short time his anger abated, so with great ditii-
culty wo got the horse over and went on our journey,
through grass-tree flats, gullies, mountains and ranges,
till I had lost the mark line.
Night wascoming on, we gotont of ourway a little,
the line not being marked to within two miles of the
station. My good man began to cry, and said wc
must lie out in the bush again all night; I said if we
lie out a fortnight I will go to my journey’s end. We
steered on about a mile further with difficulty, then
we heard the roaring of the sea : we had not time to
get dinner that day. On going a little further we
came to a tract, where persons had been dragging
saplings to make a fence with ; we proceeded about
half-a-mile further, being much tired ; the sun just
goingdown. Ifired my gun, which made a tremendous
roar ; shortly after I saw a man approaching us,
which put my man into rather better spirits; soon
after a woman and three children made their appear-
ance ; we saluted them, they did the same by us. I
said, could we unload and stop all night, for we were
much tired ? The man said we might, but the hut
was at the distance of a quarter of a mile off. The
woman was much frightened, thinking we were bush
rangers, coming to kill them all. I said, do not be
afraid mistress, I am glad we have found you, all will
be well. I said, is your master at home? She said,
“he is not far off.'' I knew where he was, for he was
gone to Browley.


We all went towards the hut; I said, have you
any tea and sugar by you ? She said, “no my good
man, if I had I would freely give you some, we have
had none these four months.” When we got near to
the hut, another woman and a girl stood at the door,
but they soon retired when they saw us ; we went in
■with the mistress, but they were all much afraid.'
By this lime the horse was unloaded, at the other
hut. I said, if you please, give me something to
jmt some tea and sugar in. She said, “have you
got some ?” I said, yes. She gave me two vessels,
and I went over to the hut; I soon returned, with
about a pound of tea, and eight pounds of sugar ; this
proved a very acceptable treat: we now became great
friends. The name of the place was Mal-la-gutter ;
the property of Captain Stephenson, the gentleman
who invited me down to shoot. We got a good cup
of tea at the mens’ hut, then laid down our beds, and
went to rest.
These two huts were made with bark, and covered
with bark ; it was quite a new settlement; close to
the beach. I got up early next morning, I cleaned
my gun, and off I went to the beach, and proceeded
a distance of several miles, the sea came foaming in
against the shore like moving mountains.
I here came to a winding river, that took its
course round a narrow neck of land, I had my faith-
ful dog with me ; I saw two white hawks on this little
Island. I stripped and made an attempt to cross the
river, with great difficulty I at last succeeded, but
had no sooner done that, than the beautiful hawks
crossed the river and were on the other side.
T put on my clothing and pursued my journev
about three miles further; the limber sets in, in some
places, about a quarter of a mile from the sea, and in
others about two hundred yards ; kangaroos were


spoking about in all directions, my dog had many n
race after them, but never captured one ; I fired my
gun at one, but I was at too great a distance to kill it;
a little further on, I fired at a bird and killed it, my dog
ran and mouthed it, which quite spoiled it; 1 beat him,
he then ran home, and I saw him no more till night.
In some places close to the beach, there grows a
kind of vine, which forms a beautiful covering over
head, so closely matted together, that it will keep the
rain out for hours together. About thirty yards
from one of these places, I was loading my gun
again, admiring the wonderful works of nature, when
suddenly a black man popped his head from under
one of these thickets, but on seeing me he instantly
drew back ; I felt much alarmed, my dog having
loft me ; I thought there might be a whole tribe con-
cealed here; to ran was of no availr I saw the black
man look out again, I beckoned to him to come near
me: he advanced several steps then stood still staring
at me, he had no weapons with him, he was quite
naked ; I beckoned him again, he then came forward,
and stood before me, stroking my gun, talking to it
in his own language. On casting my eye towards the
thicket I saw another black man put his head out,
naked as the other, —I beckoned to him, he came in
like manner as the first. I began to draw back to-
wards the bush, thinking to get out of spear-shot,
should there be any more concealed in the thicket.
There came two crows into a tree near us and perched
both together on one bough; the black men pointed
to them with their fingers ; I drew back a few yards
and fired at them, bringing them both down ; tho
blacks capered round them, picked them up, stripped
their feathers off, and hasted away to their camp with
them. I loaded my piece again ; and went towards
the camp, as I believed these two were all that were
there at tho present time. In about teu minutes the


two men made their appearance again,, with the two
crows part roasted; they were tearing them to pieces
with their teeth, they proved a great treat to them. I
made hold to go into their retreat, which I found to
he like a house inside ; their implements of war were
reared in one corner, the floor was strewed over with
all kinds of shells & Ashes’ bones, they had two fires of
wood. After taking a survey of their retreat and tho
country, I proceeded home, the day being far spent.
There was. a flne inlet of sea water, and small
Islands, all kinds of sea birds &c. harboured there.
I kepi on shooting and skinning birds for the space of
a fortnight;—in the evening I often visited the women
and children. In the course of the fortnight the Cap-
tain came home bringing with him the other woman's
husband ; he had not been there before, his wile hav-
ing come with Captain Stephenson s family. We
spent then a very comfortable night, the fears of tho
women were now all over.
One day a lot of blacks came down the river Genore
in their canoes quite naked, men, women and children ;
I soon got very intimate with them ; as there was
abundance of fish here, I brought some hooks out of
my luggage and put the natives iulo the way of catch-
ing fish with the hook, which pleased them greatly.
They made lines for themselvs from the bark of a tree,
they went into the inland water in their canoes, which
are made of one single sheet of bark, tucked up
at the ends. It was winter, they made a small fire in
the canoe, on the top of some sods ; they threw the
lines out, drew in the fish, and then put them on the
fire; broiled them and eat them; this they carried
on through the whole of the day. At low water they
would go and gather cockles, oysters, and mutton-
fish ; they tread them out of the mud. The blacks
brought us plenty of fish every night, as much as we
could do with.


The black men made me a canoe, that would hold
three of us, as a present. I went from one little Island
to another, sometimes with a black man, and at other
times with a black woman to row the canoe; the Cap-
tain occasionally accompanied me on a shooting excur-
sion. At night I would often have brought a few brace
of ducks for Mrs. Stephenson, as there were thousands
there.
Three weeks had now passed over, our stock of flour
was getting low, as well as the Captain’s wheat too.
Ho wanted this man of mine and his man to go to
Manara, for some wheat, tea, and sugar, for us both.
We agreed, they took two pack-bullocks, and a bull.
This journey was one hundred miles each way. On
coming to Liscome’s, at the foot of the mountain, this
High Peak man stopped, and let the other man come
back by himself. I had given this man the key of my
box which was lying at Liscome’s, in order to bring
mo a can of powder, and a pair ,of moulds ; but in-
stead of doing so he stopped, and also lent Liscome
all the money I had in the box to carry him to Sydney.
The money I never saw again. I was carrying on
shooting, expecting every day a return of wheat. We
had steel mills to grind the com, but we were getting
so low that we were glad to eat the siftings. The
women all joined at the tea and sugar till it was done.
One day the Captain and I, taking a black woman
with us as pilot, went to a wreck about ten miles off,
close to the Ninety-mile beach; our pilot had to take
us across the river, and through the bush; the day
being very wet, we had no pleasure. The ship was
wrecked in the night amongst some very high rocks,
it was on its way to Sydney, it lay on the sand, in
thousands of pieces; the misfortune had happened
two years before; there were eight women drowned
and seven men, I saw some of their shoes & bones lying
among the stones! Those who did escape, some got


killed by the blacks, as well as some of the blacks
being killed by the ship’s crew, the bones of both par-
ties lay on the beach. The rest made their way to
Two-fold Bay. Some sawyers that went down from
Tow-fold Bay to pick up something from the wreck,
found an old gentleman floating on the beach, with a
bag of five hundred sovereigns hung on his arm. We
returned back with our pilot, the black woman ; the
day was uncommonly wet, we saw plenty of kangaroos.
We had tw r o rivers to cross, and it being high water,
proved very uncomfortable.
I still went on bird shooting, and drying skins,
until ten weeks had expired. We could see vessels
passing almost daily, at about ten miles distant.
I was waiting for my man Friday, to fetch me up,
but he never came, I had the horse and dog with me,
but could not go up myself. Spring drawing on,
the snakes began to make their appearance, very huge
ones, and very numerous.
The Captain and his man had to go to Gcnore to
fetch some seed potatoes, they assisted me up to this
place, thirty-five miles, with two horses and a pack-
bullock, besides my own horse. I took my leave of the
wife and family, the mistress said she was frighten-
ed when I came, she was sorry to part now with such
a friend ; she wept, and the children all clung round
me, but we bid each other farewell, I suppose, for ever'.
With greatdifficulty wegot to Genore that evening;
I stopped there two days, the stock-keeper was going
to Nan-gutty for some calves, all the calves suck till
they ore ready to remove to the heifer station ; I bid
the Captain farewell, and on the third morning wo
made a start, and arrived at Wong-a-ra-bar in the
evening; the journey was about sixteen miles. I
stopped a day there, and the man went forward, the
Scotch family was going to Manara for wheat, so we
proved very good company.


The inhabitants there travel for com the same ns
the sons of Jacob did into Egypt, and also remove
their flocks in the same way for pasture. We again
loaded our stores and made ready for our journey to
Nan-gutty about seventeen miles olf; the way lay over
mountains, ranges, creeks, and vallies covered with
timber, vines and shrubs of all descriptions. With
great exertion we got to Nan-gutty that evening.
My luggage was very troublesome as I had all my
birds and curiosities to pack in a bed, which made it
difficult to got through the timber. We stopped
here all night, after breakfast next morning, we made
a start for Bundi; tire foot of the mountain at the
further end of Manara plains ; this journey was about
eighteen miles; we had Morris Mountain to cross,
which was twelve miles over, only a mark-tree line
and a very rugged journey it was, but we safely arriv-
ed at Bundi in the evening.
Here I met with Buttermilk John, (the High Peak
man,) doing other people’s work, and neglecting his
own. My cart and boxes were at this place.
Liscome was gone to Sydney, he had borrowed my
tarpauling, and all the money I had to carry him to
that place ;' and also offered this foolish fellow, (Ash-
more.) ten shillings per week to stop at his place till
he relumed from Sydney ; though Ashmore had en-
gaged with me, and well knew that I was waiting for
him at Captain Stephenson's.
I stopped here a fortnight, but no Liscome came ;
then I went to Manara, with the horse, to Thomas
Warburtons, (the Stockport man before-mentioned.)
1 stopped at Warburtons, shooting &c. till that villain
of a Liscome returned from Sydney, he went past to
Bundi that night, and the next morning 1 took the
horse and went after him ; when I entered the yard I
saw my tarpauling lying cut to pieces with the bush


tilt. It was nearly evening when I got to Liscome’s,
I had some blacks with me, we had been catching
squirrels as we came along ; I went into the kitchen,
they told me Liscome’s tally-wife was drunk in bed,
ho had brought some liquors from Sydney. Tins
man Friday of mine was at the milking yard, put-
iug the calves up , my dog and Liscome’s began to
fight, over a piece of kangaroo they had got, they run
into the passage, Liscome was holding his tally-wife
down in bed, as she was drunk, and mad ; Liscome
came running out with the gun in his hand, and said
he would shoot my dog, and me too ; I told him he
durst not. In the midst of the scuffle, his tally came
out drunk and staggering about, she somehow popped
her hand in my dog’s mouth, and he bit her; Liscome
gathered her up in his aims and took her into the
house; in the mean time my man Friday came over
from the yard, we parted the dogs and got all quiet.
We went into the kitchen to get supper; I had had
nothing to eat of all day. Liscome came in and asked
what we did there, whether we were come to rob him ;
he ordered us both out, we went out together. The
blacks were camped around the place, so wo took our
beds and bedding and slept with the blacks that night.
Liscome said he would fire a shot into us both ; I lay
all night with both guns loaded, if ho had made any
attempt I would have shot him dead.
We got up next morning, loaded our cart and set
off for Manara. We arrived at Thomas Warburton’s,
fifteen miles off, having had no breakfast, neither
supper the night before. I stopped a few days here,
then came back to my old master’s, at Bornbarlow ;
I stopped a fortnight here, and the High Peak man
and me parted.
I there met with some drays coming down the
country, and they brought my luggage to Goulbome.


At tho end of three days we arrived at Rock-flatt,
during which journey we had to sleep under the drays
at night; at this place there is a well which contains
water of a wonderful nature, the cattle are particularly
fond of it, it is excellent to use to spirits, and if used
for kneading flour with, it raises the paste quicker
than any yeast; the well is situated about three
yards from the creek, and it is about a yard in dia-
meter. We stopped all night here, and next night
arrived at Jew’s Flat, where there is a public house,
at which we had to pay four shillings per quart for
racked ale. I never suffered so much in my life as 1
did in this journey, from the dry, hot, dusty winds ;
the mouths of the bullocks were completely filled with
sand ; we took about four gallons of water with us,
but had finished it before we got half-way; and must
have perished had we not met two gentlemen in a gig,
who gave us each a gill-glass lull of brandy; we
stopped here two nights and oue day.
Two next days we travelled through nothing but
ranges, mountains, and occasionally in the bush.
Third day we came to a station at the foot of tho
Tiudry Mountains, which run for miles, and have just
the appearance of tiuder, and areiuaccessable to man.
Round about this mountain is to be found the wild
pig, and other wild cattle, which belong to any per-
son who can catch them.
The day after we arrived at mountains which are
grown over with timber, planted by nature, but as
regular as any nursery-man could have planted them ;
the mountains are each in the form of a bee hive, and
exactly at tho top there grows oue tree, they are beau-
tiful to behold.
Next day we passed over rough sidelong ranges,
nothing but barren rocks; where we had to hold the
drays up with ropes as we passed on ; and at night


arrived at a station at the top of Limestone plains,
where there is a public house, but we had to sleep under
the drays that night; and the day after we arrived at
the end of Limestone plains, and stopped all night at
a fine station belonging to Merchant Camel.
The next two days we had to take the hush again,
and stopped all night at a station at the foot of a high
range, which we mounted next morning; it was about
two miles and a half up, and the same down the other
side ; we had to fall timber at the top, to make a drag
to help us in coming down, —we arrived upon Lake
George the samenight,abouttwelvemilesnpthe Lake.
I was told, that about thirty years ago, this Lake,
(which is twenty-one miles long and ten miles broad,)
would sail a seventy-four ship; and is now quite dry,
ns level as a bowling-green, and well stocked with all
kinds of cattle. —We stopped here all night.
We next day arrived at Mndcrvin plains, where
there are many kinds of beautiflil birds; we had
next morning to take the bush again, and arrived at
Goulbome the same night; which is only about ten
miles from my old master’s, (Mr. Camel’s.)
I here left the men and drays, they were going to
Bong-bong, and I travelled on to Mr. Camel’s, where
I arrived three days before Christmas Day.
I stopped here five months, assisting them in the
harvest and shooting, where I filled up my cases, and
shot no more after.
In the latter end of May, I came down to Sydney,
a distance of one hundred and twenty miles. When
I had been there a fortnight, I met with Mr. Sparks,
he wanted me to go and wait on himself and four or
five gentlemen at a store in Blithe Street. I took
my luggage there and remained with them three
■■months, at which time the gentlemen broke up, or


failed. I remained in Sydney till tlio 2otli of Janu-
ary, 1844. At this time things were so bad in Sydney,
that I could not procure a day’s work if I would have
done it for nothing. My stock of money was ex-
hausted, and I could not get a passage to England,
for want of money.
In order to carry on, I was obliged to sell my old
favourite gun. At two places whore I had lodged,
my things, along with those of my landlord’s, were
marked for rent; with hard struggling I managed to
loose them; the town was in the most complete dis-
tress, eighteen hundred hands out of employment, all
for the want of real money; they had scarcely any-
thing hut paper money. The host of mechanics who
used to earn twelve shillings per day, were now work-
ing (that is, those who could get work,) at ten shil-
lings per week.
Four ship-loads went from Sydney to South Ame-
rica to seek work, and three ship-loads of emigrants
came into Sydney, from England, Ireland and Scot-
land ; one vessel brought chiefly women, I saw them
land on Camel’s Wharf, in a few days after I saw
some of them crying at the ends of streets, neither a,
penny in their pockets, nor a mouthful of meat to eat,
nor any friends to look at them, even begging of the
bullock-drivers who were going up the country, to
take them, and do what they thought proper with
them, for the sake of a morsel of meat. I have seen
them in the government domain getting up in a
morning from under the wild trees, not having had
a farthing to pay for any lodging otherwhere.
On all sides nothing but distress, most of the
banks having failed; property was of little value, a
good bullock might have been bought for one pound,
sheep two shillings and two shillings and three-pence
each ; they were boiling them down by thousands, to


-get the fat, and send it to England, in order to make
n little money. I could have bought articles then,
twice as cheap as I could in Manchester, Birming-
ham, or London; gentlemen were taking their watches
to the night sales, that they might raise a little money
to live upon. Guns that cost twenty guineas in Eng-
land, might there be purchased for one pound fifteen
shillings. Hundreds wishing themselves hack in
Old England, hut not a penny to bless themselves
with, myself amongst the rest; I was almost at my
wits end.
My old master sent for me up to Goulborne to stop
ns long ns 1 liked with him, I would not accept of his
great kindness, for 1 was fully bent on returning to
England.
At length providence raised me up n friend, a man
that had been transported from London, of the name
of Mndens. There was a vessel came in from London,
the Barque Aden, Captain 'Wattle. Madens was inti-
mate with the Captain, and always did his glazing
and painting when the vessel came in; this fiiend
look me on board to the Captain, and through the
character from my old master, (Captain Camel,) and
the influence of this fiiend, I got a situation to work
my passage to England, in the capacity of assisting
the cook, and the steward of the ship. 'The vessel
was discharged, and had again loaden three hundred
tons of sugar, tea, &c. to go to Port Philip. My two
boxes were put on hoard into the Captain’s hands,
there to remain till I could pay him ten pounds, for
their freight to London.
I wenton board the 25th of January, 1844, assisted
by Mr. Madens, and on the we sailed out of
Sydney harbour, —1 then hid farewell to it for ever.
From Sydney to Port Philip is about seven hun-
dred miles by sea, the passage is through the straits


betwixt Van Dieman’s Land and the main land.—
The bay is forty miles long and sixty miles broad,
in the widest part.
On the 30th we arrived at Port Philip ; the land
in the vicinity of Port Philip, is low, level, and more
fit for cultivation, than in. the vicinity of Sydney.
About five miles from William’s Town up the river
Yarrow, is the town of Melbourne, which is the prin-
cipal place within three or four hundred miles. There
were several vessels loading here with wool, which
comes down from the interior by land carriage ; also
much bark is loaden here, both for home. The bark
is beaten with hammers and stowed into the hold, fore
and aft, which creates dust almost to suffocation.
When the wool comes on board, it is in large bales
which are pressed until three are got into the original
size of one ; which gets another good screwing when
stowed in the hold. Whilst here there arrived the
Sir William Wallace, from Liverpool, with emigrants ;
out of three hundred and forty-one men, women, and
children, who left Liverpool, three hundred and one
arrived here.
On the 30th of March after taking in our cargo,
we set sail once more towards Old England, with va-
rious incidents often occurring, which would not bo
of much interest to my present readers, —a few how-
ever I shall mention. We sighted Van Dieman’s
Land, the weather then being very line, the ladies
skipping about on the deck anticipating the prospect
of a line voyage. Soon after we came in sight of New
Zealand, and were becalmed for a week. Leaving
here, we struck into the south sens : winter approach-
ing verv fast, we had heavy storms almost daily. The
Indies had then given up their mirth and dancing, and
were in a sad condition below through sea-sickness.
We passed the south sea Islands and came round
’Capo Horn about the yOlh of June, the shortest day


there; we got amongst the ice-bergs, here, and were
a month in sailing through them, we saw some, seve-
ral hundred feet high, and more than a mile round ;
floating on the water. We passed the river Plate,
and also the Island so noted as being the residence of
“Robinson Crusoe.”
We here encountered what is called a black squall,
which almost disabled the ship, snapping the main
yard and fore yard each into three pieces, and twist-
ing the boom off by the forecastle. Here died Colonel
White, passenger, who had been ill since we left Port
Philip ; having lost the use of his limbs and speech.
He was about to return to his native country, (Ireland,)
but through the sudden change of climate he died.
All hands having been cleaned and mustered aft, the
hell tolling, the body was brought out sewed up in a
hammock, with hags of sand at the feet to sink it,, and
laid on a grating,'with the union jack spread over it.
The sendee was read, and the body committed to the
deep ; the end of the grating was raised, and the body
sliding of, fell with a great splash into the deep sea;
on dashed the ship over him, when to our horror the
body rose to the surface of the water, some distance
astern.
"There is in the lone lone sea,
A spot unmark’d and holy ;
For there the gallant and the free.
In his ocean bed lies lowly.
Down down beneath the deep.
That oft in triumph bore him :
He sleeps a sound and a peaceful sleep
With the salt waves dashing o’er him.
He sleeps he sleeps serene and safe,
From tempest and from billow;
Where storms on high above him chafe.
Scarce rock his peaceful pillow.


The sea and him in death,
They would not dare to sever,
It was his home when he had breath,
’Tis now his home for ever.
Sleep oiv, sleep oni thou mighty dead,
A glorious tomb they’ve found thee;
The broad blue sky above thee spread,
The boundless ocean round thee.
No vulgar prying fool treads near,
No hand profane shall move thee;
But gallant nearts shall proudly steer.
And warriors shout above thee.
And though no marble stone may tell
Thy name, thy worth, thy glory;
It rests with hearts that lov’d thee well.
And grace Britannia’s story.”
We shortly came to Rio Janeiro, South America,
here there is the finest harbour in the world ; on the
star-board side of the ship is the Battery, on the lar*
board side is the Sugar Loaf Hill, of great height;
it would be an impossibility to get to the top. Wo
passed batteries, for a few miles, and then dropped
anchor opposite the town, which lies on a flat, level
with the sea. The governor’s castle stands on a hill
a little above the town; the surrounding country is the
most mountainous that I ever saw, some of the hills
seem almost perpendicular. A great mountain on the
left is studded over with nunneries, with curious wind-
ing walks up to them. Bio Janeiro is a place of great
trade, Merchants from all parts of the world may ho
met with here; the chief articles of merchandise are
cotton, sugar, colfee, and spices of all sorts, oranges,
lemons, &c. I was informed that there were in that
country, two and a half millions of slaves, who ore
bought and sold in tho markets like cattle! I saw
plenty of them.


We stopped here four days, taking in water and
provisions and sailed out on the Sunday morning.
We pursued our way till we came- to the line, here
were sea birds of all descriptions, flying fish, dolphins,
and spem whales to be seen close to the ship.
We next came to an Island of Portugal, in appear-
ance it was a barren rock, it was nine miles long and
three and a half broad ; containing : about ten thou-
sand inhabitants ; the interior of the Island abounds
with corn, wine, &c. We took in here, one live
bullock, plenty of fowls at three-pence each, and four
tons of water. We could have exchanged here any
quantity of old wine bottles, at the rate of two bottles
for one hat-full of eggs. There was no anchorage to
be found here, we tacked about in the front of the
rock all day, whilst taking in our cargo. The men
and women here are the very colour of a tallow caudle,
the females are not lo be compared with the rosy-
faced girls of Old England.
About eight o’Clock in the evening, we set sail
again for Old England, being about eighteen hundred
miles distant. My anxiety becoming daily-more in-
tense to get another glimpse of my native land, every
other object seemed of little importance.
On the 24tli of August, about two o’Clock in the
-morning, the sailors on watch called on mo to come
on deck to view the light-house on the British shores
of dear Old England once more, I-obcyed the sum-
mons with great pleasure, and was instantly on deck
in nothing but my shirt. The same day we got into
the channel, where we soon met with fresh provisions
in the greatest plenty, and steamers ready to tow us to
Gravesend, with a pilot on board ; we here engaged
a fresh steamer and pilot, to tow us up to London,
where we arrived safe in the London Dock on tho
30th of August, 1844 ; —having never set-my foot on


land since the 25th of January, when I went on board
at Sydney. I now went ashore, in Company with the
cook, butcher, and a few other friends; we got a pot of
porter comfortably together, in Katcliffe Highway.
I stopped in Tendon a fortnight before I could get
my luggage clear of the custom house, I then took the
railway to Manchester, there meeting two friends who
accompanied me to Chapel-en-le-Frith, near to my
native village, after an absence of nearly ten years.
“Sweet Home,’’ whilst on a foreign shore,
I often thought of thee ;
And sigh’d lest I should never more,
My wife and children see!
The flowers that bloom’d arotind me there.
To me they seem’d not sweet;
1 long’d losil in my old chair.
My childrens’ smile to meet.
■But though Old England—lovely spot —
I dearly wish’d to see;
Alas! deserted was my cot,
I found no home for me!
r. s.
Phintep bv J. Tavi-or, Ciiapkl-en-le -Tium
