



Os the part of my friends and colleagues in the printing profession,
I hereby solcmly disclaim the responsibility of all errors in the titles
of the following Acts
ELZEVIR BURJOYCE
APPEAL TO THE PUBLIC.
The decision of Aristotle is final that no dramatic composition
slydl consist of moreor less than five acts. I adhere strictly to these
maxims, and have therefore considered the acts after the first five
as supplementary, whereby 1 have saved myself from violating the
unities so strongly insisted upon by the great critic.
the author.


A NATIVE DRAMA,
ENTITLED
THE PANTING PATRIOT OF THE PATTERN
PARLIAMENT, OR THE PALMY PARIENT
OF THE PEERLESS PRODIGIES.
In Five Acts.
BY THE AUTHOR.
NEWCASTLE:
PRINTED & PUBLISHED AT THE “STANDARD " OFFICE,
BOLTON-STREET.
1867


Pedication.
TO THE GREAT RACE OF DODGERS.
you, oh ancient and illustrious tribe, do I dedicate this
Drama on Dodgers and Dodgery ! There is no other
congregation of men in all creation where the spawn ot dod-
gery is more extensively diffused than in our own.*ln every
grade of society the Dodger meets our view; but it is in the
Parliamentary soil that the genus has taken root and grown
up and flourished with the greatest luxuriance, has attained
the highest degree of perfection, and has thence thrown out
its roots and offshoots on every side. Dodgery has become a
great institution—it has blossomed and borne fruit in abun
dance, but if it impoverishes and exhausts the soil that is
the fault of those who allow it to cast its noxious shade far
and wide; instead of plucking it up and casting it forth root
and branch. If we like Dodgery why shouldn’t we be
allowed to pay for it I and why shouldn’t the Dodgers have
the privilege of pocketing our cash, and laughing at us for
our pains 1 There is no fear of the race becoming extinct
as long as we feel a pleasure in being plucked, and as long as
the Dodgers, whose name is legion, can find anything worth
plucking from us.
Your most obedient Servant,
THE AUTHOR.
NEWCASTLE, MARCH 1867.


Jemmy the Artful Dodger —a renowned alchyraist, who has dis-
covered a patent method of turning the basest metals into gold
with all the latest improvements, and also of catching biped;
who are not f eathcred with chaff of his own cutting.
The Young Dodger— a chip of the old block, who has devoted his
attention to the support of the shipping interest.
The Latest Dodger out — a young man of distinguished talents
who has won high honours at that fountain of learning the Syd-
ney University, or very likely would have done so if he had
been there and not somewhere else ; he is a great lover of what
he can get out of his country, and intends to stick to its Cus-
toms as long as he lives.
The T—N C— K, or scrivener in ordinary to the M-n—p-1 C—nc-1,
who guides its pen, and although penned up in the narrow peue-
traila of his cell from mom till dewy eve, is a man of great
penetration, and burrows deep into the mysteries of the Muni-
cipalities’ Act, particularly that part of it which relates to the
Electoral Roll—a kind of aliment that was found to be rather
stale when last produced, and too hard of digestion for the pub-
lic to swallow.
G—E B—XT—N—a gentleman whose roof is thatched with straw —
kind of material inside the top storey of the edifice not known,
supposed to he some soft substance ; he revolves round the Art-
ful Dodger at any time in the twenty-four hours, and basks in
the light reflected upon him by that great luminary.
V—oh—N—a noble youth of talents rate—a victim to the tender
passion—about to take unto himself a virgin of the soil, and re-
solved that the race of V—gh—n shall rule the destinies of Aus-
tralia ; he arrives in N—wc—tie with the intention of boring a
hole through the earth from Nobby's to Lmdon Bridge, ami is
about to depart to Grafton on an expedition for the conversion of
sawdust into timber for shipbuilding.
Author —a poor devil very much out at elbows, who, although he is
constantly receiving buffets from the world, never finds his own
Dramatis Presonæ.


buffet any the fuller, and is such an object of attention by the
officers of the law that although he never went to an execution
in his life they will insist on sending executions into his own
house, being at the same time aware of his objection to capital
punishments and that capital of any kind is to him an unknown
quantity.
Jebby Sneak—a scribbler who having but a small modicum of
brains to get through the world with, makes up the deficiency
by that sublime quality denominated cheek.
Bk—K-s—a son of Esculapius, good at cutting up a subject; a man
who brooks no opposition, and who goes m to dissect the Uod-
ger.
D—l—ny—the unoffending victim of the Dodger’s machinations,
and who was elected alderman, but didn’t get in.
Gamma—a mysterious personage, erroneously supposed to be Gardi-
ner.
Members of Parliament, Captains of the A.S.N. and H.11.N.5.N.N.
S.N.R.H., &c., &c., Company, Agents of ditto ditto, S—rg—nt
C—nw—y (in white trousers), a policeman, small boys, practi-
cal oysterman, people in general, &c., &c., &c.


Act t he First.
SCENE I.
Laboratory in the house of the Artful Dodger, who is elaborately got
up in the splendid robes of the well known character which he has
performed uninterruptedly for many years with unprecedented
success.
[The ARTFUL DODGER discovered reading a letter.]
DODGER. —Now that’s ungrateful after what I’ve
VJIy done
To serve these humbugs, hang’em, every one ;
T have sacrificed my health, my strength, my cash—
Well, all except the last, for ’twould be rash
To spend the rhino without quid pro quo ;
That ain’t my game, as all who know me know.
To be a patriot is my heart’s desire,
And have beside? some irons in the fire,
To serve my brothers, cousins, nephews, sons—
All in whose veins the blood of Dodger runs,
Is the great cause that sent me into Parliament.
At ev’ry measure there full well to snarl I meant,


Unless I got good value for my vote.
There's virtue even in a one-pound note, ,
Still more in cheques drawivlor a good round sum,.
As compensation for some worthiest slum.
To live or die to serve one’s country’s good,
But give me the man who lives to suck her blood.
For years these fools of N-wc-le I’ve sold—
Persuaded them that I their champion bold
Went into Parliament to serve their cause ;
But I’d some other object there than making laws.
Let me put all my kin in some snug place,
And then my country claims some little space.
Hem ! let me see : my brother’s made all right —
He warns the sailor with his friendly light;
Then, on the other hand, to make things even,
Two more attend the beacon at Port Stephen.
My son, whose talents would grace any court,
Takes charge of all the shipping in this port :
He only gets three hundred pounds a year
Fordoinst nothing—yes, that’s very clear !
His clerk, who does the work, gets fifty-two.
And should by right have all the salary too ;
That’s not for me to say, I do the best
To grab all I can, and feather my own nest;
Let others rage and roar about corruption—
I’ll suck away while I have power of suction ;
Myself, my kith and kin shall have the plunder,
And never shall they say that I knock under
Till there’s no more—l’ll then retire with grace,
And other patriots then shall take my place.
But soft, you know—ah ! there’s my gentle son 1
Whom I brought up with tender care as one
To follow me in all my wily tricks,
And go into the patriot dodge like bricks;
But it won’t do—he hasn’t got my head,
So I must get him something else instead.
I know a snug berth vacant in the Customs—
That place is Jem’s ! he has it, or the curst hums
And haws they make whene’er I ask a boon,
Shall haul them from their seats; for this old coon.


Ain’t to be so easily smashed up. I swear,
By my dear self, which owns my chiefest cave—
By the pure blood of all the Dodger race^—
Each member of our lot shall have a place ;
I’ll serve my country when all this is done,
But all things else must yield to number one.
Humbug’s the word ! I’ve tried it many a year,
And found it answer : to me ’tis very clear
There’s nothing like it. Humbug, then, all hail 1
Who screws his courage up will never fail.
About propriety I’m not over nice :
You know the adage—each man has his price.
But see the awful sacrifice I’ve made,
My children on their country’s altar laid ;
No one can say that I’m a selfish man,
I take whate’er I may, keep all I can ;
And when from public life I must give place,
A laurel crown these patriot brows '"ill grace.
[ Exit.
SCENJS 11.
Eatrattce to the Offices of the Public Departments..
[The Young Dodger ami the Latest Dodger discovered supporting
the door posts.]
Latest Dodger. Come, tell me, kinsman, you wbo’re
wide awake— •
Whose many labours cause your head to ache,
As in this place I soon shall get a jerk :
What shall I do to get through all my work 1
Young Dodger. Well, Jem, lam surprised; you must be
green—
Such questions scarce from you should come, I ween :
You’ll work of course as little as you can ;
I know a thing or two, and that’s my plan.
Besides, you know, the screw’s so very small
It hardly pays a man to work at all.
You can protend to work, but as for me,
My health is far too delicate you see
To stick inside an office all day long.
How thin and pale I am, I’m far from strong


I must have leisure to recruit my vigour,
And not attend my duties with such rigour.
H< we’er you work the pay is all the same,
So play at work as I do, that’s your game.
Latest Dodger. But then you know the business must be
done.
(Enter — Dodger.)
Young Dodger. Why, 1 say, guv’nor, here’s a pretty son,
Who talks of working for the public good,
He didn’t ought to do it if he could.
T.ook at that ancient man, ungrateful urchin,
Why, ’pon my word, you really want a birching :
Whoe’er saw him at work I’d like to know 1
1 Vgen’rate son of such a father, go !
Dodger. Ah ! this will never do, its flat revolt
Against my principles—l tell you, dolt,
The public is the folk that’s got the rhino,
And we must have our share, both you and I know,
So calm your conscience, chicken-hearted minor,
The public yet shall yield us many a shiner.
[Trio and Dance. — Air, "The Whole Hog or None.”]
Youngest Dodger. Now, daddy dear, do tell me how
I am to get the tin ?
Dodger. I see you’ve come to reason now,
So list your next of kin.
Young Dodger. Let others toil and work all day,
While you have lots of fun;
Catch mo to work while I can play,
Oh no ! it can’t be done.
Artful Dodger. Then make haste, Jemmy, you get lots of
money;
The C—st-m-house it is the place in which I’ll shove you
honey.
[Trio.]
And we’ll altogether go
The whole hog or none,
And we'll altogether go
The whole hog or none.
[Dance, and exeunt into the S —p p—g M—st—rs office.


Act the Second
THE publication of the foregoing scene from the new Aus-
tralian drama having produced an excitement never before
known in Newcastle, we were requested by a deputation con-
sisting of all the inhabitants (including children in arms), to
continue our extracts. This, however, could not be done
without jarmission from the author ; so we called upon him,
and, after the utmost exercise of our persuasive powers, and
the presentation of several drafts on Allsoppand Co., which
were duly honoured, we are enabled to give a fe\V more
scenes from this already celebrated work. The following are
the last scenes in the second act, and perhaps among the most
striking in this extraordinary effort of genius.
[The stage represents the interior of the House of Clamour, in the
neighbourhood of Macquarie-street, Sydney; time, 6'45 a.m.
Outside the apartment is heard the milkman’s melodious call,
the early village cock’s shrill clarion resounds through the neigh-
bourhood, aad an early German band strikes up the enlivening
and popular melody—
Oh, what a row, a rumpus, and a riotin’,
Sure such a house as this never was seen ;
The Assembly is the place they never will be quiet in,
„ And nobody can understand whatever they mean.
Inside the House, the atmosphere is pervaded by the delightful per-
fume of kerosene lamps, constantly going out, with a slight sen-
sation of stale brandy and water, as if proceeding from the
breath of the members. The dawn is seen slowly breaking, and
in the uncertain light the painting of William Wentworth
seems to look upon the rabble below more in anger than in sor-
row, as if ashamed to be seen in such company. A stray repre-
sentative of the almighty people sits in the centre of the tirst
row in the strangers’ gallery with his elbows on Hie front rail,
and his head supported by his hands ; he is looking into the
body of the house, and is supposed by some of the members to
be absorbed in the eloquence gushing from their lips ; but on


the rising of the august body he is discovered to be in a state of
insensibility, arising from a severe stroke of logomachy, or pres-
sure of words upon the brain, f rom which it is extremely doubt-
ful whether he will ever recover. lu the reporters’ gallery op-
posite a solitary member of the press is stationed, apparently
for the purpose of taking notes, but, in a tit of abstraction and
physical exhaustion, he dips the tip of his nose instead of his
pen into the inkstand, and proceeds to rub it on his note book,
under the impression that he is putting down what is going on
below. The speaker oscillates slowly backwards and forwards
upon his chair, but gives occasional starts, as if a tile of pins
hail been suddenly thrust through the seat and perforated his
cuticle; the clerks at the table have a flabby and bedraggled
appearance, with wigs awry, complexions as if they had been
washed in dirty soapsuds, and eyes bearing a stronger resem-
blance to boiled gooseberries than anything in the way of ordi-
nary optics. The members are disposed on the benches without
much attention to symmetry of form or elegance of arrangement;
and an accompaniment of snores both loud and deep adds appro-
priate effect to the fervid declamation of the various speakers.
Mr. B—ch — n—n (on his legs). Yes, Sir, I’ll speak my
blind upon 'this motion ;
I know those scoundrels, and I have a notion
That their deep baseness has no parallel :
You’ll look in vain for’t at the the gates of
Horrified Member : Well 1
I never heerd such things in all my life ;
Why can’t we put an end to all this strife ?
I think my friend will see as how the case


Is just about this here
Mr. IS — ch — n — n. Oh, go to
Mr. C — tn — gs. Aisy’s
The word for me; my sintimints is known
Upon this question, and I’ve just now shown
The honorable meml>er that he’s wrong —in fact
He’s never right, and I believe he’s cracked.
I’d have him thrust out fionj this dacent house—
J
Mr. Fl — ch — n — •n. Shut up, you idiot; me you shall
not chouse
Out of my right to speak. Ye grovelling slaves
That sit opposed to me ; ye base, vile, sneaking knaves
Who try to put me down, ye try in vain ;
For your atrocious plots meet my disdain
Your despicable, paltry, abject infamy
I spurn and spit upon. You’ve got it in for me,
But I don’t care ; your wrath you may exhibit.
I’ll see you hanged upon the highest gibbet, •
Ere I’ll descend to
Mr. M—cl — y. ' Sir, I rise to order ;
The honorable gentleman’s verging on the border
Of personal abuse. 1 think you’ll say it’s quite—
Mr. M — rl — n. He’s perfectly in order; serve ’em right.
Mr. M — cl — y. Ha ! say’st thou so, thou doubly treache-
rous traitor 1 1
Mr. M — rl — n. ’Tis false as hell, I say ! Of liars you’re
the greater.
The Speaker. To order, gentlemen, I call you both ;
The freedom of debate I’m rather loth
To interfere in. You’re evidently riled,
And really must attempt to diaw it mild.
Enter The Dodger, and takes his seat on the opposition
side of the Mouse.
The Dodger ’ (addressing knocked up member beside hirr
1 say, old chap, your eyes seem rather red.
Been up all night 1 Yes 1 I went home to bed.


I’ll serve my country when the scheme will pay.
Mind the main chance. Ah ! that’s the time ot day ;
You serve the country 1 Good ! I make use of it;
That’s my philosophy—those are my views of it.
How runs the debate 1 Going to divide ’ere long ]
I see the opposition musters strong ;
Votes are worth something now—l’ll go and see
How the Prime Minister and I agree
Upon this matter that I have in hand ;
If he is wise, he’ll quickly understand
The value of a vote. The time draws near
To make or mar him—yes, that’s very clear.-
Which would most strengthen me in my position,
To vote with Jemmy or the opposition 1
Well, if my little game this time is right,
I’ll stick to Jemmy for at least one night.
[Exit into the Library and sends a note to the Premier, who arrives
soon after, looking rather dovghy, and altogether sluggish, irritable
and uncomfortable .]
SCENE HI.
The Dodger. —Good morning, Sir, you don’t seem very
spry;
I’m sorry to disturb—you know that I,
Like you, am anxious for my country’s good ;
So, like Paul Pry, I hope I don’t intrude.
How do things look anent the next division ?
Before another hour you’ll have decision ~
On this great question. I now hold in my hand
A statement showing how the numbers stand
On both sides of the House ; without circumlocution,
j say the ministry’s near dissolution..
Yet ther;e’s one way to save it : I’ve two sons,
I’ll throw them in the yawning gulf at once,
And then myself jump after.
M — rt — n. Generous man ■


The Dodger. Just wait, old cock, till I unfold my plan ;
You kuow my eldest boy [.l/ — rt—n nods], ah, he’s so saga-
cious—
Clear head, vast intellect, and mind capacious.
He sings like Mario ; or put him at cricket,
And in a twinkling he’ll have down your wicket;
He'll row with anyone —with Green or Hickey,
And make the pair of them look very dickey.
You know full well how long and meritorious
Has been his drudgery, and the work’s laborious ;
He’s falling to a shadow day by day—
He must resign or have' increase of pay.
[Aside ■: As to resigning; why, of course it’s sartin
He won’t do that. ' I’ll try to frighten Martin.]
M — rt — n : Well, what’s the figure 1
The Dodger. Why, it is so small,
It’s hardly worth while speaking of at all—
Only another hundred pounds a year !
M — rt — n. Why, what the deuce ! Good gracious, no I
fear
It—can’t—be done. There’s our retrenchment plan,—
I—couldn’t—no —nor any other man.
The Dodger. Well, you know best; my vote’s my own.
Good morning.
M — rt—n {aside). Confound the fellow ; while his cheek
I’m scorning,
He’s got a vote, and I must have it, too.
I’ll tell you what; suppose we split the sum ?
Say fifty and it’s yours.
The Dodger Right, by Gum !
But there’s some other business to be done.
I think I told you I’d another son,
Who on the alter of his country lies,
And I’m prepared to offer sacrifice.
M — rt—n. Well, what of him ?


The Dodger. Another little boon.
There’s a small billet vacant in the Customs soon :
Give it to J em, and then I’m yours for ever.
M — rt — n. I could’nt think of it—pooh !—stuff and
nonsense—never!
•
The Dodger. All right, old bird—you’ll soon drop off
your perch ;
I’ll vote against and leave you in the lurch.
The time draws on—the hour is almost eight;
Come, say the word—no longer will I wait,
But take my seat, and vote, too, with the noes—
You knows what fate will yours be I suppose.
M — rt — n. Ha! I must have his vote—l’ll no more
dilly-dally,
Well, Sir, the place is yours.
The Dodger. He sees I know my valley ;
But I’ll support him though through thick and thin,
I mean, that is, till somebody else comes in.
SCENE IV.—Time, 8.30 a.m.
Several fresh members have entered the House with clean faces,
and no less than three with clean (paper) shirt collars, which
gives a very brilliant and animated appearance to the scene.
Stranger in strangers’ gallery still glares fixedly on the middle of
the table ; fresh reporter in reporters’ gallery—clean shaved,
clean shirt, collar, hair parted in the middle, and shining with
unicorn’s marrow : is presumed to have had his breakfast, as he
is seen occasionally to pick his teeth with his pen during the
pauses in the debate. Speaker oscillates still more heavily, and
starts still more spasmodically than before. Clerks dirtier and
more flabby. Members generally waking up and rubbing their
eyes, and blowing their noses.
Several, members. Divide , Divide ! Divide !
Divide be
E-g-n. Crammed


Into this den since yester afternoon,
I’ll stick here for a week, or just as soon
Take • ii> * '•• w g; n g S —roost here altogether
Be lore I’ll yield an inch. I ask, Sir, whether
The honorable member who just sat down
Was not disorderly ?
B-clwn-n. Shall that dastard clown
Speaker. Are we to sit here all the live long day 1
Come, let’s divide at once, and then away
To breakfast with what appetite we have,
Rest and refreshment still will nature crave.
The division bell rings, and the Dodger enters smiling, arm-in-arm
with Mr. M—et— N, with two official looking papers in his
hand, which we find refer to the conversation
held between [the Premier and the Dodger in. the
library. Members rush wildly about the House till bell ceases,
when a division is taken, and the Ministry are triumphant. The
Dodger weeps and embraces the Premier, and the Premier
weeps and embraces the Dodger, who winks and puts his
tongue in his cheek. The House adjourns. The two juvenile
Dodgers rush in and fall upon the paternal burzum ; he presents
them with the two papers and embraces them. Tea and muffins
all round.
[Grand Tableau, —Curtain falls.


Act the Third
®HE popularity of the great play entitled “ The Panting
Patriot of the Pattern Parliament, or the Palmy Parient
of the Peerless Prodigies,” is so great, the excitement
caused by its publication in Sydney last week so overwhelm-
ing, the desire to procure a copy so intense, that every one
was disposed of almost as soon as it was printed ; and
though it has already reached the .008th edition, the demand
for it still continues unabated. The author of this marvel-
lous work, stamped in every line with the true fire of poetic
genius, having kindly presented us with a copy, we are ena-
bled to continue our extracts. In speaking of this grand his-
torical play, we may call attention to the fact that the Native
Drama, like other things native, is not hampered and tied
down by the frigid conventionalities and absurd mannerisms
of things European, but is as free as air, and, as the poet
expresses it, annihilates both time and space to bring about
the denouement. Metaphorically speaking, it transports us
from Sydney to Seringapatam—from Cheapside to China,
before one is able to ejaculate “ Jack Robinson,” and by a
daring, yet skilful violation of probabilities, gives to airy
nothings a local habitation and a name, that an obscure
writer called Willi ah Shakspeare —who by some slow
people on the other side of the earth’s crust is considered to
be rather clever never once dreamt of. Added to
this charming inconsistency, there is a beauty of dic-
tion a felicity of expression in the Native Drama not
to be found in any other in this “subluminary spear,”
leaving wondering comprehension far behind. Some
of our readers may possibly remember when a soul-
stirring play, founded upon an incident in Napoleon the


Great’s expedition against the Emperor of Kumschatka, and
entitled the “ CursM Cuirassier, or the Broken Bludgeon of
the Blasted Briar,” was produced with unparalleled success
at the Prince of Wales Theatre, Sydney. We refer to this
powerful play in illustration of the vigorous and felicitous
style of writing among Australian dramatists, and the faculty
they have of conveying ideas not immediately apparent on'
the surface. What can be better, for instance, in this way
than the opening scene of the play to which we have just
alluded, where Caspar says—“ The morn is breakingand
Antonio answers him—“ Let it break and be d d, it owes
me nothing.” The same vigour of language and boldness of
imagery is carried on throughout the whole sixteen acts, and
the curtain finally descends on one of the most thrilling
situations ever placed before the public—but to proceed with
our extracts, without further digression. It’’ will be seen
from the drama now before us that, the author introduces
new characters as he gradually unfolds bis plot.
SCENE L—Deck of the H.R.N.S.N. See., &c., Sea. Company’s
steamer City of Newcastle, which is approaching the wharf at
N—wc—le; Captain S—mm—rb—U giving orders ; some of the
passengers are* parading to and fro, others, having completed
the operation in nautical arithmetic known as casting up ac-
counts are looking anxiously towards the shore, and some are
enjoying the nicotian weed. Conspicuous among them is a man
of commanding presence, on whom his fellow passengers appear
to look with a mysterious awe; his name, birthplace, parentage,
occupation, and the address of his tailor, are shrouded in impene-
trable obscurity; but he is generally supposed to be one of the
noble English family of V—oh— N, returning after long absence
to revisit the scene of youthful joys. Becoming visibly affected
he gives notice to the steward, Mr M— rl-v, that he is about to
weep previous to going on shore, and, a basin of large capacity
being placed before him, he proceeds to relieve his pent up feel-
ings by a flood of tears. The application of brandy and soda in
a state of effervesence having restored his ordinary equanimity,
he apostrophises the fair city that he is rapidly approaching.
Hail ! N—wc—le, I see thee once again;
My steps have wandered o’er the earth, but vain
Have all my efforts been to find content:
I’ve ne’er known gladness since from henoe I went,
And traveil’d lonely over foreign lands ;


But here lam again. Newcdstle stands
Exactly as "before—that’s very odd !
I should have thought now, in these Jays of mod-
Em go-a-headness, there would he dry land
To reach from N—wc—le to B— I—l—nd.
Things must be queer, I think, in this locality.
Or this should be the. place—there’s no sodality.
No pluck, no enterprise, among its sons,
Or it must soon advance. I never once
In all my travels saw a place more favoured.
Upon this spot Dame Nature must have laboured
To make it the chief port in New South Wales,
And so it should be, but no vessel sails .
From hence to Europe, and from Europe back,
Carrying our wool and hides; but then, alack '!'
I tried that game myself—it would not pay,
I lost seven hundred sovereigns in one day;
But many years have passed since I was here,
And things no doubt have altered; yet I fear
To sink my tin again in this same place ;
But still I’ll try—’tis courage wins the race
Against all comers. There’s a thing or two
I’ve picked up in my travels, which will do
To put in practice pow ; there’s none of woman born
Can hold a candle to the race of Y—gh-n.
The steamer approaches the wharf, and the commanding voice of
Captain S—mm—b—ll in that moment of intense excitement is
heard above the clank of the machinery and the shriek of the
steam rushing through the pipes, coolly giving orders to “ Port,”
“ Starboard,” “ Head easy,” and “ Turn a-stam,” as if nothing
extraordinary was going forward. Messrs. T—l—y and fb— k-r,
the enterprising agents of the H.R.N.S.N., &c., Jtc., &c., Co.,
trembling with emotion, are anxiously awaiting the arrival of the
steamer on the edge of the wharf. A warp is thrown from the
vessel, and knocks down several small boys, but after some delay
the steamer is made fast, and the passengers disembark.
The Unknown. What do I see 1 Sure I must be a block-
head,
Or else—it can’t be—yes, it is—my old friend L—chh—d.
[They embrace .]
L — chh — d. Why, you’re the very man—just come in
time :


Some fate has brought you to this distant clime,
To save N—wc—le from the jaws of ruiu ; —.
For, let me tell you, there’s some mischief brewing.
A word with you. [Whispers.]
The Unknown. , Is that a fact, upon your honour I—No,
I can’t believe it. [L—chh—d whispers again .] La ! you
don’t say so.
I say, old chum, its no use standing here,
Suppose we go and have a glass of beer 1
L — ehh — d. All right, my boy, I do feel rather thirsty.
And in that case some, beer is not so dusty.
' [Exeunt.
SCENE IL ,
r.Marble terrace and colonnade in front of the Town Hall, N—wc—le,
with a perspective view of T—n C—k’s office (l. ), and C—y
S—rv—r’s office (a.) ; door opening in the Hall of Audience (c.),
the entrance to which is gracefully ornamented with bills and
placards stuck all over it Enter DOUOeb, and his attention be-
ing attracted by one of the notices on the door, he assumes an
attitude of deep meditation, and soliloquises.]
That’s a good thought: the time is drawing near
For these elections. Let me see. No fear,
But I’ll put in the men to serve my ends.
Stay—who must they be 1 On the choice depends
Whether next year the Mayor’s chair shall be mine.
I wanted it before, but did decline
The honour—why 1 because I couldn’t get it;
K—p sticks to it like a leech, hang him, yet it
Was I that put him there to warm the place
Till I was ready : but he’s had the face
To keep it for himself, and would again
If I would let him ; but I won’t, that’s plain.
The twelfth of Febr’y next we’ll do the trick.
And afterwards for Mayor I’ll go in slick.
[Exit.
The arrival of the Unknown, who afterwards turns out what he
was expected to be—one of the noble family of V—GH— N, —
throws the inhabitants of the city in a ferment, and a great
meeting is called in the Assembly Boom, at which all the
conscript fathers and aristocracy of the city are present. TheCu.Alß-
man (H. Snooks, Esq), who is dressed in thegorgeous costume of


General of (the Fire) Brigade, his breast covered with orders and
decorations, then rises, amid the most breathless silence and
reads the following address:—
“ Tis pleasant, alter years have rolled their coarse.
To see you once more on these shores, old horse.
Time with his scythe has lately cut some capers,
And capsized emp’rors, dnkes, and linen drapers,
But has not touched you yet, you dear old bnck :
May it be long before yon cut your stick.
You travelled home across the broad Pacific
And found, we hope, your voyage, a true specific
For all ills flesh is heir to, and some more ;
You really look much jollier than before :
Old Boreas may have blustered—Neptune thundered,
But if they thought to frighten you they blundered.
You really are a most uncommon wight;
We couldn’t do without yon, and were quite
Down in the month since yon have been away ;
Don’t do so any more—oh ! please do stay.
We welcome you to our Australian shore.
And hope you’ll never leave it not no more.
They say that you intend to take a wife—
A virgin of the soil. Oh ! may your wedded life
Bring lots of joy and heaps of golden guineas,
And to the race of V—oh-n more pickaninnies.
With everything that’s nice, for of a verity
We feel much interest in your prosperity.
Good luck to you, old chap, you are a dear man ;
More power to your elbow (signed) H. Snooks, the Chairman.”
[Mr. V—oh-n, in reply to the address, which is signed by 1867 citi~
zens, delivers a speech of the most transcendent eloquence, and
is supported by the unanimous voice of a grateful people, to
whom be promises to raise their city to the highest pinnacle of
greatness, when an emissary of the Dodger faction rises and
says :
Come, cut it short and finish your oration,
You know you havn’t got no qualification.
[The infuriated populace seize upon the wretch and are about to tear
him to pieces, when V—on-N steps forward, and, with generous
magnanimity, protects his prostrate foe from destruction. The
curtain falls amid the bowlings of the mob over the body of the
prostrate emissary of the Dodger, while V—oh—N stands in
the centre like Coriolanus with his arms majestically folded on
his bosom,


Act the Fourth
editorial table groans under the weight of the let-
Outers supplicating or endeavouring to intimidate us to
continue our extracts from the Native Drama, whence
we have culled a few of the blossoms; our waste paper
basket runs over with communications from all the letters in
the alphabet and half the dictionary—they strew the floor
—they are to be found in all comers of the house ; our
daughters and handmaidens curl their hair with them ; they
serve to light the fires and wrap up pounds of butter, but
still they suffer no diminution. The postman’s bag comes to
ouroffice portly and plethoric, and departs lean and shrivelled,
—on all sides the cry is still they come, and there seemed no
means of stopping the constant influx. What was to be
done in this peculiarly perplexing predicament! We did
not feel ourselves at liberty to trench further upon our privi-
leges as critics or reviewers, so we came to a resolution of
informing the author that the public desired to become more
intimately acquainted with his immortal work. We sought
an interview, and the result was that for a pecuniary con-
sideration, which to any other living writer would appear
preposterously extravagant, the author consented to pick
out such passages from his deathless work as he considered
would be most acceptable to the public. It will be observed
that he introduces an entirely novel feature in dra-
matic composition into his play, by coming himself before
the public, putting himself in personal communication with
them, and touching upon some of the circumstances connec-
ted with the action of the drama. It is true that the Greek
dramatists and Shakspeare in some of his plays have intro


duced a Chorus in order to elucidate the action more clearly,
but this is the first instance we know of in which the author
throws off his incognito, and comes boldly upon the stage as
the interpreter of, we may say, himself. We now take leave
of the public as far as the Native Drama is concerned, and
leave the author to make his own extracts and tell his own
tale.
The stage represents the dwelling of the Author, irreverently called
the cocUoft, or known in the language of the poets as the par-
lour next the sky. Three legged stool, ditto table with inkstand,
pen, and paper; plate with shank bone of mutton and an
empty bottle. Window frame removed, in order to allow a more
uninterrupted view of the pigstye, and mud flat outside the
house, and to admit more freely the odour arising therefrom.
Holes through the roof for ventilating purposes. Walls richly
decorated with tapestry consisting of sheets of the Standard
newspaper, or Universal Journal of Politics, Literature, Science,
and tho ologies in vogue, printed by, one of Hoe’s specially in-
vented electrical printing machines, throwing off impressions at
the rate of 150,000 a minute, to supply the enormous an.l con-
stantly increasing demand. The Author is habited in the rich,
but peculiar costume which has from time immemorial been as-
sumed by gentlemen of his profession.
A night cap decks his brows, instead of bay,
A cap by night, a stocking all the day.
The rest of his habiliments are to match. Having investigated the
contents of the plate, held the bottle up to the hght, and satisfied
himself that nothing satisfactory was to be obtained from either,
he advances to the front of stage and addresses the audience.
Author. Ladies and gentlemen you see before you
A very nice young man ; do, I implore you,
Lend me your ears—l should say—your attention,
While I speak something that you’ll find worth mention.
I’m unaccustomed quite to public speaking,
And that I’m here is none of my own seeking;
’Twas through my friend, the editor, oh ! blow him—
Not a bad sort of chap, though, when you know him.
He calls on me and says, the other day,
“ Come Jack, my boy, suppose you write a play 1”
“ No, no !” I said, “ I think I’ll cut the stage—
Niggers and mountebanks are now the rage ;
The true, legitimate drama’s quite done up,


On airy nothings I’ve been forced to sup,
By sticking to the real grit so long.
Sensation’s now the word, I’ll come it strong
With things the taste and judgment tend to sadden—
See ‘ Lady Audley’s Secret,’ by Miss Braddon—
“ Stop, stop !” says he, “ that isn’t what I mean,
1 ’d bring some local matters on the scene
To stir the blood of chicken-hearted knaves,
Who, to the Dodger schemes are abject slaves;
Light in their breasts of ice some patriot glow—
Some wish to break the yoke that lays them low.”
“ All right,” says I, “ in your ideas I glory,
And set to work at once to write the Story,
So as its finished now and off my hands,
We’ll have some talk on how the matter stands.,
Well, just look here now, we’ve the artful dodger
To fill the leading part; oh, he’s the dodger
To work it up, by jingo, he’s all there—
He’s just the man, he has the talents rare
To badger ministers behind the scenes,
And make them comprehend whate’er he means ;
The Assembly never hears his voice resound,
Like the blind mole he burrows underground;
Little recks he what evil should be done
If he can well provide for Number One,
And feed his bantlings through the public purse.
Of humbugs all the Dodger tribe’s the worse.
From their high place I’d have such fellows hurled,
‘ And whip the rascals naked through the world.’
Compound of meanness, treachery, and spite,
Their deeds congenial suit the realms of night—
No spark of honour lights their sordid mind,
To every motive saving self quite blind ;
With them there’s always some vile business brewing,
Through them, I fear, the country’ll go to ruin.
Some of the kidney come in consultation,
I’ll just step in to some convenient station,
And overhear whatever they’ve to say,
I can see three of them approach this way;
There’s a conspiracy afoot, but me
They can’t get over, as you soon will see.”


SCENE ll.—Public place in N—wc —tie. Enter : The Original
Artful Dodger, the Young Dodger, and the Latent Dodger.
Artful Dodger. Now look here, hoys, we never can
Stand this,
Why here’s a rag would make the people hiss
At us ourselves and all the Dodger faction,
Upon the wretch we quickly must take action—
War to the knife’s declared, we’ll draw our blade,
Nor place it in its sheath until we’ve laid
The caitiff in the dust whose wild temerity
Has urged him to attack us. Our severity
Shall light upon his head, he’ll get his gruel,
What do we care if some may think it cruel;
We’re not to be attacked by this vile journal
With such impunity—our wrath eternal
Shall light upon and sweep it off the earth,
Together with the wretch that gave it birth,
All means both fair and foul we’ll quickly use,
We’ll make the rascal tremble in his shoes.
Of everything in this town I’m the President,
And you (to the Young Dodgek) my coadjutor. We’re
both resident
Upon the spot; both up to backstairs politics,
And every kind of mean and dirty tricks,
To knock down every one that would oppose us.
I think there’s one or two in this town knows us :
He who presumes to challenge our dictation
Had better hook it, for the visitation
Of our fierce wrath shall fall upon his nob,
And ’twon’t be long before we do the job.
But let’s to business now ; it’s really bang’d hard,
To be so gibbetted in that vile Standard.
It vexes me, and stirs up my inside
To think its shafts should pierce e’en my thick hide.
But rf this now I’m not a-going to vapour,
But keep all advertisements from the paper;
And you, too, my first-bom, after my own heart,
Must help me in this scheme to play a part:
Take all your ads. and printing to the Chronicle, —
That licks ’em now, I think, that’s what I bonny call.


Do this, my boy, and by the gods above
You can ask anything—you know a father’s love.
A posting bill tie Northern’s walls shall deck—
“ Come and see C. H. H 11, our Hon. Sec.!”
But stop ! you know th it those reporting sinners
Are always asked to pic-nics, balk, and dinners.
That’s right enough when, grovelling, they support us;
But it won’t do when they presume to thwart us.
Now, at the Cricket dinner —do you hear 1—
No ticket for the Standard ; never fear
But I’ll serve out the beggar.
You’ll support me, eh ?
Young Dodger. Of course, and then we’ll surely win the
day.
Latest Dodger. But I say, guv’nor, ain’t that precious
mean 1
Young Dodger. Be quiet, fool, you’re not fit to be seen
In our society. You’re right, old man,
No ticket do they get—ah, that’s the plan !
No dodge is too contemptible for us,
Provided our opponents we nonplus.
The power we have these rascals soon shall see;
Our watchword, “ Dodger, Humbug, and Victory!”
[Exeunt.
Author. You see, my friends, that little fakement’s done
But stop a bit, there’ll be no end of fun
In the next scene, which now is going to open.
The Dodgers fear their power may be broken,
And summon all their tribe to make selection
Of three new aldermen for the next election.
The lot assemble in the Dodger’s den
And talk about the matter. You’ll see then
The tricks devised to keep the people down,
And tom Newcastle into Dodger Town,


SCENcE lll.—Hall of audience in the Dodger’s palace. General
meeting of the Dodoek faction.
Song by the Latest Dodger.
A ir — Thfi Perfect Cure.
Oli, here we are, this is the style,
We mean to do the trick ;
Our enemies will soon find out
They’ll have to cut their stick.
We’ll hang together, man to man,
For working out the plot,
For Jemmy’s is the proper plan,
We’ll fix it on the spot.
Ah ! that’s the cure, the perfect cure,
For all those snobs and fools,
And he’s the cove, we’re very sure,
To make them all our tools.
Crawl Chorus.
“ Ah, that’s the cure, the perfect cure,” &c.,
With terpaichorean exhibition by the whole strength of the company
round the Dodger, who stands in the centre, the whites of his
eyes turned towards the ceiling, a mind concious of rectitude
within, and his finger to the side of his nose.—Tableau.
The Dodger. Mast potent, grave, and reverend Dodgers,
As in my humble den you’re just now lodgers,
I’ll just my projects unto you unfold. ,
The crisis has arrived ; we must be bold,
And stick at nothing. Next Tuesday is the day
For the municipal election. Now, the way
That I suggest, and here propose to you,
Is to choose candidates—men both good and true—
Who’ll serve me well, do any dirty job ■
That I require them. Go among the mob,
Gammon the flats, and tell all sorts of lies, —
Who can’t eat dirt by bushels I despise.
What say you, friends ? What think you of the scheme ?
I’d venture an opinion, but I deem
It quite superfluous to say a word
Upon the point—in fact’twould be absurd
To add a syllable to what I’ve snoken.
£ljc fJafthe Spams.


The Dodgers’ jwwor, T say, will ne’er lx; broken
If we stick close together, hand in hand,
Through thick and thin, for then we form a band
These ninnies of N—wc—le ne’er will break :
Upon the issue I mv life will stake.
Do as I bid you, and then, by* the powers,
We’ll fight and win the day—N-wc—le’s ours !
Meet me next Tuesday at the court-house, when
We’ll show what we can do. ' Adieu till then.
Let dodgers everywhere take off their hats—■
Jemmy’s the man to gammon all the flats.
There are some blokcheads to their countiy true ;
I’m for myself, and after, perhaps, for you.
Song by the YoCNO Dodoeb, whose infirm state of health will not
allow him to attend more than half an hour a day to the arduous
duties of his office.
Air—King of the Cannibal Islands.
Oh, he’s the chap that's got the nob,
By Jingo, he can do the job;
He’s managed to make a pretty good lob,
And he’s king of the N-wc—le dry land.
Chorus. Hoki poki winki wura, Ac.
[Scent closes.
Che Satitir drama.


Act the Fifty
part of the Native Drama at which we have now
(II arrived refers to one of the most fearful crisis in the
history ot this colony, when the public mind was wound
up to a pitch of the most tremendous excitement—.but here
comes the author; let him speak for himself.
Author, Well, here lam again, as the clowns say
Tn all the pantomimes on Boxing Day :
I’ve just dropped in—l hope I don’t intrude—
To have some chat, if you don’t think it rude
Or too familiar in this child before you,
On things in general. I promise not to bore you.
And first about this play, now, don’t you think
Its just the real thing ? I want to pink
Those rogues that live upon their country’s ruin,
Who fly, like vultures, when there’s mischief brewin’,
To gorge their unclean maws with wholesale plunder,
I’ll do my best to make the brood knock under;
The task’s hard work you know, but yet I’ll bet
You five to one that I defeat them yet.
The Dodoes class is fixed to no locality,
But spread both for and wide. In sad reality,
We’re overrun with dodgers altogether,
And as the evil’s plain, pray, tell me whether
You think its doing good to extirpate them.
For, with your help, as Paddy says, we’ll bate them.
Don’t be in a hurry, now, I’ll put the motion,
And then of your ideas I’ll have some notion—
Carried, nem. con., and now that matter’s done,
We’ll take the others coolly, one by one.


We left off in the last scene of oui play—
The meeting at the Dodgers’ on the day
When they resolved to bear down opposition,
And put the Artful in the proud position
Of N—wc—le’s perpetual dictator,
Make all its people meekly bow to fate, or
Fall under their implacable displeasure,
And of the Dodgers’ venom there’s no measure;
For aldermen we now come to give a vote,
When folks are called upon their choice to note,
Of three good men and true, to take their seats
As grave and reverend aldermen—make our streets,
Clean out our drains, in order keep the city ;
Bnt that they don’t do so the more’s the pity.
They talk, and they do nothing, well we know it—
Sti-ong words no parsnips butter, says the poet.
I’ll leave you now to study the election
While I step out and take a small refection.
SCENE. —The T —n C — k'a office.
(Enter: The Dodger.)
Dodger. To be or not to be, that is the question
Which really almost spoils a man’s digestion ;
Whether ’tis nobler in the mind to suffer
All kinds of rudeness from this ill-bred buffer,
With slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
Whose favours men so earnestly importune,
Or take arms against a sea of troubles,
Which, Stoics say, are nothing more than bubbles,
And by opposing end them—die or sleep,
With such like gammon—no 1 I’ll give the sweep
The heartache and some thousand natural shocks
If he thwarts me he’ll surely get hard knocks
To make him shuffle off his mortal coil,
Or give him pause—these paws his mug shall spoil,
And make calamity all through his life,
Since he’s declared war even to the knife.
This enterprise is of great pith and moment;
And to succeed completely I am so bent


That thus my native hue of resolution
Is doubly bent upon his retribution ;
I’ll give it him ; I’ll his quietus make
(They’re all afraid of me), I’ll make him quake
And lose the name of action; soft, you, now :
The gentle B-kr—s, ah ! he’ll tell me how.'
Friend, in thy orisons be not my sins
Remembered, nor yet any of my kin’s.
There’s no one near : Cousin of Honeysuckle,
In whom I trust, to whom my heart does buckle,
Give me thy hand. Thus high, by thy advice, '
Is Jemmy seated; its really very nice ;
But shall we wear these glories for a day, ,
Or shall they last, I pri’thee, B-rr— 8, say I
B-rr — s. Still live they, and for ever let them last.
. Dodger. B-rr—s, my boy, I’ll try and hold them fast;
I do believe that thou dost love me much.
Thou art my friend ; I’ve treated thee as such.
If thou be current gold I’ll play the trick ;
But thou must stand fast to me like ft brick.
There’s T-m the C—rpnt—r; think, now, what I would
speak.
B-rr — s. Say on, my loving lord.
Dodger. My vengeance I must wreak
Upon his head. B-rr—s, I must be Mayor t
B-rr —a. And so you will, old man, for in that chair
We’ll see you fix’d.
Dodger. But then there’s Tommy Ad-m.
B-rr—s. True, noble Sir. ,
Dodger. I only wish I had ’em
All in my power—their rage would then be null.
Cousin, thou wastnot wont to be so dull ;
Shall Ibe plain ? I wish the rascals cooked ;
Say but the word, and then their fate is booked.'


B-rr—s. Oh, don’t ask me ! Your grace may do your
pleasure.
Dodger. Well, I really am astounded beyond measure ;
Tut, tut ! Thou ait all ice ; thy kindness freezes—
Thy indecision vexes me and teases :
Say, have I thy consent to do this business 1
B-rr — s. Give' me some little breath—l’m seized with
dizziness :
’Ere I will positively speak in this,
If I can do’t the chance I will not miss. [Exit.
(Enter: G—e B-xt-n, distractedly.)
Dodger. “ The devil damn thee black thou cream-faccd
loon.
Come, don’t stand gaping there, speak out, you spoon I
What brings you here !—by what unlucky chance—
.B-xt-n. Very bad news : they all refuse to advance.
You know those chosen three that were picked out’*-
For the new Council ? ( Dodger nods.) We’d no doubt
They were the coves to go in with severity,
And punish all your foes for their temerity;
But now they’ve struck. What, think you, shall be done %
Dodger. My curse upon the rascals every one.
B xl-n. But worse remains. You know that scurvy
rag
That has presumed you through the mud to drag :
You’ll scarce believe it but upon my word,
Its editor is up for City Ward.
Dodger. Ha ! Say’st thou so 1 I fear I’ll go denientec ;
Come, that won’t do, this scheme must be prevented :
What’s to be done in this emergency ?
Let’s send for Brr—s, then we soon shall sec.
Just stop a bit; this antiquated poll
Is not quite empty—there’ the electoral roll
That we can work upon. It must be done !
c


I’ve got a move to make the battle won.
Tliis tongue, which, at all times, in the House,
Is always still and quiet as a mouse,
Here, in this place, rolls out its brazen sound,
And scatters wholesome feat of me around.
Ye jiowers of impudence your aid extend me,
A nd ever from my enemies defend me.
SCENE.—Antc-chamber in the Court house.
[Enter Dodoer solus.]
Dodger. The varlets think they’ve got me in a fix;
They havn’t, though—l’ll disappoint their tricks;
IVe got the electoral roll within my hand— •
It’s only two years old, and that won’t stand
In law I know—there’s no one here knows better;
I ve studied every word and every letter,
As it may p’r’aps on some day be my fate
To be created Police Magistrate.
I’ve lalxjured very hard to get the billet.
And ne’er shall leave off trying till I fill it;
And though few would believe mo, ’tis a fact,
I’ve learnt almost by heart the.. Municipal Act,
So that it’s dear I know my way about..
I have a dodge I’ll,lay they'll not find out
When the time comes. Oh, ain’t 1 wide awake !
VII pull the wrong roll out by pure mistake;
Then, in my usual bullying blustering waj,
I'cfuse the nomination on tlujt day ;
I then shall have a week to work my friends.
And put in candidates to serve my ends.
[ Exit.
SCENE.—The Court-house.
[Enter, Tue Dodger and the T — n C—k.
T—n C — k. The clock is near upon the hour of noon ;
The meeting of the electors opens soon.
But you hvok pale ; tell me, O, Dodger, pray.
What brings that cloud upon thy brow to day ?
Dodger. You know what’s up, so say no more abmt it;


Your jaw’s unpleasant—l can do without it. ■
Open the doors now, and let’s hold the meeting.
Enter Citizens.
Friends and ratepayers all, I send you greeting.:
The Council settled I should bike the chair,
And fill pro. tem. the office of the Mayor.
I am Retuming-officer of the election,
And call upon you straight to make selection
Of three fresh aldermen for the situation
Of those who now retire by due rotation,
how is the time ; if any of you knows
A fit and proper person, you can propose
Him for the City Ward : I think it best
To take that first, and afterwards the rest.
Just and impartial I have ever been ;
No tinge of selfishness was ever seen
In me. Through all my life I’ve studied you,
And to your cause was ever firm and true.
I’ll stick to you until I end my days—
(Aside. That is as long as I can find it pays.)
No response is made to the eloquent and touching appeal of the
Dodger, and a long silence ensues—no one seeming disposed to
Sse a candidate. At length a courageous ratepayer comes
/forward and addresses the Retuming-officer.
Cr—sw — ■k. I beg to rise, Sir, with the greatest deference.
Hoping my candidate will have a preference
O’er all the others that are named this morning,
And that his name will soon be found adorning
Our Council board of aldermen, from whence
There issues forth such bursts of eloquence.
Looking around this room I don’t'see any
That suits my ticket better than D—l—ny.
Him I propose N-wc-le’s rights to guard,
And be an alderman of City Ward.-
Dodger. As we’ve to look out sharp concerning dates.
Pray let me ask if you have paid your rates ?
rijr £attbr Santa.


Or— sw — k. You won’t catch mo upon that little caper,
They’re paid in full—just look upon this paper.
\Jlands up paper.
(Dodger grins sardonically, and feels in his pocket.)
Dodger (Aside. He thinks he’s got me, but I’m not «iuite
done;
And now I’ll show them all a bit ot fun.)
My worthy sir, I’m sorry beyond measure,
It’s quite impossible to have the pleasure
Of noting down* this fellow’s nomination :
The reason is he’s got no qualification.
His name’s not mentioned in the electoral roll,
And for that reason he can’t go to poll.
I’m forced by law to come to this decision,
But gladly would I see the Act’s recision.
The man you’ve named I love, upon my word ;
I’d like to see him at the Council board.
(Consternation.—Puts the electoral roll in his pocket and his tongue
in his cheek.—
Is there no other gent you’d like to buckle
To Wards Macquarie or Point Honeysuckle ?
[A pause
Well, since your wise heads have not in that way turned,
I here proclaim the meeting now adjourned,
And when you come on this day week, you snobs,
I hope you’ll bring some sense in your thick nobs.
(The meeting breaks up in great confusion.)


Act the Next
Qi UTh QIL Shut, shut the door J good John, fatigued, 1
!
And say i’m not at home—l’m sick—Pm dead
(The verse is Pope’s, although of course, you know it—
No harm to cabbage from a brother poet).
Upon my word I’m utterly disgusted
To see such baseness among men we’ve trusted ;
The knaves, too, think that we can’t do without them ;
It curdles up one's ink to write about them.
They prate about their country and such stuff,
Hang ’em, I say, they’ve had quite rope enough.
“ To return now to de subjek,” for ’tis time
That we marched onwards with our thrilling'rhyrae.
We left the Dodger at his ancient game :
Dodging, and still to dodge, ’tis all the same
Whether ’tis here or there or anywhere ;
’Mid dodgers all he’s fit to take the chair.
We left him there—a pretty mess he made of it—
I’ll lace his jacket, for Pm not afraid of it.
Think now, good people, what you are about ;
Do act like men and kick the Dodger out.
But there he is—his friend who looks so meek
Is a mean, grovelling hound called Jerry Sneak.
SCENE —Room in the Dodger* Arms Hold.
Dodger. Come cn my cringing friend, my own, my
Jerry,
Let’s have some drink, for ’tis exhausting very
To stand there talking to the vulgar crowd ;
I keep ’em under though, my voice so loud,


The way I’ve got to bully and to bluster.
Soon frightens ’em and puts \’em in a fluster :
As for the scnrn that are opposed to me;
I know a thing or two I’ll let ’em see;
But I say. Jerky, come, you wretched scribbler,
I know at all things grovelling you’re a nibbler,
Then work for me; I’ll give you lots of cash
(I promise, but to pay I’m not so rash).
Jerry Sneak. Oh, don’t fear me ! you know I’m emptible,
1 relish all things dirty and contemptible,
No character is safe from my attack,
In telling lies I never yet was slack.
To stub men in the dark is my delight;
A reputation fair 1 love to blight.
No generous sentiments my bosom fill,
Like birds of night I gloat o’er all things ill.
Good faith, be hanged ; I tell a different story —
Meanness my honour is, and shame my glory.
Dodger. Its no affair of mine whose fame you burk,
I don’t care twopence if you do my work.
, Jerry Sneak. I’m your’s for ever, by this hand I swear.
Dodger. I don’t believe you.
Jerry Sneak. (Ah, he had me there !)
To leave yon then I should be very loth,
We’ll play the same game since it suits us both;
We’ll stick together—aye, like wax of cobbler,
And now I hope your going to stand a nobbier.
Dodger. Well, I don’t mind, I feel my bosom kindling
With noble sentiments, here’s “ Success to swindling.”
Jerry Sneak. Ah, that’s the style ! your toast goes to
my soul,
I to that glorious maxim drain the bowl.
[They drink.
Dodger. But who goes there I Ah ! ’tis that faithful
noodle


Who follows me about like any poodle
B-xt-n, come in ! you need not be afraid,
Here’s Sn eaking Jerky, and, by bis powerful aid,
We’ll quickly put an end to all ourfpes— .
I feel that now 1 have them by the nose
But look, my B-xt-n ; look upon this castor—
Now tell me whether you e’er saw one past or
Present that became me half so much %
B-xt-n. I never did, upon my word.
Dodger. Then such
Is the affection- that I bear towards thee
For thy long faithful service done to me,
I now give thee the one that is its fellow—
Observe its gi-aceful form, its colour mellow —
The broad encircling band about the crown.
And which in graceful folds behind hangs down—- ,
Its wide expanse of brim, bound round with black,
To purchase it of tin there whs no lack ;
My faithful follower put it on thy noddle,
And now we’ve had our I. think we’ll toddle.
[Exeunt.
SCENE— The toviitry near ffoneysueile Point.
Enter : The Dodger.
Dodger. The time is drawing on ; somehow I feel dejec-
tion
That things won’t go all right at this ele ;tion.
I’ve gained a week, that’s something, by the plan
That I devised so aptly; there’s ho man
About here but myself would have the face
To do such hocus pocus from the place
Whereon he sat, clothed with a solemn trust
To serve the public—pshaw ! what of that ? I must
Triumph o’er those who feel for me such hate, or
No longer be of N-wc—le dictator.
SCENE— The C—t //—«•.
[The twin hats of the Dodser and his faithful follower B—xt-x are


seen in close proximity, as if the persons they belonged to we re
in deep conversation.]
Dodger. My faithful follower have you made it right 1
B-xt-n. I have, and no mistake, for long ere night
Has everywhere spread darkness like a pall,
And frisky gents crowd round the oyster stall.
Or at the supper rooms in Hunter-street—
Devour fried eggs and bacon for a treat;
Long ere that hour, I say, has come to pass—
Long ere the stars have
Dodger. Silence ! you’re an ass I
We must be brief when traitors take the field,
And now, without further preface, to me yield
What’s the result of your negociations.
Have you been round to all my near relations—
My nephews, uncles, cousins, sons, and brothers—
My kith and kin, and whatsoever others
Could all be scraped together to support me t
B-xt-n. Well, yes, I think I have.
Dodger. Then quick report me—
What’s their resolve 1 Will they be here to-day %
Well, ’pon my word, I don’t think I can say.
Dodger. You can’t say, numskull ? What’s the good of
you t
Be off, Ivtell you—quit my presence do ?
B-xt-n. Sly honoured master, mercy, I implore 1
Dodger. Cut!—mizzle !—hop the twig ! —l’ll hear no
more !
B-xt-n. There’s Sp— rke he says
Dodger. Ha ! what is that I hear,
I have an instinct that there’s cauaq to fear—
Well, what says Sp—rke ?
B-xt-n. Why he says he’ll stand.


Dodger. Does lie 1 My noble B-xt-n, here's my hand.
Ido reproach myself; I’ve done thee wrong,
These tears I shed attest the feeling strong
I entertain for thee. Now, what comes next ?
B-xt-n. Well, about City Ward I felt perplext—
Folks seem so disgusted with the imposition
You played off here last week. On no petition
That I could make could one be found to stand,
Because your conduct was so underhand.
Dodger. Ha ! Dost thou beard me t
B-xt-n. No, I’d rather not,
Because I should expect to get it hot.
Dodger. The Fates seem unpropitious—.isn’t there any
Who would oppose this d—d, — l mean my friefad D-I—NY
B-xt-n. None to be found—but stop : I’ve an idea—
Dodger. Have you ? It can’t belong to you I fear
B — xt — n. Well, never mind, St—K —s is the man, I
say; -
He can’t refuse to stand, as he’s away.
Dodger. Ah, well, my sprightly youth, that’s all decided,
J—n W—n thought of him before you or I did.
Now, there’s Macquarie, who’s to stand for that ?
B — xt — n. I do not know, and so I tell you flat.
Dodger. Go- call our force, much will I see remain
Yet to be done ’ere we the battle gain.
SCENE.— lnterior of the C — t H —e.
[The Dodger seated on the bench. By his side the T —N C—K.
Thousands of citizens in a state of frantic excitement fill the
apartment. Sergeant C —w—Y in full uniform, including
trousers of dazzling witeness, a clean shirt, and boots got up
with the utmost brilliance of Day and Martin, stands in a
corner, taking notes of what is going forward.]
Dodger. Friends, fellow-citizens, we’re met here once
more


To do now what we should have done before ;
There's been some row about a nomination,
Which now I’ll bring to a quick termination :
I lag to say D— l — ny’s not elected—
Another condidate must be selected.
D — l — ny’s nomination I will take —
Not l.is election (now I’ll make him quake).
B — k-s. Not quite so fast ; T should much like to know
Who gave you power
Dodger. Here’s a pretty go !
Before I even notice what you’ve said,
Just let me ask you if your rates are paid 1
T — n C—k. No, they are not.
B — k-s. Well, then, here’s the rhino :
This bird’s too old for you to catch me, I know.
I wish to ask you who placed you there—
By what authority you take the chair 1
Dodger. Am I to be bullied in (his scandalous way,
Or dictated to by you ! Sit down, I say !
I am Sir Oracle, and, friend, just hark :
When I ope my wise mouth let no dog bark.
B — k-s. I’m here to represent the people’s right,
And your your big words won’t put me in a fright.
Dodg r. Sit down, I say—do you intend to joke, eh ?
.For if you do I’ll shove you into chokey.
[Frantic applause from a celebrated literary character named-Boors
(from America), who calls out—
Ah, that’s the ticket! shove him into durance ;
His insolence is quite beyond endurance.]
B — k-s. I stand here by protection of the laws,
And 1 now wish to point you out a clause
By which you’ll see that you’re quite in the wrong.
Dodger. Now, don’t you think you’re going to come it
strong ?


He re, seize this fellow —seize him, I refloat,
And cast him forth from hence into the street.
C—nw — y. (Winks, aside. That you’re quite wrong is
easy to lie seen ;
But look you, Sergeant C—>’w— y’s not so green.)
R—k s. Take me into custody I Why don’t you do it ?
You know my Dodc.er if you do you’ll rue it.
Dodger. Come, no more humbug, Sir, sit down, I say !
R — k-s. The humbug, I .submits the other way.
[Dodger forms a beautiful and exciting tableau by rising and dis-
playing the ample outline of his dorsal region to the admiring
gaze of the people. Intense excitement—an opinion generally
prevailing among the spectators that the Dodger is about to
favour them with a representation of the Grecian statues. The
disappointment gradually subsides, and the business of the scene
is carried on.]
Cr — sw — k. I want to ask a question, Sir, d’ye see ?
Dodger. Where is the man that dares to question me?
Cr — tw — k. Just tell me if D—L—Y
Dodger. No, he ain’t.
This riot is cn nigh to spoil a saint;
Nor yet he ain’t a-going to be, that’s plain,
So never let me hear his name again.
D-dn-y. I say I am elected.
Dodger. No, you’re not,
Nor ever will be while I’m on the spot.
Now, who comes next ? I’m not inclined to jokes.
J—n W—d. The man that I propose is Chas. F. St k-s.
Dodger. A nyone else ?
J V-st-w-y, For Br-k-s we’ll go to poll.


[The Dodger and the T— v C—K whisper together and examine the
electoral list.]
Dodger. Just hold your tongue, your name’s not on the
roll.
W-sl-w-y. Hand it up here and let me look, old bird.
1 know your wiles, and wouldn’t take your word.
[Aramines the roll.]
Why here’s the name ! at him we cannot wonder,
This is the way they do —another blunder.
' '
Dodger. (Aside.) I wish I was away from all tliis strife,
I never was cut up so in all my life.
Come, look alive, and finish off this stuff,
To tell you plainly I’ve had quite enough.
A voice : We've had enough of you you antique buffer,
And want much to get rid of such a duffer ;
Fortune will never smile upon this place,
Until we’ve rooted out the Dodger race.
B-xi-n. For Lake Macquarie W-xsh-p is the man,
We know him well, his merits we can scan.
t
Dodger. W-nsh-p’s returned—now Honeysuckle’s next.
Come, I won’t wait much longer, for I’m vext
At your disgraceful conduct on this day ;
I’ll keep it in for yqu*—l’ll make you pay.
Cl-fl-n. I will no longer keep you in the dark,
The man I mean to name is Mr. Sp--rke.
W-lsh, Br—k-s is the man for me, with him I’ll side,
If he gets in he’ll tan the Dodger’s hide.
Dodger. Have you all done 1 Are there no more to
speak 1
pause.
The elections will take place on this day week,
Until that time I bid you friends farewell—
The love I bear towards you none can tell,


Until life’s latest breath I will be true
To one great cause, and that is ,to sell you.
[Exeunt omnes.
Author . Men of Newcastle, be my timbers shivered
If e'er I saw a set so lily livered, 1
Bound hand and foot beneath such slavery.
Kissing the hand that smites you ; there’s no braver}-,
No pluck, no spirit in your composition.
Or ne’er would you submit to this condition-
just list to me, and I’ll just ask you whether
A pull both long and strong and altogether
Would not destroy the thing thot makes you tremble 1
I tell you plainly ne’er will I knock under,"
Until the Dodger’s power is rent asunder.
[£'.W{.


The Act after the one Before
SCENE, —The Dodger’s Study.
£/v*ALLS hung with portraits of dodgers from the earliest
|) l period of history till the present day. Table covered wit'i
ViVVpens, ink, and paper, Johnson’s Dictionary, Mut+ay's Gram-
ie., ic. The Artful Dodger discovered seated at table.
After a few moments spent in deep reflection he rises and fervenuy
apostrophizes the shades of departed Dodgers whose counterfeit re-
semblances seem to smile approvingly upon him.
Ye venerable manes of antique Dodgers,
Who look with pity upon us poor codgers,
That try to imitate your great ability,
And take advantage of mankind's senility,
Come to my rescue in this awkward fix,
In which 1 fear that I shall get more kicks
Than halfpence if I don't look very bright.
To beat these coves will want a sturdy fight,
I’ll leave no stone unturned, but don’t you see
’Twould be an awful sell if they beat me ?
Give me a lift o’er this pons aeinorum.
Ah 1 Mendez Pinto, come, old cockalorum,
Hear; I beseech thee, hear thy suppliant’s vow,
Thou prodigy of htftnbugs help me now
To hoax, bamboozle, hocus, snare, entangle
My enemies, and all their plans to mangle,
Back me to send tnem to eternal smash,
Their power to beat down all their hopes to dash ;
Smile on thy votary tor I'm sore afraid
That I shall be chawed up without your aid.


[Left eye of the picture is seen to wink distinctly three times.]
Dodger. Oh, far-famed rogue, my brazen head I bend,
In bumble thanks that thou my suit dost tend,
And promisestso quick thy strong assistance.
My foes will try in vain to make resistance
To our united efforts, in the mill
.Spite of theirefforts we will beat them still.
[Kyes of the picture roll towards the back of the scene, which opoai
and discovers an apparation having a level in its band.]
Dodger. Angels and ministers
Appa. Oh, don’t stand aghast—
-IVe long been coming, but I’ve come at last.
My friend'up there, who winks a warm reception,-
Knows that in me there’s not the least deception.
Men talk of justice, truth—what rigmarole—
That don’t go down with me upon my soul,
1 tell you, Jemmy, that whate’er betide,
I’m ever strong upon the strongest side.
If I’m convinced q man’s about to win,
I always do my best to help him in ;
But for the blockheads that are going to tail,
They’re not for me. I say, *■ Success all hail!”
The cause that wins shall ever be my guide,
Honor be blowed, such phantoms I deride.
I tell you plain of dirt I’d bushels swallow,
So that I could in fortune’s favour wallow.
Dodger. I rather like your style, pray what’s your name!
A.ppa. Come, try and guess it, that is if you’re game.
Dodger. Pshaw ! speak at once, and don’t propound a
riddle,
Do you suppose that me you’re going to diddle 1
/
Appa. Don’t get your back up so— here, list to rue,
My name’s familiar : it begins with G.
Cljc flattfat Qr.ima.


Dodger. Help! Murder! Fire! Police! Oh, seize
that stranger!
Take him away—he’s Gardiner, the bushranger.
Appa. Just hold your stupid tongue, and cease this
clamour,
In a mistake you lie, my name is “ Gamma P’
Dodger. Gammon, you mean, you can’t get over me,
I’m like an old opossum up a tree,
“Who's not by gammon easily brought down.
Gamma. Cease, my majestic Dodger cease that frown—
I’ve something here will put you in good temper,
And of my talents give a fair exemplar.
[ Takes out of hit pocket a copy of the Newcastle Barnacle and handt it
to the Dodger.]
Just cast your optics over that epistle,
I think there’s something there will make folks whistle.
I sent it last night to your friend M'Slickum—
Ain’t that about the Stilton 1 won’t that stick ’em t
Gamma has De(a)lt-a blow, a regular smeller,
They won’t get over —think they will, old fellar ?
Dodger. Oh, dash my wig and turnips, this is prime :
By Gosh I think you’ve done ’em up this time.
Gamma. You see, I’pi used to this kind of thing —
I always choose the proper time to sting;
To pump my victims Ia plan chalk out,
So that they’ve no idea what I’m about,
And when as lemons I have sucked them dry,
I throw away the skins—you see I’m spry.
Dodger. My G — my Gamma— my
Gamma. Husn ! keep it dark !
Dodger. Oh, won’t we give it ’em—this is a lark !
Excuse my rudeness, but, before we go,
CI)C jJatibr Crams


Jlave you a strawberry-mark on your big toe 1
Gamma. Jlot as I know on!
Dodger. Then indeed ’tis he,
It is my long-lost brother that I see.
[They both take out their pocket handkerchiefs, and blow their noses
with touching pathos, then fall into each other’s armsand exeunt
fainting.]
Verandah outside the T—n C — h’s office.
Enter: The Dodger, followed by B— xt-x, in the costume of the
Dodgerville volunteers —straw helmet richly embroidered with
black, broomstick gracefully carried over left shoulder, 4c.
Dodger. Halt ! Right face ! Stand at ease! Now
list to me 1
You nTust take note of every soul you see,
That in and out this office comes and goes,
And more particularly of all our foes;
Keep your eyes open, stir not a step from here,
And I’ll reward you with some ginger beer.
B-xl-n, I’m precious hungry, I ain’t had no breakfast.
Dodger, No Insolence to me, I’ll break yout neck first.
Stop here till four o’clock—there, no mistake,
I’ll serve you out if you’re not wide awake.
You have ray orders, so mind what you are at—
We both must watch the jumping of the cat.
People may say—but I don’t mind their growling—
Returning officers, like jackals prowling,
Is not exactly right; but I don’t care—
I think I’ve shoulders broad enough to bear
Whatever they may say : my hide’s so tough
That they may try in vain to reach my buff; —
Ah ! but that Standard —yes ! he’s made me dunce,
I’ll sheet it home to him if I’ve a chance;
About the ways and mean's I am no stickler,
So that I’ve my revenge I’m not particular.
But now for action— B-xt-x, stand thou faM,
D


I know that tliou’lt stick to me till the last.
J t must lie clone, no stone we’ll leave unturned
To make sure St—k-s ancl.Sp-KKE.shall be returned.
Now, look out sharp, my B-xt-n, when you’ve done
I’ll go and buy you,a nice penny bun.
[B —xr—n remains sentry at the door of the T—N C—x's office;
until son* one enters it, when he follows—to hear what is said
and see what,is done.]
Room in the house of An R F n, more generally incur n to pos-
terity by his historical title of Alexander the (Jottersmith.
Fl — d. Now, mildly speaking this is precious hard ;
Mankind I’ve served, and where is my reward t
After deep thought and toilsome work for years,
To be the butt of that vile Dodger's jeers.
I’ve brought my long experience in,Bengal
To teach these people, ah ! they don’t at all
Appreciate me for the good I’ve done,
But coarsely poke at me all kinds of fun.
Of my own merits I’ll lie no repeater,
But there’s the natural history of the Cheetah—
One ot the finest things that e’er came out;
The “ Essay on the Angry Man,” no doubt
A most instructive moral dissertation,
Which quickly earned.a,wide-spread reputation,
Plans to re-fill the. colony’s exchequer,
Which calmed our fears, sustained our falling pecker,
To sell the waste lands and to raise new taxes—
In fact to set the earth quite firm upon its axis,
Arc some small things I’ve done through dilfrent channel'
1 like this place, but I don’t admire its annals :
The Dodger to those annals does contribute;
1 ’ll ne’er bow down. to. him, or give my tribute
To anything he does. He’s done me brown,
But upon him I think 1 can come down.
There’s going to be next Week anew election,
Which hardly can be called a free selection
Of candidates, because the Dodger’s plan
Is to pick out and shove in his own man ;
But At,—ji F— I>, sumatned the Coppersmith


Will stop this game—he’s of the proper pith
To battle with the Dodger. Here’s a pill
I’ve just administered to keep him still;
It just shows up how he has served D— h —NT.
Why, he must be an ass, a regular zany,
To come the dodge so strong. But it won’t do.
Dodger, I know enough to settle yon.
Of nuisances I was once inspector— .
Of all kinds of bad smells the keen detccter.
1 got the sack through someone, but lie’ll find
I’ll stick to him, and touch him up behind,
[Enter a Messenger, and delivers a document to F —n, who reads *B]
I see ! Because I’ve stopped the Dodger’s sport,
He’s brought an action in the Supreme Court.
It’s all the same to me, for I shan v ( hdfed it—
Ix)ok ! here’s the writ, and anyone may read it.
For damages he asks five hundred jiounds';
His impudence does really pass all bounds.
Well, 1 don’t care, but of the Dodger say.
The cat maynnew, the dog m ty have hi* day.
The Dodger’s day has lasted long enough,
I’ll try and pull him down —I think I’m strong enough.
SCENE. —The inside of the Court-house.
[Grand Procession. Enter: Acting He turning-officer in his official
costume —black court suit, yellow straw hat with black trim-
mings, &c. Deputy lleturning-ofßcer—parti-coloured suit,
yellow straw hat, with black trimmings, &c. B—K-'s scruti-
neer, with inquisitorial catechetical countenance,' in a rich
vesture of Shepherd's plaid, white hat, richly jewelled, feather,
&c. Poll clerks, in the prospective enjoyment of a guinea each
for their superhuman exertions. Attendants carrying ballot,
boxes; standard-bearer holding aloft a banner, to which is
attached a document having the inscription, Roll of
1866.” Friends and supporters of the candidates, a policeman
one abreast, the practical oystermau, three dogs, the common
rabble.]
Dodger. The time is now approaching big with fate,
To rule if I must sink or still be great.
'To thee, my B—XT— N, I confide this box,
We bold the keys that open both the locks,-


Bring it with ballot papers filled for me—
I mean for Sp— ke ; it’s all the same, you see,
Then shall our anxious care wifh joy be crowned,
Then shiill we send the foaming Ixjwl around.
We’ll give our B-xt- N, by our sovereign will, a
Mantling glass of sparkling sarsaparilla.
1 have for poll clerk—although he hasn’t axed it—
That tall slim youth, I think he’s called Sid. M-xt-d ;
One of the enemy—that looks impartial;
lie’ll look surprised when we out forces marshal,
And lick our rival into a cocked hat;
You know our little game—how will he like that I
There’s Al—u F—d I’ll keep my eye on ;
He won’t get over m*, though In; may try on
Some of his ancient tricks. He’ll have the treat
To note down our competitor’s defeat.
Off to your posts till four tliis afternoon.
Fly on, ye hours, for the time comes soot/
When St-k-s and Sp—ke also shall bo returned,
And I shall take the place for which I’ve burned.
SCENE.— Verandah of the Court-house.
• Enter: Tint Author.
i Author. To come before I made a resolution,
But couldn’t, ’cause I’ve had an execution
Oh all my goods and chattels; —what a go !
You rausn’t think the Dodger did it—No 1
He wouldn’t do sucH things for heaps of money ;
But someone did it, though. Jt’s rather funny
That when we’d got so near the jiolling day
Borne one should try to serve me out that way ;
But never mind, of pluck I’ve got no lack—
I’ll fight while I've a shirt upon my back.
I do not mean to fail, sirs, in this race,
But screw my courage to the stipking place
No mercy I’ll the Dodgers show, for since
They’ve tried to crush me I’ll just make them wince.
But see, the clock is on the stroke of four;
!My time is up, so I can say no more,
[ Exit.


SCENE. —Intide of the CouH-houte.
The Acting Retuming-officer, T—N C— K, scrutineers, and poll
clerk, seated at tabic. Fragments tf mutton pies, and a large,
number of that peculiar description of bottle known as dead men
scattered alwut the floor. Enter B—XT—N with turkey-cock’s
feather stuck in his hat as a signal of triumph over the prostrate
and defeated B—^K-s; poll clerk, tc. X—s H —sf B, scruti-
neer for B—K-s at H—u —s —kle, is seen to rush in an agitated
manner into the Ship Inn, whence he emerges wiping his
mouth, and appears rather more calm and collected. Returning
officers, scrutiuuers, and poll clerks enter the Court-house,
when the ballot boxes are unlocked, and the scrutiny of the
votes for the City Ward commences. As it proceeds, the
anxiety depiotod upon the countenance of the Dodger disap-
pears, the cloud upon his brow clears away, and his features
are lighted up by au exulting smile. At its conclusion —the
Dodger exclaims,
ITooray ! The beggar's done ! I’ve cooked his goose!
In vain he strove,’twas not of any use—
'Jumps on the table and dances a break-down, to the great adm'ra-
• tion of the select number of spectators surrounding him. Having
partially relieved the exuberance of his feelings, he again sits
down at the table, and the scrutiny of votes for H-n-ys—Ho-
ward is commenced. Again is the countenance of the Dodger
illumined- by a smile, but after a time it begins gradually to 1
darken, and he! taps nervously upon the table.
T—n C —k (having verified live voles). I say, old man, by
Jove, it is a case !
Come, chase away that scowl from off your fiice.
What man could do was done to get Sp— ke in :
Kcver say die 1 I’m sure you yet will win.
Dodger. It’s very fine to talk in such a strain;
Those palmy days I ne’er shall see again,
When, bent obedient to the Dodger’s fiat,
The people dared without me nought to be at.
My troubles every day will now increase,
And with that cursed Br— k-s I’ll ne’er see peace :
He’ll give it to me strong. Oh, hang the fellow !
I see I’m falling in the sere and yellow.
Br— K-S to bo Mayor! Suffer that I can't to,
Then comes D —l —NY with his quo warranto —
So altogether I am done up quite;


The time is almost come to say good night f
And, as it’s pretty evident I’m licked,
I’ll walk off quietly before I’m kicked.
[To Captain P—tt—sox.]
Open the portals and let in the crowd ;
I’ll read the numbers of the poll aloud.
[Fearful excitement, and tremendous rush of citizens, consisting of
the practical pystennan, a policeman in procession, and a small
boy, to be present at the ceremony. Ushers of the conrt call
out “ Silence !” and after a time the frantic ebullition of feeling
is allayed. Betnrniog-officer deposits his official head-dress
carefully on the table, and rises to address *he people.]
w e’ve finished this part of our civic drama,
And now I’ll tell you plain without a crammer
The names of those that hare your choice decided,
And also how the votes have leen divided.
For City Ward there’s St-k-s has thirty-four ;
D—l—XY sixteen, neither less nor more ;
W—d’s number’d four, and Br—K-s’s just the same ;
One vote informal finishes the game.
6t—k-s is the man that most of you selected,
And he therefore is legally elected.
For H-n-ys—kle Ward, Br— K-s, who comes first,
Gets thirty-three ; gp— ke thirty, as he’s worst.
Your choice on Br—k-s has fallen, Bex. L-psc—b’s nil.
And two informal do the numbers fin ;
And now if any of yon’ve aught to say.
Do just look sharp, I want to cut away.
Hr — k-s. Well, gentlemen, the time has passed for talk.
And ’tis eur business now to go to work :
Deeds and not words iit my opinion must
Show that I’m not unworthy of your trust.
I thank yon much for your adjudjeation,
And will strive hard to earn your approbation.
Dodger. (I’d like to send that Br— K-s to Jerichoj)
I wish you all “ Good day” before I go.
[Takes up bis hat and scuttles off. The multitude slowly disperses
as the scene closes.]


The Finish, under the Winding-up Act
SCENE—An open place in the vicinity of Scott-streel, near
Compensation Comer ..
[Enter: Podokr, with chiefs of Dodgerville Brigade in full. uniform
—yellow straw hats embroidered with black, &c. J
Now let us halt, friends, in t/ils street of
i£J Scott,
O' And, by ray truth it is a pleasant spot ;
Here for my services to this great nation
I got a thousand pounds in compensation
For cutting off a piece of water front.
They run me down, but I can bear the brunt—
I’d rather have a thousand one pound notes
Than all the honor I gain by their votes.
What’s honour 1 says the poet; none that I know.
There’s something sterling in good solid rhino :
Oh, that’s the stuff—that’s what I’m alive for,
And that, until I’m cooked, I’ll always strive for.
But come, my lads, I’ll show you a contrivance,
In which I’ll ask you for your warm connivance.
This is the night when they elect a Mayor;
In stratagems you know that I’m all there.
Whate’er it costa I in that chair will sit;
The thing is by what means to compass it.
T must engage your firm co-operation
To place mo in that proud and lofty station ;
I hope you mean to stick to me like trumps.
All. We do, old cock.
Dodger. That’s right ; then stir your stumps,
Harangue the people, make them all declare,


“ Long live the Dodger !—lie shall he our Mayor !”
Latest Dodger. Guv’nor, no more—we’ll go about it
straight;
The hour’s at hand, you’ll no* have long to wait
Ere in the chair we all shallesee you seated ;
Our stock of joy will then b quite completed.
I’ll to the Court house go to-night; I vow
I’ll stir ’em up old man. I’ll make a row I
Don’t you think, now, a few of rotten eggs
Would come in fine while Be— k-s is on his legs 1
Dodger. Why, that’s my noble child—l think so too ;
But yet I fear me that it wouldn’t do :
People will talk, you know, they’re so unfair,
Though for whate’er they say not much I care ;
But we must show respoct to this same lot,
Whom I should like to see soon go to pot.
No ; just go there, make all the noise you can—■
I nither think ’twill be the better plan.
My honest B-xt-n, why look you so sad %
B-xt-n. Most noble general I feel very bad—
It’s very kind of you to ask the question—
Oh,, dear, I’m suffering so from indigestion ;
The buns you bought were stale—the ginger beer
Cave me the mulligrubs. lam so queer.
Dodger. Well, never mind, my faithful candle-holder
Never to you will I show the cold shuuldei—
A box of Knag os’s antibilious pills
You’ll find a remedy for all your ills ;
Go, buy them quick—take two or three at nighty
There’s not the slightest doubt they’ll set you right;
But if your viscera you would keep quiet,
Take my advice avoid luxurious diet.
But now to business ; all of you disperse—
We’ll meet to-night for better or for worse.
[Exeunt Chiefs of the Brigade.
Dodger solus. And now ’tis time to go and have a drink.
My friends stand fast to me; but yet I think


That things are going not entirety right.
But why 1 should I really can’t relate—
Perhaps ’tis written in the book of fate.
The Dodger’s power is near its termination —
No ! it can never be—‘that consummation
Is not devoutly wished by me, no how !
What ! shall this antiquated head-piece bow
To W-nsh-p, and to Bn—K-sl No ! Never shall it bd
There’s but one man in Newcastle—l say that’s me—
That has the nous to gull the vulgar herd ;
But I can do it—do it like a bird.
This very night I’ll try a coup d'etat
I think both Br —K-s and W-nsh-p plaas will mar.
Spite of their teeth they'll see me in the chair,
Then of their P’s. and Q’s. they’d best take care. [Exit.
SCENE.—The Council Chamber brilliantly illuminated by two mag-
nificent kerosene lamps recently purchased at a reckless regard
of cost at HollinshkAd's sale. T—n C—k rushing wildly in
a state of the highest nervous excitement between his office and
the Council Chamber, carrying things to the Council Chaml>er
that he ought to leave in his office, and carry things to his office
that he ought to leave in the Council Chamber ; in his agitation
he takes a draught of copying ink to revive his drooping spirits,
instead of an exhilarating fluid known as " Hennessey’s Battle-
axe.” After a short pause—when he wonders how he could be
so ini-onsiderate os to to mistake one for the other, and show-
ing by the expression of his countenance that what ho took
Wasn’t nice—he proceeds diligently in his preparations for the
meeting of the Council. In the meantime every store is closed,
every house deserted, and the inhabitants with the gravity be-
coming so solemn an event, proceed towards the spot where the
great civic drama is about to be enacted. Waiting for the critical
moment to arrive, some collect in groups to discuss the probabilities
of the election—some scatter themselves about the corridors and
vestibules of the edifice—others indulge in the nicotian weed,
or quaff the flowing bowl to calm their agitation. All waitwith
impatience the moment that will admit them to the Hall of
Council. The signal is at length given, and the living flood
rushes tumultously in, filling every nook and comer of the vast
edifice. The conscript fathers of the municipality in their gor-
geous robes of offices are seated in dignified silence round the
Council table, at the head of which is placed the T—N C-— K,
as chairman of the meeting. Amid the most breathless silence
—during which the fall of a feather would burst with startling
effect upon the car—Alderman W-nsh-p rises and addresses
the assembled representatives of the municipality.]


W-nsh-p. I rise, Sir, to propose—and with great
deference,
Hoping you’ll give my candidate a preference—
A gentleman to fill our oivic chair,
And trust this night to see you place him there :
You all know Bn— K-s; he’s got proficiency ;
He’ll serve you honestly and with efficiency.
Br— K-s is a man that’s got his wits about him,
And I don’t think that you can do without him.
You want a mayor who’ll wisely spend your cash :
I’m sure in doing this Bb— k-s won’t be rash.
In choosing him you’ll not yourselves disgrace,
But put the right man into the right place ;
He’ll stick to you, I say, through thick and thin—
Take my advice, therefore, and put him in.
Ch — st-e I beg to second Br— K-s’s nomination,
And to do so requires no declamation.
You’ve heard from W-nsh-p what Br— k-s can do,
And I’m content to leave the rest to you.
To lose your time in senseless volubility
Is not my forte ; I’ve no ability
To spout like one in this association,
Whose words produce a dreadful perturbation
In people’s minds; —hear him, I’d rather not!
He’d talk a hole right through an iron pot.
Ad — m. I rise to order, Sir, for I’ve a notion
My worthy friend’s not speaking to the motion.
Chairman. In his neat speech the Alderman is travelling
Into a subject we’re not now unravelling :
Let him confine himself in what he’ll say
Ch — st-e. I want no row, and, therefore, will obey'.
To vote fop Br—K-s I hope you’ll find it meet,
And, with these few remarks, I’ll take my seat.
The Dodger (aside to Ad--m). I say, go on, for now’s
your time, my mate—
“ You’d better be quick, or else you’ll be too late I”


Ad —m. I’m here to fill a a task that's not unpleasant,
And that’s to call upon the gents, now present,
To choose a mayor for the ensuing year;
I’ll offer you a good ’un never fear—
One who ne’er bent to fear or clutched at pelf—
A regular out-and-outer-p-that’s myself.
You put me in, and'jWll soon see what I’ll do;
I flatter myself I’ll show a thing or two.
They won’t catch T—MY Ad—M on the hop ;
To all their little games I’ll put a stop.
Then vote for me, and let me be your mayor ;
But if you don’t, why devil a bit I care.
[Shouts from the populace]
That’s right, Old Tommy ; walk into ’em slick f
There’s no mistake about it—you’re a brick.
Bi-nd-rs-n. The Artful Dodger’s my man, never
fear—
Him I propose to be the mayor this year.
Chairman. * Now, who’s the next that wants the situa-
tion 1
[A pause,]
What! no one else 1 Well, let’s hear the oration
From the three candidates. Come forward, Bb— K-s,
Since your name first appears upon the books.
Br — k-s. I havn’t much to say this time o’ night;
But if you put me in I’ll do what’s right.
I’ll rake ’em up that havn’t paid the, rates,
And bring the law down slap upon their pates.
A pretty thing it is the folks to tax all
For making roads where carts sink to the axle.
I’ll strive the burdens on the town to dwindle —
The way the thing’s done now’s a regular swindle :
There’s no supply of water in this city,
And no one tries to get it, more’s the pity.
To act like this the Council didn’t oughter,
But should have given the people lots of water.
On this affair I mean to make a bobbery.
And get them water without any jobbery.


1 f you olect me I’ll do all that cail
Be done by me—or any other man—-
To serve you faithfully. And now I’ve clbnfe,
And trust I sob’) may claim the battle won.'
Dodger. It’s scarcely nCedfiil that I should declare
I never sought to be elected Mayor;
I’ve not the least ambition—that you know,
Although some spiteful people will say so.
These burdens I don’t seek, you’re quite aware — 1
They bring me such a load of anxious cam
I’m very ’umble ; like Uriah Heep,
Unnoticed and unknown I like to creep;
Nor try to thrust myself in every Spot— 1
That suits my game if people will or not.
To be the Mayor I don't at all desire,
I’ve got so many irons in the fire.
l!ut look at me and those two other candidates
My labours for you long before them antedates.)
There’s none in New South Wales, whoe’er he be,
That as a mayor can be compared to me.
When you have searched the whole country wide t.iund,
7 say my match is nowhere to be found.
Upon this subject I could talk all night;
To you, I’m sure, it is refreshing, quite,
To listen to my spirited harangue.
Well seasoned with a little spicy slang.
In the Assembly my remarks are few ;
I save tip all my eloquence for you—
Not in speech only am I meritorious ;
I’ve worked for you in manner quite laborious.
For four revolving years your mayor I’ve been.
And none to equal me e’er yet was seen.
When in that place I wrote a kind ot history—'
And pretty bosh it is—rbut that’s no mystery I
I drew up, too, a long financial statement,
Which to Ik; swallowed requires some abatement;
And when I left the office I was feted.
The public with me felt so much elated ;
•' nd now kind colleagues put me in again
v o your favour is not on the wane.


I don’t wont to be elected —not a Lit!
For your sake only do 1 think of it:
I scarce need tell you so, for in good south
You all know that to be the solid truth.
As for what Brookes said of the hospital,
Tis plain he knew about it nought at all,
IF-— y. Before you talk like that it would be bettor
Just to reply to Dr. IPs. letter,
Dodger. I shan’t reply at all—it aint my way ;
I'm right, and they’re all wrong—that’s what I say.
A Dodger I was e’er, aud e’er shall be,
As when you put me in I’ll let you see.
I’ll just repeat that I’ve no inclination
To be brought out from my own private station,
Still if you will on me the honor thrust,
Aud wish we to be Mayor I s’pose I must.
ITbc Dodger sits down amid the most enthusiastic applause from
the Dodgrb Juvenissimus, who stamps, claps his hands, aud
shouts with his utmost vigour, aud Mr. Bogus (from America)
grins enthusiastic applause. The vast assemblage in the body
of the ball, breathless with excitement, await the result of the
ballot, which is taken in a cabbage tree hat belonging to one of
the aldermen. Just as the T—N O—K0 —K is ab nit to declare the
numbers, the Dodger rises aud calls out frantically to the T— n
(J —K.
Give me that paper back —I didn’t mean
To vote for Br—K-s, but for myself I ween.
Ur — k-if. That little dodge won’t do—you are just too
late;
In a cocked luU you’re licked as sure as fate.
T—ji C—k. I’m very sorry but it can’t be done,
You ought to look out sharp for number one.
Majority’s for Brookes ; I now declare
•That ho is lawfully elected Mayor.
Dodger (frantically)■ Oh, no !he ain’t we're going to vote
aagin !
I will be Mayor, and so I tell you plain


Chorus of Citizens : Dodgee you're done for ; Be—k-s
has cooked you quite;
ut on your tile, old boy, and say good night—
: uto the last a dodger you will be,
Although you find the game is all U.P.
T —n C — k. The voting I declare is quite complete,
And do request the Mayor will take his seat.
{The Mayor is solemnly conducted to his seat in grand procession,
the Crasher Band playing “See the Conqnenng Hero Comes."
The universal people of N-wc—le raise -one general shout of
triumph. The Mayor rises majestically from his chair te
acknowledge the salutations of the people. Final discomfiture
of the Dodger, who falls senseless in the arms of his retainers,
and is carried away on a shutter—Blue fire—
falls.
Jims-
Clje sat(bc Slyama.


|>oti« to J>'luirpwji, tfmrsiqmts,
&C., OF
GOODS, PRODUCE, OR LIVE STOCK.
To OR FROM TUB HUNTER RIVER DISTRICT AND SYDNEY,
THE DIRECTORS OF THE
AILSTHAL\S\I\ & II.!{.\.S.\.COJIPAMES
Have agreed on and from the FIRST DAY OF MARCH, 18S7, to
discontinue the practice of making allowances, discounts, or rebates
off the rates of Freight on Wool, or any kind of Produce or tioo Is
conveyed by their steamships : and in hen thereof have reduced the
freight from Newcastle or any part of the Hunter River to Sydney ;
on wool to 8s per bale, on sheep or lambs to 1 )d each: —and from
Sydney to Newcastle or any part of the Hunter River ; to any one
shipper in the course of any one day, to one consignee, shipping
sugar, salt, iron, wheat, flour, or cement, in quantities of not less
than ten tons of each article, three fourths only of the general rates
of freight will be charged.
ANY CARTAGE paid by the Companies on Wool or any kind
of Produce cr Goods, to or from their WHARVES and the MOR-
PETH'RAILWAY STATION, or elsewhere, wiU be charged and
collected with the freight from the shipper, owner, or consignee.
THE CARRIAGE due on wool from the COUNTRY, delivered
for shipment from the Hunter to Sydney, by the Companies’ steam-
ships will be paid by their agents, as per way bill, when required,
and charged and collected with the freight from the shipper, owner,
or consignee.
A CHARGE of 3d per bale per week, or portion of a week, on
hay remaining after fourteen days from the date of discharge (inclu-
sive), on the Sydney wharves, will be strictly enforced. ■
PRINTED LISTS of the rates of tares and freights may be ob-
tained on application to the managers or agents.
By order of the Board of Directors of the Australasian
Steam Navigation Company,
FREDERICK H. TROUTON.
Manager.
By order the Board of Directors of the Hunter River
New Steam Navigation Company,
F. J. THOMAS,
Manager.
Sydney, 27th February, 1867.


|Tw J?traw Companm.
(INCORPORATED BY ACT OF COUNCIL, 1852.)
CAPITAL PAID DP £55,000.
DIRECTORS.
B. LEE, Jun., Esq., Chairman.
P. O'KEEFE. Esq. I W. WATSON. Esq.
JAMES CAMPBELL, Esq. | J. B. K. EOBEKTSQN, Esq-. J.P.
G. VINDIN, Esq.
Manager —P. J. THOMAS Esq | Secretary— L. BARBER, E B *!-
Superintending Engineer —Mr. JOHN FYFE, Sen.
Bankers —The Commerial Bank, Morpeth and Sydney.
AGENTS.
Morpeth, Mr. L. BABBER ) Clarence Town, Mr. BRODERICK.
Raymond Terrace-Mr. W.E. SHAW 1 Xetccas tie-Ur. G. TULLY.
Singleton—Mr. V. CULLEN.
The MORPETH, George Bndd, Cdmmander.
The CITY OF NEWCASTLE, W. Summerbell, Commander.
The PATTERSON, \V. Summerbell, Commander.
The ANNA MARIA, William Craigie, Commander.
FARES.
Between Sydney and Morpeth, either M ay,
Saloon AT 0 0 Fore Cabin ... £0 12 6
Between Sydney and Newcastle, either way.
Saloon .. £0 17 6 Fore Cabin ... ilO 10 6
Freight to the Hunter, 15a. per ton; ditto fipm ditto, 15s. ditto.
A SMITHERS
PHOTOGRAPHIC ARTIST,
Hunter Street, Newcastle.
Mr. A. Smithers has much pleasure in announcing that he has
OPENED his New Gallery, which is constructed on scientific
principles, so as to secure the best artistic effect qf Light and Shade.
Having lately received New Apparatus, both for Landscapes and
Portraiture, in which is combined all the latest improvements sug-
gested by modem art, he is prepared to take Photographs not to be
suqtassed by any other Artist in the colony.
Note the Apdrsss :
HUNTER STREET, near NEWCOMEN STREET, NEWCASTLE.


J. S. PAINE,
gootsrlto, tationw, |lfivs
Ac., Ac.,
OPPOSITE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH,
HUNTER-STREET.
Importer of every description of Fancy Goods, Toys, <tc.
An excellent assortment ot Brushware, Cutlery, Perfumery,
and Tobacconists’ Goods always on hand.
N.B.—CIRCULATING LIBRARY.
11. IV. HOPPER.
iWmltsale and |lrtail gtaptt,
AND GENERAL OUTFITTER,
HUNTER-STREET, NEWCASTLE.
SOLOMON COHEN,
WHOLESALE
(Sfocrr, anb Mint aitb Spirit
COMMISSION AGENT AND AUCTIONEER,
KEMP’S BUILDINGS, HUNTER-STREET.
JOHN GULLIVER,
FAMILY GROCER AND PROVISION DEALER,
DARBY-STREET, NEWCASTLE.
SODA WATER AND CORDIAL MANUFACTORY.
NEWCOMEN-STKEET, NEWCASTLE.




LG-JE3 .A.XWI
always on hand.
GENERAL DRAPERY.
SHAWLS.
MILLINERY.
MANTLES.
b I
4>
O
o
£
CP
HOSIERY.
SILKS.
BLANKETS.
HABERDASHERY.
MEN’S READY vIADE CLOTHING AND FANCY GOODS OF EVERY
DESCRIPTION.
N.B.—A FIRST-CLASS CUTTER and good Workmen employed. on the premises in the Tailoring
Department.
DESPATCH :
A SUIT OF CLOTHES COMPLETE MADE IN FIVE HOURS'
FIT GUARANTEED.
HUNTER-STREET, NEWCASTLE.


AUSTRALASIAN
Jfire, Jife, anb DJariiic Insurance Company
4. HEAD OFFICE—
HALL OF COMMERCE, MELBOURNE
Possessing an accumulated Reserve Fund, amounting
to upwards of £60,000.
FIRE DEPARTMENT.
First-class risks are taken at rates of premium varying from 3s. 61.
to 6s. 6d.
MARINE DEPARTMENT-
Policies effected at lowest current rates, and losses made payable
in Newcastle, Sydney, Melbourne, or London, at option of assurers.
This Company is favourably known for its extreme promptitude in
the settlement of all claims.
The undersigned having been appointed agent in Newcastle, ia
prepared to receive proposals and accept risks.
ROBERT H. GRIERSON,
Offices, Scott-street, Newcastle.
ROBERT H. GRIERSON
Sjiippinj itnl) (Stncral Commission Jgtnt
Offices: Scott-strrrt, Newcastle.
Agent for the Amtralaiian, Fire, Life , ani Marine Insurance Co.
AND FOR
MESSRS MAGAREY & CO.
„ W. DUFFIELD & CO.
J. DUNN & CO.
MILLER’S ADELAIDE.
Constant supply of Flour from the above on hand.
D. MILLER,
iSiJjjolesale anti Retail ©rarer,
CLYDESIDE STORE,
HUNTER-STREET, NEWCASTLE,


gairdtn, fljaUaglict & U'JottntU
(DATE d. t. bishop & CO.),
WINE & SPIRIT MERCHANTS,
WHOLESALE <fc RETAIL
SHIPPING AND FAMILY GROCERS.
AND GENERAL OUTFITTING
Hvnteil street, Newcastle.
Shipping Supplied with all kinds of Spirits, Wines, Tobacco, Cigars,
Coffee, < be., die., in bond.
A LARGE ASSORTMESTOFSEAMEN’sCLOTHINOt BOOTS ALWAYS ON HAND.
LAING & WYLIE,
BUILDERS, HOUSE AND SHIP JOINERS,
Cabin and all kinds of Ship Fitting Done.
Perkins and Hunter Streets, Newcastle.
ARCHIBALD HAT
CABINET-MAKER, UPHOLSTERER.
AND UNDERTAKER.
Warehouse : Hun W-street/ Newcastle.
A. FRAZER,
BOAT- B U I LD E R,
Soott-street, Newcastle.


MR. GEORGE WALLACE,
SOLICITOR, CONVEYANCER, Ac.,
Kemp’s Buildings, Hunter-street, Newcastle.
W. PHILIPS & CO,
SHIPPING & FAMILY
Watt-street, Newcastle.
IjgrAll kinds of Colonial Produce always on hand.
GEO. LULLY & CO., '
CUSTOM HOUSE AGENTS, AUCTIONEERS. AND
GENERAL COMMISSION AGENTS,
Office : Scott and King streets, Newcastle.
W. J. LANGHAM,
HOVEL,
HUNTER-STREET, NEWCASTLE.
BTNICOIL, -
Confectionery a fancy goods.
Near AyA. Co.’s New Bridge, Newcastle.
FRANCIS HICKS,
WATCHMAKER AND JEWELLER,
Nc*r A. A. Co.’s New Bridge, Newcastle.
J. S. STEWART,
BOOTMAKER, 4c.,
Near A. A. Co.’s New Bridge, Newcastle.
THOMAS INNES,
SHIPOHA N D L’ E R
Newcastle.
