



HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS
THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH, K.G.


HIS EXCELLENCY SIR DOMINICK DALY,
GOVEENOE-IN-CHIEF OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.




A NARRATIVE OF THE VISIT
ERE
TEE DUKE OF EDINBUEGrB,
KG.,
TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
BY J. D. WOODS.
‘ SIS LICET FELIX, ÜBICUNQUE MAVIS,
‘ ET MEMOR NOSTRI, GALATEA VIVAS.’
HOE. CAEM. 27, LIB. 111.
ADELAIDE;
PUBLISHED BY CHAS. PLATTS AND CO.
PRINTED BY DAVID GALL, 89, KING WILLIAM STREET.


.# %
cT 5 MAR 1208 *
v
r OFT


17032
DEDICATION. .
To Lady Daly.
Madam,
The following pages were written under
instructions from your lamented husband, Sir Dominick Daly,
late Governor of this province. They are respectfully inscribed
to you.
South Australia was the first colony in New Holland ever
visited by a Prince of Great Britain ; and Sir Dominick Daly
first welcomed him to the great southern continent, and to him
the successful results of the Duke of Edinburgh’s visit are
mainly due.
I beg you to accept this little book in his memory; and
although greater and more lasting memorials will perpetuate
his fame amongst those over whom he ruled so wisely, and
who loved him so well, none will be more sincere than that
which is respectfully offered by,
Your Ladyship’s faithful servant,
J. D. WOODS.
Nortli Adelaide, 26th March, 1868.




PREFACE,
The history of this book is soon told. Sir Dominick Daly (our
late Governor) was anxious to have an independent account
of the visit of His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh,
K.G., &c., in a more compact form than the requirements of the
daily journals would be likely to give—at the same time
sufficiently minute to form a colonial record of the auspicious
event —the task of writing it was confided to me. Every
facility for carrying out His Excellency’s wishes was afforded
by the Hon. H. Ayers (Chief Secretary) and the other members
of the Ministry; and the book, such as it is, is the result. It
pretends to be no more than an accurate and impartial story
of the Prince’s visit; and, as I have been left to tell it in my
own way, I alone am responsible for any errors (I hope not
many) that it may contain.
J. D. WOODS.
2fith March, 18G8.




She Dufy of (Bdinbmigh’s ®M
TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
PREPARATIONS.
No event that has taken place since South Australia was
founded has created’ such a sensation as the visit of H.R.H.
the Duke of Edinburgh to her shores. It has moved all
classes, from the highest to the lowest, and evoked a spirit
and a demonstration of loyalty such as no other occasion
has yet drawn forth. One feeling of deep and affectionate
regard for the mother country and for our beloved Queen,
united all in the wish to do honour to the illustrious guest
who came to the antipodes for the first time, and every nerve
was strained to make his reception cordial, enthusiastic, and
worthy of the occasion.
The first intelligence received in South Australia of the
projected visit of the ‘ Galatea ’ and the Royal Captain, was
through some paragraphs which appeared in the English
papers. It was hoped and believed that the news was true, but
nothing certain Avas known. The United Service Gazette ,
hoAvever, afterwards not only confirmed the tidings, but gave
the route of the ‘Galatea’ and the probable dates of her
arrival at and departure from the Mediterranean, Avhich it Avas
intended to visit in her way to the colonial dependencies, in
the course of this, the first voyage of a Royal Prince round
the world. In these were included Mauritius and Western
Australia. It was believed, hoAvever, that until that fearful
fever, Avhich had ravaged the former colony, had abated, it


would be highly improbable that His Royal Highness would
call in at Port Louis; nevertheless the inhabitants of that
island hoped almost against hope, and even sent, so it was
reported, a deputation to meet His Royal Highness at the
Cape of Good Hope in order to prevail upon him to include
that dependency in his route. That request however, if made
could not be complied with, and it was understood that the
‘ Galatea ’ would sail direct from the Cape for South Australia.
The official despatch from the Secretary of State to Governor
Sir Dominick Daly, communicated to the Parliament by His
Excellency on the 12th July, 1867, mentioned the West Coast
of Australia as one of the colonies to be visited, but it gave
no probable dates, so that it was only by estimating the length
of voyage between the different ports that the time of his
arrival could be approximately fixed. An idea had got abroad
that the ‘Galatea’ would leave the Cape about the 25th of
August, and therefore she might be expected to be in South
Australian waters in about one month from that date.
In forwarding the despatch to the Houses of Parliament,
His Excellency the Governor recommended that such provision
should be made for the suitable reception of His Royal High-
ness as the occasion demanded, and the House of Assembly
responded to the message by giving the Ministry an open
vote to expend whatever sums of money they might think fit.
A Reception Committee was formed, consisting of the Members
of both Houses, the Mayors of corporate towns, the Magistrates,
and most of the influential colonists who could manage to
attend. Their first business was to arrange a programme, so
that during His Royal Highness* stay such a varied entertain-
ment should be provided, and such a series of scenes to be
visited mapped out, as was supposed would afford the
Prince an almost exhaustive opportunity of seeing the country
and the resources of its inhabitants. Certainly, if this pro-


gramme, which of course was subject to alteration to meet the
Prince’s wishes, had been carried out, the Duke of Edinburgh
would have had three weeks of the hardest labor that ever
fell to the lot of a Royal Prince in the pursuit of amusement.
It need hardly be said that it was not adhered to, and though
the programme, which was eventually followed, gave a fair
notion of what South Australia really is—it unfortunately
could not include a visit to those great copper mines, which
have given South Australia such a hold upon the markets of
the world; and have made her so famous as a mineral country.
As soon however, as the preliminary programme had been
agreed on a difficulty arose —the Reception Committee had
arranged that the official landing should take place at Glenelg,
where the first colonists landed in 1836. The inhabitants of
Port Adelaide objected to this on the ground that the principal
port in South Australia should be the first to receive the
illustrious visitor. All kinds of grounds were alleged in favour
of the alteration, but were wisely disregarded by the Com-
mittee, to the great annoyance and chagrin of the inhabitants
of the Port. These gentlemen inveighed in unmeasured terms
against the injustice done to them, and, it is said, threatened
at one time to send a deputation to Western Australia to meet
the ‘Galatea’ iu order to induce the Prince to change the place
of landing. This threat, however, was not carried into effect, and
the dissatisfied silently gave in to the arrangements, though not
without a quiet resolve to make on a future occasion one more
attempt to carry their point; this effort, however, when made
proved fruitless, as will be subsequently seen.
In the meantime the preparations went on, designs were
called for for triumphal arches and for decorating the approaches
to Adelaide, and the principal street—King William Street—and
also for illuminations. The bustle and excitement caused by
carrying them out silenced for a time all the grumblings which


are inevitable in undertakings of the kind; but through all
the preparations there was a feeling of uncertainty. No one
knew when the Prince would arrive. He was expected in
September, but that month passed away without authentic
tidings as to his movements. October wore on and the
Overland Mail, which reached Adelaide on the 11th, brought
no news from the Cape whatever. By some mischance the
Cape Mail had not reached the steamer, and though the
arrangements were well under way there was a fear that the
‘ Galatea’ would drop into Holdfast Bay without warning, and
find all the elaborate preparations in a half finished state.
The decorators, however, pushed on with a will and the greater
part of the ornamentation was put up for a considerable time
before it was required—a couple of days only was needed to
make everything ship shape ; but when it had been advanced
so far a perfect outcry was raised against it The decorations
were mean and tawdry, so it was said —unworthy of the
city—unfit for the reception of a Prince ; King William Street
was likened to a rag fair, and every epithet exhaustive of
condemnation was heaped upon them. Nevertheless the
Reception Committee, with Mr. Puller, M.P., the Mayor, at its
head, and Mr. R. D. Ross, D.A.G.C., for its honorary secretary,
disregarding the general dissatisfaction, worked on steadily to
complete what, in the end, proved to be a most beautiful and
effective design.
Private enterprise in the meantime was not idle. Specula-
tive citizens on the one hand, and enthusiastic colonists
on the other were crowding the footpaths with balconies,
from which a good view of the procession might be obtained ;
and for some weeks the usually staid and quiet city of
Adelaide looked more like a theatre, behind the scenes of
which some gigantic spectacle was in preparation, than the
centre of a wealthy and prosperous colony. It seemed for a


time almost hopeless to expect that out of the confused mass of
flags, trophies, timber, evergreens, half finished triumphal
arches, incipient gas designs and transparencies, anything like
completeness, effect, or even order, could be attained. A
drinking fountain which had been erected in the centre of
King William Street, was mercilessly sacrificed, and it was
thought it never could be taken away in time to make that
part of the roadway even decently passable. Like the rest of
the gloomy forebodings this, however, proved to be unfounded.
In the meantime, whilst all the preliminaries were in progress,
the colony was visited by a series of violent gales, which swept
over the city, overturning one triumphal arch, and were followed
by violent squalls of rain, which for the time, did not improve the
appearance of the trophies which had been erected. Then even
those who had been disposed to give the Committee credit for
being able to achieve a success, either sided with the grumblers
or looked on in sorrow or in silence on the failure and dis-
appointment which now seemed almost inevitable. The Com-
mittee, however, kept on the even tenor of their way with an
earnestness and perseverance which deserved the splendid
success with which their efforts Avere eventually reAvarded.
The uncertainty which had prevailed as to the time of the
‘ Galatea’s’ arrival Avas at length dispelled by news via Sydney,
brought by H.M.S. ‘Virago’; that the ship Avith her royal
commander had arrived at the Cape of Good Hope, and would
sail from thence direct to Adelaide about the 25th September.
In order that timely notice might be given of her arrival a code
of signals had been agreed upon, so as to announce it at the
earliest moment after she was sighted. Commander Hutchinson,
RK, Admiralty Surveyor for South Australia, on duty in St,
Vincent’s Gulf in the ‘ Beatrice’ Avas instructed to look out for
her, and Avith rockets or flags to inform the signal station of her
arrival either by day or night, as the case might be; but the


gallant Captain looked out in vain. Pilot boats anxious of the
honor of taking her to her anchorage’cruised and cruised to no
purpose; day after day went on, and no ‘Galatea.’ No rockets
were thrown up in the Gulf at night. The signal mast in
Adelaide gave no sign of the ‘ Galatea’s’ number, and the signal
guns which were to be fired in Adelaide when the ship was
sighted continued gloomily silent. At last it was settled that
Western Australia had been the first point of call, and the
middle of November was thought to be the earliest period at
which it would be possible for the Duke of Edinburgh to arrive.
The end of the month drew near. The overland mail went out
on the 28th October, but with instructions to the mail agent
that if the branch steamer met the ‘Galatea’ to stop and take
from her any letters which the royal party might wish to
forward. On the evening before her sailing some young gentle-
men with more fun than wisdom got to the signal guns and
fired two shots at the regulated interval—the third shot missed
from some unexplained cause, but the flash was distinctly seen,
and Adelaide was for more than an hour in a state of wild
excitement. Almost every one turned out into the streets,
which wore a more lively and busier appearance than they had
done for many a day previous. After wandering about for
more than an hour in a most purposeless manner, irritated
and excited by all kinds of contradictory rumours, they gradually
dispersed with the unpleasant conviction that they had
been hoaxed.
After this, of course, even the real signals would for a time
have failed to dispel the feeling of sullen disappointment which
seemed to weigh on those who had come long distances to be
amongst the first to greet the Sailor Prince upon his landing.
All this while the ‘ Galatea ’ was steadily nearing her destina-
tion, she had met the mail steamer, had sent on her dispatches,
and on the succeeding evening, ran quietly up the Gulf without


a pilot, and anchored in the place fixed for her, as cleverly as
though her captain and men had known the Gulf for years.
The pilot cutter had seen a large steamer passing up the Gulf,
but being becalmed could only send away her boat, which,
however, did not reach the frigate, as she was under steam.
The ‘ Beatrice, ’ with Commander Hutchinson, R.N., was
becalmed off the Lightship, so that he could be of no service
for the moment. On coming to anchor, the ‘ Galatea ’ sent up
showers of rockets, which at last convinced the men at the
signal station that their labors were at an end. The three
signal guns were fired in Adelaide before daybreak, and roused
the still sleeping citizens, who now felt certain that the festival,
—the event in the history of South Australia, and in most of
their lives, —for which they had looked and hoped for days and
weeks before, had really come upon them at last.
The good folks at Glenelg however could scarcely make up
their minds that the ‘ Galatea ’ was really in the Bay, and some
extraordinary telegrams are said to have been transmitted
thence to town. ‘ There was a large ship in sight supposed to
be the “Galatea.”’ £ lt was the “Galatea” without doubt.’
And then, ‘lt was not the “ Galatea ” at all, ’ In order to
solve these doubts, five young gentlemen, connected with a
business house in Adelaide, who had gone to Glenelg on an
excursion the day before, quietly pulled off to the stranger. They
were courteously received by the officers of the watch, and after
a short stay rowed ashore, bringing reliable intelligence to the
daily journals. All this time the mass of the good people of
Glenelg were fast asleep, and were as much surprised as grati-
fied at waking to find the stately frigate swinging quietly at
her anchor in the Bay. Here it was that the Corporation of
Port Adelaide made their last attempt to bring the Prince to
Adelaide by way of the Port. A deputation from Port Adelaide
sailed early on the morning and boarded the ship. They brought


with them an address asking His Royal Highness to change his
place of landing. The Prince did not receive them. The
address was sent through one of His Royal Highness’s equerries,
and a polite, but decided verbal answer was returned to the
effect that the Duke could not depart from the course which
had been laid down for him with the sanction and approval of
the Governor-in-Chief. The only consolation afforded them
after this well merited rebuff was in the programme which they
had so strenuously opposed, viz., that the Prince should embark
on his departure by way of Port Adelaide; to this they were
obliged to reconcile themselves, and no more was heard of this
little, but perhaps pardonable local jealousy, during the Prince’s
stay.
Although Glenelg is not the most attractive spot at which a
stranger could land on the coast of South Australia, there were
reasons why it should have been chosen for the royal disem-
barkation. It was hallowed by the remembrances that here the
first settlers stepped on shore and began the weary, arduous,
and for a long time dispiriting task of colonizing the immense
tract of country before them; here, too, the colony was pro-
claimed by Governor Hindmarsh as a separate dependency of the
British Crown. It offered also one of the shortest routes to
Adelaide, along an excellent road, through a good country, and it
afforded the best entrance into and passage through the city.
By way of the Port there is a run of about a dozen miles up a
creek bounded by mangrove swamps which fringe a sandy and
scrubby Peninsula on one side, and barren islands on the other;
along an unsightly, dreary, and dusty road, the very life of
which has been taken from it by a railway which runs parallel
to it; a road, which fills the minds of those that sec it for the
first time, when they come into the province from the sea, with
the idea that the fertility of South Australia is almost as much
a myth as that of the celebrated ‘Eden’ in the novel. From


the end of the Port road too there is but a short run along
North Terrace to Government House, allowing no sight of the
city, no room for the procession for which the Reception Com-
mittee had laboured so hard and on which ‘Young Australia’
had built so much. In fact, the entrances by way of the Port
would have spoiled the whole of the arrangements that had
been made, or, if adopted in the first instance, would have ren-
dered it impossible for the citizens and Committtee to do what
they did to welcome the Royal visitor.
The time originally fixed for the arrival of the Prince in
South Australia was the best that could have been selected.
At the end of September the spring is just commencing. The
winter rains have ceased, and the country looks fresh and
green. The country about Adelaide, where not under cultivation,
is covered with spring flowers, and the growing corn on the
farms shows out in beautiful contrast to the dark back-ground of
the mountain ranges by which the Adelaide Plains are bounded.
Rut as September passed, and October came and gradually wore
on, it was feared, and not without reason, that the fierce sun
which rages during the hot months, would burst upon the
country, and give it that arid and scorched appearance which
is its characteristic during summer. The rains, however, con-
tinued for nearly a month beyond the usual period, and at the
end of October the hills and plains still wore their vernal dress.
The weather was cool, and the sky shewed that beautiful clear
blue tint which is seldom equalled and never surpassed out of
Australia. Other circumstances also contributed to render the
time of the royal visit most propitious. Parliament was in
session; but there were no party questions to disturb its
deliberations, nor to excite the public mind. Religious dis-
sensions—almost unknown in South Australia —did not
exist. The drought, which had almost devastated the northern
part of the colony, had come to an end. The previous


harvest had. been abundant beyond anything previously expe-
rienced in the annals of the province, and all classes were
prosperous and contented. The commercial crisis which had
shaken Great Britain during the previous year, and which had
also tried South Australia severely, had passed over, so that
there was nothing to prevent the whole population from uniting
as they did, in onC grand intention to make the reception of the
Duke of Edinburgh a success. The people felt proud of the
honour—at one time unexpected—that they should be the
first to welcome him to the Great Australian Continent. They
rejoiced also that the only colony in the group not founded by
the Crown, and which had never been tainted with the element
of convictism, was appropriately chosen as the first to receive
the representative and son of Her Most Gracious Majesty, under
whose gentle rule the southern portion of Australia had grown
in less than one generation from a wilderness into a flourishing
state.
It had been arranged by the Reception Committee that a
day should elapse between the time of the ‘Galatea’s’ arrival
and the official landing of the Prince. This was for the
purpose of enabling His Royal Highness to make requisite
preliminary arrangements for the length of his stay, and to
revise the programme of his proceedings. It was necessary,
also, in order to enable the Reception Committee to complete
those portions of the decorations of the city of Adelaide which
were unavoidably left over until the last moment. On the
morning of the 30th October, the Private Secretary to the
Governor, Mr. D. Daly, Mr. R. D. Ross, D.A.C.G., Honorary
Secretary to the Reception Committee, and Major Lucas (late
40th Regiment), A.D.0., proceeded to Glenelg to wait upon
His Royal Highness and to receive his directions; but before
they reached the Bay they were met by Viscount hie wry and
the Hon. Elliott Yorkc, who were on their way to Government


House to wait upon Sir Dominick Daly,
Adelaide returned with their visitors, and they stayed with the
Governor the greater part of the day. The Prince instead of
remaining on board as it was supposed he would, came quietly
on shore incog., and strolled about for some time. Late in the
afternoon, Lord Newry and the Equerry-in-waiting returned to
the ‘Galatea,’ and the time for the landing was fixed at two
o’clock on the 31st October. In the evening, bonfires were lit
on the principal peaks of the Mount Lofty Eanges, and from
the sea eighteen were plainly visible at once. There were
many others lighted in different parts of the country, but
though useful in conveying the news of the Prince’s coming to
distant parts, they did not add to the display the fires were
intended to make. There was a good deal of haze hanging
over Adelaide at the time the bonfires were kindled, so that
their effect was, in a great measure, lost to the inhabitants, but
even without the haze they could not fail to be disappointed
at the result. Scarcely a summer passes without one or more
enormous fires taking place on these hills. They stretch away
sometimes for miles, burning grass, trees, fences, animals,
reptiles, and, in fact, everything before them. The good people
of Adelaide are thus accustomed to bonfires on the hills on a
4
scale that the Reception Committee could not expect to equal.
If the Prince’s visit had been delayed one month later in the
year, this portion of the great rejoicing must have been omitted
from the programme altogether, in consequence of the danger of
setting the country on fire. Once a bush fire is fairly started,
it is impossible to control it, or even to conjecture where it is
likely to stop. Some years back one of those fearful visitations
swept a tract of country more than two hundred miles in length
and many miles in width, and a number of farmers and others
were burnt out and nearly ruined.
The town of Glenelg, at which the Prince’s official entry


into South Australia was fixed to take place, is situate on the
eastern shore of Holdfast Bay, in Gulf St. Vincent. It is built
on and behind a range of sandhills, which stretch away, from
Marino on the south to the entrance to the Port op the north,
for about fifteen miles, varying in width, but generally rather
over a quarter of a mile wide. They are composed of the finest
white sand, and before the wind the particles drift and shift
about almost like wreaths of snow. Their shapes and position
arc thus almost always changing, and in places where no
improvements have been undertaken to arrest their progress
they are gradually creeping further and further inland. They
are thinly covered in some parts with stunted shrubs, rushes,
and a coarse kind of grass having long sharp-pointed blades
with hard cutting edges, under cover of which snakes, lizards,
and other reptiles find shelter. Between the sandhills and the
sea there is a fine hard beach —a favorite place of resort for
picnic parties, and for those who wish to indulge in the luxury
of sea bathing. On the land side of the sandhills the plains
commence. The soil is at first rather poor, but it gradually
improves as it goes towards the hills until it reaches the remains
of what once was known as the Black Forest, which borders
closely upon the limits of the southern Park Lands. Although
the trees have been cut down with an unsparing hand, there is
still enough of the growing timber and a sufficient number of
stumps remaining to shew what it must have been in the earlier
days of the colony. It now bears the appearance of a beautiful
park rather thickly wooded, but wanting sadly in those stately
trees which give so great a charm to English landscapes. The
trees here arc more known as the peppermint gum —the wood
of which is not much in request except for fuel. Through the
plains there is a straight road leading from the sea-beach to the
south-west corner of the City of Adelaide.
The city is situate on the plains, about midway between the
12
THE DUKE OF VISIT


lulls and the sea. It is divided into two portions, called North
and South Adelaide, separated by a valley, through which the
Torrens flows. This river is no more than an insignificant
stream, narrow and shallow in the summer time, but swelling
into a wide and dangerous mountain torrent after the winter
rains. In 1851 it swept away three bridges which united
North and South Adelaide ; and a few weeks back destroyed a
dam erected at great expense so as to secure a good sheet of
water in the city instead of the present uninteresting rivulet.
The southern part of the city has an area of about 700 acres,
and the northern about 350. These are surrounded by Park
Lands, which are the property of the public, and cannot be
built upon ; so that the city can never increase in size. These
reserves contain about 2,000 acres of land. Round the city—
both north and south —are terraces, which are planted with
trees and shrubs, so that the approaches to the town on all sides
are through pretty aveftues, which will be extremely beautiful
when the plantations have arrived at their full growth. The
streets are laid out at right angles, at the ends of which there
is always a good view of the splendid amphitheatre of hills by
which the Adelaide Plains are closed in. The western openings
of the city afford a view of the sea, and the northern thorough-
fares lead out to the plains which stretch away to Salisbury
and Gawler. The streets are wide, and some of them remarkably
fine—King William Street, the chief thoroughfare, being 132
feet wide, and graced with many very handsome buildings. On
the north side of North Terrace, just where the division of the
city takes place, are the Railway Station, Government House
and grounds, the Houses of Parliament, the Police and Military
Barracks, the Institute, Hospital, Botanical Gardens, and the
Lunatic Asylum ; none of which, however, require any special
description here.
The time for the royal landing being now positively known,


every effort was made to complete the decorations of those
streets through which the Prince’s cortege was to pass. The
route by which the procession was to enter Adelaide was from
the jetty at Glenelg, along the Bay Road, to the junction of
South and West Terraces —along South Terrace to the termina-
tion of King William Street south —along that street, round the
eastern side of Victoria Square—along King William Street
north, between the New Post Office and the Government Offices,
past the Town Hall to the entrance of the Government Domain
and to Government House,
In anticipation of His Royal Highness’s visit, the viceregal
seat had been newly decorated, and one wing set apart for the
use of the Duke of Edinburgh. This portion of the building
had been entirely refurnished in the most costly and elegant
manner. The furniture was made in the colony ; and for taste
and workmanship could not be excelled even in England. A
stud of splendid horses and suitable carriages had been provided
for the Prince, and a large building, originally intended as a
drill-shed for the volunteer force, was converted into a roomy
and well-appointed stable for the horses of the royal party.
These portions of the arrangements had been completed some
time before the ‘Galatea’ came into the Bay, and there was
nothing left to be done at the last moment. Out of doors it
was otherwise: workmen were busy giving the finishing-touches
to the triumphal arches. The trophies—the flags attached to
which got hard usage in the squally weather that had prevailed
—required to be put in order again, and the festoons of ever-
greens which were to fringe the streets were not yet hung in
their places. It seemed, indeed that the time allotted for the
completion of the work was all too short; but everyone worked
as if he meant it, and the morning of the 31st found every-
thing in admirable order.
The Glenelg Jetty, by way of which the Prince was to come


ashore, is about twenty feet wide and 1,350 feet long, and built
upon screw piles, having a wooden platform of diagonal planking.
A portion of this had been railed off for the accommodation of
those who had received tickets to be present at the landing,
the remainder being kept clear for the passage of the Duke and
those who received him. At the landing steps there was a
canopy and dais for the accommodation of His Royal Highness
and the Governor-in-Chief. The whole length of the hand rails
from the steps to the junction of the jetty with the shore, was
streaming with flags and pennons of all the colors of the rain-
bow ; and at the shore there was a handsome pavilion, sur-
mounted by a ducal crown, within which the Mayor of Glenelg
(Mr. E. W. Andrews) was to present the first address of
welcome to the Duke of Edinburgh. In the town itself there
was not such a display of bunting as might have been expected,
or rather, as the houses are built in a somewhat straggling
way, the effect was not so good as perhaps a smaller show
would have made if confined within a more compact space.
Along the Bay Road there are comparatively few houses, but the
occupants of these had made the most of their small opportunities.
Wherever there was a chance of erecting a balcony to get a sight
of the Prince there one was sure to be found. On the garden
gates were floral devices; some forming the Prince’s initials;
some those of the Queen; but everywhere there was an attempt
in some way to show that the residents shared in the universal
desire to contribute toward the general welcome to the illustrious
visitor.
The first formal or perhaps official decoration was at the
south-west corner of the city. Here there was a triumphal
arch of three bays, the centre one thirty feet wide by thirty-five
feet high, and the side openings fifteen feet by twenty-four feet
high, and topped by a sort of scarlet and gold colored cloth;
above all floated two Royal Standards, and innumerable flags


referable to no known nationality in the world. The arch itself
was by no means pretentions, but its effect was pretty and it
was so far a success.
Along South Terrace to King William Street the private
houses all bore some kind of decoration; floral wreaths, festoons,
initials of the Prince and Queen, balconies, and flags, met the
eye at every step, and gave that quiet part of the city a lively
appearance. These efforts, cordial though they might be, of
course could not vie with the elaborate works of the Reception
Committee, for near the entrance of King William Street the city
pageantry opened out to view. It was at this point that the
Mayor and Corporation were to welcome His Royal Highness
to Adelaide. A triumphal arch had been erected here, the
principal opening of which was thirty feet wide by forty feet in
height, with side arches of proportionate dimensions, giving the
whole structure a total width of ninety feet. It was profusely
covered with green boughs, and surmounted with flagstaff’s,
topped with ferns, displaying a wonderful variety of national
flags. At the springing of the arches there were panels covered
with red and yellow cloth, while festoons and garlands of flowers
were suspended all about, which added an additional charm to
the really fine effect of the structure. Some time before the
Corporation had made a nice wide path through the centre of
Victoria Square, so that from the south end of King William
Street there was a clear vista of more than half a mile down to
the last triumphal arch, and the Government domain. The
sight from this point was really splendid, for after passing round
Victoria Square, which had no special decorations worth noting,
the elaborate preparations of King William Street north, came
full in sight. The inhabitants had done their utmost to add
variety to the scene, and the balconies they had erected over the
footpaths all covered with different hues of cloth, made really
a fine relief to the formal embellishments of this thoroughfare


erected by the Reception Committee, The street at each side
was lined with flagstaffs surmounted with spear heads; on
each of these at rather less than midway up there was a shield,
above which rose a cluster of flags of different colors and designs,
the ends of which were gathered together so as to form a very
tasteful trophy; between the poles at regular intervals were
placed pedestals, on which rested very handsome vases filled with
flowers. The flagstaffs each had a flag hoisted on it, and chains
of flowers united the tops of these from one end of the street to
the other ; in the bight of each chain hung a party colored
flag thrown on it with studied negligence, and which effectually
did away with the least trace of monotony in the design. At
every house where it could be done a flagstaff was erected,
showing an endless variety of colors of England and of other
nations, besides flags owning no characteristic beyond that which
was derived from the taste or caprice of the maker.
At the end of King William Street, at the junction with
North Terrace, the last Triumphal Arch was erected. This was
really a most elegant structure. Its external height over all was
about 70 feet, its height under the arch 45 feet, with 40 feet
clear roadway. The framework was covered with a light kind
of material which gave it the appearance of solidity which
boughs and evergreens cannot approach, at the front, back, and
sides were pillars of open work, gilt, rising over 30 feet in
height, resting on open trellised pedestals covered with flowers
and evergreens and on which rested shields bearing the royal
arms and other devices. The outlines of the arch were bordered
with flowers and in front and back appeared the word ‘Welcome.’
The panels at the side of the arch bore the royal initials and
the whole was crowned by the arms of the Duke of Edinburgh
behind which were trophies of flags most tastefully arranged.
Round the platform at the top on which the last rested,
banners were fixed wherever available space could be found.


Whatever might have been said about the decorations whilst
they were in progress the feeling had changed now. No one
could pass through King William Street without being convinced
that the Reception Committee had achieved a success. Everyone
was pleased that the work was done and done well; and what
was more important still, the Prince was at hand, holiday
making was the order of the day, and no one had time for
grumbling.
In Bindley Street and Bundle Street, which join King
William Street from the west and east not far from the arch,
the Reception Committee had done nothing, as neither of these
thoroughfares were in the line of the procession; but trades-
men and shopkeepers in both were determined not to be outdone
even by the authorities. The footways were lined with flags
and banners, the verandah posts were covered with evergreens
and flowers ; gas devices of the most elaborate kind, alternately
with transparencies, were seen almost from end to end of the
streets. Variegated lamps, colored lamps, Chinese lanterns,
flower wreaths stretching from side to side of the streets,
afforded a view inferior perhaps in conception to that of King
William Street, but picturesque without formality and effective
without pretension. Of the rest of the city little need be said,
except that even in the least frequented parts some attempt at
display was seen. The mania for bunting had extended even
to the children, and one enterprising man made a good thing
by printing Union Jacks and Tricolors of small size to meet the
immense demand on their account.
In order to make the city decoration complete, illuminations
on a large scale had been projected. The whole of the Govern-
ment establishments were covered with fittings, and in nearly
every case the pipes followed their various architectural features
so as to trace out the whole of the buildings in lines of fire.
All the private houses on the western side of King William


Street to Bundle Street were united in one grand design, the
regularity of which was occasionally broken by the introduction
of stars and transparencies. The banks were covered with
devices ; those of the Union Bank, the South Australian, and
the Bank of Australasia, being most elegant. In many of
the illuminations the orthodox gas pipe had been done away
with and a most effective substitute adopted. Boxes of sheet
iron, about two inches deep with designs perforated in the
outer face, were erected, and being kept supplied with gas
were found to answer admirably. They were certainly more
beautiful than any designs made from pipes. They are not
only inexpensive but admit of any pattern being adopted, no
matter how complicated it may be. There is one drawback
however, that in the daytime they are most unsightly. The
Exchange was illuminated by means of this contrivance. In the
night the beautiful scrolls, anchors, stars, and crowns, were the
theme of universal admiration —in the daytime they looked like
little rusty saws —and on other buildings where circular devices,
monograms, &c., had been fixed, in the daylight the apparatus
resembled gongs, saucepan lids, and fryingpans.
The device in front of the Town Hall was chiefly dis-
tinguished by an enormous star, twenty-five feet across, which
was most brilliant. When the gas fitting arrangements had
proceeded to a considerable extent, doubts were expressed that
the supply of gas would be insufficient. The Gas Company
being applied to intimated that they could supply all the
demands for which they had so far arranged, but they would
not enter into any fresh or more extended arrangements. As
the devices on the different buildings were completed, they were
tried in turn—the effect was not very encouraging—some of
the supply pipes were too small, and there appeared to be an
insufficient pressure of gas. These defects were remedied in due
course ; but, in order to guard against the possibility of failure,
19
TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


certain of the Government buildings were lighted only on
special occasions. This not only relieved the Gas Company
to a great extent, but left private persons free to make the
most of their own illuminations. The appearance of the
different Government establishments when illuminated was
certainly most creditable and did honor to the good taste of
of the Colonial Architect’s department. The only thing to be
regretted is that they could not be lighted up all at once.
w


THE LANDING.
The morning of the 31st of October, was marked by unusual
bustle and excitement in the streets of Adelaide. For some
two or three days previous, visitors from all parts of the
country had been streaming in to take part in the festivities
promised on the Duke’s arrival. All the hotels were crammed;
beds were not to be procured, and many strangers, after seeking
in vain for accommodation in the city, were obliged to resort to
the suburban houses of entertainment, two or three miles away.
The population of the city, for the time being, was nearly
doubled, and it was estimated that at the time of the Duke’s
entrance more than 50,000 persons were assembled to greet
him.
Early in the morning the streets were filled, but as the day
drew on they were thronged; many vehicles passed rapidly
through the city on their way to the Bay, carrying those visitors
who were privileged to be present at the landing, The
entrance into the town however seemed to be the great attraction,
and few, save those who had cards for the jetty, turned their
attention towards Glenelg. There was indeed enough to see in
Adelaide. The unusual appearance of the streets, the crowds,
the spirit of hearty good humour which seemed to possess every
one, made the little city a centre of attraction in itself. Busi-
ness of course was entirely suspended, except by those whose
fate or function it is to minister to the physical wants of their
fellows. At the corners of the streets crowds of people had
assembled, though there was no procession in sight, and no
prospect of its appearance for hours. The monotony however


every now and then was broken by a heavy lumbering noise.
The detachment of artillery which was to fire the Royal salute
was on its way to Glenelg ; then several omnibusses filled and
covered with the detachment of volunteers which formed
the guard of honor passed on ; then similar conveyances con-
taining bands of music; then the volunteer cavalry, which was
to serve as the escort to the royal carriage. These, however, made
but a momentary sensation, and were forgotten almost as soon
as they had passed. The Bay Road presented a gay appearance.
The roadway was filled with carriages and conveyances of all
descriptions, and the supply of dust was most liberal; but dust
is the normal state of all South Australian roads in summer, so
it was passed through unheeded. The Bay itself presented a
most unusual appearance. Once a year, on the anniversary of
the founding of the colony, crowds of people assemble there to
see the sport by which that event is commemorated, but no
such gathering as that of the 31st of October had ever yet been
seen there. Before the Pier Hotel barricades had been erected to
keep the crowds from the road through which the Prince was to
pass, but all the space outside was filled, as well as round the
head of the jetty. On both sides of the pier on the beach
people had gathered in crowds, and the jetty itself was lined
on the south side by a throng of ladies, whose gay dresses
showed in bright contrast with the sombre colours of the jetty
itself. A few boats were dancing lightly over the water in the
Bay, and two steamers which had come round from the Port
full of passengers to witness the ceremonial of the day, were
lifting and dropping lazily in the swell, waiting until the Prince
should leave his ship. The chief object of attraction however
was the ‘ Galatea,’ which was moored about three and a half
miles off the shore, dressed out in flags down to the water’s edge.
Every field and opera glass was eagerly turned towards her, so
that the moment of His Royal Highness’s departure should at


once be known, but the high bulwarks of the frigate prevented
anything from being seen.
As one o’clock drew near, three companies of the Adelaide
Volunteer Regiment, under the command of Lieut. Colonel
Mayo, were drawn up just at the head of the jetty, with the
Regimental band. The detachments of artillery, under Captain
Claxton, were stationed on the north side of the jetty
in readiness to fire the royal salute as soon as the Prince
touched the shore.
About a quarter to two His Excellency Sir Dominick Daly,
Governor-in-Chief, arrived, accompanied by the Hon. H. Ayers,
Chief Secretary, and his Aides-de-Camp, Major Lucas, and
Captain Deering, came along the steps to the pavilion under
which the Duke was to rest while the procession was being
formed. On the pier were, the Hon. T. Reynolds, Treasurer ;
the Hon. R. B. Andrews, Attorney General; the Hon. L.
Glyde, Commissioner of Crown Lands; the Hon. P. Santo,
Commissioner of Public Works ; the Mayor of Glenelg (E. W.
Andrews, Esq.) ; the President and Members of the Legislative
Council; the Speaker and Members of the House of Assembly;
Sir J. H. Fisher; the Lord Bishop of Adelaide (the Right
Rev. Dr. Short); the Very Rev. Dean Farrell; Archdeacon
Woodcock; Colonel Hamley, 50th Regiment, Commander of the
Forces ; the Members of the Marine Board, headed by Lieut.
Douglas, R.N.R., President; and a large number of the
leading merchants and citizens of Adelaide.
At half-past one precisely a slight commotion was visible on
board the ‘Galatea’ —men were seen swarming up the rigging
of the frigate, and clustering in the tops. A boat was pushed
off from her side, the men then ran out on the yards, and a
flash burst from the starboard bow of the vessel, followed by a
heavy, deep roar, and a dense cloud of smoke, against which the
‘Galatea’s’ launch, bearing the Royal Standard, showed out in


strong relief. The firing continued until the salute of twenty-
one guns was completed, and when the smoke had cleared away,
the launch was steadily rowing towards Glenelg Jetty, followed
at a short distance by the steamers ‘Eleanor’ and ‘Goolwa’ as
an escort.
At two o’clock precisely the launch came to the landing
steps, the seamen topped their oars, and H.R.H. the Duke of
Edinburgh stepped from his boat amidst the most enthusiastic
cheering and waving of handkerchiefs. At the bottom of the steps
he was met by the members of the Marine Board; at the head
he was received by His Excellency Sir Dominick Daly, the
Governor, with whom he shook hands warmly, and they remained
in conversation for a minute or two. They then advanced to the
pavilion, where the address of the Corporation of Glenelg was
presented. It had been intended that the Ministry and
other officials should have followed the Governor and the Duke
in an order which had been pre-arranged, but at the moment
this was entirely forgotten, and the officials, His Royal
Highness’s staff, and the members of both Houses of Parlia-
ment, and the rest of those on the jetty came after as best
they could. The ladies too, who had assembled, rushed on to
get another view of His Royal Highness, and, if possible, to see
the presentation of the address of the Mayor and Corporation ;
but their eagerness defeated their object, and a greater crush
was the consequence, from which it was impossible to escape
for some time. The Band of the Adelaide Regiment greeted
the Royal Party with the National Anthem, and the artillery
fired a royal salute to welcome him to Australia. Having
arrived under the pavilion, the address was read and handed
to His Royal Highness, who returned a suitable reply.
The Prince and the Governor then proceeded to the royal
carriage, which was waiting. When they were seated, the
guard of honor presented arras, and the party set forward —one


of the horses, either frightened at the crowd or disturbed by
the noise of the guns, reared and threw himself down, at the
same time dislodging his rider. No damage was done, and
the horse having been quieted and the postilions re-mounted,
the carriage drew off at a smart pace, preceded by a troop of
volunteer cavalry, with two other troops on the flanks as an
escort.
The order of precedency to be observed by the different
functionaries in the procession had been carefully laid down some
time before, and there were marshals in attendance to arrange
them accordingly; but, in the hurry and confusion it was
impossible to observe this order strictly, so that some of them
were placed, or placed themselves, lower down in the ranks
than it was intended they should be. In the excitement of the
occasion this was not noticed, and the cortege moved rapidly
towards town. It had been arranged beforehand that no
vehicles should be allowed to enter the line of procession by
any cross roads; but several horsemen, as well as the drivers
of many vehicles endeavoured, before leaving Glenelg, to
break through this regulation in their anxiety to follow the
Prince to town. With some little trouble and confusion this
was prevented, and a fair and clear start was made. Along
the road the colonists turned out everywhere in great numbers,
and in spite of the dust raised by the long cavalcade, shouted
and cheered with the most lusty good will. At the Half-
way House the Prince received a similar hearty greeting, and
as he proceeded the crowd increased and the cheering was
taken up and repeated to the echo. Wherever there was a
balcony, it was crammed with spectators ; and at the cross
roads vehicles of all kinds were drawn up filled with settlers
all anxious to get a sight of the Duke and his suite as they drove
past. At the Black Forest Inn there was another large
concourse of people, and a repetition of the shouting and


cheering which had accompanied the royal party from the Bay,
As he approached the first arch at the south-west corner of
the city (which is distant about six miles from Glenelg) the
road was lined with people who had come from Adelaide to
meet him. The procession, however, did not stop, but pro-
ceeded along South Terrace to the second arch in King William
Street, where the Mayor, Mr. H. R Fuller, M.P., and the City
Councillors were in waiting to present the address of the
Corporation of Adelaide to the Prince. Two raised platforms
had been erected underneath the centre arch —the one side
being occupied by the Mayor, Councillors, and Corporation
Officers ; the other by ladies. The procession halted here, and
the Mayor and Council stepped forward to meet the Prince’s
carriage. The Mayor, after welcoming His Royal Highness in
a short but appropriate speech, called on the Town Clerk, (Mr.
W. A, Hughes) to read the address. It was beautifully
engrossed on vellum lined with silk, and when presented to the
Duke was enclosed in a magnificent silver casket—the gift of
the Mayor. The Duke of Edinburgh returned a kind reply to
the address and handed the casket back to the Mayor to be
kept by him until after his arrival at Government House : the
procession then assumed something like its official shape, and
proceeded in the following order to the Government domain —
Advanced Guard of Volunteer Cavalry.
The Executive Committee.
The Committee of Management.
The Mayor and Corporation of Adelaide.
Outrider. [- Escort of Volunteer Cavalry. ■{ Outrider.
Escort of ) ( Escort of
Volunteer > Carriage of His Royal Highness. < Volunteer
Cavalry. ) ( Cavalry.
Outrider. }- Escort of Volunteer Cavalry. -[ Outrider,
Aid-de-Camp to ) s .. fH; R . tt- h C Aid-de-Camp to
His Excellency. \ bmte ot K ° yal \ His Excellency.
Suite of His Excellency.


The Lord Bishop of Adelaide.
The Members of Executive Council.
The President of the Legislative Assembly.
The Members of the Legislative Council.
The Speaker of the House of Assembly.
The Members of the House of Assembly.
The Heads of Departments of the Civil Service.
The Friendly Societies.
Members of the various Corporations.
The German Club.
The Liedertafel.
The Tumverein.
The German Eifle Club.
Private Carriages.
Horsemen, &c.
This was the order in which the procession had been
arranged to take place, and it was observed as closely as
possible. Places had been appointed for the Judges of the
Supreme Court, but they were unable to be present. The
procession was considerably more than half a mile long.
On the halting of the Duke’s carriage there was a slight
rush of the numerous bystanders to witness the ceremony; but
the crowd, though large, occasioned no inconvenience. The
great spectacle—the passage through the city—had begun, and
the people closed in alongside and after the cavalcade, so as to
be present at what was the most effective feature in the pro-
gramme—the singing of ‘ God Save the Queen ’ by the Sunday-
school children. For some days previous these little colonists
had been under the guidance of Mr. George Loder—a gentleman
whose name is not unfamiliar to English ears. When the idea
was first mooted that this should form part of the proceedings,
he devoted himself with great energy to bring the mass of
children under direction, so as to enable them to sing the
simple, grand old anthem, in a way which would do justice to
the music, and to the son of the Royal Lady through whose


forethought and kindness he came to the Australias on a
mission of peace and of recognition to Her sons and daughters
in the southern hemisphere. Around the spot which had been
selected for the site of the Victoria Tower of the New Post
Office a gigantic balcony had been raised, facing to the south
and east in a semicircle, and rising tier upon tier nearly forty
feet high. In this were assembled 4,070 children, gathered
from the various Sunday schools in and about Adelaide,
marshalled by their respective teachers, and all under the
direction of Mr. Loder. Long before the Duke left Glenelg
they had assembled, and without confusion or disorder had
ranged themselves in their respective places. Looking from
Victoria Square the splendid gathering of well-dressed and
well conducted children —boys and girls—looked like a huge
bouquet of flowers. In the wonderful mixture of costumes and
colors the identity of the little ones was lost. An occasional
movement or fluttering was observed amongst them as some of
the most eager stood up to see if they could see the Prince
coming; but this passed like a gentle breeze across a flower-
bed, and they relapsed into quiet but earnest expectation.
The booming of the guns on the rifle-practice ground on the
south Park Lands, which announced the Prince’s entrance into
the city, had hardly ceased, when the bells at the Town Hall
rang out a loud and musical peal of welcome. Other bells rang
also, neither mingling with nor marring the music which floated
from the Albert Tower; but amongst them the deep-toned
clang of the immense bell at the Roman Catholic Cathedral was
heard loudest of all. Presently a movement was perceptible at
the second arch. A cloud of dust heralded the onward march
of the advanced guard of cavalry. Slowly they came along to
Victoria Square, and slower still round its eastern side; for
the people were coming together thicker and faster, until the
Prince’s carriage stopped near the platform where the children


were. Cheers and counter-cheers had filled the air as the pro-
cession had entered the city to this point, and even the children
had joined in the enthusiasm until the caariages stopped. Then,
without faltering or delay, the first notes were poured forth in
a low tone, but swelling until the whole 4,070 voices were as
one, singing from the heart that hymn of loyalty which greeted
the son of England’s Queen.
The effects of this chorale was wonderful. It awed all other
sounds into silence, even those who were most anxious to press
forward to see the Prince stood still, and remained so for a short
time after the last note had died away. The Prince, and indeed
all the assembled multitudes remained uncovered during the
singing, and when it had ceased, a cheer —such a cheer as had
never before been heard in South Australia, rang through the
city. The song was heard for nearly two miles from Adelaide
as it was borne eastward with the breeze; but the cheer, not
indeed as musical, but as honest and heartfelt, was heard even
at a greater distance, and told of the loyalty and affection of the
people of Australia to the Ruler of Great Britain, and to that
great nation from which they derived their origin, their institu-
tions, and the self-reliance which had made the colony what it is.
The procession moved on, and the passage from the new Post
Office to Government House was one grand ovation. The
people in the balconies cheered and waved their handkerchiefs;
the crowds which lined the footpaths pressed on with eagerness,
but without disorder, everywhere was enthusiasm and general
delight. The guns from the battery on North Terrace announced
the Duke’s arrival at Government House, where he was received
by a guard of honor of the 50th Regiment; and the Prince was
at last at home in South Australia.
In the afternoon, after resting himself, His Royal Highness
drove out into the suburbs, to the east of Adelaide, towards
Payneham and Campbelltown, and in the evening was present at
TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA.


a state dinner at Government House. The members of the
Ministry, the Lord Bishop of Adelaide, the Judges, Colonel
Hamley, 50th Regiment, Commandant of the Forces, Captain
Hutchinson, R.N., the Prince’s Suite, the Governor’s Staff, some
members of His Excellency’s family, and a few private gentle-
men, had the honor of being invited. The day though fine had
entailed upon the Prince a considerable amount of work, and
the party broke up early.
The illuminations during the evening were general, and
altogether most successful, though for reasons already stated some
of the principal Government establishments were not lighted up.
The great sight, however, was the crowd in the streets; the
passage of carriages through the main thoroughfares had been
prohibited during the night of the illumination, so that both
roadway and footpath were covered with spectators,—in fact
there were more people out than even in the day time.
Although the largest assemblage that ever met together in
Adelaide there was not the slightest appearance of disorder or
drunkenness; and there was not one single instance of misbe-
haviour of any kind brought before the Police Magistrate next
morning. Not a single robbery was reported, and it may be
stated that for the first four days of the Prince’s visit the night
charges were not more numerous than those which make the
average of two ordinary days. Another fact made an impression
upon some members of the Prince’s suite—there were no poor
people to be seen. In the great concourse of colonists everyone
was well, or at least, decently attired, and there was a total
absence of that poverty which glaring and hideous in Europe is
unhappily not uncommon in other colonies in many respects
more favored than South Australia. A beggar is almost an
unknown character in this province, indeed there is so little
necessity for mendicancy, that it is not, and never has been, a
profitable trade.


THE LEVEE.
In order that a public memorial should remain of the visit of
the Duke of Edinburgh, it was determined by the Reception
Committee to ask His Royal Highness to lay the foundation
stone of the tower of the new Post Office, which it was intended
to name the Victoria Tower, in honor of his royal mother. The
day after his landing was fixed upon as the most suitable time.
His Royal Highness cheerfully fell in with the wishes of the
Committee and fixed half-past two, on the Ist November, for
the ceremony. Previous to this he had to suffer that ordeal
which happily Governors of colonies undergo but once a year.
A levee at Government House took place at noon. At the
annual ceremonial on the Queen’s Birthday there is generally
a large attendance, but on this occasion, of course, an unusual
number of visitors was expected. The Governor’s levee is over
generally in about half an hour, the Prince’s reception took
more than an hour and a half, indeed it was found necessary
to make a break in the ceremony to give His Royal Highness a
few moments rest, for, besides the gentlemen who are usually
present on occasions of • this kind, a number of friendly,
charitable, and other societies, attended to deliver addresses of
congratulation and welcome. As might have been expected,
their ranks were swelled by every member who could in any
way contrive to put in an appearance. The scene
was a brilliant one, such a varied collection of costumes had
never before graced the reception-room at Government House.
Most conspicuous of course, was that of His Royal Highness.
He wore his uniform as Captain in the Navy, the Riband and
Star of the Garter, the Stars of the Orders of the Thistle, and


of St. Patrick; and round his neck the Collar and Badge of the
Brazilian Order of the Southern Cross. He was attended by
the Governor and surrounded by all the dignitaries eccle-
siastical, legal, military, naval, and civil, all in their robes or
uniforms, and in greater number than had ever assembled at
Government House before. At the entrance door there was a
great crush. The day was sultry, the ante-room densely
packed, so that those who in turn were jammed in the centre
of the crowd, which moved very slowly, suffered a great deal
from the heat.
After emerging from this ordeal there was room to breathe
freely, and to watch the behaviour of the various visitors as
they passed through the chamber. Some marched through
without even saluting the Prince ; some stared about them as
if they could not find His Royal Highness; others bowed to
the first object that met their eye, so that the compliments
intended for him were very liberally distributed amongst his
attendants. It is said that one enthusiastic colonist insisted on
shaking hands with the Duke ; and that another was so over-
whelmed at the sight of royalty that he went on his knees
before the Prince, though these rumours certainly want confir-
mation. One immensely tall and powerful figure passed
through the room and, as might have been expected, attracted
some notice; the Duke was anxious to learn who it was —
it was Mr. John McKinlay, the explorer; one of the first to
cross the continent of Australia, and whose journeys will bear
honorable and favourable comparison with those even of the
most renowned of the Australian explorers. Without a single
instrument by which he could determine his position, except a
compass, he conducted a large party across the continent to the
Gulf of Carpentaria, and thence to Queensland, without the loss
of a man, keeping only a dead reckoning of his course. When
his route was plotted in the Surveyor General’s Office, his


estimated distance was not more than nine miles out in a
journey of more than 2,500 miles. The feat deserves a passing
notice, for though Mr. McKinlay’s story fills an honorable page
in South Australia’s history, it has not received the prominence
which it merits.
After the multitude had paid their respects to the Prince,
the Masonic body and the Friendly Societies made their appear-
ance ; the curious and mysterious emblems which most of their
members wore were very striking. Their addresses were merely
handed in, but replies were sent to them subsequently. There
were also addresses from the Civil Service, the Old Colonists,
the Church of England, the Presbyterian Church, the Methodist
body, and from the Corporation of Kensington and Norwood,
With the presentation of these the levee terminated, doubtless
to the great relief of His Royal Highness and suite.


THE VICTORIA TOWER.
Long before the appointed time those who were privileged
to attend the ceremony of laying the foundation stone assembled
in the balcony provided for them. It was the same in which
the children had sung the National Anthem. It was densely
filled, and it is estimated that upwards of 3,000 persons were
present. The picture which this gathering presented was even
more remarkable than that which had taken place the previous
day. The gentle sex had not forgotten their passion for adorn-
ment, and they had dressed, indeed as they looked, to the best
advantage. As the time for the Prince’s arrival approached
there was some crowding, but altogether it was not more than
might have been expected under the circumstances.
The building which was to be inaugurated under such un-
usual auspices had been designed by Messrs. Wright & Woods.
The foundation of this, the largest edifice in the colony, and by
all accounts, the most costly, had been put in some months ago,
but the buildings, owing to circumstances which it is unnecessary
to enter upon here, had not been proceeded with. It had
always been intended to designate the tower as ‘ The Victoria
Tower, ’ though at the outset it was not anticipated that the
foundation stone would be laid by the son of Queen Victoria.
When it was known that the Prince would visit South
Australia, the opportunity was eagerly seized upon, and every
preparation had been made to cause the interesting ceremony to
go off with eclat.
The stone was obtained from the Macclesfield marble quarries,
and had been suitably carved and ornamented; it bore the
following inscription : —‘ Victoria Tower —this stone was laid


by H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, K.G. ’ A blank was left
for the date, which will now be inscribed upon it before the
building is completed. It is unnecessary to describe the archi-
tectural features of this structure, but photographs of the
elevation have been supplied to His Royal Highness,
Shortly before three o’clock, loud cheering, a cloud of dust,
and the clatter of a cavalry escort, announced the arrival of the
Prince, accompanied by the Governor, and his own suite, and
that of Sir Dominick Daly. Having passed the private
entrance he took the seat that had been prepared for him, and
when the vociferous cheering which burst forth on his arrival
had somewhat subsided, the Hon. P. Santo, Commissioner of
Public Works, read an address, in which the character of the
building was generally described. His Royal Highness replied,
briefly expressing his satisfaction at having the pleasing task of
laying the stone which was to inaugurate the building, Mr.
R. G. Thomas, F.R.S.A., Colonial Architect, then read a copy
of the record placed beneath the stone, containing the names
of the Governor and of the legal, military, and other principal
authorities of the colony, as well as those of the architects and
builders. Along with this were deposited the newspapers of
the day, and the usual coins current in the colony. These
were covered with a sheet of plate glass cemented into the stone.
A trowel handsomely jewelled and ornamented, and made of
South Australian gold, the gift of Messrs. Brown & Thompson,
the builders, was then handed to His Royal Highness, and after
the mortar had been spread the stone was gradually lowered
into its place. The square, level, plumb, and rule having been
duly applied, the Prince declared the stone to be well and duly
laid. The Commissioner of Public Works then called for three
cheers for His Royal Highness, Avhich were given again and again
The Prince having bowed his acknowledgments, left with his
Excellency the Governor and suite.


As his Royal Highness was getting into his carriage he was
much pressed upon by the crowd that had assembled outside
the platform, and one or two of the bystanders got up behind
the carriage ; they were speedily removed, and the party
returned to Government House, cheered enthusiastically the
whole way.
In the afternoon His Royal Highness drove out for a short
time. His Excellency had issued invitations for dinner and
an evening party, both of which were numerously attended;
but the great, at least the most picturesque demonstration —
the torchlight procession, or the ‘ Fackelzug ’ of the German
colonists—took place in the evening.


THE TORCHLIGHT PROCESSION.
The German residents in South Australia, although mostly
naturalized, and as good and loyal subjects as the Crown has
under its rule, preserve, at least in public demonstrations, the
practices and traditions of their fatherland; these are so
different in every way from the stereotyped from which
English festivities assume, that in all cases where they are
introduced they make a welcome as well as a most picturesque
addition to the whole. While the Reception Committee were
busy with their arrangements, the German colonists acted for
themselves, and without assistance from the Central or indeed
any Committee except their oWn, they organized and carried
out one of the finest and most effective displays of its kind
ever witnessed out of Germany. It is seldom, indeed, that
a people so widely different from the English in their customs
and institutions, can be found to assimilate their views, and
adopt themselves to the new circumstances in which they are
placed, as the Germans have done in South Australia. It is
this inestimable quality, combined with their own industry
and perseverance, that has contribued to make them such
valuable colonists, and generally so prosperous and happy. In
the general rejoicings they played a double part. As subjects
of the Queen they wished to testify to her son their
appreciation of the liberty and justice they enjoy under her
dominions ; as Germans they could not forget the traditions
of the ‘ Yaterland ’ in their new nationality ; and while they
joined in heartily with their fellow-colonists in giving a warm
and cordial reception to the son of the Sovereign of Great
Britain, they gave it in a way most congenial to themselves


and to their early associations. A Committee, consisting of
the principal German inhabitants of Adelaide and its
neighbourhood, organized a'torchlight procession in honor of
the Prince. The ‘ Leidertafel 5 cordially co-operated with
them. The night for the display was well chosen. In the
line of march there were some illuminations, but their light
did not interfere with the general effect of procession.
The place of assembling was front of the Armoury on
North-terrace, when the final arrangements were made. The
members then passed through Gawler-place to Pirie-street
en route for Yictoria-square, where the torches were kindled.
Seen from the tower above the offices of the ‘Register’
newspaper, the assembly had a strange aspect—an irregular
stream of beings flitted along in front of the Union Bank,
looking like spectres in the light shed by its illuminations.
There was no uniformity in dress, the only distinguishing
mark being the torch, composed of rope-yarn, pitch, tallow,
and rosin, carried on the shoulder. When the party had
reached Yictoria-square, the torches were lighted; and having
been marshalled into order, four abreast, they streamed down
King William-street for the Government domain, preceded by
a band. The ‘ Leidertafel ’ carried lanterns, shaped so as
to resemble lyres; and a party of ten bore others inscribed
with letters, which, when ranged in line, showed the word
‘ Wilkommen.’ A great crowd accompanied them; but
when they came to the gates of the Government domain, it
was so dense that there was some difficulty in clearing a
passage for them on entering. They went round the semi-
circular walk, which fronts the principal entrance, and remained
stationary ; the ‘ Leidertafel ’ stood in front of the lawn,
nearly opposite the drawing-room windows, through which a
number of ladies had emerged to see the strange display.
Held as the torches were, the holders could scarcely be seen,


for the lurid light shed by them, and the
off from them, rendered all objects in the gardens but “dimly
visible. Behind the torch-bearers there was a dark shrubbery,
which made the picture still more sombre. As they stood
there waiting for the signal for the serenade to begin, they
looked like the embodiment of one of those dramatic scenes
‘where fiends assemble warring against good,’ but their’s
was a more gentle mission.
As soon as the Prince came out at the principal entrance
the ‘ Leidertafel ’ sang several German songs most effec-
tively ; and after they had been concluded, a deputation of
five from the Committee waited upon His Royal Highness
with an address, expressing their feeling of loyalty to the
Crown, and their delight at his visit to the colony. His
Royal Highness gave a brief reply, and then walked through
the avenue, round which the procession had been distributed,
with Dr. Schomburgk, Curator of the Botanical Gardens,
Mr. A. von Treuer, Acting Prussian Consul, and Mr. C. Balk,
to whom he expressed the great pleasure he felt at this mark
of attention from the German population. The conversation
with these gentlemen was carried on in the German language.
The ‘ Liedertafel ’ sang, by special request, ‘ Auf ihr Briider
lasst uns wallen,’ during the performance of which a line
of Bengal lights behind the torch-bearers was fired, making
the torch gleam more dim, and the figures of the bearers in
front still more sombre than before. The National Anthem
was then sung, in which almost all present joined, and His
Royal Highness withdrew, evidently much pleased with the
demonstration.
The address was presented in a casket, made of blackwood,
inlaid with more than thirty different varieties of colonial
timber, and shaped so as to resemble a blazing torch. The
procession then re-formed, and passed along King William


Street and Grenfell Streets tothe place of assembly in front of
the Armoury, where the remains of the torches were heaped
together and burned as a bonfire. There were nearly 600
torch-bearers in the procession, and the splendid though
strange appearance they presented during their progress was
one of the most picturesque, effective, and memorable sights
during the whole stay of the Prince in the colony. Dr. Lacroix
and Mr. H. E. F. Kirchauff were with the Prince during
the demonstration.


THE REVIEW.
The opportunities for having anything like a military
display in South Australia so seldom occur, that the
announcement of a Review is certain to collect as large a
concourse of spectators as the Races, Agricultural Show, or
any other of the annual festivities which are observed in
Adelaide. Of course, a Royal Duke could not be allowed to
leave South Australia without letting him see what the
Volunteer Corps was like, and the occasion was used to give
the mustering a special interest by asking His Royal Highness
to present the Regiment with colors, which had been made
expressly for the purpose by Mrs. Fuller, the wife of the
Mayor of Adelaide.
The Review took place on the North Park Lands, at the
foot of Montefiore Hill. This rise springs up from the plain
in such a way as to form a sort of amphitheatre, from which
several thousand persons can without crowding or inconve-
nience obtain a complete view of the whole ground. The
announcement of the Review created great excitement, and
the side of the hill was covered with people. The dresses of
the ladies and children, and the varied costumes which prevail
amongst the sterner sex in summer, gave the scene an
extremely gay appearance. In order to swell the numbers on
the ground as much as possible, a detachment of the 50th
(Queen’s Own) Regiment was brigaded with the Adelaide
Volunteers.
The troops arrived on the ground shortly after 11 o’clock,
and remained drawn up in line until the arrival of the royal
party.


Shortly after 12 o’clock the Prince, escorted by a detach-
ment of Cavalry, made his appearance on the ground. He
was dressed in the uniform of a Colonel in the Prussian
Guards, and was accompanied by Lord Newry, Lieutenant
Haig, E.E., and the Hon. Elliott Yorke, Equerries; Captain
Taylor, E.M., Lieutenant Fitz George, E.N., the Hon Mr.
Curzon, E.N., Mr. Brierly, Captain Deering, A.D.C., Messrs.
D. G. and J. G. Daly, George Hamilton, Commissioner of
Police, and R. D. Eoss, D.A.C.G.
The Brigade was commanded by Colonel Hamley, 50th
Eegiment; Colonel Biggs, Commandant of the Volunteer
Force; Lieutenant-Colonel Mayo, in charge of the Adelaide
Eegiment; Lieutenant-Colonel Higgins, of the Cavalry; and
Lieutenant-Colonel Matthews, of the Artillery.
On arriving on the ground the Prince was received with
great cheering, and he proceeded with his Staff to ride along
the line both front and rear. After the inspection was over
and he had reached the saluting flag, the troops marched past
in slow and then in quick time, saluting the Prince as they
passed him. They were preceded by the Adelaide Eegimental
Band and the Band belonging to the Artillery Corps, The
Duke seemed much pleased with the steady behaviour of the
men and the creditable way in which the evolutions were
performed.
The Brigade then formed a square, open towards the north,
into the centre of which the royal party advanced. The
drums belonging to the regiment had been piled up, and on
them rested the colors which were about to be presented.
The Lord Bishop of Adelaide (Dr. Short), assisted by the
Yen. Archdeacon Woodcock, read the religious part of the
ceremony, commencing with the 46th Psalm, and concluding
with a suitable prayer. The Ensigns then advanced and
knelt in front of His Eoyal Highness, and the Mayor, on


behalf of Mrs. Fuller, requested His Royal Highness to present
the colors to the regiment, and asked that in future it might
be known as ‘Prince Alfred’s Own Regiment’ of Rifle
Volunteers. The Duke having signified his consent, the
colors were handed to the Ensigns, who returned with them
to the regiment. Lieutenant-Colonel Mayo, in command of
the regiment, briefly returned thanks to His Royal Highness
for the honor conferred upon them.
In presenting the colors, the Prince expressed himself
pleased to see that the defence of the colony was entrusted to
such good hands, and he said he was sure if ever it was
necessary to take these colors into action the regiment would
behave as British soldiers always did, and would make a name
that those who came after them would be proud of. The
men present then gave three hearty cheers and re-formed
into line.
The Prince and suite having left the ground, they were
speedily followed by the brigade, preceded by the bands.
The whole ceremony did not take much more than an
hour, and those who had assembled to witness the Review
were much disappointed. Such an exhibition in Adelaide
has hitherto ended in a sham fight, and the spectators felt
that they had been ‘taken in’ by being deprived of this part
of the performance. There were about 750 men of all arms
on the ground.
As soon as the military display was over there was an
exhibition of athletic sports on the Cricket Ground by the
members of the Adelaide Amateur Athletic Club, consisting
of running, jumping, leaping, putting the stone, and the usual
course of feats of the kind. They created considerable amuse-
ment, but the arrangements were not well conceived or carried
out, and the spectators crowded in upon the line so much as
to interfere greatly with the performances. The Committee,


however, had too short a time to make their arrangements,
and so are scarcely to blame. His Royal Highness was present
for a short time during the sports.—ln the afternoon he drove
out to the suburbs, accompanied by Mr. J. G, Daly and a few
members of the Staff.
In the evening he attended an amateur performance at the
Royal Victoria Theatre, given by the Officers of the 50th
Regiment, in aid of a local charity. Of this it is enough to
say that it was successful, and afforded considerable amuse-
ment to the audience.
On the following day, Sunday, November 3, the Duke
drove down to the Semaphore early in the morning, in order
to spend the day on board the Galatea. He was taken to the
frigate in the gig belonging to Mr. Jagoe, Health Officer, and
was steered by the President of the Marine Board, Lieutenant
Douglas, R.N.R.
The good people of Adelaide, always most attentive to
Sabbath observances, manifested an unusual desire to get to
church on this particular Sunday; a report had got abroad
that His Royal Highness would attend Divine Service in
Adelaide on that day, either in Trinity Church, in South
Adelaide, or at Christ Church, in North Adelaide. The
result was, they were both crowded ; and although the congre-
gations were not gratified with a sight of the Prince, it is to
be hoped they derived much benefit from their attendance
in another way.
The Prince returned from the ‘ Galatea’ early on Monday
morning, and in the afternoon paid a visit to the orangery of
the Hon. Mr. Justice Gywnne, accompanied by a few of his
suite. The remainder of the party inspected the Stockade
(as the Convict Prison is called), at the Dry Creek. It is to
this place that all the offenders who are sentenced to penal
servitude are sent, and the labour they have to perform is


principally quarrying and breaking stones. The worst criminals
and the long sentenced men work in irons. Some few are
employed in making and mending shoes, and in making and
repairing the prisoners’ clothes. There is also a blacksmith’s
shop for repairing tools. The prisoners take their meals in
separate cells, and are tolerably well fed, and the diet is plain
and wholesome. A minimum amount of work is exacted
from each man each day, and those who do not perform this are
not allowed to have any tobacco. Those who are well-
behaved and industrious are allowed a £-oz. per diem. The
only system of discipline adopted here is that of keeping the
men in subjection and making them work. The reclamation
of the prisoners is not made a special study, and they are
dependent for religious instruction on the voluntary visits of
clergymen of different denominations. The punishment for
breaches of discipline, riots, or attempting to escape, are solitary
confinement and, in bad cases, corporeal punishment. The
general average of prisoners confined there is about a hundred.
The Adelaide Gaol is used for the incarceration of runaway
sailors, persons committed from the Local or Insolvency
Courts, debtors and persons committed for misdemeanour and
minor offences ; convict women are also detained here. The
male prisoners are employed principally at out-door work,
such as keeping the prison garden in order, and until recently
in the construction of a dam across the Torrens (lately washed
away by the flood). The female prisoners are engaged in
such occupation as are suited to their individual capabilities
as far as possible.
After the return of the party the Duke and suite
attended the Theatre, where the opera of ‘ Lucretia Borgia’
was performed by Lyster’s Opera Troupe.


BOTANICAL GARDENS.
On Tuesday, the 10th inst., His Royal Highness paid a
private visit to the Botanical Gardens for the purpose of
planting a tree as a memorial of his visit to South Australia.
No public notice had besn given of His Royal Highness’s
intention, partly because he was anxious to inspect the
splendid collection of shrubs and plants, without the annoy-
ance and pressure of a large crowd, and partly because Dr.
Schomburgk, the Curator, was afraid that so large an assem-
blage would be attracted there on the occasion as would greatly
endanger the neatness and order of the gardens themselves.
Doubtless the comfort of the Prince was a sufficient reason for
the private manner in which the ceremony was conducted, but
there was no more reason to fear injury to the gardens from a
crowd than there was on any other public days when the
colonists visit them by thousands.
Since the gardens have been established—about ten years—
there have not been half a dozen cases of damage or misconduct
brought under the notice of the Magistrates. The gardens
are managed by a Curator under a Committee, consisting of the
Mayor, the City Members, the President of the Agricultural
Society and a few gentlemen appointed by the Governor.
They were first laid out by Mr. G. Francis, F.H.S., and it was
wonderful what he did in a short time with a moderate amount
of money. At his death they were placed under the charge
of Dr. Schomburgk, by whom they have been much improved.
They are about sixty acres in extent, and have lakes, planta-
tions, avenues, conservatories, and fountains, all arranged with
admirable taste and judgment. There is a good number of


animals, birds, and reptiles, though the carnivora are repre-
sented only by one large and two small tigers and a brown
bear, but the collection of native animals and birds is very
complete.
On alighting at the Garden gates the Duke was received by
the Curator, who conducted him round the gardens and
through the conservatories, and after spending some time in
examining the various remarkable plants, proceeded to the spot
which had been fixed on for the planting of the trees. There
a number of ladies had assembled. Three holes had been
prepared and three small trees were in readiness to be placed
in the ground. The first plant a cedrus deodora was placed in
the first hole, and having been surrounded with earth by His
Eoyal Highness, the spade was handed to Lord Newry, who
planted a cupressus Knightii, the implement was then taken by
the Hon. Mr, Yorke, who planted a cupresses Lindleyana. After
the usual three cheers, the party proceeded to the Curator’s
residence, where a certificate of the planting of the trees was
entered in the book of the Botanical Gardens’ Committee and
signed by His Eoyal Highness, Lord Newry, and Mr, Yorke,
The Duke and suite then left for Government House, evidently
well pleased with what they had seen.


THE ALFRED COLLEGE.
The next ceremonial in which His Royal Highness took
part was the laying of the foundation stone of the Alfred
College—an institution intended principally for the education
and training of members of the Wesleyan body : though, also,
open to receive members of other denominations. It is in
fact somewhat on the plan of St, Peter’s Collegiate School,
which although actually an establishment belonging to the
Church of England is freely open to scholars of all other denomi-
nations numbers of whom have been educated there. Although
there was no open demonstration against, or objection made to,
the participation of the Prince in inaugurating this building,
there were many who thought, that in a country where the most
complete religious equality exists, no special favor or distinc-
tion should be shown to any one particular denomination.
If the building had been a denominational church this
objection might have bad some force, and would, no doubt,
have been taken by His Royal Highness himself at once, but
the general educational character of the institution seemed to
remove any difficulty which might otherwise have existed, and
the Prince felt that there was no substantial objection to his
complying with the request to lay the first stone and honor
the college by giving it his name. To show the general
interest that was felt in the institution it may be mentioned
that a large number of clergymen of the Church of England
aud other religious bodies attended on the ground and took
part in the proceedings. The establishment of the college
was projected many years ago, but it was not until 1866 that
the scheme took a definite shape. The building will be


erected by voluntary contributions, and when completed will
cost about £30,000; of this sum about £4,000 are already
collected.
On the site at Kent Town, about a mile east from Adelaide,
a pavilion had been erected, containing accommodation for about
1000 spectators. In the centre where the stone was to be
laid a space had been reserved for the Prince and his atten-
dants, and this was nicely carpeted. The outside of the
pavilion was properly decorated with flags, indeed they were
displayed everywhere along the streets and roads through
which the Prince passed. In the Buik-road there were
festoons of evergreens and flowers with an array of flags which
looked extremely pretty. There was also a triumphal arch
bearing the Prince’s arms, a guard of the Scotch volunteers
now known as ‘the Duke of Edinburgh’s Own,’ under Captain
Buik, was drawn up to receive His Royal Highness,
Shortly before 3 o’clock the Prince drove up. He was
accompanied by the Governor and Staff, Lieutenant Haig,
R.E., and the Hon. Mr. Yorke, Equerries, Lord Newry and Mr.
Brierly. He was received with loud cheers.
The proceedings were commenced by a psalm, followed by
reading the Scriptures and prayer. After these had been
concluded, the Rev. J. Watsford (president of the Wesleyan
Conference in South Australia) read an address to the Prince.
His Royal Highness replied briefly, expressing the pleasure
he felt in complying with the request that had been made to
him to inaugurate and name the college. The building will
be a handsome Elizabethan structure, and is designed by Mr.
D. Garlick. After the reading, the records (which had been
placed under the stone with the newspapers of the day and
the customary coins) the mortar was spread on the bed pre-
pared for the stone, which was then lowered into its place,
His Royal Highness assisting in the work; and, after going


through the usual formalities, he declared it ‘ well and truly
laid.’ The stone, like that of the Victoria Tower, was of
Macclesfield marble, suitably carved, and bearing the inscription
‘ This stone was laid by H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, K.G.,
on the sth day of November, mdccclxvii.’
The trowel presented to the Duke was of gold, engraved on
the border with fern leaves and the clianthus JDampieri. The
handle was of frosted work, ornamented at the joint where
the blade is fixed in with the rose, thistle, and shamrock.
The level was of Huon pine, bearing the crest and cypher
of the Prince, and lions couchant at the ends, exquisitely
carved. The plumb-line was of silk, with a golden weight at
the end.
The religious portion of the ceremony was conducted by
the Revs. R. C. Flockart, J. G. Knight, and J. G. Millard.
The proceedings terminated at about half-past 3, when His
Royal Highness and the Governor withdrew amidst enthusiastic
cheers.
iQk


THE ASSEMBLY BALL.
On the evening of the sth of November the City Ball—the
largest, and certainly the most splendid, one held in South
Australia—was given by the citizens. As soon as the pro-
jected visit of the Duke of Edinburgh became a certainty,
arrangements were made by the Reception Committee for
carrying it out on a grand scale. No more appropriate or
convenient place for such a festivity could be found than the
Town Hall. The room was all that could be desired. The
only difficulty that was felt was that it contained no room
large enough to serve as a supper-room for the very large
number of visitors who were expected.
It was determined at length to make use of a building
adjacent to the hall, which had originally been built as a
market-place, but which, not being made use of by the market
gardeners and others, had been leased by a large importer in
Adelaide, who had converted it into an immense warehouse.
The lessee (Mr. Futcher) kindly placed it at the disposal of
the Committee. No one who saw it in the state in which it
come into the hands of the Committee could conceive how a
building so thoroughly unsightly, both inside and out, and
apparently so extremely inconvenient in every way, could be
made even decent for the purpose for which it was required.
The difficulty, however, was soon overcome. Painters and
carpenters were set to work; and when they had put a new
face on its interior, the decorators began their task. Amongst
them all they not only contrived to adapt it most admirably
to suit the occasion, but succeeded in fitting it up in a style
which called forth the most unqualified expressions of admira-
tion from His Royal Highness himself, and from everyone who


had an opportunity of seeing it. The walls were covered
with flags, shrubs, and flowers harmoniously intermingled.
The pillars which supported the roof were dressed round
with leaves of the iris and other plants, so as to give them
the appearance of trunks of tropical trees. The roof was
tastefully colored, and flags and wreaths of flowers were
suspended from every available point. At one end appeared
the Australian arms and stars formed of ramrods, swords, and
bayonets; and at the other with the escutcheon of the Duke
of Edinburgh, with trophies of weapons on either side, illu-
minated by horizontal gas stars, tastefully shaped in brass,
depending from the ceiling. At the eastern side was a dais,
raised slightly above the ground, and fitted up for the Prince
and his suite. The remainder of the space was occupied by
the tables, laid out most elegantly, and covered with a pro-
fusion of all the delicacies whiflh the season of the year
afforded. It was arranged so as to contain 400 guests
at one time, without any inconvenience or crowding.
The entrance to this apartment was through the City
Council Chamber, across a yard ; but this had been covered
in and decorated in a most charming manner. At
the south end there was a perfect fairy grotto, covered
with moss, in the centre of which a fountain was playing ;
the background was formed of rare shrubs. Above these was
a cut-glass device, illuminated from behind, shewing the
Prince’s initials in colors ; and at the opposite end a small
bower of shrubs surrounding a bust of Her Majesty the Queen,
above which there was a cut-glass star, also illuminated from
behind. The really beautiful effect of this arrangement was
considerably heightened by the dim and irregular light which
shone through the glass designs at either end. The decorations
were carried out principally by Mr. J. 11. Parr and Mr.
Councillor Pulsford.


Here, perhaps, it may be proper to give a brief description
of the Town Hall, which was designed by Messrs. Wright and
Woods, and built by Messrs. English & Brown, of this city.
The facade consists of a massive arcade of cut white freestone
in rusticated work, the keystone of the centre arch bearing a
likeness of H.R.H. the late Prince Albert —after whom
the tower is named. Over this arcade is another, sup-
ported by Corinthian columns, with balustrades and cornices
of the same order. From the centre the tower rises to
a height of 143 feet, the first story being devoted to the
arms of the colony, the second to the clock chamber, and the
other two to the peal of bells, which bear the same name as
the tower, the whole being finished with a dome lantern, gilt
ball, and vane. The centre entrance is under an archway in
the tower, whose keystone bears the likeness of Her Majesty
and leads into a handsome Hall paved with tesselated pave-
ment to the foot of the grand staircase. This is twelve feet
wide and leads to the Town Hall, which occupies the space
over all the numerous offices which are on the ground floor.
The hall itself is 106 feet long, 66 feet wide, and 43 feet
high, this length being independent of the gallery—2B feet
deep—supported from the body of the ball by groups of
slender Corinthian pillars. The walls around are broken by
Corinthian columns or pedestals, from which spring the
vaults over the windows, an enriched architrave and Corin-
thian cornice completing the whole. The ceiling is deeply
sunk in the centre and highly enriched, the spaces between the
columns are filled with panels, and above them are circular-
headed windows —openings deeply recessed and ornamented
with composite columns and rich mouldings. The architectural
beauty is such that it requires no decoration whatever.
The only ornament introduced was a cut-glass star of the
order of the Garter lighted up from behind at the southern


end, and a partition composed of large mirrors and evergreen
shrubs which divided the orchestra from the dancers and
completely hid it from sight.
There were more than eight hundred subscribers to the ball,
and as nearly all of them attended, the number of guests pre-
sent—including the Prince’s suite, a great many officers of the
e Galatea,’ and the officers of the 50th stationed at Adelaide —
could not have been less than nine hundred.
Sir Dominick Daly, the Governor, was unwell and could
not attend. The visitors began to drop in at a little after
nine o’clock and shortly after ten the Duke of Edinburgh
and suite arrived. His Royal Highness opened the ball with
Mrs. Hamley, wife of the Commander of the Forces. The
dancing then became general and was kept up with spirit till
nearly twelve o’clock. His Royal Highness’s piper then made
his appearance on the scene. This was the signal for the com-
mencement of a Scotch reel, in which the Duke of Edinburgh,
Lord Newry, Lieutenant Haig, and Mr, Souttar (son-in-law
of Sir D. Daly), took part, with Mrs. Hamley, Mrs. Souttar,
and the Misses Smillie, as partners. This dance, into the
spirit of which His Royal Highness seemed thoroughly to
enter, created intense amusement. So eager were all,
especially the ladies, to witness it that they pressed in so
closely as to afford the dancers but a limited amount of space.
As soon as it was ended the Prince, with Mrs. Souttar, led
the way to the supper-room, which was speedily filled. When
supper was over the Hon. H. Ayers, Chief Secretary, proposed
the health of the Queen, and afterwards of the Duke of
Edinburgh, His Royal Highness delivered a short reply but
so worded as to cut off all further speech making if any more
had been intended. He regretted that the Governor, Sir D.
Daly, to whose worth he paid a graceful compliment, was unable
to attend; and after expressing his thanks to the gentlemen


of the colony, made a special acknowledgement to the ladies
of South Australia for their kind reception.
The party then returned to the ball-room. The second
instalment of visitors went to supper, and the dancing was
kept up to an advanced hour. The room, crammed as it was
with ladies splendidly dressed, and with officers of the naval,
military, volunteer, and civil services, in showy uniforms,
contrasted greatly with the conventional black evening dress
of the civilians, and had a remarkably picturesque appearance.
Everything went off well, and without doubt it was the
most successful ball ever given in South Australia.


VISIT TO KAPUNDA.
After the excitement in and about Adelaide, which had
now lasted for nearly a week, a country excursion was
organized. His Royal Highness and party went by railway to
visit Kapunda and its mine ; returning by way of Gawler,
where it was intended that he should plant a tree on the Park
lands as a memorial of his visit. The stay at both those
places was necessarily short, for it had been arranged that the
party should be back in Adelaide by six o’clock on the same
evening.
The royal party, accompanied by the Members of the House
of Assembly for the northern districts, the Ministry, several
Members of the Legislative Council, the Mayor of Adelaide,
and several other gentlemen, arrived at the terminus of the
railway shortly before ten o’clock, where a special train was
waiting to convey them to their destination.
The principal, in fact the only feature worthy of special
remark at the station, was the State Carriage which had been
been built expressly for His Royal Highness at the railway
workshops, from designs made for the purpose in the depart-
ment of the Colonial Engineer. The whole of the work, with
the exception of the framing on which the carriage rested, the
wheels, axles, and boxes, was of South Australian manu-
facture, and anything more elegant it is difficult to conceive.
The panels of the carriage were of sheet iron, the mouldings
of white metal, all cast in the railway shops, and painted in
suitable colours in the shops of the carriage department. The
interior of the carriage was divided into two compartments
communicating by means of a sliding door, so that the Prince


could, if he thought fit, enjoy complete privacy. Handsome
mirrors were fixed at each end of the carriage, and the floor was
luxuriously carpeted; the sofas and chairs being covered
with brocade to match the carpeting and the curtains. The
inner roof of the carriage was made of Huon pine carved in
open work with slips of dark coloured polished wood let in so
as to subdue its rather bright color. The interior of the
of the private compartments was similarly furnished, and
provided with a lounge chair and a table. The windows were
of plate glass fitted with the usual spring roller blinds. The
design had been made in admirable taste, and carried out in
the most elaborate and careful manner.
At a few minutes past ten the train started, the engine, a
new one, being in charge of Mr. J. H. Clark, superintendent
of the locomotive department of the South Australian Rail-
ways. There was no stoppage until Gawler was reached, at
about eleven o’clock. Here the train stopped for a few
minutes for a fresh supply of water. His Royal Highness did
not leave his carriage, so that the large number of persons
who had assembled on the platform in the expectation of
seeing him were for the time disappointed.
Up to this point the country passed through was an
extensive plain stretching out towards the sea on the western
side, and gradually rising towards the Mount Lofty Ranges
and the Gawler Hills on the east. Most of the land was
under cultivation and the crops looked strong and healthy.
A few miles out of Adelaide, the hills lose the trees which
distinguish the central position of the Mount Lofty range, and
have a bald and naked look except where their faces have been
ploughed up and put under crop. At Gawler the hills take a
new direction until they unite with the Barossa Range. From
Gawler to Kapunda there is a constant rise, the gradient in
the railway being as steep as one in sixty for a considerable


distance. For a few miles out of Gawler the country is good
and well cultivated, but the line soon leaves this behind
and runs through patches of scrub which grows upon a
poor and stony soil. As Kapunda is approached the land
improves, and though hilly a great deal of it is under culti-
vation, or is used for depasturing sheep and cattle, and to a
small extent for dairy farms.
Before entering Kapunda the river Light is crossed by
means of a bridge of somewhat novel construction. It is built
of wood, and is a combination of the laminated arch and
lattice girder. It was built under the superintendence of Mr.
W. Hanson, M.1.C.E., late Colonial Engineer, by whom in
fact the whole line of railway was constructed. About a mile
further on is the Railway Terminus, and from it the town of
Kapunda, on rising ground about half a mile distant is plainly
seen. Its appearance is somewhat singular, being built prin-
cipally of a white stone —a sort of steatite —so soft that it
can easily be cut with a knife. The town owed its origin (and
indeed its existence for a long time) to the copper mines,
which are immediately contiguous to it, and which were dis-
covered in 1843 by Captain C. H. Bagot, and worked by him
for several years. Of late, of course, the railway has attracted
to the town an immense amount of traffic from the agricul-
tural districts by which its surrounded, and even from more
distant parts. The main traffic to and from the celebrated
Burra Burra Mines, also goes through Kapunda.
Unfortunately the projected visit of the Prince had com-
pletely defeated the main object for which he came to Kapunda.
He was anxious to see the mines, but all the miners and work-
men had been allowed a holiday in honour of the occasion, so
that he came away without paying the works a visit. To
make up for this disappointment there was immense enthu-
siasm ; some really pretty street decorations, evergreens, and


flags, and an appalling quantity of that horrid white dust,
which not only covers, but literally saturates the unfortunate
traveller on a hot day. Bad as this usually is it was tenfold
worse on the present occasion. The crowds of people collected
in the dustiest part of the road near the Railway Station,
never still for a moment, kept a thick cloud constantly afloat;
this was further increased by the horsemen and vehicles which
were moving about in all directions.
The Prince, after receiving the Corporation address from
the Mayor (Dr. Blood), with his suite drove through this
gritty vapour bath, but happily emerged from it in a short
time, though somewhat changed in appearance. After hearing
God save the Queen sung by the school children, the party
proceeded up the main street of Kapunda, which was crammed
with people, especially around Crase’s Hotel, where they
lunched. That really fine hotel was almost hidden under an
accumulation of shrubs and flags.
Here an elegant and substantial luncheon was prepared, and
after enjoying the luxury of cold water and a clothes brush
the party sat down to it. There were about one hundred and
fifty persons present. The Mayor presided, His Royal High-
ness being on his right hand, the remainder of the seats at the
principal table being filled by members of the Duke’s staff, some
of the Ministers, Sir J, H, Fisher, and other leading colonists.
The other seats were occupied by members of the party, and
a number of residents in and about Kapunda.
After the lunch had been duly disposed of, the Mayor gave the
health of the Queen, and also of the Prince of Wales, Both of
which were enthusiastically responded to. The Mayor then
proposed the health of H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh. This
was received with reiterated cheers. Before His Royal
Highness could get upon his legs a most unexpected and novel
incident occurred. Some person in the body of the room


called out for musical honors, and led off with ‘ For he’s a
jolly good fellow,’ to the horror and amazement of some, and
the intense amusement of others. However excusable this
sort of thing may be at a convivial gathering, which has been
prolonged till the small hours, and after a 1 wet ’ evening, one
could scarcely expect to encounter such a demonstration at
mid-day, and at a Royal reception. However, the Duke took
it as it was meant, in good part, and was doubtless quite as
much amused at the novelty of the occurrence as any one
present.
Shortly afterwards the party broke up, and returned to the
Railway Station, where, besides undergoing once more the
dusty ordeal which was suffered in the morning, the party
had literally to force their way through a dense crowd, which
filled every available space on the railway platform ; but even
that was penetrated at last, and the train reached, in which
the visitors at once steamed away for Gawler.


THE VISIT TO GAWLER.
The town of Gawler is a thriving little place, prettily
situated on the Para River, hemmed in on the east side by the
end of a range of hills, and bounded on the west by an
extensive plain. It is the centre of a large agricultural
district, and consequently has a considerable trade. It
certainly outstrips Kapunda in almost every respect; but in
dust there are few, if any, places in the colony that can at all
compare with it. Here the train stopped shortly after three
o’clock, and the Duke and suite entered the carriages provided
for them, and proceeded through the principal streets to the
Park Lands, where His Royal Highness planted a tree to
commemorate his visit.
Gawler has always been distinguished for the singular good
taste and elegance with which its inhabitants carry out public
demonstrations, and the show made by them in decorating the
town on this occasion fully sustained the reputation they had
gained. The pine forest, which is situated only a short
distance away, had been ransacked in a most unsparing
manner; and what with triumphal arches, and other festive
decorations, the main street looked like a large grove. There
was an abundant supply of flags, and a crowd of people as
vociferous and enthusiastic as they could be expected to be.
At the Railway Station a procession was arranged, or as it
was turned out, extemporised, and a long train of carriages,
horsemen, and pedestrians started in a most elaborate dust
bath for the scene of His Royal Highness’s labors. He had
been received at the platform by Mr. W. Duffield, M.P., Mr.
Martin, M.P., and Mr. H. E. Bright, M.P., the members for


the district, by several Justices of the Peace, and by a guard
of honor of the Gawler Volunteers, under the command of
Captain Martin.
On reaching the boundary of the town an address was read
by the Mayor (Mr. T. 0. Jones), to which His Royal Highness
made as usual a brief reply, and the cavalcade moved forward
to the Park Lands. The arrangements that had been made
to prevent His Royal Highness from being incommoded by
the crowd, and to enable everyone to see what was going on,
were very good. A large piece of ground had been enclosed
in a ring-fence on the Park Lands, outside of which the public
were assembled, the interior of the circle being reserved for
the Prince and suite.
When His Royal Highness had reached the appointed spot,
Mr. T. O. Jones, the Mayor, formally requested the Duke to
commemorate his visit by planting a tree. His Royal High-
ness having signified his assent, three trees were brought to
the holes prepared to receive them. Here, however, a slight
difficulty started up —the spade which had been prepared for
the use of His Royal Highness had not come, and it turned
out that it had been forwarded to Kapunda by mistake.
There was nothing for it now but to make use of the only
appliance which was at hand. This took the shape of
an old garden spade, very much worn and extremely dirty.
However, the Prince took it without hesitation, and planted
one eucalyptus and two plants of the species called pinus
insignis. As he entered the enclosure, ‘ God Save the
Queen’ was given by the school children very effectively, and
on returning to his carriage he was loudly cheered.
The procession was reformed as far as it could be, and pro-
ceeded to the Gawler Institute, tp which His Royal Highness
had promised a visit. After it had started, the fortunate
owner of the shovel shouldered his now valuable property,


declaring that he would not take £5 for it. Ten minutes
before it would have been difficult to find a market for it if
appraised at eighteen pence.
At the door of the Institute His Royal Highness was
received by the President, Mr. Martin, M.P., who read an
address of welcome. After expressing his acknowledgment,
the Prince wrote his name in the visitors’ book, and then paid
a short visit to the Museum. Some refreshments had been
provided in the hall above the Institute for His Royal
Highness and friends. On coming up the staircase, the doors
were found to be locked. There were some gentlemen inside,
but they would not believe that His Royal Highness was
waiting on the stairs, and would not open the door. Two or
three gentlemen who were in front, however, solved the
question by surging against it and bursting it open. The
Prince then went out on the balcony, and remained there for
a short time while the children sang the ‘ Song of Australia,’
a copy of which had been presented to him by the President.
There was immense cheering as the Duke retired.
The party having returned to their carriages, set out for
the railway station. It was understood, however, that the
Prince and some of his suite would visit the mansion of
Mr. Duffield at Para Para, about a mile beyond the station.
As soon as this became known, a number of horsemen who
had been acting as an escort to the procession, being anxious
to lead the way, suddenly dashed forward, in spite of the
remonstrances of the marshals, and raised a dust in front of
the Royal carriage worse than anything that had been seen
during the day, and which stuck to the cortege closely until
the railway had been crossed.
After a short stay at Para Para, the Prince drove back to
the railway station, en route for Adelaide. The train stopped
at Salisbury for the Prince to hear the Sunday School children


sing the National Anthem. They had been assembled on a
platform on the west side of the railway. The singing was
fair, but the conductor of the choir attracted a great deal
more attention than the song. He wore a long dark coat
and a black felt hat with a high peak and a broad brim ; as a
baton he wielded a formidable bludgeon, and his gestures,
instead of marking the time and rhythm of the music,
appeared, as he stood with his back to the carriages, more
like fierce threats of vengeance against the little flock. Alto-
gether his appearance was most grotesque, and gave rise to
considerable merriment. The singing was soon finished, and
the train started again, reaching Adelaide at a few minutes
past six.
In the evening there was a party at Government House,
and a grand display of fireworks on Montefiore Hill.
wig*


THE EXHIBITION.
The great annual festival, which brings together the largest
assemblage of visitors, is the exhibition of the Agricultural
and Horticultural Society, which usually takes place in
February of each year. The harvest by that time has been
gathered—autumn is at hand—and those fruits and agricul-
tural staples for which the colony of South Australia is most
famous are seen in their fullest perfection. Their show, how-
ever, is mainly confined to agricultural products, and to the
implements and machinery used in the tillage of the soil.
Some few exhibits of articles not strictly belonging to these
classes are shewn, but not sufficiently varied or numerous to
destroy the special character of the exhibition.
The cattle-show takes place at a different time of the year,
and the horticultural shows take place at those seasons when
certain classes of flowers are in their greatest perfection.
The scheme of a general exhibition, which should unite the
specialities of all these different shows with the manufactures
and mineral products of the colony, was first started by Mr.
E. Ward (secretary to the Agricultural and Horticultural
Society). The idea was warmly taken up by the managing
committee, and every preparation made to render it as far as
possible a truly representative show of the resources and
industries of South Australia, and one not unworthy of the
royal visitor in whose honor it was undertaken. All under-
takings of this kind are beset with difficulties ; but the main
drawback in the present instance was that the time of the
Prince’s arrival was so uncertain, and a vast number of the
exhibits of such a perishable nature, that it was not possible


to arrange so as to calculate upon a great many articles which
are produced in the colony to the greatest perfection. The
best arrangement that could be made was that when the time
of the Duke’s arrival was ascertained, a few days’ notice
should be given to intending exhibitors, and they were then
to do the best they could. The Government co-operated
heartily with the committee as far as they were able, and
caused the building in which the annual exhibition bad here-
tofore been held to be considerably enlarged and improved.
They also placed a sum of money at the disposal of the society
for prizes beyond those offered by the society itself, so as to
assist in providing gold and silver medals, to be presented to
the successful competitors by the Prince.
The list of exhibits was most comprehensive, including all
the varieties of cereals grown in the province ; all the fruits,
flowers, and vegetables in season; ores, metals, refined and
otherwise; turnery, upholstery, carvings in wood and stone,
saddlery, boots and shoes, leather, machinery, agricultural
implements, jewellery, plate and gold and silver work, letter
press and lithographic printing, engraving, stereotyping, works
of art, photographs, building materials, carriages, winemaking
and distilling apparatus, washing machines; wines, spirits,
beer, aerated waters ; perfumery, cordials, sauces, pickles,
bams and bacon, confectionery, flour, bread, biscuits, soap,
candles, starch, oils, sheep; horses, cattle, pigs, dogs, poultry,
native birds ; eggs, butter, cheese, &c., ifec.
The grounds outside the building were occupied by the
sheep and cattle pens, carriage shed, and a large collection of
agricultural implements. A splendid still, in full operation,
was a most conspicuous object There was also a printing
machine in full work; tents and refreshment booths, which
last came in for their share of patronage. A short distance
from the northern end of the Exhibition building stood a


pagoda, the lower chamber of which was fitted out as a retiring
room for His Royal Highness and suite, and the upper part,
an open gallery, was occupied by the splendid band of the
‘ Galatea,’ who were kindly permitted by the Prince to give
their services on the occasion.
Considering the advanced period of the year, the show of
flowers was really wonderful. It comprised roses, gloxinias,
calceolarias, verbenas, petunias ; one new plant a climatis
fortunica, and a variety of bouquets and floral devices. These
were exhibited in pots, and as cut flowers. A miniature
garden, arranged by Dr. Schomburgk, however, monopolized
the attention of the visitors. It was formed on the east side
of the building, and was divided into flower beds and walks.
The principal plants in bloom were calceolarias, gloxinias, and
lobelias, relieved by a back ground of shrubs and ferns;
and in the centre there was a bust of the Queen. The bright
colors of the flowers were varied by an intermixture of plants
with variegated leaves; the walks were made of living mosses,
bordered with dwarf plants. The whole was surrounded by a
semicircular wire fencing. For taste, elegant arrangement, and
beauty, the whole exhibition offered nothing equal to this ;
and the judges awarded the worthy doctor a special gold
medal for his design.
At the south end of the building, arranged along the walls,
was a splendid collection of specimens of refined copper,
exhibited by the English and Australian Copper Company.
Next to it was a collection of ores of cobalt, cobalt ingots pure,
and in combination with copper, and a small but beautiful sample
of cobalt bloom, all from the Cartarpo Mines in the North.
Next came a collection of bismuth ores, pure bismuth, and
plumbago, shown by the Murninnie Mining Company ; then
another collection of bismuth, exhibited by the Daly and Stanley
Mining Company. This section attracted a great deal of


attention. There were two or three very splendid collections of
copper ores. There was a fine cabinet of Echunga gold and gold
bearing quartz, and silver and its ores from various southern
mines, which were the subject of much notice. The wools
were very fine indeed, and those samples which had been
washed were greatly admired, not only for their color, but for
the fineness, length, and strength of the staple. The greasy
wools, too, were of remarkably fine quality.
The collection of gold and silver work was extremely elabo-
rate ancf beautiful, and the caskets in which the various
addresses had been presented to the Prince attracted so much
notice that it became necessary to fence the cases round with
a strong barricade to prevent the crowd from overturning the
tables on which they stood. Some centre pieces and corner
ornaments of plated silver manufactured by Mr. J. M. Wendt,
pleased His Royal Highness so much that he purchased them,
in order to take them to England with him. Some cups and
vases exhibited by Mr. C. E. Firnhaber were also objects of
great attraction, especially a masonic presentation cup
emblematic of the mystic craft, manufactured by himself.
The leather, the boots, and shoes, and the saddlery were
remarkably good, both as regards the quality of the material
and workmanship. The specimens of turnery and wood
carving were very beautiful. The vegetables and fruits were
not up to the standard of the February show, but on the
whole were very fine. The various collections of photographs
were eagerly scanned by the visitors, and as a whole they were
well worthy of the attention they attracted.
The collection of wines was large and varied, and all the
leading vignerons entered keenly into competition for the prizes.
The white wines were thought by the Judges to be of superior
quality, the red wines though of high character were
somewhat inferior. The best samples were exhibited by


Mr. R. D. Ross, Hon. J. Baker, J. Gillard, J. Gilbert, and
E. J. Peake.
It would be impossible to go further into the detail of the
different objects without almost reprinting the catalogue. Con-
sidering the short time allowed for sending in exhibits, the
distances from which some of them were sent, their perishable
nature, and the unusual season at which they were shown, the
general result was most satisfactory. The show fair, as it was
called, was equal to the occasion which had called it forth,
and South Australia had no reason to be ashamed of'it.
Outside the building there were splendid collections of
poultry, ducks, and geese—a wonderful assortment of native
birds —and a fine display of South Australian wheat. The
heaviest sample was 671bs. 20z., excellent in quality, but not
up to the standard of the celebrated exhibition wheat which
reached nearly 691bs. per bushel. Around the fencing on the
eastern side the dogs were shown. Unfortunately they were
exposed to the full force of the afternoon sun without shelter,
and they were much distressed in consequence. There were
some fine kangaroo dogs, three splendid mastiffs and a few
good collies; the rest were worthy of no special notice. One
little silky haired poodle was exhibited in a glass case reclining
on a satin cushion, and tended with the most assiduous care by
its proud proprietress. As the afternoon sun became more and
more powerful the animal appeared to suffer greatly from the
heat—and though no doubt a jury of old maids would have
voted the poor wretch a gold medal as much for its sufferings
as from its appearances, the judges passed its charms unnoticed
and left beauty (!) to be its own reward.
The horses were well selected, and mostly splendid animals,
and the Prince was much struck by the appearance of the
heavy draught stock. He seemed, also, much taken with the
cattle and sheep, but he spent some time in examining the


really excellent show of carriages. Before the Prince came a
carriage was bought in Melbourne for his use. The Melbourne
people were rather vexed that it had not been kept there. It
is almost a matter of regret that it was not, for it was in no
way superior to the elegant articles which were shown at the
Adelaide Exhibition, and in some respects decidedly not up to
their standard.
The Prince and suite had been expected to arrive shortly
after 1 o’clock, but he had been delayed in consequence of
being present at a dinner given in the room used as a supper-
room at the ball, to the men of the ‘ Galatea,’ who had been
allowed to go on shore. There were about 250 present.
After dinner the Duke spoke feelingly of the reception he had
met with in the colony, and asked them to drink the health of
the ‘ People of South Australia.’ This was done with great
enthusiasm. After dinner a dance in the Town Hall had
been extemporised, and after an hour or two the crew
separated.
About two o’clock His Royal Highness and suite came to
the ground, where he was saluted by a guard of honor of the
volunteer regiment. At the verandah he was met by the
President of the society, the Hon. J. Baker, M.L.C.; Mr. E.
Ward, Secretary; the Committee, and several other gentlemen.
An address was then read describing the objects of the society
and general scope of the exhibition, and the difficulties which
had been met with in bringing it about. His Royal Highness
read a reply, in which he expressed the satisfaction in being
asked to inaugurate the show, and dwelt slightly on the
advantages which were certain to arise from exhibitions of the
kind. The doors of the building were then opened, but un-
fortunately such a rush took place as completely to fill the
building in a few minutes. The crowd was so densely packed
in the narrow avenues that it was impossible to move about,


and the Prince himself, as well as most of those inside, were
greatly inconvenienced. After a short time the doors were
again opened, and all who could escape into the fresh air were
glad to do so. The police were then so stationed as to allow
of ingress at certain entrances only, so that the crowd moved
in one direction, and all further confusion or annoyance was
obviated as far as possible.
His Royal Highness, in company with the Governor, then
made a tour of the grounds, and carefully inspected the
articles which, had been arranged outside the building. He
left shortly before four o’clock, greeted by the usual demonstra-
tions of loyalty, and returned to Government House.
The place was, as might be expected, swarming with people,
and with the exception of the rush as the doors were being
opened, there was no contretemps or failure throughout the
day.
On the following morning (18th November) the Duke of
Edinburgh and some of the suite paid a private visit to the
Exhibition, and spent some time in inspecting it. He paid
great attention to the splendid mineral collections, to the
show of plate and goldsmiths’ work, as also to the miniature
garden, and the horses and carriages. There was no one
present except the president, a few members of the committee
and their families, the secretary (Mr. Ward), and a few of the
exhibitors. He was shewn round the building by the presi-
dent (Hon. J. Baker, M.L.C.), and expressed his great satis-
faction at what he saw.
Amongst the varied amusements prepared in honor of the
royal visit, a cricket match had been arranged between the
officers of the ‘ Galatea’ and a South Australian eleven, and
Mr. J. Davis had presented a handsome silver cup, to be the
prize of the victors. It had been reported that the crew of
the gallant ship numbered amongst them some crack players,


and the contest was looked forward to with considerable
interest. Notwithstanding the attractions of the exhibition,
there was a large and highly respectable attendance on the
cricket ground, besides most of the members of the different
branches of the Legislature and their families. The wickets
were pitched shortly before ten o’clock, and the Galateas took
first innings. They did not do much at the first onset, and
they were all out for forty-one runs. The South Australians
then went in and scored 111 for their first innings. The
Galatea’s side then went in again, but could not make more
than forty, being thus beaten in one innings by thirty runs.
The day was intensely hot; but as the deck of a man-of-war
is not exactly favorable for keeping up this favorite game, it
is not to be wondered at if the Navy eleven where somewhat
rusty. After a week or two on shore, with a fair amount of
practice, there is no doubt they would have given their colonial
competitors their work to do to beat them, even if they were
able to do it at all. During one of the intervals of the game
there was a capital lunch provided. The chair was taken by
His Honor Mr. Justice Gwynne. His Royal Highness was
present, and his health was drunk with hearty cheers. He
remained on the ground about three hours, and then returned
to the Exhibition Building to distribute the gold and silver
medals to the successful exhibitors.
This part of the ceremony had attracted a greater crowd
than ever, and at the time of the Duke’s arrival there were
more than 8,000 persons assembled. They had massed them-
selves in front of the royal pavilion, where the distribution
was to take place, and all along the roadway down to the
gates at which His Royal Highness was expected to enter.
So thickly were they jammed together, and all so intent upon
getting a good view of the proceedings, that for a long time
it was found next to impossible to keep a clear passage for


the Prince’s progress, or even for the mounted troopers to
move up and down without danger of running over some one.
After a great deal of trouble, shouting, and confusion, the
eager spectators were brought into something like order, and
at a quarter-past four the Duke drove up. He was at once
conducted to the pavilion, at the entrance of which he was
met by the president and committee, and a number of ladies.
The president, in the name of the Society, asked His Royal
Highness to honor them by presenting the medals. The
Prince having consented, the names of the fortunate ex-
hibitors were called, and as they came forward in turn were
each presented by His Royal Highness with the prize which
had been awarded to him. Fifty gold medals were dis.
tributed on this occasion, and about seventy silver ones. The
remainder were left with the committee to be handed to
those who were entitled to them, but who had not been
present when their names were called. His Royal Highness
then retired, the band playing the National Anthem, and he
left the ground amidst tremendous cheers.
The exhibition was kept open till late in the evening and
during the following day. From the crowded state of the
building and of the grounds, and the expressions of admiration
heard on all sides at the display, it may be safely said that
the show was eminently successful.
In the afternoon of the 7th the Prince and party went to
Government Farm where, after dinner, they amused them-
selves by opossum shooting till a late hour.


THE CIVIC BANQUET.
The address of the Mayor and Corporation of Adelaide,
presented to the Duke of Edinburgh on his entrance into the
city, assured His Royal Highness that the Corporation at all
times sought to model their institutions on those of the mother
country. If evidence was required to test the sincerity of that
assertion, it could be found in one sense in the magnificent
banquet given by Mr. H. R. Fuller, the Mayor, in honor of the
Prince’s visit. The evening chosen for the entertainment,
November 9 th, was singularly felicitous, for whilst it is the
day of days amongst the dignitaries in the good old city of
London, and invariably celebrated by a banquet in honor of
the newly elected mayor, it is, at the same time, the birthday
of the Prince of Wales, the brother of the illustrious guest who
enjoyed South Australian civic hospitality for the first time.
Grand banquets and mayoral hospitalities are no novelties in
this province. The Town Hall itself has already been filled
with welcome guests at the bidding of a former mayor, but in
all these entertainments none of the precedents of the City of
London have been followed, and the proceedings have been
conducted according to the conventionalities which govern all
festive gatherings projected on a large scale here. It was
reserved for the present Mayor to have the honor of entertaining
the first of the Royal Family that has ever visited the
regions at the antipodes, which in their short existence as
dependencies of the Crown have done so much to extend
England’s greatness through the peaceful enterprise of her sons.
The event was one which had never been expected to happen
in the history of the colony, and the opportunity was turned to


the best advantage. The Hall itself, in which the banquet was
given, required, as already stated, no decoration; but the long
rows of tables splendidly laid out, and loaded with a profusion
of the good things of this life, conveyed to the visitors, in whose
honor the festival had been inaugurated, a new and not un-
pleasant idea of the resources and good taste of the citizens of
South Australia.
The guests began to assemble at about seven o’clock, and
after paying their respects to His Worship the Mayor, were
ushered to the seats appropriated to them at the different
tables. Before the guests of the evening arrived about six
hundred gentlemen were seated. The gallery at the end of the
large hall was filled with ladies, who, although not uncared for
in their temporary isolation, by custom were excluded from
direct participation in the civic feast. The guests included the
Ministry, the Judges, the Bishop and clergy of the Church of
England, the Vicar-General and clergy of the Roman Catholic
Church, the ministers of the Church of Scotland and of the
various religious denominations in Adelaide. The Hon. J.
Morphett, President, and the Members of the Legislative
Council, the Hon. G. S. Kingston, Speaker, and the Members
of the House of Assembly, Sir J. H. Fisher, the Magistrates,
the heads of departments, and other members of the Civil
Service, and . the leading merchants and citizens of Adelaide and
the Port. A number of the officers of the ‘ Galatea’ were also
present, as well as Colonel Hamley and the officers of the 50th
(‘Queen’s Own’) Regiment, and the officers of ‘Prince Alfred’s
Own’ Regiment of Volunteers. Altogether, over 600 guests sat
down to dinner.
At eight o’clock the Prince arrived and was saluted by a
detachment of the Volunteer Regiment, consisting of two
companies under Colonel Mayo and Major Clark. He was
Ushered into the Council Chamber by twelve gentlemen in


waiting, where he was received by His Worship the Mayor, by
whom he was accompanied to the banqueting room.
As His Royal Highness was announced the company rose,
and he was conducted to his seat on the dais to the right of
the Mayor, preceded by the piper of the Scottish Volunteer
Company ‘in full blast ’as he marched up the room. How
the gentlemen present who were not sons of the ‘Land o’ Cakes’
liked the—well, the music—it is hard to say, but it is certain
that the Duke’s piper stared at the being, who, for the nonce
had usurped his function, with a look of mingled pity and
indignation. The performance, musical or otherwise, was
happily short-lived, and grace having been said by the Lord
Bishop of Adelaide, the business of the evening commenced.
The bill of fare was as profuse and varied as the season would
allow, and ample justice was done to it.
After dinner was over the ‘ Non nobis’ was sung, and the
Mayor handed the loving cup to His Royal Highness, having
drank health and welcome to his guests. The usual loyal and
patriotic toasts were duly honoured, especially that of the Duke
of Edinburgh, In reply, His Royal Highness dwelt upon the
kind reception which he had everywhere received, The health
of the Governor was received with the greatest enthusiasm,
which was the more marked because His Excellency was absent
in consequence of illness. Colonel Hamley, of the 50th Regi-
ment, returned thanks for the Army, and His Royal Highness
for the Navy, and in the course of his speeeh he expressed the
pride he felt in having the command of such a ship as the
‘Galatea,’ and of having the opportunity of sailing, like
Captain Cook, round the world.
After some routine toasts, His Royal Highness proposed ‘the
health of the Mayor,’ which was cordially received; and then
‘the Mayoress and the Ladies of South Australia.’ Lord
Newry returned thanks in a short but lively address. And the


Duke having retired, the Company separated at eleven o’clock.
His Eoyal Highness remained with the Mayor and some other
gentlemen in the Council Chamber until nearly twelve, when he
returned to Government House.
The following day being Sunday was as before spent on board
the ‘Galatea,’ returning in the evening to Adelaide, as on the
Monday (11th November) the party was to start on a hunting
tour in the neighbourhood of Lake Alexandrina and Lake
Albert.


THE VISIT TO THE LAKES.
No route through any part of South Australia could have
been better chosen to give the Duke of Edinburgh an idea of the
magnificent scenery with which our hill country abounds, than
the road through Glen Osmond by Echunga and Macclesfield to
Milang. The peculiar formation of the hills themselves, the
dark trees which cover them in places, the long vistas which
the winding roads open out in all directions, stretching far
away through savage glens, and long, deep valleys, until they
are lost in that blue haze which seems eternally to hang over
the distant scrub, presents a sight at once grand and impressive,
a sight confined almost exclusively to South Australia. The
mountain ranges which form the background to the city of
Adelaide are almost destitute of water; it is true it may be
found in attenuated streamlets which trickle silently and almost
unseen at the bottom of those deep ravines by which the
different mountain ridges are divided; but the splendid sheets
of water, the deep blue lakes to which the Scottish Highlands,
and the Killamey Hills in Ireland, owe their highest charms
are absolutely wanting. Those who have been accustomed to
wander amongst them, and still more those who do so for the
first time, are oppressed with the dead silence which finds its
fitting dwelling place amongst them. It is true that this is
occasionally broken by the shrill yet sweet note of the
Australian magpie, or ‘ organ bird ’ as the settlers call it; but
the silence, when this transient song has faded from the ear,
becomes even more painful and oppressive than before. In
rough weather the roar of the wind through the thin leaves and
naked branches of the trees sounds like the heavy breaking of


surf on a distant shore; but at all times the solitude is the
same—dull, heavy, and dispiriting. There are no animals
to lure the hunter, few birds to tempt the sportsman.
Near those little streams which lie hid amongst the ravines
waiting for the snakes and reptiles which abound in such
spots, the laughing jackass may be seen perched on some
adjacent branch. The approach of a human footstep startles
the bird from its usual grave silence and he breaks away
after giving utterance to the quaint and almost grotesque
note, a strange compound of shrieks and laughter, which has
given this strange denizen of the solitude his name. If this,
however, was all the hills could show, a passing visit would be
all they would deserve. But the heavy mountain chains, after
the summits have been passed, subside into gentle and fertile
slopes, which constitute some of the finest agricultural country
in the province.
A great part of the ranges is useless for the purpose of culti-
vation. The hills thickly timbered with stringy bark trees,
the stems of which are dusty and ragged-looking at the close
of the autumn, but clean and straight, and tinted with a bluish
leaden tint after the bark is shed, as though the tall stems had
been smoothly trimmed and painted over. Under the trees and
down the steep slopes low brushwood abounds, intermixed with
heaths, wild myrtles, and epacris, covered with small but beau-
tiful blossoms in the early spring. Seen from the road, these
hills and ravines are always charming; but to climb amongst
them on foot is to lose their beauty altogether. Their great
height, their varying colors, and bold outlines are not imme-
diately realized, for the roads mostly run along the ridges or
along their sides, where the downward view is shut out by the
thick timber and dense undergrowth beneath them. At the
tops of the highest peaks, however, the view is unrivalled. It
is bounded on the south-east by the Murray Scrub and the


Lakes, which on a clear day can be plainly discerned, and in
the opposite direction by the Adelaide and Gawler Plains and
the sea. From the summit of Mount Lofty the ships, as they
sail up and down the Gulf, seem no larger than toy-vessels
worked by clockwork; the roads like thin light lines traced
on a map. A railway train is a small black object with a
gossamer film floating behind it, which in the distance seems
scarcely to move, but yet slowly but surely creeps away.
Towards the lakes the view seems one uninterrupted forest.
Under the dark brown foliage the lines of road are completely
hidden, and the mass of trees in the distance seems as dense as
if it never could be penetrated by mortal man.
It was a long time before the early settlers found a way to
those fertile districts which lie beyond the hills, and Cox’s
Creek, about fifteen miles from Adelaide, owes its name to an
unfortunate man who lost himself in the scrub and perished.
All this altered now. There is a splendid road from Adelaide
to the edge of Lake Alexandrina, smooth and well-kept, and
fit for traffic in all weathers, and which runs through some of
the most beautiful as well as the most fertile country in the
province.
At seven o’clock in the morning of the 11th November, the
members of the party who were invited to join the Prince in
his excursion, assembled at the Parliament Houses, and after a
short delay started forward on their journey. The first few
miles of road run through rich and well cultivated land, dotted
with villas and cottages, and plentifully sprinkled with orchards,
vineyards, and flower gardens, as far as the entrance into Glen
Osmond, at the foot of the hills. Here the scenery changes
altogether. The gradual ascent towards the ranges from
Adelaide now becomes steeper, the road narrower, and is at last
confined between huge hills, which overhang the roadway, as
it winds along for about three miles. These hills rise many


hundreds of feet in height, and, though appearing to slope back
gradually, are so steep as to be almost inaccessible. Some of
them are completely destitute of vegetation, except a thin grass
on which the cattle which wander about them seem to thrive ;
and others are thinly covered with trees, which, as one looks up
at them at the dizzy height at which they spring from the hill
side, seem as if they were about to fall into the valley below.
The natural old appearance of the hills themselves has been
much altered by the quarrying operations, which have been
carried on there for some years. By means of these some of the
most picturesque of the spurs of the range have been entirely
cleared away, leaving deep gaps in the hill sides, terminated by
high, flat, dark brown walls. On many of these, towards the
tops, the rocks crop out through the thin soil and grass and
assume the most fantastic shapes—some like the battlements of
ruined castles, others seem as if they had been suddenly arrested
in rolling downwards to the bottom of the ravine, and wanted
no more than a touch to start them on again.
At the Mountain Hut the steepest pinch in the road occurs,
passing Stevenson’s garden (once celebrated as the finest in the
province) up to Snapper Point, just at the top of the ridge,
When this is reached, the view is most magnificent. Through
the openings in the trees the Adelaide plains may be seen, and,
in clear weather, Yorke’s Peninsula, at the western side of the
gulf. Down the ravine, at the right hand side of the road, aro
some of the best and most extensive market gardens near
Adelaide.
The difference of climate between that of the hills and plains
is wonderful. During the strong summer heats, when the latter
are scarcely habitable, and sleep almost impossible, the former
are always cool and pleasant. Here gooseberries, raspberries,
strawberries, and other European fruits, are brought to perfec-
tion, whilst on the plains they can scarcely be got to grow at all.


About a mile further, on looking towards the sea, a most
glorious prospect is seen looking clown what is called the
‘ Long Gully’ leading to the great and little waterfalls. This
gully is about three miles in length, and is formed by two moun-
tain ridges running parallel, the longer spurs of which interlace
each other, in the most extraordinary way. The waterfalls
themselves are but puny streams in summer. In winter when
they are swelled to good dimensions no one thinks of going into
the raw bleak hills to see them. The little waterfall is chiefly
remarkable for the gigantic ferns which belong to a species said
to be extinct in Europe.
The Prince started from Adelaide driving four in hand. Ho
stopped in Glen Osmond, at the residence of the Hon. T. Elder
to breakfast, and after a short stay proceeded to Echunga where
lunch had been provided, and where he changed horses. All
along the road wherever there were any settlers they lined the
road sides and lustily greeted the party with cheers. At
Echunga every one had turned out to do honour to His Royal
Highness, and the villagers had done their best in the shape of
arches, wreaths and other floral decorations. Lunch being ended
the Prince was shown the process of gold washing, and carried
away with him a small quantity of gold which had been washed
out expressly for him. The party then proceeded on towards
Macclesfield, where they were met with the usually noisy
demonstrations. This village had also its arches and evergreen
decorations. There was also an escort of cavalry in waiting to
accompany him on his journey as far as Strathalbyn. This
township had made very elaborate preparations to receive the
Duke, and from the entrance to its boundary, about half a mile,
there were no less than five triumphal arches; besides a profu-
sion of evergreens flowers and flags adorning the houses in all
directions. There were crowds of people—bands of music—a
bullock roasted whole—a crowd of handsome young women on


horseback—rushing about in all directions—an escort of cavalry
and some mounted troopers—a royal salute fired in very
indifferent time—and the usual address of congratulation from
the Chairman and Councillors of the District. All this was very
well. The outside show looked very dressy ; but though it was
known that the party would change horses here, no apartment
had been provided for His Royal Highness’s reception. The
carriages drove up to the Victoria Hotel, by no means the best
hotel in Strathalbyn, and here so large a crowd had assembled,
that in alighting it was quite impossible for the Duke to enter
the house. There were several police troopers trying to keep
the crowd back, but they only added to the confusion ; at last
some gentlemen of the party cleared the way for him, and he
got into the back parlour. He was joined here by several of
his suite, but strangers kept coming in and out and staring at
him in the most rude and thoughtless manner during almost
the whole time he remained.
As soon as the fresh horses were put to the party started
again, His Royal Highness driving, as he had done all the way.
He was cheered most vociferously on leaving, and was doubtless
not sorry to get clear of the honest though somewhat incon-
venient enthusiasm of the good people of Strathalbyn. From
this township to Milang the road is perfectly level, and goes
through some tolerably good but not very pretty country. It
was mostly under cultivation, and the young corn looked healthy
and well.
The Prince arrived at Milang at about half-past three, and
after receiving an address and hearing the children sing the
National Anthem, at once went on board the ‘ Queen ’ steamer,
which had been courteously placed at his disposal by Mr.
Charnock, of the firm of Stilling and Co., and Mr. Gunn, of
Wentworth. The Duke was accompanied by a few only of his
friends. The rest of the party went on board the ‘ Telegraph.’


About four o’clock the ‘ Queen’ started on the passage across
Lake Alexandrina, followed at a short distance by the ‘ Tele-
graph,’ and they reached the other side in about two hours.
Here there was a large assemblage of blackfellows waiting on
the Peninsula to welcome the Prince as he landed. They
belonged to several different tribes, and on the whole were
somewhat better dressed, or rather more completely covered, than
the aborigines usually are. Several of the women had children
with them, which they carry slung in their blankets or opossum
rugs on their backs. On coming ashore the natives cheered
His Royal Highness loudly, but in a very English way. The
‘ hurrah,’ in fact, had nothing savage about it, and was so well
timed that there is little doubt that it had been well practised
beforehand.
The cheering having come to an end, one of the blackfellows
read an address to the Duke. It was said to have been com-
posed and written by one of themselves. Perhaps it was; but
if so, the institution at Point Macleay has succeeded in
imparting to the natives under its care a special education
which can be met with nowhere else in Australia. Those who
mixed and conversed freely with the natives assembled on the
ground could not find the least approach to the correct language
which the address embodies. With the exception of one half-
caste woman, who spoke English almost as well as any
Englishwoman, they all conversed in that broken and mangled
dialect which bears about the same relation to genuine Anglo-
Saxon as that peculiar language which is used by Chinamen in
Canton in their intercourse with Englishmen.
The object of assembling these blacks was to afford His
Royal Highness an opportunity of witnessing a ‘ corrobboree,’
a native dance. In former days these exhibitions used to be
performed on a grand scale —sometimes by many hundreds of
aborigines; but the race has so dwindled away that it is very


difficult, indeed, to collect any large number of them within the
settled districts. The Adelaide tribe is extinct, the only
remains of it, in fact, being a grammar of the language compiled
by some Lutheran missionaries. The Port Adelaide tribes
have died out, as well as those formerly belonging to Gawler,
Mount Barker, &c. In fact, for a distance of more than fifty
miles around Adelaide, except in the vicinity of the Lakes and
of the Murray River, they are scarcely ever met with at all.
Into the causes of their rapid disappearance it is unnecessary
to enter here. There is no record, or even approximate census,
of their numbers at the date of the foundation of the colony.
By all accounts, however, they must have been very numerous,
and their disappearance before the influence of civilization,
without being caused by open violence, has certainly been
more rapid than that of any known race.
The protector of aborigines (Mr. E. B. Scott) had been
collecting them for some time before, as it was intended to have
the corrobboree on a very large scale, and the members of four
tribes were present. In the official programme it had been
announced that it was to take place on the 12th November, but
when the Duke and suite arrived on the ground, it was
determined to hold it on the 11th. The object of this was to
enable His Royal Highness to proceed on the following morning
in his hunting excursion, as well as to get away from the crowd
of settlers which it was well known would assemble on the
occasion. It was not expected that, at Macbeth’s, any one
would be present except the members of the Duke’s party, and
a few gentlemen who were expected to meet him; but, on
landing, it was found that a large number of persons—many of
them from Adelaide—had assembled there, much to the incon-
venience and annoyance of His Royal Highness and party, who
wished to be let alone and enjoy themselves, without restraint,
in their own way. The camp was pitched about a third of a
TO SOUTH AUSTRALIA


mile from the shores of the lake; and after the meeting with
the blacks was over, the Prince adjourned to his tent to dinner.
In the meantime great dissatisfaction was expressed by the
visitors, who had mostly travelled long distances to see the
corrobboree, at the alteration in the arrangement; and some
persons who, it was said, were interested in the steamers, went
amongst the natives, and by promises and presents endeavoured
to persuade them not to join in the dance that evening. In
this they succeeded so well that, out of all the aborigines on
the ground, not more than about forty or fifty took part in it.
In consequence of this the demonstration was to a great extent
a failure. There certainly was the quaint dancing, and the
wild monotonous, though not altogether unmusical, chant, which
accompanied it, but the numbers, which give it its principal
effect, were wanting. Mr. E. B. Scott, the protector, did his
utmost to get them all to join, but without success.
At a little past nine the corrobboree began, though the
Prince and suite did not make their appearance for some time
afterwards. The men wore no clothes, except girdles round
their loins, and they were painted in the most extraordinary
manner —some with bands of white round their bodies and
limbs, like the stripes of a zebra, others were dotted over with
white spots, others with regular white streaks from the hips to
the feet, with extraordinary devices on the breast and back; all
had their faces painted ; a great many of them had scars on
their backs, which form some distinguishing mark of the various
tribes. They are caused by incisions made in the flesh with
sharp stones or shells, and treated afterwards in such a way
that when they heal up they leave prominent ridges quite a
third of an inch in height above the surface of the body, and
from an inch and a half to two inches in length. Most of the
men had spears, waddies (clubs), and boomerangs, and some few
of them shields. These last are about two feet long, nine
THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH’S VISIT


inches wide in the centre, tapering off to a point at either end.
There is only one handle, placed transversely across the middle of
the back, and are used for warding off spears as they are thrown.
They are made of hard wood, and are rudely carved on the face.
When the royal party arrived at the scene of action the
dancers were seen lying on their backs on the ground in an
irregular line, and perfectly motionless. The women were
seated on the ground chanting their peculiar chant, and beating
time with their hands on rugs made of opossum-skins folded on
their laps, whilst some of the men, who were in ordinary
European dresses (uncommonly dirty, by the way), accompanied
them in their chant with an instrumental performance by
knocking sticks together. After a few moments, the wild
chorus seemed to wake the blackfellows into life. First their
feet began to quiver—then they raised their right legs so as to
rest the feet upon their left knees—the left legs were then
gradually drawn up, and, after rising to a sitting posture, the
men suddenly started to their feet, and broke into a strange
antic-dance. Their voices then swelled the song of the women,
and their action, though most absurd, was carried on in the
most admirable time. They moved with as much ease and
regularity as well-drilled soldiers, apparently adapting their
movements to the words which formed the burden of their
song. As each part of the dance came to an end, they gathered
together in a crowd, and, after brandishing their weapons in a
way by no means agreeable to those who were not acquainted
with their peaceful nature, gave vent to a long, deep, pro-
tracted ugh ! in an inexpressibly comic manner.
It is not quite clear what a corrobboree is intended to signify.
Some think it a war-dance —others that it is a representation of
their hunting expeditions—others, again, that it is a religious,
or pagan, observance ; but on this even the blacks themselves
could or would give no information,


A corrobboree never takes place except on a bright moonlit
night—for the natives have a great objection to moving about
in the dark. Seen as they were in the moonlight, daubed with
paint—shrieking and contorting themselves into postures that
defy description—it was difficult almost to regard them as
human beings.
The whole scene was perhaps as great a novelty as the royal
party had ever witnessed; and its strange effect was much
heightened by the distant fires which dimly lighted up the
surrounding scrub, and by the intermixture of white people of
both sexes who had assembled to witness the strange exhibition.
During the dancing there was one black who did not join in
the song with the others, but kept up a long monotonous
droning sound, not unlike that which is peculiar to the chanter
of a bagpipe. This attracted some notice, and, after the
corrobboree had been finished, the Duke sent for his piper, who
played to the natives for some time. They all listened with
marked attention to this part of the evening’s amusement, and
seemed greatly delighted with it. His Royal Highness and
suite shortly afterwards retired to their tents, and the blacks
went away to their own camping ground.
On the following morning the camp was broken up, and the
party, being separated into small divisions, proceeded through
the scrub in search of kangaroos and such other game as the
country afforded. They were to cross the peninsula, and meet
in the evening at Campbell House (Mr. Davenport’s station),
on the shore of Lake Albert. His Royal Highness took
his guns, and only two or three friends went with him.
The rest of the party had with them a good supply of kangaroo
dogs.
For some time after starting forward His Royal Highness
was much annoyed at finding that a number of strangers from
Adelaide, having seen the direction he was about to take, went


before him, killing and scaring away almost everything which
lay in his route. For a considerable distance, go where he
would, he was met in every direction with the report of fire-
arms ; and the result was, what might have been expected,
that he had a day’s hard work, but very indifferent sport. On
coming to camp that evening, a pretty flying doe and a few
wallabies were all that he had been able to kill. The rest of
the party were more fortunate. They had plenty of dogs, and
were guided by Mr. Lovegrove, who acted as the huntsman of
the party, and who knew every inch of the country ; and before
they had been an hour on horseback they had some very exciting
runs. In a very short time they had pulled down some ten or
a dozen splendid kangaroos—the tail of one (the only part taken
by the hunter) weighing no less than seventeen pounds.
The country through which the party hunted is not of a very
interesting character. The soil is sandy, covered in places with
a coarse grass, and plenty of open scrub—mostly sheaoak.
The day’s excursion produced no special incident except that
one of the party got separated from his companions, and lost
himself for sometime in the scrub. It was near sundown when
His Royal Highness rejoined the party, and a good dinner,
which had been prepared, doubtless proved acceptable after the
day’s fatigues.
The evening was devoted to amusements of various kinds,
and the recollection of the corrobboree of the previous night
seemed to aford food for considerable merriment. In the
evening Mr. A. Macfarlane, who had joined the party, shot a
wombat, at a short distance from the camp. He presented it
to His Royal Highness, who seemed much pleased with it.
Some of the party who had accompanied His Royal Highness
so far, returned on their way to Adelaide, by the * Queen ’•
steamer, which had come round from Mcßeth’s, where they had
first landed, to Campbell House, with a few visitors, who


preferred an excursion on the Lakes to a ride through the scrub
on a hot day.
On the 13th the camp was not moved, and in the morning
the party divided into several detachments, and went off in
different directions to hunt in the scrub. Several, however>
remained about the camp, sketching, and amusing themselves
in various ways. His Royal Highness went out with Mr.
Mason (manager of the Hon. J. Baker’s station), and not being
preceded by his unwelcome attendants, as on the previous day,
or hampered with too many companions, had a very good day’s
shooting. Amongst the spoils a fine kangaroo, which was about
five feet high, was shot by the Prince. The rest of the party did
very well also, and they did not return to the camp until after
dark. The hard work and the heat of the day began to be
felt, and all were glad to get to rest early.
On the following morning the tents were struck, and His
Royal Highness and party started forward through the scrub
round the borders of Lake Albert, intending to reach the
Tatiara water holes, about 30 miles distant, and to camp there
in the evening. The baggage came after them, and certainly
those who travelled with it came in for their full share of the
discomforts of the bush. The day was intensely hot, the
waggons overloaded, and the horses knocked up—even before
they started —from the hard work of the previous week (they
had brought the tents, provisions, &c., from Adelaide), and they
had no water. The road, or rather the country, for many
miles was a series of sandy rises thinly covered with grass, but
plentifully sprinkled with grass trees and sheaoaks. The
horses wherever they came to a hill stuck fast, until some of
those harnessed to some other waggons could be detached to
pull them out of their difficulty. In consequence of this it was
late in the afternoon before Meningie was reached—not much
more than half the distance that had to be performed. Here


however the country improved. It was more level, though in
places it was extremely heavy, being of dark black soil, which
had formed the beds of swampy ground now dried up. The
progress through this was very slow, and at sundown they had
not come up with the party. The party themselves, however,
had not reached the spot intended, and as the baggage could
not reach them they had to return sortie distance to meet it.
When they came to the place where they had stopped it was
quite dark, and too late to attempt anything like an encamp-
ment. Some of the party set to work to get materials for a
fire, and His Royal Highness assisted in cutting down a tree
and in getting a fire ready. There was plenty of timber, and
several fires were very soon under way. Fortunately there was
no lack of provisions, but grilled mutton seemed to be the
favorite dish. The night was tolerably calm and bright, and
the prospect of camping out seemed to afford the royal party
considerable amusement. Supper being ended the party
wandered about, smoking, and chatting by the fires until it was
time to sleep. In the baggage-waggons a number of straw
mattrasses were stowed away, as also a good supply of blankets,
but in the darkness and confusion they could not all be found,
and those who could not get them had to content themselves
with anything that came to hand. A number of the party had
to rest satisfied with such covering as their own clothes afforded,
but in summer time this is no great hardship. Stock drivers
and others sleep for weeks and weeks in the open air, with
their saddles for pillows, and no shelter from the weather what-
ever it may be, but a blanket rolled round them.
While the attendants were engaged in preparing supper,
the Duke amused himself by cutting some firewood and assist-
ing to make the camp fire, and when it was ready the demand
for grilled mutton taxed the cook’s energy to the utmost.
His Royal Highness seemed to enjoy the novelty of the situation


very much, though it may be questioned whether those who
got the hill side alone for their resting place liked it quite as
well next morning. His Royal Highness slept under a tree on
a straw mattress, covered with a thick rug. Some slept in the
waggons, others under them, and altogether the night was got
through pretty comfortably. The only drawback (as it usually
is in a bush camp) was*the want of good water ; but even that
was compensated for to some extent by an abundance of other
fluids.
Shortly after daylight some of the party began to move about,
and the sight they encountered was at least new. No one
coming upon the hill side where the sleepers were scattered
about could have dreamt that they composed the members
of a large hunting party. They were dusty and haggard
looking, lying about the ground in an irregular and
even disorderly manner. The empty bottles, fragments of food,
Ac., strewed about the place, made the camp look more like
the theatre of a ‘ free fight ’ than the scene of the bivouac
of the Duke of Edinburgh and suite. It is greatly to be
regretted that Mr. Duryea, the photographer who had accom-
panied the party, had gone on the night before to the next
station.
The Aveather so far had been very favourable, and though the
sun Avas strong there had been a cool breeze almost every day
the party had been out. The morning of the 15th, however,
brought about a change, and an oppressive hot wind blew
during the greater part of the day. After the horses had
been collected, and the party had got such a breakfast as could
be extemporized, they set out through the scrub for Poltallock
Avhere they were to lunch. The distance is about ten miles, and
through a most wretched inhospitable country. Sand, grass
trees, and low dense scrub for miles, until Lovegrove’s is reached,
Avhere the land becomes more open, and fit for depasturing a


few sheep and cattle. From Poltallock the party went on to
Macfarlane’s, where they remained for the night, and started early
next morning on their return to Adelaide. They reached
Wellington about 9 o’clock. Here the River Murray is crossed
by means of a punt, propelled by hauling in a wire rope which
stretches from one bank of the river to the other. After a
short stay the Duke and suite were ferried over.
At Wellington there was a tolerably fair green arch, erected
on the east side of the river, and as much attempt at decoration
as such a wretched place admits of. On the western, or
Adelaide side, the most striking feature is the huge mound of
sand on which the few houses which constitute the township
are scattered about. From this point the party proceeded on
through a flat uninteresting country —the Prince driving his
four-in-hand, as usual, till they came to Hartley. Here there
were the usual decorations, and the inevitable address (to which
a reply was promised), and, what was more to the purpose,
some lunch. After this they pushed on rapidly to Mount
Barker, which was reached at about two o’clock. The inhabi-
tants of this really beautiful spot did not seem to agree with
the sentiment that ‘ beauty unadorned is adorned the most,’ for
they had gone into triumphal arches, evergreens, flags, and
crowds quite as extensively and enthusiastically as either
Gawler or Kapunda. On the Duke’s entry he was met by a
large number of ladies and gentlemen on horseback, by whom he
was preceded into the town. Fortunately the heavy rain which
.had fallen during the previous night had laid the dust, otherwise
the royal visitor would have enjoyed a second edition of the
clouds of Gawler. Passing under the arch erected near the
National Bank, His Royal Highness proceeded to a platform to
receive the address of the Council of the district; and after he
had rested a short time at the National Bank, he adjourned to
a comfortable pavilion, erected by the directors of that bank,


where a most elegant and substantial repast had been prepared
by their instructions for the Duke and his friends. His Royal
Highness was received by the Hon. A. Blyth, Chairman of the
Board of Directors, and several other gentlemen connected with
the bank. After the important business of luncheon had been
disposed of, and the Prince’s health had been proposed by the
Hon. Mr. Blyth, and duly responded to, the carriages were once
more brought into requisition, and the journey homeward was
resumed. The road lay through a most picturesque country of
hills and valleys—a country at all times charming, but looking
especially fresh and green after the rain of the previous night.
Through all the villages on the road flags and flowers were
shewn in profusion ; but in the German hamlet of Hahndorf
the inhabitants had made a display worthy of a much more
pretentious place. The straight road which runs through
it was for nearly half a mile an avenue of bright flags, clusters
of evergreens and flowers, and contained four triumphal arches.
The stereotyped inscriptions, however, were happily departed
from. The first was simply ‘ Wilkommen,’ and the last
‘ Wiedersehen.’ The children of the hamlet had been collected,
and greeted His Royal Highness with a German chorus ; and
at its close, an address having been presented, the carriages
moved on towards Adelaide, The journey was soon made, the
only stoppage being at Glen Osmond, where His Royal Highness
received two elegant bouquets from two young ladies. At
about seven o’clock the Prince and suite reached Government
House, somewhat fatigued after his week’s journey, but
evidently well pleased with the novelty of the various scenes
he had met with during his progress.
It should be mentioned that the committee which had charge
of the country excursion consisted of the Hon. J. Baker, Hon.
J. Morphett, and S. Davenport, Esq.
On the 17th November (Sunday), as on previous occasions,


the Prince went on board the ‘ Galatea ’ to attend divine
service. A couple of days before, however, one of the sailors
of the ship had fallen overboard. He was picked up, but died
from the injuries he received in his fall. At half-past one a
funeral party of about seventy seamen and marines, twelve
officers of the ship, and H.R.H., as Captain, came ashore, and
proceeded to the cemetery at Alberton, where the deceased was
to be buried. The funeral was conducted in a most impressive
way; and, besides those who immediately took part in it, there
were between two and three thousand spectators present. His
Royal Highness returned with the procession to the Port, and
shortly afterwards drove up to Adelaide.


YORKE’S PENINSULA.
Although several of the officers of the ‘Galatea’ accompanied
ilis Royal Highness to the lakes, those who were left behind
were not uncared for. A hunting excursion on Yorke’s Peninsula
was projected for as many as could be spared from the duties of
the ship. On the evening of the 10th November the Govern-
ment schooner ‘Flinders’ left the anchorage off the Semaphore
with about a dozen officers, with Lieutenant Douglas, R.N.R.,
J. Hart, Esq., Mr. J. Hart, jun., and Mr. Ringwood. The stiff
breeze that blew on that evening caused the little ‘Flinders’ to
behave in an extremely lively manner, and made all the
‘ Galatea ’ men somewhat sensible of the difference between
a 100-ton schooner and a 3,000-ton frigate. Shortly after
midnight she anchored outside the shoals in Oyster Bay. At
daylight she weighed anchor, and, passing round a sandspit,
brought up about a mile from the landing-place. At half-past
seven the party landed. Horses had been provided for them
by Mr. Fowler and Mr. Giles, who own extensive sheep runs
on the peninsula ; and, as it turned out, sufficient to accommo-
date a much larger party. By half-past eight o’clock all were
mounted, and the hunt, consisting of about thirty persons—•
with blackfellows and dogs—set forward. About a mile from
the beach, in a north-westerly direction, the first kangaroo was
sighted. The country here is well-grassed, but is rendered
somewhat rough by the limestone which crops out in almost
every direction, and by the wombat-holes with which the
peninsula abounds. The land, too, is pretty thickly timbered
with sheaoaks and dwarf gums, and renders a kangaroo hunt
rather trying to those who have not had experience of bush


riding and bush horses. Sundry casualties
except in one instance, without serious consequences. After
several exciting runs—which resulted in the destruction of
many kangaroos, some of which, however, were not recovered—
three tails were secured. The party got sadly scattered in the
scrub, and it was some time before they were collected together.
On assembling, it was found that Mr. Archer (one of the mid-
shipmen who had been thrown from his horse in consequence of
the breaking of his stirrup-leather) had broken his arm badly
above the elbow. Dr. Symes (the assistant-surgeon of the
‘ Galatea,’ who was with the party), thought it desirable that
the sufferer should be taken on board the ‘ Galatea ’ before he
set the limb. He was at oj*ce removed to the ‘ Flinders,’ which
reached the frigate shortly before midnight, where he received,
of course, every necessary attention. In the meantime the
party on shore continued their sport without any further
mishap. In the afternoon several more kangaroos were
taken, and in the evening with five guns, upwards of
twenty opossums were shot. The party passed the night in
a spacious woolshed, where they were made as comfortable as
circumstances would allow. On the following day an eccentric
old native joined the the hunters, with a fresh supply of dogs.
Under his guidance the sport was much better. In the after-
noon the game was driven down to the sea shore by the natives,
and about a dozen more kangaroos were shot. In the evening
the party embarked on board the ‘ Flinders,’ and reached the
‘Galatea’ at ten the following morning. The officers, for
whose amusement the excursion had been undertaken, expressed
themselves greatly pleased with the trip, and with the sport
they had enjoyed in so short a time, and with so little of the
discomforts which the bush is supposed to inflict. The excite-
ment by the visitors when the bounding of the
kangaroos first met their view afforded immense amusement to


the blacks who went with the party, and not a little to the
white folks to whom such sights were of common occurrence.
The excursion to York’s Peninsula was certainly not the least
successful of the amusements provided in honor of the Prince’s
visit.
98
THE DUKE OP EDINBURGH’S VISIT


ADELAIDE.
On Monday, the 18th November, a deputation from the
Reception Committee, consisting of the Hon. Henry Ayers,
M.L.C., Chief Secretary, the Mayor of Adelaide (Mr, Fuller,
M.P.), and Mr. R. D. -Ross, D.A.C.G., Hon. Secretary, waited
upon His Royal Highness, with a view to prevail upon him to
lengthen his stay in the colony beyond the 21st, the day fixed
for his departure. His Royal Highness‘received the deputation
most courteously, but he informed them that it was impossible
to comply with their request—as his own feelings prompted
him to do—because he had already postponed the period of his
departure once, and he feared he could not do it a second time
without discourtesy to the Governor of Victoria, with whom
he had promised to be on the 23rd instant. The day for his
departure was therefore fixed for the 21st instant.
About one o’clock in the afternoon His Royal Highness paid
a visit to St. Peter’s Collegiate School, on the invitation of the
Governors of the institution. He was received at the entrance
gate by the Lord Bishop of Adelaide, the Very Rev. the Dean,
Rev. Canon Farr, Principal of the institution, Mr. G. W.
Hawkes, S.M., Hon. Secretary, the Rev. Canon Marryatt, and
the Governors of the establishment, and after the gentlemen
present had been presented to him, he was conducted over the
building. It is not necessary to dwell here upon the objects of
the institution, as they have already been noticed in connection
with the Alfred College. The building is situated on the
Hackney Road, about a mile and a half from Adelaide, in an
easterly direction, and as it is erected on a rising ground in a
large paddock destitute of trees, it forms a very prominent but


rather bare-looking object. It is in the Gothic style, with a
square tower in the centre, and two wings running north and
south. It is so entirely out of keeping with all surrounding
objects, that, whatever its architectural merits may be, it has a
cold and rigid look which ill befits a building of its character.
Nevertheless, the internal arrangements are excellent, and the
course of instruction admirable. Although many of the educa-
cational establishments in the colony bear deservedly a very
high character, it is generally considered that St. Peter’s takes
the lead. The building cost some £20,000, about £7,000 of
which was given and bequeathed by Mr. Allen, formerly a
merchant captain who- had acquired a large fortune. On
reaching the schoolroom, where the scholars were assem-
bled, His Royal Highness was greeted with immense
cheering, which was renewed furiously when a holiday was
granted to them at the Prince’s request. There are three
scholarships connected with the College, called the ‘Allen,’
‘Christ Church,’ and ‘Westminster.’ Masters Scott, Moore,
and Sawtell, who are at present enjoying these rewards of
industry, were presented to His Royal Highness, and Scott in
the name of the school thanked the Prince for his visit. After
more cheering the party adjourned to the library, where the
Prince recorded his name in the visitors’ book, and after a short
stay proceeded to the chapel attached to the College. In the
ground the Prince planted a cedrus deodora as a memorial of
his visit. Before leaving the College, Mr. G. W. Hawkes pre-
sented an old sailor, named Stephen Williams, to His Royal
Highness. This veteran, who is near eighty-eight years old,
was captain of a gun in the ‘Revenge,’ 74, at the battle of
Trafalgar. The poor old fellow is an inmate of the Destitute
Asylum. He has no pension, but the kindness of his many
acquaintances enables him to procure for himself many little
comforts which are not within the regulations of that institution.


The Prince shook hands with the old man and seemed to take
a very great interest in him. After one of the scholars had
taken a photograph of the Prince, the party proceeded to
the magnificent villa of Mr. P. D. Prankerd to lunch, and
then returned to Government House.
On the following day the Prince and suite paid a visit to
the South Australian Institute. The building is in the Italian
style, and is certainly the best building, in point of architectural
taste, in Adelaide. It was designed by Mr. Edward Hamilton,
when Colonial Architect. It contains an excellent library of
12,000 volumes, a reading-room, museum, class-rooms, and
offices. The Society of Arts, and the Philosophical Society are
affiliated to it and are in connection with it. The reading-
room is supplied with all the English magazines and the
leading English and Colonial journals, and scientific works. It
is open to the public, free of charge, from ten o’clock a.m. to ten
p.m. daily. Those who visit it are not allowed to take the
books away; but subscribers of a pound a year have the
privilege of taking books, &c., home under certain, but very
liberal, restrictions. There are lectures occasionally, to which
all subscribers have access, and quarterly soirees. These last
are generally so numerously attended that they are held in the
Assembly Rooms or, the Town Hall, where there is more
accommodation than the Institute affords. The Institute is
supported by the subscriptions of members and annual grants
from the public revenue, and is governed by a Board of
Governors elected by the members of the Institute, and by
those of the affiliated societies. It is ably managed, and is one
of the most popular, as well as useful, institutions in the
colony. His Royal Highness was received by Mr. W. Everard,
Chairman of the Board of Governors; Mr. J. H. Clark and
Mr. C. Todd, Governors; and Mr. Kay, the Librarian and
Secretary, by whom he was shown through the building. Mr.


F. G. Waterhouse, Curator of the Musuem, was also in attend-
ance, and pointed out the different objects of interest in his
department. Of ancient rarities, the"museum is almost bare,
but there is a very good collection of tertiary fossils, a fine
assemblage of native birds and insects, and arms and utensils
from Africa, the Fiji Islands, and native weapons. Although
small, the museum contains the nucleus of a very valuable
collection, and when this portion of the building is enlarged, as
is intended, many most interesting objects, which are now put
away for want of room, will add greatly to its attractions. The
visit of the Prince was a private one, so that very few persons
were present, and, for once he escaped the crowds which he
always seemed anxious to avoid.
In the evening the Governor’s ball took place at the Town
Hall. It was held there because the ball-room at Government
House could not have accommodated, with comfort, many more
than a fourth of those who had the honor of invitations. The
arrangements were very much the same as those which had
been so successfully made at the assembly ball, and, as a matter
of course, left nothing to be desired by His Excellency’s guests.
King William Street was brilliantly illuminated, and in order
to prevent inconvenience to the visitors, it was closed for
general traffic. At a little before nine o’clock the visitors
began to arrive. His Excellency Sir Dominick Daly came at
about a quarter past that hour, attended by Mr. D. Daly,
private secretary; Captain Deering, A.D.C. ; and Mr. and Mrs.
Souttar, Shortly afterwards His Royal Highness, accompanied
by Lieutenant Haig, R.E., and the Hon. E. C. Yorke, equerries,
and Lord Newry, drove up, having been escorted by a detach-
ment of the mounted police, under the command of Mr. Searcy,
chief inspector. There was a large crowd assembled, but as it
was behind barriers, erected in front of the Town Hall, it caused
no inconvenience. On alighting, the Prince was received with


enthusiastic cheering; and, with his attendants, proceeded at
once to the ball-room, where he was received by the Governor.
His Royal Highness opened the ball with Mrs. Hamley, and
dancing became general.
At 12 o’clock His Royal Highness went to supper, which was
provided on a most splendid scale. At its close His Excellency,
Sir D. Daly, proposed the health of the Queen, which was, as it
always is, most enthusiastically received. The Governor then
gave the health of H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, ‘whose
amiability, courtesy, and condescension had impressed all those
who had come into contact with him during his visit to the
colony.’ This was drunk amidst a perfect storm of cheers. His
Royal Highness briefly acknowledged the compliment, and
expressed his great gratification at the reception which he had
met with in South Australia, The party then returned to the
hall, where dancing had been kept up with great vigour. While
the second instalment of guests retired to the supper-room, the
Prince, more suo, danced a Scottish reel, to the great amusement
of those who witnessed it. The company did not separate until
a veiy late, or rather early hour in the morning. A guard of
honor of ‘ Prince Alfred’s Own ’ Regiment of Volunteers, under
command of Captain 0. A. Babbage, was in attendance during
the evening.
The toilettes of the ladies were even more magnificent than
those which were displayed at the Assembly Ball; and every
one seemed disposed to make the most of the last opportunity
afforded them of meeting His Royal Highness.
The ball itself was the largest ever given by any Governor of
South Australia, and was as successful as any one that has ever
been held in the province. Much regret was felt that the
delicate health of Lady Daly prevented her on this, as on
previous occasions from being present.
During the Prince’s stay in Adelaide he drove about the


suburbs constantly, so as to see as much of the entourage of
Adelaide as possible; and, amongst other places which he
visited, was the seat of the Hon. J. Baker, M.L.C., at Morialta,
where he was entertained at lunch. His Royal Highness went
about without any state or parade, and was usually attended only
by a few of his own friends, who rode in his waggonette with him.
The residence of so distinguished a visitor as the Duke in
the midst of a population, to the most of whom royalty had
hitherto been merely an idea, could not fail to give rise to
numbers of anecdotes —true and otherwise—of the Prince’s
sayings and doings. Amongst them there is one that will well
bear mentioning, because, besides being amusing, it has the
merit of being true. An Irish colonist, who had carefully
taught a cockatoo to speak, wished to present him to the Prince;
and waited on His Royal Highness for that purpose with
the bird. Anxious to shew his pet to the best advantage, he
endeavored to make him speak. ‘ Say u Good morning ! ” to
the Prince,’ said the proud proprietor. The cockatoo looked
as if he had not been spoken to, and remained silent. ‘ Say
“ Good morning !” to the Prince,’ was repeated in a
somewhat sharp tone. The bird gave his master one
of those expressive looks which cockatoos only can give,
and still held his peace. The order was repeated in a
sharper tone —‘ Say “ Good morning !” to the Prince.’ The
bird spread out his crest, scratched his beak with his claw, and
continued dumb. ‘ Oh,’ said the master, ‘ I see what it is, your
Royal Highness, and if you’ll just forgive me for calling you a
gentleman for once , the bird will understand it. The Prince
assented to this proposition ; and the order being given in the
customary way — 1 Say “ good, morning ”to the gentleman ! ’ the
bird promptly replied— ‘ Good morning, sir.’ No doubt the
Prince has not forgotten the joke; and, it is understood
presented the trainer of the bird with a watch.


THE DEPARTURE.
Wednesday, the 20th November, was kept as a close holiday
in honor of the Prince, and although all was done that could be
to make the ceremonial of leave-taking as impressive as possible,
its arrival was looked for with considerable regret. It was felt
that though His Royal Highness had been feted and feasted
with the greatest cordiality and good feeling during his stay, he
did not remain long enough to see some of the most important
places and industries for which South Australia is famed. There
was no fear that he would carry away with him any but
favorable impressions of the first people who had welcomed him
to Australia, or of their country, but it was thought, and not
without reason, that he did not see enough of the colony ; and
certainly the colonists showed very plainly that they had not
seen enough of him, for they gathered everywhere along his line
of route, almost in as great numbers as during any day since he
had landed. Every thing that had been undertaken for the
entertainment of the Prince and his suite had passed off so well,
and the genuine pleasure which His Royal Highness’s residence
and demeanour in the province had afforded to all classes, was
so universally acknowledged, that general disappointment was
expressed at the necessity which compelled the Prince to bring
them so soon to a close.
But the inevitable ‘ last day’ had dawned upon the colonists,
and there was nothing for it now but to make the farewell
greeting as effective as the reception had been. Half-past twelve
o’clock was fixed upon as the time for the Prince’s departure, but
before that hour a number of ladies and gentlemen, con-
nected with the Choral Societies in the Province, assembled in


front of Government House to sing a farewell hymn to the Prince.
The composition was from the pen of J. G. Gibbs, and the con-
duct of the music was entrusted to Mr. Loder, who had so ably
trained the Sunday-school children to sing the National Anthem.
At twelve o’clock the choristers, numbering between two and
three hundred commenced the anthem, His Royal Highness
being seated with the Governor on a rustic seat near the
entrance to Government House. The singing was really excel-
lent, and considering the very short time there had been for
practice deserved no ordinary praise. The Prince seemed greatly
pleased with the performance, and with the kindly feeling that
had prompted the demonstration. Before it was commenced, a
copy of the anthem, ‘The Favoured Nation,’ was presented to
the Prince by a Miss Hince. It was enclosed in a silver casket,
The little girl was led to the Duke by Messrs. Brenton and
Tilley, and His Royal Highness received the present with plea-
sure, and briefly expressed his thanks to those from whom the
gift had emanated. A loud burst of cheering closed this portion
of the day’s proceedings. Mr. G. F. Angas, a gentleman well-
known and highly esteemed in the province, defrayed the whole
of the cost of training, &c., of the choir, and of organising the
demonstration.
Prior to the departure of the Prince from Government House,
a guard of honor, consisting of two companies of the 50th
‘ Queen’s Own ’ Regiment, were drawn up in the domain, under
the command of Captain Fyler. At about a quarter to one the
Prince, accompanied by the Governor, Colonel Hamley, in
command of the troops in the colony, and the Hon. E. C.
Yorke, equerry in waiting, entered the royal carriage en route
for Port Adelaide. At that moment a company of artillery,
under Captain Claxton, commenced firing a royal salute. This
startled the horses in the state carriage, and one of them
plunged, reared, got his leg over the trace, and finally threw


himself down. He was soon on his legs again, and no damage
having been done either to carftage or harness, the carriage
moved away, escorted by a troop of cavalry, under the commahd
of Captain Ferguson, and followed by three other vehicles,
containing the members of the Duke’s suite and the Governor’s
staff. On emerging from the gate of the vice-regal domain an
immense cheer burst from the large crowd of spectators, who
had assembled to say farewell to their distinguished visitor.
The cortege proceeded through King William Street, along
Hindley Street, and so to the Port Road. It was expected the
procession would have gone along North Terrace, so that in the
other streets there were but few persons present. The Port
Road, as has already been stated, is not remarkable for its
attractiveness, and certainly offers but few opportunities for any
display. Nevertheless, wherever there was any convenience it
was eagerly made use of, and a good number of flags flying in
various directions. At Thebarton there was not much to be
seen, but in Hindmarsh most of the houses and balconies were
clothed in green flags of all colors, and almost of all sizes
and shapes, fluttered gaily in the air. A garland, bearing the
parting word ‘ Farewell,’ was stretched across the road, and the
inhabitants, who had turned out in large numbers, cheered
loudly as the royal party passed along. Through Woodville as
much variety of colors, as the resources of its few inhabitants
allowed, was displayed.
The first attempt at formal decoration was met with at the
junctions of the townships of Alberton and Queenstown. It
consisted of three arches of evergreens stretching across the
road, surmounted with flags. Over the centre was the word
‘ Welcome,’ and over the side arches the names of the townships.
The arches themselves were tastefully hung with garlands,
which really looked extremely pretty.
The Port was reached about half-past one. Those who are


accustomed to see that extremely disagreeable but prosperous
seaport town in its working (fress could scarcely recognise it in
its holiday attire. The good people who are doomed to reside
in that very unfashionable watering-place had evidently deter-
mined to outdo Glenelg in festive decoration, so that if they
had not the honor of first receiving the Prince, they would at
all events make the most of their opportunity to bid him
farewell. They certainly succeeded to admiration. There was
a very handsome triumphal arch spanning the Commercial Road
at St. Vincent Street. It had the orthodox three openings, and
was surmounted with the royal arms, Prince Alfred's monogram,
and a profusion of standards, flags, and floral devices. Near
the arch a platform had been constructed, where the Port
Corporation was to present their address. Here the Mayor,
Mr. J. M. Sinclair, was in waiting with the Councillors and
Mr. Edmunds, the Town Clerk.
The Port, although by no means a fine town, contains many
really handsome buildings, and a large number of extensive and
substantial warehouses. There are also many fine hotels. On
all of these, wherever it was possible, there was displayed a
profusion of evergreens, flags, floral devices, and mottoes. The
Mayor had decorated his residence with a model of a ship in a
framing of flowers, further relieved by a quantity of tastefully
arranged evergreens. All the balconies were filled with spec-
tators, who were to the full as loud in their cheering and as
earnest in their enthusiasm as any who had previously welcomed
the Prince. All the ships in the harbor were dressed in flags,
and the entrance to the wharf, where the Prince was to embark,
was decorated with a very effective arch of evergreens. The
large shed on the MacLaren Wharf had been fitted up with a
commodious platform for the accommodation of the Prince and
his party, and the civic or state chair of the Mayor of Port
Adelaide was placed in the centre for the use of the Duke.


At the Port, close by the place of embarkation, four com-
panies of Prince Alfred’s Own attended as a guard of honor,
commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel Mayo and Major Clark.
The greatest novelty in the decorative art was in the stream.
Two handsome brigs, the ‘Prospero’ and the ‘ Blairmore,’ were
moored side by side, but at a convenient distance from each
other. They were covered with bunting in every part of tliQ
rigging, while strings of flags stretched from the tops of their
masts, making thus a triumphal arch in the water. Under
this it was intended that the Prince should pass on his passage
down the river to the ‘ Galatea.’
The decorations of Port Adelaide were altogether most effec-
tive, and reflected great credit both for taste and arrangement
upon the local committee who had charge of them.
Previous to the departure of the Prince from Government
House, a special train conveyed a large party of gentlemen and
and ladies to the Port. The gentlemen had been invited to
lunch on board the ‘Aldinga’ steamship, which had been placed
at the disposal of the Duke by the managing owner (Mr. J,
Darwent). The party consisted of the Ministry, the Members
of the two Houses of Parliament, Sir J. H. Fisher, the
members of the Reception Committee of Management and of
the Port Embarkation Committee, the officers of the 50th
Regiment, some of the officers of the ‘ Galatea,’, the Town Clerk
of Adelaide and the Councillors, the Mayor and Corporation of
Port Adelaide, Commander Hutchinson, R.N., and the officers
of the ‘ Beatrice’ (Admiralty surveying schooner), the Heads of
the various Departments in the Civil Service, and a few private
persons. These gentlemen were in waiting to receive His
Royal Highness on his arrival at the wharf. The Prince, with
the Governor and their suite, reached the platform, where 1,000
Sunday-school children were assembled to sing the National
Anthem, at about half-past one. The singing was very fair, but


nothing like that which the Prince heard in Adelaide on the
day of his landing. This over, the carriages moved towards the
Port, followed by cheers from the little scholars. By some
mistake the royal party did not stop at the platform where
the Corporation were assembled to present their address,
but proceeded to the Custom House, some distance on. Here
it became necessary to send for the civic authorities. They
certainly were not well pleased at this unusual mode of receiving
an address of welcome ; but when they reached the royal
carriage His Royal Highness expressed his sorrow for the un-
intentional mistake that had occurred. After a few preliminary
words of welcome from the Mayor, the Town Clerk read the
address, which was handsomely engrossed on vellum and taste-
fully illuminated. The Prince, having read his reply, the pro-
cession proceeded to the wharf, and to the platform which had
been prepared for his reception.
After a brief delay His Royal Highness, and a large number
of the gentlemen present, embarked in the ‘ Eleanor ’ steam-
boat, which at once conveyed them to the Government yard to
witness the launch of a new lifeboat. This boat, which had been
constructed by Mr. Taylor, superintendent of the yard, embodied
all the latest improvements adopted in the building of such
useful vessels. She is of good size, being over forty feet in
length and nine in width, and is so constructed as to right
herself if capsized. The Prince, who had gone ashore with the
Governor and a few gentlemen, seemed to admire her greatly.
Lieutenant Douglas, President of the Marine Board, presented
His Royal Highness with an elegant model of the boat. The
ceremony of christening the craft was performed by Miss Ayers,
(daughter of the Hon. the Chief Secretary), who named her
1 Lady Daly.’ The usual cheering accompanied the boat into
its future element, which was taken up by the spectators on
both sides of the river. As a test of her buoyancy she was
110
THE DUKE OF EDINBURGH’S VISIT
