

A NATIONAL POLICY.
OUR FISCAL SYSTEM AND IMPERIAL
RECIPROCITY.
A SPEECH
BY
SIR GILBERT PARKER, M.P.
GRAVESEND:
STANDARD, LTD. 75, NEW ROAD.


The following- speech, delivered before the Chairmen, Vice-Chair-
men, Secretaries and workers of the Committees of the Unionist
Party in Gravesend, is not published with any feeling that it is an
important contribution to the great discussion of the moment.
The response the speech met with, however, has significance, and
is issued chiefly for the constituents of the borough in which it
was delivered, fl he matter is re-printed from the report of the
4 ‘ Gravesend Standard,” and demonstrations on the part of the
audience are preserved merely to show in what manner the
speaker’s statements were received.
G. P.


A NATIONAL POLICY.
OUR FISCAL SYSTEM AND IMPERIAL
RECIPROCITY.
A SPEECH
BY
SIR GILBERT PARKER, M.P.
Delivered at the Conservative and Unionist Club of Gravesend
on Monday, June 2gth , Lieut.-Col. Sankey in the chair ; and now
printed and published by the Conservative and Unionist Asso-
ciation of the Borough.
Sir Gilbert Parker, who was received with cheers, said he
must beg - their patience if he addressed them at some
length, because he considered this occasion one of the
most important in his political life. He wished to speak to
them upon a National Policy. (Hear, hear.) They were
aware that his election was not fought upon a khaki issue.
The arguments which he brought forward in connection with his
appeal for the suffrages of this constituency were upon the basis
of trade. (Hear, hear.) Upon the question of trade he had
addressed audiences in this constituency again and again. He had
seen and encouraged the evolution of political circumstances where
trade was concerned, not, he admitted, with the fullest conscious-
ness of what was approaching; but at the same time from the
moment he entered political life he realised that the question of the
future was the question which was now being presented for enquiry
before the people of this country. They who were the workers in his
constituency—not a casual assemblage of people gathered from here
and there, but that body of men to whom he was primarily respon-
sible for his conduct in the political life of this country —were
assembled there to hear him, not give an account of his steward-
ship, but tell them what he intended to do in the future—(cheers) —
and, he hoped, with their confidence and support. (Cheers.)


On the second reading- of the Finance Bill of 1901,,
he moved this amendment in the House of Commons :
“ That no financial arrangements of the Government are satisfac-
tory which do not provide a system of preferential trade with the
Colonies and place a duty on all foreign manufactured goods
—(cheers) —for the purposes of revenue for the defence of the
Empire.” (Hear, hear.) Upon that amendment, which was with-
drawn, which he only flew as a kite—(laughter and hear, hear) —and
flew it so that in the future when this question came up he should
not be misunderstood when giving his adherence with or his sym-
pathy to the policy, he spread his flag. It came to nothing, but he
told them afterwards what he had done, and he tried to justify
himself, using these words in a certain speech he made in March,
1902 :
“ Before I sit down, let me be bold and prophecy. We
have talked about domestic legislation, and we regret we
have not had it, and cannot have it in the House of Com-
mons until the war is over. But I venture to say that when
the war is over the question which will perplex the mind
of this country is not alone the settlement of South Africa,
not alone temperance, and not alone the housing question,
but a far greater question, a question which concerns you
more nearly, and that is the question of finance, and how the
taxation of this country is to be paid. And it is a thing to
consider whether in the new form in which taxation must
come, it shall be developed in order to include other com-
modities for indirect taxation —taxation for the purposes of
revenue, upon other articles than tea and sugar. Whether
those other articles would bring us the taxation we want or
not, one thing is certain —that you are not going to get off
by taxing income alone. And the man of the future in this
country is the new Chancellor of the Exchequer, whoever
that may be, who will arrange for England a new financial
system, develop a tariff system, which will hold the old
principles, but will give them a new form.”
He regretted to have had to detain them so long in, as it were,
explaining his position, but he did it because that night he must
refer definitely to the present, and hopefully to the future. He
wanted them, as the workers in this constituency, responsible to
their several committees, to consider the resolution which was going
to be placed before them that evening, which was as follows :
“ This meeting is of opinion that the time has come for
a close enquiry into our present fiscal system, with a view
to devising needful measures for checking the increasing
inroads upon our home and export trade by protected foreign
rivals, and of further developing trade on a preferential
basis between the mother country and the Colonies, as being
the best means of securing the most stable prosperity, and
promoting the unity and strength of the Empire.” (Cheers.)


Now, he was an advocate of the open mind—(hear, hear)—of
enquiry; he was an advocate of a party which would not, in any
portion of it, shut itself out from considering whether the financial
system of this country was satisfactory, based upon our present
scheme of tariff and trade. He had no sympathy with
any members of any party in this country who wilfully
set their faces against enquiry. (Hear, . hear, and cheers.)
For it meant a little more sleep, a little more slumber,
a little more folding of the hands to sleep in the presence of what
he believed to be a real and great national danger, a peril to the
trade of this country, and a great peril to the welfare of the working
man. In this constituency they had varied interests, they had the
small manufacturer, the small trader, the small merchant,
and the riverside interests, and at the other end of the district
they had a great manufacturing interest —the cement trade. (Hear,
hear.) That cement trade afforded to a portion of the people in
this constituency their livelihood.
What I am concerned about, continued the hon. member, is
this : Is that trade offering all that it should afford under the best
conditions possible for these working men whom I represent in
the House of Commons? I have grave doubts. The adverse
conditions which I suggest are not due to inefficient business
methods, to lack of improvement in machinery alone, they are
not due to manufacturers who do their best, under difficult con-
ditions, to develop and possess their opportunities, but are the
outcome of the policy of this country, which, right. or
wrong and for which we are all responsible —has obtained
now for over half a century. As I have said before in this con-
stituency, for any man to set his face against enquiry, against the
possibility of reconsidering our fiscal position,. is to set his face
against his natural, his national, and his civic duty. (Cheers.)
Now we have had of late important questions put before us in these
relations. I need not dwell long upon what may be considered
vital to the Colonies in their connection with the United Kingdom
and to the centre of the Empire—preferential union. The Colonies
have been for a long time on their own, they have had to de\ elop
their trade under very difficult, sometimes very oppressive condi-
tions. Canada, for instance, had to develop her trade under the
oppression, the commercial oppression, of a great rival. I say com-
mercial oppression not in the sense of tyranny; but when the United
States withdrew from Canada the opportunity for reciprocal rela-
tions, and by virtue of her great industrial and agricultural wealth,
shut out the Dominion from opportunities for further devel-
oping her limited resources, she dealt a blow from which,
as a free trade country, it was difficult for Canada to recover.
It shook her, lamed her commercially, industrially, and agricul-
turally. But she did recover —and on what basis? She
recovered on the basis of attempting to build up a trade with Eng-
land, with the United Kingdom, in spite of the immense leagues


of water intervening - . She developed it in spite of high tariffs on
the part of the United States; she developed it to that point where,
feeling for the first time that she was strong enough to be free to
move in the interests of that Imperial Unity of which she had always
been an exponent —and the first of all the Colonial exponents——
she said: “We will give England a preferential tariff.’’
(Cheers.) * She gave us per cent., and in the course
of a very few years the trade between England and Canada
increased to the extent of four millions of pounds. Now,
that is not much, but what does it represent ? It represents wages
to the English working man. I know it has been pointed out by
a great many exponents of the policy of free trade who will not
reconsider, that Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa
are not very important after all, and for us to alter our fiscal system
in order to benefit three or four Colonies is not sufficient to a nation
which has so much at stake.
Well, I grant that a matter of four or five millions of pounds
increase is not sufficient for us upon which to base a question of
preferential tariffs. I would point out to you, however, as I would
like to point out to a greater number of people, that the trade of the
Colonies is in a condition at the present time where it represents,
as the Colonial Secretary —(loud cheers) —showed the other day,
a greater amount of export trade from this country than all the
export trade of this country to foreign nations; and the possibilities
of that trade are immense. Our export trade with our Colonies
has increased by 80 per cent, since 1872, while our export trade
to foreign countries has decreased by nearly 23 per cent. Our
export trade to foreign countries represents our
export trade to our Colonies represents The Colonies
have saved our position. We have only made a beginning an
auspicious beginning. (Cheers.)
Canada and Australia are in a position to advance by leaps
and bounds. Being solvent, being assured in their own
policy, which is not a policy of free trade, they can advance by
an arrangement with us to a position where —though not to the
full extent —they can take the place of other nations with whom
we are competing at the present time at great disadvantage, SO'
that the trade which they represent now might be doubled and
trebled within one decade. And what would that mean to us ? In
point of figures it would mean a great deal of wealth; it would mean
to us in point of our future a great deal more of wealth and security
and Imperial solidarity; for you are aware how important it is
that we should trade with those nations which are friendly to us,
primarily friendly to us. These young nations say to us
now: ‘ ‘ The time has come when we, having built up our
industries to a certain point, are now ready to give to England,
to the United Kingdom, a concession—a great concession for
us —and that is some remission of the taxation which we
place on other countries.” They have offered that remission, and,


as the Colonial Secretary said not long ago, as the Prime Minister
said, Was it possible for the Government of this country having pre-
sented to it this preference, this concession, this act of hscal friend-
ship to stand still, to put the Colonial proposals in some secret
drawer of the Cabinet, and wait for some imaginary opportunity i
The opportunity came when the Colonies, upon a basis of senti-
ment and for the preservation of the Empire in South Africa,
united with us—(cheers)— and at the same time, with the other
hand, as good business men, said: “Come, we offer you
an opportunity for closer business relations upon a basis
which we trust will be for your present and your ultimate
benefit, and which will, we know, be for our benefit now.”
They asked for, or they expected rather, _ some remission
upon those things which they sent to this country, and
which we must have, if not from them, from other nations less
friendly. They give us their corn, and they give us their wool
and meat, and other things vital to our support hitherto upon a basis
of free trade. Now, however, we are faced by the question and
it looks like a very ticklish question—(hear, hear) —as we
have been told, with much uplifting of hands—“ Taxing the food of
the people!” Well, we admit, it is a serious question, and the
man who proposes to tax the food of the people, and not make it
up to them in other ways, and who proposes to do it upon a basis
of pure sentiment, is not the man for a great political job. (Cheers.)
But that is not the case presented for enquiry to the people of
this country. The case is this : The Colonies can give us and
particularly Canada —can give us corn for our bread, the bread of
the working man. We prefer his corn by putting a tax on foreign
corn. But the working man says, perhaps : “ I have got to pay
more for mv bread then. ’ ’ How much more will he have to pay ? Ihe
experience 'of the last year has shown that a shilling corn tax has
not increased the cost of bread to the people. (Cheers.) I will
not assert that a two-shilling or a three-shilling tax on corn a
quarter would not increase the cost. How much, is a ques-
tion for economists. In what proportion it would fall
upon the —that is, the United .States, or Argentina,
or Russia —how much upon the middleman, and how much
upon the consumer, I am not prepared to say; but I will
say this : that if a man who makes the proposition of a
tax upon corn says to you at the same time that. youi
taxes will be less in other directions —that is, in the direction of
tea, sugar and tobacco—l don’t see that there is much ground for
complaint. (Cheers.) It is purely a question of balance, and if
you ask me why the tax is not taken off tobacco, and sugar, and
tea, as it stands, well, I say that we must have revenue, and what
will give us increased revenue is this very thing—a tax upon
corn. That sounds like a paradox, but what does it mean? It
means first of all this : that your tax on corn will be balanced by
taxes taken off in other directions. It means more than that. It
means vastly developed trade wdthin our own domestic circle of the


Empire. It means that our exports to the Colonies, which have
increased 80 per cent, during- the last thirty years, and have pre-
served for us our trade position in the face of a vast decrease in
our exports to foreign countries, will steadily increase to make us
independent of the foreign markets. It means that your tax on
corn will be balanced, by other taxation which has been suggested
by the Colonial Secretary and the Prime Minister, in the form of
retaliation or negotiation—in plain words, in the form of tariffs, of
taxes on foreign manufactured goods.
That is the point to which I come, and I beg you to follow me
closely here, in the matter of retaliation or negotiation—by which-
ever name you choose to call it. I am quite willing to call it
retaliation, I am quite willing to call it an act of defence against
other nations, who have invaded our trade to such an extent that
they have reduced our exports to foreign countries by 23 per cent,
in the last 30 years, and our exports surely represent to you and
to me the labour done by the working men of this country, and
the products of our manufacturers. But the policy of other nations
has gone much further. It has attacked and captured a valuable
portion of our home trade. Since 1885 our imports have increased
87 per cent, and these imports represent things which we manufac-
tured or manufacture for ourselves. (Loud cheers.) I have been a
Free Trader all my life, and never gave a Protectionist vote in my
life, and never wrote a Protectionist article, and never made a Pro-
tectionist speech. The kind of Free Trader who has refused to con-
sider the question at all is not the kind of Free Trader best suited
to solve the great question now before us in this country, the
problem of whether we shall go on as we are, facing the fact that
our trade has, by that amount which I have said, been reduced.
That kind of Free Trader says : “ Ah, but you see, our decline in
exports is represented by interests upon foreign loans and by re-
turned capital, and by marine insurance, and also by the fact that
we have the carrying trade of the world.”
Well, now, I want to ask you this question—Do you think that
the man who carries a load represents as much capital, represents
as much to the country, as the man who fills his carriage with the
load? Is it to be believed that a dividend upon a ship is equal to
the dividend which represents the profit of the goods carried in that
ship ? I don’t think so. I don’t believe that the interest upon a safe
and sound investment in railway bonds or foreign loans, takes any
place as an alternative against those natural profits which come
from good investment in manufactures which give employment to
the working man, which keep in the country, actively engaged,
that energy, that paying energy, which is necessary for its progress
and development. (Loud cheers.) Gentlemen, I put to you this
consideration : it is absolutely necessary to a country that all its
available capital shall be engaged in profitable undertakings; it is
necessary for the working man of this country that that capital shall
be employed, and that he shall be employed. (Loud cheers.)


When I am told that the trades which have been invaded by America
and by Germany, that the losses which have been incurred and the
trade taken away is not a real loss to this country, because the
energy and capital have been diverted into other channels, I say
that "that is not the case, and I ask your statisticians and economists
to point out to you where that energy and that capital have been
diverted which represent even the invasion of ten trades in this
country, which I will name.
Let me take them, if I can remember them all at once. I will
take boots and shoes, glass, embroidery and needlework; cotton —
we know in what condition our cotton trade is; hardware —and we
know what position we hold in the manufacture of hardware; imple-
ments of all sorts —and we know what position we hold with regard
to them; house-furnishing* joiners’ work, cabinet work, and all that
work in wood which belongs to house building; cork, watches.
That is nine. (Voices: “Pianos,” “paper,” “ musical _ instru-
ments.”) Well, I have given you nine, and that is sufficient for
the argument.* Within the last 20 years in these 10 trades alone we
have been invaded to the extent that we have lost seventeen millions.
That seventeen millions of trade represents what? It represents a
vacuum which is not filled elsewhere in the progress and the com-
mercial status of this country. We have lost that much of home
trade. In that seventeen millions will you be kind enough to reckon
the wages of the working man? (Cheers.) Make the calculation
for yourselves of what it represents, ask yourselves if our position
is a sound one which permits the invasion and partial diminution
of those trades in which we were pre-eminent. Let me give you
an illustration. It is a simple one. Yesterday I was staying at
the house of a former member for this constituency, a man for
whom you have the greatest respect—(cheers) —who asked me to
convey to you his best wishes, and who, I am glad to say, is in
sympathy with me in this matter. Someone at his house said to me :
“ I went to a toy shop in south-west London to buy some English
toys. The only English toy I could get was one which was too
expensive for me to buy. All the other toys were made in Germany
—(laughter)—and when I went to Germany I found that these toys
were dearer there than they are here.”
Now, what does that mean? It sounds as if Germany was very
beneficent, just as the United States was considered to be beneficent
when she sends tinplates to Newport, Monmouthshire, cheaper than
she sells them for in her own country. (Cheers.) How is it? How
is it that that tinplate trade, which represented seven millions of
money to us, is as regards our exports to the United States finished
entirely, and how is it that we are importing tinplate into
Newport from the United States. I say that this is a
very serious question, and I ask you what it means.
* The tenth was wrought iron.


Please consider the explanation also in relation to prefer-
ential tariffs and a retaliatory tariff. Por 3 0 years, 'while
Europe was at war, when two great nations, Germany and the
United States, one recovering from a great civil war, and the other
embarking on a great war with France, and both as yet but
agricultural countries, were steadying to the position which would
enable them to compete with the great manufacturing country of
the world, the pre-eminent country, England—during the
first thirty years of free trade, owing to adventitious circum-
stances, England marched ahead splendidly, triumphantly. She
had no rivals, nobody in the world to compete with—like Mr. Brod-
rick’s Army scheme, holding the field—till a better one appeared.
(Laughter.) There came a time of doubts and trouble.
That came when the United States, after her Centennial
exhibition, feeling how great had been the demonstration
of her industrial power, having her capital and her energy
set free after the war, having the great power of population
and great natural resources behind her, said, Me will compete
with this world-wide power.” And Germany, settling down from
the Franco-Prussian war, said, ‘‘We will have Colonial Empire;
we will have, at any cost, pre-eminence, commercially, in the
world.” How did they proceed? I say it, without any antipathy to
the United States or Germany, that they played a game which
we should have been justified in playing up to a point, but beyond
which we should not be justified in playing except as greedy game-
sters with a weak rival. The weak rival, lam bound to say, was
this country to which you and I belong, and to which we attach
our fortunes. (Cheers.) In what way? Germany and the United
States set up high and protective tariffs. They said, “We will
shut England out as far as we can; we will manufacture for our-
selves those things that we need, and by bonus-fed, Government-
assisted industry.” And mark you, how that bonus-fed industry
is represented. It is represented by cheap fares upon railways,
by cheap rates on steamers, by which Belgian cement comes to
this country, at artificial advantage, by which German goods
can come into this country and are laid down at a . less
cost than they are sold for in the country of their origin.
(Cheers.) Their home prices are kept up by an artificial
process, and the surplus manufactured goods compete with the
energy and vigour and integrity of England in her fair course
of commercial enterprise. (Cheers.) You know as well as Ido
that if your rival can, for a few years, put you in the hands of the
banks, she has got you on toast. (Laughter and hear, hear.) And
that is where Germany and the United States have had this
country —on toast, because they, by artificial methods, have built
up their own trades by high protective tariffs, and their surplus
goods have come over to England and competed with us, and by
steady competition, and by steady State aid and bonuses have, so
far, not crippled, but staggered us. We face the fact that for
the last thirty years, since the Franco-Prussian war, instead of


increasing - in proportion to other countries in our exports, we have
been placed at terrible disadvantage. In the last seventeen years
the export trade of France has increased 21 per cent., that of
Germany 32 per cent., of the United States 220 per cent., and of
England 15 per cent.; and England would have had no increase at
all were it not for our Colonies. (Cheers.)
Now let us see something more of the unchallenged glories
of our present fiscal policy. Our trade from 1830, for 15 years
under a system of protection, represented an increase of 74 per
cent. Our trade in England —in the United Kingdom
from 1886 to 1900 —represented an increase of 42 per cent.
Now what does that mean? Don’t think, gentlemen, I am
going to say to you that that condition was due to free
trade or to protection, but I challenge every man who bases the
prosperity of England upon free trade alone to respond to these
figures. I say that a great many circumstances prevent me from
thinking that free trade or a moderate system of protection or retalia-
tion are matters of principle. I believe it to be, as a distinguished
friend of mine said to me to-night, a matter of policy. (Cheers.) I ask
you to listen with patience while I say what, during the last 15 years,
when we have increased our whole trade by 42 per cent., has hap-
pened elsewhere. Austria, one of those countries we think so little
of, has increased her trade by 64 per cent., Sweden has increased
her trade by 75 per cent., Germany has increased her trade by 80
per cent., and Denmark has increased her trade by 144 per cent.
(Expressions of surprise.) We have increased our whole—not our
export —trade at the rate of 3 per cent, a year, or 42 per cent, in
those 15 years. Our export trade to foreign countries has decreased
by 23 per cent. Our imports exceed our exports by 174 millions.
Yet in 1872 our exports balanced our imports as aforetime we
were told they should. I cannot find where the balance
is, and that is what troubles me. (Laughter and cheers.) I ma y
not be of the elect who know where the balance is but won t tell
us—who won’t tell us really where the profits are which should
come from the diversion of this capital into other channels but I
will make this venture : when the matter is set before the manufac-
turers and workers, the labouring men of this country, we, es-
pecially we who advocate this reconsideration of the fiscal policy,
this reconsideration of the question of how we shall compete with
foreign nations, and how we shall foster trade w ithin our own
circle, if we are not the “ elect ”we shall be the elected. (Loud
cheers.)
I beg you not to think this is mere platform oratory.. I am
talking seriously upon trade subjects, and with my political life
in my hands. My political life depends upon your assenting to
the question whether you will agree with me that we should inquire
into this question of trade and of our fiscal system, and ask if we
are prepared to go on as we have been going with eyes shut, wit
hands folded, not asking whether all is well. (Cheers.)


I do not believe, gentlemen, that all is well. I cannot
believe in the kind of argument advanced by Lord Rosebery—yet
I wish to keep this question, mind you, out of political strife as
far as the present moment is concerned—when he says, concerning
the preferential tariff, that it will so invade the agricultural industry
of this country by the cheapening of food through the corn that
will be poured into this country, that through cheapness of food
the agricultural industry will suffer; and three days afterwards, at
the National Liberal Club, says that every man will pay more for
his foods, I don’t quite see where I am with such an econo-
mist. (Laughter.) I believe that every man may, possibly
he will, if a tax of 3s. is put upon a quarter, pay a
little more for his food. I submit, however, that he will
pay less for something else —but I go further. Beneath
those general propositions which the Prime Minister and Colonial
Secretary have laid down there rests this fact, that retaliation or
negotiation means—means what? It means that we shall put on
a tariff somewhere to meet the high tariffs of other nations; that
we shall put up a barrier which they will have to face, and consider
whether it is not worth while offering us something in order that
we may take down the barrier. We will, I believe, re-capture the
home trade we have lost, by putting ourselves again in a position
of equality with our foreign competitors. (Cheers.) And from the
taxes we put upon foreign goods we will get revenue; and getting
this revenue we shall be able to reduce taxes in other directions. In
getting this revenue the working man will not have to pay more, for
the tax will not be on necessaries, but on general comforts, and if you
have increase of trade and plenty of employment, and increased
wages, the middle classes can afford to pay more for their comforts.
And 1 come now to what I consider an international
question—a very great international question. It has been
said by political authorities—l am bound to say not fiscal
authorities—that when you present this matter of preferen-
tial tariffs—when you establish retaliation you have to face
the question of a battle of tariffs. Gentlemen of Graves-
end and Northfieet, I don’t believe it, and I will stake
my all upon this challenge, and this prophecy—that there
will be no war of tariffs. I will give you my reason for the
faith that is in me. The United States to-day is carrying as high
tariffs as she can carry with political safety. For it must not be
imagined that all the people of the United States and all the people
of Germany are in favour of high tariffs. There is a very large
body in favour of low tariffs, of free trade.
Very well. Have you noticed that the American people have
not been exceedingly irritated or very excited over the fact that
Mr. Chamberlain has proposed preferential tariffs with a policy of
self-defence against hostile tariffs? What is the reason for the
quietude, for the quiescence of their voices—not always so still on
even lesser subjects ?Jfche reason is this : that America and Germany


have reached the highest point they can go with protective tariffs-
tariffs which I believe, and hope, and pray, will never exist in this
country; and are welcoming any action —no, I will not say any action
of England—but are welcoming those general outlines of policy
put forth by Mr. Chamberlain, because they believe that by a prose-
cution of this policy, that thing which they have long desired, the
reduction of high tariffs, may occur. And so in the end this princi-
ple which has been put forward may act for a re-arrangement of the
whole fiscal policy of Europe and America. (Cheers.) It will be what
one of the most eminent Americans said to me a year and a half ago.
I met three Americans at different points of the compass, and the
question of Imperial Defence and Fiscal Union came up. They could
not understand why the Colonies and ourselves do not combine in
two spheres, for defence, and for fiscal union. I ventured to say to
one, “ Yes, that is all very well, but if we put on tariffs you will be
hostile, and you will fight us with higher tariffs.” This eminent
American said very sharply and quickly, “ Oh, no, we won’t. We
will say, ‘ Don’t shoot, we’ll come down.’ ” (Laughter and cheers.)
His two other fellow-countrymen, both almost as eminent, said the
same in effect.
Gentlemen, that I believe to be the real position of the question
of tariffs in our relation to our greatest rivals—Germany and
America. They cannot go further, they cannot go higher, and
they cannot hurt us more than they have hurt us, and they have
hurt us sorely—(hear, hear) —and one of the best evidences of the
power of the policy that has lately been presented, and of the man
who presented it, has been the fact that within the last three weeks
we have had Germany explaining away her action concerning
Canada, and agitation in German newspapers, fear in Germany
lest we shall do what we threaten; and in the United States there
are hints here and there that, after all, reciprocity may be a very
good thing to consider. (Cheers.) I have lived in several Colonies
of this Empire. I have lived in a Colony, crushed, cruelly crushed,
by the natural, by even the defensible policy of another country at
its side, which refused reciprocity. I have seen that younger
country rise to the position where she says, “ Now that we can
stand alone, we turn to the Mother Country and offer her a junior
partnership, offer her a large increase in trade, which will not be
open to hostile and adverse action in time of war, offer her food-
stuffs which will not be stopped in time of war, but will be pro-
tected from Colonial wheat-field to British baker shop.” The door
is open to us, within a generation, and a short generation, too, if
you will, to have within our own boundaries all that is necessary
for the food supply of the Empire, all that is necessary to give us
a balance of trade as against the rest of the world, so securing
us, and so making us stable; and I am satisfied to see that, at the
present time, the attitude of the United States when the question
of retaliation comes up is that of one sensible business man towards
another, who says, “ Very well, now you have me in a corner, you


have taken my weapons to fight me with, let us lay them on the
table, and see if we can come to an understanding. (Cheers.)
That, gentlemen, I believe to be the true solution of this ques-
tion of retaliation. I have absolutely no fear, and I don’t speak
without experience, but, believe me, I don’t speak with
any particular pride in my own judgment. I have gone
through various phases of doubt and anxiety in this question of
tariffs, and I only speak to you as one who, having touched the
life of the Empire at different points, and who knows the United
States pretty thoroughly, and who knows the opinion there, and
the character and the trend of the American people, know this,
beyond peradventure, that they honour the man who is a good
fighter, who puts a good face upon a political battle, or a battle
of any other sort; and they will measure the circumstances, and
ask, “Is it worth while fighting this friendly nation? After all,
we cannot live as well without you, let us see if we cannot come to
terms. ”
I want to submit this proposition, without fear of contradiction,
that the United States cannot live without England —(cheers) —■
without altering her whole position as a commercial unit. For
this reason : that London is the Bourse of the world—(cheers) —we
have not yet lost that proud position. (Cheers.) In London lies
what may be called the great financial standards of the nations.
We have so much money locked up in stable and sound investments,
carrying low rates of interest, not vexed or alterable to any extent
by fluctuations of business, that the people of the United States —
the greatest adventurous commercial power, the great financial
pioneer of the best sort —who want to use every dollar where
the chances are that it will earn most, who want to ex-
ploit every opportunity —say it is absolutely necessary for the
security of American finance that English finance shall be at once
stable and secure.
Upon the united prosperity of the English speaking peoples
depends, I firmly believe, the individual prosperity within the circle
of English speaking peoples, and I have no doubt—and I
don’t say this to challenge your sympathy as we come to
the resolution about to be presented —I have no doubt
of the issue, as I throw my political life into this crucible, where
fires will burn fiercely during the next year or two. For there will
not be calm and quiet enquiry, there will not be careful and accurate
deliberation, there will be excitement, behind which does not always
lie sound judgment. But there will be, upon the side where those
free traders stand, who will not face the new music, and upon the
side of those others, where I stand, who are willing to face what-
ever the results of enquiry may be—there will be desperate ill-
feeling, there will be irritation, there will be the exit of some from
the party to which I belong, never again, perhaps, to return, and
some who will come over from the other party, never again to
return. But I believe that this country will divide itself into two


parties who are anxious and eager for the good, the ultimate good,
of the United Kingdom and the whole Empire, mistaken though
one party will be, unwilling as it is to accept guidance in this
business from that statesman who, with high patriotism, has in-
voked the judgment of the Empire and arrested the deliberations
of foreign chancelleries. (Cheers.)
As to the end, well, the end will be hastened, if you will to-night
do me the honour to say that you have confidence in me, that you
do not fear any action that I may take in this direction, believing
that I shall act patriotically for the good of this land—(loud and
prolonged cheering)—and will pass this resolution which I have
presented to you, if you can conscientiously do so. As the workers
in this constituency, as chairmen and members of committees, will
you take on yourselves the responsibility of committing yourselves
to this resolution, which embodies the desire for enquiry—“ For
devising needful measures for checking the increasing inroads upon
our home and foreign trade by protected foreign rivals, and of fur-
ther developing trade on a preferential basis, between the Mother
Country and the Colonies,” which we believe to be for the security,
for the prosperity, and the unity of the Empire at large. (Cheers.)
I leave the case now in your hands to decide. (Loud and continued
cheering.)
A gentleman in the audience (upon questions being invited) asked
if the proposed inquiry was to be made into the matter of a tariff
on food, leaving manufactured articles to come in free?
Sir Gilbert Parker replied : I am glad to be asked that question.
I intended to make it clear—l thought I had—that if food is to be
taxed it is not certain that the whole of the cost of the taxation will
fall upon the consumer. A proportion will fall upon the producer,
and the middle-man, as in the case of the shilling tax last year. . I
do not believe you can have that and retaliation, the prin-
ciple which the Colonial Secretary has advanced, or negotiation,
which ever we please to call it, unless you have taxation on certain
foreign manufactured goods. But now Igo further, and I say that
it is going to be very difficult to exactly choose what the articles
will be upon which you will place your tax. I believe that it must
be done upon manufactured articles in the chief staple industries
of this country; that is to say upon goods which come from foreign
countries competing with the staple industries of this country.
(Cheers.) And now what will that do? In every other country
that means increased production. (Hear, hear.) If you increase
production—well, you employ more labour. (Hear, hear.)
If you employ more labour you get competition of labour.
If you get competition of labour, you get increase of wages.
(Cheers.) Increase of production, increase of employment and com-
petition of labour, and, by that, an increase of wages. Here is
another point which I am glad this question enables me to bring
out. Under our old conditions, before 1845 or 1850 agricultural
wages were 10s. a week. Now they are 16s. a week. To


what is due the increase in wages, since agriculture has
declined? It is due to this fact, that the mass of your production,
of your productive industries, always govern the rate of wages.
That which the country produces the most of, which is of the most
value to the country produces a Certain standard of wages, is
approximated to by all lesser industries.
Therefore I assert without fear, not of contradiction, but with-
out fear of refutation, that if you increase the wages of all people
industrially employed in this country, you will increase the wages
of clerks, accountants, and all classes, even people in the Govern-
ment service, because the wages of the mass of the artisans and
manufacturing people bring up to the standard approxim-
ately the wages of all other classes of people. When we
have got our taxes upon foreign manufactured goods,
which we do not pay altogether, for the producer pays,
and the middle-man pays, when we get the revenue that way we
shall have to pay less in other ways. (Cheers.) Then I must again
point out to the working man that taxes upon manufactured goods
will fall less upon him than those above him in position. (Hear,
hear.) The things that touch him nearly, most nearly, are the
things that he eats and the things that he wears; and the things
that he wears have received a vast amount of competition of late in
Germany. Go into the Midlands, go to the manufacturing
districts of England, and you will find American boots and
German woollens competing with that trade here which had
pre-eminence in the world. Therefore, I say that the working man
under a system of moderate taxation on foreign manufactured goods
will be in a far better condition than he is in to-day, and if we get
revenue that way—well, we won’t have to pay in other directions.
(Hear, hear.) Your income tax will go down —(hear, hear) —and
so will mine, I am glad to say —(laughter)—and the working man
will benefit to this extent : that if his taxation is not greater on the
whole, certainly his wages will be greater. (Cheers.) But suppose
that what I advocate is all wrong, suppose the policy is mistaken,
but suppose the country accepts it by a majority, and it becomes
our National Policy, what will happen? Right or wrong, fair or
foul, good or bad, a stimulus will be given to production, capital
will be set free for investment in industrial concerns, energy will
be free from fear of apprehension, and you will have such a stimulus
to trade that for a number of years in any case—even, I say, if
the policy w r ere a bad one —you would have an immense increase
of production, and an increase of wages. But it would be fatal
to launch a policy on a speculative basis, and I honestly be-
lieve that this policy, which is founded on protection of our interests
—rather defence of our interests—which means the compulsion
upon foreign countries to reduce their tariffs to reasonable con-
ditions, and closer and larger business relations with our Colonies,
is one that must work for the welfare and prosperity of all
classes in this country. (Loud cheers.)
