

or INSPECTION THROUGH
THE WESTERN DIVISION
OE NEW SOUTH WALES,
SEPTEMBER 30th TO OCTO-
BER 19th, 1895, BY MAJOR-
GENERAL E. T. H. HUTTON,
C. 8., A.D.C. TO THE QUEEN,
COMMANDING NEW SOUTH
WALES MILITARY FORCES.




A NARRATIVE
OP THE
TOUR OF INSPECTION THROUGH THE WESTERN
DIVISION OF NEW SOUTH WALES,
SEPTEMBER 30th to OCTOBER 19th, 1895.
By Major-G-eneral E. T. H. Hutton, C. 8., A.D.C. to
the Queen, Commanding New South Wales
Military Eorces.
[Note. —This narrative was given at a conversazione of the Uvited
Service Institution of New South Wales upon Wednesday,
11th December, 1895, and was followed by a discussion.]
In consideration that the reasons for and facts connected
with my tour of inspection in the Western Division of
New South Wales may prove hereafter of military as well
as of general interest, I propose to give a short narrative of
my journey. I have added in conclusion the deductions
which I have made from my experience of the tour, and


from the experience of the physical character of the country
which I have pained.
During the three years of my command I have laid down
for myself a routine of inspection of the various portions of
the colony, and in the third year it came about that I had
to undertake the inspection of the whole of the troops
located in the townships upon the Western line of rail-
road and its branches. It was also necessary to develop
at the various centres the system of Tolunteer Reserves,
which had been recently evolved from the Rifle Club
system—a change which had been approved of by the
Executive Council and Parliament upon my recommenda-
tion. Being unable to obtain any reliable information as
regards the difficulties of travelling over the Western
Division from a military point of view, or, indeed, any
information regarding the physical character of the
country which would be of use in the event of military
operations being conducted in this or similar country, I
conceived it to be my duty to extend my tour of inspection
to the Western District beyond the furthest points at which
bodies of troops exist, so that I might ascertain for myself
the information necessary. So far as I am aware no
officer on the Staff or belonging to the present military
force of the colony has any knowledge or experience of
the Western Division which, from a military point of
view, could be considered of any value. My reasons,
therefore, for undertaking the tour of inspection hereafter
described may be summarised as follows :
1. To personally inspect the Western Division of the
Colony, its physical characteristics, and its
probable future development.
2. To ascertain the actual difficulties of moving
troops in the Western Division of the Colony,
remote as it is from railroads or from well-
known mail routes.
3. To develop the system of Tolunteer Reserves
authorised from existing Rifle Clubs, and, if
possible, to encourage the establishment of
Rifle Clubs where none have previously existed.


4. To remove the idea that the difficulties of communi-
cation from a military point of view between the
terminal points of the railroads at Cobar and
Hay with the Darling Eiver and points of the
colony on its extreme western limit are as
serious as represented.
In response to careful inquiries, I had been assured by
many gentlemen conversant with the country that the
difficulties of travelling were almost insuperable, except
with much personal inconvenience, either by mail coach,
where such exists, or in a buggy by such routes as it might
be possible to follow. I was informed that to attempt to
cross on horseback the Western District of the colony,
more especially in the then existing state of the drought,
would be positive cruelty to myself and to my horses. It
seemed to me, therefore, that from a military point of
view, the very difficulties represented to me were addi-
tional arguments for my seeing and ascertaining for myself
what real difficulties existed if in the future any military
force, mounted or otherwise, were required to operate in
this or similarly situated portions of Australia. It was
very obvious to me that the only possible means for gaining
the information I desired would be to carry out my inten-
tion on horseback, as by these means I should be indepen-
dent of the weather, and of any difficulties connected with
the route which might present themselves.
As regards the difficulties represented to me of such an
expedition through the Western Division, it is only right
to say that little or no rain had fallen throughout the
districts which I proposed to cross since the early part of
March, and that the stock in some portions of the districts
were perishing from want of water. It seemed obvious,
therefore, that my expedition would be undertaken under
the most unfavourable climatic and physical conditions
which could affect its success.
The following details as regards my party, myself and
my equipment may be of use to others undertaking this
or similar expeditions. The party consisted of myself,
Major George Lee (Staff Officer, Mounted Brigade),
each mounted ; an orderly (Corporal Cameron) of the
Hew South Wales Field Artillery, mounted; one spare


horse, and one pack-horse. Each of the three individuals
carried upon his saddle what kit he required for the
journey. Major Lee and myself had sent by rail some
additional articles of clothing for use at Broken Hill.
Each carried as follows :
2 flannel shirts —one worn, one in the wallets.
2 pair socks ditto ditto.
1 pair thin canvas shoes with India-rubber soles.
Comb, brush, razor, tooth-brush, and small sponge.
1 towel.
1 pair pyjamas.
My walking weight being 12st. 61b., I rode, including
saddle and kit, about list. 71b., or little short of 15 stone.
Major Lee, ditto.
The pack-horse was provided with the regulation
Imperial pattern Otago pack-saddle, which, though heavy,
is the best description of such equipment that I am
acquainted with. The pack-horse carried our mid-day feeds,
and certain reserve forage in case of accident in two bags,
weighing 60lb. Another bag carried our billy, cups, etc.,
and a tinned reserve ration with tea and sugar. A pair of
saddlebags was added, carrying nosebags for the horses,
one canvas bucket, our hobbles, and horse-cleaning things,
and four canvas water-bags, the total weight being well
under 2001 b., or about 14 stone.
On Monday, the 30th September, our above-mentioned
party left Cobar accompanied by the Mayor and other
gentlemen to see us on our road. A difficulty occurred
with regard to the pack-horse, which is not unusual on such
occasions. My staff had little or no experience of a pack-
saddle or pack-horse, and I had not personally supervised the
arrangements. The horse, in consequence, unaccustomed
to a pack-saddle and to carrying a dead weight, resented
the indignity of being relegated to the pack, with the result
that its burden was in a short space of time bucked off
and lay in the road. This in itself was a valuable lesson
to me in marking the necessity for proper consideration
being given, and rules laid down, for the use of pack


animals with the troops of the colony. Although pack
animals were formerly much used in the back blocks, and
are still in many places, the experience and knowledge of
their use are limited to a few. It is clear to me, as a
result of my experience, that mounted troops, if required
to be moved with rapidity in the back blocks of the colony,
must ride light and be accompanied, as in our case, by
pack- horses to carry forage where necessary, and rations
for the men. It is clear that, to enable this to be done, the
question of imck transport requires much thought and
careful consideration. About mid-day we reached the first
Government tank (twenty-three miles), where we lunched,
and finally Dominick’s hotel at five p.m., a total march of
thirty-six miles. The country between Cobar and Domi-
nick’s is undulating, and covered with a sparse scrub.
There are neither springs nor wells, and the country having
a shallow depth of soil, interspersed with outcrops of rock,
is, except after rain and in a good season, more or less
sterile from want of water. During the present season
the drought has been so serious that, though this district
was well known as a rabbit-stricken country, hardly a
trace of a rabbit was to be seen. In this tract of country,
and indeed throughout the Western Division of the
Colony where no natural and constant supply of water
exists, Government tanks have been formed at varying
intervals dong the various stock routes and recognised
mail route. The water at these tanks is sometimes
slightly thi;k, but in all cases good. It is advisable to be
provided with a canvas bucket, or such utensil, in order
to water Inrses, as in some cases approach to the water
is preventei and the troughs occasionally are not filled. In
a good seastn, which maybe reckoned in this district as three
years out c£ four, the whole of this country at this time of
the year is covered with a rich herbage. The whole of the
land has been taken up for pastoral purposes, on leasehold,
by squatters in holdings upon a very large scale, who
maintain stock at the average rate of one sheep to eight
acres.
Our parly was very comfortably housed for the night at
the little lotel ahovementioned, and on Tuesday, the Ist
October, ve resumed our journey. Major Lee and


myself visited some rocks, distant a mile and a half
from the mail road, upon which were painted in red or
black pigments numerous aboriginal drawings and designs
which certainly appeared to me to be of a very doubtful
antiquity. About 10 a.m. a heavy rain set in, and
by the time we reached Barnato Station, at 11.25 a.m.,
it was fairly tropical in its character. Barnato Station
is an out-station of Nelyambo Station on the Darling,
distant sixty miles. There is a considerable but brackish
lake at this place, and in ordinary years the neigh-
bouring country provides excellent pasturage for stock.
The much-needed rain was welcomed as a satisfactory
termination to the prospect of a ruinous drought, which the
manager had been previously contemplating. At 2 p.m.
we resumed our journey in heavy rain, and through mud
and slush, and with rain-water up to our horses’ hocks we
traversed the next fifteen miles, reaching eventually, at
5.15 p.m, the caretaker’s hut at the Government tank
(thirty-six miles) ; the weather had then cleared. Neither
forage in the existing condition of drought, nor feed for
the horses, was to be found at this point—a difficulty which
we had anticipated by having forage provided and put
down for us by the local coach contractor at Cobar. In
ordinary years ample and very good grass is found at this
and other places on or near the road, so that the question
of carriage of forage must depend upon the season and
the natural feed available. The wife of the caretaker
lodged us to the best of her ability, and cooked us a rough
but much-appreciated dinner, after which, by means of a
large wood fire, we dried our clothes, and slept the sleep
of the just.
The country which we had passed through had suffered
severely during the drought, and dead sheep in mobs of
six and seven were seen on every side, which, together
with the dried-up carcases of dead rabbits, gave this
portion of the road and bush a peculiarly sad and desolate
appearance. This drought-stricken portion of the road
was followed by a ridge of sandhills, across which it is
sometimes found most difficult to drive. In the present
instance, had we been driving instead of riding, we should
have found it impossible to have continued our journey


from Barnato and reached our destination until the
weather had cleared and the road had recovered from the
rain.
On Wednesday, the 2nd, we resumed our journey in
bright sunshine, and crossing a waterless and sterile-
looking country, though still covered with a sparse scrub,
reached about half-past twelve the Government tank,
ninety-five miles from Cobar. Leaving the Government
tank we reached, at one hundred and four miles, Moama
Station, where the country improves, and where good
herbage was seen to exist on all sides. Biding through a
country of far richer land, better grass, and improved
vegetation, we reached a boundary rider’s hut on the
banks of Lake Perpelloe. This lake, which at this season
covered an area of approximately nine miles by twelve,
is slightly brackish. Its existence is due to the rise of the
Darling during floods, and it is connected by a creek with
the Tallywalka Creek, an effluent of the Darling. This
lake forms one of the natural water reservoirs of this
portion of the colony, to which I shall make further re-
ference in my remarks upon irrigation. Binding the road
in places not very distinct, we followed the banks of the
lake for nine miles and then turned north, reaching
Petyuna, an out-station of Murtie, and situated close to
Lake Perpelloe, distance fifty-four miles. Petyuna should
in ordinary times have supplied us with forage, but as a
precaution we had arranged for it to be sent, so as to make
us independent of our kind hosts.
We left again on Thursday, the 3rd October, with a
mounted policeman as a guide. Having left the main road
or track, we now followed a cross-country track for Murtie
Station, which, without the assistance of the policeman,
we should have found it difficult, if not impossible, to find.
The country through which we passed was more or less
dreary in consequence of the drought, though in places
patches of grass and stretches of salt bush provided suffi-
cient pasture for the stock. We reached Murtie Station
at twelve o’clock, and were welcomed at that pretty station
by Mr. Johnson (the manager) and his wife. After lunch
we left Murtie Station, and on the road to Wilcannia we
were met by the Mayor, Mr. Morrison, aldermen, and


other gentlemen from Wilcannia and the neighbourhood
who had come to welcome us. In company with our kind
hosts, some riding, some driving, we proceeded to and
reached the floating bridge at Wilcannia about five o’clock,
and shortly afterwards the very comfortable Wilcannia
hotel, distance thirty-six miles.
The Darling at Wilcannia at this time was a narrow
and comparatively insignificant-looking river, which, from
the nature of its steep hanks of alluvial soil, its dark
water and its sluggish current, reminded me of one of the
irrigation canals in Egypt. So strong, indeed, was the
impression thus given me that I half expected to hear the
creaking of the sakyeh and to see the Egyptian husband-
man at vvork upon the neighbouring fields. It seemed
hardly credible that such an insignificant river, or
more properly canal, should form the drainage of a
watershed which is said to be one of the largest in
the world. The country which we. had crossed since
leaving the ninety-five mile Government tank was for the
most part of the same rich alluvial character which is to'
be found in the Delta of Egypt, and upon the banks of
the Nile —land which only requires in addition to its
natural though insufficient water supply an irrigation
system to become highly valuable as agricultural land
capable of producing magnificent crops.
Wilcannia is a thriving, bright township of some twelve
hundred inhabitants, and is the centre of a considerable
trade from the stations on the river bank, from the Paroo
Eiver district, and from the large and considerable stations
north and east. Nothing could exceed the kindness and
cordiality shown to my party by the inhabitants, who, one
and all, endeavoured to contribute to our welcome.
We remained at Wilcannia on Eriday, the 4th, in order
to give our horses a rest, and the opportunity was taken
by myself and Major Lee at a meeting of the Mayor,
Corporation, and leading gentlemen, to suggest the forma-
tion of a rifle club and the enrolment of volunteer
reservists. The proposals were received in the most
encouraging spirit.
Little, if any, rain had fallen in this neighbourhood or
upon any part of the river district to the south since March.


The general rain, therefore, which had recently fallen
throughout the colony had not, unfortunately, reached
this district. In spite of the drought, however, the
squatters were hopeful, and the season altogether did not
seem to he as bad an one as had been represented.
On Saturday, the sth, we left for Tintinalogy Station,
via Bellila Station, at which place we halted in the middle
of the day for lunch, Tintinalogy Station is the long-
established head station of a large leasehold estate. The
banks on either side of the river were of the same rich
alluvial character as the land which I have described between
Wilcannia and our route 50 miles west of that place. No
attempts have as yet been made for irrigating this rich alluvial
land, or for utilising it for agricultural purposes. If it has,
therefore, in this season of drought an appearance of sterility
and barrenness, which is only due to the absence of any
attempt to utilise the water of the Darling, which is so
close at hand. Having in regard the fact that this
country is liable to drought, the squatters have, no doubt
wisely, restricted their stock to one sheep to ten acres.
Given a good season, or some system of irrigation which
would ensure an adequate water supply, this country, now
so inadequately utilised for pastoral purposes, should be
able to maintain as large a population and produce equally
magnificent crops as the similar description of land
found in the Delta of Egypt. In Egypt, as is well known,
no rainfall of any kind ever takes place ; in these Western
districts, on the contrary, a rainfall three seasons out of
four can always be reckoned upon, though this rainfall may
not in itself be sufficient for agricultural purposes.
On Sunday, the 6th, we left for Albemarle Station, 30
miles. This station is one of the largest in the Western
Division, and one of the oldest established. It includes an
area of nearly 1500 square miles upon a leasehold tenure,
only a very small proportion of which is freehold. The
station belongs to Mr. Phelps, a minor, and was formed by
his father in the early fifties. The house itself is a good
specimen of a hack-block station, consisting of the main
building with high and lofty rooms, surrounded by a veran-
dah, and situated in the middle of a garden overlooking the
Darling. Near at hand is a barrack for the bachelors and


responsible employees of the station. These buildings,
together with kitchen, stables, outhouses, etc., complete the
station proper. We here left the orderly and our five
horses for a few days’ rest.
On Monday, the 7th, Major Lee and myself left for
Broken Hill, by road, in a buggy and four horses, driven
by, and belonging to, Mr. Nicholas, the coach proprietor.
Starting at 6 a.m. from the right bank of the river,
we soon afterwards left the river flats and crossed a barren-
looking and dried-up country, in many places covered with
loose sand. The country was, for the most part, treeless,
and consisted of undulating flats of red sand covered with a
patchy and drought-stricken vegetation. About 1 p.m. we
reached Kerr’s (or Number One, as it is called), an out-
station of Kinchenga, where we lunched. Leaving this
solitary and (in this season) uninteresting spot, we con-
tinued our journey to Broken Hill over a barren, waterless
country, reaching our destination at 7.30, having covered
nearly 90 miles in 13£ hours. Late as was the hour, the
Mayor, aldermen, and many leading gentlemen came to
the hotel to bid us welcome.
Tuesday, the Bth, and three following days were spent
by Major Lee and myself in visiting the mines, Silverton,
the Stephens’ Creek Reservoir, and other points of interest.
Two meetings in connection with the enlargement of the
Rifle Club and the enrolment of its members into a Volun-
teer Reserve were held with a very satisfactory result. We
everywhere received kind and frequent hospitality, and the
most cordial spirit was shown us by all.
On Saturday, the 12th October, we left Broken Hill at 11
a.m., and reached Kerr’s about 0.15 p.m , where we spent tbe
night. We had left Broken Hill in a blustering, blinding
duststorm, which, together with the great heat, made our
journey anything but pleasant. We found that at Kerr’s
the thermometer had registered 158 degrees in the sun
and 98 degrees in the shade. There had been little or no
rain in any portion of this district since the second week
in March, and the herbage had been in consequence com-
pletely dried up ; the scanty stock maintaining as well as
they could a poor subsistence from the salt bush and occa-
sional scrub. As an instance of what a duststorm may be


in this district, I might mention that about nine o’clock I
left the out-station for a building less than fifty yards away,
and in consequence of the blinding dust and opaque darkness
I completely lost my way in attempting to return. For
nearly one and a-half hours I endeavoured to regain the
house, and only by chance did I at last come upon a neigh-
bouring stockman’s shanty. The owner, who had similarly
lost his way in the sudden and overwhelming duststorm,
showed me the way back. I can only compare tbis
duststorm to the milder forms of simoon which are not
unusual in the Nubian and Libyan deserts of Upper
Egypt, and which in an aggravated form are so dangerous
to caravans. In these districts the duststorms, though not
so fatal to life, are the cause of grave damage and occa-
sional ruin to stock and vegetation.
Gn Sunday, the 13th, the wind had changed to the
south, and we left Kerr’s at 6 a.m. in a cold breeze, with
the thermometer at 60. bleaching Menindie at 11.30 we
there crossed the Darling, and arrived at Albemarle at
1.30 p.m. Our return route brought us across Menindie
Lake, leaving on our left the freshwater Lake Speculation.
It is a matter of regret that the scheme to retain in Lake
Menindie the large volume of fresh water with which it is
filled during flood time on the Darling was abandoned, and
that the dam which had been made—perhaps of inadequate
construction —across the mouth of the creek connecting
Lake Menindie with the Darling had been destroyed by
the floods of 1892, and has never been renewed. Lake
Menindiej Lake Cawndilla, and Lake Speculation are
inundation lakes in this district similar in character to
Lake Perpelloe, and to the string of lakes formed by the
Tallyawalka Creek and the Teryaweynya Creek, upon
which I shall have some observations to make later on.
The country lying between the Darling and Broken Hill,
though it appeared to us in this exceptional drought sterile
and barren, presents at this time of the year in an ordinary
season the appearance of a rich meadow. However that
may be, it is very evident that the soil is fertile in itself,
and only requires a reliable water supply to be valuable
for agricultural purposes. Immediately north of the road
by which we crossed commences the Barrier Eange. The


low hills composing this range run in a more or less con-
tinuous but irregular line to Mount Brown, forming the
western limit of the watershed of the Darling and its
affluent, the Paroo.
Thanks to the kindness and hospitality of our hosts, we
found our horses, which we had left at Albemarle Station,
in excellent condition, and on the following morning, the
14th, we left upon our return journey to Hay. The line I
had arranged to take being across country and away from
any recognised stock route or mail road, mounted police-
men had been provided me at the various points to act as
guides. It would have been impossible without the
local knowledge of these mounted troopers for us to
have found our way. The whole of the country has been
taken up for squatting purposes and divided into wired-in
paddocks of various sizes, some being twenty miles square.
It is consequently impossible to cross the country by
compass bearing, and an acquaintance with the general
lay of this country, in the absence of mountains or other
physical landmarks, is a paramount necessity. We
crossed good and fertile-looking country, with the excep-
tion of here and there a sandy ridge, and reached at
4.45 p.m. Victoria Lake, upon the banks of which stands
an out-station of Albemarle, a distance of fifty-four miles.
The last twenty miles of our route lay across an espe-
cially rich valuable-looking country, where even in this
time of drought good herbage was on all sides visible.
Victoria Lake, about nine miles square, is one of the series
of freshwater lakes which extends from Teryaweynya
Lake in the North, to Victoria Lake, Boolabulka Lake,
Eatcatcher’s Lake, and, finally, to Pigeon Lake, forming
roughly a cordon of lakes shaped like the capital letter J.
This simple, but effective form of bringing so vast and
valuable a fresh water supply to this previously waterless
tract of country, was effected in the early sixties by the
present manager of Albemarle Station, who formed a dam
across the Tallyawalka Creek, at the point where the
Teryaweynya Creek leaves it. This dam, made with the
consent of the owners of Teryaweynya Station, lying
between Tallyawalka Creek and the Darling, diverts the
superfluous flood water of the Darling when required into


the above succession of freshwater lakes, and by this very
simple and cheap expedient a very large area of country has
received an effective water supply for the last thirty
years. It would thus seem that Nature has provided for
these districts a natural system of irrigation, which only
requires thought, development, and scientific knowledge
to increase ad libitum. Ample pasture is to be found at
Yictoria Lake even in this season of exceptional drought.
On Tuesday, the 15th, we continued our journey, and
crossing the wide creek which connects Victoria Lake with
its neighbour, we rode across a rich fertile-looking country,
and at 12 o’clock reached German tank, an out-station of
Manfred Station. At this point, by pre-arrangement with
the mounted police at Ivanhoe, forage had been provided,
though ample pasture is to be found. In the afternoon we
left for and reached Beelpajah, an out-station of Kilfera,
where excellent pasture was also found. On Wednes-
day, the 16th, we left for a short journey to the head
station (Kilfera), which we reached at eleven o’clock.
Kilfera is one of the largest stations in this portion of the
back blocks, and belongs to the Kilfera Pasturage
Company. It includes 1200 square miles, the greater portion
of which is excellent country. The country around is
perfectly flat, without a stone, and consists entirely of
alluvial soil. Kilfera Lake is a small freshwater lake,
formed!) y the Wallandera Creek, an effluent of the Lachlan
Kiver. This lake is formed in a similar manner to Lakes
Perpelloe, Teryaweynya, Yictoria, Menindie, etc., and is
another instance of the natural system of water storage
which has been already described.
On Thursday, the 17th, we left at 7 a.m. Hiding through
a rich alluvial country, and crossing the Wallandera Creek,
we reached Mossgiel at 12 o’clock, a distance of thirty-five
miles. The country across which we passed was composed
entirely of a rich black loam, similar in character to that
described at Kilfera. This district, so well suited to
agriculture, and destined, no doubt, hereafter to support a
large population, now maintains one sheep to eight acres.
The enormous tract of country formerly comprised by
Mossgiel Station is now being, in a measure, broken by
the appearance of a few selectors, who, availing themseves


of the Land Act, are working, with more or less profit,
comparatively small areas of country. On Friday, the 18th,
we left the small hotel at Mossgiel, and under a hot sun,
tempered by a cool breeze, we crossed a perfectly level,
treeless, grass plain composed of the same rich, dark,
alluvial soil. At thirty-five miles we lunched at a small
inn situated upon a creek, and remaining there until
the heat was partially over, we left for Booligal at four
o’clock, which we reached soon after six o’clock. Booligal
is a small town of 150 inhabitants, situated on the Lachlan.
On Saturday, the 19th, leaving at 6.30, we crossed a hot
and treeless plain of rich alluvial soil, and arrived at a
small inn twenty-six miles distant at 10 a.m., where we
lunched and remained until the worst of the heat was
over —3.45 p.m. We then continued our journey to Hay,
which we reached at 6.30. The thermometer registered
96 degrees in the shade.
The itinerary and distances covered by myself and my
party are given below. It will be seen that from Cobar to
Broken-Hill, via Wilcannia and Albemarle, thence via
Menindie, Albemarle, and Kilfera to Hay, we covered by
riding and driving 680 miles in twenty days, or on an
average, including all haltfc, thirty-four miles per diem.
Of this distance we rode five hundred miles. Our horses
thus in twenty days, including all halts, did twenty-five
miles a day. The chestnut horse ridden by myself, and a
brown mare, had previously covered one hundred and ten
miles in two days —on the 25th and 26t.h September—so
that my own horse covered a distance of six hundred and
ten miles in twenty-six days, including all halts, with
nearly fifteen stone on his back; or twenty-three and a
half miles per diem. The horse ridden by Major Lee
broke down, and had to be replaced en route. It was old
and past work, and should never have attempted the
journey ;it was, moreover, badly shod. With that excep-
tion the horses upon arrival at Hay were in excellent
condition, and none the worse in other respects for their
journey.
Itinerary of Ride. —September 30: Cobar to Dominick’s Hotel,
36 miles. October 1: 72-Mile Tank, 36 miles. October 2:
Retyuna Out-Station (Mr. Johnson, Murtie Station), 54 miles;


October 3: Wilcannia (via Murtie Station, Mr. Johnson, manager),
36 miles. October 4 : Wilcannia (on the Darling). October 5 :
Tintinalogy Station on the Darling (Mr. Eeid, owner —via Billilla
Station, Mr. Tully, manager), 50 miles. October 6 : Albemarle
Station (Mr N. Sadlier, manager), 30 miles. October 7 to 13:
(inclusive) : Drive to Broken Hill and return, 180 miles; horses
left at Albemarle Station. October 14: Albemarle Station;
Victoria Lake (Mr. Neil via. Wheeler’s Well), 54 miles; October
15 : Beelpajah, Out-Station of Kilfera (Mr. It, C. Webb), 45 miles.
October 16: Kilfera Station (Mr. E. 0. Webb, manager and
partner, Kilfera Pastroal Co.), 20 miles. October 17 : Mossgiel,
35 miles. October 18: Booligal (via Sullivan’s Hotel), 54 miles.
October 19: Hay {via One Tree Inn), 50 miles. Total, 680 miles.
Additional Itinerary. —September 25 ; Molong to Wellington,
40 miles. September 27 : Wellington to Dubbo (including an
error in road), 70 miles. Total, 110 miles. Grand total, 790 miles.
Some remarks would not be out of place as regards the
care of horses upon a journey similar to the above. The
greatest pains and care as regards feed and watering must
be observed. When possible horses must be freely and
well watered, the girths slackened, and bits taken out of
their mouths for that purpose. The old-fashioned notion
that it is dangerous to water horses when hot has very
properly exploded; but at the same time it must always
be remembered that though horses may without disadvan-
tage be watered when hot, they must not be allowed to
stand and get partially chilled before watering, and in this
lies the danger. It is only by assiduous attention, careful
feeding, watering, watching, and grooming that horses can
travel long journeys without detriment. Though the
grooming need only be of a rough character, nothing is so
essential to the well-being of horses as rubbing by a wisp
of hay or straw or by a brush. By these means circula-
tion of the blood is restored to the surface of the skin
after a long journey, and the pores of the skin are released
from the perspiration, thus restoring inspiration and respi-
ration through the skin. Nothing can be worse than the
cheap saddlery of this and other British colonies
similarly situated ; the very shape of the ordinary bush-
man’s saddle is sufficient in itself after long and continuous
journeys to give a horse a sore back. The side-bars must,
if the saddle is properly fitted, press evenly upon the surface
of the ribs of a horse, and thus the ordinary stockrider’s


saddle with the curve given to it by the side-bars and stuffing,
causes the weight to bear on certain points of the surface
of the horse’s back, in place of being evenly distributed.
Little care is given, as a rule, to the fitting of saddlery in the
colony, and I have rarely seen a saddle removed from a
horse’s back which has done anything in the shape of a
long or hard day’s work without a saddle gall of some sort
as the result. In a country abounding in horses as
is New South Wales, saddle galls are lightly considered ;
but when horses are required for military purposes upon
active service, or for performing continuous hard work
upon a long journey, success can only be achieved by
having good saddlery and by bestowing the most infinite
pains in fitting the same.
During the march we invariably carried out the prin-
ciples laid down in the new Manual of Mounted Drill for
Australian Mounted Troops —principles which I know by
personal experience to be as necessary for a small party as
for a large body of mounted men. First of all, as little as
possible should be carried on the saddle, and all weight must
be evenly distributed, so that the weights on either side of
the saddle balance exactly. Secondly, nothing should be
allowed to hang loose from the seat or other portion of the
saddle. Nothing is so provocative of sore backs as a long
loose nose-bag, a water-bag, or other detached articles.
Thirdly, it is most essential to start with a horse girthed
up as tight as possible to prevent the oscillation of the
saddle when weighted with kit. Fourthly, a halt should
always be made for five minutes within half or three-
quarters of an hour after starting. Saddles should then be
girthed up and straps tightened where necessary. Fifthly,
it is most essential to dismount and walk on foot for from
five to ten minutes every hour. Nothing relieves a
horseman so much on a long journey as a walk to stretch
his legs, though it may sometimes seem irksome, and
nothing so much relieves a horse as to be eased of the
weight that he is carrying occasionally. It allows of the
free circulation of the blood into the pores of the skin
under the saddle, and this has an important effect in pre-
venting sore backs or lumps. Sixthly, the pace to ride
in covering long distances is a slow trot. Nothing,


in my opinion, is more likely to contribute to loss of con-
dition, saddle galls, and a sore back than the Australian
canter usually made use of in this country. By a slow
trot, if properly carried out, the horseman should support
the whole weight of his body upon the inside of his thighs,
and the soles of his feet resting in the stirrups. He should
never allow the body during the trot to touch the actual
seat of his saddle; leaning forward, he will in this manner
relieve his horse’s back of the weight of his body, except
so far as it is evenly distributed over the side-bars of the
saddle resting upon the ribs. The best pace for covering
long distances is the trot at the above-mentioned slow pace
of not more than eight miles an hour. Thus given a halt
of five minutes and a walk on foot from five to ten
minutes, nearly seven miles an hour will be accomplished
without difficulty. This is the most rapid pace that should
ever be attempted, in my judgment, in performing a long-
distance ride by a small party. In the case of a large body
of mounted men an average speed of six miles an hour
while actually travelling is the maximum rate which it is
safe to adhere to.
Living as I have done for some three years in this land
of horsemen, nothing has surprised me so much as the
cruel neglect with which horses are so often treated.
Saddle galls are the rule rather than the exception. The
reason is obvious enough : it is not altogether bad saddlery,
and it is certainly not bad horsemanship, because we know
that we have as a nation the best horsemen in the world
in Australia; but it is due in the first place to bad saddlery,
in the second to careless riding, and in the third place to
neglect and want of thought for our horses, the result of
horses being very plentiful, and being cheap to buy, and
costing little to feed. An Australian rarely trots his horse
on a long journey, as I have already said ; he usually canters
or ambles. We in England never ride our hunters thus.
The only means of performing long and continuous journeys
at a quick pace is to trot and walk alternately, upon the
principles which I have endeavoured to indicate.
I will conclude by a few deductions which have occurred
to me as the result of my visit to the West.
No stranger who has travelled the world, as I have had


the good fortune to do, can fail to be struck with the
immense potentialities of the boundless plains in the
Western District. Adam Smith tells us in his “Wealth
of Nations ” that it is, after all, the soil which makes a
country, and every intelligent traveller visiting the Wes-
tern District of New South Wales must acknowledge that
the future wealth and prosperity of this part of Australia
lies in the black alluvial lands now confined to a capricious
pastoral industry.
In appearance, at any rate, these plains have the advan-
tages possessed by the rich lands of Egypt —the same black
alluvial soil, the same bright climate. They have, however,
what Egypt has not —a rainfall, insufficient, perhaps, at all
seasons, but still a rainfall. In Egypt rain never falls, and
the agriculturist depends solely and entirely upon the Nile
and its yearly flood.
It is sufficiently obvious that a system of waterstorage and
irrigation is alone required in the hands of an adequate’
and industrious population to convert these lands, now
running ten acres to a sheep, into the richest grain-produc-
ing country of the world. I have already indicated that a
natural system of water storage already exists in many
places, and this with little labour might be developed.
Abundance of water falls in the uplands of the colony or
in Queensland to supply the whole of these rich western
plains —a supply which is not dependent upon the melting
of the snow in spring, as in the case of the Abyssinian and
Equatorial mountains of Africa, which supply the Nile.
Your rainfall is pretty constant all the year round.
In Egypt, since our occupation in 1882, a great develop-
ment of the old irrigation system has taken place under
that able Officer of the Eojal Engineers, Sir Colin
Moncrieff. Similarly in the last ten years extensive irri-
gation works have been undertaken by the Indian
Government in Central India, with the result that
immense tracts of rich land previously waterless and there-
fore sterile have been converted into a rich agricultural
country. It is in a great measure due to this irrigation
system that the Indian corn trade owes its recent develop-
ments.


I cannot too strongly urge the Government of this
colony, before it is too late, and before the riparian
rights of selectors and landowners become fixed, to con-
sider the whole question of the agricultural development
of this rich district. I would suggest that they invite
the assistance of the experts who have developed the
agricultural interests of Egypt, who have converted the
deserts of Central India into the most valuable corn
land in the world, to advise upon the system which will
best meet the future requirements of New South Wales,
and, indeed, of Australia. Upon receiving such expert
and competent advice, the Government will be able to
develop the resources of these districts by degrees based
upon one general system.
Such an enterprise is one for an enlightened and strong
Ereetrade Government; it is beyond the scope of private
enterprise.
It is not too much to say that the future prosperity of
New South Wales depends in a large measure upon the
attention given by your present legislators to this the
burning question of the day. Upon a successful solution
of the water storage and irrigation questions hangs the
destiny of this colony. No thinking man, who visits your
alluvial western plains, can fail to realize the boundless
wealth which lies within your grasp —a lasting source
of wealth, and pregnant with the embodiment of a great
people.
Ip. the course of the discussion which followed the
reading of Major-General Hutton’s paper,
Dr. James C. Cox, an invited guest, rose and said: I
trust, Mr. Chairman, that I will be excused if I offer a
few remarks on this part of the colony over which Major-
General Hutton has recently travelled with so much
success, and an account of which trip has been so graphi-
cally given to us this evening. In 1881, in my annual
address to the New South Wales Linnsean Society, I drew
the attention of the Society to facts which tended to show
that in past times a vast storage of water had existed to
the north of Wilcannia, in the form of a freshwater lake*


and that this store of water had been dammed back by the
existence of a range which had stretched across from the
higher ranges which exist south of Wellington or from
Molong across the present plain country to Wilcannia, and
passed on from there to the ranges, probably to the north
end of Broken Hill; and it seems probable that another
vast inland sheet of water was held back by ranges some-
where about Brewarrina and covering the Liverpool plains.
There seems good reason to suppose that similar inland
pent-up waters existed and covered the great plain valleys
of the Darling Downs; for during the existence of these
vast areas of pent-up waters animals known to us as
diprotodons fed on the vegetation which surrounded these
waters, and in and around the more elevated lands the now
extinct thylacoleo lived, a great marsupial lion, and also
other forms of life, as gigantic kangaroos several times
larger than any known existing forms. Dine specimens of
the two latter are found in the Wellington Caves, and the
remains of the diprotodons are found as recent fossils in
the beds of what were these ancient great inland reservoirs
of water. By a process of erosion and decomposition the
great wall which held back the water above Wilcannia
gave way at Wilcannia and allowed the pent-up waters to
escape ; again further north, up possibly about Brewarrina,
a similar erosion occurred and let flow other stores of
water. These reservoirs seem to have been the medium
by which the course of the Darling was formed. The mass
of land surrounding the lakes where the barrier gave way
was occupied by a vegetation of its own, and by these
becoming probably suddenly drained, the large anijnals
being suddenly deprived of the vegetation and of the
necessary conditions of their existence, perished in the
mud plains, and we now find their remains at no great
depth in what appears to be rich alluvial soil, such as
would be produced by the drainage of a great water-
covered area of land. But the Major-General has spoken
to us about the vast plains of alluvial land below Wil-
cannia, and which only required water to cover them with
a verdant vegetation. It is probable that this vast rich
country has been formed by this giving way of the barrier
at Wilcannia, and by the force of the waters which escaped


vast quantities of vegetable mud has been carried down
and spread over these plains, and that the water in its
onward course has made a channel for itself which we now
know as the Lower Darling. I can appreciate the devas-
tation witnessed by the General caused by the drought
in these arid lands, for once I had to take a trip from
Wellington to Warren, and on from there down the
Marthaguy River. I passed station after station, expect-
ing to see vast flocks of sheep which we hear and read
about, and which may be seen in prosperous seasons, but
instead I saw vast numbers of pigs devouring the dead
bodies of starved out sheep, desolation and want being
evident on all sides ; such scenes, it is to be hoped, will
one day be a thing of the past, as the borings which are
now being made for water seem likely to meet the dire
effects of these inland droughts. The water which is being
tapped and brought up by these borings is not water
coming from the basins of these great defunct inland
lakes ; it comes from a much older upper cretaceous strata,
which stretches far and wide towards the Gulf of Carpen-
taria on the north to St. Vincent's Gulf on the south, and
is the bed of what was once a great arm of the sea. The
fossils found in the alluvial plains are of a much more
recent origin, probably of a tertiary character. When I
addressed the members of the Linnsean Society on this
subject in 1881 it was supposed that the rocks forming the
barrier at Wilcannia were paleozoic, but our Government
Geologist, Mr. Pittman, has shown that this was not the
case —That they are, in fact, rocks of the upper cretaceous
peripd. I would refer any of those who take an interest
in this subject to read Mr. Pittman’s valuable report on
this subject in the annual report of his department for
1891.
Mr. Geobge Male. also rose, and spoke as follows .*—
I must say that I feel some diffidence in addressing
you, gentlemen, this evening ; for it has never before fallen
to my lot to address an assemblage consisting purely of
military men ; and I do not pretend to a very intimate
knowledge of the technical subjects in which soldiers may
be supposed to be more particularly interested. I do,
however, possess some acquaintance with the country over


which General Hutton has been travelling, having, many
years ago, owned and managed considerable station pro-
perties in that very district. I may as well confess that
I am one of those at whom the General has been poking
some sly fun for trying to persuade him not to undertake
what I looked upon as a somewhat hare-brained expe-
dition. Finding that it was impossible to dissuade him
from attempting the journey, I urged him to make better
preparations for it than he seemed inclined to do. With
regard to himself, I took it for granted that he was as hard
as nails, and that there was no personal hardship likely to
be met with which he could not get through. But I
had strong misgivings with regard to his horses, and
urged him to provide himself with a waggon and four
stout horses to carry fodder for the journey. Reason and
argument were entirely on my side ; but the trouble of
arguing with a soldier is that he does not know when he is
beaten, and so the General persisted in making the journey
on horseback, with the successful result which he has
detailed to’ us this evening. It is all right for General
Hutton to make light of the difficulties of the journey now
that they are over ; but I have been in that country when
it was not only impossible to get a horse strong enough to
carry me 20 miles without fodder brought from a great
distance, but when there w r as great difficulty even in
getting supplies for the men on the stations I w 7 as there
when flour was up to £IOO a ton, and when nineteen
travellers out of every twenty looking for employment
would ask for a billet as cook, taking it for granted that
the cook at least would be sure of his food, whatever
might happen to the other men on the station. In those
days you might as well have asked for I do not know what
as for a peck of oats for your horse ; and I think that the
General has shown no small degree of management in
getting through without detriment or serious difficulty, in
a time of drought such as that country has lately been
going through. The General has made some remarks
about the Talyawalka Creek and the series of lakes filled
by its overflow ; and I must say that he has taken in all
the features of the country with wonderful quickness and
accuracy. He has referred to a dam in the Talyawalka


Creek, which plays so important a part in the filling of
these lakes ; and I may mention that when the original
dam was washed away, the present larger and more per-
il'anent one was in 1873 constructed under my own super-
vision.
With regard to the potentialities of the country if
brought under irrigation, I am entirely of General
Sutton’s opinion that they are almost illimitable, for I
know by personal knowledge that only water is needed to
cause the land along the banks of the Darling to produce
the most abundant fodder for stock, as well as every
variety of suh-tropical fruits in the greatest luxuriance.
But, in order to carry out a system of irrigation, engi-
neering works of a very large and costly kind would have
to be undertaken. I have seen the Darling when I could
cross it by stepping from one limestone rock to another in
the bottom of its bed, without wetting my feet; and I
have se m it when no one could get over without crossing
40 miLs of water. The possibility of successful irrigation
is entirely dependent on the construction of enormous
reservoirs at the various heads of the Darling, so that the
flow of water may to some extent be regulated, and that the
country may not at one time he devastated by floods and
the water allowed to run to waste, whilst at other times,
for a year or more together, there may be no water at all
for the purposes of irrigation. The engineering works
involved in the construction of such reservoirs would, I
fear, be both of a difficult and costly kind ; and I am
inclined to think that to render a scheme of irrigation
successful, a much larger population than at present
inhabits this country will be needed—population, in the
first place, to provide the necessary labour for the works
at a reasonable cost, and population afterwards to consume
the products of the irrigation. But, whenever the popu-
lation comes, we have (in that river, and in the country
along its hanks) an ample means of sustaining it. With
proper irrigation that country could he made to sustain in
fatness a human being to every acre. Without it we shall
have to he content to see the country carrying—and often
half-starving—a sheep to ten acres.
Although I am inclined to think that the actual


carrying out of such works as have been referred to may
have to be postponed for a good many years, I am certainly
of General Hutton’s opinion tbat tbe Government, looking
to tbe future of tbe country, should lose no time in having
these districts examined by tbe most competent engineers
obtainable, and in making, under their advice, such reser-
vations as might seem desirable, before private rights have
grown up which could not hereafter be disturbed without
great cost and great injustice.
I will not take up your time by any attempt to
elaborate the subject. I only wish to express my
admiration for the wonderful quickness with which the
General, in the course of his rapid journey through the
country, has taken in its features, and for the very graphic
description of them which he has given.
Geo. Murray & Co., Limited, Printers, 91 Clarence Street, Sydney.






3 1508 00786301 7


