

NARRATIVE
OF THE
Capture of the Ship jlgnes,
Commanded by Capt. Coffin ;
THE MURDER
THE CAPTAIN AND EIGHT OF HER CREW,
THB
NATIVES OF NEW ZEALAND,
ass asm©*
JOHN MTHERFORD,
One of the 5 Surtieon.
assarrington:
PRtMTKB BT C. MALLEY, HORSE MARKET,
FOR THE AUTHOR.




AN ACCOUNT
OF THE CAPTURE
OF THE
SHIP AGNES, &c. fro
HAVING been discharged from his Majesty’s Naval
service in the year 1815, I shipped myself on board
the Ocean, of London, 350 Tons burden, to proceed
on a voyage with Convicts to New South Wales. We
sailed from the river Thames, on the 10th day of
November, and on the 20th day of January, arrived
at Rio de Janeiro, on the coast of Brazils.
A quarrel arising between the Captain and the
Crew, four of the latter left the Ship, I then ship-
ped myself on board the Agnes of Boston for the
purpose of trading for Pearl, Tortoiseshell, and San-
dalwood, among the islands of the immense Southern
Pacific Ocean.
On the first day of February 1816, we left Rio
de Janeiro, and sailed for Cape Horn; —and on
the fir.-t of May we arrived at Otaheite ; here we re-
fitted' our Ship, and refreshed the Crew ; thence we
proceeded to trade among the Pearl Islands, the
Society Islands, and the Sandwich Islands, and after
touening at many others in our course, we arrived
off the Island of New Zealand, with the intention of


anchoring in the Bay of Islands to water ; tin's being
the place where the British missionaries resided.
A strong gale of wind arising prevented our
making the Bay of Islands (as we intended) and drove
us down off the East Cape, where rve anchored in a
Bay, called by the Natives, Tocomardo ; where as I
have very good reason to believe from the account I
afterwards received from themselves, no Ship had
had ever before anchored—This is about throe hun-
dred miles south and by east from the Bay of
Islands.
Tocomardo is an extensive Bay laying in the
form of half a moon, sheltered by a reef of rocks,
stretching to the North East, with a fresh water
river at the head of it, and surrounded on the land
side by a chain of barren mountains.
Here a number of the Natives came off in their
Canoes to trade with us. The articles they brought
for Barter, were white Flax Mats, Potatoes and Hogs
for which we gave them in return, Muskets, Powder
and Ball, Tomahawks and Fishhooks, The usual
price received for, a Musket was thirty five of the
largest Flogs, hr-re the Natives were very just in
their dealings with us.
The inhabitants of these Islands are of a bright
capper colour complexion; the men in general, stand
from six feet to six feet and a half high ; with strong
and long black hair, like ihe Malayans; well made in
proportion to their height, and tattooed on the face
body and posteriors
* Our Captain being aware that they were Canni-
bals, and that they would seize every advantage
that might arise to them from the separation of our
Crew, took the precaution to keep the whole of us
on Board, and employed one of the Native Chiefs
to take our boats and c..sks to procure us a supply
<if water. This they completed on the third day and


anti seemed to consider themselves as amply repaid,
by receiving from us two Muskets.
Having hoisted our Boats on Deck, the Carpen-
ter on examination, discovered that the Natives hai?
been busily engaged in their absence, in extracting
the Nails from the Planks.
Our Captain having informed the Chiefs t.iat he
intended to set sail the next morning, five of them,
and nearly two hundred of both sexes of the common
people remained on board all niyht, some amused
themselves by singing and dancing to divert our at-
tention from the other, some were most actively em-
ployed in cutting lead from the Ship’s Stem and
other parts of the Vessel. This being perceived by
some of the Ship's crew, a stop was put to their
proceedings for a short time ; This caused them to
grin most horribly, and to brandish their Tomahawks
in a most menacing manner.
In the course of the night, a number of their
War Canoes were proceeding to enter the Bay in a
■suspicious manner, and to land on the beach abreast
of the Ship, where they kept up a large fire tiß
break of day. When the morning was further ad-
vanced we could perceive many others lighted on the
summets of the surrounding mountains in answer to
their signals ; shortly afterwards we could perceive
the Natives flocking in every direction towards the
beach.
When it became perfectly light we counted no
fewer than forty War Canoes making towards the
Ship, they came alongside and the Crews immediately
leaped on Deck, where they squatted down cross
legged like so many tailors, r J he ship’s crew con-
sisting of no more than fourteen, and not being fur-
nished with boarding netting, were unable to prevent
their crowding upon Deck. At this .our Captain
being naturally much alarmed he called the Crew on


the. Quarter Deck, and communicated to us his ap-
prehensions of an immediate attack from this terrible
body of savages. As they were all armed either with
Muskets, Tomahawks, Stone Battle Axes, or Spears,
we had no apparent chance of escape; therefore the
Captain ordered us to go aloft and loose the Sails.
We all accordingly left the Deck excepting the
Captain and the Cook ; I myself went to loose the
Jib : and the mate was in the Cabin, busyly engaged
loading Pistols, the Natives perceiving the Decks
clear all suddenly jumped up at the signal given by
the Chief Idawana, throwing otf his War Mat and
brandishing his Marie or Stone Battle Axe, he com-
menced singing their War song, to which the rest
danced in such a manner as made us think they would
have staved in the Decks.
The Chief then turning suddenly round and
struck our Captain such a 'dreadful blow with his
Marie, as caused him to fall down dead in an instant,
the Cook running to his assistance was instantaniousiy
killed in the same manner.
Cne of the Chiefs and a number of his followers
jumped into the Cabin, and in a moments time dis-
patched the Mate, whilst another numerous party
pursued the Crew aloft. Those who remained on
Deck were busily employed in cutting the running
and standing Rigging, and in attempting to cut down
the Masts.
Some of the Crew made their way down the
Back Stays whilst others jumped overboard; those
were soon picked up by the War Canoes and tied
hand and foot as well as those who came down the
Back Stays During these transactions I was sitting
on the Jib Boom, an anxious spectator of the dread-
ful scene one of the Chiefs beckoned of me to come
in ; which I own I did with much fear. I was then
bound hand and ftet and put into one of their Canoes


with the rest of die prisoners; They then carelessly
threw into the Canoe the bodies of the Captain, Mate
and Cook, We now left the Ship and made towards
the shore, with about thirty of the Natives in com-
pany ; One of them perceiving the blood issuing from
the Mates wounds stooped down and lick’d up the
gore with seeming satisfaction. They then conveyed
us on shore where they tied us by the hands to some
small trees, and hung the three dead bodies by the
heels on the branches over our heads, to prevent
the dogs and pigs getting at them.
During the night, the blood was dropping or! ns
from the dead bodies. They next cut the Cable,
and let the Ship drift in over a bar, where she drove
ashore near a village at the mouth of the river. The
Canoes were passing and repassing from the vessel
to the shore with plunder, collected from various
parts of the Ship ; large fires being kept burning on
shore to direct them where to land with their picador.
Tlie-next morning they set fire to the Ship, in
order to obtain all the Iron used in her construction.
Her Water casks they likewise broke up, for the sake
of the Iron hoops. It had rained during the nigh.t
which caused us to be wet cold and hungry, as well
as being prisoners in the hands of merciless Cannibals
and our Ship burning before our eyes The Natives
now squatting down in a circle, and the five Chiefs
being placed in the centre, holding a coasultatioa, we
conceived ourselves to be the object of their delibera-
tions, as the moment they ceased debating they came
over to the trees to which we were tied, and eaca
made choice of one of us and released him from the
tree. One of them took his Marie and dispatched
the remaining six of our number.
They afterwards conveyed the surviving prison-
ers into the centre of the ring, where they stripped
us of our clothes, and immediately proceeded to cat


the buttons from our clothes, as 'precious ornaments
to hang in the ears of the chief women of the horde.
Some were now employed in digging nine large
circular holes in the ground, which being completed
a great fire was kindled in each, and many stones
placed on the fire till they were thoroughly heated ;
then a number of green branches, dipped in water
were placed upon the heated' stones which caused a
sudden steam to arise. The bodies of our murdered
companions were then cut up and laid on the green
branches with a quantity of potatoes : these were
covered oVer with a wetted flax mat, and afterwards
with earth, to confine the steam. This I afterwards
found was the. regular method of cooking, practised
in these countries.
The five survivors were then led to the centre
of the circle, laid dow n on our backs, and the opera-
tion of tattooing commenced, our arms and legs were
held by numbers whilst four operators went to work
upon us.
The instruments used in tattooing were made
of bone or shark’s teeth some were sharp like a Chi-
sel ; and others indented like a Saw. They are dip-
ped into a black liquid composed of charcoal and
water, and then applied to the skin ; they are then
struck smartly with a piece of wood, till the blood
flows copiously. The operation causes very great
pain, the eyes frequently being swelled up. The
females during the whole time sat beside me, wiping
away the blond which flowed from innumerable
wounds, with a piece of white flax. They afterwards
conducted us to the river to wash j after which they
returned.«s our shirts, Knives, and Tobacco Boxes-
A number of new baskets were then made by the
women, in which they deposited the bodies of our
mangled companions and the potatoes which had been
cooked along with them.


These being divided among them, a portion was of-
fered to each of .us, which we rejected with horror
and disgust. .
The next morning three of the Chiefs, returning
to their respective homes, took each one of my sur-
viving companions along with him, whom 1 never
afterwards saw. Myself and another remained at
Tocomardo with our Chiefs, for the space of six
Weeks at the end of which time rny companion in
misfortune was put to death, by order of the Chiefs
for giving some potatoes which he had paired with
his knife, to an old woman who was ill at the time,
and died a few days afterwards. They attributed
her death to his using his knife to the potatoes.
I was ihen removed about one hundred miles
into the Interior, to the residence of Hamee, the Chief
whose property 1 had become ; there I remained six
years; and then to fullil the customs of the Country,
took the two Daughters of the Chief in marriage.
The only marriage ceremony is performed by the
Chief’s joining the of the parties, and conclud-
ing the day with festivity and merriment.
Being now married, I became a Chief of power ;
and had slaves given mjp to wait on me ; I was com-
pelled to fight in their battles against each other, in
one of which, I was speared through the left thigh ;
the weapon having been cut put with an instrument
madb of an oyster shell ; the scars of which are still
visible. At this battle I was introduced to Shonghec,
one of the two Chiefs who had been in England.
Whilst be and 1 were discoursing, (havingendca-
voured to make myself master of their language) a
slave was brought before him, whom he instantly dis-
patched with his marie ; he then ripped him open, and
held Iris yet palpitating heart in his hand,. 1 then en-
quired into the occasion of this sudden fury; he in-
formed me that the slave had stolen from him the
Armour which had been presented to him, by the


King'of England when he was in this country.
Though Shonghee had been three years among
Englishmen, 1 consider him as the most incorrigible
eannibal in those Islands.
In battle, the New Zealanders form themselves
into a solid square each party, placing the butt of the
musket to the hip, then discharging it, and throwing
it down, leave it to be picked up by the women ; the
warriors having the marie slung by a string to the
wrist; the two parfies having discharged their pieces,
rush furiously towards each other and endeavour to
seize their opponents by the hair, they then cut off
the head with their marie, which are carried off tri-
umphantly by the victorious party ; their heads they
cure, and will sell them to strangers, fop what seems
seems to them a valuable consideration, the bodies
they devour out of revenge; in this case many a wo-
man undoubtedly partakes of the slaughtered body of
her son.
The war Canoe is about 60 feet in length and
from three to four feet in width, handsomely carved,
ornamented with pearl, shell arid feathers, and will
convey from two to three hundred warriors each.
New Zealand extends from 34° to 48» Southern
Latitude, and consists of two Islands, separated from
each other by Cooke’s straights which are about 7
leagues in width.
The Sea Coast is mountainous and barren, the
interior contains many fine plains, which produce 3
crops of potatoes and other vegetables in the eourse of
the year. The Country is well watered, having sever-
al beautiful streams and romantic waterfalls. The
huts of the Natives are most wretched hovels covered
with rushes. The domestic animals are confined to
lire Dog and the Hog. There are no reptiles and few
of the birds are known to Europeans ; My stay
among these inhuman savages was ten years, during
which mournful period my eyes were never blessed
with the sight of an European.


I escaped by the Brig Avenger, commanded by
J. JACKSON, On the 18th of January 1827, which
Vessel carried me to the Brazils ; from whence I came
to England in His Majesty’s Ship, Le Blanche.
MAI.LRT, PRINTS*, WAR*IN«TOW*
