

A
Narghile
of Poems
Stephen Skinner
2/3 net




A Narghile of Poems
by
Stephen Skinner
Arthur H. Stockwell Ltd.
Ilfracombe Devon




CONTENTS
Ecomium to Hemp .. .. .. .. .. 5
Berashith (In the Beginning) .. .. .. .. 6
Desolation 7
Dream .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 8
The Grove .. .. .. .. .. .. 9
Sonnet to an Undine .. .. .. .. .. 10
Sphinx .. .. .. .. .. .. ..11
Lyric .. .. .. .. .. .. 12
A 1 Kurkan .. .. .. .. .. ..13
Alexander of Macedon .. .. .. .. .. 14
lo Pan .. .. .. .. 15
A Narghile of Bhang 16
Moon .. .. .. .. .. .. ..17
The Wanderer 18




ECOMIUM TO HEMP
The silk waves of rhythm caught me away;
I soared, flew, dropped, and gently rose again
Upon their huge coloured fleck’d crests of pain.
Curtains and sheets of quiet flame display,
In palest gold, darts shimmering through sound
Vortexes, swept down to lift glowing fire.
And dance with it in spirals of desire:
Soft tracings, while lithe winds writhed and wreathed round.
The perfume of great flowers rose over all —
The living flowers, pulsing—and stark stars cold
Shone through its scent, like showers of swimming gold
Shredding the filigree of vision (small
It grows), torn aside to reveal, upturned
On the table, the empty vial, spumed.


BERASHITH
(IN THE BEGINNING)
Berashith!
The silent Spirit slowly spreads
Over the mercurial flowing peace of the waters.
And the Breath of Life arouses activity
As it stirs the first glistening riplets.
The waves of creation rend the mute calm and mingle
Their ever-arching crests —still subsiding
Into the profound deeps of their inmost origin
Ever pursued by another —rolling, returning.
Dawns now the effulgence that shatters
The solemn majesty of night’s dome.
And flecks the waters as they gently billow.
Slowly, surely, with a swaying grandeur.
Tender warmth enraps the icy waves with a flush.
Which glows like globulous embers as they bare
Onwards —never to gain that infinite shore
That would dash their ardent beauty to foam.


DESOLATION
The dying sun etches the stark mountain
Crowned by its diadem of ruined stone:
Built by mighty labour, but wrought in vain,
To rear a proud edifice to enthrone
The dwellers of Olympus. Deep shadow
Cast across the sandy wastes, long faded.
By fluted colonades, revealed aglow.
Burning sun-seared rubble lies scattered.
Steps lead nowhere and arches uphold nought.
Shimmering capitals rise into the air.
And crumbling lies the art so dearly wrought
By craftsmen labouring without despair.
The last rays burn the violated dome;
Powerful yet shattered symphony in stone.


DREAM
“To drown the consciousness in the drugs of fantasy is to
bestow peace”— Naberius.
The disc of dreams burns fierce,
As the raven pinions high, proud,
And soars down azure crystal canyons
Across a gold marbled sea
Through vermilion-stained portals
To the lushness of pure running rills.
Dissolved from the glistening canyon walls.
Spraying fine perfumes over jasper boulders.
Verdant foliage softly sways
In the gentle strains of mellifluous sound
Rising from trellised comolans
Lazily floating down the misted falls
Split by the cool of a blue orb
Gently careering through a warpling sky,
Edged by the gold marbled sea
Issuing from the morphous earth,
Uphueing colours to besprinkle the sky,
Shimmering down to lakes of lucid sleep
Fluently flowing from the bowls
Of sapphire smoke which curl, arching,
From the silken gem of dark depths—
Lost, buried in the floor of endless peace.


THE GROVE
“ To Sylvia ”
Surely the soul that heard, was sucked,
Like an essence from the goblet of life.
With an ecstasy of plucked
Strings. Strange delirious melodies, rife
With the shrill voices of flutes, fashion
Delicate, dripping notes, bathed
By the bated breath of passion
Breathed softly, russet swathed.
Harmonies filling the pale cavern ear
Drench the gasping spirit in delight
And buoy it bursting with foam. Near,
By a heavy-leafed flower, night-
Withered, and refreshed by sun, dewing
Oblivious of cares, and aught else said.
Save the hidden luting and piping,
Pillows the drowsy head.


SONNET TO AN UNDINE
A mountain stream reclines beside my way,
Lying amid soft banks of silvery sand,
Wreathed with the dew, before the dawning day,
Dripping from overhanging boughs which band
The limpid pool’s surface. A cowling morn
Mist slowly eddies across the pool’s breast
And the Spirit of Water distils form.
Gently wavering, but yet manifest,
She twines by glistening strands, a shaded sheath
Never achieving the fullness that lies
Like a suggestion on the living wreath.
Poised, fleeting, barely glimpsed before she flies.
Enjoying those hours ere the sun resolves
To rise, and dancing, drifting, she dissolves.


SPHINX
O polished Sphinx upreared in sandy waste,
Sombre temple of old Theurgic rites,
When shall thy sullen walls again resound
With the solemn incantations of old?
When shall thy Priests glide, gently without haste,
Through vaulted chambers and stone arched flights ?
Descending from portals above the ground
To sunless caverns gathering precious gold:
The wisdom of lost centuries, now passed.
O loosener of man’s bonds of thraldom,
Desolate enigma, thy grim and lined
Edifice shall for eternity stand:
Enduring Guardian of the Gods, sent
To preserve unchanged the Ageless Wisdom
That was in those lost aeons well enshrined
Within thy bulk, amid a flood of sand.
Once more the Veil of Silence shall be rent,
And man will his Ancient Heritage claim.
Then shall be called forth grim Gods, now sleeping.
And from the dross of ages they shall wake,
Rise, wax, and be adored at the dawning
And setting of their Lord: Ra the gold one.
No more will mankind bow before bronzing
Monuments of worldly power—but break
These shadows, and heed the ancient warning:
Pursue not the transient things, for none
Shall by them gain peace in Eternity.


LYRIC
Shades of poets gone before,
Stretch out to me your hand of Fame,
Imbue me with your art and lore,
That I may some slight honour claim.
Invoke from out the distant years,
Creative genius of yore,
The much maligned Wilde, his tears,
Or laughter of the witty Shaw.
The sultry ‘Sphinx’ is not for me.
Nor yet the wail of ‘Reading’s’ pain,
Or saintly Joan’s impassioned plea:
My lay lies in another vein!
O Spirit of Aeolis nurse.
On Grecian hills, the lilting string,
And fan the flame of lyric verse,
To make my ode a living thing.


AL KURKAN
The Muezzin wails from the purple etched towers of antiquity:
A rustle and low murmur permeates throughout the sombre
day,
All those faithful, in that hour, turn to the minareted city,
And carpets rare and rich are unrolled by the pilgrims on the
way.
The way that leads to A 1 Kurkan.
The cry threads through the dim and congregated gloom of
gathering night;
The oriental dusk enfolds the walls of age that house within
Those sultry dark skinned followers of mighty Islam’s failing
Light.
The wicks aglow now shed strange burnished lights and
flickering shadows thin.
Shadows along the way to A 1 Kurkan.
The smoke from brazen censers upward curls midst wailing
chants and cries:
Accrescent orisons resound until the dusky silence lifts,
And swirling through the arches of the courts, the ravelled
incense rise,
Shadowing the brightly hued mosaics and mystic Moslem
glyphs.
The glyphs that pave the way to A 1 Kurkan.
The fragrant night of Nature is amingled with a plea acute.
Appealing to a diety whose strength may never come again:
Eclipsed by many surging tides of zealous faiths that persecute
Those left to worship and to find, through faith and hope,
a higher plane.
A higher plane that is the way to A 1 Kurkan.


ALEXANDER OF MACEDON
The mighty Macedonian who sought
To conquer and bestride the known world,
Athwart the huge Bucephalus he fought
His way from Greece, to where the Indus swirled.
The Valley of the Kings, he laid in waste;
Crushed Darius, his golden spoil he gained.
At splendrous Babylon, his Empire based:
Incarnadine those green clad hills he stained!
The worshippers of Isis sang his praise.
And bowed to images of man far famed,
But fever struck and fixed his stoney gaze;
This demi-god now mortal, death had claimed,
And warriors’ footsteps through the Hall did ring,
As each man passed before his dying King.


10 PAN !
Serene and undulating flows the dusk,
Bearing the pungent odours of the Spring;
The saffron jasmine, and seductive musk
That beguiles the Neophyte invoking.
But suddenly the sighing air is smote
By sprightly trill that drifts across the glade:
Long low, silvery slow, sensuous note,
That permeates the dappled floor of shade.
The fecund Earth delivers up Her son:
Bushes stir, and from the gloom his laughter rings!
The demi-god his fleeing love has won,
And heralded by flowing laugh, that brings
Cloven hoof, tangled hair and head of Man —
The Neophyte’s salute of To Pan!’


A NARGHILE OF BHANG
A serpent of smoke oozed from dark rents
And ravelled the air round the narghile,
Lit by glowing eyes of burning black.
Lumps and holes of fire:
Eyes, that lull, and drowsy
Eyes, of some elemental beast,
Beckoning the being, down
To tortured pits of flame.
Through this fiery mist
Of red flecked smoke,
Portals of fanned ferocity, to
Floating, veiled regions.
Worlds, multi-hued, scents
And permeate seductive sounds
Through drowsy shades of shifting light,
Odiferous, reeling the senses,
Curved and flowing on.
No horizon bounding, but rising mists.
Revealing swaying swards
Undulating and pouring out waves,
Trees and scented bush
Flush forward into form and dissolve
Above a billow sea efflorescent
With bursting light, gold, crimson.
Green, gently intermingle, singing thaws
The yielding trees —a flake of flame,
The scene, and gloom falls.
Gradually the dying narghile
Looms through the pall:
The last ember of bhang has died.


MOON
Shall I then counsel the moon in her ascending?
Journey by that tall palm-tree through the night.
And rest on the deep-shadowed mountain slope.
Near by the taughtly crouching antelope;
Enthroned amid wan rays of lunar light.
Hide now the soft lustre thou art lending.
Unseen, lean on sinuous brook that leaps
Down silvery ways and tortuous falls.
Softly echoed by lofty chasm walls.
O Moon, arise no more to crown the steeps:
Nay, for Hecate is the mistress of thy wending!


THE WANDERER
Towards evening a spectral form appears
O’er ridg’d and purple etched hills he nears.
Journeying on with soft shadows looming
And flickering, entwined the dusky grey
Nadir of day. Thus Visions entombing
Endless vistas of wastes strewn o’er the way
Have lured the Wanderer onwards—never
Unloosed from the enchantment of thraldom—
Doomed always to dream, while body holds breath;
Spirit of Solitude, then endeavour,
On thy last day, break bonds and gain Freedom,
Never achieved in Life, though won in Death!


PRINTED BY
WALTER COLLINS LID.,
STROUD.
