

“A NATION SORROWING FOR ITS PRINCE.”
A SERMON
PREACHED ON THE OCCASION OP
€ljt Dentj) of fjj? Consort,
ALEX. R. RUSSELL,
INCUMBENT OF ST, PAUL’S, ADELAIDE, CANON OF
4 ADELAIDE, AND RURAL DEAN.
THE PROCEEDS ARISING FROM THE SALE OP THIS SERMON WILL BE
APPLIED TO THE SUNDAY SCHOOL LIBRARY CONNECTED
with st. Paul’s church.
ADELAIDE:
W. MULLETT, RUNDLE STREET.
1862.




PREFATORY NOTE
M335S P \
This Sermon is published at the request of some members of the
writer’s congregation. The proceeds will be applied in aid of a
fund for the enlargement of the Sunday School Library connected
with St. Paul’s Church, Adelaide. It is hoped that the peculiarity of
the occasion will seem to justify, in this instance, some departure
from the ordinary style of pulpit address, and some larger reference
to public occurrences than is usual in sermons.




SERMON,
«He was a good man.” Acts xi. 24.
It often happens, in the national as in the domestic life, that the
deepest blessings are very heedlessly enjoyed. It needs that the
stay and the staff be broken before we can understand how much we
have leant upon it. How many domestic histories in the midst of
us testify of this ! In each home in our land you shall see, it may
be, the father and mother, the sons and daughters, mingling year
after year in the sweetly intimate intercourse of family life : feeling,
perhaps, that there is no place like home ; but yet hardly under-
standing what portion of the general gladness and satisfaction is
contributed by each member of the circle —until, one day, in that
house there is a vacant place. Then there rushes on the mind a
flood of tender recollections : a veil seems to fall, as it were, from
the eyes of the bereaved ; and they now know so painfully well
what it is they have lost. They now remember how their heart
burned within them as he walked with them on their onward way,
and wonder that they thought of it so little at the time. The sense
of privation was needed to discover to them all that such a loss
means. But they know it now, and they stand amazed at themselves
to think that they could have gone on so long in such heedlessness;
so seldom possessed by an adequate sense of the blessing they enjoyed
in a relative so valued and so dear. And perhaps in no case would
this be more powerfully felt than in that of a father, especially if he
were a good father, commanding the reverent love of all within the
circle of his own home: it seemed so natural to them to see him
there every day, to go to him for counsel, to look to him for example,
and to have all gladness sweetened by the keen zest of his


participation. This was so much a matter of every-day life, there
was in it so little unusual or exceptional, that the family could little
tell how much their father was to them until he was taken away,
and then they knew it well indeed.
They “see the vacant chair, and think—
How good ! how kind ! and he is gone !”
The first discovery, then, which a great domestic bereavement
makes to us is, of the place which the lost relative filled in our own
affections, and the elements of good which have been subtracted from
our own life. And such is the selfishness of even our purest
attachments, that this thought has at first an almost too prominent
place. But other thoughts soon present themselves, in
“ that hidden, quiet room
Far in the depth of our spirit’s gloom,”
to which we go to commune with our dead. Solicitude for him that is
gone will eventually lead us away from our own sense of aching want, to
think how it is with him now in that unseen world to which he has
gone. And then, if he was a good man : —if he was pious in heart,
and Godfearing, and consistent in life : if he was one who loved God
and loved his brother also; and who so anxiously and earnestly
governed his own life that all could see there was working in him a
true and living faith—what consolation there is in that case-
Despite the painfulness of parting, what repose and soothing in the
thought that he lived just as we would have had him live now that
God has called him away —that his life was so truly that of one
“ beloved” of God, that we are sure it is He who has “ given him
sleep.” But for this comforting conviction, there would be pain and
dread mingling with even our very brightest and most affectionate
recollections of his living career.
Such thoughts as these, my Brethren, have their not remote
application to great calamity for which a whole nation is now
making piteous lamentation. The Prince who has gone from us
stood at the head of that family, the highest in the nation, holding
the central place in its affections, in which happily has been realized
the very ideal of what an English family should be. He had not
the name of king, nor did he share our Sovereign’s throne, but *' the
great good Prince, the dearly-beloved father” in that family, so
cherished by all English hearts, was contemplated in that paternal
character by the great mass of our countrymen ; whose common


pride and pleasure it was to know that he illustrated his high place
with those manly and Christianlike graces, which are now his
noblest memorial. While he was living, we hardly, perhaps, knew
or thought how essential he had become to our country’s truest
welfare ; how much that we value most, depended on him ; for what
a great and good work he was raised up. It is only now that he is
gone that the full extent of what the nation owed to him, can, be
appreciated. In our vain way of thinking on such great subjects,
despite the solemn teaching of every fresh catastrophe, we had
supposed him for many a year to come secure from the approach of
death ; his removal, thus in the vigour of his manhood, was among
the last things that would have entered into our thoughts ; and just
because we did not think of his removal, the conviction was never
actually brought home to us, of what a blessing to England he
really was.
I know well it is not the office of the preacher to speak the mere
language of eulogy over the great who have departed, if greatness
were all we had to remember ; but as it is purely and pre-eminently
as a “ good man” that the Prince Consort has won his high place in
the people’s regard, I feel it will be no prostitution of a sacred office
if to-day I recur to the chief signs and tokens of that goodness which
his life displayed. In all the language of Holy Scripture, which
might have been applicable to this subject, there was none which
seemed so to express the thought in my own mind, as this simple and
brief description, of one of the great preachers of Christianity —“ He
was a good many
Let me remind you then, in the outset, that there is a depth and
universality in the grief felt for this bereavement which the fact of
Prince Albert’s rank can of itself by no means explain. It is not
always that the death of even a Royal Prince awakens feelings of such
genuine, widespread, and unselfish regret. It has in this instance
confessedly nothing whatever to do with political prospects or appre-
hensions. There have been critical epochs in the past days of England,
when the peace and the very safety of the country seemed to hang upon
some one uncertain life; and when, with the lamentations for such
a death, there intermingled feelings of partly selfish apprehension for
the future. It is on no sijch account as this that the sudden death
of Prince Albert has visited us with such a grieved consternation.


Again, there have been deaths of Royal Princes which have
awakened feelings of a very different nature. In some instances,
there has been a sense of relief at the country’s deliverance from a
grievous burden; in others, the feeling that an unwholesome
example of vice in high places, had ceased to afflict the nation. In
such cases, beyond a certain awe of death in its visitation of Kings’
houses, and its exaction even there of the natural penalty of sin,
there could be little of the nature of real mourning. But our Prince,
whom it has pleased God to take from us, was a far different man
from those. I suppose there are some here who can recollect and
retrace his whole career in England; and, now that the day of his
earthly probation is closed, it is something for loyal hearts to
remember, how pure that life was, how self-restrained, how manly and
how honorable. He has left behind him a name of which his
children may well be proud, or rather (which becomes them better)
for which they may reverently thank God as a very precious portion
of their heritage. He came amongst us as a stranger, but he was
not long alien from the pursuits or the affections of Englishmen.
The manly simplicity of taste which distinguished him was truly
English: it was one of the signs of the Saxon race of which he had
come. But there were evidences also of higher and holier influences
still, having moulded his character, determined his opinions, and
formed his habits. It was no slight reassurance of the anxious solici-
tude of the country concerning the husband of their Queen, to be thus
reminded that he came of a true-hearted God-fearing people, and to
perceive that the virtues to which he had been trained were those
which have always been dearest to the hearts of Englishmen.
The position which he came to occupy was one of great difficulty,
and of perilous responsibility, in which, whatever influence he might
leave behind him would tell, for good or for evil, on many future
generations. The worship of “ the world and the glory of it ” were
tempting his heart: the love of self, and the spirit of vainglory,
were no doubt soliciting him, as they solicit the hearts of all who
are placed in conspicuous situations ; but there is reason to believe
that He who knows what is in man gave him strength to resist
these temptations, and to seek for a higher kind of gratification.
You know how he aided our Queen in her efforts to establish a pure
court, and to make the highest household in the land, in all good
things, an example to the meanest. You do not need to be told


what were the great beneficial objects in endeavouring after which
his life was spent. But the most blessed recollection of all, now that
he is lying dead, is, that according to all well-authenticated accounts,
he tried to live the life of a Christian, encouraging by his influence
and example all that was done throughout the country for the
advancement of true religion, and in his own person showing that
this sprang not from a mere sense of decorum, but from a religious
principle as deep and strong as it was calm and undemonstrative.
We learn to appreciate the value of such conduct, in such a case,
when we contrast it with certain dismal recollections of the earlier
portion of the present century, and think what the Court was
in the days of the last Regency. When you remember what a
withering influence on the morality of the highest ranks one bad
man in that high place exerted, you will be able to appreciate the
value of a good, conscientious, christian-rainded man in such a
station. In those former evil days, there was no Royal example of
virtuous self-government, no exalted goodness to abash the evildoer,
but under the shelter of what ought to have been the highest
example, men of rank were encouraged to cast aside, in their selfish
sensuality, all regard to what is right before God, and decent in the
sight of man. Illustrious instances there no doubt were of the
purest virtue in the noblest families ; but the intimates of the
Prince of that day made his vices a fashion, and through all ranks
the bad infection spread. The sense of disgrace which in a happier
age would have attached to foul excess was stupefied into unfeeling
apathy in the noxious moral atmosphere of the times; until at
length the better feelings of England were too grossly outraged, and
from end to end the country rang with righteous execration of
offences offered to public decency and morality. It is refreshing to
to turn from those evil and profligate days to the better era which
the good Prince Albert was so largely instrumental in introducing.
Whatsoever practices he has brought into fashion among men of
rank have been pure, humane, and noble. From the moment when,
having made himself master of our language, and acquainted
himself with our national temper and our wants, he took a decisive
part in public affairs, it became evident to every careful and un-
prejudiced observer, that he had been trained in a godly school, to
recognise the Christian claims of fellow men of all ranks, as of one
blood: to see imaged in them the Divine Humanity of Him who


was pre-eminently " The Man;” and to recognize them all alike as
objects of a common Divine care and a common Divine Redemption
Rut despite his admiration of our culture and our civilization, the
"black fermenting mass of life whereon our state is built,” could
not but give occasion to many anxious thoughts in so close and
thoughtful an observer. His fine and generous nature was pained
to the very heart at the sight of sufferings among our poor, in their
squalid habitations, which it was easier even for him to see than to
redress. And so this good man and princely prince found ready to
his hand work most congenial to his eminently humane tastes.
Without pretending to anything inconsistent with the most self-
forgetful modesty, his example did help to teach the proprietors of
England to recognise their duties to those who are labouring on
their lands, and to create throughout society the feeling that the
poor should be better housed and better cared for; that their life
should not be surrounded with needless perils, nor their hearts
afflicted with needless sorrows; and that they should have the same
opportunities as others of guarding those feelings of modesty and
purity, which their crowded habitations were fast obliterating.
Such a work undertaken by a Royal Prince was sure to enlist the
sympathy of many helpers —and it did. What multiplication
throughout England, during the last twenty years, of " dwellings
for the poor,” and other appliances for the better health and comfort
of that class whose lot our blessed Lord chose for His own! How
much has been done (though perhaps much more remains to be
done) to mitigate the sufferings of honest and industrious poverty!
Genius, which does so much to beautify our mortal life, and surround
it with a celestial grace, claims a kind of immortality; but a surer
immortality results from those humane efforts, addressing himself
to which, a Prince "builds himself an everlasting name.” " Ever-
lasting ” indeed; since, though earthly glory may fail, yet come
the time will when a Divine voice will recognise all such ministry
to the wants of the meanest of His brethren, as effectual service
rendered to himself. The revelations of the judgment-seat, which
will cover with shame so many of the great doings of earth, will
unbury fromjthe past all forgotten recollections of Christian pity and
Wing-kindness, to crown them with an everlasting glory.
We may glance also, as we pass on, at the work of general
enlightenment to which the Prince Consort addressed himself.


Every one now knows that he was the warm friend and the wise
counsellor of all schemes for the advancement of knowledge. In
this respect also, his example was followed. The changed fashion
of the times showed itself in the growing practice, among men of the
highest rank, of taking a personal share in the instruction of the
people, in the removal of ignorance, and the promotion of pure and
elevating tastes. And this was part only of a fuller recognition of
their Christian fellowship with others simply as men ; for, disdaining
all airs of patronage and condescension, we know with what sincerity
many of the noblemen and gentlemen of England have of late years,
taken arms against the monster evils that oppress the social life of
their country. These inheritors of noble names have shown them-
selves also to be men of a noble nature, have been in many
instances the disinterested mediators between hostile classes, and
have uttered their outspoken protest at once against the sordid
tyranny of Mammon and the brutal selfishness of lust. It is no
wonder that the Royalty and the Aristocracy of England have again
become darling names to the suffering classes of their country; now that,
in harmony with their own best traditions, they have thus identified
themselves with the purest and most sacred interests of humanity.
PTere too, of all places, we ought to remember how closely the
name of our Prince was identified with the cause of Peace. We live
in an age which has had its heroes of both sorts: in which men,
inspired by a pure love of country, have willingly laid down their
lives on the field of battle; but in proportion as we honor them, we
shall desire to be grateful to those who, by promoting the cause of
peace, have striven to avert the necessity for the costly sacrifice of
such precious lives. And Prince Albert is conspicuously identified
with one memorable attempt to unite all nations in a holy bond of
peace and goodwill. The Great Exhibition of the Industry of all
Nations was well known to be his darling project. In the language
of his “bereaved son,” in that beautiful, manly, and loving letter
which has reached us this very day* —“ That great undertaking sprang
from the thought of his enlightened mind, and was carried through
to a termination of unexampled success by his unerring super-
intendence.” The wonderful scene which London then presented,
served to show what were the real aspirations of the man ; how
true and pure were his conceptions of what glory consists in, and in
• The 12th of March, on which day the January Mail from England arrived.


what striking contrast with its vulgar parody in the nearest continental
State; how he was constantly desiring, and aiming at, what would
tend to the greater happiness, and (in the largest sense of the
old word) the greater “ wealth” (well-being) of man ; how all
suffering, if he could, he would mitigate ; how all separating
influences dividing between nation and nation, if he could, he would
remove; how, in order to secure that universal brotherhood and good-
will of which the Gospel has given us the promise, he would enlist
even the inferior motives which sway the human will, and turn the
very strivings of commerce to the great and holy purpose of
promoting on “earth peace, and good will to man.”
Now, was not this a Prince ? Aye, my friends, every inch a Prince !
But is it come to this, that we must say —he was 1 Is all this good-
ness perished from the earth? No, not the goodness —that remains,
that never dies. Say what you will, the “good men do” lives after
them, and he will still continue to revive in the lives and the efforts of
others, the signs and tokens of his permanent influence for good The
aspirations which he awakened, or deepened, in the hearts of others,
will again and again renew the noble efforts amid which his life was
spent. But mysteriously as the elements of the deepest joy and the
deepest sorrow sometimes commingle here on earth, it does fill us
with a solemn wonder to think that the season when our native
land was putting on the garments of mourning for him, should have
been that sweet Christmas-tide, which so aptly symbolises the
character of his whole career. And to-day also, we have thought it
a strange coincidence to have heard as in one breath, the news that
the apprehension of War is at an end, and that this true friend of
Peace among all nations, has ceased to live on earth.
I must be permitted to allude to one other feature of the life and
work of our Prince who is gone. Public allusion has already been
made to the fact that in him were illustrated the believing spirit
and the modesty of true science. On the last great occasion when
he stood forth before the scientific men of England, he combated the
notion that science and faith can possibly have interests at war with
one another. He spoke in the spirit of one who knew that, while
sciolism is arrogant, true science is ever humble i that the wisest
seekers after human wisdom have confessed themselves to be but
children, knowing but little, reverently seeking to know more, their
very inquiry and experiment being a sort of patient “ prayer for


light” to Him who has put into their hearts this passionate thirst
for truth, and who discovers the secrets of nature, as of grace, to
those who use the right means in the right spirit. It is something
to find in a mind so philosophically calm as Prince Albert’s, the
evidences of a faith so earnest and undoubting, showing him to be of
one mind with that great man who well said, that “ the chief
fathers of science and knowledge have likewise clave with the saints.”
But what is of more importance still to England than all these
indications of a wise mind and a far-reaching philanthrophy, we
know what sort of husband and father our Prince was.- If hereafter
his son should come .to the throne, and fulfil the good promise he
has given of personal worth, modesty, and uncontaminated natural
affection ; if, by the blessing of God, he should add another to the
roll of godly Princes sometimes sent, in troublous times, for the
more confirmation of the faith of God’s servants, —then we, or they
who may be living then, will bless the memory of the good father
and good mother who raised up such a son. In that son, it may be,
their teachings and their example will live again. For the safety,
for the honor, for the happiness of our country, let us pray God that
they may indeed. But knowing also what a husband Prince Albert
was, the sorrow of the widowed Queen is the sorrow of the whole
land. If her true and faithful heart felt so keenly the cruel
laceration of bereavement, when her mother died, many lips have
been already asking how she will bear this “ sorrow upon sorrow”
which has fallen upon her. We have this week, as I trust, borne
her upon our hearts before the throne of grace, and these have been
no formal prayers. The throbbings of a painful sympathy have
agitated the whole body of her people, and these prayers are but the
echo of feelings which millions of mourners have sought to translate
into the language of fervent supplication. In what country but ours
could that have happened which has happened since this tidings
reached us? To every lip the exclamation rose — <e Oh, the good
Queen ! —the dear Queen !—the poor Queen, God comfort her !”
And all this means “ what a Queen she is! and what a husband
she has lost I” May God comfort her indeed.
Thus, my brethren, I have striven to recall to your recollection, some
of the chief evidences of that goodness in Prince Albert, exhibiting
itself outwardly in action, even to think of which makes the nation’s
grief so hard to bear. In doing this, I have but pursued the same


course of thought as all must do who are in any way bereaved—
thinking what he was that is gone, and what sort of life he lived.
But we cannot forbear the thought also, of what he is, and how it is
with him now. We will offer no vain prayers "for the repose of his
soulfor he is where no prayers of ours are needed, where, so far
as we can tell, no prayers of ours can avail him. But our hope
concerning him, is, that as he was a good man : as there was in him
an evident desire to act out the principles of Life in Christ; so we
hope and believe that now he rests in Christ. And this is the
consolation wherewith we trust the heart of the sorrowing Queen
may be sustained, that, having a husband now in heaven, she may
the more earnestly strive to bend her own steps thitherward, and
lead on in the same holy and ever-brightening path the children
whom God has given her.
But here, my brethren, let me utter a needful word of caution.
If this our Prince has found an entrance into the Eternal Blessedness,
we know how he has found it. No virtues or good deeds of his own
won for him that reward. These showed, indeed, that he believed
Christ’s redemption to be a redemption from all the vain conversa-
tion of the evil self-loving nature, and that he was yielding himself
up to His redeeming power. But before God, in the great matter of
salvation, none is Prince and none is peasant; and we know that he
must have gone, as a humble contrite sinner, asking pardon for the sin
of all his life through Jesus Christ our Lord : betaking himself, with
an awful reverence of supplication, yet with a faithful confidence, to
Him, the Prince “ Immortal and Invisible ” before whom every knee
must bow, and in whose presence the transient glories of earthly
greatness flee away. For Prince Albert all distinctions of rank and
title are over now ; his very mortality, with all the accidents that
appertained to it, is laid aside; our one hope for him is, that having
here on earth entered into that Eternal Life which is in Christ, he
has now passed into its inner regions of perfected blessedness. Happy
the country that can entertain such hope of a departed Prince.
Happy the Queen who can so think of the husband she has laid,
with much weeping, in the grave. Happy the children who, to all
their glad remembrances of what he was, can add the thankful
persuasion that they are the children of one who has “ passed into
the skies.”
And now, my brethren, go your way and think how you must


live. If you have been impressed by this example of a consistent
and useful life, in a perilous station, you will resolve, in the strength
of God, to war the same good warfare with the besetting sin and
suffering of the world ; you will be found with the same sobriety and
conscientiousness, illustrating the Christian character. You will live
not for yourselves, but be pierced through and through with the
conviction that “ whether you live, you live unto the Lord, and
whether you die, you die unto the Lord ” You will so give yourself
up to God’s calling, and so act in your humbler sphere, that those
around you will be able to cherish peaceful and comforting thoughts
concerning you when you are gone. And this you know they will
not be able to do if you are living in any kind of deliberate sin.
Nay, there will be little sweetness and beauty in their remembrances
of you, if you are now living to no manifestly good purpose. Try,
like this good Prince, to live useful lives, and to adorn with
heavenly graces, the station you are placed in, whatever it be. And
you that are already trying to do any kind of good, be “ steadfast” in
it, “ unmovable,” doing yet more and more, “ always abounding in
the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not
in vain in the Lord.” Most impressive is the appeal which such a
life and death address to us. Perilous are the temptations of high
rank; difficult it is to serve God in simplicity of heart when
surrounded by the pomp and glitter of a splendid life j and yet we
have had an example given us of a truly Christian Prince, whose
heart was evidently set on better things than these, and whose
ardour in the pursuit of the great object for which he lived never
flagged, because he did not think his work to be in vain in the Lord.
And how will such an one bear witness against us, if we, with none
of the temptations of splendour to beguile us, yet suffer our affections
to be wholly absorbed on fleeting and perishable interests. When
the end of life shall come, the great question with us will be, not
what we have received, but how we have used it. And be sure that
all who work for God, the humble and the dignified alike, will in due
season “reap if they faint not.” It is for you then, my brethren,
while time is fleeting away, and your very powers and affections
and energies are being lost to you if they are not being used
for God—are actually perishing if they are not being quickened by
the conviction of your divine calling—it is for you to take yourselves
seriously to task; to rouse yourselves out of the low commonplace


views of life to which we are continually tempted, with their paltry
sentiments and their vulgar ambitions; to determine that you will
outrage and put to utte*r shame all personal habits, and all
conventional notions, which hold you back from an earnest and
pure-hearted service of God; ,to resolve once for all, that in the very
sphere assigned to you, you will try to live a life of holy activity
and manly outspoken practical godliness.. To this the lives of all
good men constrain you, who have lived their day on earth, and
gone hence, in obedience to the voice which called them to “come up
higher.” Few may be the things committed to you, yet to'those
few you are to be strictly faithful, And what animation to a feeble
faith, and a wayward heart, and a faltering will, in these words of
promise wherewith our beloved Master has cheered us :—“ Because
thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will malce thee ruler over
many things : enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.”
1508 00618836 6
rrie Streets.
Sherring & Webb, Printers, corner of King WiHiara and Currie Streets,
