

*
A New Enropean-Australian Rente.
Proposals for a New Route which will
enable Passengers , Mails , Light
Goods and Produce to be carried
between London and Sydney in
Sixteen , and Heavy Goods and Cattle
in Twenty-three days , combined with
a System of Canals , to be used for
Transit , Irrigation and General
Water Supply throughout Central
A ustralia.
C. “STUART-CANSDELL,
Of the Inner Temple, Barrister at Law, for some years Chief Crown Law Officer of
Northern Queensland, subsequently Judge of the Western District
Courts, New South Wales, and recently Acting
Solicitor-General of Tasmania.
■WITH J&. U.
Showing the route of the proposed Railway and probable extensions
to the principal Railways of Australia.
GORDON & GOTCH.
Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Capetown, and. London.
1895.
[Copyright. All rights reserved.]
PRICE - SIXPENCE.




A New European-Australian Route;
Proposals for a New Route which will
enable Passengers , Mails , Light
Goods and Prodvtce to be carried
between London and Sydney in
tilTf ’ Sixteen , and Heavy Goods and Cattle
v. v v* z/z Twenty-three days , combined with
a System of Canals , to be ttsed for
Transit , Irrigation and General
Water Supply throughout Central
A us tralia.
C. STUART-CANSDELL,
0/ tfte inner Temple, Barrister at Law, for some years Chief Crown Law Officer of
Northern Queensland, subsequently Judge of the Western District
Courts, New Smith Wales, and recently Acting
Solicitor-General of Tasmania.
with: a avt-a.! 3 ,
Showing the route of the proposed Railway and probable extensions
to the principal Railways of Australia.
GORDON & GOTCH,
Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Capetown, and London.
[Copyright. All rights reserved.]
PRICE - SIXPENCE.
W. M. Maolardy & Co., Printers, 82 Pitt Street, Sydney.


COITTE UTS
Of the two great needs of Australia—quick transit across and irrigation of its
Central Lands .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 3
Of the difficulties over which the Suez Canal triumphed .. .. .. 4
Of the enormous traffic developed by the Suez Canal, and how a large part of it
must pass over to the proposed Railway .. .. .. .. .. 5
Of the difficulties, which obstructing the carrying out of the proposed works
when first projected over thirty years ago, have been gradually removed .. 6
Of the corroboration of the soundness of the projects by the recent conversion of
the deserts of Southern California, Arizona, and Africa into thriving
Settlements by means of Railways and Irrigation .. .. .. .. 7
Of the outlines of the author’s complete scheme of irrigation and transit .. .. 8
Of the main objects of the Company to be first accomplished ;
1. The Trans-Australian Railway.. .. .. .. .. 10
Of its construction as a first-class Railway, and ultimately as a
“Lightning Express.” .. .. .. .. .. .. 10
Of its reduction of journey between London and Sydney to 16 days .. 11
Of its avoidance of over 6000 miles of ocean voyage—half the sea route
to London .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 11
Of the Gauge of the Railway .. .. .. .. .. .. 11
Of how running the Railway in the dry bed of the Irrigation Canal,
Irrigation being only required at distant intervals, will not only be
practicable, but ensure safety at highest speed .. .. 11 and 17
Of the Route of the Railway .. .. .. .. .. 12
(See Map) .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 13
Of Improvements in Construction .. .. .. .. .. 11
Of Improvements in Motive Power ..... .. .. .. 15
Of its value for Defence Purposes .. .. .. .. ~ 16
2. The Main Irrigation Canal .. .. . .. .. 17
Of the sources for Supply of Water .. .. .. .. .. 18
1. By drawing from Rivers and Creeks .. .. .. .. 19
2. By Catchment Reservoirs of Rain .. ... .. .. 19
3. By sinking Artesian Wells .. .. .* .. .. 19
3. The Supply of Sea, Condensed, and Fresh Water to Gold Fields, and the
utilization of the delivery of such Waters by Gravitation, in the working
of Dynamos and Drilling, Boring and other Machinery for Lighting and
Mining, and other purposes .. .. .. .. .. 10
Of the Cost of the Railway .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 14
Of the Profits of the Railway .. .. ... .. .. .. .. 21
Of the Cost of the Main Irrigation Canal.. .. .. .. .. .. 18
Of the Profits of the Main Irrigation Canal .. .. .. ... 24
Of the Profits which will arise from the Supply of Water to the Goldfields, and
other Works and Operations collateral to, and from subsequent extensions of
the main projects .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 26
Of the Capital of the Company .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 28
Of the issue of a limited number of Founders’ Shares and Debentures on favourable
terms .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 29
Of Grants of Land, and the Guarantee of a Minimum Dividend by the Imperial and
Colonial Governments .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 29


K33^T/ rr / y • Tn 4
-4
Proposals for a new Route which
will enable Passengers, Mails ,
Right Goods and Produce to be
carried between Loiidon and
Sydney in sixteen and Heavy
Goods and Cattle in tzventy-three
days , combined with a system of
Canals to be used for Transit,
Irrigation and General Water
Supply throughout Central
Australia , being the Prospectus
of the Trans-Australian Rail-
way and Irrigation and Transit
Canals Company , Limited.
The two great of the Continent of Australia are means of
quick transit across it to some north-western point which would
consideiably shorten the route to Europe and the redemption by
irrigation of its central lands from their present unprofitable
condition.
These important undertakings have been full enough of
promise to interest the projector for over thirty years, and the
developments of commerce and science now warrant their
construction.
Great indeed were the difficulties which presented themselves
at the inception of these ideas. At that time the condition
of the interior of Australia was little known. Population
and ti’ade were confined to a mere fringe of the Eastern, South-
eastern and South-western coasts and the advantages to be gained
by the carrying out of the proposed works seemed, to nearly all, to
be utterly beyond realization.
But though beyond the confidence of that period, the proposed
undertakings were so clearly the natural complement of the Suez
Canal, then just commenced, and the necessary precursor of settlement
in Cential Austialia as to warrant a strong faith in their ultimate
completion.


All great and novel undertakings have had to struggle to
success through difficulties, only to be overcome by perseverance.
The Suez Canal was no exception to this rule. That great work
was anticipated by many an enthusiast in very early times ; but since-
the Venetian and Genoese merchants sought, unsuccessfully,
towards the close of the Sixteenth Century, to obtain the consent
of the Egyptians, nothing was done until Lieutenant Thomas
Waghorn, of the Royal Navy, having previously gained a world-
wide renown as the Pioneer in 1830 of “ The Alexandria and Suez
Railway,” most commonly known as “the Overland Route” to
India and the East, not only conceived the idea that a canal
through the Isthmus of Suez would save much time and labour,
then lost in the transhipment of goods and their transit across the
isthmus by railway, and, with indomitable zeal, made soundings in
the Mediterranean and Red Seas but submitted a perfected scheme
to the English Government and the East Indian Company ; yet only
to meet a repetition of the doubts and ridicule which had previously
delayed his “ Overland Route,” notwithstanding he had succeeded
in carrying passengers, mails and light goods, by such route to India
in a less number of weeks than the months which had before
been consumed in voyaging round the Cape. Subsequently Louis
Napoleon, then President of the French Republic, and his
Ministers gave much encouragement; but Waghorn, desiring that
England should have the honour of initiating the work, again
endeavoured to obtain the assistance of the English Government,
but unsuccessfully ; Admirals and other professionals having declared
before a Commission that it would be impossible for steamers to
navigate the Red Sea. It was then that Lesseps, on being
appointed French Consul in Egypt, induced, as he has several
times publicly admitted, by the previous labours of Waghorn, took
up the work and with Pere Enfantin, suggested the idea in 1833
to Mahomet Ali the Pasha of Egypt, and urged its accomplish-
ment, The project was, however, as new to the people of the
Nineteenth as it was to those of the Sixteenth Century, and it still
seemed so impracticable that it would probably have been altogether
abandoned by Lesseps, had he not on being appointed as Consul-
General for France at Jamaica, obtained in 1857 the co-operation of
Sir Daniel Lange and through his enthusiastic support much
assistance from English capitalists. But it took over twenty-six
years from the initiation of the idea before arrangements could
be made for its commencement in 1859.
In the meantime, ruined in pocket and wrecked in health by
continued disappointments, Waghorn had died, and the only
public recognitions of his past services are the erection of a bust and
a statue of him, the first on “Waghorn Quay,” at the entrance
to Suez, and the other on Gibralter Hill at Chatham, his native
place. At the Unveiling of these Lesseps attended and publicly
admitted, “it was to Waghorn alone he was indebted for the
“ original idea of forming the Suez Canal.”


Prominence is now given to these facts, because honour should
be rendered where it is justly due ; because, anticipating possible
objections to the now proposed works, it is well to put on record
that the objections of even learned men are not always to be relied
on ; and further, because it is hoped that in these advanced times
the now proposed great works will not encounter a repetition of the
like indifference, or be permitted to be carried out by strangers.
But the troubles through which the success of the Suez Canal
was achieved have afforded encouragement and valuable suggestions.
Not the least of these is found in the fact that the prior construction
of “ The Alexandria and Suez Railway,” the “ Overland Route,” as
it was called, was of much service in developing a traffic which
ultimately passed over to the Suez Canal. And so that great and
most profitable work will, in like manner, aid the now proposed
Railway, because that large part of the Australian traffic of the Suez
-Canal, which demands a quicker route to and from Europe, must pass
■on to the Trans-Australian Railway.
It was only natural that a Ship Canal should first suggest
itself as the best means of avoiding the discomforts of a long
sea-voyage round the Cape and the saving of time in the delivery
of mails and goods. Shortly afterwards two other Ship Canals were
proposed by other projectors but to take a course from North to
South and subsequently a Trans-Continental Railway from Brisbane
to Port Darwin was proposed. Nothing came of such proposals,
and it was determined to adhere to the route from West to East as
the only one which could give quick transit to and from the great
markets of the World.
A Ship Canal and a Ship Railway were successively considered
and abandoned. Subsequently the construction of a Boat-canal
was thought out and also rejected, because even by the use of the
swiftest steam launches but little advantage would be gained as
against first-class steam vessels steaming round the coast.
The completion of the Suez Canal stimulated the projector to
the advancement of a new plan which by the union of a Railway with
a Canal would enable transit and irrigation to be carried out together
with much economy. The plan involves the construction of a
canal which having a width of about 10 feet 6 inches by a depth of
about 4 feet would serve the double purpose of carrying a sufficient
body of water to be obtained from reservoirs at a higher elevation,
to act as a feeder of subsidiary channels for irrigation and alternately
as the bed of a Railway, in the first place, of the ordinary type,
which could be safely worked at fifty or sixty miles an hour, and,
anticipating improvements which would be ultimately available, at a
speed of at least double that of the fastest locomotive.
But the general opinion inclined strongly to the impossibility
of finding water. In vain was it urged that every explorer, however
arid he had found some parts of the districts he had traversed, had
met with many oases, which indicated the near presence of water ;
that many fresh water lakes had been discovered and a considerable


number of springs which must be supplied from larger sources ;
that the presence of aboriginals, kangaroos, dingoes, emus and flocks
of birds of several kinds in many parts of the far and apparently water-
less interior, gave undoubted assurance that water was near and avail-
able to them who knew where to seek it; that as of the enormous floods,
of which aboriginals spoke and from which settlers so frequently
suffered, only a very small part found its way through the Murray
and other rivers to the ocean, the bulk of such floods together with
the entire rain-fall over an area half as large as Europe would be
found in subterranean reservoirs ; and that these stores, abundantly
sufficient to irrigate many millions of acres, only needed to be raised
to the surface. In vain were these matters urged. It was necessary
to let the projects rest.
Nor had they to wait long for confirmation. Early in 1874
information reached Australia of the services rendered by “Burleigh’s
Rock Drilling Machines ” and “ Beaumont and Appleby’s Diamond
Drill’s ” in sinking bores for the supply of artesian wells. At
length in 1879 the first artesian well was sunk in New South
Wales by private enterprise, and others were subsequently put down
with equal success. Nevertheless their undiminished flows of water
did not for a long time dissipate the fears generally entertained that
the supply would only suffice to water travelling stock and could not
be depended upon to give a sufficient supply for irrigation. Gradually
the large quantity which continued to be yielded year after year had
a reassuring effect, and the opinion so long entertained that Central
Australia was absolutely waterless suffered a change, and a belief in
the possibility of an extensive system of irrigation by means of
artesian wells began to be admitted.
These opinions were subsequently much strengthened by the
fact that Southern California, which, with a rainfall considerably less
than that of Australia, was in 1855 an unprofitable desert, had been
transformed by means of 4000 artesian wells into the greatest fruit-
producing country in the world.
And abundant confirmation of the soundness of the proposed
undertakings is found in the great works which the French have
entered into in Africa. These are in the main, identical with the
objects of this company, and they are being carried out under
conditions precisely similar to those presented in Central Australia.
The Romans during their occupation had utilized the vast reservoirs
of water beneath the sandy deserts of Africa for the purposes of
irrigation by means of ordinary wells. These being of small depth
did not reach the main water-bearins: strata, and having in course of
years become choked with sand, the settlements around had fallen
back into a state of aridity. The French, with better experiences,
have sunk hundreds of artesian wells to very great depths ; and using
the enormous supplies so obtained in the irrigation of the surround-
ing country, many villages on the point of being abandoned, are
now more flourishing than ever ; many new ones and thriving plan-
tations have also been formed and scores of others are contemplated.


Information shows that the condition of these once arid lands has
so improved and promises such future developments, that, precisely
on the plan here contended for as to Central Australia, a Railway
has been commenced from Algiers through the desert to Lake
Tchad, a distance of 1900 miles, and by sinking wells as they
proceed and forming plantations around them, millions of non-
productive acres have been, and many more will be, converted into
rich producing lands.
But a Railway through the sandy plains of Africa can never
offer a tithe of the profits which will be obtained by a Railway
across Australia from West to East. The one runs from a City of
no great importance for 1900 miles through lands, which though
irrigated, can only yield a limited traffic and its inland terminus at
Lake Tchad will still be in the desert. It starts from no great
centre of commerce and it reaches none. But of the route of “The
Trans-Australian Railway” not more than about 600 miles can be
said to be destitute of water and its terminii needing only short
extensions, to be within easy railway communication with Sydney,
Melbourne, Brisbane, Rockhampton, Adelaide and Perth and many
other thriving cities and settlements will afford direct access to all
the markets of Europe at a great saving of time and cost.
And the many doubts which opposed these projects thirty
years ago have been dissipated. Numerous explorers have since
shown that the interior of Australia is not a mere waterless desert.
Many experts believe that large areas have vast subterranean
reservoirs which can be utilized for irrigation ; the population, then
about 1,500,000, has increased to nearly 4,000,000 ; the inland
traffic then served by a few coaches and bullock-drays, now employs
over 10,000 miles of railway ; the water-borne traffic, which then
gave scanty freights to a tonnage, under 3,500,000 tons now
employs a tonnage exceeding 20,000,000 : the live stock
then numbering about 45,000,000 is now over 120,000,000 ;
the area under crop then under 2,000,000 has now increased to over
9,000,000 acres ; and the external trade then under £30,000,000
has now increased to about £150,000,000. It is 'worthy of remark
that a large part of these increases quickly followed the opening of
the Suez Canal and has greatly helped that company to pay annual
dividends of £lB per cent, and as a large part of its Australian
traffic, which is ever increasing, will, in consequence of the great
saving of time pass over “ The Trans-Australian Railway,” it
may reasonably be expected to net equally good profits upon an outlay
of £4,000,000, only one-fifth of the cost of the Suez Canal.
And it will do so, and more, when its own local traffic is
developed by means of irrigated settlements, fruit and other farms
and plantations of profit-giving trees along its route, hereinafter
more particularly described. Australia, possessing great advantages
in its seasons, which are the reverse of Europe, will be able to send
not only dried and canned, but fresh fruits by her central railway to
European markets in sixteen days and even less. This, and the


carrying of live cattle or chilled meat, for which a large demand
has sprung up in Europe, will bring a traffic, which, entirely new and
in excess of the traffic now passing through the Suez Canal, must
assure additional profits to the Trans-Australian Railway.
Under these promising circumstances the prospectus of “ The
Trans-Australian Railway and Irrigation and Transit Canals
Company Limited .” is now submitted to the public.
The objects of the Company which embrace works capable of
being dealt with and completed separately, yet so naturally connected,
that each will render considerable assistance to the others in their
profitable working, will probably be taken up and completed in the
following order ;
A. THE RAILWAY.
1. The construction of a Railway across a large part of the Continent
of Australia running either from Exmouth Gulf or the mouth
of the Gascoyne to Weld’s Springs, and thence to meet the
South Australian Northern line at some point near Charlotte
Waters Telegraph Station, or if the Queensland Government
extend their railway from Charleville to their own Western
boundary, then to join such extension at about that point
where its Western and Southern boundaries meet.
2. The sinking of Artesian Wells at stations along a large part of the
route of such Railway where no permanent springs or other surface
supplies can be found.
3. The formation of an Irrigated Settlement at each Terminus and
other Stations around each artesian well or other supply of
water,
4. The erection of Telegraph posts and wires along one side, and of
Telephone posts and wires along the other side of the Railway,
and of poles on each side to carry the overhead electric wires, if
such motive power should be adopted, alone, or in conjunction
with any other.
5. The planting of Fruit and Flower bearing vines and creepers at
the base of the Telegraph and Telephone posts, and the so
training of them by the use of wire netting and tappa as used_ in
India, over the railway, as to assist in modifying the surrounding
heat.
6. The planting of a strip of land on each side of the Railway with
fruit-bearing and ornamental shrubs and trees, and forest and
shelter trees on the outer sides, so that on growing up they may
afford a most agreeable and shady route.
B. THE MAIN IRRIGATION CANAL.
7. The construction of a main Irrigation Canal along a large part of
the route of such Railway.
8. The formation of reservoirs by utilising lakes or natural depressions
or by the construction of dams along the route of such Railway
and Main Irrigation Canal.
9. The sinking of such other Artesian Wells in addition to those to be
sunk for the use of the Railway 7 and its Settlements round
stations, as mentioned in objects 2 and 3, at frequent and as far
as possible equal distances along such Main Irrigation Canal, to
serve as feeders to such reservoirs and Canal.
8


The construction of distributing channels and other works and
the laying down of pipes for the conveyance of water from such
reservoirs and dams to such Canal, and thence for the purpose
of irrigating settlements founded or plantations made along
its course.
The supply of water for household or irrigation or other
purposes.
C. IRRIGATION COLONIZATION SETTLEMENTS.
The formation of Irrigation Settlements along the route of the
Railway round each of the Company’s wells or upon its own, or
other lands in aid of Colonization by the sale or leasing of such
lands.
The formation, planting, and management of farms and planta-
tions of Fruits, Flowers, Vines, Figs, Dates and other Farm,
Orchard and Garden produce ; Sorghum and Cane for Sugar:
Wheat, Millet, and other Cereals ; Tea, Coffee, Cinnamon, and
other Spices; Tobacco; and Olive, Wattle Bark, Cork, India-
rubber, Castor, Gutta-Percha, Camphor, Cotton, Timber, and
other profit-giving Shrubs and Trees ; and Horse-breeding. Sheep,
Cattle, and Ostrich Farms along the route of such Railway, on
lands belonging to the Company or to the Crown or other
owners.
13.
14.
The construction of distributing Channels along the route of such
Canal and the laying down of pipes and other irrigation works for
the supply of water for irrigation and other purposes.
The sale or leasing of its own lands.
The supply of Trees, Plants, Seeds, Agricultural Implements,
Machinery, Cattle, Carts, Drays and such other farming requisites
as may be needed by settlers.
The purchase from settlers of the Fruit and other produce of
their farms, saving them the cost and loss of time in sending the
same to long-distant markets.
The picking, grading, preparing for and sending to market the
Fruit and other produce grown on its own lands or purchased of
settlers.
The conveyance of live Stock, Fruit, Farm, Plantation and
Forest produce to market and for such purposes to charter such
passenger and cargo steamers as may be needed, to run between the
United Kingdom, France, Italy and other countries and the
North-Western Terminal port of the Company.
17.
D. IRRIGATION AND TRANSIT CANALS.
These works are only presented as forming part of that
complete system of Irrigation and Transit which should follow the
construction of the Railway and a Main Irrigation Canal, and they
may be carried out, length by length, by the Company for any
Government or for itself or any other Company.
20. The construction of one or more Canals to the North and of one
or more others to the South of the Main Irrigation Canal and
running parallel to and at about equal distances from it and from
each other, to be used for Transit as well as irrigation purposes.
21. The formation of Reservoirs by utilizing lakes or natural
depressions or by the construction of dams along the route of
such Canals.
9


22. 'lhe sinking of such Artesian bores along the route of each of
such Canals as may be required.
23. The construction of such distributing channels, and other works,
and the laying of such pipes as may be needed to convey water
from such reservoirs and dams to such Canals and thence for
the purposes of irrigating Settlements, Farms and plantations
along their route.
24. The supply of water for irrigation household or other purposes
along the route of such Canals.
25. The formation, planting and management of settlements along
the route of suoh Canals.
26. The erection of Telegraph and Telephone posts and wires along
the route of such Canals.
27. The construction of overhead or other Electric motive power
conductors along the course of such Canals.
28. The providing of steam, electric or other motive power launches,
barges and boats to run on, or railway carriages and vans to run
in, the beds of or above such canals.
29. The planting of Fruit and Flower bearing vines and creepers at
the base of the Telegraph, Telephone and overhead Electric power
poles and the so training them on wire netting as to afford shade
and coolness along the course of such Canals.
30. The planting of suitable fruit-bearing and ornamental shrubs and
trees backed by Forest and other Trees along the course of such
Canals for profit and shade.
31. The formation, planting and management of Farms and Planta-
tions of Fruits, Flowers and other farm, orchard, and garden
produce; and Wattle, Cork, India-rubber,Gutta-Percha, Camphor,
Olive, Date and Timber and other profit-giving shrubs and trees
along the course of such Canals.
32. The supply of Seeds, Plants, Trees, Agricultural Implements and
Machinery, Cattle, Carts, Drays, and Stores required by settlers.
33. The purchase of Fruit and other produce grown by settlers along
the course of such Canals and the grading, packing, conveyance to
European markets and sale of such produce.
E. WATER SUPPLY TO GOLDFIELDS.
34. The raising of sea water to Reservoirs and Condensers at such
elevations as will enable the Company to supply Gold Fields with
sea water, which is found to be well adapted for amalgamation and
sluicing purposes, and condensed and fresh water at higher rates.
THE TRANS-AUSTRALIAN RAILWAY.
In determining to push on its Railway first, the Company is
influenced by the fact that it is a work not necessarily connected
with its irrigation projects and the desire to become a dividend-paying
concern from a very early time. Besides this, it will afford an
economical means of obtaining that complete knowledge of the
country as to soil, natural supply of water and possible increase by
means of Artesian Wells, which is necessary in fixing the route of
the Canal.
Though the Company contemplates the construction ultimately
of a Railway which will be capable of crossing the Continent of
Australia to its north-western Coastal Terminus, in only as many
hours as it now takes days to voyage round the Coast, it will at
first only provide a Railway capable of carrying passengers and light
goods at from 30 to 50 miles an hour and wait for future develop-
ments to warrant the construction of a “ Lightning Express ”
10


capable of conveying passengers with perfect safety at 150 miles an
hour or more, and so reduce the journey from Sydney to London
now taking, as to passengers and mails via Suez and Brindisi,
27 to 21 days, and when specially constructed steamers are available,
to 16 days ; and as to heavy goods now taking 48, to 27 and,
■ultimately, 23 days.
But even at the lower speed the new route will not only con-
siderably reduce the time of transit according to the port of
departure on the Australian Coast, but afford means of diminishing
the sufferings, great indeed to many, of a long voyage by admitting
of the avoidance of over 6000 miles, —half the sea route to London, —
and of saving live stock, fruit and light goods from much of the
delay and injury now suffered in reaching a European market.
And besides these advantages, which would alone warrant the
construction of the heavy railway contemplated, it will afford great
assistance in its own construction. Pushed out simultaneously from
each terminus, every mile laid down will afford a ready means of
carrying materials from each terminus to extend its practicable
mileage both easterly and westerly, and as its rails and sleepers will
be prepared beforehand in lengths easily handled, leaving little work
to be done on the ground, except the fixing of the work so
prepared, a large number of miles will be laid down in a very short
time and with great economy.
As, however, the sinking of bores can alone determine where
the subterranean waters can be best reached the line of deviation
usually allowed in the construction of railways will have to be very
liberally extended.
GAUGE OF THE EAILWAY,
Though, having regard to the advantage, if great speed is to be
secured, of adopting a width of carriage which will offer as little
surface resistance to the atmosphere as possible, a very much
narrower gauge might be preferred, yet, regarding also the comfort
of passengers in so long a journey, and that being on table-land,
which is the nature of the route nearly all the way from terminus
to terminus, there would be little saving in adopting a gauge below
the English gauge of 4 feet 8-| inches, it has, therefore, been deter-
mined not to adopt a gauge below that. Sufficiently wide to rnn
carriages, sleeping cars and dining saloons having a width of 10 feet,
it will at the same time under the plan intended to be used in making
up each train, the motor being constructed so as to present a wedge
form in front, offer little resistance to the atmosphere, even at a
very high speed. But in regard to travelling at a speed now
frequently anticipated in proposals for
a “lightning” express,
its construction in a tunnel or deep cutting would secure safety and
the minimum of atmospheric resistance. These obvious facts have
suggested that the proposed Canal may be utilized alternately for
Railway as well as Irrigation purposes, as hereinafter is more
particularly explained.
11


ROUTE OF THE RAILWAY.
As the main objects are to secure the most direct route to
Eurone by way of the Suez Canal and avoid a long voyage round
the Coast of Australia, the western terminus will be in Exmouth
Gulf, at the extreme north-western point of the Continent. Starting
from this point, it will follow the course of the Ashburton River for
about 400 miles along its Southern bank, so as to avoid the bridging
of many rivers and creeks which flow from it on its northern bank.
It will run on from thence for about 80 miles south-easterly to the
north of the Weld Springs—a chain of magnificent springs of water
supplying a running creek of considerable length. These springs
and creek being surrounded by splendidly-grassed and slightly-
timbered land, present a most charming oasis. From this verdant
spot the line will proceed easterly along about the 25 degree of South
latitude through a long stretch of level, desert country for about
150 miles, presenting in all directions an ocean of spinifex on
gently undulating land, and thence passing south-easterly through a
country level as the sea and still clothed with spinifex for another
100 miles, will run still easterly, but inclining a little more southerly
through another stretch of country for another 150 miles, consisting
of sandhills timbered slightly with desert oaks and occasional
patches of mulga mallee and grevillia, will proceed for about another
80 miles to the eastern boundary of West Australia, and thence
still passing easterly but still more southerly to just above the 26
degree of south latitude, will continue for about 75 miles further
through a magnificent country of rich soil covered with grass, vetch,
geraniums, and wild flowers of every hue, and still passing on east-
ward but slightly more southerly will traverse for another 50 miles
through a stretch of splendid flat country well grassed and having a
rich brown soil ; and still proceeding for about 255 miles easterly,
but to the north of Mount Charles, Fraser’s Wells, Mitchell’s
Nob and Mount Cameron and slightly to the south of Mount
Cavenagh on a line a little above the 26 degree of south latitude,
will cross the Trans-Continental Overland Telegraph line at Charlotte
Waters station and may there, at a distance of 1360 miles from its
coastal terminus, but reckoned herein as 1400, make its inland
terminal station, if the South Australian Government extends its
Northern Overland Railway to that point. In such case there will
be railway communication right through, to and from the Trans-
Australian Railway terminus in Exmouth Gulf and Adelaide,
Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane and Rockhampton along a course of
about 4500 miles, of which 3000 are now in working. If it makes
its inland terminus at Charlotte Waters Station the cost of
constructing about 200 miles of Railway and Canal will be saved.
But if Queensland, to secure a more direct route, saving many
hundreds of miles, extends its railway from Charleville to its
western boundary, the Trans-Australian Railway will continue its
route easterly to meet such extension, from just above the head of
Finck’s Creek, to avoid the numerous channels into which that creek


A MAP OF AUSTRALASIA.
Showing the Route of the Proposed Trans-Australian Railway, with probable
extensions to the principal Railways of
Australia, by which quick transit will be secured between its Western Coastal
Terminus and New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia,
Queensland, New Zealand, and Tasmania.
13


breaks in its southerly course, for a further distance of 200 miles to
unite with such Queensland line and there fix its inland terminus.
Power will be reserved to adopt an alternative route between
the North-western Coast and the Weld Springs, starting from Port
Whitmore, at the'mouth of the Gascoyne, instead of from Exmouth.
Gulf. This route, indicated thus on the annexed map, would
reduce the length of the railway by about 100 miles, and secure-
good harbourage and shipping accommodation already developed,,
and at a point within easier reach of the settled districts of the
Western Coasts than is Exmouth Gulf. If a further survey
should confirm the report that it offers an equally favourable route
in other respects, it may be preferred.
Each route offers through its entire length one of the easiest
lines of Eailway ever presented. It is practically a level, with no-
rivers, few creeks and no flooded country to cross. It therefore
opposes no engineering or other difficulties of construction. Being
only slightly timbered at a few parts and at others only covered by
spinifex, mulga, mallee, scrub and wild flowers, just sufficient to
show how fruitful it will be when under irrigation, it will present no
difficulties in clearing. And as the sinking of artesian wells along
its route and the collection of the waters so obtained, and from the
overflow of rivers and creeks into reservoirs for the supply of the
Main Irrigation Canal will act as drains of large volume, the whole
route will be always dry and require little ballast.
SPECIAL IMPEOVEMENTS IN CONSTEUCTION.
A journey of 1400 miles within the Tropics and through a
country for the most part barren would be extremely trying to
passengers and live stock, except under the special arrangements
which will be adopted.
The carriages will be constructed as much as possible of non-
conducting materials and with double roofs. A high speed will
cause cool streams of air to pass through fine gauze ventilators
covered with tappa kept moist by an axitomatic contrivance. The
telegraph and telephone poles will also carry lattice-work or wire-netting
stretched overhead across the line as a support Tor vine¥~arrd"creepers.'
The coolness induced and the shade given by these means will be greatly
increased as trees planted along each side of the line attain a sufficient
height. By these means the surrounding temperature of the
carriages will even at midday be less than that now endured in a
passage through the Eed Sea, and, indeed, less than that now suffered
in journeys through the pastoral districts of the several colonies.
COST OF THE EAILWAY.
Considering that as the route will be all the way on tableland
without timber or other obstructions, the cost of clearing will be very
trifling ; that, being a surface line, but little excavations or
embankments will be necessary; that, as until settlement has
developed, fencing will only be required near stations ; that, as the
soil is mostly sandy and generally without surface water, there will


be little need of drainage works or ballasting; that, as until
settlement greatly increases, there will be no need for level crossings ;
that accommodation gates will only be required at stations ; that,
as except at parts approaching each terminus there are no streams
or creeks to cross, there will be little need of culverts or bridges ;
that, as the traffic will for a long time be mostly a through traffic,
the stations may be of the most simple kind, as also the bungalow
residences for officials ; and, as the imperishable timbers of the
country will be largely used in construction and no payment will
have to be made for land, it is estimated that the permanent way of
the line can be most soundly constructed with 60 lb. steel rails for
£ISOO a mile. Having regard to the great length of the line,
calculated at 1600 miles, and that at first but few trains will be run,
it is estimated that the Rolling Stock, whether consisting of Steam
or Electric or other motors, as hereinafter described, and the neces-
sax-y carriages, saloons, sleeping cars, waggons and trucks can be
liberally provided at £SOO per mile ; that the Telegraph and
Telephone poles, with all necessary equipments and the lattice-work
or wire-netting as before described, can be put up for £l5O per
mile ; that sufficient Artesian Wells in aid of natural springs and
creeks can be sunk and sufficient dams constructed for £75 a mile ;
that the small settlements to be formed round each station, and
the planting of a strip of land along each side of the Railway, as
beforementioned, can be done for £25 per mile ; that the extra
poles required for the overhead electric-power wires can be put up
for £IOO per mile ; that the Terminal buildings, stations, paddocks
for cattle in transit, and proposed settlements can be completed for
£SO a mile—making a total of £2400 per mile, and allowing
£160,000 for parliamentary and other expenses and contingencies a
Railway capable of carrying the heaviest traffic at the highest
attainable speed can be fully completed for £4,000,000, averaging
£2500 a mile.
The saving of time in transit to and from Europe and
the other advantages offered by this line to the Merchants,
Pastoralists and Farmers of Australia and the Merchants and
Manufacturers of the United Kingdom makes it well-deserving of
the guarantee of the Imperial and Australian Governments of a
minimum dividend of £3 per centum per annum. Such a guarantee
would ensure the support of capitalists and its early construction.
MOTIVE POWER.
The working of a Railway having a run of about 1600 miles,
along 1000 of which the country has little wood or surface water,
and near which no coal or shale or oil springs have yet been
discovered, presents some difficulties. But, happily, they are not
insurmountable.
It seems, after much consideration, that provision for motive
power will best be made by the joint employment of Steam and
Electricity. And particularly so because Steam can not only be
used alone and as a means of producing electric power, but because
15


the possible temporary failure of one of such powers would be
readily met by the use of the other, and further, because the two
powers can be used together with very economical results. Thus,
Steam may be employed alone when low or moderate speed is
sufficient. But 'steam or the vapour of petroleum generated on a
Locomotive, and employed to generate electricity by means of an
adjacent dynamo to turn the axles of such Locomotive and by
connections made therewith to turn the axles of the carriages which
form the train will be found a very economical way of providing
electric power, which will enable the Railway to be worked at a
speed of even 150 miles an hour.
The economy of such a combination of powers is exhibited in
the fact that while it takes about 6lbs. of coal to generate sufficient
steam to transmit a power equal to that of one horse to the axles of a
locomotive it takes only 41bs. to produce and transmit the same
power, if, instead of its being employed directly to the Locomotive,
it is used to cause the revolution of a dynamo to generate electricity.
There is, therefore, a saving of one-third in the cost and weight of the
coal to be used and carried, a fact of much consequence having regard
to the working expenses of the Railway and the carriage of coal to
depots along such a great length of mileage. But a further economy
can be secured by the use of the Petroleum Oil Engine. It is
found that when the vapour of oil is used instead of Steam produced
from coal to generate electricity, it will produce at least equal results
at a saving which reduces the cost of traction by about another
third.
But while providing, as is only prudent in a line of such great
length, against the possibility of a temporary failure of either of such
motive powers, the overhead system of electrical traction will be also
used and the motive power transmitted thereto from storages of
electricity produced at each station by dynamos worked most
economically by water, where a sufficient fall can be obtained, or,
still more economically, by windmills, which, there are reasons for
thinking, will be capable of supplying sufficient power without other
means and at little cost.
ITS VALUE FOR DEFENCE PURPOSES.
The importance of “ The Trans-Australian Railway ” for
defence purposes should enlist the support of every Australian and
ought to secure the substantial assistance of the Governments of
the Australian Colonies and the Mother Country also. It would
not only enable troops to be conveyed to or from the United
Kingdom or to or from India with much saving of time, but give
an unbroken line of railway communication of upwards of 4000
miles, as before shown, from its North-western Terminus to
Adelaide, Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane and Rockhampton and to
Perth and Albany by a short extension to their Murchison line.
With such facilities of transit, troops could be collected and
conveyed within a few hours to any point on the settled coast line of
Australia at which an attack is threatened or made. And in the
16


event of any advance, inland from its Northern Coast, which in
consequence of its non-settlement is especially open to attack, it
would enable the concentration of its Federal troops in a prompt
advance to meet the enemy, and so, unless attacked simultaneously
at several places, which is unlikely, it would enable a small army to
be as effective as a much larger one.
THE MAIN IRRIGATION CANAL.
The Railway being completed, the Company will engage in the
construction of its Main Irrigation Canal and the Reservoirs and
other Works connected therewith. Aline of Artesian Wells will
be sunk and reservoirs constructed to the northward of the Railway
and the Canal will be built up along the surface line of the Railway
with a width of about 10 feet 6 inches and a depth of 4 feet, so that
the Railway, when the Canal is completed, will run between its
walls as railways run in railway stations between the platforms.
The carriages will be of the saloon kind, access being obtained
by steps down instead of up. The weight of the carriage and its
passengers or other load being thus brought close to the rails and
about one-third of each carriage, counting from the base of its
wheels, being below the surrounding soil, it will be possible to run
the Railway at high speed without any fear of lifting or derailment.
The walls of the Canal, having regard to economy and despatch
in construction, will be constructed chiefly of wood, on a plan which
will give great strength and facility of construction.
The contour of the country will enable the construction of the
Canal without locks, or otherwise its dual service as a Railway and
sometimes as an Irrigation Canal would be impracticable. As an
Irrigation Canal it will only need to be employed from time to time
and along small lengths of it. For such purposes each length will
be easily convertible by means of removeable sluices into so many
temporary reservoirs. And this arrangement will work excellently
well in the dual purposes for which the Canal will be used—at one
time as an Irrigation Canal and at another as the bed of the Railway.
Nor will these arrangements in any way interfere with each other.
In a line of such great length but few through trains will be run in
each week, and as irrigation will only be required during about one-
third of each year, and then only on alternate nights, and as all
discharges for the purpose of irrigation will only occupy about
two hours, the Canal will be mostly available for use as a Railway.
Moreover, as working the line at great speed will develop great
heat in the rails, axles and tyres, the fact of its being also a Canal
will permit of a few inches of water being always left in the Canal
to keep such parts in a proper state of coolness.
Contemporaneously with the construction of the Canal, length by
length, the Company, in addition to the Artesian Wells, which will
have been previously constructed for the use of the Railway and the
limited settlements round each station, will construct such other
wells and reservoirs as shall be necessary to furnish a sufficient
supply for periodical irrigations.
17


The construction of distributing channels will be a matter
between the Company and the occupier of the lands to be irrigated,
and the cost, together with the charges for water supplied, must be
paid by such occupier.
As settlement extends, wells will be required in Central
Australia at intervals of every few miles. At some parts but few
and at others none will be needed. In the estimates presented it
is assumed that there will be an artesian well every six or seven
miles through the waterless part of the route.
COST OF THE CANAL.
Considering the sandy nature of the soil in some parts, it will
probably be desirable to slab the walls of the Canal with Timber.
It is estimated that this can be done for £l5OO a mile, or even less.
The earthworks, which are hardly entitled to be so described,
consisting as they will, the Railway being separately provided
for, of only the labour required in backing up the slabbed parts
with soil, should not cost more than £4OO a mile, and the cost
of sluice gates at every quarter of a mile to economise in the use
of water, estimated to cost £lOO per mile, will bring the cost of
the Canal up to £2OOO a mile. To this will have to be added
the cost of 20 additional wells as before mentioned, and of a
dam or reservoir attached to each, and of channels to run
the water into the Canal when irrigation is required. These
additional works, which will be only sunk or constructed as demands
for irrigation arise, are estimated to cost £3OO a mile, which
sum, with the liberal sum of £2OO a mile for contingencies, will
bring the total cost of the Canal to £2500 a mile, making a
total cost, reckoning the length as 1400 miles, of £3,500,000.
SUPPLY OF WATER FOR CANAL.
It is not thought necessary to present the mass of information
which has been collected on this point. It will be sufficient to
submit the conclusions which have been arrived at from numerous
reports obtained from the authorities of the several Colonies :
The very limited plantations of vines, creepers, and fruit and shade
trees along the sides of the Railway comprising one acre for garden, orchard,
and paddock at each station, and one square rood back on each side of the
Railway, reckoning the waterless part at 1,000 miles, will amount to an
area of about 600 acres. Calculating w ith allowance for evaporation and
other waste every inch of water over the surface of an acre to be equal to
25,000 gallons, and that irrigation will be required to the extent of six
inches for, say, 100 days, the whole area will need 9,000,000,000 gallons a
year.
The irrigation of the paddocks at each terminus for horses, cattle and
sheep which, having been travelled long distances across country, may need
time, feed and water, to recover their condition before transit on the
Railway or shipment, will consume a large quantity of water if the “Trans-
Australian Railway ” be as extensively adopted as is anticipated. Assuming
each sheep to require two gallons and each head of cattle ten gallons, a
18


day, and suppose the Company to be called upon to convey 500,000 sheep
to the port of shipment in each year, and has always 10,000 in course of
transit, they will need 7,300,000 gallons a year. And, supposing it conveys
100,000 cattle and horses to the port of shipment, and has always 2,000 in
course of transit, they would also consume 7,300,000 gallons, making
altogether 14,600,000 gallons a year while in transit alone. And as each
sheep needs one acre, and a horse or other head of cattle five acres, to feed
on, the same numbers constantly in paddock would require 20,000 acres to
be be kept in grass, and such area would require irrigation to the extent of
twelve inches for 100 days, and consume 600,000,000,000 gallons a year.
The model townships to be founded by the Company along the route
of the Railway and Canal would present increasing demands ; but assuming
five settlements —one at each terminus; one about midway, and two others
at approved spots—each settlement to comprise at first only 640 acres,
making in all 3,200 acres, cut up into 120 fruit and other farms and canning
and preserving factories, together with provision for irrigating a small
public park, the filling of swimming and other baths, and the irrigation of
shade trees along the sides of the streets ; and assuming that ten inches iof
water would be required—though six inches are found sufficient on many
such estates in Southern California —it would take 250,000 gallons per acre
(equal to 80,000,000,000 gallons for the whole 3,200 acres), and, say,
with provision for such parks, baths, and domestic purposes,
100,000,000,000 gallons a year.
The supply of water for the irrigation of the proposed plantations of
caoutchouc, wattle-bark, cork, camphor, olive, date, cacao, cinnamon and
other fruit, spice and timber trees and shrubs, made by or on behalf of
the Government of any Colony through which the Canal may pass or by
this or any other Company must obviously depend upon the extent of such
operations. But assuming such plantations to be made over an area of 3
miles beyond the Railway line and the run through the so-called waterless
route to be 1200 miles, such area would comprise 3600 square miles or
2,304,000 acres. Assuming, as Forest plantations, except at starting, do
not need so much water as Fruits or Cereals, that 5 inches or 125,000 gallons
would be sufficient for each acre, the whole area, if irrigated during 100
days in each year, would consume 28,800,000,000,000 gallons.
A summation of the quantity of water which will be needed in
each year for all the foregoing purposes shows a total of a little over
29,000,000,000,000 gallons a year, a quantity which can be
assuredly obtained, even in the central district, as hereafter is shown.
There are three sources of supply:—(l.) By drawing from the
rivers and creeks which run sufficiently near to the course of the
Canal in the north-west and south-east. (2.) By catchment
reservoirs of rain, natural springs, and other surface waters which
may be secured along its course. (3.) By sinking such artesian
wells on its northern side as may be found necessary.
The supply from rivers will have to be drawn in the north-west from
the “ Ashburton ” and possibly from the “ Gascoyne.” These are powerful
streams, flowing for about 400 miles and having great breadth, depth and
velocity of water.
The supply from rivers flowing into the south-east can be drawn from
that enormous volume of water brought down by the Diamentina, the
Thompson, the Barcoo, the Paroo, the Warrego and numerous other
smaller streams, of which about one-tenth passes on through Lake
Mackillop into Lake Eyre and so to the ocean, while the rest spreads out
into numerous creeks and lakes, or finally sinks into the soil over thousands
of square miles of the interior.
19


It is estimated that any river having a mean width of 200 feet and an
ordinary summer level of 30 feet, when the water may be calculated to
travel at the rate of one foot a second, sends every 24 hours at least
3,000,000,000 gallons of water to the ocean, and that this output scarcely
equals a tenth'part of the actual overflow in times of flood. In other
words, it would be possible to draw 30,000,000,000 gallons a day from
any river of such a volume without diminishing its usefulness along its
course, and with much advantage in the prevention of devastating floods.
The average capacity and velocity of all these rivers exceed these
limited estimates. It would be possible to draw from “ The Ashburton ”
and “ The Gascoyne ” at least 6,000,000 000 gallons a day, and from the
overflow of the Diamentina, the Thompson, the Barcoo, the Paroo, and
the Warrego and other smaller streams at least five times that volume, or
30,000,000,000 gallons a day, and reckoning flood-time to last only 60 days,
it would be possible to pass into storage, from these sources alone, the
enormous volume of 2,160,000,000,000 gallons, without taking any account
of the overflow and ordinary rainfall which soaks into the adjacent soil.
But the total amount of water available in any country must depend
upon, and is better shown by, an estimate of its rainfall. This varies in
Australia from about 10 to 65 inches. The total area of the Continent
comprises 1,884,562,320 acres. Assuming that 884,562,320 acres represent
those parts extending from the coast inland which have the largest rain-
fall, and averaging this at 30 inches a year, and calculating each inch as
only equal to 20,000 gallons an acre, the volume of rainfall in these
favoured districts is equal to 530,737,338,000,000 gallons ; and estimating
the central area as 1,000,000,000 acres, and to have an average rainfall
of only 200,000 gallons on each acre, which is considerably less than
10 inches, a volume of rain equivalent to 200,000,000,000,000 gallons, must
also annually sink into the soil and swell the stores of water to be drawn
upon by means of artesian wells.
These totals show the enormous annual rainfall of over
730,000,000,000,000 of gallons, which, less the amount flowing in
rivers, in waste to sea, and lost by evaporation, sinks beneath the
soil, and is enough—more than enough, if conserved or drawn to
the surface—to convert the whole of Central Australia into verdant
pastures, fruitful farms, pi'ofitable plantations and blooming gardens.
And it is, therefore, obvious that in case of any difficulty arising
with any Government as to obtaining supplies from any river,
artesian wells will supply all the water required.
ADDITIONAL IRRIGATION AND TRANSIT CANALS.
These Canals, though forming no part of the works now
proposed to be carried out, will constitute an important part of that
complete irrigation system under which it is believed the whole of
Central Australia may be gradually redeemed from its present
unprofitable condition. The proposed system would comprise five
or seven irrigation Canals, of which the Main Irrigation Canal
would be the central one. All these should run as nearly as the
contour of the country will permit from east to west two or three
being constructed to the north and two or three to the south of and
all, as nearly parallel to the Main Irrigation Canal as circumstances
will allow and connected with each other by Subsidiary Canals,
from which smaller channels will distribute water for irrigation.


Besides their incalculable services in the proposed system of
irrigation these Main Canals will afford a means of easy and
economical transit by electric launches and barges along many
thousands of miles in the interior of Australia.
But how, it may be asked, can water be found to supply these
additional Canals ? The answer is, that beyond the sources already
shown to be far, very far, in excess of the supply which will be
needed by the Main Irrigation Canal, there are other sources in the
north and south from which, with the concurrence of Queensland
and South Australia, all the necessary supply could be drawn, not
only without injury, but with much advantage to each Colony in
preventing destructive floods A flood is only more water in one
place than it can profitably use. Permit all surplus water to flow
away to where it is needed and it is of more value than gold.
It is not, however, now necessary to pursue these proposals any
further. They are only mooted as pointing the way to that com-
plete development of Central Australia by means of irrigation under
one common design, which could be best carried out by the same
Company, gradually, length by length, over a period (it may be) of
one or more decades.
PROFITS OF THE RAILWAY.
Interest on the outlay of £4,000,000 at £7 per cent, per
annum, a rate which ought to satisfy investors, would amount to
£280,000, and allowing half of the receipts for working expenses, a
very large proportion, considering the great length of the line and
that but few trains will be run until traffic requires more, it would
take an income of £560,000 to pay such £7 per centum and
expenses. Can the Railway yield such an income ?
It will not fail to do so. A railway has ever been the most
active means of settlement and traffic. But, besides the settle-
ment and traffic which the proposed line cannot fail to develop in
passing through 1600 miles of new country, it will assuredly be
quickly adopted as the direct route between Australia and Europe,
affording as it will a saving of many days and many thousands of
miles now wasted in the transit of passengers, mails, and light
goods round the Australian coast. Considering that there are at
least 80,000 passages now made annually between Europe and
Australia, that a subsidy of £170,000 is now paid for the convey-
ance of mails, and that quick transit must develop a very extensive
live cattle, fruit, and farming produce trade, it offers the best
assurances of an increasingly large traffic.
Of the trade between Australia and Europe, about 600,000
tons, is conveyed through the Suez Canal to Albany, Adelaide,
Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane for local consumption or tranship-
ment to other ports. How, if only one-tenth of this tonnage
(60,000 tons—a very low estimate) is sent by “The Trans-Australian


Railway,” it would, at the rate of one penny per ton per mile, yield
freights to the extent of over £400,000, which, allowing £160,000
for working expenses, will pay a dividend of £6 per centum on an
outlay of £4,000,000.
But this estimate does not include the passengers who voyage
to and from Australia by the Suez Canal. These amount up to at
least 15,000 a year each way, making 30,000 voyages. And if the
number of passengers be only doubled, and they will soon be quin-
tipled, when the fact is realized that a journey to and from Europe
can be made in sixteen days, then at least 40,000 may be expected
in each year to avail themselves of the speed and comforts of a
journey across the continent of Australia in a Railway saloon. And
if, of these, 20,000 journeys are made at the through rate of £l5
(equivalent to two pence farthing a mile for first-class), and 20,000
at £lO (equivalent to one penny half-penny a mile for second-class),
the total fares would amount to £500,000 a year, which sum,
allowing over 44 per cent, for working expenses, would pay a further
dividend of £7 per cent.
But, besides these items, as conveyance by this Railway from
its inland terminus across the continent of Australia will enable
cattle and sheep to be conveyed by swift steamers from its north-
western coastal terminus and landed in the United Kingdom and
other parts of Europe for about £4 10s. a head, and in .less time
than from the Argentine States, or probably under arrangements
in progress, by Railway through France in 16 days, for about
£7 a head, a very large traffic in cattle to Europe is certain
to be secured. And conveyance of horses to India, where
some thousands are needed annually for remounts, is also
sure to be sought. As the demand for meat in Europe is now
over £40,000,000 a year, and the reduced time of transit, by saving
the cost of fodder and water which would be otherwise needed in a
long voyage round the Australian coast, will not only permit of
low freights but avoid, by a Railway journey, the loss of weight and
condition inseparable from a long voyage, a very large part of this
traffic, which promises to be continuously increasing year by year,
will, doubtless, pass by rail. But, assuming that only 100,000
bullocks and 500,000 sheep—about one-sixth of the live-stock
required—are conveyed, the bullocks at a charge of £1 10s., and
the sheep at a charge of 35., per head, the freights so earned
amounting to £225,000, and with the freight on, say, 10,000 horses
at £3 per head to £255,000, would, allowing £115,000 for
working expenses, pay a further dividend of £3|- per cent.
But, besides all this external through traffic, which is certain
to increase, there are other demands in Europe for fruits—fresh,
canned, and dried—butter, eggs, fowls, and other farm produce,
which, if quick transit were available, would fast develop into a very
extensive trade, and yield a further dividend of at least £1 per
centum. And it is very probable that, as it is winter in Australia
when it is summer in Europe, a large through traffic may be


ultimately established for the supply in Australia of the surplus
produce of Europe, each hemisphere being enabled by this railway
to supply the other with such fresh fruits and other produce as may
be out of season in its own area.
And to all these sources of profit the Company, being able to
diminish the time now occupied in the delivery of mail matter by
one-half, will have an unquestionable right to a fair share of the
subsidy of £170,000 now paid by the Imperial and Australian
Governments to other companies. Measured by the time saved,
half of this sum should be allowed ; but, assuming only £70,000
to be voted, deducting £lO,OOO for expenses, it would give a further
dividend of £l|- per cent., and bring the total dividends on through
traffic alone, between Europe and Australia, up to £l9 per cent, on
an outlay of £4,000,000.
But this estimate takes no account of the purely local inland
traffic which must come to the Railway, and be increased by settle-
ments which will assuredly develop along its route, considering
that it will be in direct communication with all the present settled
districts of Australia, and consequently with all its pastoral farming
and mining traffic ; that, as the Murchison and Ashburton goldfields
will be more readily reached by this Railway than by coastal steamers,
it cannot be unreasonable to estimate that much of the stores and
machinery which will be required on such inexhaustable gold-fields
will be forwarded from the southern or eastern colonies along about
1,200 miles of the Railway. Considering that such stores and
machinery will be able to pass from Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne,
or Adelaide, to the Murchison or Ashburton districts in a tenth part
of the time they could be sent by coastal ship, and at less freight and
charges, it cannot be an over estimate to count upon 1,000 tons a
week being ultimately so sent; and this, at one penny per ton per
mile, will give freights to the amount of £260,000 ; and if £lOO,OOO
be allowed for working expenses, the balance will give a further
dividend of £4 per centum, making £23 per centum in all.
But these estimates do not include the passenger fares of those
commercial, mining and other persons who may be expected to avail
themselves of a Railway which will enable them to pass to and from
the commercial and mining districts of the eastern and western
halves of the Continent of Australia with comfort and dispatch. It
is not too much to expect that the thousands who now pass in ships
will quickly increase to tens of thousands when they can accomplish
the journey in a few hours in place of many days and much suffering
at sea. But assuming that only 50,000 journeys are made by this
route to and from the El Dorado of Western Australia, these at the
low charge of £7 10s, equivalent to one penny halfpenny, a mile for
say, 1200 miles, to or from the inland terminus of the Railway, will
give fares amounting to £375,000 a year, which, allowing £175,000
for working expenses will leave a balance of £200,000 capable of
paying a further dividend of £5 per centum, making in all a profit
of £2B per centum on the Railway traffic alone. Of this very


large return, of which £l9 per centum is estimated as resulting from
its external or foreign through traffic and £9 per centum from its
local traffic, it is only fair to note that all calculations have been
based upon very low estimates of passenger, produce, goods, cattle
and other freights, and that the prospect of such large profits is mainly
due to the small cost at which the Railway can be constructed.
PROFITS OF THE IRRIGATION CANAL.
To the foregoing estimates of the profits which the Railway
may be expected to yield must now be added the profits which will
be secured by irrigation. These profits will arise out of charges for
water supplied to two extensive settlements—one at each terminus ;
to several other smaller ones which may be founded by the Govern-
ments of the Colonies through which the Canal will pass or by this
this and other companies to the extent of about 500,000 acres and
cut up into fruit or other farms for sale to or rental by settlers, or
into plantations of profit-giving trees and shrubs adapted to a
tropical climate.
Of these may be specially noted the Caoutchouc, or India-rubber, and
the Gutta Pereha trees, each of which is getting scarce in consequence of
large demands ; the Wattle, for the bark of which there is a never-failing
sale ; the Cork tree also getting scarce ; the Camphor tree valuable for its
gum and timber, and no longer abundant; the Olive, valuable for its
fruit and oil; the Date Palm, affording food, wine, fodder, timber fuel and
various domestic articles ; Grapes, for wines, or as fresh fruits or dried as
raisins and currants ; Pigs, Citrons, Lemons and Oranges; Wheat and
Milet, for food; Cane and Sorghum for sugar; the Castor tree for oil;
Cinnamon Cassia and other spice-bearing shrubs ; Tobacco, for which the
climate is admirably adapted ; and the Jarrah and other native timber
trees, which will, besides yielding large profits, afford shade for Vines and
the Cotton, Cacao, Coffee,Tea, Mulberry and other tropical shrubs and trees
which, together with sericulture, will flourish under such protection.
As to the profits which may be so made, it affords great
encouragement to know that several large schemes of irrigation have
already passed through the stage of experiment to the gratifying
position of acknowledged success.
In India, which is now irrigated from end to end, with the natural result
of a certainty as to the profitable growth of crops where all before was
precarious or impossible ; and with great increases in the quantities, and
much improvement in the qualities, and consequently in the value of
property.
In South California, where wuth a rainfall only half that of Australia,
the success of irrigation has been marvellous. In 1873 a mere desert, if
has become the largest fruit-producing country in the world and the value of
land has risen to from £2O to £2OO an acre. It is further worthy of notes
as touching the prevailing desire of Australians to prefer city to country
life, that the advantages which can be secured by the cultivation of a
small block of land, aided by the inviting manner in which fruit settle-
ments in Southern California have been laid out for residence, with broad
streets bordered with the choicest shade trees; every house having its
beautiful and well-kept garden, with ample provisions for physical,
mental and artistic enjoyments in a public library, assembly room, concert
room and theatre, gymnasium, billiard-room, tennis court, swimming baths,


park, churches and schools; every house and store and building being
lighted by electricity and the whole surrounded by orchards and vineyards
without end, offers that combination of the social advantages of the city
with those of the country, that thousands have come to prefer the healthier
life of the city farm.
In Arizona, in the United States, with the result that its once dreaded
desert has been reclaimed in like manner.
In Africa, where as before described, though rain only falls at intervals
of five or sometimes ten, and even twenty years, the enormous desert of
Sahara is being fast covered by thriving settlements by means of irrigation
supplied by artesian wells.
And in the younger and consequently less-advanced irrigation
settlements at Mildura, Malvern and other places in Victoria, and at
Renmark, in South Australia, where the results achieved in India,
California and Africa are being fully realised.
In California fruit-farming ordinarily yields about £lOO an acre. In
Victoria, irrigated fruit and vegetable gardens near to Melbourne yield over
£l5O an acre under a supply of only 6J inches of water and at a charge of
£8 an acre and authorities state that the profits could afford to pay double
that rate and more.
What has been accomplished in India, California and Africa
can surely be done in Central Australia, where the rainfall is greater,
more general, and more frequent.
And if it be objected that irrigation will stimulate production far
beyond demand, the fact that Tea, Coffee, Wool, Cotton, Silk, Fruit, Wine,
Wheat, Cheese, Butter, Sugar, Meat, Timber, Tobacco, Spices and other
produce, all of which can be grown in Australia, are imported by the
Mother Country to the value of £300,000,000, of which less than
£60,000,000 is supplied by the Colonies, it is obvious that with the aid of a
railway which will save many days in transit, and therefore much charges
for freight, a very large part of the demand now supplied by foreign coun-
tries could and would be supplied by Australia.
Aud if it be urged that a railway of such great length and a system of
irrigation so extensive will take many years to complete, the answer is,
that the Railway being a surface one, could be put in running order within
a year, and the Irrigation Canal within three years ; and further, that
every mile of each, as completed from each terminus, wmuld as fast as
completed be able to earn dividends.
And if it be urged that the quantity of land which such a length of
Canal would be capable of irrigating—say about 5,000,000 of acres—could
not be sold, leased, or otherwise employed for many years to come, the
answer is that, as under less inviting conditions over eight millions are now
under cultivation in Australia, her rapidly-increasing population, and the
thousands who will be attracted from the mother country will absorb all
such irrigated lands as fast as the works are completed.
And if it be urged that it is a folly to attempt to reclaim a desert
track of 1,200 miles, or even to run a railway through it, the answers are :
that the same objections were raised against the like reclamation of the
enormous deserts of California and Arizona, yet they have been reclaimed,
and chiefly by the aid of artesian wells. They are deserts no longer, and
such will soon be the case with the great desert of Sahara, since by means
of artesian wells vast subterranean reservoirs are being utilized for irriga-
tion, under which system flourishing settlements are being fast established
along a Railway of over 1,900 miles, and there, in the desert of Africa, as
this Company proposes to do in Australia, the construction of a railway
and works of water conservation, irrigation, planting, and settlement, are
proceeding together, one work helping the other, and leading there, as it
has in America and will in Australia, to the effacement of the word
“ desert” on the maps of three continents.


The profits of the Canal depending upon the demands made
for water, the charge while such demands are small, will have to be
fixed at a high rate. Assuming a demand of 12 inches, for double
crops, for only 50,000 acres, the charge would probably be £lO per
acre. This would produce an income of £500,000, which, allowing
£150,000 for expenses of distribution—a very liberal allowance—
would pay a dividend of £lO per cent. When the demand extends
to 75,000 acres, the charge would, probably, be reduced to £9 an
acre ; when the supply is required for 100,000 acres, if the charge
be reduced to only £8 per acre, it would, even then, yield £BOO,OOO,
which, allowing £lBB,OOO for expenses, would pay a dividend of
£l7| per cent. When the supply is required for 150,000 acres,
the charge could be reduced to £7 an acre ; when to 200,000 acres,
to £6 per acre; and when to 250,000 acres, to £5 per acre, at
which rate, allowing £200,000 for expenses, it would yield a net
dividend of £3O per cent. ; and when the supply extends to 500,000
acres, the water rates, amounting to £2,500,000, would, allowing
£400,000 for expenses, pay the enormous dividend of £6O per cent.
These profits will, possibly, seem to be improbable ; but there
is, perhaps, no undertaking which affords such immense returns as
irrigation works, because every increase in the number of acres to
to be watered is chiefly profit.
PROFITS OF WATER SUPPLIES TO GOLD FIELDS.
And very large profits will also assuredly be made by the
Supply of Sea Water to the Gold Fields, because not only is the
source of supply (the Ocean) inexhaustible, but, as the suitability
of sea Avater for gold amalgamation purposes has been proved by its
use in New Zealand and many other parts, the demand will be
enormous. It would therefore seem that the salt water found in
the lakes of Western Australia would be available for the same
purposes. And they are so used; but under the disadvantages
that they are limited in quantity and greatly vary as to the amount
of salt held in solution. Sea water, on the other hand, is not only
of a lesser degree of salinity as compared with the waters of these
lakes, which are little better than salt-pans; but offering a fixed and
known density and unvarying chemical constituents, the managers of
mining batteries are able to use Avater drawn direct from the ocean
for amalgamation purposes with certainty and economy.
The Sea Water will be raised at but little cost from the ocean
into reservoirs, at heights Avhich will enable its distribution by
gravitation to the various Gold Fields, and condensers being erected
at such reserA’oirs, or at points along the distributing channels and
pipes, condensed water could also be supplied, and fresh water also
by separate mains at higher charges.
Considering that Miners in West Australia are now paying
£8 for every 1000 gallons of Avater to run their batteries with and
that supplies for such operations and sluicing being possible under
these proposals at a tenth part of such charge, such an enormous
demand may be counted upon as will yield a further large dividend


from this source alone, because the water being most economically
raised by the spare motive power in use on the Railway the cost of
supply will be chiefly limited to the laying of the necessary
distributing pipes.
Other profits will also arise out of charges for watering and
feeding cattle while waiting shipment; out of charges for supplies
for domestic purposes and for obtaining motive power; out of the
rents of irrigated lands belonging to the Company; out of the pro-
ceeds which, in course of years, will come from the yield of India
rubber, wattle, and cork bark, grapes, raisins, dates, figs, and other
tropical and semi-tropical fruits, silk, cotton, corn, cacao tea, coffee,
spices, tobacco, olive and other oils, Jarrah and other timbers, and,
possibly, sorghum or cane sugar grown on its own plantations; out
of charges and commissions paid by local Governments and Com-
panies for the sinking of Artesian Wells, the construction of
Canals and other irrigation works, and for the forming and manage-
ment of other plantations on their account; out of charges made for
planting and tending of crops for absentee purchasers until they are
able to reside thereon and cultivate the land themselves. These,
and other sources of profit, will, in course of time, yield large
additions to the annual dividends; but of them it is not now
intended to take any account. All such profits will be carried to a
Reserve Fund to be held by the Trustees of the Company, to be
applied to the paying off of the Debenture capital, every reduction
of which will increase the annual dividends on the Share capital.
If the Suez Canal possessed such extraneous sources of profit to
enable it to pay off its Debebenture capital, its dividends would rise
at once from £lB to £24 per centum.
It is, however, more than sufficient to show that under very
partial developments the Railway will ultimately yield profits of
£2B per centum, and the Canal at least £3O per cent. Such
prospects may assuredly be accepted as indicating that, while
unusually large sums may be carried to “ Renewal,” “ Extension,”
and “Reserve” Funds, dividends of at least £lO per cent, may be
reasonably expected from each of these great works as soon as
they are in working order, with substantial increases in the course
of a few years.
And if any one has doubts of such results, let the figures pre-
sented be carefully tested. It will be found that every estimate has
been made without any desire to favour results, and noting that
such large profits will be the natural outcome of the small cost of
construction, it will be seen that they may be safely counted upon
by a Company which will also possess a monopoly of quick and easy
transit across the continent of Australia with a saving of many days
in a journey to or from Europe, combined with a system of irrigation
which will convert the arid plains of Central Australia into pro-
ductive pasturages, farms and plantations, which, surrounded by
attractive settlements, will afford homes to tens of thousands, who
while enjoying all the comforts and pleasures of refined civilizationt
may, by labours not arduous, but sufficiently sufficing for the de-
27


velopment of grateful pursuits, enjoy a healthy life amidst a
present plenteous peace, leading to future competency.
This picture of Arcadian comfort and prosperity is no mere
dream. It must be the natural outcome of the conversion of the
arid plains of Central Australia into fruitful orchards, vineyards and
plantations, which will be within a few hours access of home markets
east and west and north and south, and within a few days of Indian,
European, and American consumers, whose demands may be regarded
as practically without limit. Its accomplishment only needs
determination, money, and time.
The capital of the Company will be £10,000,000, of which a
first issue will be made of £5,000,000, divided into 1,000,000 shares
of £5 each, to be paid up in full at the option of the holder in cash,
or by equal quarterly or monthly instalments, counting from date of
application, and spread over five years. Of these the first 250,000
granted will be distinguished as “ A ” shares, and being foundation
shares, bearing the charge of preliminary expenses, will be entitled to a
Preferential Dividend of per cent, per annum upon and from
payment in full, in addition to an equal share of the net profits with
other shareholders after deduction of such preferential claims.
It is proposed to forthwith issue Debentures for the purpose of
providing additional capital in order to carry out the objects of the
Company as promptly as possible. Such Debentures will be secured
byjbeing constituted a first charge on the Lands, Railways, Canals,
Artesian and other Wells, Dams, Reservoirs, Plantations, Farms,
and other Settlements, Electric and all other Works, Plant, and
property belonging A the Company, together with its Capital, and
giving to the holders thereof a voting power in connection with the
administration of the affairs of the Company in accordance with the
powers conferred on them by the Memorandum and Articles of
Association, will afford powers of surveillence not usually accorded
to Bond-holdprs.
The first series of these Debentures will be issued for such
amounts respectively, not being less than £5 each as shall not
altogether exceed £1,000,000. Such first series will be issued as
Perpetual Debentures, being only redeemable at the option of the
Company ; they will carry interest at £6 per centum per annum,
less any interest guaranteed by any Government or public institu-
tion, coupons for which will be attached, made payable to Bearer or
Registered holder, and being Foundation Debentures, will be issued
subject to a discount of £5 per centum.
The Company will seek to obtain the united guarantee of the
Imperial and Australian Governments of a minimum dividend of
£3 per centum per annum on the amount of Share and Debenture
Capital actually expended, to commence from the completion of the
first fifty miles of the Railway from its Forth-Western terminus,
and a like number of miles from its inland terminus, and having
regard to the amount of trade between the United Kingdom and
Australia, and the local services of such railway to the home
Australian traffic, an adjustment of such guaranteed minimum


dividend would sum to fairly entail a payment of one per cent, per
annum from the Mother Country, of one half per cent, from New
South Wales, the same from Queensland ; of 7s. 6d, per centum
from Victoria ; of the same from South Australia, and of 5 per
cent from Western Australia. Such a guarantee would enable a
small dividend to be paid during construction. After completion,
the guarantee would be merely nominal, since it cannot be doubted
the dividends earned would greatly exceed such minimum rate.
The issue first of a small series of Founders’ Shares, bearing a
small preferential dividend, and also of a small series of Founders’
Debentures at a discount of £5 per centum and bearing interest at
£6 per centum less any guaranteed interest, very equitably meets
the possible loss of interest on Capital and preliminary expenses
which all persons engaged in the prosecution of a great undertaking
must encounter, during that time which occupied in its early stages
and construction, cannot be productive of profits.
The Company will require of the Governments concerned :
1. A grant of 10,000 acres for every mile of Railway completed, and
12,000 for every mile of The Main Irrigation Canal completed. Such
grants to consist of, and include, two blocks of 30,000 acres, one for founding
a Settlement and Irrigated paddocks, at the North-western Terminus of the
Railway ; and the other for like purposes at its Inland Terminus ; a strip
of land extending along the entire course of the Railway, and having a
breadth of one and half miles on each side of it, measuring from the centre
of the line, and the remainder of such grants to be utilized for such
Settlements, and Farms, and Plantations, along such courses, at such
places, as the Company may determine.
2. A grant of 640 acres round every Artesian or other Well it may
sink, and every Reservoir or Condensing Station it may construct to form
the nucleus of a Settlement around it.
Powers will be reserved :
1, To obtain from the Imperial and other Parliaments, and such
Governments and authorities as may be necessary, such concessions,
grants, and powers, and to enter into such contracts and arrangements
with Pier Majesty’s Government, or the Government of any of the
Australian Colonies as may be necessary to authorise and enable the
Company to construct or enter into contracts to construct the proposed
and one or more other Railways, and irrigation, and transit Canals, and to
erect such works and lay down all such main and other pipes as
may be necessary to raise fresh or sea water to such Reservoirs and
Condensing Stations as may be considered necessary, and all such
such subsidiary, distributing, and other channels and works as may be
required, to work the same, upon such terms, concessions, grants, and
rights to lands, and the use of lands, a.nd to draw water from such rivers,
creeks, streams, and catchments as may be agreed, and to sink such wells,
and form such Catchments, Dams, and Reservoirs as may be deemed
necessary and for such purposes, to utilize and convert such lakes and
depressions along the route of each Railway or Canal into such reservoirs
as may be deemed necessary for the conservation of the waters so obtained,
and to employ the fresh or sea waters so conserved or obtained in carrying
out any of the objects of the Company.
2. To enter into arrangements with other Companies for running
powers on each other’s railways, and in case the steamship companies
running to and from Europe should not arrange to receive and land
passengers and cargo at the Port of the Company’s North-western
Terminus, to build and equip or hire and charter and navigate such steam
29


and other vessels, launches, barges and boats as shall be necessary to
convey passengers, mails, light goods, fruit and other produce to and from
London and other European ports, and in any case to build or hire and
navigate a class of steam or other vessels, specially constructed for the
conveyance of cattle, so that they may be carried with greatest economy
and speed aaid shipped and unshipped with greater comfort than at
present.
3. To construct, if at any time it maybe deemed advantageous by the
Company, a second Canal alongside of the Railway-Canal, to be used as a
Reservoir and for the more economical conveyance of heavy goods in
barges to be moved by electric power.
4. To increase the Capital of the Company to such extent as may be
necessary for the completion of the proposed Railway and Canal and of
all wells, works and undertakings which may be required to put and keep
the same in working order, and to complete the various farms, settlements,
plantations and irrigation works hereinbefore proposed, and with the
consent of a general meeting to increase the Capital from time to time for
the purpose of enabling the Company to construct such other Railways,
Irrigation and Transit Canals, Artesian Wells and other works to the north
and south of the Trans-Australian Railway as may be determined, for the
purpose of carrying out the complete system of Irrigation and Transit
Canals and Water Supplies hereinbefore proposed.
5. To vary the route of the proposed Railway and Canal, or of either
of them, so that instead of starting from some point in or near the
Exmouth Gulf the same or either of tbem may start from some part in or
near to the mouth of the Gascoyne River, or from such other part on the
western, north-western or northern coast of Australia as the Directors may
approve.
6. To vary the grants and concessions hereinbefore required to be
made by any Government concerned, and to accept such a less number of
acres in respect of each mile of railway or canal constructed or to be
constructed or in lieu of any such grant such lease or leases of such lands
as the directors may approve, and so that the refusal of any Government
to grant or lease lands along the route of such railway or canal shall not
operate to prevent the Company from constructing the same.
7. To purchase or otherwise acquire or lease from any Government,
Company or other persons or person all such lands and other real and
personal property which may be deemed necessary for the proper construct
tion and carrying out of the proposed Railway and Canal or of either of
them or of any works connected therewith,
8. To clear and make a track, way or road along the proposed route
of the Railway, and to use the same with or without laying down thereto
planks or other timbers, or other materials, and with or without wooden
or metal facings or rails, and to work the same as a temporary road or
railway in the drawing of carriages, vans and trucks, in the conveyance of
materials for the construction of the Railway or Canal, and of passengers
and goods, by horses or other animal power, or carriages, vans and trucks,
propelled by steam, electric, or other motive power or combination of
powers, so as to obtain revenue while the permanent railway is being
constructed.
9. To hire, charter, or build such ships fitted up with, and to fit any
ships hired, chartered, or built, with such freezing, refrigerating, chilling,
and all such other thermostatic appliances as may be approved, and to
construct such Freezing, Refrigerating and Chilling Works at the
terminii or any other part of any Railway belonging to the Company as
may be necessary, and to fit up the same with such thermostatic and
other appliances as may be required for the freezing, refrigerating, or
chilling of meat, and having first agisted sheep and cattle driven across
country to any such works, to kill and freeze or chill, and convey them
in such specially fitted up ships to such markets as may be required.
To avoid heavy preliminary expenses, which in the case of the Suez
Canal amounted to an enormous sum, arrangements have been made under


which all expenses incurred in securing special powers from the Parliaments
of the United Kingdom and such of the Australian Colonies as are
concerned, and all such concessions and grants as will be needed and all
legal and other preliminary expenses attending and up to the incorporation
and registration of the Company, except engineering and surveying fees
and charges, salaries and wages, rents, printing, advertisements and
brokerage will be undertaken for a fixed sum, to be paid wholly or partly in
paid-up shares or debentures. In relation to this economical arrangement
applicants for shares will be deemed to waive the insertion hex’ein of the
particulars of such contract and to accept the foregoing statement as a
sufficient notice thereof in compliance with “ The Companies Act.” But
such contract and the Memorandum and Articles of Association can be
inspected upon application.
In the foregoing estimates of the profits of the Railway,
Canal and other proposed works no account has been taken of the
value, rental or other profits of the land which any Government
may grant or lease to the Company in aid of the construction of
such Railway, Canals and other works; but the same and all
improvements thereon and the moneys received as the rents or
purchase moneys of such lands shall be kept separate from all other
assets of the Company and be held in Trust as security besides
the capital and all other assets of the Company for payment
of the moneys owing by the Company on Debentures issued by it
and interest thereon, and no part of such rents or purchase moneys
or of interest earned thereon shall be applied to the payment of any
other liabilities of the Company until such Debentures and interest
have been fully paid off.
As the objects of the Company will absorb a large Capital the
bulk of which will have to be provided in England, the members of
the London Board will be entitled to sit and vote at any Board
sitting in any of the Australian Colonies ; and the like privileges
will be conceded to the members of the Australian Board when
in London.
These proposals, having been well considered, are now sub-
mitted for the practical realization which the enormous amount of
Capital now waiting investment invites and the need of quicker
transit between Europe and Australia demands.
Communications from all who are desirous of assisting in the
development of these great works and applications for Shares or
Debentures may be made in the first instance by letter addressed to
the Directors of the Company, but Forms of Application and
Prospectuses may be obtained on application at the Temporary
Offices of the Company, 48 Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
31


-
■ y
* ■»
Sydney:
W. M. MACLARDY & CO., PRINTERS,
82 Pitt Stref.t.
'i i
■ I '


WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR.
OPINIONS OF THE PRESS.
A PLAN FOR THE APPLICATION OF ASSURANCE TO
DEBTS AND OTHER MONETARY RISKS. 4th ed.
Of the soundness of the idea there can, as we have already
observed, be no doubt, and the only difficulty in connection with it would
be that which attends all new objects, namely, the arrangement of details.”
—Times (London),
. . . “ The principle involved merits the serious consideration of
the commercial community. . . The several pros and cons are ably
discussed by Mr. Cansdell with much perspicuity.” —Daily News.
Mr. Cansdell shows by indisputable evidence that while
advantage has been taken of assurance to neutralize many descriptions of
calamity the system may with great propriety and advantage be extended
to the assurance of capital adventured on credit.” —Daily Telegraph.
. . . We have here a fair field for Mr, Cansdell, and that gentle-
manunder takes to do the work—nay, he has done it. . . We
heartily recommend Mr. Cansdell’s pamphlet to perusal.” —Railway Record.
“Mr. Cansdell shows that the average of Trade Losses are
as readily determinable as other contingencies. , . . The points are
ably argued by the Writer.”— Economist.
, . . We have read Mr. Cansdell’s pamphlet with much pleasure,
and heartily recommend it to general perusal.” —Mining Journal.
. . . “A well written exposition of the principle of assurance.
The subject is treated at considerable and with great ability. It
cannot be too strongly recommended for perusal in the abstract furnished in
another column or in the concrete as set forth in the work itself,” Observer,
A NEW METHOD OF LIFE ASSURANCE. 7th ed.
. . . “ A very clever and taking little treatise.” —Daily News.
. . . “ A very able and interesting pamphlet. . . A most
ingenious adaptation of the very facile principle of assurance.”— Reporter.
“ The projection of this plan is traceable to the indefatigable
energy and talent of Mr. Cansdell, who has obtained no inconsiderable
popularity and eminence from the perspicuous and common-sense views
he holds on all matters of finance.” —London Mercantile Journal.
“The careful perusal of Mr. Cansdell’s admirable pamphlet
will be found profitable to all interested in the important subject of Life
Assurance.” —Gity Press (London).
BANKING BASED ON GOVERNMENT SECURITIES.
“An eminently safe system, but more particularly adapted
to a new' community, in which no vested interests exist to oppose its
introduction. —The Times.”
. . . “An able epitome of the business of banking, with suggestions
in favor of consols as the basis of the note issues and investments of a
bank, which is worthy of attention.”— Daily News.
. . . ‘‘ An able epitome of the history and practice of banking.
. . Mr, Cansdell is evidently master of the subject.” —Daily Telegraph.
. • . An able pamphlet. . . . The subject is debated with
much financial ability. . . . Should find favour in the constitution of
some new and independent country. ” — Economist.
“An exceeding well written exposition of the science of
banking, with suggestions as to the issue of notes upon Government
securities only, and as to discounting without recourse to the last holder,
which are well deserving consideration.” —City Press.


. . . “ The primary aim of the writer is to show that by adopting
Government securities as the basis of the note issues of a Bank not only
government securities as tne oasis or tne note issues or a r>ann not oniy
v will unquestionable safety be secured, but a large profit obtained. Mr.
■Cansdell supports his views with most cogent arguments.”— London
Mercantile Journal.
A NEW METHOD of PROVIDING FOR SUPERANNUA-
TION.
. , , “A skilful adoption of Annuity and Endowment Assurance®
to the practical settlement of the very important question of Superannua-
tion. ... It should be read with great interest by all members of the
Public Service.” —Daily Telegraph.
, . . A very clever and taking little treatise to which we can with
pleasure refer our readers as having considerably enlightened us on the
validity of the scheme.”— London Mercantile Journal.
. . , This plan, we must confess, completely staggered us when
we first looked at it. . If Mr. Cansdell had been a new hand in
the business of insurance, there might be some grounds for viewing his
project with suspicion, but regarding his experience we feel that his views
upon the subject are entitled to attentive consideration.” — Chronicle.
. . . A very able and interesting pamphlet, heralding an entirely
new and startling method of endowment assurances combined with
deferred annuities. . . .”— Reporter.
FEDERATION, COLONIAL AND BRITISH.
. . . Mr. Stuart-Cansdell sets about his work very thoroughly.
He has evidently been to an infinite degree of pains to collect his facts
and digest and methodise them. . . . They have great value for
reference, for they deal historically and analytically with the several
systems. —Sydney Morning Herald.
. . . A very useful little book, dealing with Federal matters, with
a great deal of very useful comments thereon and expositions thereof. Mr.
Stuart-Cansdell exposes the oft-repeated fallacy that there cannot be federa-
tion without an absolute uniformity of tariffs. . . He also points out that
the Swiss Referendum is not suitable for great nations and is capable of being
“ worked ”as the plebiscite proved in France. . . Contains a plan for
the redistribution of the Colonies. . . The Author has done a very
useful work as to Federation.”— The Mercury.
, . . Notably, a well written work. — Tasmanian Evening News.
. . . In Mr. Cansdell’s able and suggestive pamphlet a judicious
distinction is drawn between Colonial and Imperial Federation, which, he
writes, though commonly treated as identical, are actually distinct, and
yet, while so distinct that either might exist without the other, are
nevertheless the natural complement of each other; and he points out
that unfortunately the whole subject has been so much discussed under
the title of “Imperial Federation” as to have forced objections which
would, otherwise, never have been raised. ... In dealing with this
* 7 ------ I * O
important question, Mr. Cansdell’s contribution is most valuable. ... j
He has set forth in interesting fashion the result of his extensive reading
and keen observation.-— Tasmanian Evening Neivs (second notice).
. . . “The author points out that two great questions, depends *
on British Union—Defence and Trade. Colonial Federation he regards as a
large, important, and needful part of British Federation, but the latter alone
as able to secure Colonial safety and continuity of British supremacy. . .
Mr. Cansdell prefers the term “British” to “Imperial,” as should we
ourselves if we had to start afresh, . . . Mr. Cansdell makes the
suggestion, which has been favorably canvassed, that the Parliament of
the United Kingdom should pass an enabling statute leaving each colony
or group of colonies to adopt it as the time for each comes. We agree that
this idea is a good one. . Mr. Cansdell’s work is one calculated to do much
good. . We trust it will be widely read.— Federation League Journal.
