

A New Deal for
Australia's
Children!
Tomalin & Wigmore, Sydney.
(40-hour week).


Conference on Education for a Progressive,
Democratic Australia.
JUNE, 1938.
ORGANISATIONS REPRESENTED ON THE GENERAL
COMMITTEE ORGANISING THE CONFERENCE.
Australian Teachers' Federation. Royal Architects.
NSW Public School Teachers’
Federation. The Institution of Engineers,
Australia.
The Teachers’ CxUild of N.S.W. Recreation a nd Leadership Movement.
Catholic Education Association ■
of NS W. The Parks and Playgrounds Movement
of N.S.W.
Federation of Parents and Citizens
Associations of N.S.W. Australian Youth Council,
N.S.W. Division.
Federation of Mothers’ Clubs.
i Federal and State Public Service
. , Defence Committee.
Sydney Day Nursery Association.
Kindergarten Union ot N.S.W. National Connect Women
N.S.W. Section of New Education
Fellowship United Associations.
Free Library Movement. Country Women’s Association
of N.S.W.
Workers’ Educational Association
of N.S.W. Central Cultural Council for N.S.W.
British Medical Association,
N.S.W. Branch. N.S.W. Trades & Labor Council.
Dental Health Education Department, D _ .. „ .
Australian Dental Association, State Unemployed & Relief Woikeis
N.S.W. Branch. Council.
Chairman: Hon. Secretary-Organiser: Hon. Treasurer:
M. Mackinnon, 8.A.. B.Sc. S. P. Lewis, B.Ec. T. A. Munay.
Address all communications to W. J. Hendry or E. A. Ambrose, Joint Hon.
Secretaries, c/o N.S.W. Public School Teachers' Federation, O’Brien House.
56 Young Street. Sydney. ’Phone: B 2047.


Telling Points from Conference Addresses.
Mr. P. Board, M.A., C.M.G. (former Director of Education):
“Economy in education is a calamity.”
“The science of human relationships—individual, community, national and
international —should occupy minds of pupils and be discussed and applied.”
The Hon. D. H. Drummond, M.L.A., Minister for Education:
“I cannot conceive any more important subject to which a free people might
address themselves in conference than that which has been chosen on this
occasion, namely, a consideration of the factors which make for a progressive,
democratic nation, with special application to Australia.”
“I assume that to every normal Australian citizen freedom of speech, freedom
of the written word and freedom of action are the very breath of life. They are
indeed more precious than life itself.”
“Democracy, to exist, must be progressive. It cannot be progressive unless
it is educated.”
Mr. M. Mackinnon, 8.A., B.Sc., President of the N.S.W. Public School
Teachers’ Federation.
“When we see the fine banks, insurance offices and hotels which have been
and are still being built in Sydney, it makes us wonder if something is not
radically wrong with a system which allows the school buildings to be such
hovels in comparison.”
“With classes of 60 children, totally inadequate equipment and no library
facilities, mass production methods only are possible. The teacher has to be
the main source of information for his class, who tend to become mere passive
recipients. Self-activity cannot be fostered.”
“The country was put on its feet financially largely at the expense of the
children of the State.”
“Money can always be found for munitions whenever it is necessary. It is
equally essential that it should be found for education.”
“It is hoped that this Conference will initiate a request from the community
as a whole to both Governments, State and Federal, which will grow like a
snowball until it becomes an insistent demand which cannot be denied, resulting
in a new and better deal in education for the youth of Australia.”
The Hon. F. P. Kneeshaw, M.L.C., Past President, Chamber of Manufacturers
of New South Wales.
“An enormous field in scientific and industrial research lies ahead of the
young Australian scientist . . . for the results of scientific research the whole
world pays tribute annually of several million pounds.”
“Our youth must be encouraged and assisted to secure increasing oppor-
tunities for themselves.”
Mr. J. R. Hughes, President, N.S.W. Trades and Labor Council.
“As it is the children of the working man and woman who are trained in
our State schools, the trade unions obviously are vitally concerned.”
“Just as the Trade Union Movement has fought to establish factory Acts
to govern factory conditions, so should we to-day lend our support to demand
some Act to govern conditions in our public schools.”
“We must at least see that one necessary reform is the raising of the
school leaving age to at least 16 years.”


Mr J R. Darling, M.A. (Oxon.), Headmaster, Geelong Grammar School.
ss* fuS
which follow our failure to provide something bettei.
“A Government cannot go very much faster than public opinion will allow
it. It therefore, is to the makers of the Government that we must go. the
Government is only the agent of the people.
Mr. R. Windyer, K.C., B.A.
“Freedom is at the centre of our ultimate aim, and I emphasise freedom.
“If growing minds are to be tightly bandaged, if thinking and speculation
are to be pu? into straitjackets by brutal gangster tyrants, all advance is at
an end.”
CONFERENCE REPORT
The Conference on Education for a Progressive. Democratic
Australia was officially opened by the Hon D. n.Drummon '
Minister for Education, at the Sydney Town Hall,
Tune 8 1938, at a meeting over which Mr. P. Board, M-A.,
(former New South Wales Director of Education), presided.
Mr. M. Mackinnon, 8.A., B.Sc., President, NS W. Public School
Teachers’ Federation, addressed the meeting on “The Purpose or c
Conference”: Mr. J. P. Tivey. 8.A., B.Sc., B.E M.I.E. (Aust.), Chair-
man, Education Committee, Sydney Technical College Advisory Coun
cil on “Technical Education in a Modern Democracy ; the Hon. t.
P. Kneeshaw, M.L.C., Past President, Chamber oi Manufacture, o
N.S.W., on “Education and the Business World, and Mi. ■
Hughes, President. N.S.W. Trades and Labor Council, on Education
and the Trade Union Movement..
Three business sessions, attended by 650 delegates were held on
June 9, 10 and 11 in the Assembly Hall, Margaret Street, -T dn T f
Of the 342 bodies which elected delegates, 306 were organisations o
widely differing types with 450,000 members, and 36 were municipal
and shire councils representing 600,000 Council electors.
At the business sessions papers were presented by people chosen
by the Conference Committee. Resolutions were moved at the con-
clusion of the papers, some in the form of “platforms programmes
and all carried either unanimously or by overwhelming majorities.
The resolutions adopted appear on pages 6, 7 and 8.
A Final Public Rally was held at the Sydney Town Hall on
Wednesday, June 15. The Plon. Mr. Justice Halse Rogers, BW 8.C.L.,
Chancellor, Sydney University, presided. „ Mr , R ., T C riarlinv
BA spoke on “The Enlightened Citizen, and Mr. J. R. Dari
M.A.’ (Oxon.), Headmaster, Geelong Grammar School, who had been


especially invited from Victoria, gave an address on “The Educational
Needs of a Progressive, Democratic Australia.”
Mr. S. P. Lewis, Conference Secretary-Organiser, and Miss L.
Woodcock, Acting Deputy-President, N.S.W. Public School Teachers’
Federation, reported briefly on the business sessions and placed before
the meeting the following resolution, which was carried unanimously;
“That we citizens, present at this Public Rally at the Sydney Town
Hall on Wednesday, June 15, 1938, will strive, in co-operation with the
largest possible number of people, to have developed in this State an
up-to-date system of education, commensurate with the needs of the
community and to carry into all parts of New South Wales the cam-
paign for education for a progressive, democratic Australia.”
This resolution expresses the desire and determination of a large
number of citizens to gain for Australia’s children educational con-
ditions and an educational system second to none.
The Conference Committee and delegates to the Conference desire
to secure the active co-operation of all organisations, of all citizens in
making the campaign for education for a progressive, democratic
Australia one of the greatest and most successful movements ever
organised.
Therefore, it is hoped that every organisation which supports the
work being carried out will forward resolutions of support to the
General Committee and to the Press.
Every individual, every local organisation can make education a
matter of first importance by assisting to organise local conferences
,and by building local committees.
Education, the conditions under which children live for a large part
of the day, should become a question of outstanding importance among
all sections of the community and with all organisations.
Central Councils and Executives and Sectional Associations and
branches can assist the campaign considerably by forwarding resolu-
tions to the Premier of New South Wales, the Prime Minister of
Australia and the Press. Local organisations, committees and con-
ferences should persistently bring before local members of Parliament
and the local Press the urgent local educational requirements and the
major educational needs of the State.
The citizens of New South Wales are charged with the respon-
sibility of seeing that our children work under the best possible school
conditions, receive the best form of education, and are provided with
really effective post-school education.
It is the concern of all citizens to work for
“A NEW DEAL FOR AUSTRALIA’S CHILDREN.”


Names of those who Read Papers, and
Resolutions Adopted at the
Business Sessions.
A. —“LAYING THE FOUNDATIONS.”
(Pre-School and Physical Education.)
I.—PRE-SCHOOL EDUCATION.
Papers by—
1. Dr. Grace Cuthbert, Director of
Maternal and Baby Welfare.
2. Miss M. Bird, Superintendent of
Nursery Schools under the Nur-
sery and Day Nurseries’ Associa-
tion.
3 Miss J. Wyndham, B.Sc., Nursery
School Lecturer and Supervisor at
the Kindergarten Training College,
Sydney.
Platform or Programme.
1. Extension of pre-natal and baby
clinics and health centres, particularly
in congested areas and country towns,
increase of suitable foods to be supplied
to ill-nourished mothers and babies.
2. Effective system of nursery
schools to be established by the Govern-
ment —such nursery schools to be ven-
tilated and heated; furnished and equip-
ped on up-to-date lines; equipment to in-
clude adequate provision of playing areas
(indoor and outdoor), toys, tables and
chairs, and adequate facilities for train-
ing in hygiene. Milk and other necessary
foods to be supplied to nursery schools.
II. — PHYSICAL AND HEALTH
EDUCATION.
Paper by Dr. E. Stephen, Represen-
tative of the British Medical
Association.
Platform or Programme.
1. Provision of properly equipped play-
ing fields with an appropriate area for
small schools and proportionately
greater area for larger schools.
2. Provision of gymnasia in all schools
for recreation and for general physical
training, especially during hot or wet
weather.
3. Provision of suitable public playing
spaces, especially in congested areas.
4. Provision of satisfactory sport
equipment in all schools.
5. Training of specialist teachers for
physical and for general and health edu-
cation.
6. Establishment of cafeteria in schools
and provision of hot midday meals for
children, free where necessary.
7. Training of children in hygienic
practices. Provision of school showers
and modern hygienic sanitary accommo-
dation in all schools. Hygienic disposal
of school garbage —children not to han-
dle same. .
8. Appointment of permanent regional
medical staffs for schools, such staffs to
include doctors, dentists, and nurses.
B. —“THE SCHOOL AS A LIVING
COMMUNITY.”
(School Education.)
I—SCHOOL SITES, BUILDINGS AND
EQUIPMENT.
Paper by Mr. C. E. Martin,
M.Ec., LL.B.
Platform or Programme.
1. School sites to be chosen, as far as
possible, in open spaces, away from fac-
tories, tanneries, laneways, main roads
and tramlines.
2. Erection of modern school buildings
with effective ventilation and heating
facilities, the larger schools to be cen-
trally heated. Modernising of old build-
ings and building of new schools to make
provision for rooms to be like playrooms.
Workshops, laboratories, offices and com-
mittee rooms to be more life-like than
the present class-rooms. Provision also
to be made for children’s personal be-
longings. Libraries, music and art
rooms to be built, and suitable shelter
sheds provided. Buildings to be archi-
tecturally suited to the training of fu-
ture Australians.
3. School furniture to be suited to the
work being carried out; to be adjustable
and movable where necessary. Effective
equipment of all rooms according to pui-
pose of room—manual work, science, lib-
rary, office work, recreation, music, art.
4. Text books and tablets to be sup-
plied to all pupils. .
5. Establishment of libraries and in-
stalment of radio and cinema.
6. Reduction of classes to not more
than 30 pupils.
7. Adequate training of a larger num-
ber of students and employment of a
greater number of qualified teachers.
8. Building of more schools and reduc-
tion in number of pupils taught in larger
schools —maximum number of pupils to
be taught in any school to be 1000 —ex-
tension of facilities for all types of
secondary education.
9. Free travelling facilities for all
school pupils.
10. Appointment of janitors and/or care-
takers in schools with 200 pupils or more.


lI—CURRICULUM, EXTENSION OF
SCHOOL LEAVING AGE AND
COUNTRY EDUCATION.
Paper by Miss L. Woodccok, 8.A., B.Ec.,
Acting Deputy President, N.S.W. Public
School Teachers' Federation.
Platform or Programme.
3. Complete revision of the present
syllabus with the object of fitting the
syllabus to the child and his present and
future needs —greater freedom to be al-
lowed to both teacher and child. The
curriculum to be linked up with the
child’s real world and with the world
with which he will come in contact when
he leaves school.
Greater attention to be paid to tech-
nical education and to real commercial
and rural education; to the various
social and public institutions and the
activities involved in their development,
e.g., municipal councils, parliament, pa-
rents and citizens’ associations, employ-
ers’ organisations and trade unions. In-
creased attention to be paid to the con-
ditions and institutions of people in
other countries and to the effect of the
interaction of people of different coun-
tries on each other.
Introduction of courses of general and
social sciences that will help to explain
the natural world and social conditions.
Less emphasis on foreign languages
and higher mathematics.
2. Modification of examination system.
3. Extension of school leaving age to
16 with allowances for pupils over 14
years.
4. Development of facilities for educa-
tion in country—elimination of the sub-
sidised teaching system, opening of more
public schools in country including small
schools and central schools. All subsi-
dised teachers who qualify to be trained
at the Teachers’ Colleges, others to be
employed at not less than the basin wage
as supervisors of work from the Corre-
spondence School. Children in very iso-
lated areas to be taught by a system of
house-to-house schools and by Corre-
spondence School. Appointment of tra-
velling superintendents to assist parents
in the handling of correspondence work.
C.—“ENLIGHTENING THE CITIZEN."
Post-School Education.
Paper by Dr. W. Duncan, M.A.,
Director of Tutorial Classes.
Platform or Programme.
1. The opening of schools, institutions
and centres for vocational and cultural
courses for those who have left school,
and have special aptitudes or are unable
to secure employment—allowances to be
provided for all such students.
2. Liberalisation of University bur-
saries and modification of matriculation
requirements.
3. Greater attention to be paid to social
sciences at the University. Institution
and full functioning of Chairs of Music,
Domestic Science, Physical Education.
Sociology and International Relation-
ships at the University.
4. Increase in the Government grant
to the University.
5. Representation of various public in-
terests on the University Senate.
6. Extension of Teachers’ College
course for teachers to a minimum of
three years and the provision of a much
more professional course with adequate
allowances for students.
7. Extension and development of the
work of the Workers’ Educational Asso-
ciation, with increased Government aid.
8. Encouragement of the trade union
movement to develop courses of educa-
tion, with library facilities.
9. (a) Completion of State Public
Library to include facilities in traininj,
librarians: (b) subsidising of all special
libraries by the Government.
10. Provision by Government of tra-
velling libraries.
D—GENERAL EDUCATIONAL
PROGRAMME.
1. Greater care of the pre-school child
by the provision of pre-natal and baby
clinics and health centres, proper nutri-
tion and an effective system of nursery
schools.
2. Provision of school playing fields
and public playing areas; of school and
public gymnasia and more effective me-
thods of physical and health education.
3. Establishment of efficient health ser-
vices, milk services and. in poorer areas,
hot midday meals, medical, dental and
first aid services.
4. Erection of buildings to accord with
modern educational standards on suit-
able sites, and the provision of up-to-
date equipment, including text books,
materials, and libraries.
5. Re-organisation of existing accom-
modation: the provision of additional ac-
commodation, and the training of more
teachers to allow for a progressive re-
duction in the size of classes till a maxi-
mum of 30 is reached.
6. Revision of the curriculum and
modification of the examination system
to make it fit more the needs of a mod-
ern democratic community, and to allow
greater freedom to pupil and teacher
7. Greater attention to the educational
needs of the country population both in
special (rural) and general education and
in the provision of facilities for both
teachers and pupils.
8. (a) An extension of secondary edu-
cation to provide for: —
(i) a comprehensive scheme of vo-
cational (technical, commercial,
industrial, rural, domestic
science) education;
(ii) increased facilities for general
and cultural education.


(b) Increase of the school leaving age,
by progressive steps, to 16 with allow-
ances. where necessary, for pupils over
14 years of age.
9. An extension of tertiary education
by the opening of special institutions to
attend to the vocational and cultural
aspects of education.
Provision of bursaries on a liberal scale
for these institutions and the University.
Development of education for all adults
by provision of special courses, particu-
larly on social and economic issues, mak-
ing it possible for living discussion to
take place on urgent present-day prob-
lems.
10. Provision for the development of
an effective free library system through-
out N.S.W. both in the schools and in
local centres.
E, FINANCIAL AND ORGANISA-
TIONAL RESOLUTIONS.
i.—Financial.
That this Conference of 648 delegates
elected from 342 bodies, 306 organisa-
tions representing 450,000 members, and
36 Municipal and Shire Councils repre-
senting 600,000 council electors, deplores
the backward state into which education
in this State has been allowed to drift
and urges the allocation, without delay,
of sufficient funds to provide an up-to-
date system of education, commensurate
with the needs of the community.
As a beginning, Conference requests :-
(1) The Commonwealth Government
to subsidise Australian education to the
extent of at least £5,000,000 per annum.
(2) The State Government to restore
the education vote, immediately, to the
1928 standard, namely, £l4/7/1 sterling
(£AI7/18/10) per child per annum, and
progressively increase the amount.
(3) The State Government to adopt a
progressive policy for the development
of adult education in this State. We be-
lieve such a policy can only be made
effective by the Government placing ade-
quate funds at the disposal of the Educa-
tion Department, to be allocated as
grants to the University and to approved
voluntary organisations in proportion to
the work done.
ii.—Organisational.
1. That the General Committee which
organised this Conference be appointed,
together with additional representatives
from organisations already represented
or from other central associations on the
basis of two members from every or-
ganisation which has 1000 members or
less, and one member for every addi-
tional 2000 members, no organisation to
have more than five representatives.
2. That the General Committee is in-
structed to continue to conduct *the cam-
paign with undiminished energy for
Education for a Progressive, Democratic
Australia; to carry it into every part of
N.S.W., and to make every endeavour to
generate and/or co-operate in building
similar movements in other States for
the purpose of developing a Common-
wealth-wide campaign.
3. That delegates to the Conference —
(a) report back to the organisations
they represent on the proceedings and
decisions of this Conference and en-
deavour to induce these bodies to take
an active part in the campaign;
(b) under the jurisdiction of the
General Committee, undertake to orga-
nise local and sectional conferences and
committees or councils to carry the cam-
paign into all parts of N.S.W.
F.—COMMISSION OF INQUIRY.
That this Conference of 648 delegates
elected from 342 bodies, 306 organisa-
tions representing 450,000 members, and
36 Municipal and Shire Councils, repre-
senting 600,000 council electors, is alarm-
ed at the neglected state of education in
New South Wales and requests the Gov-
ernment to appoint a commission with-
out delay to make a complete investiga-
tion of the question and to report on the
most effective steps for putting educa-
tion on a satisfactory basis at the
earliest possible moment.
