

The Athenian Mercury:
10,
fjutttb. 24.
June 17. 1693.
Queft. i. IV. ] *othing, in Lzr/n Nihil, in Greek
'V f is in all thefe Languages a NounSub-
/iuntive ; nova a Noun is the name of a
thin* that may be [een, felt, heard, or understood, and how
caH any part of that Description agree to Nothing ? If you
Jnfwer V is the name of Nothing, or word Nothing which
is fee*, or heard, &c. and is therefore a Noun [ubfiantive,
why then is p other wife put Nullores, or iJiv
which Nulla and ifi/ are both Adje ft lues, and have their
Subfhintives Res, and put with them to exprefs
nothing and why Jhmd the • parting of No from thing
caufe u tobe Nulla res, and fhv'-7i(y.yy.u., and theput-
ting’em together mufs 'em Nihil, and and how can
Nothing be a Name , for Nothing can. have no Name but No-
thing, which is no Nothing, and therefore no Noun, and yet
it agrees with , and is govern’d by forks, and has all the
cafes, as well as oth.r Nouns; I defire your ferious Anfwer
herein, and the Definition of Nothing, and Opinion whether ,t
may properly be call'd a Noun-fubftantive ?
Arifw. As for this weighty Queftion, which un-
doubtedly he who fent it thinks deferves a ferious An-
fwer, and accordingly defires it, We have already in
part reply’d to t, but Hull here for his fatisfadfion be
a little larger. He requires a Definition of Nothing,
nor can we give any more clear or compfehenfive than
what he has formerly had, that Nothing is——
oooooooooooooooboooo, wherein ’tis a plain
Cafe are included all things that are neceflary to a corn-
pleat Definition; for there’s firft its Genus, which is
o then its difference, both eflential o and acci-
denralo nay, all the Train of Style tiny accidents
that wait upon the ancient Family of the Nothings,
clearly and diftindlly mar (hailed according to their re-
fpedtive Ranks and Tides, as o—o—o o | — and
left others of’em ihou’d take it amifs for being negledf-
ed or excluded, a long <6 fc. is left for a Bact{-door to all
the reft. . t
But in order to Airfwer his weighty Objections, We
muff now, like bad Difputants, be forc’d to diftinguifh
after we have defin’d. There are 3 forts of Nothings,
very near akin to the 3 kinds of Seefiers y one nothing
which is Something, another nothing between nothing
and jometbing , and a third nothing which is nothing. This
may mafic People ftare that are no Metaphyficians, but
’cis all as plain as a Iftke-ftaff to one that has but read
Suaref, for look ye Sir, to be yet more methodical,
there is in the firft place your purum nihil, or arrant
nothing, a Contradiction, an abfolute impoftlbility in
Nature j A Monfter, one part of whom unbuilds ano-
ther ——as Tranfubjiantiation , a Jacobites Faith, Courage,
Honour, Honejiy, and 20 other nothings of the fame
ffamp. There is a 2i. Nothing which is between a
nothing and a fomething, what the old Jabberers call a
Nihil exifiencia aftualis. Nothing as to actual, real Exi-
fterce, but what may exift; as a million of things
( Nothings we mean ) that are polfible are not future,
or which we hope, nay we have a ftrong guefs will
never be prefent: As a Plague that ftiou’d fweep away
every honeft Englifkman, a Del cent, from France wc
mean A feventh Son of trie late K. James 1 , to do
Marvels, and be a Bidiop of Canterbury, arid Legate a
Latere, at the fame time that his Brother of Wales isK.
of England. But tho’ this Nothing has but a very fmail
portion of Something in’r, yet fome it Teems to have, at
ieaft as to Conception, and there is, by Avicenna's
leave, a difference between the Nihility of a poffibili-
ty, and an Impoftlbility.
There is further a Nihil pofitionis, fueh a Nothing as
comes we think nearer to lomething than all the reft,
and may be reckon’d juft on the edge of Being. A No-
thing which puts or affirms nothing, but either takes
fomething away, as Privation, blindnefs in a
or only outwardly aflfefts it, as any Extrinfeed Denomi-
nation. Some reckon alfo a Nothing of fubtiftence, by
which they mean accident, or modes of Being, but
we think thele downright fomethings, and that Nothing
has nothing to do to pierce ip far into the Realms of
Entity. After-all, it Teems to us that there’s (till lurk-'
ing one old, great Genericd Nothing, which includ
all thefe, and yet may be conlider’d as abftraded fro
them a fort of an Idaral Nothing, a Being of Reaton
Fancy, which we muft have in our Minds Tome how
or other, when we difcourfe of Nothing, and wTiicl
yet can’t perhaps llri&ly and properly be comprehenc -
ed under any of the former Heads: And yet lefs tha
all thefe is the word Nothing, the meer lhadow of
fhadow, for all its high pretentions to Latin, Greek
and Hebrew, and for ought we know <ro Language
more than ever were in the Polyglott. This fomttime
exprefles all the foremention’d particular Notions,poi*
iible, irnpoflble, privative, &c, at others, only th
general confus’d Notion of undeterrmhate Nothing
and fometimes agen ’tis taken for its own
Little jelf, the very tiny word, the Nihilum , firti dock’
into Nihil , and then gelt again, and ramm’d up into
Nil, ( not unlike our Nothing, not ought Nought) and To
made lefs than nothing— ( and if any can make more
on’t, they are welcome.)
Now for the other Queries, how can Nothing be
Teen, felt, heard, or anderftood ? O very eatily : Die
you never yet fee a Countrey Fellow in Cheap fide gaping
up in the Sky * go to him, and ask him what he fee
tnere, and temto one his Anfwer will be, Nothing ; nay
pick out (if you can )40 wife People out of the Crowe
that pafs the EouUrej in a Summers day, and detire them
to look up as well as he they’ll all agree they fee
thing, tho’ perhaps a hundred thoufand Fools might tiare
fo long, till they had ma Je fomething on’t, and difeo-
ver’d whole Squadrons of tiery Dragons, and headlefi
Armies: Then for feeling, Nothing may be a Noun
ay arid a Noun Substantive too for all that, for did yoi
never put your Hand in your Pocket, and feel nothing
there ? If not, we’re lure you have better Fortune than
fome, that lhall be Nameleis. Then for hearing, there’s
no manner of doubt on’t, for as long as were lute, that
an horrid tiillnels may invade the Ears of ns Mortals,
’tis a dear Cafe, that like a fat old Gentleman with
Gold-fring’d Gloves, who fteals many a hearty Nap at
Cnurch again!! the Pillar of the Middle Ajle, tis poflble
for a Man to have his mouth open, and yet hear No-
thing : Or if he fhou’d chance not to Nod fair, but try
hard-heads with his Brother-fnorer, and wake ’em both
before the (breaking Clarli did it, yet if the Parlbn
talkr fence, they might uHtkr/land Nothing on’t: And fo
may nothing be feen, felt, heard, and underrtood: Erg.
tis a Noun D. Audit all this ben’c enough,
but we Ibou’d be accus’d for trifling in lo weighty a
Cafe, let the Querili look back to our diltin&ions r-
bove, and as for w hat remains, he may eatily anfwer it
lumlelf, without putting us to any further trou-
ble.
Quell, z. A lVidiower talking with bis Mi-
■iirejs, among other Complements, koncluJei wuh this , That
'he hop'd Jbs t votid-~ plead W> B reeding in his Ah fence: She
curi'tunderjiani what'he drives at, and wan’d defits)cu who
are us'd to hard. Quejiions, to try if you can explain his
mining t h’,7
Anfw. And that we think is clear enough : An FTorfe
that’s well-bred, as well as of a good /train, is. mod fit
for Now this, being a \nown Truth , the Qe n*
tleman deifr’d the Lady in his Abfehce'thaf her Love or
Good-


a&fcertffments!.
A urt^er Account of the Tryals of the New-England
ii Witches , with the Observations of a Perfon
that was upon the place fix or feven days, when the
fufpedfed Witches were firrt taken into Exa/nination: To
which is added Cafes of Confcitnce concerning Witchcrafts ,
and Evil Spirits perlbmting Men. Written at the
Requeft of the Minirters of Neia-England, by Increafe
Mather, Prefident of Harvard-Colledge, Price One
Shilling. Printed for John Vunton at the Raven in the *
Poultry, of whom may be had The Third Edition of Mr.
Cotton Mathers firfl Account of the Tryals of the Nesc~
England Witches, printed on the fame foe with this UJI
Account, chat they may bind up together.
He Second Volume of The Pofi-Boy robb'd of hit
JL Mail, or the Pacquet broke open : To which
are added feveral Ingenious Tetters lately fent by leve-
rai Gentlemen and Ladies to the Perfons concern’d in
this Frollick; as alfo Copies of thofe Private Letters
that lately pafs’d between with Obfervations upon
each Letter. Price bound i s. 6 d.
(O' A New Difcovery of that Unknown part of the
/jl Earth, call’d Terra Incognita Aufiralis, or the
Southern World. By JAMES SAVEUR a French-man:
Who being cart there by a Shipwrack, liv’d 5 y Years
in that Countrey. Thele Memoirs were thought lb Cu-
rious that they were kept Secret in the Cabinet of a late
great Minifter of State, and never Publilht till now
fince his Death. Tranflated from the French Copy print-
ed at Paris by Publick Authority. Licenfed and Enter*
ei according to Order. Price Bound One Shilling.
S3* ~THe Converfion of Theodore John, a late Teach-
X er among the JEWS, together with his Con-
jejftun of the Chriftian Faith which he delivered imme-
diately before he was Baptized. Price 6d.
All 1 Printed for J. Vunton at the Raven in the Poultry.
OBfervations on the Venerial Difeafe. By Charles
Peter, Chyrurgeon. Wherein is Explicated the
feveral Caufes and Signs of the Infection, with its va-
rious Effects, together with the true way of Curing
the faid Difeale, and all the Accidents that attend it.
Price Bound One Shilling. Sold by the Author a; his
Houfe in St. Martins-lane, near Long. Acre.
F Or the Satisfaction of the Publick, who are fo much
Abuled by partial and trifling Relations, a Genr.-
who hath fixed a Correfpondence in all places of ACh
on beyond Sea, will as loon as pofllbly after the Arri-
val of each Port in a 6 d. Letter, give an Impartial Ac-
count of what is material in the Harlem, Paris, Leyden
and Latin Gazettes and Slips, with a Letter from the
Camp in Flanders, and a Reference on the Margin deno-
ting the News of each, and del'cribing loch places as
are mentioned for Seige, Camp, or Battle, and on
Port-nights in another 6 d. Letter give Extra&s of pri-
vate Letters, which befides other things of Moment, con-
tain the News of the laid Gazettes a Port before the
Prints come over, to which he will add what is confi-
derable of Domeftick Occurrences. Such as pleafe to
leave Directions with Mr. Belt and Mr. Luntky, at the
Pejile and Morter againlt the Horfe-Jhooe Tavern in Chan-
cery-lane, may be furnilhed by the Penny-port, or other-
wife. To prevent Counterfeits, the Letters will be
feal’d with * Boars-heads between a Chereor Enpraild
and a Demi-boar for Creft. g
Goodnefs might often recall to mind his pretty Part*,
and neat Addrefs and Behaviour to make a fair and im-
partial Judgment of his extraordinary Accompli (hments
and good Breeding, and plead his Merits for him more
ftrongly and tenderly with her felf, than he ( mo deft
Mm ) cou’d ever do when adually prelent.
Queft. 3, if the Wind has fa great a Poster over the found
of a Ring of Bells , as to make 'em be heard much mm plain
that way it blows than the contrary, what's the Reajon by its
irregular rapid motion it does not rather confound and render
the Sound inharmonious ?
Anfw. The Sound of Bells is doubtlels render d more
or lei's diftinft at a diftance by the violence or equable-
ne|s of the Blaft, as it happens 5 for often we hear and
not hear the fame Bells in a time, nay hear
Come of ’em ( without any regard to their inuinficfound )
more clearly or dully than others. But notwithftanding
this occidental difference, the Air is of it felf equably
and circularly mov’d whenever found is made, as the
Water when a Stone or any other pondrous Body
thrown into it ; and thole Circles move on ft ill, ’till
their force is fpenr, the Wind furthering ’em in their
way, tho’ it may chance a little to ruffle ’em; as at Sea,
where thele Circles are larger, if there’s a Gale of
Wind, it drives on the Undulated Water lb equably and
juftly, that the Wave dees not often break’tillic reach-
es the Shore, unlels another dafhes againft it.
Queft. 4. A Gentleman hath been for fame time extream-
ly in Love with a Lady of a Fortune fupirtour to his own ,
who has always had a goof Ejleem for him , yet he never
durji by Word or Ad ion difeover bis PaJJion , confining it to
his own Breaft.
Another rvbofe love is not inferior to the former , Courts
a Lady with all imaginable Aidrefs y and the receives bin
with as much rigour , not enduring fo much as his fight with-
out a vifible Cunftraint and Ur,eifine\s : Query, Whether of
thefe can boaft bimfelf the unhappier Man .<*
Anfw. Truly neither has much Caufe to boaft; only
Lovers have a way of expreffion different from other
Men : However for the prefent we think the former is
the lefs Unhappy, becaufe not under the Frowns of his
fair Idol, who *tis not impoflible may hereafter re-
ward that Palfion ftie’s now ignorant of, and may ftill
continue to be lb, if he has Prudence and Conftancy,
’till perhaps flhe may Love him as much as he now
Adores her ; which if ffie once comes to, Inequality of
Fortunes will make no difference, but fhe’ll rather be
pleas’d, if generous, that ’tis in her Power to advance
his: But agen, let him manage Wifely lb Nice a Point,
or he lofes her for ever.
<%(?#. s lam a Barber ; being lately fent for to a
Tavern to Comb out fome Gentlemen’s Peruques, as I
was a Combing them, one of them ask’d me whether I
was willing to Serve the King under Brigadeer Stewart ;
I replyed, Yes, thinking to fpeak Loyally, not know-
ing they were Officers; they gave me a Shilling, which
1. thought was for Combing the Peruques, and fo ftopt
me, telling me I had Lifted my felf for a Souldier : We
w ent before my Lord Mayor, where I was put to my
Oath, 1 Swore I did not Lift my felf, fo was difmilfed;
it has troubled me lince that I Swore fo ralhly, there-
fore Pray give me your Opinions in your next Mercury
Whether I have done ill in Swearing fo y I not understanding
their meaning , nor why they tl.utn gave me the Shilling f If I
had gone i hud been ruined.
Anfw. If in your Oath you fpoke according to your
Intention, and as you underftood them, when you re-
ceiv’d the Money, We think you have not done amils.
Queft. 6. Pray, Gentlemen, of what Vfe is
ths Wind-bladder in Fifties i
Anfw. The Wind-bladder, wherewith moft
of them are furnifhr, lerves to poife their Bo-
dies and keep ’em equipondrant to the Wa-
ter, which die would fink to the bottom, and
lye grovling there, as hath by breaking the*
Bladder been experimentally found. By the
Contraction and Dilatation of this Bladder
they are able to raife or fink themfelves at
pleafure,* and continue at what Depth of Wa-
ter they pleafe.
LONDON, Printed for 31dl» &im*m at the Raven in the 1695.
