

■ *■
»


XLVI. A note on Chorozema varium ; a new Greenhouse Shrub
from Swan River, with a plate. By Professor Lindley.
.Among the multitude of papilionaceous shrubs inhabiting New
Holland there is so great a uniformity of appearance that a very
few species only are favourites in cultivation. That which is now
represented is however a striking exception to the general rule, for
the colours of its flowers are lively and varied, its foliage is of a
deep rich green tint, and it forms a compact bush, which has no
disposition to become naked, or drawn up, if managed with ordinary
skill.
It is a native of the Swan River Colony, was raised in the So-
ciety’s Garden in 1837, from seeds presented by Mr. Smart, under
the name of a native pea, and in the following year produced a single
flower about the end of the summer. Since that period the seed-
lings have become vigorous and have blossomed most abundantly,
both in the Society’s Garden and elsewhere.
There appear to be several varieties already, and it is not impro-
bable that this plant may have such a tendency to departure from
its wild form as to lend itself freely to the arts of amelioration, in
regard to the size and colour of the flowers, as well as that of the
foliage. On the accompanying plate two such varieties are re-
presented ; of which that on the right has the leaves constantly
destitute of the spiny wavy margin present upon the majority of
individuals that have been raised, and that on the left has larger
and brighter flowers than usual. It has not however been thought
necessary to give them separate names.
It grows well in pots or in the border of the conservatory, strikes
freely from cuttings, and is readily preserved during winter if pro-
tected from damp, which proves fatal to so many New Holland


HORT. TRANS. Vof H.FLJU. SECOND SERIES.
£ F Gibbon




A note on Chorozema varium.
47 9
Plants. It produces a long succession of flowers in the early
months of spring.
The accompanying figure has been made by Miss Drake from
specimens in the Society’s Garden.


