





PARLIAMENTARY
VETERAN
The Hon. Richard Thomas Ball
M.L.A. for Albury, 1895' 1898;
Corowa, 1904-1920; Murray,
1920-1927; and Corowa, 1927-
Secretary for Public Works, Minister for Railways,
1916-1920; Minister for Agriculture, 1922; Secretary
for Public Works, Minister for Railways and State
Industrial Enterprises, 1922-1925; and Minister for
Lands, 1927-1930
Thirty-five Years of Public Service and
Record Achievement
Printed at The Free Press Office, Sanger Street.
1937




HON. R. T. BALL, M.L.A




Preface
COROWA is distinguished aJbove all other New South
Wales electorates in having as its Parliamentary repre-
sentative the Hon. R. T. Ball, whose length of service
and achievements as Minister in control of important Depart-
ments of State constitute a record. Conscious of this fact,
and highly appreciative, the electors have reciprocated by
returning Mr. Ball at every election he has contested save one
since his first successful campaign 41 years ago.
In the course of his protracted membership of the
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Ball has sat in thirteen Parliaments,
and —again a unique experience—taken the oath of allegiance
to five Sovereigns; he has seen eleven Premiers at the helm
of affairs and an equal number of Speakers installed in the
Chair. It may with truth be said of such a man, as the author
of the sketch fittingly concludes, that Parliament is the richer
for his presence.
The review of his Parliamentary activities contained
within the covers of this brochure, based upon material culled
from official sources, has been published already, by special
arrangement in the columns of “The Corowa Free Press.” It
offers a plain, unvarnished tale of Mr. Ball’s public career
and laudable work as Administrator and Legislator that has
been followed with very keen interest from issue to issue. In
pamphlet form it will be welcomed by his host of friends and
supporters as a merited tribute to a man who has done much
to advance not only the welfare of his constituents, Ibut who
has rendered memorable service to the whole State.




Contents
Page
MR. BALL’S CAREER OF RECORD ACHIEVEMENT 1
EARLY YEARS 2
LOCAL GOVERNMENT EXPERIENCE 2
ELECTION AS MEMBER FOR ALBURY 3
FIRST AND ONLY DEFEAT 4
RE-ELECTION FOR COROWA 5
COROWA REMAINS TRUE 5
MINISTERIAL PREFERMENT (1917-1920) 6
SECOND TERM AS MINISTER (1922-1925) 7
THIRD TERM AS MINISTER (1927-1930) 8
HIS STERLING QUALITIES 9
ADMINISTRATION (1917-1920): (Public Works and Railways) 10
Norton Griffiths Agreement 12
Grain Elevator Contract 14
Hydro-Electric Development: Barrenjack, Nymiboida,
Port Kembla 15
River Murray Waters Agreement 17
Water Supply and Sewerage Works 21
Metropolitan Water Supply 23
City and Country Sewerage Schemes 25
Bridges 26
Harbour and River Improvements 26
Railways and Tramways 27
Uniform Railway Gauge 28
The 1917 Railway Strike 29
State Industrial Undertakings: Lime Brick Works, Botany;
Timber Yards 30
Walsh Island: Wartime Negotiations 31
ADMINISTRATION (1922-1925): (Department of Agriculture);
(Public Works, Railways and Industrial Enterprises) .. 33
Country v. City 34
Border Railways Agreement 34
River Murray Waters Agreement: (Amending Legislation) 39
Cement Products Ltd., Contract 42
Hydro-Electric Development: Barrenjack Transmission
System; Nymboida; Port Kembla; Hume Reservoir .. 43
Bridges and Roads 46
Sydney Harbour Bridge: Authorising Bill; Initial Works .. 46
George’s River and Spit (Middle Harbour) Bridges 52


CONTENTS—Continued
National Bridges 53
National Roads 54
Sydney Water Supply (Amplification) 55
City and Country Sewerage Schemes 57
Legislation: Metropolitan Water, Sewerage and Drainage Act 57
Country Measures: Public Works (Country Towns Water
Supply and Sewerage) Amendment Act; Country
Towns Water Supply and Sewerage (Debts Reduction)
Act 59
Railways and Tramways (Concessions to Producers) .... 59
Development of the Rail Motor 60
City and Suburban Electrification 61
Railway Royal Commission 62
Uniform Railway Gauge 63
Tramways 64
State Industrial Enterprises; Timber Yards; Homebush
Bay Brickworks; Bonus System 65
ADMINISTRATION (1927-1930): (Department of Lands) .... 67
Closer Settlement 67
Settlement of Crown Lands 68
Voluntary Subdivisions 69
Settlement near Border Railways 70
The Western Division 71
Concessions to Settlers 71
Migration Agreement 72
'Snow Leases 72
Legislation: Crown Lands (Amendment) Act; Western
Lands (Amendment Act) 73
LIST OF PUBLIC WORKS LEGISLATION 75
A 'HARVEST OF GIFTS 77
PARLIAMENTARY CAVALCADE: ELEVEN PREMIERS .... 79
ELEVEN MR. SPEAKERS 84
CHANGES IN PARLIAMENTARY PROCEDURE 86
SOME MEMBERS OF THE PAST S 7
APPENDIX: Presentation on the occasion of the Opening of
the Hume Reservoir 89


Illustrations
Pago
Frontispiece: The Hon. R. T. Ball
Barren Jack Hydro-Electric Works 16
Hume Reservoir: Site of the Turning of the First Sod 20
Hume Reservoir: Preliminary Work 22
Metropolitan Water Supply: Avon Dam 24
Bridge Over Murray River at Abbotsford 36
Bridge Over Murray River at Mildura 38
Sydney Harbour Bridge: Laying Foundation Stone of
South-East Abutment Tower 48
Sydney Harbour Bridge: General View 50
Metropolitan Water Supply: Nepean Dam 56




PARLIAMENTARY
VETERAN
{1 T YE serves the party best who serves the country best.” On
[J that basis of assessment the Hon. Richard Thomas Ball
must rank high in the esteem of the members of the
Party with which he is associated, for it would be hard to find
another member of the Legislature with such a striking record of
work accomplished for the welfare of the State.
Few political aspirants have been permitted to spend so many
years in Parliament; none to enjoy such a spell of Ministerial office.
There may be an odd member who, like Sir Daniel Levy, for ex-
ample, has sat in the House for a longer unbroken period of years,
but not one of those who were Mr. Ball’s contemporaries when he
made his political debut in 1895 sits with him to-day. In spite of
an absence of six years from the Parliamentary arena, he carries
the distinction of being the doyen of Parliament. As a Minister
his period of office as Secretary for Public Works was almost with-
out parallel. He held the portfolio altogether for six and a half
years, thus excelling the service of every other occupant of the
position, except one, since the inauguration of responsible Govern-
ment seventy years ago. The holder of the Marathon record is
John Sutherland, an old-time worthy, who represented Paddington
in the 4th Parliament (1860-64), and who remained its representa-
tive until 1880. For a while he went into limbo, to re-appear in
the 10th Parliament (1880-82), after an electoral redistribution, as
member for Redfern, wffiich seat he retained until his death in June,
1889. John Sutherland was raised to Ministerial status in the
Robertson Government; thenceforward he figured in pioneering
Ministries formed by Cowper, Parnell and Parkes, his years of
office totalling roughly nine. But apart from the fact that they


noth filled similar positions in the Governments of their day for
protracted terms, there are no other comparable circumstances. It
is truly a case of other times, other manners. The conditions ob-
taining in politics and the State at large when John Sutherland
administered the Public Works Department were poles apart from
those prevailing when Mr. Ball was in control; and any attempt to
establish a comparison must add to rather than detract from Mr.
Ball’s prestige. Furthermore, it has to be remembered that, in
addition to his long service as Secretary for Public Works, Mr. Ball,
for not quite three months, held the portfolio of Minister for
Agriculture, and later, in the Parliament of 1927-30, the portfolio
of Minister for Lands for over three years, so that the total of his
years of Cabinet rank falls just short of ten.
EARLY YEARS
Richard Thomas Ball came into the world three weeks after his
parents disembarked in Sydney—as he himself says, he just escaped
being born at sea. Wreckage from the ill-fated “Dunbar” still
drifted on the face of the waters as the vessel on which his parents
travelled entered Port Jackson. The father, a man of Devon, came
to Australia to take up the position of Manager for the Johnston
Estate, Annandale. But before long Death called him. The widow
later married a Mr. Francis, and with him settled at Rooty Hill.
Here young Ball grew up and imbibed the rudiments of education
at Eastern Creek school —a seat of learning on whose attendance
roll appears the name of a brilliant Australian, destined to become
leader of the New South Wales Bar, A. B. Shand. Though they
were far afield, the welfare of the Ball family continued to interest
the Johnstons, and when Richard Thomas w~as old enough it was
proposed that he should go upon the land. His mother, however,
did not take kindly to the suggestion ; a commercial career was chosen
for the boy. Thus his salad years were spent with the engineering
firm of Chapman & Co., Druitt Street, successors to P. N. Russell
With that firm he remained for some years until he found employ-
ment with the Atlas Co. Having rounded off his training, young
Ball set out to widen his experience; and his next job was to estab
lish, with a partner, an engineering works in Goulburn. In that
eity he spent fourteen years, at the end of which time he had be-
come a large employer of labour, had successfully carried out some
important contracts, and won the esteem of his fellow citizens.
Such was his interest in his'adopted profession that he helped to
Found the Institution of Engineers of Australia. With the Sydney
Division of the Institution he is still associated, his long-sustained
membership having earned for him a place on the honorary list.
MUNICIPAL EXPERIENCE
It was whilst he was residing in Goulburn that Mr. Ball made
his first essay in public affairs in the sphere of Local Government.
For eleven years he sat as an Alderman in the Goulburn Municipal
Council, twice during that period filling the Mayoral chair. Upon
his retirement to enter politics the local newspapers expressed, on
behalf of the citizens, the satisfaction widely felt at the way m


which he had worked in the interests of the municipality. They
described him as “one of the best Mayors we have ever had.” The
“Goulburn Penny Post,” referring to the Mayoral election in 1892,
paid a warm tribute to Mr. Ball for the excellent way in which he
had, during his Mayoralty, discharged his duties “in the face of
difficulties happily but seldom experienced in Goulburn” —in a way,
it declared, that had given a higher status to the Mayoralty. It
was mainly due to Mr. Ball’s suggestion that the City had been
very much improved and beautified by the planting of trees in the
streets, and that Belmore Square had been transformed. The same
newspaper, announcing Mr. Ball’s resignation from the Municipal
Council, in July, 1894, paid tribute to the undoubtedly high and
valuable qualities he had shown himself to possess, and went on to
add:
His record in this respect is one in which he may reason-
ably and without any suspicion of egotism, take pride. As
Alderman he has always been characterised by a well-
balanced mind that went intuitively to the real point in
any question under discussion, and by a capacity to regard
matters from the standpoint of the general welfare. What
he had to say was always clear and to the point, and it was
invariably free from the slip-shod either in argument or in
diction. ... As Mayor, he was an undoubted success. He
set an example of diligence and attention to duty which
was an indication in itself that he did not regard the posi-
tion as merely an honorary or ornamental one; and his con-
duct of meetings was always courteous, firm and intelligent.
The article concluded by echoing the wish expressed by one of
Mr. Ball’s Aldermanic colleagues, that “it will not be very long
before the opportunity is given for a return to a sphere in which
his native good sense and energy have done such excellent service
on behalf of Civic Government.”
ENTRY TO PARLIAMENT
The fine qualities Mr. Ball showed himself to be possessed of
in the sphere of Local Government developed to full perfection in
the forcing-house of politics. It was in July, 1895, that the oppor-
tunity to enter Parliament presented itself. A general election was
then imminent. Albury had been served by the same Parliamen-
tary representative for many years, but as the sitting member de-
clined to offer himself for re-election, the chance presented itself
for new blood to take his place. Mr. Ball entered the list of candi-
dates prepared to contest the vacancy. At that time he was in the
border town carrying out a contract with the Government in con-
nection with the local water supply scheme. Though a compara-
tively young man he was not inexperienced, and if not personally
known to many of the electors of Albury when he wooed their
suffrage, he was able at least to offer as evidence of his trustworthi-
ness the laudatory comments that had appeared in the Goulburn
Press upon his Municipal career. As a candidate for Parliamentary
honours, Mj*. Ball announced himself a supporter of the programme


and policy of the Reid Free Trade Government. An important
plank in the party platform was Constitutional Reform. Apparent-
ly the Upper House of that day, as has been the case on many occa-
sions since, was in conflict with the Legislative Assembly. It was
“completely ignoring the wish of the people and blocking useful
and much-needed reforms,” consequently there was demand for a
reconstruction “to bring it into closer touch and sympathy with
the people.” To this end George Reid and his supporters were pro-
mising, if returned, to abolish the life tenure of Legislative Coun-
cillors and to apply the principle of quinquennial election, with the
chance of re-appointment. Mr. Ball expressed himself favourable
to the reform. His political creed also embraced support for the
Land and Income Tax Bill. He confessed that he had long been an
advocate of the taxing of land A r alues as a just and equitable means
of raising revenue, but he would not consent to more than “one
penny in the £ on the unimproved value” without first consulting
the electors. The Customs Bill met with his approval, for it meant,
he told the electors, the removal of taxation from those least able
to bear it, and any loss in revenue that might result would be made
good from the proceeds of the Land and Income tax. To the farmer
and small landholder the land value tax, the candidate declared,
was not an additional burden; on the contrary their burden would
be lighter. He believed in the Referendum as the best means of
resolving any deadlock between the two Houses of Parliament, and
promised support to a scheme of Civil Service Reform on the
ground that whilst he believed in paying good men well, he did not
believe in taxing the country to keep a lot of men in comparative
idleness. That Avas bis platform; it was for the people to accept or
reject it.
If he Avas unversed in politics, his opponent Avas equally un-
tried, but Mr. Ball’is personal qualities, business standing, and the
policy he enunciated so impressed the electors that after a strenu-
ous campaign they returned him victorious.
Parliament at this time was composed of 125 members. The
Hon. G. H. (aftei-Avards Sir George) Reid was Prime Minister of the
ucav Parliament. Mr. Ball took his place in the ranks of the Govern-
ment supporters. Here he found himself in excellent company.
Associated with the Premier in the Ministry Avere J. N. Brunker,
•1. H. Carruthers, J. H. Young, Jacob Garrard, C. A. Lee, A. J.
Gould, Joseph Cook, J. H. Want, AndreAV Garran and John Hughes.
Among the rank and file of members sitting to right and left of
the Chair were such outstanding figures as James Ashton. Angus
Cameron, Tom EAving, R. G. D. Fitzgerald, W, M. Hughes, W. J.
Lyne, Win. McCourt, James McGoAven, R. D. Meagher, E. W.
O’Sullivan, A. B. Piddington and John See—some of whom in later
years Avere to win fame and high office in the Federal arena. In this
distinguished company the neAvly elected member for Albury won
his political spurs.
FIRST AND ONLY DEFEAT
At the election folloAving the dissolution of Parliament three
years later, Mr. Ball failed to secure re-election. His defeat was


not due to any “pendulum swing.” It was attributable rather to
his espousal of an unpopular cause. The Federal issue was over-
shadowing all other political issues and a strong body of Parliamen-
tarians was opposing certain features of the proposed Constitution,
especially as it applied to the Senate. Amongst the dissentients
were W. D. Millen, James Ashton, and W. T. Dick. Mr. Ball was
in their company. Unfortunately for his immediate political pros-
pects the electors of Albury did not see eye to eye with him. They
were more concerned with getting rid of inter-State border duties
—one of the promised benefits to be conferred by Federation; and
they were prepared willy nilly to accept the Constitution as set out
in the Bill for the passing of which the country was asked to give a
mandate. Mr. Ball stood to his principles, and when the campaign
was over, found himself ousted from the Albury seat by a narrow
margin of votes. If solace was denied him at the time, Mr. Ball can
flatter himself that the dissatisfaction he voiced against the Constb
tution of the Senate has not waned after 35 years’ experience of
Federation; if anything, it is even more pronounced to-day.
HIS RE-ELECTION
For the succeeding six years he pursued his business avocation,
hut his first taste of political life, far from satisfying his ambition,
had left him with an even stronger desire to participate in the
Government of the country. He patiently bided his time. In 1904
there was a redistribution of electorates. This rearrangement of
boundaries created a new electoral district, that of Corowa, and
simultaneously reduced the Assembly members from 125 to 90, at
which number they have remained. Also women, for the first time,
were entitled to exercise the vote conferred upon them by the
Women’s Franchise Act, 1902. In the remodelling of the constitu-
encies, Mr. Ball descried the opportunity he had been waiting for
to again try his luck. Looking round for the most likely prospect,
he picked upon Corowa as affording the best opening. He offered
himself, obtained selection by the local political party organisation,
fought the election and was returned at the top of the poll by a
substantial majority. On this occasion when he entered Parliament
he found himself ranged behind Sir Joseph Carruthers, who was
head of the new administration.
COROWA REMAINS TRUE
A Parliamentary candidate, it has been observed, has to be
either a habit or a surprise. Mr. Ball has gradually fallen into the
first-mentioned category. Having accepted him in 1904 as their
representative the electors of Corowa marked their appreciation of
his honourable and faithful service by returning him at the top of
the poll at each of the four succeeding elections.
Upon his third appearance in Parliament in 1907, Mr. Ball,
was elected a member of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Public Works. On this body he served for three years, his fellow
members appointing him vice-chairman. The works referred from
time to time for investigation were varied in character and neeessi-


fated travelling to almost every part of the State as well as to
adjoining States; and in the conduct of the inquiries Mr. Ball ac-
quired information at first-hand and a rich experience that were
most helpful in the work of administration and legislation he was
shortly afterwards called upon to undertake. Having discovered
for himself what the country required he bent all his efforts to see
that the country got it. This quality of consideration and interest
has remained an outstanding characteristic. As one of his con-
stituents recently observed, “Mr. Balks care has always been to
know his subject by heart, and to prove it by the evidence of his
own eyes. In that lies his assured popularity and the faith the
electors have placed in him for thirty long years.”
For half the time covered by his representation of Corowa in
the Parliaments of 1907, 1910, 1913 and 1917 the party Mr. Ball
supported occupied the Treasury benches and steered the ship of
State; for the other half it sat in opposition to Labour Govern-
ments. In those probationary years the hon. member for Corowa
learned something of the tactics used by a political party against
opponents installed in office. They were momentous years. They
covered the peak of the good times, and the duration of the war;
and to sit in Parliament even as an opponent of the Government,
was a salutary experience. It was a period also of internal political
turmoil, as well as grave events abroad, which increased the burdens
and reponsibilities of all the Australian Governments, Labour was
disrupted, and a National party evolved whose policy appealed so
strongly to a harassed public that it was returned to poAver at the
general election held early in 1917. The leadership of the neAV
political organisation was conferred upon Mr. W. H. Holman, erst-
vvhile Labour Premier.
MINISTERIAL PREFERMENT
In this National Ministry Mr. Ball, almost ranking by this time
as an “old Parliamentary hand,” was accorded a place. It was an
honour deservedly conferred for long and loyal service and marked
ability. The portfolio allotted was the very important one of
Secretary for Public Works and Minister for Railways—important
because of the disturbing shrinkage in the amount of money avail-
able for public works and the menace of a swelling tide of unem-
ployment. Mr. Ball administered the affairs of the two depart-
ments until the dissolution in February, 1920.
Included in the legislation passed by the National Government
was a measure to apply to future elections the principle of propor-
tional representation. * It may be mentioned incidentally that Mr.
Ball Avas instrumental in having inserted in this Bill an amendment
intended to prevent personation by requiring each elector Avhen he
went to the poll to sign a declaration attached to the roll that he
had not already voted at the election and that he Avas the person
referred to in the electoral roll. An integral part of the reform the
measure brought about was a readjustment of the electoral boun-
daries to create a series of three-member and five-member constitu-
encies, in substitution for the single electorates with Avhieh the


country had been for so long familiar. The number of members
was left undisturbed. One effect of this redistribution was that
Corowa as a separate electoral district ceased to exist. The area
embraced within its boundaries was merged with Albury and
Wagga to form the spacious Murray electorate. If the National
Government expected any advantage to accrue from the application
of the principle of proportional representation it failed them at the
polls. The final count left them in a minority; Labour came home
triumphant.
Among the Nationalists who weathered the storm was Mr. Ball,
lie was one of several candidates who contested the new Murray
seat. The electors in the Corowa section of the area remained
staunch, as did many of Mr. Ball’s old friends in the Albury dis-
trict. Sufficient support was thus assured not only to include him
among the three chosen to represent the multiple-membered con-
stituency but to return him at the top of the poll.
The successful Labour Government had a checkered career.
First, John Storey wore the mantle of leadership. Upon his death
while still in office, James Dooley succeeded and survived for two
months and thirteen days. Then followed the ‘‘one day” Ministry
formed by Sir George Fuller—officially reigned for seven hours;
1o be superseded by a second Dooley Ministry which struggled
along for less than four months. To try to clarify the situation and
secure a measure of governmental stability, the country was
appealed to. The appeal resulted in the return to power of an anti-
Labour Government.
SECOND TERM AS MINISTER
It was about this time that there appeared in the political field
a small party of men, country members in the main, who styled
themselves “Progressives,” whose special mission it was to advocate
and forward the claims of the man-on-theJand. Insignificant as it
may have seemed in those days, with the passage 0? years the party
has grown into a powerful body, now known as the “Country
Party,” and a most influential factor in the Government of the
country. The exigencies of the situation at the beginning of 1922
were responsible for a coalition between Nationalists and Progres-
sives; and the government of the country was placed in the hands
of a Ministry composed of representatives of the two parties, with
Sir George Fuller as Premier. In this administration Mr. Ball for
the second time held Cabinet rank. On this occasion he was award-
ed the portfolio of Minister for Agriculture. Two months later a
reshuffling was rendered necessary by the retirement from the
Ministry of Sir Thomas Henley, when the position he relinquished
of Secretary for Public Works, Minister for Railways and State In-
dustrial Enterprises fell to Mr. Ball.
The Coalition Government retained control of affairs until Par-
liament expired by effluxion of time —a most rare happening in the
history of Parliamentary Government in this State. In the succeed-
ing Parliament which lasted from May 1925 until September 1927


with Labour iu control, Mr. Ball sat again as one of the three mem-
bers for Murray.
COROWA AGAIN EMERGES
Just prior to the dissolution the Government, adopting the
methods of its opponents but blind to the lesson of experience, tink-
ered with the electoral law to restore the system of single-seat
electorates. Under the operation of this amendment the constitu-
ency of Murray was disintegrated and its area apportioned between
Albury, Corowa and Wagga. At the subsequent general election
Mr. Ball submitted himself to the electors of Corowa, the district
in which he was best known. The soundness of his judgment and
his good repute were attested by the number of votes recorded
which placed him at the head of the poll and returned him with a
handsome majority. The verdict of the country as a whole restor-
ed the National party to power.
THIRD MINISTERIAL TERM
When the House assembled Mr. Bavin met it as Premier. Among
the men selected to compose the Ministry was the hon. member for
Corowa. By virtue of his mature judgment and ripe experience
as a country member, he was on this occasion installed in the office
of Minister for Lands. The Public Works portfolio went to Mr.
Buttenshaw, the leader of the now significant Country Party
—a body which though maintaining its separate entity, was but-
tressing the National Party with its support in the administration
of the affairs of the State.
A FAITHFUL AND ESTEEMED MEMBER
Ever since the re-creation of the Corowa electoral district, Mr.
Ball has continued to be its Parliamentary representative. His
many electioneering campaigns were all fought fairly, with a scru-
pulous avoidance of personalities—that fruitful source of disorder
and ill-feeling. The excellent example he set, if generally followed,
would help to make politics a cleaner and more attracting game.
Thus, year by year, his reputation and the good-will of his constitu-
ents have grown together until at the last election in 1935 such
was the measure of appreciation and so impregnable the position,
that his right to retain the seat was not challenged by his political
opponents. Public expression has been given on many occasions to
the esteem in which he is held, but never so warmly, so sincerely,
so fully or in such practical form —wallets of notes, an inscribed
silver cigar ease, and entree dishes were presented to him—as at
the receptions in Corowa and Lockhart accorded Mr. Ball after his
unopposed return. His constituents assembled in force, every dis-
trict in the electorate being represented. Speaker after speaker join-
ed in showering encomiums upon their sitting member. They eulo-
gised him as an outstanding figure in Parliament, and extolled his
work in the interests not only of his own electorate but of the
whole State. His achievements in the field of land settlement, rail-
way and bridge construction, and in other directions to bring the
amenities of life to country people were specially applauded. It was


agreed that the most enduring monument to his statesmanship was
to be found in the host of men and women on the land to-day, who
were living under conditions assuring them reasonable comforts
And nowhere more so than in the Corowa electorate.
A MAN OF STERLING QUALITIES
Reviewing the career of Mr. Ball since he was first elected to
Parliament, it will be generally conceded that his honourable record
of service rendered conforms to the best traditions. The work he
lias accomplished must win wide recognition. By constructive
achievement he lias succeeded in making solid and valuable his
political principles. He has pursued his aims with courage and con-
viction. lie may, and possibly did on occasions display the common
human failing of fallibility, but his integrity was never in doubt.
To a marked degree he has shown himself to possess those cpialities
that invariably win respect. He parades no meretricious accom-
plishments; he is content to be a plain man, and thereby is better
understood and perhaps more readily trusted. His actions instil a
feeling of security, and his personality unites with his achievements
iO place him in the ranks of patriotic self-made men who have done
so much for the advancement of Australia, and whose guerdon is
the recognition that they are of the good men who, in all ages,
have helped to endow humanity with the best form of government.
Throughout the 35 years of his public life, Mr. Ball never once
failed in his duty. As a private member of the Assembly he was
regular in his attendance, zealous in the discharge of his duties, and
keenly interested in the business before the House. Always he
showed himself specially concerned with questions affecting the
welfare of the country, alert to further the affairs of his constitu-
ents. and possessed of a sense of values and of responsibilities that
marked him for advancement later. In tiiose early formative years
lie learned something of the problems of government, acquired a
Knowledge of human affairs and developed a power of understand-
ing that were an invaluable asset. This prior training stood him
in good stead when he received preferment; and once in office he
amply justified the choice by his intelligence, discernment, determi-
nation, initiative, zest for work, and, more than all else, by his
capacity to get things done. As Minister in control of public de-
partments, the long list of Acts and works with which his name is
associated, all of them important contributions to the well-being of
the State, is at once a tribute to his diligence and striking testimony
that his efforts have not been without a substanial measure of
success. It is an interesting footnote to history that Mr. Ball’s
tenure of Ministerial office was determined in every instance only
by the dissolution of Parliament and the defeat at the poll of the
Government of which he was a member, never once through any
adverse verdict of his own constituents.
If, as a speaker, Mr. Ball never soars to a high plane of oratory,
he can be persuasive and sufficiently powerful to command attention
and sustain the interest of his hearers, for shrewdness of judgment
and clearness of observation permeate all he has to say. Both his


character and manners are above reproach. From his association
with the last of the political “giants” he learned something of
Parliamentary procedure, and abiding respect for Parliamentary
traditions, whilst long association has developed wisdom and a
kindly tolerance that disarms even his most uncompromising politi-
cal opponent.
Much water has flowed under the bridge since Mr. Ball made
his first bow in the Legislative Assembly 41 years ago. Tremen-
dous changes have occurred in the social, industrial and political
life of the State. Fat times of prosperity have been followed by
lean times of depression. Each phase brought its own peculiar
problems to be unravelled, its own difficulties to be surmounted;
and Governments were made and unmade in the attempt to cope
with them. To have survived these perplexities and the natural
viscissitudes of politics, and to be returned again and again by the
same electorate is a tribute to his worth and character flattering to
any man. Mr. Ball, no less susceptible than his fellows, must be
gratified to feel that his constituents place such a high value upon
his services, and that for more than three decades he has discharged
his duties to their entire satisfaction. This confidence on the one side
and loyal service on the other, continues. Mr. Ball as the representa-
tive for Corowa, still serves his country with faculties unimpaired
and sagacity bred of experience; and the electorate that has
honoured him and that he graces, may confide its trust with equa*
nimity knowing that “he is well paid who is well served.”
ADMINISTRATION 1917—1920
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND RAILWAYS
Mr. Balks unparalleled service to the State is epitomised in the
list of public works completed whilst he held Ministerial office, in
the success that attended his administration of the Departments
he controlled, and the many measures of legislation he sponsored
and carried through Parliament.
When first appointed to the position of Secretary for Public
Works and Minister for Railways in the Holman National Govern-
ment, the Great War was slowly drawing to an end. Monetary
stringency had become more and more acute. The spectre of the
depression had not as yet made its appearance, but the harassing
problem of the moment was how to obtain loan money to continue
expenditure on the accustomed scale and retain in employment the
thousands of men whose livelihood depended on the construction of
public works. The State finances for the year then current showed
a deficit; a Treasury analysis disclosed that there was every pros-
pect of the quarter of a million at which the deficit then stood
swelling in the ensuing financial year to one million. Loan expen-
diture In the last year of Labour’s administration had approxi-
mated 7! millions. In its first year of office the new National
Government, sensing trouble in store, budgeted for five millions. A


steady rise in the cost of everything needed to properly equip and
carry on essential services joined with a falling revenue to accen-
tuate the difficulties of administration. The cost of living was
soaring; workers were clamant for a compensating wage increase.
Not only was money hard to get, but when it was procurable a
greatly advanced rate of interest had to be paid.
One way of easing the situation the Government realised was
to apply a policy of drastic economy. Expenditure in every pos-
sible direction must be cut down to what in the circumstances might
be regarded as a fair thing. But the application of this policy was
far from simple. In all directions throughout the State were to be
found works partially completed, and therefore not fulfilling the
purpose they were intended to serve. From every quarter also
were coming requests for further works to promote intercourse,
develop trade and industry, and increase the comforts of country
residence. After a careful review the Government decided that
even though in some cases money was being spent on reproductive
works, to continue the expenditure meant increasing the national
debt and therefore it must cease. Where commitments had been
entered into by the various departments in connection with rail-
ways and other important public works, the expenditure was to be
lessened by degrees. And in those cases where work had reached
the stage that to abandon it would have meant the total loss of the
already spent, every effort was to be made to complete it.
Undismayed by the perplexities of the situation and unimpeded
by the handicap of unfamiliarity, Mr. Ball bent all his efforts to
back up his colleagues in their work of transforming political
promises and the policy adumbrated in pre-election speeches into
practical accomplishment. He gave of his best, and resolutely and
meticulously guided the affairs of his great Department. He drew
up a long programme of work and carried it out as speedily as cir-
cumstances allowed. Difficult as were the times, it is doubtful
whether any Minister who has held the portfolio of Secretary for
Public Works can point to a more solid achievement. Heavy com-
mitments had been entered into by the previous Government which
the National Government had to honour, yet Mr. Ball by his astute
administration, managed to restrict expenditure to the limits of
necessity with no sacrifice of any call from the country and the
minimum of dislocation. With the cessation of hostilities and the
end of international strife, it was possible for the Government to
concentrate attention upon the question of production. Every in-
ducement was held out to landholders to respond. As one means to
this end, Mr. Ball initiated and pressed forward railways to facili-
tate the distribution of products and the opening up of areas suit-
able for settlement; hydro-electric schemes as an essential to modern
business; water supply and sewerage schemes; harbour improve-
ments and bridges to encourage intercourse and the interchange of
products. In the accomplishment of this great aim he was greatly
helped by the Government’s policy of judicious expenditure to the
maximum allowed by the position of the finances.


THE NORTON GRIFFITHS AGREEMENT
An early administrative act was to bring under review by his
colleagues the agreement entered into by their predecessors in
office with Messrs. Norton Griffiths and Co. This English firm had
contracted with the Holman Labour Government to finance and con-
struct an agreed upon list of public works as the best means of
overcoming the difficulty the Government was experiencing in ob-
taining money, and of providing employment for the thousands of
labourers, skilled and unskilled, who were dependent for work upon
the State’s loan expenditure. The flow of money from overseas had
ceased under war pressure. The Norton Griffiths’ offer promised a
welcome relief. The firm was ready to raise £10,000,000 over a
period of five years for public works purposes. During the first
two years of the currency of the contract £4,000,000 was to be
found; in each remaining successive year £2,000,000 to be spent on
works enumerated in the schedule attached to the agreement. For
their services as underwriters, Norton Griffiths were to receive H
per cent, brokerage charges, and 5 per cent, interest. For acting
as agents for the Government in supervising and carrying out the
specified works, a further 5 per cent, was to be paid on all moneys
expended. It was justifiably anticipated that by reason of the repu-
tation of the contractors and their wide experience in the construc-
tion of public works in other parts of the world, the arrangement
entered into would permit of certain railways and other urgent
works being constructed economically, efficiently and with expe-
dition. On the part of the firm there was a further undertaking to
hand over to the State Government on sth November, 1920, the
various works scheduled so far as they could be completed by the
expenditure of £10,000,000.
The specified works included three sections of the North Coast
railway (then in course of construction), railway lines from Glen-
reagh to Dorrigo, Humula to Tumbarumba, Broken Hill to Men-
indie, Condobolin to Menindie, Werris Creek to Binnaway, and
Forbes to Stockinbingal—all projects with which a start had
already been made. Other lines that had been commenced but
which had been closed down owing to shortage of funds, and a
number of newly approved works were also scheduled. In addition
were included the improvement w r orks at Coff’s Harbour and the
Homebush Saleyards and railway loop. The total cost of this pro-
gramme was estimated to be £12,774,000. Of this sum the New
South Wales Government was to be responsible for £5,870,000, and
the supervisors, Norton Griffiths, for the balance.
The contract was signed on April 24th, 1915. Operations com-
menced on Ist July of the same year. But well laid as was the
scheme, unexpected happenings defeated it. In a very little while
it was clear that owing to the abnormal conditions prevailing, not
only here but all over the world, neither party to the agreement
would be able to fulfil its contractual obligations. On the part of
the Government there was an obligation to provide the facilities
necessary to enable Norton Griffiths to earn the commission to which
the firm was entitled at the rate specified. And on the part of the


contractors there was the obligation to raise and spend £4,000,000
exclusive of the value of plant and material to be supplied by the
State between July 1915 and November 1917—a period of a little
over two years.
So soon as it was realised that to carry out this ambitious
scheme at the estimated cost and within the specified time was an
impossibility, Mr. Ball suggested that the contract should be
amended, that Norton Griffiths should be relieved of the work of
supervision, and that the five per cent, payment agreed upon should
apply only to the amount of loan money actually raised. The
situation was an embarrassing one all round. Not only were the
contractors in trouble by reason of the difficulty in getting plant
from abroad, but the Government itself was equally unable to ob-
tain rails and structural steel for bridges in anything like the
quantities required to permit of the work proceeding at the neces-
sary pace. The alternative was to allow the contractors to purchase
the materials abroad. But even if this had been possible, which
was doubtful, it would have meant that the Government would have
bad the task of finding the 5 per cent, it was liable to pay on all
expenditure, which would have meant greatly increasing its
financial obligations under the contract. A further source of
embarrassment to the Government was that to give full effect to
the agreement would require the diversion of every available penny
to this purpose and the starving of every other public work in the
State, no matter how important, no matter how urgently needed.
The proposal to modify the contract provoked prolonged dis-
cussion. A good deal of diplomacy had to be exercised by the
Minister before he could persuade some of his colleagues in the
Cabinet to accept his suggestion. In a measure it meant swallowing
their principles, for as members of the Labour Government that had
conducted the negotiations with Norton Griffiths, they had hailed
the agreement as the "Open Sesame” if not to unlimited millions,
at least to sufficient means to permit of escape from a situation
financially embarrassing. But the case Mr. Ball presented was con-
vincing, and the course he recommended was followed. As it turn-
ed out, the action of the Government was as acceptable to Norton
Griffiths as it was advantageous to the Government, for whilst the
contractors received as compensation for any rights they were de-
prived of, no less a sum than £360,000, the country was saved
millions. When the proposal was first put before Cabinet it was
believed that the saving to the taxpayers would in all probability
be one million. At a later date, however, it was computed that the
amendment of the contract drafted by Mr. Ball prevented what
might have been a total loss of £3,870,000 —that figure representing
the extra cost to the State that in all probability would have been
incurred if the contract had been allowed to proceed to completion.
All things considered. Mr. Ball was entitled to regard the cancelling
of the contract as one of his most laudable actions, for not only was
a very substantial saving to the taxpayers effected by terminating
the construction and supervision of public works by the company,
but the State interests in the matter of finance were fully protected.


THE GRAIN ELEVATOR CONTRACT
Not only in connection with the Norton Griffiths’ contract did
Mr. Ball serve the State well. Another opportunity presented itself
when the building of grain elevators was decided upon in fulfilment
of past promises by the Government and of demands by wheat
growers. Provision for the bulk handling of wheat was a plank in
the platform of the Holman Labour Government. It was really a
question of National interest. Victoria, South Australia and West-
ern Australia had all paid considerable attention to it, and together
with New South Wales, had agreed to establish on a uniform basis
the system of bulk handling in substitution for the bagging of
wheat. This change in method was to apply to the 1917-18 season’s
crop. It was computed that with a normal harvest on the then
basis of production a saving of £1,200,000 would be effected by
farmers in the cost of handling their product. The New South
Wales scheme contemplated the construction of terminal elevators
of large storage capacity at both Sydney and Newcastle, and 200
country silos. The cost of the complete programme was expected
to reach in round figures £2,000,000.
A Grain Elevator Bill to give Legislative sanction to the Labour
Government’s policy was introduced in and passed through the
Assembly, but it received its quietus in the Legislative Council.
Soon afterwards the Labour Government went out of office. The
succeeding National Government reintroduced the bill; it was adopt-
ed by both Houses and became law. Lender this measure the De-
partment of Agriculture, which had drafted the legislation, was
made the constructing authority, not the Department of Public
Works. As a preliminary step it was decided to build the terminal
elevators in Sydney and Newcastle, and in addition six of the more
important country silos. It was the intention of the Minister for
Agriculture to give the job to a Melbourne contractor, Teesdale
Smith, without publicly calling for tenders. The cost of the first
section of the works was estimated to be in the vicinity of half
a million. In due course the Department of Public Works was
asked to prepare an agreement in accordance with Teesdale Smith’s
offer. This responsibility Mr. Ball, as Ministerial head of the De-
partment, declined to accept. The amount of money involved and
the casual manner in which the matter was being dealt with he
viewed so seriously that he at once brought it under the notice of
the Premier, Mr. Holman. Later Cabinet decided to follow the
usual practice and protect the taxpayers’ interests by publicly call-
ing for tenders. Although the author of the original offer was the
successful tenderer, the public was safeguarded by the fact that the
work had to be carried out in strict conformity with conditions laid
down by the Government and subject to supervision that made for
fair dealing. How much this foresight and adoption of common-
sense practice saved the State it is not possible to compute, but it
is safe to say that it must have been a substantial amount.


HYDRO-ELECTRIC DEVELOPMENT
Among the many measures fathered by Mr. Ball at this time
not the least important was that which initiated the development of
hydro-electric power in New South Wales. The authorising hill
was introduced in 1919; it met with little opposition, and was speed-
ily passed. The proposal to which Parliament was invited to give
its approval was but the preliminary to a more pretentious scheme,
the dimensions of which would be determined by the measure of
success and the experience gained in this initial step.
Realising the tremendous part electricity would play in the
future expansion of country towns and primary industries, Mr. Ball
set up a special committee of experts to investigate the whole
question and to indicate the sites most favourable for the establish-
ment of hydro-electric stations. This body, after inquiry, recom-
mended two schemes —one at Barren Jack dam and the other on the
Nymboida river. The total expenditure involved was estimated at
£900,000. Both projects, the Committee pointed out, were planned
to permit of expansion to meet the growing needs of the community.
Consideration had been also given to the extension of the principle
1o other portions of the State where conditions were suitable, as
for example on the Snowy river, the Shoalhaven and the Tumut
river. But the ideal spot for the first trial was Barren Jack Dam,
where an immense volume of water was impounded. The scheme,
so far as it applied to that site and as it was devised by experts, pro-
vided for the construction of power stations at the dam with auxil-
iary stations on the Tumut and its tributaries. Three years earlier
Mr. de Burgh had submitted a much less ambitious proposal, which
was not proceeded with. That scheme contemplated the erection
of a small station at the Barren Jack dam to develop 8 million units
of electrical power. It was anticipated that a demand for the
current at payable rates would be found in the towns in the imme-
diate vicinity, more especially in connection with the pumping of
water for domestic supply purposes. This was to be the inaugura-
tion of the development of hydro-electric pow T er in the State, and
the scheme w r as so planned as to permit of gradual enlargement as
the demand for current increased. Although it was not adopted,
the proposal aroused a very keen interest in the municipal authori-
ties and the people generally on the south-west tableland in centres
such as Cootamundra, Temora, Junee and Wagga, and kept alive
the agitation for this or some more effective scheme. It remained
for Mr. Ball, with his broad vision and keen appreciation of the
needs of the country, to resurrect the matter and give it practical
effect.
Though prepared on a more elaborate and much more costly
scale, the second and substituted proposal, carrying as it did the
imprimatur of experts, met with ready acceptance. With a mini-
mum output of 36 million units the power stations and other works
at the Barren Jack Dam, together with the auxiliary stations re-
quired for the protection of the settlers on the Murrumbidgee Irri-
gation area and the avoidance of any possibility of interference with


yfgfgK
L. \ j!
f N| \ jm*
. /*V A ' 1 , -. . ,>r .> *,
*f/\ ? \ #1 1 • ' .-v • j*T«Hi
J«r 4 i
- «* Jl
/ •■ ..Vr-v- ; •■ :. /- Jr! 1 's*\ / .fltoH
v- ! .- -^S
• • • •; . * - ■' ■ >. \/ \
w\|| 4^ v
* J v i' -
«v , v ■ |i /ip/ V v *■ ;v - N _ .;. be m - .• ■■ . ■>
% /’ . . ' ’ v. > ■- • >4§
/; Y ' i% -. vf
&•■' ■ > ' V ':£ k v ‘:‘' 1 ’ • " ’.V$ v -’-* %:
R| & fi
' ■ - Vi 5 ’'/ 4 ' : ;■>;. ; ' V W^
:rt,: ;y.*« p 3flS??''pw^. ; -^^KSSMr
t iipw
't's- •}“- v . « ' ; ., JU ? v * ” r >.-. )?5 ' s^f
courtesy of Govt. Printer.)
BARREN JACK HYDROELECTRIC WORKS.— View from No. 3 Tower to Murrumbidgee River.


riparian rights, were estimated to cost £820,000. It was computed
that with current generated on the most favourable terms, a revenue
of £150,000 would be earned annually from the minimum output,
and that the annual expenditure should not exceed £95,000. If
favourable terms were granted, so the experts advised, the develop-
ment of districts remote from the seaboard would be encouraged.
The towns that would come within the immediate sphere of influ-
ence were Cootamundra, Murrumburrah, Harden, Yass, Gundagai,
Wagga and Junee. Further to the east, Goulburn could be served;
to the north, Young and probably Grenfell; to the west, Temora and
possibly the irrigation area and Narrandera.
The Nymboida scheme was but a small installation intended to
be the forerunner of a large and comprehensive undertaking locally
known as the Gorge scheme, to be gradually developed on the
Clarence river and its tributaries. It comprehended besides the
erection of a regulating weir on the Nymboida river, the utilisation
<>+’ the tunnel conveying water from that source in connection with
the North and South Grafton water supply. The main purpose of
the station was the generation and transmission of electricity to
Grafton for lighting and power purposes. It was expected that the
project would prove more than self-supporting; and it was said to
possess the advantage that it could readily be extended to serve
other centres, and finally merged in the larger project. The cost
was estimated at £BO,OOO.
When asking for Parliamentary authority to construct the
works, Mr. Ball expressed the hope that they presaged a develop-
ment that would be of inestimable advantage to the country. The
power of the future, he foresaw, would be hydro-electric power,
which could be economically generated from the natural resources
with which the State abounded.
Although not coming within the same classification as the two
schemes just described, another and most important electrical
generating plant was installed at Port Kembla to facilitate the
operating of the coal loading appliances of the harbour, and the
construction of the breakwater. From this establishment current
was to be transmitted to the water supply construction works on the
Gordeaux and Avon rivers. An agreement already entered into
with the Wollongong Municipal Council secured a supply of electric
current for that town from the Port Kembla station for light and
power purposes; and there was in contemplation the carrying of
transmission lines to the municipalities of Mittagong, Bowral, Moss
Vale and Picton. Upon the foundations thus laid has been gradu-
ally erected the wide-spread service in operation to-day.
RIVER MURRAY WATERS AGREEMENT
In the forefront of the schemes to encourage land settlement
and productive development—a significant item in the Government’s
policy at this period, as it is to-day, stood the series of important
works stipulated for in the River Murray Waters agreement. The
object sought was to secure, for the purposes of navigation and irri-
gation, the economical use of the waters of the river and its tribu-


taries, and reconcile the interests of the Commonwealth and the
riparian States. As far back as 1914 the Prime Minister of the
Commonwealth and the Premiers of the States of New South Wales,
Victoria and South Australia had perceived the necessity for some
such control, and had resolved upon combined action. But not until
J 917 were negotiations sufficiently advanced to enable Mr. Ball, as
Secretary for Public Works, to draw up an agreement to ratify the
resolution, and obtain Parliamentary approval. The immediate
purpose of the undertaking was the appointment of a River Murray
Commission representative of the four contracting Governments to
co-ordinate the activities of the several constructing authorities,
and ensure uniformity in administration.
The works to be constructed were set out in four groups: They
were intended to provide: (i) A system of storage at suitable sites
on the Upper Murray; (ii) storage at Lake Victoria; (hi) weirs
and locks in the course of the Murray from its mouth to Echuca;
and (iv) w T eirs and locks in the course of the Murrumbidgee from
its junction with the Murray at Hay, or alternatively at the discre-
tion of the New South Wales Government in the river Darling, ex-
tending upstream from the Murray and involving an equivalent
monetary expenditure. All the works between the mouth of the
Murray and Wentworth were to be constructed by South Australia;
those on the Murrumbidgee or the Darling above Wentworth, by
New South Wales; and those on the Murray above its junction with
the Darling jointly by New South Wales and Victoria. The several
authorities concurred in the view that a commencement should be
made with the building of the storage works, locks and weirs as
soon as possible after the agreement became operative. And all
were agreed that as far as was reasonably practicable the works on
Lake Victoria should be completed within four years, those on the
Upper Murray within seven years, and all other works within twelve
years.
At the time the agreement was entered into it was computed
that the cost to be incurred would not exceed £4,663,000. Of this
amount the Commonwealth undertook to find £1,000,000. The bal-
ance was apportioned equally among the three interested States,
representing a contribution by each of £1,221,000.
Analysing the programme of works to be carried out, 9 locks
and weirs were to be placed between Blanchetown and Wentworth
at a cost of £865,000; 17 weirs and locks between Wentworth and
Echuca, at a total cost of £1,700,000; 9 weirs and locks between the
junction of the Murray and Murrumbidgee and Hay, or alternative-
ly. from the junction of the Darling with the Murray upstream in
the river Darling, at a cost of £540,000. The Upper Murray storage
to be established at some convenient site immediately below the con-
fluence of the Mitta Mitta river with the Murray, it was estimated
would cost £1,353,000; and the Lake Victoria storage scheme
£205,000. Under the provisions of the agreement all tolls collected
were to be paid to the Commission for distribution among the con-
tracting Governments in certain defined proportions. The bearing
of all these projects upon the important question of the provision of


areas of land for settlement purposes, the protection they would
afford, during a period of drought, to settlers already established
along the river ,and the opportunities they would open up for em-
ployment for returning soldiers, determined the several Govern-
ments to put forward every endeavour to bring about an early start
with as many of the works as possible.
Before any of the works for which New South Wales was re-
sponsible could be put in hand, Mr. Ball, as the constructing author-
ity for the State by virtue of his position as Secretary for Public
Works, had to confer with the State Rivers Commission of Victoria
to determine the conditions that should apply. The decision of the
conference was that the works contemplated under the agreement,
in so far as they were situated on the portion of the Murray river
forming the boundary between the two States, should be carried out
jointly. It was also agreed that at the outset efforts should be con-
centrated on the Upper Murray storage dam, and the lock and weir
at Torrumbarry at the site afterwards selected by Mr. Ball in con-
junction with the Victorian State Rivers Commission. April, 1919,
saw affairs so forward that the departmental engineers were in a
position to submit a design for the weir, which was approved of by
the Commission; and orders were given for the preliminary work to
be put in hand. The estimated cost of the work w T as £120,000. To
avoid the difficulties likely to arise in carrying out contracts en-
tered into by dual authorities, the construction was placed in the
hands of the Victorian Commission on the joint behalf. Tenders
were called for, but as all those sent in were considered excessive,
none was accepted and the work was done by day labour.
Dealing next with the major scheme, the Upper Murray storage,
surveys and borings were made to find the most suitable site for the
dam. After exhaustive tests a position immediately below the
junction of the Mitta Mitta with the Murray -was chosen. Prelimin-
ary designs were prepared and approved early in 1919, and the
work of construction authorised. In this case it was arranged that
the recognised constructing authority in each of the two States,
Victoria and New South Wales, should deal with the portion of the
work situated within its respective boundary. The estimate of the
cost of the reservoir at this stage was £1,639,000 —an advance of
£286,000 upon the amount fixed when the agreement was signed.
Already it 'was clear that the ultimate total cost of the scheme
would be greatly in excess of the original estimate, and instructions
were issued therefore that the greatest economy in construction
should be exercised. Due to Mr. Ball’s keen interest in the matter,
i\ u early commencement was made with operations on the northern
side of the river. Bores and shafts were sunk, a quarry site select-
ed, roads of access planned, and the site for the establishment of a
township fixed. Work went forward so expeditiously that on 28th
November, 1919, the inaugural function of turning the first sod took
place. The ceremony was performed by the Governor General (Sir
Ronald Munro Ferguson) in the presence of a distinguished gather-
ing, including members of the Federal and State Ministries and
Legislatures. Under these most auspicious circumstances was set


■■‘Jt 'Sf r **rr ■ /%%l> . -y -If , ,1
'ft',:- -••, ' , J., ,„yt %- < ,*T- V «r- -v ■■• ■■ *
•?‘r?r » ■ , 4 1 ’ . ■' ■■ ■ ' ■ ' ■ s /•..>■
% - V ' ■ *- v ' ■ *vfc <* t> »
’"'■s. . , i-i*’ ■ ?" ■■<■ i- f: & ■
, .< '■ ■• ■ '
■ '.Vi ■• ' •_
1 ’" """ rp v Courtesy of Govt. Printer.)*
HUMP RESERVOIR— Site of the Cutting of First Sod (November. 1917).


in motion a vital undertaking of huge dimensions, which thence-
forward advanced steadily to full fruition. When a suitable name
for the storage reservoir was canvassed the claims of Hume, who ac-
companied Hovell when he first crossed the Murray near this spot
in 1824, appeared predominant. His name, therefore, was selected,
and an appropriate honour was thus paid to the memory of an in-
trepid Australian explorer.
In January, 1918, in compliance with the terms of the agree-
ment. Mr. Ball informed the River Murray Commission that the
works enumerated in paragraph (iv) would be constructed in the
course of the Murrumbidgee and not the Darling river. He con-
cluded, after a perusal of all the official reports, that from the
standpoint of the advancement of the State, the greatest benefits
would flow from the conservation of the waters of the Murrum-
bidgee, and that the land in the vicinity of that river would more
readily and fully respond.
When the agreement was drafted no provision was made for
the building of a weir above Echuca. It was left open to Victoria
and New South Wales to mutually agree and to locate one or more
sites that would best serve the interests of both States. When the
need for further works became apparent conferences were held
between the constructing authorities, and many visits of inspection
were made. Ultimately, after much delay and indecision, a site was
selected in the vicinity of Yarrawonga, the point from which, at a
later date, the Victorian Government in the exercise of its powers
under the Border Railway agreement projected a railway to link up
with the New South Wales system at Oaklands. Work was prompt-
ly commenced, and is being continued, with little intermission, to
the stage of completion. The water conserved at this point will be
diverted for the irrigation of the country between Deniliquin and
Mulwala, including Berrigau, under what is known as the Berriquin
scheme, a magnificent irrigation project initiated a year ago when
ihe New South Wales State Premier, the Hon, B. S. Stevens, turned
the first sod.
As evidence of the attitude of the New South Wales and Vic-
torian Governments towards the River Murray waters conservation
scheme and their desire to fulfil the agreement both in the spirit and
the letter, it may be added that in February, 1920, the constructing
authorities were in a position to submit to the Commission for
approval tentative sites selected for weirs and locks in the neigh-
bourhood of Wentworth and Mildura. Furthermore, a commence-
ment had been made with surveys on the Murrumbidgee river to
determine the most suitable positions for the nine locks and weirs
to be constructed at the discretion of the New South Wales Govern-
ment.
WATER SUPPLY AND SEWERAGE WORKS
From the standpoint of the health and comfort of the people, no
items in the comprehensive works programme arranged by Mr. Ball
constituted a more important safeguard than the water supply and
sewerage schemes for country centres, and certainly none did more


a %
a a
>
o
® O
O) «4—l
> o
a £
o 3 S
9
0)
o
-*-> 'tr“ N
m
O *>
o
b/r~
'% c
o §
as a
«J
cS
51
cs a
r—l Q}
as
*t:
0) ed
•- oj
!>
T 3
a i
a) ?
9w
• £
Ph
o-S
% a
m
M
«a
H s
§
p
w


to improve the conditions of living. The Minister’s concern was as
acute for the needs of the city as it was for the demands of the out-
back. When he took over control of the P.W. Department, Mr. Ball
found that many works had already been commenced and partially
constructed in country centres all over the State, either to supple-
ment the existing service or to instal a water supply system. By
maintaining a careful scrutiny over the appropriation of loan funds
it was possible not only to complete these works, but to make pro-
vision for many additional new works. So also with country towns
sewerage schemes—works already initiated were carried to comple-
tion, and other and new works were put in hand. In each of the
three years of Mr. Ball’s administration a substantial sum was allo-
cated from the Loan vote to finance the expenditure on these under-
takings.
THE METROPOLITAN WATER SUPPLY
The problem presented by the Metropolitan district was much
more complicated. The consumption of water was increasing daily;
and the existing storages were not sufficient to ensure an adequate
supply through such periods of drought as had been expreienced in
the immediate past. The outlook therefore was regarded as serious.
To help clarify the situation and procure the guidance of expert ad-
vice, Mr. Ball took steps to have a special Board appointed whose
job it was to exhaustively enquire into the question of the water
supply of the city, and the steps to be taken to amplify it. In the
meanwhile, as a precautionary measure, the building of the (Bor-
deaux dam, a start with which had already been made, was ad-
vanced as rapidly as the supply of material permitted. This work
was regarded as an absolute necessity in view of the admitted in-
sufficiency of the existing storages. Building operations had been
interfered with owing to the action of the Imperial Government in
twice commandeering for war purposes generating machinery that
had been ordered for the Port Kembla power station, the source of
the electricity to operate the dam construction works. This circum-
stance, in conjunction with the rapidly growing requirements of the
City and its environs, increased the concern of the Government and
the desire of the Minister that no effort should be spared to protect
the interests of the citizens. At 80th November, 1919, when the
situation came under review, the expenditure at Cordeaux amount-
ed to £236,000, or a little more than one-third the total estimated
cost, £675,000.
With the object of ascertaining what further storages could be
economically provided to satisfy the growing needs of the Metro-
politan district, the Chief Engineer for Water Supply and Sewerage
had for some time been conducting an exploration. The conclusion
he arrived at was that an amplification scheme involving an outlay
of five millions, would be called for. When the experts came to con-
sider the project in detail, they were divided in their opinion as to
which was the best proposal to adopt, having regard to the immen-
sity of the sum at stake. To settle these differences a special Board
was appointed by Mr. Ball towards the end of 1918. It was their


11^1
SYDNEY WATER SUPPLY AMPLIFICATION: Avon Dam. (Courtesy of Govt. Printer.)


job to advise what steps should be taken to provide the Metropoli-
tan area with a water supply that would meet the needs of the
people for at least the next three decades. The Board’s investiga-
tions were comprehensive and protracted. Its conclusions were con-
veyed to the Minister in a series of interim reports. In its first re-
port the Board recommended the construction of a dam on the Avon
River. The Departmental surveys and enquiries showed that 30,000
million gallons of water could he impounded at a cost of £600,000.
Realising the urgency and to avoid undue delay, it was decided that
the preparatory work should be put in hand forthwith, and the
necessary authorising legislation passed later. In accordance with
this decision, a road of access was cut from West Bargo to the site
of the dam; Parliamentary sanction was then obtained, and the main
work was pressed on with. Later investigations led the Board to
vary its earlier recommendation, and to advise the Government to
carry the dam to a height of 200 feet. This increase in elevation it
was reported, would augment the water storage to 43,000 million
gallons, though it increased the original estimate of cost —£600,000
—by only £136,000.
Other interim reports submitted by the Board dealt with pro-
posals for the improvement of the distribution and storage of water
locally and at Rockdale, Manly, and the Northern suburbs. These
works, it was estimated, would cost approximately two millions.
Half of this amount was required for the Pott’s Hill pressure tunnel
to replace the existing trunk main. A third report recommended
that the height of the Cordeaux dam should be increased by 10 feet,
to 170 feet, at an added cost of £185,000, thereby increasing the
volume of water stored to 20,610 million gallons. The Board also
considered further proposals for amplification of the City supply by
the provision of storage at Warragamba, Woronora and on other
favourable catchments.
Before concluding its enquiries, the Board spent some time in-
vestigating a request for a cheaper water supply for industrial and
manufacturing purposes in the Newcastle and Hunter River district.
The evidence obtained convinced the Board that the request was
well founded, and it recommended the Minister to complete without
further delay the Chichester gravitation scheme, authorised by Par-
liament in 1916. The works then approved were estimated to cost
£1,049,000, and the gravitation main it was calculated would supply
8,000,000 gallons of water per day. The scheme was subsequently
amended to provide for a daily supply of 12,000,000 gallons at an
extra expenditure of £350,000. Industrial developments in the area
to be served were so notable and so potential that the Minister
found no difficulty in persuading the Government to approve of the
recommendation and order that the work should be forwarded with
all possible speed.
CITY AND COUNTRY SEWERAGE SCHEMES
Of the sewerage works carried out during this period the most
important was the Northern Suburbs ocean outfall sewer. This work
for the benefit of part of the metropolitan area, it was estimated.


would cost nearly 2-|- millions to complete. At this stage operations
were confined to the section between Bluefish Point and the head
of North Harbour, and the specially designed syphon crossing
Middle Harbour. In the country quite a number of works were in
progress. Services were completed at Orange and Albury, and an
extension of the existing system provided for Narrandera; whilst
in connection with the Newcastle sewerage system reticulation ser-
vices were constructed at Waratah, Broadmeadow, New Lambton,
Mayfield, North Waratah and Wickham. Further works were in
hand at Goulburn and South Grafton, and money was made avail-
able to enable a start to be made with sewerage schemes at Dubbo,
Tamworth, Lithgow, East Orange and West Maitland.
BRIDGES
As representative of a country constituency, Mr. Ball had a
keen appreciation of the value of bridges in forwarding settlement
and in promoting intercourse and the interchange of commodities;
and despite the handicap of straitened finances he embarked upon
a constructional policy which, in comparison with the efforts in
previous years, showed a marked increase both in the amount of
money appropriated and the volume of work carried out. Right
through his administration progress in this section of the Depart-
ment’s activities was sustained to the extent of the funds available.
In addition to bridges being completed over the Orara, Dumaresq,
Abercrombie, Barwon, Cudgegong, Castlereagh and other rivers, as
well as Lane Cove, a tender was let for a further bridge over the
Lachlan at Willanthry; and tenders were invited for an additional
three bridges over the Tweed, Hunter and Brogo rivers. To round
off the schedule of structures to improve means of access in remoter
parts of the State, other bridges were designed to span the Murrum-
bidgee, Murray (at Tooleybuc and Mulwala), Brogo, Woolondilly,
Orara (at Coramba), Bogan, Hawkesbury (at Windsor), and
Georges rivers, and across Middle Harbour.
HARBOURS AND RIVERS IMPROVEMENTS
Substantial expenditure in the interests of country develop-
ment was undertaken by the Government during Mr. Ball’s Public
Works administration upon harbour and river improvements. At
Port Kembla, to quote an instance, a port that received a good deal
of attention, the principal work carried out by the Department was
the continuation of the northern breakwater and an extension of
the eastern breakwater in conformity with the recommendation of a
Harbour Improvement and Dredging Conference, which met
with official approval. At Coff’s Harbour, where an improvement
scheme involving the running out of two breakwaters and the build-
ing of two jetties had been authorised by Parliament as far back as
1913, practically nothing had been done when the Department took
over control from Messrs. Norton Griffths and Co. in 1915. A little
over one thousand feet of the northern breakwater had been ex-
tended, and a quarry had been opened up; but by the end of 1919
the northern breakwater had been run out a further two thousand
feet, part of the approach to and a short length of the eastern


breakwater had been built, and nearly eight hundred feet of the
reclamation wall at the southern end of the harbour. On the Clar-
ence River an extension of the breakwater on the northern side of
the entrance had been approved - by Parliament, and the National
Government made the necessary financial provision to enable a com-
mencement to be made with the preliminary work. For the further
development of the port of Newcastle harbour, improvements were
effected, and shipping appliances and additional wharfage accommo-
dation provided at a cost of £IIO,OOO.
RAILWAYS AND TRAMWAYS
The activity which characterised the various branches of the
Public Works Department was paralleled in the field of railway
construction, at this time in the hands of the Railway Commission-
ers, the Railway Act which came into operation at the beginning of
1917 having transferred that responsibility to them from the
Department of Public Works. During Mr. Ball’s three years’
tenure of office as Ministerial head of the Department, fourteen new
railway lines, totalling 529 i miles, were completed and opened for
Iraffic. The longest stretches included in this substantial mileage
were those from Dunedoo to Binnaway (44- miles), Binnaway to
Coonabarabran (30J miles), Wagga to Humula (52 miles), Denman
to Merriwa (35 miles), Wyalong to Lake Cudgellico (70 miles), the
two sections of the North Coast line—Wauchope-Kempsey (30
miles), and Kempsey-Macksville,—Dubbo to Merrygoen (59 miles),
Condobolin to Trida, a 130-mile link in the railway projected to
Broken Hill, and Carragabal to Forbes (39 miles).
Financial limitations and dearth of materials during the war
years had brought the work of railway construction almost to a
standstill, with serious repercussions upon the country. The start-
ing of new works had been prevented, and what was equally as bad,
if not worse, the closing down of operations on a number of lines
already in hand was necessitated. But with the war concluded, the
Government found it possible to resume both the work in suspense
on the lines temporarily closed down, and to proceed with new
extensions. In the first-mentioned category were the North Coast
railway (section 8, from Coff’s Harbour to Glenreagh), and the lines
from Nimmitabel to Bombala, Glenreagh to Dorrigo, Werris Creek
to Binnaway, Sydenham to Botany, and Condobolin to Broken Hill.
Construction was undertaken on the lines from Humula to Tumbar-
umba, Craboon to Coolah, and Henty to Billabong. Money was
forthcoming from the Loan Vote to enable a start to be made with
lines from Canowindra to Eugowra, Molong to Dubbo, and West-
mead to Castlehill. Over and above this work, comprehensive as it
was, the Federal Government undertook to finance several railways
required for repatriation purposes: Barmedman-Rankin Springs,
Griffith-Hillston, Coonabarabran-Burren Junction, Gilmore-Batlow,
find Yanco-Griffith. The construction of these works, in the main all
country works, was made possible by the abandonment of the City
railway started by Messrs. Norton Griffiths under their contract
with the Government. It was deemed to be a wiser policy to expend


upon works to develop the country the money that should have
been spent in the metropolis.
Besides building new lines, duplication and deviation work pro-
gressed as rapidly as the necessary limitation of capital expenditure
and shortage of materal would permit; locomotives and rolling
stock were added to, and in many other directions much was done
to improve country services, notwithstanding the dearth of materi-
als. Immediately hostilities abroad ceased, the authorities were
quick to take advantage of the return of industries to somewhat
normal conditions, and to obtain the essential materials required by
the State.
UNIFORM GAUGE
Illustrative of Mr. Ball's broad outlook was the interest he dis-
played in the establishment of a uniform railway gauge throughout
Australia. This was essentially a national matter, one that had exer-
cised the minds of Governments and Railway authorities for many
years, and was becoming increasingly urgent. Various tribunals
grappled with the vexed question, but their efforts had proved in-
effectual. The problem presented was exceedingly difficult of solu-
tion because of the immense monetary outlay involved in the sub-
stitution of a standard gauge for the widely differing gauges adopt-
ed in the various States. For that reason railway users had to con-
tinue to put up with the disadvantages, and be content that their
grievance should go unredressed.
Two of the most practicable proposals put forward to overcome
the break of gauge difficulty came from Mr. Ball. They offered a
comparatively inexpensive and simple means of linking Sydney
with Brisbane in the north, and Perth in the west. Both proposals
possessed the further merit that their adoption would materially
shorten the distance to be traversed in either direction. The project
so far as it related to Western Australia, was to extend the railway
then under construction between Condobolin and Broken Hill in a
straight line across South Australia due west to Port Augusta, the
starting point of the transcontinental railway built by the Federal
Government on the New South Wales gauge. To bridge the gap
required the construction of 220 miles of railway. The proposal,
besides giving direct communication with Perth on a uniform gauge,
would have shortened the distance between the two capitals by 414
miles. Port Augusta by the route suggested, would be 918 miles
away from Sydney as compared with the 1332 miles to be traversed
to the same destination via Melbourne and Adelaide. From a de-
fence point of view the scheme had great strategic value, to say
nothing of the gain to trade and commerce. The second proposal,
intended to expedite traffic between Sydney and Brisbane, called for
the building of 90 miles of New South Wales standard gauge rail-
way between Kyogle, the terminus of a short branch from Casino on
the North Coast railway, through Richmond Gap and across the
Queensland border to Beaudesert. This would open up practically
a straight run between the capitals that promised to reduce the
time of the journey by many hours.


Both proposals were submitted to a Conference of Premiers.
They were also put before the Federal Uniform Gauge Royal Com-
mission. One suggestion, the line to South Brisbane, was approved;
the other and major work, to connect the New South Wales system
with the transcontinental railway, the authorities, for financial
reasons, declined to undertake, and it was shelved. The Kyogle-
Beaudesert project Mr. Ball was able to advance with little delay,
and before he left office there was every prospect of its consumma-
tion. A final agreement was come to at a conference he attended
with representatives of the Commonwealth and Queensland Govern-
ments —the other interested authorities —and it was his pleasure to
draft and pass through Parliament the necessary piece of State
legislation to give effect to his proposal.
When the question of the extension of the railway from Kyogle
was under consideration, Mr. Ball endeavoured to have the Clar-
ence River bridge at Grafton, an integral part of the North Coast
railway and a vital link in the main line to Brisbane, placed in the
category of National works. In this he was less successful. The
suggestion was considered, but no finality was reached. But if he
failed to attain this object he was more successful with another.
When the design for the bridge was prepared by the Railway Com-
missioners as the constructing authority, railway purposes only
were studied. Mr. Ball however took the view that both rail and
road traffic could at the same time be equally and conveniently serv-
ed, and he gave directions that fresh plans should be prepared to
give effect to this dual purpose. The Government endorsed his
view and agreed to meet the extra cost involved. Ultimately the
work was carried out on these lines and Grafton is therefore in-
debted to Mr. Ball for the convenience it enjoys to-day.
THE STRIKE OF ’l7
In August, 1917, occurred a strike of Tramway and Railway
employees of greater magnitude than any previous industrial up-
heaval the State had ever known. Coming at a time of National
crisis, this attempt to dislocate and hold up vital transport services
added enormously to the worries of the Minister charged with the
administration of this huge asset. On the first day of the month
representatives of the Labour Council presented an ultimatum to
the Commissioners, threatening that all Railway and Tramway em-
ployees would cease work next morning if a card system recording
work done in the workshops at Randwick and in the carriage shops
at Eveleigh, was not at once withdrawn. As the system was re-
garded officially as one which, while operating to the advantage of
the Department, could not detrimentally affect any employee, the
Commissioners ignored the threat. At the time stipulated, in ac-
cordance with the terms of the ultimatum, a considerable section of
employees absented themselves from duty, and everything possible
was done by Union officials to extend and prolong the disturbance.
Prom the very outset of the trouble the Government, under the
firm guidance of Sir George Fuller, who was Acting Premier in the


absence from the country of Mr. Holman, stood behind the Railway
Commissioners, and put forward every energy to end a situation
that could not be allowed to endure. The action of the strikers
was viewed as an attempt to usurp the powers of Government, and
on the part of the public it aroused a remarkable display of patri-
otism. People, both male and female, came in thousands from town
and country and generously volunteered to assist the employees who
remained loyal, in maintaining and even improving the Railway and
Tramway services. The strike dragged on for a month, largely due
to the fact that practically every industrial Union struck in sym-
pathy. Eventually it was terminated by agreement with the
Government, tactfully engineered by Sir George Fuller. Echoes of
the great upheaval were heard in Parliament for many succeeding
years. The “Loyalists” became the shuttlecocks of party political
action. Under Labour Administrations they were regressed and
even dismissed. Under National Governments, in fulfilment of
promises made at the time, the status of the men affected was re-
stored ; and many years were to elapse before contentment reigned
in the dual services.
STATE INDUSTRIAL UNDERTAKINGS
Allied with the administration of the departments of Public
Works and Railways was the Ministerial control of the State Indus-
trial Enterprises. These undertakings were at this time numerous
and multifarious; and many of them had become a burden upon
rather than an esset to the State. Various adventures into the field
of industry had been sanctioned by the previous Labour Government
in furtherance of its policy of socialisation, a fetish of the Party.
When the National Government took up the reins of office the in-
dustrial establishments under the aegis of the Department of Public
Works represented a capital investment of fully £500,000. Accept-
ing the position as it found it, the Government expressed its readi-
ness to allow those industries to continue to operate that showed a
profit under the same conditions as were applicable to private en-
terprise. Those that did not pay, on the other hand, must be
closed down. To rigorously apply this dictum was a task beset
with considerable difficulty, but Mr. Ball perceived that if waste
was to be eliminated and efficiency increased, drastic measures were
unavoidable.
A thorough overhaul of the various activities quickly disclosed
that in regard to many of them, if not all, the conditions under
which work was being* done fell far short of the standard adopted
in similar outside establishments. As a start on the road to reform,
the principle of preference for Government work that had obtained
under Labour was abolished, and managers were told that they
must compete for business in the open market on the same footing
as outside privately-owned establishments. As the investigation
proceeded it was found that affairs in connection with some of the
undertakings were highly unsatisfactory. Take, for example, the
Lime Brick Works at Botany. Not once since its establishment m
May, 1907, had the concern shown a profit. At the beginning of


1919 the accumulated net loss was in the vicinity of £20,000. With
the State Timber Yards the position was even more serious. Each
financial year of its operations had ended with a substantial deficit.
j u view of the magnitude of this particular undertaking, Mr. Ball
ordered an independent exhaustive inquiry to be made, and, with
the report in front of him, was able to effect a number of advanta-
geous administrative changes. A temporary improvement in the
financial situation resulted, but it was short-lived. The deficit con-
tinued to grow. Immense stocks of timber had been accumulated,
hut the demand for material for Government works had diminished
to such an extent that the management was forced to seek new busi-
ness in the open market. Little was to be obtained in this direction.
Indeed, all the attempts to bolster up the industry failed. At the
elose of the 1918-19 financial year the Auditor General reported a
further serious deficiency of £68,000 on the trading operations. In
the ensuing nine months some of the loss was retrieved by a change
in the management, and more particularly by a successful purchase
of timber sanctioned by Mr. Ball. Nothing more was done at this
stage. That was the position when Mr. Ball vacated office and as
it was put before his successor.
WALSH ISLAND
The largest of the State Industrial Enterprises was undoubtedly
the engineering works at Walsh Island. This undertaking by rea-
son of its magnitude was the cause of grave concern to the National
Government. Over half a million of money had gone to its estab-
lishment, and its operations were showing a substantial financial
loss. The site was selected in 1913 by the McGowen Government, as
•i suitable place at which to establish works for repair of dredgers
nnd iron and steel construction required by the State, Cockatoo
[stand Dockyard, where the bulk of this work had been previously
carried out, had been taken over by the Commonwealth Government,
and some other place had to be found. The new establishment,
opened a year later, cost £500,000 As is the case with many, if
not most of the Government undertakings, the scope of the work
performed was gradually enlarged, and in addition to repairs, the
building of new dredging plant was carried out. It was only a step
from that to ship-building. At the moment of Mr. Ball’s advent to
office this side of the Island’s activities was very much to the fore.
The ruthless submarining policy of the Germans had brought
Britain and her Dominions face to face with an acute shortage of
shipping, and the Commonwealth Government was considering the
possibilities of building ships locally to carry away our wheat and
other products. Walsh Island seemed to offer the needful facilities.
An inspection by competent judges confirmed this view. The works
were declared to be suitable and well laid out; but in spite of a
strong public agitation for a vigorous policy to overcome the ship-
ping shortage, no definite proposals were forthcoming. In the
meantime, the N.S.W. State Government, acting on its own initia-
tive, had plans prepared for a number of vessels of 2500 tons capa-
city and a speed of ten knots. Before the work was commenced,
however, the Broken Hill Pty. Co., with large and steadily expand-


iug steel works on the mainland just across the Hunter River, ap-
proached the State Government for a long lease of the Island, with
ihe right of subsequent purchase, for the express purpose of carry-
ing out a ship-building programme. The proposal appealed to Mr.
Ball, as Secretary for Public Works, and the view of the Govern-
ment was favourable, for the offer might pave the way to the ulti-
mate disposal of the works at a handsome profit and the develop-
ment of a thriving industry under the control of a powerful organi-
sation. It was known that although the works were up-to-date,
natural handicaps of the site would make it impossible to operate
them profitably, and this was an added reason for disposing of the
establishment when the opportunity offered. As a State industrial
undertaking, Walsh Island was in the group showing a heavy annual
loss. It was equipped with expensive machinery installed for the
purpose of building steel bridges for the Railways, but an Act re-
cently passed had robbed it of this profitable employment. That
measure took from the Public Works Department and placed in the
hands of the Railway Commissioners control over the work of rail-
way construction, and the Commissioners found it more economical
to build the bridges in their own works at Newcastle and elsewhere.
The negotiations between the State Government and the Broken
Hill Pty. Co. had almost reached the stage of finality when the Fed-
eral Government intervened and intimated to the Company that it
would not be permitted to build ships for its own requirements, but
only for the Commonwealth and under Government supervision.
Feeling that the Federal authorities might be embarrassed if it per-
sisted, the Broken Hill Pty. Co. patriotically withdrew from the
negotiations. Check-mated in this move, the State Government next
offered to lease the dockyard to the Federal Government, with the
right to purchase. A lengthy interchange of correspondence and
numerous interviews between representatives of the two Govern-
ments followed, but without result. The State Government then
decided to retain the establishment and accept a contract to build
ships for the Commonwealth, the Imperial authorities having direct-
ly requested the Prime Minister (Mr. Hughes) to use all the re-
sources of Australia at his disposal. Under an agreement entered
into in March, 1918, New South Wales contracted to construct,
launch, try under steam, and deliver to the Commonwealth six steel
cargo steamers, each of a length of 331 feet and with a beam of 48
feet, of approximately 5500 tons dead weight. The contract price
was £2B per ton per ship. Work was duly commenced, and it was
pushed forward with all the expedition the resources of the estab-
lishment would allow, under the joint supervision of Mr. Bomphrey,
a shipbuilder of experience who had been associated with the
Williamstown Dockyard (Vic.), and Mr. Cutler, general manager
of Walsh Island.
Throughout the whole of the preliminary negotiations in pro-
gress since early in 1919, Mr. Ball had taken a very deep interest in
the project. He realised not only its tremendous importance as a
war measure, but the ultimate value of the industry as an addition
to the industrial activities of the State. As a safeguard, a Board


of Control was created, with himself as Ministerial head, to review
and deal with all matters requiring attention. Although ship-
building as an industry was in its infancy, splendid results were
achieved, and, despite delay in procuring requisite material, remark-
able progress was made. Indeed, so satisfactory were the results
that authority was sought from the Commonwealth to build further
vessels of a capacity of 12,800 tons. In the carrying out of all this
work one condition Mr. Ball insisted should be observed—that the
establishment must comply with business principles and it must be
clearly demonstrated that the work could be done as cheaply at
Walsh Island as in private establishments.
In the light of present-day knowledge of the fortunes of the
establishment it is interesting to conjecture what the situation
might have been if the Federal Government had not interfered to
prevent the acquisition of Walsh Island by the Broken Hill Pro-
prietary Co. To what extent would the works have shared in the
tremendous development that has marked the other activities of
I hat powerful and courageous organisation ? Instead of being prac-
tically a dead-letter, ship-building would in all probability now
rank high among the major industrial enterprises in the State.
ADMINISTRATION (1922-25)
DEPARTMENT O* 1 AGRICULTURE
From 13th April, 1922, to 28th June of the same year—a little
over seven weeks—Mr, Ball sat in the chair of the Minister for
Agriculture in the Fuller Coalition Government, when he relinquish-
ed it to accept the portfolio of Secretary for Public Works, Minister
for Railways and State Industrial Enterprises. Short as was his
tenure, he was able to leave his mark upon the administrative re-
cords. In his Ministerial capacity he took part in a conclave of
inter-State Ministers and officers of the various Departments of
Agriculture. The gathering met in Perth (W.A.). Many matters of
importance to primary producers were discussed and certain uni-
form lines of action decided upon. One of the major determinations
related to the fixation of the quality standard of butter for export.
Before the views of the parties could be harmonised, a lengthy dis-
cussion was necessary. The decision of the Conference was later
adopted and applied to the great butter producing industry in New
Bouth Wales, and with comparatively little, if any, alteration it re-
mains operative to-day.
PUBLIC WORKS, RAILWAYS AND INDUSTRIAL
ENTERPRISES
Installed again in the familiar office of Secretary for Public
'A orks, and shouldering in addition responsibility for the adminis-
tration of the Railways and State Industrial enterprises, Mr. Ball
undertook his multifarious and important duties under conditions
very different from those obtaining in the period 1917-20. The
financial situation and outlook, both important considerations, were


materially changed. In view of the Departments he had to adminis-
ter the cliange undoubtedly was advantageous. Strict economy was
being still exercised, but at the same time the amount of money allo-
cated from Loan Estimates for the expansion of public works and
the implementing of the'Government’s developmental policy, was,
in each of the three years of Mr. Ball’s control, much in excess of
Ihe amounts voted during his first administrative term. The appro-
priations for the three financial years, 1923, 1924, and 1925, were
respectively £10,250,000, £10,863,000, and £8,700,000. From these
amounts, although constructional costs were on the up-grade, money
Avas found for the completion of works in hand, the resumption of
those in suspense, the launching of new ones, and generally to make
good some of the neglect of the past.
COUNTRY v. CITY
There was complaint from country members that too much
money was being spent in the City, and too little outside it. As a
country man himself, and the representative of an exigent country
electorate, Mr. Ball Avas all too painfully aware that a fight always
had to be put up before money could be wrung from Governments
for country works. This knowledge but deepened the sympathy he
naturally felt towards country requirements. So that Avhen the
charge of unfair discrimination Avas formulated, he was able to show
that during his administration at all events, and under the regime of
the National .Government, country and city expenditure had been in
the ratio of six to one. Whatever else may have distinguished the
life of the Fuller Coalition Government, it was certainly remarkable
for the intense activity and enterprise of the Secretary for Public
Works, Mr. Ball. Scarcely one area in the State failed to partici-
pate. Railways were pushed forward, water and seAverage works
provided, rivers bridged, roads improved, and hydro-electric schemes
expanded to provide power and light for country homes and indus-
tries. In fact, in all directions Avorks as varied as the requirements
were numerous, were authorised, commenced and in many instances
completed; and many important questions of policy Avere determin-
ed.
BORDER RAILWAYS AGREEMENT
It had become increasingly apparent that the settlement of the
remote south-western portion of the State Avas dependent as much
upon the successful marketing and sale of its products as upon the
provision of a permanent Avater supply. And the best way to ensure
this was to build roads and railways. From this aspect the Border
Railways Agreement Mr. Ball negotiated with the neighbouring
State of Victoria, he may regard as a feather in his cap. It was an
administrative act beyond praise. The policy underlying the
Agreement had no precedent; it Avas a complete departure from all
traditions. As bold as it Avas unconventional, it followed as the
natural corollary to the River Murray Waters Agreement of 1917.
and is destined to play a significant part in the development and
settlement of the rich lands that lie in almost “boundless contigu-
ity” to the Murray River.


Mr. Ball both initiated the proposal that was the basis of the
Agreement and carried it to finality, his colleagues specially deput-
ing him to complete the job. The undertaking arrived at after many
conferences with the Victorian authorities was much more favour-
able for New South Wales than were the terms of an earlier pro-
posal. The Victorian Government was given the privilege to con-
struct within the boundaries of this State certain railways designat-
ed “border railways”—subject, of course, to ratification by Parlia-
ment. The essential authorising enactment presented by Mr. Ball
to the Legislative Assembly in October, 1922, was readily adopted.
The agreement this measure confirmed invested the Victorian
Government with authority to cross the border line of the Murray
River and to build in New South Wales territory four lines of rail-
way planned to link up with existing means of communication on
Ihe southern side of the river, and thus give to the settlers within
the area proposed to be served a more easy approach to their natural
market, Melbourne. The whole cost of construction was to be
financed by Victoria. Complementary to the network of railways
the agreement also provided for the building of four bridges over
the river.
The railway programme, which was vital to the success of the
scheme, embodied the following proposals:—
(1) —A line from a point on the existing Moama-Deniliquin rail-
way between Moama and Mathoura to be carried for 120 miles to
Balranald. The object of this line was to tap some of the best wheat
lands in the State, and to open up a large extent of splendid country
which so far had been denied the benefit of rail communication. It
was the longest and most important of the four lines contemplated,
and had to be completed within three years.
(2) —A line from Kerang in Victoria, a distance of thirty miles,
to the Murray at a point known as Gonn Crossing. Prom the Cross-
ing the line .was to continue in New South Wales territory on the
southern side of the Wakool River for a distance of 56 miles to meet
the transit requirements of a spacious tract of good agricultural
land which would be to a large extent irrigable. The settlers within
the sphere of influence of this railway had long laboured under the
disability of lack of facilities to get their produce to the natural
market. This line, like the previous one, is un fait accompli.
(3) —A line from Euston through the Benanee country, a part
of New South Wales recognised as excellent from a primary pro-
duction standpoint. This line was expected to open up Crown lands
which later on could be provided with a water supply from the
River Murray that would prove an additional incentive to settle-
ment.
(4) —A line to penetrate the Gol Gol area, a distance of twenty
miles, and thus serve a stretch of territory hitherto catered for by
the private line from Moama to Deniliquin.
None of these lines, it was realised when the agreement was
entered into, could be looked upon as in any way interfering with
existing New South Wales railways, or as likely to rob them of any




traffic. Among the provisions of the agreement was one obliging
New South Wales to acquire the private railway between Moama
and Deniliquin. There was also power for the acquisition of the
whole of the lines to be built by the Sister State at a valuation after
the lapse of fifteen years.
The clauses in the agreement covering bridge construction de-
fined the sites of the four works. Two were in the vicinity of Mil-
dura and were intended to give access respectively to Wentworth
and to the Gol Gol country, described as one of the finest tracts on
the Murray River, excelling even Mildura. Two others were to
span the river at Gonn and Euston. To increase the effectiveness of
the new means of communication to be afforded the people of Went-
worth, the Victorian Government undertook to construct a line up
to the bridge and so give the Curlwaa settlers a better chance to
market their produce. Of the four bridges to be erected two were
intended to carry a railway, and two both vehicular and rail traffic.
Where the double traffic was catered for Victoria had to contribute
two-thirds of the total cost of both the bridges and the approaches
and undertake the maintenance as well. Where the bridge was to
be used solely for rail traffic each State had to bear half the cost and
contribute equally towards the maintenance. On this basis it was
estimated that Victoria would be required to find £200,000 and New
South Wales £lOO,OOO.
Over and above the works enumerated, the agreement permitted
a further railway and one or two other bridges to be constructed at
the expense of Victoria. These additional works were dependent
upon an inquiry and satisfactory conclusion being arrived at as the
result of the investigation. If the report showed the works to be
advisable the Victorian Government was prepared, at its own ex-
pense, to build a fifth line of railway from Corowa or Yarrawonga
to Oaklands, the rail-head of the New South Wales branch line from
The Rock. In the exercise of this right the Victorian authorities,
having made the precedent inquiry, selected Yarrawonga as being
the most convenient point from which to carry the line to link up
with the New South Wales system. This connection is now complet-
ed.
It was hoped that the various works when carried out would
prove not only a boon and a blessing to present settlers, but would
he a magnet to attract many new settlers to that well-favoured part
of the State, Under the conditions then existing the trade of the
area went preferably to Melbourne which, as compared with Syd-
ney, is only half the distance away. Improved means of communi-
cation it was argued, so far from interfering with the normal flow of
trade, would merely remove harassing disabilities and make easy
what was then an arduous and difficult approach. Therefore no
further loss would be suffered by New South Wales by any deflec-
tion of trade across the border lines.
Under the terms of an earlier agreement that was being nego-
tiated, New South Wales would have been required to pay the full
cost of the construction of somewhat similar lines, and upon com-
pletion hand them over to Victoria. All that the neighbour State




hncl to do was to accept responsibility for the interest on the mone-
tary outlay and meet the working expenses. Mr. Ball was able to
secure terms much more favourable. Under the agreement he nego-
tiated, tiie Victorian Government had to find the whole of the
money for the construction of the railways and its proportion of the
cost of the bridges. The expenditure to which Victoria was commit-
ted under the revised arrangement was estimated at approximately
tl,500,000; the compensation was the right to the trade and com-
merce of the country to be served by the projected public works.
New South Wales, on the other hand, hoped to reap from the con-
cession by way of compensation the taxes payable by existing resi-
dents and a fresh field of taxation in the settlement that would be
induced once the improved facilities were provided. To meet the
expected demand for land, this State undertook to make available
400,000 acres for closer settlement, either by resumption or private
subdivision. Events proved that the area first contemplated was
altogether inadequate; the demand greatly exceeded anticipation.
Another hope cherished when the agreement was come to was
that it would be effective in breaking down the long enduring
jealousy between the two States —or at least do more to remove it
than Federation had been able to achieve.
The Border Railways Agreement was the recognition of the
right of people with an identity of interests to be given access to
their natural market. The acceptance of the principle was welcom-
ed by the New States advocates as an admission on the part of the
New South Wales Government that there were certain parts of the
State for which it was not possible to do anything. Whatever else
may be said for it, the agreement certainly relieved New South
Wales of the obligation to dip into her own loan funds to find the
means to build railways in a portion of the State remote from the
Capital, and already bound to the adjoining State by trade relations.
Thus the Government was able to devote so much more money to
the carrying out of necessary works in other and less remote dis-
tricts. It may be added that in an effort to widen the application
of the principle underlying the compact with the Victorian Govern-
ment, New South Wales invited the Queensland Government to
enter into a similar agreement. But the overtures in that case were
fruitless.
Of the several works involved in the undertaking, the major
one —the line from a point on the Moama-Deniliquin railway .west-
wards towards Balranald—was proceeded with promptly. In less
than a year after the ratification, Mr. Ball was able to take part, to-
gether with Mr. Barnes, the Victorian ex-Minister for Railways, in
the ceremony of cutting the first sod. The incident occasioned great
jubilation locally.
RIVER MURRAY WATERS AGREEMENT
The great scheme of water conservation on the Murray River,
covered by the terms of the River Murray Water Agreement enter-
ed into jointly by the Commonwealth, New South Wales, Victorian
and South Australian Governments, was by now well under way.


But in implementing the agreement many difficulties had cropped
up which could be overcome only by an amendment of the authoris-
ing Act. Thus it became Mr. Ball’s duty, soon after his accession to
office again in 1922, to invite Parliament to sanction a variation of
the basic contract to make smooth the way. Originally provision
was made for the construction of a series of weirs and locks at cer-
tain points along the course of the River Murray to meet the needs
of both irrigation and navigation. It was found impossible to
carry out this programme in its entirety. For example, nine weirs
and locks had to be placed below the junction of the Darling with
the Murray, and another well above the junction. In the case of
the last-mentioned work, when the engineers tested the tentative
site, they could find no satisfactory foundations, and as the investi-
gation was extended it was made plain that it would be advisable
to place the weir at some point below rather than above the
junction. To validate this departure from the plan legislation was
necessary.
Another question to be settled was the relative urgency and im-
portance of conservation works to benefit navigation and those to
provide for the needs of irrigation. This point was raised by the
insistence of South Australia that works coming within the first
category should be given preference and hurried on with. The
authorities in that State were pressing for the construction of the
whole 24 weirs and locks above Wentworth, in accordance with the
terms of the compact, to keep the river navigable. A conference
of representatives of the three contracting Governments considered
the matter, and largely as the result of what Mr. Ball had to say
concluded that the claims of irrigation were transcendent and
should have precedence. Since the original covenant had been
entered into the outlook had undergone a radical change. As Mr.
Ball pointed out, the lesson learnt from the work already done was
that many of the navigation locks and weirs could be built only at
a cost that was unwarranted. Furthermore, some of them would
not be required for many years to come, even if they were wanted
at all, seeing that under an intermediate agreement with Victoria
a number of railways were to be constructed that would adequately
serve the traffic of the locality.
Added weight was given to Mr. Ball’s representations when the
financial aspect of the case came to be studied. The works so far as
they had progressed, it was found, were costing the contributory
States very much more than the amount originally estimated. The aver-
age expenditure per lock and weir worked out at about £200,000. This
meant that the outlay upon the full programme would be
£7,000,000, a sum fifty per cent, in excess of what was presumed
would be the total cost of the whole of the scheme. These figures,
together with the arguments put by Mr. Ball, were convincing and
caused the South Australian delegation to reverse its views. Eventu-
ally South Australia agreed to waive her claims and fall into line
with the Governments of New South Wales and Victoria. The Con-
ference, after a careful review, also decided that the works to which
precedence should be given were the huge dam above Albury, the


Hume Reservoir, which would regulate the flow of the Upper
Murray, and the locks and weirs that served the dual interests of
both irrigation and navigation. It was considered that these works
were the most urgent and useful, and should consequently be con-
centrated upon.
A further amendment of the original agreement altered the
method of dealing with the tolls collected. In the first instance it
was arranged that the money should be paid to the Commission and
credited to the contracting Governments. Meanwhile the Common-
wealth Government had intimated its willingness to increase its con-
tribution towards the expenditure, on the understanding that the
States’ intention was to carry out the 1914 agreement in its entirety.
But having done that, it was not prepared to shoulder any further
obligation. Conference therefore resolved that any tolls collected
should be equally divided among the three contributing States and
used for maintenance purposes. The financial responsibility
assumed by the Federal authorities was substantial. As fourth
partner, they were prepared to find a quarter share. That might
mean not the one million to which the Commonwealth was already
committed, but three and possibly four millions of the from ten to
twelve millions which it was computed would be the ultimate total
cost of all the works scheduled in the agreement.
Still another amendment agreed upon extended the period
within which the key works in connection with the storage scheme
must be completed. Seven years was the time first prescribed.
Although good progress had been made, it was realised that this
was a quite impossible limitation. In the case of the Hume Reser-
voir, for instance, there was no chance of the job being completed
within the time fixed, therefore to be on the safe side it was agreed
to grant an extension of five years. All these variations w T ere con-
curred in and confirmed by New South Wales when it accepted Mr.
Ball’s amending legislation.
In the three years under review, construction work was pro-
ceeded with by the New South Wales Authority in conjunction with
the Victorian Authority. In pursuance of the earlier decision
attention was concentrated upon the Hume Reservoir, the work of
greatest magnitude among those comprehended by the Agreement.
Work in connection with the dam was put in hand in 1920; and in
the following years, right up to 1925, it progressed steadily. The
preliminary designs submitted by the Constructing Authorities and
approved by the Commission, provided for a storage of 1,100,000
acre feet capacity. Whilst the work was under way the feeling
grew that the storage capacity of the dam might, with advantage, be
increased to fully safeguard the rights of settlement. The question
was, in fact, at this time under discussion, urgency being imported
by the potential value of the storage for the generation of hydro-
electricity. Conferences of Ministers and of experts considered the
matter. Pending a final determination the actual building of the
foundations for the main portion of the concrete dam was retarded,
as in the event of the decision favouring an increased capacity the
design would need to be varied. Mr. Ball put all his weight into


the scales to adjust the balance in favour of making' provision for
the maximum impounding at the outset. He held the view that this
course would prove, in the long run, most economical, and that the
limitation of the storage would inevitably impede the future de-
velopment of the resources of the Murray basin. But it was not
until June, 1925, that the ground was cleared, and an agreement
come to. At that date the Commission approved of the capacity
being increased to 2,000,000 acre feet, and at the same time author-
ised the Constructing Authorities to carry out the work in accord-
ance with the amended design.
The weir and lock at Torrumbarry, near Echuca, carried out on
behalf of the two Governments by the Constructing Authority for
Victoria, was by now practically completed and in operation. Con-
siderable progress had also been made with the design and con-
struction of No. 10 lock at Wentworth. Subject to the passing of
legislation by the Parliaments, the works were established at a point
below the confluence of the Murray and the Darling. Surveys in
connection with the design of locks and weirs were completed to a
distance of 440 miles upstream of Wentworth on the Murray River,
and for a distance of 30 miles on the lower end of the Murrumbid-
gee. Expenditure for the three years by New South Wales on these
conservation works amounted to £590,155, making a total expendi-
ture of £1,080,647 up to 30th June, 1925.
CEMENT PRODUCTS LTD. CONTRACT
Whatever may have been the attitude of Mr. Ball’s political
opponents towards the rest of his administration and legislative
work, one action at all events provoked controversy and precipitat-
ed a vote of censure upon the Government. That was the contract
entered into with Cement Products Ltd.
In 1923, in fact soon after he took office, Mr. Ball was greatly
perturbed over the price the Government was being called upon to
pay for supplies of cement required by the various public depart-
ments. Cement was a commodity in increasing demand, and the
Government was bound hard and fast under a contract let by its
predecessors to pay the Commonwealth Portland Cement Coy. £5/8/
per ton for every ton delivered. This price became the standard
price and was exacted from the public also. It was considered ex-
cessive ; inquiry showed that it was even above the price at which
cement could be imported from abroad. As the result of an investi-
gation, Mr. Ball concluded that a much more advantageous arrange-
ment could be made. The contract with the Commonwealth Port-
land Cement Coy. still having some time to run, Mr. Ball, before
determining upon other action, asked the Company to grant a price
concession. The Company, however, was adamant; it insisted upon
the strict observance of the terms of its contract. Denied relief in
this quarter, Mr. Ball, anticipating the termination of the contract,
took steps to get more favourable terms elsewhere. To this end
tenders were invited for the supply of fifty thousand tons of cement
annually. In response to the advertisement offers were received from


concerns with already productive establishments as well as from indi-
viduals and companies with no existing works. The most attractive
proposal from the point of view of the State was submitted by a
group of capitalists controlling the necessary source of production.
The price quoted was £2/17/6 a ton. The tenderers were prepared,
if their offer was accepted, to float a company with a capital of
£200,000 to undertake the manufacture of cement at a site near
Charbon on the Mudgee line. They were prepared also to meet the
State’s requirements for three years (the time limit was imposed by
the Government from a desire not to bind its successors), and to
commence delivery of supplies within two years. As a guarantee of
good faith, the tendering syndicate was prepared to deposit with
the Treasury £SOOO.
Before matters were sufficiently advanced to warrant the Gov-
ernment taking Parliament into its confidence, a rumour of what
was in contemplation came to the ears of the Opposition, who wel-
comed it as providing an excellent reason and opportune moment
for launching a vote of want of confidence. Anticipating the intro-
duction of legislation to ratify any contract proposed to be entered
into and any authoritative pronouncement of the Government’s in-
tentions, the leader of the Opposition moved his motion censuring
what he described as “dishonest administration.” An acrimonious
debate ensued. But if the Opposition expected to gain political
kudos from its exposure of supposed wrong-doing and to precipitate
a crisis, it was doomed to disappointment. When the facts were
related, rumour, as so often happens, was proved to be a lying jade.
In his reply to the Opposition’s attack, the Premier, Sir George
Fuller, soon made it abundantly clear that what had been done so
far from meriting condemnation, was deserving of praise, inasmuch
as is would save the country a substantial sum. And the House en-
dorsed this view by defeating the motion.
In due course, the contract received Parliamentary endorse-
ment; the syndicate honoured its undertaking; the Standard Port-
land Cement Co. was formed, and another competitor entered the
field of cement production. The new arrangement proved an excel-
lent bargain for the State and incidentally to cement users gener-
ally. It was at the end of 1924 that the contract was let. In a little
over two years the delivery of supplies commenced; within two and
a half years from the date of the delivery of the first consignment,
100,000 tons of cement had been produced to meet the requirements of
the various Government departments, and the saving effected, as
compared with what the Government would have been called upon
to pay under the previous contract, was £250,000.
HYDRO-ELECTRIC DEVELOPMENT
Due in large measure to the general advancement that marked
the science and practice of electrical engineering, the Engineering
Branch of the Public Works Department was exceptionally active
during the period 1922-25. As Mr. Ball had anticipated would be
the case, a remarkable and successful expansion in the use of elec-


tricity had taken place, especially in country towns. Not only so, but
a widespread preference was being shown for electrical-driven
machinery upon construction works. Considerable headway had by
this time been made with the great national hydro-electric projects
that Mr. Ball had initiated three years earlier. Taking first the
Barren Jack scheme, the power station was by now in course of
construction. The utilisation of the water from this large reservoir
for hydro-electric purposes had been authorised by an Act passed
in 1919. An actual commencement was made with the work in
February, 1923, when funds were made available to cover the esti-
mated cost of the power station, a reinforced concrete structure
situated some 1500 feet doAvn the river from the dam. Here was to
be installed the machinery essential for the generation of electricity
by the aid of water power. Early in 1924 authority was given for
the expenditure of a further £350,000 to cover the cost of the ling
transmission system which comprised two lines from the source of
the power running east to Wagga via Gundagai, and north to
Jugiong, Harden and Young. Before Mr. Ball left office the founda-
tions of the power station were well in hand, and some 1600 feet of
the pressure pipe had been laid.
Work in connection with the second major scheme for the utili-
sation of the waters of the Nymboida was entrusted by the Depart-
ment to the newly-established Clarence County Council in accord-
ance with the Local Government Act; and by the end of November,
1924, the first plant installed was brought into operation.
In a commendable continuity of purpose the special expert
committee appointed by Mr. Ball under the previous National
Government, carried on its investigations into the power resources
of the State. Considerable attention was paid to the opportunities
for development presented in the northern area of the State, particu-
larly on the headwaters of the Boyd and Nymboida rivers. Pre-
liminary examinations led to the selection of the most suitable sites
for storage dams in connection with the main Nymboida develop-
ment, and the determination of the best proposal to serve as the
next stage in the project.
In the southern area of the State the possibilities of the Shoal-
haven were explored, and exhaustive surveys of the different
alternative schemes carried out. The Tooma River, as a source to
supplement the Hume power during the three non-irrigating months,
Tumbarumba Creek and tributaries, and the tributaries of the
Tumut River were also surveyed as a preliminary to the preparation
of feasible proposals.
A further undertaking for which the Electrical Engineering
Branch was responsible, the Port Kembla electricity supply scheme,
had by his time become in plant capacity the largest in the State
outside Sydney and Newcastle. The first fruit of past activities in
the investigation of the power resources of the State, the compara-
tively small station established at Port Kembla in 1915, mainly to
supply power for the operation of the plant on the coal loading
jetty and the works connected with the construction of the Harbour


breakwater, had in the succeeding decade expanded to a plant capa-
city of 20,000 k.w. With the increase in the power available the
transmission system was extended from time to time until it served
the requirements of the countryside between Wollongong to the
north and Kiama to the south. Westward current was provided for
the Cordeaux, Avon and Nepean River dam construction works in
connection with the Sydney water supply amplification, as well as
for the lighting and power needs of Mittagong, Bowral and Moss
Vale. Extensions contemplated and in hand were intended to carry
the service to Nowra and to a number of Central Illawarra town-
ships.
All these undertakings designed to make available cheap power
benefited not only the civil engineering works under construction
by the Department, but fostered the development of industries,
assisted in decentralisation and brought to the people of the country
districts the advantages of abundant lighting, water supply, sew-
erage and domestic labour saving appliances. The measure of the
success of this policy was the remarkable growth in the use of
electricity throughout those areas coming within the sphere of in-
fluence of the various undertakings mentioned.
Impressed by the extent of the ramifications and future possi-
bilities of the electrical system, Mr. Ball formed a committee to
review the question of the establishment of some authority to more
effectively control the public electricity supply throughout the
State. The need for a body of this nature had become urgent
Other States had established Commissions or separate departments
to meet the position, but the Department here lacked any authority.
Unfortunately, the Committee was unable to complete its investi-
gations before the National Government left office, and with the
change in administration the matter was allowed to lapse. It has
remained for the present National Government to solve the diffi-
culty, and it is illustrative of Mr. Ball’s long view that the Advisory
Board set up and the system of administration recently adopted by
Parliament, conform in the main with the principles originally laid
down by him.
For the first time, about the middle of 1922, the possibility of
using the storage in the Hume Reservoir for hydro-electric genera
tion was mooted. The project was attractive and likely to be of
great utility. As the work of construction was proceeding at the
site of the dam, and as there was no clause in the Agreement pro-
viding for the use of the works for such a purpose there was need
for prompt action, especially as the structure was not planned to
permit of it even if the legal difficulty were removed. In view of its
importance, the question was submitted to a special conference. The
investigation was exhaustive, and the evidence voluminous. The
conclusions arrived at were set out in a report presented in June,
1924. They were summarised in two recommendations: (1) That
provision should be made at the dam for outlet works suitable for
hydro-electric generation; and (2) that the dam should be carried
in the first instance to a height sufficient for a reservoir capacity of


1,000,000 acre feet, but that the work should be so constructed as
to permit of the dam being raised at a later period to provide for a
storage of 2,000,000 acre feet. Both recommendations were subse-
quently considered by a conference of Ministers held in Melbourne,
which Mr. Ball attended as one of the New South Wales delegation;
and both were unanimously approved subject to confirmation by
the four contracting Governments. In due course all the necessary
confirmatory steps were taken, and a design for suitable outlets was
prepared by the New South Wales Electrical Engineering Branch
for submission to the Board of Water Supply and Sewerage. The
design was accepted, approved by the River Murray Commission,
and the dam was constructed thereafter with three outlets from
which a minimum output of 45,000 h.p. could be obtained with a full
supply head of eighty feet.
BRIDGES AND ROADS
In the National and Local Government Works Branch of the
Public Works Department nearly millions were spent in the tri-
ennial period on the maintenance of old and the construction ot*
new works, two-thirds of this amount being expended on roads and
bridges. Work of a similar kind and to an equal value was perform-
ed for the Local Government Department; and other work was
undertaken on behalf of the Public Instruction and other public
departments to the tune of half a million more, bringing the total
expenditure to £3,782,000.
SYDNEY HARBOUR BRIDGE
It was the bridge building programme that Mr. Ball prepared
and carried out during his second term of Ministerial office that was
most praiseworthy, and with which his name will remain popularly
associated. It stood out in a class by itself. The most noteworthy
structure among the many embraced in the list was, of course, the
world-renowned bridge that now spans Sydney Harbour. Besides
being the ‘ 4 Father of the House,” Mr. Ball has every right to claim
that he was the “Father of the Bridge,” the largest arch bridge in
the world. At intervals during the better part of a century, pro-
posals had been advanced for improving the means of communica-
tion between the northern and southern shores of Port Jackson.
From the middle of the eighties until the middle of the nineties, the
period covering Sir Henry Parkes’ representation of St. Leonards,
scarcely a political meeting was held at which a promise to bridge
the Harbour was not made. No more hardy perennial bloomed in
the political garden. At one time it seemed that the project was
about to enter at long last the domain of practical politics, but the
consummation devoutly wished remained imrealised—a grandiose
and seemingly impracticable project. Then in place of the bridge a
scheme of submarine tunnelling captured the public imagination.
But, like all the other proposals, this too was abandoned. Public
interest waned; the demand died down; and so the position remain-
ed until Mr. Ball found himself again installed in the chair of Secre-
tary for Public Works.


It is not without interest to review the sequence of events that
led to the evolution of the latter day bridge scheme. The first im-
portant stage was reached in 1912, when the Parliamentary Stand-
ing Committee on Public Works, to whom the question had been
referred, agreed to a motion “that it was expedient Sydney and
North Sydney should be connected by means of a bridge,” and recom-
mended the adoption of the scheme submitted by the Chief Engineer
for Metropolitan Construction, Mr. J. J. C. Bradfield. Two attempts
were made in 1916 to obtain Parliamentary endorsement of the re-
commendation. On each occasion the Enabling Bill, though passed
by the Legislative Assembly, was defeated in the Legislative
Council. In 1921, for the third time, the Bill was introduced. Again
the measure passed the Assembly. It was carried to the Legislative
Council and reached the stage of being placed on the business paper
when Parliament dissolved. Undeterred by the ill-fortune that had
attended the bill, Mr. Ball, in 1922, went one better than the pro-
verbial three times, and sponsored the desired legislation on the
occasion of its fourth introduction. Success crowned his efforts.
Although a country man, and member for a country constitu-
ency, Mr. Ball realised all the implicit values in this great engineer-
ing enterprise. No one better than he appreciated the tremendous
advantages that would accrue to the citizens of Sydney and the
community at large from a bridge across the Harbour; and he em-
ployed all his power of persuasion to gain the support of his Minis-
terial colleagues to the scheme. Cabinet finally approved, and in
the first year of his administration Mr. Ball was able to submit the
Authorising Bill to Parliament. Moving the second reading, he, as
Minister in charge, appealed for support for the measure on the
ground that the Bridge was necessary in the interests both of the
districts immediately served and of the State as a whole. He de-
clared that time would never be more opportune, and predicted
that when tenders were called for as low an offer would be forth-
coming as was likely to be made at any time henceforward.
One feature of the Bill which it was hoped would placate pos-
sible opponents, especially those in the ranks of Labour, was a
provision that tenderers should either use steel manufactured in
New South Wales, or, in the case of importation being imperative,
steel that could be fabricated in the State. Everything possible
would be done, it was promised, to see that our own workmen and
our own material were employed to the fullest extent in the con-
struction of this great work. It was made clear in the course of the
debate that the Leader of the Progressive Party and his small band
of followers were antipathetic to the enactment. They expressed
the opinion that under the conditions prevailing and having regard
for the needs of the country, the State was not justified in embark-
ing upon an expenditure of six millions on any public work in the
City. To allay the fear that the spending of this sum would mean
the starving of other important and pressing public works, Mr. Ball
gave an assurance—amply warranted as experience proved—that
country development would not be retarded, but would proceed
without interruption. He further pointed out that the Bridge would


t,iiy Courtesy of Govt. Printer.)
SYDNEY HARBOUR BRIDGE; The Hon. R. T. Ball lays the Foundation Stone of
South-east Pylon


take at least eight years to build, and that for the first three years
at any rate the expenditure would be limited to £BOO,OOO annually.
But if this was unconvincing the Minister’s exposition of the distri-
bution of the financial burden imposed by the measure should have
banished the last vestige of antagonism lingering in the minds of
Progressive Party members. For besides contemplating a direct tax
upon bridge users through the medium of tolls and fares, there was
express provision for, the application of the betterment principle to
property owners in areas adjacent to and served by the bridge. By
means of a land tax of Jd. in the £ on the unimproved capital
value of land within the City of Sydney, the Municipalities of North
Sydney, Mosman, Manly, Lane Cove and Willoughby, the Shires of
Kuringai and Warringah, and portion of the Shire of Hornsby it
was proposed to defray one-third of the capital cost of the bridge
and land resumptions. For the other two-thirds the Commission-
ers for Railways accepted responsibility.
Despite the magnitude of the project and money involved, the
Minister’s explanatory speech occupied no more than half an hour
to deliver. It was thoroughly businesslike—short and to the point.
The debate that ensued was equally terse; and the second reading
and committee stages were safely weathered. In the end, the third
reading was carried on division by 39 votes to 30, the Progressives
voting with the Labour Opposition against the measure which was
made a non-party one. Carried to the Upper House, the Bill ran
the gauntlet without mishap under the expert guidance of that
seasoned political leader, Sir Joseph Carruthers, and received the
Royal Assent on 24th November, 1922,
As soon as Assent was reported no time was lost in preparing
plans and specifications. To inspire confidence in prospective ten-
derers, to convince them that the Government was in earnest and
that work would go on, Mr. Ball approved of the construction of the
railway approach on the northern side of the Harbour six months
ahead of the time of the closing of the tenders for the bridge itself.
The object was to enable the railway goods traffic to be diverted
from Milson’s Point to the new North Sydney station with the mini-
mum of delay once a tender was accepted. On Saturday, 28th July,
1923, a definite commencement was made with the great project
when practical effect was given to the approval by the turning of
the first sod in connection with the deviation. As was fitting, the
ceremony was performed by Mr. Ball. A large and distinguished
company gathered at a spot commanding a splendid view of that
part of the Harbour to be spanned by the future bridge. The
audience included many members of the State Parliament as well as
representatives of the City of Sydney and the Municipalities and
Shires on the North Shore. The significance of the occasion was
not lost upon them. One and all must have appreciated the benefits
to be derived from this monumental enterprise, the pertinacity of
those who had worked to secure Legislative sanction for it, and the
originative part played by Mr. Ball himself. The spade with which
the sod was cut, with its commemorative inscription, remains one of
Mr. Ball’s most prized possessions.
49




Tenders for the bridge were then called, to close at the end of
November, 1923, but to meet the requirements and representations
of certain firms, Mr. Ball consented to extend the time to 16th
January, 1924. In answer to the Government’s advertisement,
twenty tenders in all were submitted by six firms, and the prices
quoted bore out Mr. Ball’s favourable anticipations. Procrastina-
tion in this instance had the attendant merit of ensuring to the Go-
vernment a welcome saving in the cost of construction. On the
advice of Dr. Bradfield, the Chief Engineer, Mr. Ball recommended
the acceptance of the tender of Dorman, Long & Co. for the con-
struction and erection of a two-hinged arch bridge from Dawes’
Point to Milson’s Point with a span of 1650 feet and five deck ap-
proach spans on either side of the Harbour, at a cost of £4,217,721.
The overall length of the bridge was to be 3770 feet, and provision
was made for four lines of heavy electric railway track, as well as
for a roadway 57 feet wide, and two wide footways; the headway
under the bridge to be 170 feet at high water.
The Government approved of the recommendation, and with-
out loss of time the successful tenderers njade a start with the
preliminary work of erecting workshops, procuring freighters (the
first was delivered by the Walsh Island Dockyard in April, 1925),
and the opening up of the Moruya quarry for the purpose of obtain-
ing the granite needed for the facing of the bridge piers and the
abutment towers or pylons. The roadway and railway approaches,
included in the Authorising Act but not included in the schedule
upon which the tender was based, were constructed by day labour
under the supervision of officers of the Public Works Department.
In anticipation of and preparation for the main undertaking, exten-
sive land resumptions had to be made, and properties demolished
on both sides of the Harbour. Up to June 30, 1925, no fewer than
139 buildings had been razed to the ground.
The next stage in the story of progression was the setting of
the memorial stone in the foundation of the south-east tower on
Dawes’ Point. The towers or pylons are a striking architectural
feature. Constructed of reinforced concrete faced with granite,
they form the abutments for the graceful arch of the main bridge
structure. By March, 1925, exactly one year after the acceptance
of Dorman Long’s tender, excavation for the Dawes’ Point tower
had advanced so far that it was possible to set the foundation stone.
As in the case of the turning of the first sod that set in motion the
work of railway deviation on the North Shore, the episode was
clothed with impressive ceremonial. Introductory speeches were
delivered by His Excellency the Governor (Admiral Sir Dudley de
Chair), and the Premier (Sir George Fuller). Then the Minister,
the Hon. R. T. Ball, was called upon to perform the duty allotted to
him. Briefly addressing the assemblage, he traced the history of the
agitation for direct communication across the Harbour fo its realisa-
tion in the w r ork then in hand. The fact was emphasised that the
various plans prepared in the earlier stages would have been inade-
quate for the traffic demands even of to-day, to say nothing of
twenty years ahead; whereas the design accepted would meet all


requirements for the next half century. By waiting it had been pos-
sible to accept a tender in every way advantageous to the State, and
to get a larger structure of more up-to-date design. Mr. Ball as-
sured the gathering that his association with the passing of the Bill,
the starting of the bridge approaches, the removal of the North
Sydney station, the calling for tenders, the acceptance of such a
satisfactory one, and the progress generally of the work made his
task of setting the foundation stone a pleasure, and an honour he
most deeply appreciated. The ceremony over, Sir A. J. Dorman,
who was present specially to represent the contractors, handed to the
Minister a chastely engraved casket bearing on the front panel a
coloured presentment of the future bridge, to commemorate the
part he had played in an important historic event and a significant
function in connection with the development of the State and the
Commonwealth.
Verily it was a red-letter day in the calendar of National
events, for it augured the materialisation of a long cherished dream
and fulfilled a promise made by the leader of a Government in the
previous century. What had hitherto been a mere abstraction was
row concrete. From that auspicious moment work uninterruptedly
proceeded until the even more memorable day, eight years later,
that saw the fabric completed, and, after an amazing interlude,
officially opened for the use of the people. It may be that, now
grown familiar, the striking beauty of the bridge fades to the
public eye, but there is not a visitor, however lowly or however dis-
tinguished, who, when he first glimpses the rainbow-like span of the
structure and sees its tracery silhouetted against the sky, does not
express unstinted admiration at the grandeur of its appearance.
Ebon-lined against the evening beam that “tints with prophetic
ray” or refulgent in the silver and blue of early morning, the grace-
ful crown of the bridge ever dominates the prospect, an object of
blended utility and charm.
As with uncanny prevision, Dr. Erasmus Darwin limned it in
1768:
‘ ‘ There the proud arch, Colossus-like, bestride
Yon glittering stream, and bound the chafing tide.”
GEORGE’S RIVER AND SPIT BRIDGES
Two other notable bridge construction works inaugurated dur-
ing this period were the George’s River bridge, estimated to cost
£200,000, and the Spit bridge, estimated to cost £70,000. To Mr.
Ball must go the credit for each. The necessary authorising meas-
ures were prepared, introduced by him and passed by Parliament.
In the case of the first-mentioned bridge the Sutherland Shire
Council was made the constructing authority. In this capacity the
Council was authorised to borrow the necessary funds and em-
powered to collect tolls to enable it to discharge the obligation im-
posed by the Act to liquidate the money borrowed in twenty years.
At the close of that period it was provided that the bridge should
revert to the Government and become a National asset. Soon after
the passing of the Enabling Act in December, 1922, plans and speci-


fications were prepared. The approved design provided for a steel
truss bridge of six 225 ft. spans, and three 90ft. plate girder ap-
proach spans on reinforced concrete piers. Tenders were invited
and contracts let to Armstrong Whitworth Pty. Ltd. for the supply
and delivery of steel work, £80,370; and to the State Monier Pipe
Works for the erection of steel work and construction of the piers
and approaches, £109,371.
For the bridge to cross Middle Harbour at the Spit, the Har-
bour Trust was made the constructing authority, and the work was
carried out under agreement with the Manly Municipal Council.
Here *again provision was made for the imposition of tolls and the
ultimate transfer of the asset to the State. It was computed when
the work was sanctioned, that the Council would be able to dis-
charge its indebtedness within 15 years, but immediately the bridge
was opened the volume of traffic exceeded all anticipations and
assumed such proportions that within eight years the original debt
had been cleared off and the bridge made free to the public. The
Spit bridge was a much less pretentious affair than that over the
George’s River. As it was intended at a future date to build a
high-level bridge over Middle Harbour in connection with the elec-
trification of the railway system in and around the City, it was
decided, in order to minimise the initial expenditure, that the struc-
ture should be of timber. Both the Spit and George’s River bridges
were carried to the stage of completion, and the public for some
years have enjoyed with a full mede of appreciation the ready
means of access they afford to coastal resorts north of the Harbour
and south of Botany Bay.
NATIONAL BRIDGES
The schedule of works carried out, coming within the category
of National bridges, fully substantiated Mr. Ball’s claim that
country needs would not be neglected because of the State’s com-
mitment in connection with the Sydney Harbour Bridge. In his
desire to satisfy requirements he succeeded in having made avail-
able increased financial provision for the repair, maintenance and
erection of new bridges. There was scarcely a part of the State
that did not benefit by this expenditure. Many bridges were built
to facilitate transport and intercourse; and demands for as many
more were investigated. Whilst the appropriation enabled many
structures badly in need of repair to receive attention, the Depart-
mental reports showed that there still remained 385 bridges unfit to
carry heavy traffic owing to the neglect of past Governments to set
aside a sufficiency of funds.
A good deal of activity was displayed at this time in the carry-
ing out of works essential to and required by the Border Railways
Agreement between New South Wales and Victoria. In accordance
with the provisions of the Act, the Murray River was bridged at
Mildura at an expenditure of £98,000, Other bridges involved in
the Agreement were in course of construction over the Murray at
Abbotsford (£78,000), Euston (£131,000) and Gonn Crossing
(£49,000), the cost in each case being defrayed between the States


concerned. The extension of the Victorian Railway system from
Swan Hill to Kooloonong necessitated the erection of a further
bridge over the Murray at Tooleybuc in lieu of the ferry service.
The cost of the structure was £28,795. Both this bridge and that at
Mulwala (£35,902, of which £13,294 was chargeable to the Victorian
Government) were completed. A bridge over the Murrumbidgee
River at Carrathool was also completed at a cost of £29,000, of
which the Shire Councils concerned contributed one-half. Work of
an extensive nature was carried out in connection with the bridge
over the Murray River at Barham. And bridges over the Culgoa at
Brenda, over Willandra Creek at Roto, over Tweed River at Mc-
Kenzie’s Crossing, over Menindie Creek on the road Menindie to
Pooncarie, over Bogan River at Gongolgon, over Wybong Creek on
the road Muswellbrook to Merriwa, Kinchela bridge on the road
Kempsey to Jerseyville, Six Mile Creek on the road Wentworth to
South Australian border, and over Pamamaroo Creek on the road
Menindie to Wilcannia, were all renewed. New bridges were con-
structed at Upper Manilla and Paddy’s River. The bridge over the
Hunter at Denman was repaired throughout, while the deck of the
Iron Cove Bridge and a large portion of the 0 ’Connell Street bridge,
Parramatta, were also repaired. Other work was in progress at
Palmer’s Channel, Dingo Creek, Yarrawa and North Sydney Sus-
pension bridge, tinder the heading of “Bridge Works Investigat-
ed” were included bridges over Paterson River at Gostwyck, Cock-
fighter Creek at Warkworth, Emigrant Creek on the road Lismore
io Ballina, Richmond River at Woodburn, and at Ballina street,
Lismore, Cook’s River at General Holmes’ Drive, Tweed River at
Byangum, Willandra Creek on the road Mossgiel to Ivanhoe, Box
Creek on the road Whealbah to Trida, Willandra Creek on the road
Ivanhoe to Clare, Merrimageel Creek on the road Booligal to Oxley,
and over the Murrumbidgee River at Taemas.
NATIONAL ROADS
In the matter of roads construction, although work in the
Western Division was restricted owing to the absence of pavement
material in that remote part of the State, a good deal was done to
improve travelling conditions in the outback. Taking the National
Highways in the Eastern Division, nearly £15,000 was expended
upon the sections Jindabyne to Kosciusko, and Edith via Jenolan
Caves to Hampton. But of all the work carried out by the branch
in the three years the road planned to give settlers in the Upper
Clarence district, an outlet to the rail-head at Rathdowney (Queens-
land) was outstanding. Mr. Ball managed to have made available
for this new highway no less a sum than £39,000 from Common-
wealth-cum-State funds for Main and Developmental roads. The
work was divided into four sections and contracts were entered into
for the first two. Within the County of Cumberland extensive re-
construction work was carried out. Fifteen miles (three sections)
of the Prince’s Highway were reconstructed at a cost of £50,000;
two sections of the Great Northern Road at a cost of £146,000; 26
miles (five sections) of the Great Southern Road at a cost of


£161,400; and 20 miles of the Main Western Road, between Parra-
matta and Penrith, were asphalted at a cost of £22,100. Pady Car-
rington Drive and General Holmes’ Drive were also greatly im-
proved.
In addition, extensive levelling of sandhills, reclaiming of
swamp lands and road construction in the vicinity of Maroubra Bay
and Bnunerong, were undertaken primarily to relieve unemployment.
The amount allocated for and expended upon this work was
£56,500. Outside the County of Cumberland the construction of that
portion of the Prince’s Highway between Eden and the Victorian
border, and between the Sutherland Shire boundary and the top of
Bulli Pass, was put in hand, money having been apportioned from
the £250,000 vote passed in 1923 for the relief of unemployed return-
ed soldiers. Both works were completed at a total cost of £47,000.
Upon Closer Settlement roads, apart from a comparatively small
expenditure on Dyraaba Soldiers’ Settlement roads, a bridge over
Gibberagong Creek and Walbundrie Soldiers’ Settlement roads,
little or no money was spent, although numerous investigations were
undertaken at the instance of the Department of Lands and reports
furnished.
WATER SUPPLY AND SEWERAGE
For the triennial period the Water Supply and Sewerage branch
of the Department expended £3,939,976—a sum indicative of the
Government’s desire to meet the needs of the community. Both the
city and the country impartially participated. Water supply works
were completed in thirteen country towns; new schemes were in
course of construction at Yass and Blackheath; new pumping plants
were installed in five important centres, and in several other cases
steam plants were converted to electric drive. Principal of the
proposals investigated was that pertaining to the provision of a
water supply for the South-West Tablelands to serve the towns of
Cootamundra, Stockinbingal, Temora, Murrumburrah, Barmedman,
Wyalong, West Wyalong, Young and Grenfell, The estimated cost
was £1,664,000 and Parliamentary authority was obtained for carry-
ing out the work.
SYDNEY WATER SUPPLY AMPLIFICATION
The amplification of the Sydney water supply, prominent in
1917-20, was still claiming the attention of the Department. The
special Board of experts, set up by Mr. Ball in 1918, pursued its
inquiries and continued to do so until the end of March, 1925, when
the body constituted under the Metropolitan Water, Sewerage and
Drainage Act, 1924, came into operation. Among the works recom-
mended by the Board before it ceased to function, and for which
Parliamentary authorisation was secured, were a pressure tunnel
from Potts Hill to Waterloo, a third 6ft. main from pipe-head to
Potts Hill, and many extensive additions to the branch mains and
the pumping stations in the Metropolitan area, the cost involved
being £3,000,000; a dam 200 ft. high on the Nepean River at Lupton
to cost £826,000, and a 48in. diameter main from pipe-head to Ryde




to cost £425,000. The final matter to which the Board gave atten-
tion was the furnishing of a water supply for Wollongong, Port
Kembla and the South Coast towns. It recommended the spending
of £164,000 on a scheme to supply industrial water to Port Kembla
and Wollongong contingent upon the building of the Moss Vale-
Port Kembla railway, and adequate guarantees by the various in-
dustries.
Having set in train the business of amplifying the city water
supply, the Minister’s next concern was to protect the supply from
pollution. To procure expert guidance, Mr. Ball, in 1925, as one of
his last administrative acts, formed a committee of representatives
of the Departments of Public Health and Public Works, the Metro-
politan Water, Sewerage and Drainage Board, the Crown Solici-
tor’s Office, and the Hunter District Water and Sewerage Board,
under the chairmanship of the Director General of Public Health.
Both the Cordeaux and Avon River reservoirs—essential units
in the City water supply amplification scheme—were by this time
approaching completion. In the three years no less a sum than
£1,112,464 was spent on these works, bringing the total expenditure
up to £1,831,944. Preparatory work was also carried out at the site
of the proposed dam at Lupton. on the Nepean. All the necessary
clearing was done, a road of access cut, and the building of a rail-
way put under way. Outside the Metropolitan area the most im-
portant undertaking in point of dimensions was the Chichester River
gravitation scheme to augment the water supply of the Hunter
River district. Upon this project, control of which was put in the
bands of the local Water and Sewerage Board towards the middle
of 1925, £528,794 was spent in the three financial years of Mr. Ball's
administration, bringing the total expenditure to £2,044,158.
CITY AND COUNTRY SEWERAGE SCHEMES
Of the sewerage works in course of construction, the Northern
Suburbs outfall sewer was steadily advanced. Several sections had
been carried to the point of completion. In 1922 a commencement
was made with the Southern and Western sewerage system to serve
the Canterbury, Campsie, Belmore and Bankstown districts. Au-
thorised ten years earlier, by the end of the financial year 1924-25,
£145,490 had been spent upon the work. Country works in progress
included a complete sewerage scheme for Tamworth, reticulation,
extensions at Narrandera, Lithgow T and East Orange; while plans
for new schemes and extensions of existing services were well ad-
vanced in a number of other country centres including Dubbo.
Forbes, Grafton, Goulburn, Parkes, Wollongong, Newcastle and
Stockton.
LEGISLATION
Metropolitan Water Sewerage and Drainage Act
Apart from his administrative record, Mr. Ball was responsible
for a number of legislative enactments effecting reforms in the ad-
ministration of both City and Country Water and Sewerage ser-


vices. First and foremost was the Metropolitan Water, Sewerage
and Drainage Act, 1924, a measure regarded as one of the most im-
portant submitted to Parliament for many years. It was designed
to constitute a Board to replace the then existing Board of Water
Supply and Sewerage, and to entrust to the new body the construc-
tion, control and management of all works of water supply, sewer-
age and storm-water drainage in an area_extended to include certain
districts in and adjacent to the County of Cumberland.
The Metropolitan Board of Water Supply and Sewerage had
performed its duties for many years subject to the administrative
control of the Secretary for Public Works, and had been dependent
upon the Government for financial provision to meet capital expen-
diture. This division of responsibility operated with most unsatis-
factory results. For a considerable time it had been recognised
that this state of affairs was intolerable and must be terminated;
but it remained for Mr. Ball to evolve the most effective substi-
tute. Fortified with information concerning the administration of
similar services in other parts of the world as well as in the various
States of the Commonwealth, the Departmental officials drafted a
formidable Bill of 146 clauses which repealed existing enactments,
introduced a wide measure of administrative reform and at the
same time simplified the code under wdiich the new Board would
work. The Bill gave to the body proposed to be created long-
wished-for financial independence, and powder to go on the market
and, subject to certain restrictions, borrow" the money required fer-
tile future amplification and extension of its works. The Board
itself was reconstituted. In place of seven members as heretofore
—three appointed, two elected to represent the City of Sydney, and
two the suburbs —it w T as proposed to have a Board of nine members,
only one of wdiom, the President, w r as to be appointed by the Gov-
ernment. This right of appointment retained by the Government
w T as warmly criticised, but it was claimed that justification for it
was to be found in the fact that the State had advanced to the
Board approximately £22,500,000. As the executive member, the
Government appointee would be able to see that the Board’s lia-
bility to the Crown w r as properly discharged, and so direct the
policy as to secure to the ratepayers the utmost efficiency in the
controlled services and protect the interests of the State generally.
Of the eight members to be elected under the Bill one, instead
of two, was to represent the City of Sydney, and seven a series of
constituencies grouped in such fashion as to secure representation
of the outside area on a population basis. Provision wms made for a
re-grouping of the areas wdien and wdrere development or extension
of the Board’s activities rendered such a course necessary.
In order to avoid complicating the financial operations of the
new T Board it was proposed that the construction of the Cordeaux
and Avon reservoirs, the Northern Suburbs Ocean Outfall
and the new darn on the Nepean at Lupton should remain in the
hands of the Department of Public Works; and that the w r orks,
when finished, should be transferred to the Board. The completion
of these w r orks wms regarded as matter of such urgency that it


would be disastrous if their progress were delayed by the change in
the personnel of the Board. Provision was also made in the Bill to
crystallise any recommendations that might be made by the Com-
mittee of experts appointed by Mr. Ball for the protection of the
catchment area and to prevent the pollution of the City water
supply. Though the personnel of the Board has been altered by
amending legislation passed in recent years, the basic principles of
Mr. Ball’s measure remain unchanged.
Country Measures
Another measure amended the Hunter District Water and Sew-
erage Acts, 1892 and 1906. Welcome legislation was embodied in
the Bill Mr. Ball introduced to amend the Public Works (Country
Towns Water Supply and Sewerage) Act. This amending measure
was of special interest to country Local Government authorities
inasmuch as it empowered the Governor-in-Council to authorise the
construction of works to cost more than £20,000 without reference
to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works. This
was a most acceptable change in the law. Experience had shown
that the section of the Public Works Act requiring the reference to
the Committee of every undertaking involving an expenditure in
excess of £20,000 frequently resulted in hardship by holding up for
long periods urgently needed water supply and sewerage works.
Mr. Ball’s amendment was drafted to short-circuit the procedure by
abolishing the prior inquiry by the Parliamentary Committee, It
provided that where it could be shown there was reasonable pros-
pect of the local authority being able to finance the scheme, the
Government would be prepared to permit of the work being pro-
ceeded with. Furthermore, the Government would help to find the
money, design the work and supervise its construction. This meant
that if any country centre wanted a water supply or sewerage
scheme the local authority could put the work in hand without fear
of delay. Since the law was amended a good many country works
have been carried out under the altered arrangement.
A further measure of interest to the country was the Country
Towns Water and Sewerage (Reduction of Debts) Act passed in
1922. By this enactment the debts of certain country Municipali-
ties were reduced where the altered conditions prevented the Local
Government Authority meeting its liabilities in respect of works of
water supply and sewerage—a relief that was greatly appreciated.
DEPARTMENT OF RAILWAYS AND TRAMWAYS
Concessions to Primary Producers
As Minister for Railways it was Mr. Ball’s responsibility, as it
was his wish, to ease to the fullest extent possible the transport
burdens of the primary producers. To give effect to this plank in
the Government’s policy platform and attain his own ambition, was
a task beset with many difficulties. The problem was how to grant
the further concessions sought by the country, which meant inevit-
ably a loss of railway revenue, and at the same time meet the enor-
mous increase in railway expenditure due to causes beyond the


Commissioners’ control. More efficient management alone was not
the solution, though the attainment in this direction had been great,
the people of New South Wales in one year, 1922, having been saved
no less that £3,000,000 by this means alone.
A factor essential to the solution was increased production to
increase the railway earnings. Despite the diminished receipts inci-
dental to the prevailing drought conditions and increased working
expenses resulting from increases in wages under arbitration
awards, the ever-growing cost of materials and advancing interest
rates, much was done to benefit the users of the railways. Both
freights and fares had been steadily reduced until by the end of the
financial year 1924-25 the total value of the concessions amounted to
£890,000. That was the limit of achievement at the moment. No
further relief could be granted until either the working expendi-
ture was reduced or the railway revenue showed a substantial in-
crease. To bring this about the Government’s land policy had been
devised.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE RAIL MOTOR
A commendable feature of Mr, Ball’s administration, and one
specially directed to assist country dwellers, was the attention he
devoted to the question of providing better facilities for the travel-
ling public over branch railway lines. For some time he had been
pressing the Railway Commissioners to introduce a system of motor
trains, and it was upon his recommendation that a trial service was
ultimately arranged for between Grafton and Lismore. The experi-
ment, though conducted with a small rail motor, proved, as Mr. Ball
fully believed it would, a big convenience to the public. Better
still, it was a success from a railway business point of view. It also
conclusively showed that no general application of the system of
rail-motors would be thoroughly satisfactory until a very substan-
tial improvement had been made in the type of motor used. The
experts therefore set to work to evolve a more fitting class of motor
for this spcial kind of service. The development was difficult and
necessarily slow, but eventually a heavy motor was designed which
it was hoped would serve the purpose. A number of country lines
were known to be admirably adapted for motor trains, and upon
these it was desired to introduce a service capable of doing more
work and work of a more general nature than was shown to be pos-
sible in the experimental service on the Grafton-Lismore section.
The first of the new motors was tried out on the Tamworth-Barraba
extension. So satisfactory were the results that, as rapidly as
manufacture allowed, the system was installed on other country
branch lines. At the close of the financial year, and before Mr. Ball
left office, rail-motor services were successfully operating on the fol-
lowing sections: Narrandera to Hillston, Narrandera-Tocumwal,
Narromine-Cootamundra, Dubbo-Wellington-Stuart Town, Wends
Creek-Tamworth, Burren Junction-Pokataroo, Burren Junction-
Walgett, Binnaway-Werris Creek, Dubbo-Gwabegar, Muswellbrook-
Merriwa, and Kyogle-Lismore. In this wider application the inno-
vation met with such popular approval that it was determined to


improve existing services, and, in recognition of the appreciation of
railway users, to extend the benefits of the system to other branch
lines. The serious loss of time as well as inconvenience suffered by
the travelling public who patronised the mixed train services on
branch lines, w T ere eliminated by the substitution of rail motors. Not
only so, but running expenses were materially reduced —a vital con-
sideration for a Department overburdened with non-paying rail-
ways. Country lines indicated by Mr. Ball as lines on which motor
trains could be run with advantage to the public and economy to
the service were: Culcairn to Corowa, Culcairn to Holbrook, Henty
to The Rand, The Rock to Oaklands, Wagga to Tumbarumba, and
Cootamundra to Tumut.
CITY AND SUBURBAN RAILWAYS
During the three years of Mr. Ball’s Ministerial control of the
Department, railway constructional w r orks of a comprehensive
nature were carried out. Some 36 miles of duplications and devia-
tions were completed, and steady progress made with the quadrupli-
cation and electrification of the railway line between Sydney and the
National Park. Early in 1922 the building of the City and Subur-
ban electric railway was re-started. This work had been in sus-
pense for five years, in fact ever since the cancellation of the Norton
Griffiths agreement. Though the work was regarded by the Com-
missioners as of the greatest urgency, even now progress was slow,
and while they still stressed this view and the fact that the Harbour
Bridge being under construction made it more than ever necessary
that the building of the railway should be accelerated, the amount
of money made available by the Government did not admit of the
progress necessary for the maintenance of adequate transport ser-
vices for the increasing population of the city and suburbs.
COUNTRY LINES
But if insufficient attention was devoted to railway works in
the City, the country had no cause for complaint. In the triennial
period 526 miles of new lines were opened for traffic. The complet-
ed sections included a number of those appearing in the schedule of
works attached to the Norton Griffiths agreement, some of which
had not been started when the Department took over the construc-
tion, and others were progressing. The lines opened were: Coff’s
Harbour to Glenreagh, Canowindra to Eugowra, Barmedman to
Rankin Springs, Westmead to Castle Hill, Castle Hill to Rogan’s
Hill, Urunga to Raleigh; Griffith to Hillston, Coonabarabran to
Gwabegar, Tarana to Oberon, Binnaway to Werris Creek, Macks-
ville to Urunga, Gilmore to Kunama, Glenreagh to Dorrigo, Regent’s
Park to Cabramatta, Molong to Yeoval, and Yeoval to Dubbo.
With the opening of the line between Macksville and Urunga in De
comber, 1923, it is interesting to note that the North Coast railway,
the construction of which commenced at West Maitland in 190 S
was completed. The only break remaining in this new direct com-
munication with Brisbane was the Clarence River, and pending the


building of a bridge, traffic between Grafton and South Grafton was
carried by a train ferry service which was brought into operation
about the time the last gap in the railway was closed.
Apart from the railways completed and opened for traffic, a
number of new lines were in course of construction. For example,
the line from The Rock to Pulletop (26 miles) was finished with the
exception of the station buildings, which were approaching comple-
tion; the line from Roslyn to Taralga (26 miles) was proceeding,
and considerable progress had been made with the extension of the
Condobolin-Broken Hill line from Trida to Menindie (159 J miles).
A further line from Booyong to Ballina miles) was in progress,
though continuous rains were retarding the work.
An interesting, if short line, for the construction of which Mr.
Ball obtained Parliamentary sanction, was that from Richmond to
Kurrajong. There was delay at the outset in obtaining possession
of the necessary land and in determining the route to he traversed,
but by the middle of 1925 the principal earthworks and minor
water-ways had been completed; rails had been laid to the Hawkes-
bury River (2 miles) and work on the bridge over the Hawkesbury
River was well forward.
Over and above from railways completed and those under con-
struction at this time, the procedure precedent to the launching of
new public works had been followed by Mr. Ball in connection with
a series of railway proposals. Before he left office the permanent
staking of the line between Kyogle and Richmond Gap, between
Uranquinty and Moon’s Siding, and between Camurra and Bogga-
billa had been finished. Similar work was also in progress on the
proposed line between Ungarie and Naradhan, Wyalong and Wom-
boyne, Rand to Coreen, and Moss Yale to Port Kembla. Trial sur-
veys had been completed of lines contemplated to connect Grafton
and Killarney, Cooma and Adaminaby, Cooma and Dalgety,
Regent’s Park and Bankstown, and Sutherland and Cronulla; a
trial survey had been commenced for the proposed line between
Rogan’s Hill and Dural; and explorations of routes between Men-
dooran and Tooraweenah, and Mumbil and Burrendong had been
made.
RAILWAY ROYAL COMMISSION
It was during this period of administration that Mr. Ball
got the approval of the Government to the appointment of a Royal
Commission to thoroughly investigate the working of the Railway
and Tramway services. Two Commissioners were brought from
England to conduct the inquiry. They were Sir Sam Fay, General
Manager of the Great Central Railway, and Sir Vincent Raven, who
for many years had been the chief adviser to the London and North-
Eastern Railway Co. The appointments were the direct product of
criticism on the floor of Parliament of the Railway administration.
It was felt that this State enterprise had attained such magnitude
that there was need to assure the public that affairs were being
conducted efficiently and that the equipment was up-to-date. The


best way to satisfy the public mind on both points was to have an
independent investigation by experts from outside the service into
every phase—management, equipment, and general working, includ-
ing finance, administration, control and economy of both railways
and tramways. At this time the New South Wales State Govern-
ment railways open for traffic represented a capital of £98,855,000,
and despite the loss incurred in the running of many unprofitable
lines, the annual balance sheet showed a small surplus after meet-
ing Avorking expenses and interest on State loans.
Appointed in May, 1924, the Commission tendered its report to
the Governor in October of the same year. Thirty-six days were
devoted to tours of inspection, in the course of which the Commis-
sioners travelled 9530 miles over the State railways, and gained
first-hand information regarding both facilities and plant. The
scope of the Commission was wide. It covered the organisation and
running of passenger and goods traffic, the services rendered, the
scales of fares and freights operating and the financial returns. It
embraced also matters appertaining to the organisation and conduct
of the mechanical section of the system in relation to the respective
types of locomotives and rolling stock in use, cost, economy of life
and equipment, renewal and maintenance charges, as well as matters
relating to the construction, renewal and maintenance of the per-
manent way, including station equipment and the system of signal-
ling and interlocking in vogue.
The evidence elicited was most voluminous, and a long series of
recommendations was finally submitted for the enlightenment and
guidance of the Government. One, and by no means unimportant,
recommendation was that the Railway Commissioners should be re-
couped by the Treasury for losses incurred upon developmental
lines during a period of ten years after they had been opened for
traffic. The bearing of this will be appreciated when it is mention-
ed that when the recommendation was made there was a list of 46
old country lines on which the loss in 1924, after providing for
working expenses and interest, was put down at £1,288,427; and nine
newly opened lines, the net result of the working of which in the
same period showed a loss of £1,505,000. This burden the Railway
Commissioners reported was being greatly increased annually; so
that unless the suggested relief was afforded the service as a whole
would not continue to return sufficient net earnings to cover the
working expenses and interest upon the total capital expenditure.”
UNIFORM RAILWAY GAUGE
This question of a uniform railway gauge must be placed with
the problems that recurringly present themselves to Australian Go-
vernments and are seemingly insoluble. Many schemes have been
devised to overcome the difficulty, but financial considerations ren-
dered even the most commendable unacceptable. Putting aside the
general question, the one and only attempt to remove the existing
handicap was jointly made by the N.S.W. and Queensland Govern-
ments in conjunction with the Federal Government, when it was


agreed to construct a line between Kyogle and South Brisbane
which would give direct communication between the capitals of the
two States on a uniform gauge. This work was initiated by Mr.
Ball, and he carried out all the preliminaries essential to the under-
taking. Mr. Ball also submitted a proposal which, if adopted, would
have afforded a simple solution of the problem so far as it related
to the East-West line. But it was pigeon-holed, and that larger
problem remains of academic interest and outside the range of prac-
tical politics. An opportunity for a further discussion of the mat-
ter presented itself at the conference of Commonwealth and State
Ministers and officials convened by the then Prime Minister, Mr.
Bruce, and held in Melbourne in May, 1923. The subject was listed
with a score of other important questions for consideration and, it
was hoped, uniform action. As Secretary for Public Works and
Minister for Railways, Mr. Ball, who was one of the delegation from
this State, was able to enlighten the gathering in regard to the
work being accomplished on the North Coast, between Kyogle and
Richmond Gap, the New South Wales section of the new through
line to Brisbane. This joint effort was the subject of appreciative
comment. Conference recognised the necessity for a uniform rail-
way gauge between the various capital centres as much for defence
purposes as to facilitate the transport of passengers and goods; but
it was not prepared to sanction immediate action. All it would
agree to was the appointment of a Board, comprising representa-
tives of each of the mainland State railways and the Common-
wealth railways, whose task would be to fix and prescribe stand-
ards for the construction of the lines affected by the conversion,
and to determine the manner in which the conversion should be pro-
ceeded with. Through this agency it was hoped the work would be
not only facilitated when the time was ripe to undertake it, but
carried out expeditiously and at a minimum cost.
TRAMWAYS
In this domain of Departmental activity the electrification of
the Newcastle tramlines was perhaps the chief incident. Commenced
in 1923, by the 17th December of that year the Mayfield line, the
first section to be converted, was opened for electric traction. Mr.
Ball performed the official ceremony arranged to mark the occasion.
Work generally was pressed forward, and at June 30, 1925, the
overhead wiring, feeders, etc., had been completed on the Mere-
wether, Adamstown, Waratah and New Lambton sections of the
tramway system, and work on the lines to West Wallsend and Car-
rington was in hand.
In the Metropolitan area, besides maintaining in good working
condition the permanent way, buildings, rolling stock, machinery
and plant, and making additions to the power-houses to cope with
the increasing calls upon the electrical distributing system, the
Commissioners were becoming concerned, even alarmed, at the fact
that the Tramway system was not paying working expenses and
interest, and that recent developments indicated that the position
was rapidly growing worse. In the first place the withdrawal of


the additional penny fare imposed in 1914 on tickets issued on
Sundays, Christmas Day and Good Friday, caused a revenue loss of
£90,000 in the first two years. More serious still was the steady
decline in the number of passengers carried, largely owing to the
pressure of motor bus competition. This duplication of facilities
already provided by the State was described as totally destructive
of good service. It caused dangerous congestion in the streets, and
was creating a serious, unnecessary and increasing financial burden
which must be borne by the public. Here was sounded the first call
for the creation of a competent authority to control the volume and
nature of motor bus services likely to have an effect on existing
State transportation systems. The Commissioners were operating
228 miles of track, representing a capital investment of £11,131,000;
and in the absence of such control there was a lack of reasonable
business security for the investment of further capital in extending
and improving the State’s existing services. The situation and the
vested interests that were rapidly being built up contained a prob-
lem which all the talents of succeeding Governments have been
needed to unravel.
STATE INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES
Uhr’s Point Timber Yards.
At an early stage of his second term of administration, Mr. Ball
resumed his task of reviewing the activities of the State Industrial
Undertakings and giving effect to the Government’s decision to
close down those that were unprofitable. The enterprises in exist-
ence in 1922 included the Homebush Bay Brickworks, the Metal
Quarries, Building Construction Branch, Monier Pipe Works, State
Bakery, Motor Garage, Clothing Factory, Timber Yards (Uhr’s
Point), Sawmills (Craven and Gloucester), and Trawlers. The three
last-mentioned showed on the trading operations for the last finan-
cial year a loss computed at £145,000. The heaviest loser was the
Timber Yards with £90,298 to its debit account. This was the first
of the establishments to be overhauled. In the two years that had
intervened since Mr. Ball had previously exercised control, affairs
had gone from bad to worse. Not only were the yards still in the
category of financial failures, but the annual deficit had swollen to
a staggering amount. No time was lost by Mr. Ball in recommend-
ing the closing down of the works and the disposal of the stock-in-
trade. But before resorting to this extreme course it was decided
that the stock, plant, machinery, buildings and land should be
advertised for sale as a going concern. The advertisement was pub-
lished in all the States. One offer was received from a City firm
prepared to pay £60,000 for the whole thing, lock, stock and barrel.
That not being entertained, the tenderers advanced their offer to
£71,000. Even this Mr. Ball did not consider good enough, although
there were members of his party who advised him to close with it,
get rid of a “white elephant,” and make the best of a bad bargain.
During the ensuing three months several tentative offers were
made for the purchase of the whole or part of the establishment.
From the country came an offer of £85,000 for all the assets, the
price being subsequently advanced to £105,000 when the first bid


was not accepted. The Government next decided, on Mr. Balias
recommendation, to close down the yard and dispose of the stock
separately. Within two months stock to the approximate value of
£40,000 was sold. folloAving which the balance remaining was taken
over by a City firm at agreed rates that returned an additional
£62,000. A month later the same firm offered £40,000 for the estab-
lishment, comprising land, buildings, plant, machinery, power house
and railway siding rights. Believing that an even better deal could
be effected, Mr. Ball had the whole establishment put up at auction.
The highest bid, £35,000, did not reach the reserve. Eventually the
property, excluding plant and machinery, was sold for £27,500*; and
a further £26,494 was obtained from the sale, in separate lots at
auction, of the plant and machinery. When the final reckoning
came to be made it was found that the sum that had been realised
was £160,000 as against the initial bid of £60,000 for the whole con-
cern—a result that was a fine tribute to the Minister's perspicacity.
The State Sawmills at Gloucester and the timber yard at Wick-
ham were among other of the industries that did not stand up to the
test applied, and that failed to comply with the conditions of the
Government’s policy. The manager in each instance was given the
opportunity to carry on if he could without incurring further finan-
cial loss; but the moment failure was exposed the industries were
offered for sale. An invitation for tenders brought one bid for the
Gloucester sawmills, and as the price was considered favourable
Cabinet was recommended to and did accept it in March, 1924. Six
months later the sawmills at Craven went into the discard; and
about the same time the Lime Brickworks at Botany were closed
down.
Introduction of Bonus Payments
Practically the only enterprises now remaining were the Home-
bush Bay Brickworks, the Metal Quarries and the Monier Pipe
Works. In a commendable attempt to preserve these useful and
profitable avenues of employment, Mr. Ball instituted a system of
bonus payments to employees—the payment being contingent upon
the undertaking showing a profit. To start with, the innovation
was confined to the Brickworks at Homebush Bay. Although the
industrial unions strenuously objected to its introduction the bonus
system proved a signal success. The immediate effect was to en-
courage the employees to take a keener interest in their job. This
keenness brought about an improved output and a reduction in over-
head expenses, which in turn resulted in an increased profit. In the
first year in which the system was operative the trading profit was
reported by the Auditor General to be £23,879 —in the previous year
it was £10,900. At this time the total capital provided to establish
the industry had been repaid and the State had a valuable asset
carrying no liability. In the following year, 1923-24, the surplus at
the credit of the trading account had grown to £27,511, the largest
profit yet shown in the life of the undertaking; but even this record
was broken in the succeeding year when the trading profit was cer-
tified at £30,149. Both the State Metal Quarries and the Monier
Pipe Works were in an exceptionally sound financial position and


fully justified their retention as State Industrial Enterprises. In
the case of the metal quarries it is true that the profits fell in the
three years from £25,400 to £23,400 and finally to £21,200, yet the
undertaking was still able to add to its assets out of its own funds.
The Monier Pipe Works, on the other hand, like the Brickworks,
showed profits on a yearly ascending scale—£ll,soo, £14,000, and
£20,244.
ADMINISTRATION (1927-1930)
DEPARTMENT OF LANDS
The financial barometer was veering from fair to unsettled
when, in 1927, the Bavin (Coalition) Government found itself in-
stalled on the Treasury benches. The clouds presaging the depres-
sion were gathering. A shrinkage in the National income was al-
ready observable. Budgetary deficits were manifesting themselves.
The flow of loan money was failing. All these conditions combined
to make it less and less possible for the Government to develop the
country by the building of public works, and more and more neces-
sary to seek other means to bring development about. The inutility
and unwisdom of commencing public works, and especially railways,
when there was an insufficiency of funds in sight to permit of these
works proceeding-steadily to completion, were all too clear. It was
an uneconomical policy that resulted in increased expenditure and
retarded the very development the works were designed to bring
about. It was driven home that the more sensible course was to
push ahead with such undertakings as were in hand and complete
them as rapidly as possible, and to start those works only for which
funds would unquestionably become available to admit of an un-
interrupted continuance of operations. And this plan was prefer-
ably adopted. But whatever easing off there may have been in rail-
way construction for economical reasons was more than compen-
sated for by the building of main roads, money for which was
forthcoming from both the Federal and State Governments.
CLOSER SETTLEMENT
The brightest hope of unravelling the difficulties with which
the Government was beset was seen to be in increased land settle-
ment and the opening up of fresh avenues of production. The assur-
ance was conveyed through the Governor’s speeches that close at-
tention would be given to this important aspect, and that no effort
would be spared to make land available for intending settlers. And
right through its term of office the Government sought to brigade all
the elements favourable to success and to concentrate on this single
definite end. Additional areas for productive purposes in favour-
able localities were opened up, and a sympathetic co-operation with
landholders was promoted, conducive to the interests of both. The
practical results of this policy of exploiting to the full local resourc-
es soon became evident. At this time there was no incursion of
settlers from abroad. The Migration Agreement of 1923 between
the Imperial, Commonwealth and State Governments, favourably as


it was regarded when entered into, was moribund. No attempt had
been made to reap the advantages it offered until the Bavin Govern-
ment signed up in 1928.
If one were seeking an illustration of what can be accomplished
in the way of closer settlement —given the will to do so—there
would be no need to travel further than Mr. Ball’s own constitu-
ency of Corowa, a constituency remarkable for the number of men
and women living on the land in comparative comfort. Every
Shire in the area—Lockhart, Culcairn, Hume, Urana, Coreen, Jeril-
derie and Berrigan—has shared more or less in the activity, but, as
is to be expected, acquisitions have been most numerous in the east-
ern part of the electorate where the rainfall is better. A glance at
the schedule discloses such notable early subdivisions as Walla
Walla (50,187 acres), Coreen and Back Paddock (39,334 acres), and
Tuppal (50,251 acres). These three estates alone provided 253 farms
for landseekers, and centres such as Culcairn, Henty and Finley owe
much of their present-day material prosperity to the increased set-
tlement in their neighbourhood and its concomitant productive de-
velopment. Later subdivisions include Urangeline (71,634 acres),
Mahonga (7,502 acres), and Walbundrie (16,032). Between them
they provided 113 further farms. It is as yet too soon, possibly, to
assess the results, but they bid fair to be in time equally as success-
ful as the earlier subdivisions, and will no doubt contribute .in the
same manner to the development and production of their districts.
Taking the electorate as a whole and summarising the gain in
closer settlement over the passage of years, 67 properties have been
acquired at a cost of no less than £1,404,567. Subdivided they pro-
vided 549 farms of an average area of 453 acres. What this repre-
sents in the way of added population, production and increased
National wealth is hard to appraise. Certainly it is one of the fac-
tors that are helping to make the State sound, safe and prosperous.
If other electorates emulated Corowa and attempted to equal if not
surpass its record, and responded as splendidly to the call for closer
settlement, the State would enjoy balanced budgets, financial buoy-
ancy, economic equilibrium and generally an era of well-being in
which the whole community would participate.
SETTLEMENT ON CROWN LANDS
It was Mr. Ball’s great responsibility, as Ministerial head of
the Department of Lands, to attain the main objective of the Go-
vernment’s land policy. It was a task that called for the exercise of
all his administrative talent; and in the perfomance of it his know-
ledge of the country and his discernment were of inestimable value.
As a first and essential step inquiries were instituted to ascertain
the possibilities of future settlement on Crown lands, especially
in the Eastern and Central Divisions where the conditions were most
favourable. The investigation was thorough. The chances of in-
creasing settlement on vacant Crown lands, leased Crown lands and
alienated lands were explored to the fullest extent. With the in-
formation before him obtained as the result of the inquiry, Mr. Ball
realised that the extent of Crown lands available for the expansion of


settlement was comparatively small, and that for the future re-
course must be had more and more to the alienated lands of the
State.
In an effort to make the best of the material at command every
opportunity was taken to make land available. During the three
years of Mr. Ball’s administration over 2J million acres of Crown
lands were classified and thrown open for selection under the vari-
ous types of holdings provided for in the Crown Lands Acts. In
regard to reservations for public purposes the policy laid down
that they should be restricted to actual requirements was faithfully
observed. In 1928 public reservations stood at 17,711,119 acres.
This area was curtailed successively between that date and 1930 by
316,878 acres, 179,952 acres, and 80,708 acres—a total revocation of
577,538 acres. The withdrawal of this area from the public reserves
—travelling stock, forest, mining and goldfields &c., —was made
without in any way prejudicing the public interests. At the end of
Mr. Ball’s administration the total area of the public reserves stood
at 17,450,459 acres. Long term leases were also carefully reviewed
with the object of exercising rights of withdrawal of areas for
settlement. From these sources and from leases that had expired
land was redesigned for home maintenance areas and additional
areas and thrown open for settlement.
Further large areas of Crown lands were opened up for occu-
pation in the immediate vicinity of three railways, completed about
this time, to serve soldier settlements, viz., Gilmore-Batlow,
Griffiths-Hillston and Barmedman-Rankin Springs. The line from
Coonabarabran to Burren Junction and traversing the Pilliga Srub
was also believed to offer immense settlement possibilities; but as
much of this area was becoming infested with prickly pear special
conditions had to be offered to attract settlers.
The practical result of the policy of utilising as far as pos-
sible Crown lands for closer settlement, was that no fewer than
565 holdings were subdivided in the three years under the pro-
visions of the Crown Lands Acts, the new tenures created embrac-
ing a quarter million acres. Closer settlement was further aided
by the acquisition of eleven estates, the areas of which aggregated
201,000 acres. The cost of these resumptions was £545,000. For this
expenditure 162 farms were provided. To preserve the Crown’s
power of resumption under the Closer Settlement Acts, 116 estates,
totalling 1,499,652 acres were covered by proclamations indicative
of the intention of the Government to consider the advisableness
of acquiring the land for Closer Settlement purposes.
VOLUNTARY SUBDIVISION
Voluntary subdivision by private land holders in co-operation
with the Crown continued throughout the period and helped
materially the general cause of closer settlement. By this method
a number of suitable properties within easy access of a railway or
a port were cut up into 60 or more farms. Quite a number of
other subdivisions were effected without Rural Bank assistance.
Many of these estates had been covered by proclamation, but as


the owners were agreeable to subdivide and dispose of a reasonable
proportion of their land on terms and conditions approved by the
Government the proclamations were cancelled.
SETTLEMENT NEAR BORDER RAILWAYS
Possibly the greatest activity in the promotion of land settle-
ment occurred in the southern Riverina and along the Murray basin.
It was in this favoured territory that the N.S.W. Government, under
the agreement with the Victorian Government negotiated by Mr.
Ball when he held the portfolio of Public Works in 1922, was re-
quired to provide land for settlement adjacent to the various border
railways. This obligation the N.S.W. Government conscientiously
discharged. The measure of the response was in fact most generous,
as is shown by the figures procurable which carry the official im-
primatur.
Taking the two border railways completed and in operation at
this date, the Barnes Junction to Balranald line and the Gonn Cross-
ing to Stony Crossing Line, the Agreement required the State to
provide along the route of the first mentioned railway 125,000 acres,
and along the route of the latter line 75,000 acres, suitable for
mixed farming. To satisfy this condition the N.S.W. Government
threw open Crown lands, and where no Crown lands existed induced
the owners of private estates within the sphere of influence of the
respective lines to subdivide. First of all under existing legislation
the Government took the step of gazetting proclamations of its in-
tention to consider the acquisition or resumption of certain specified
estates. Following the proclamations an invitation was issued to
the owners to submit proposals for voluntary subdivision with an
assurance that if a reasonable proportion of any given property
were disposed of for settlement the embargo would be removed from
the whole estate. In those cases where the invitation was accepted
the local officers, free of cost, designed the blocks on reasonable
home maintenance lines, having regard to the liability of recurring
dry conditions. Furthermore, assistance was given to owners in
the way of road adjustments, and advances were made to purchasers
by the Rural Bank. The extent of the area of land put up for
subdivisional sale under this procedure surpassed anticipations.
Before the opening of the Balranald line in April, 1926, and the
Gonn Crossing line in February, 1928, the quota had been materially
exceeded. Instead of the 200,000 acres required under the Agree-
ment, 708,477 acres were provided, of which 569,285 acres were
taken up. The area selected was subdivided into 402 mixed farms
—282 in the vicinity of the Balranald line, and 120 adjacent to the
Gonn-Stony Crossing line. In addition land suitable for grazing
only to the extent of 221,959 acres (48 farms) was taken up along
the route of the Barnes Junction-Balranald railway. The Victorian
Government was appreciative of this achievement, and acknow-
ledged that the revenue derived from the transport of farm produce
had been highly satisfactory.


THE WESTERN DIVISION
In the exploration of the possibilities of settlement in the great
Western Division of the State the Western Land Board was assidu-
ous and helpful. There were many portions of their domain of con-
siderable extent that could not be put to their best use unless
waters from such sources as the Murray, Darling, Lachlan and
Murrumbidgee rivers could be artificially provided. The importance
and necessity of utilising to the fullest extent the waters of these
rivers on adjacent lands for the purpose of irrigation and mixed
farming was recognised by the Board and the Government; but
remoteness from the capital accentuated the natural difficulties of
the situation. Among the areas with potentialities was a large
tract of country on the Murray, known as Benanee, practically
opposite the successful Mildura settlement. One of Mr. Ball’s
first administrative steps was to endeavour to bring this tract under
settlement occupation. Three subdivisions were arranged which
made available in all 151 farms, aggregating 207,062 acres. The
blocks were promptly applied for. The subdivision of a further
20,400 acres, representing the one-eigth withdrawal from Paika
Western Lands lease, containing country similar to Benanee.
opened nine more blocks for mixed farming.
CONCESSIONS TO SETTLERS
As the next best thing to promoting new settlement by the
cutting up of large estates, and by the intensification of agricultural
pursuits, the consolidation of the position of the men already
established on farms was regarded as a prudent measure. Pro-
posals were framed for the relief of rural settlers that were in-
tended to be not only an incentive to increase the area under pro-
duction, but a help through a period of seasonal depression. It was
felt that farmers who had been the victims of a succession of poor
harvests were deserving of special consideration. The most effect-
ive form of assistance in such circumstances and the one both
justified and inevitable was a monetary advance or its equivalent.
Much was done in this way to alleviate the disabilities that handi-
capped existing settlers by reducing their indebtedness to the
Crown, and by judiciously lowering capital values, rentals and
interest rates. In addition to these very liberal concessions, ad-
vances were made for wire netting and other useful improvements.
Generous conditions of debt repayment were also conceded. Re-
funds to pastoralists and farmers in connection with the carriage
by rail of starving stock and fodder for starving stock at greatly
reduced rates alone represented in one year £160,000 —a serious
encroachment upon the revenue of the railways. Over and above
these aids the Government was called upon to shoulder the losses
in respect of soldier settlers. Inevitable from the inception of the
scheme of soldier settlements the extent of the burden of losses be-
came of so much concern to the Federal Govrnment that Mr. Justice
Pike was asked to investigate the position with a view to determin-
ing what portion of the loss might be reasonably borne by the
Commonwealth. As a measure of help the State Government con-


stituted four special Boards of Inquiry to deal with the question
of home maintenance areas and the further writing down of indebt-
edness in cases where any readjustment of area involved consid-
eration of the settler’s debt to the Crown. Three of the Boards
dealt with the settlers engaged in mixed farming, grazing and
dairying pursuits, and one with the fruit growing settlements.
THE MIGRATION AGREEMENT
As already stated the Migration Agreement, although it had
been in existence for five years, remained inoperative until the
Bavin Government, of which Mr. Ball was a member, signed up in
1928. The paramount need of the country then, as now, was more
men, more money and more markets; and by accepting and fulfilling
the terms of the agreement the Government saw the best prospect
of realising all these objectives. The first care, therefore, was to
remove all impediments, both political and economic. The terms of
the agreement were so favourable that the prospect was opened of
settlement under conditions that imposed the minimum of obliga-
tions upon the State Government. One of the obligations, and
possibly the most important, the Government incurred was the con-
struction of the Wyangala Dam. This work, to utilise the surplus
waters of the Lachlan River, and estimated to cost £1,352,000, was
designed primarily to open up for settlement an area of about
850,000 acres of Crown lands which, with the provision of a perman-
ent stock and domestic water supply was eminently suitable for mix-
ed farming, with wheat and sheep. The area in question, it was
expected, could be conveniently cut up into from 500 to 600 farms.
Once a permanent water supply was assured considerable develop-
ment was also looked for in the growing of fodder crops and in the
encouragement that would be given to the fat stock industry.
Before Mr. Ball left office satisfactory progress had been made with
this project. A further obligation devolving upon the Government
under the agreement was the building of a line of railway between
Ilillston and Roto, on the Condobolin-Broken Hill line. Several
other comprehensive development schemes to be financed under the
agreement were the subject of investigation.
SNOW LEASES
In the early part of the financial year 1929-1930 a compre-
hensive review of the conditions under which the relief country
within the snow belt on the southern tablelands was occupied was
undertaken by the Department at Mr. Ball’s instigation. This
spacious tract of country was of tremendous value to pastoralists in
the interior whose secured lands were subject to dry spells. It was
in fact regarded as one of the greatest safeguards against drought
by landholders in districts liable to suffer adverse seasons. There
was keen competition naturally to secure an area of the relief
country. Whilst he was appreciative of the needs of the pastoralists
Mr. Ball was not satisfied that the terms under which the snow
leases were held were as advantageous from the point of view of the
State as they might be. With the information before him, gathered


as the fruits of the departmental investigation he concluded that the
fairest course to follow in the interests alike of the State and the
landholders was to invite tenders for the various blocks from
pastoralists in need of snow country. This procedure was adopted.
Seventy-nine blocks, aggregating 324,160 acres were designed and
offered; and the keenness of the demand was demonstrated by the
fact that 218 tenders were received.
A special Board consisting of the Surveyor General and the
District Surveyors at Goulburn and Wagga, appointed by Mr. Ball,
considered the applications in detail. Each tender was reviewed
from the standpoint of the needs of the applicant, afld the capacity,
character and situation of the area carrying the stock for which
relief was required. Having studied these aspects of each case it
was for the Board to decide whether or not a measure of preference
should be granted to an old tenant whose qualifications had merit;
and at the conclusion of its investigation the Board recommended
that certain deserving settlers should be allowed to increase their
tenders to an amount deemed to be the fair rental value of the land
for the term of the lease. The work of allotting the snow blocks
was one of difficulty owing to the number of deserving cases; and
it was not accomplished without arousing dissatisfaction and disap-
pointment, which was given expression to on the floor of Parliament
when the question was raised by the Opposition and charges of
favouritism were launched against the Minister. But in spite of
complaints Mr. Ball had the satisfaction of knowing that £7,663
ensured to the Department in rentals annually, as the payment for
these occupancies, was a very much better return than had hitherto
been received from this source.
LEGISLATION
Mr. Ball was no less active in the sphere of legislation than in
the sphere of administration. In the triennial period many measures
were passed affecting the work of the Lands Department and the
welfare of settlers on the land. Among the most notable pieces
of legislation were the Crown Lands (Pilliga Scrub) Act, 1928; the
Returned Soldiers Settlement (Amendment) Act, 1930; the Western
Lands (Amendment) Act, 1930; the Prickly Pear (Amendment)
Act, 1930, and the Crown Lands (Pilliga Scrub) Amendment Act,
.1930.
The Crown Lands (Pilliga Scrub) Act provided for the de-
termination of the capital value and annual rental of holdings with-
in the Pilliga Scrub area, the new appraisement to take effect from
the date of acquisition of the holding by the holder in possession on
March Ist, 1927. This provision represented a substantial con-
cession, and the expression of one facet of the Government’s wide
reaching policy of easing the burdens of existing settlers, initiated
by the Fuller Government in 1924. The principal object of the
amendment of the Returned Soldiers Settlement Act was to grant an
extension, until one year after the passing of the measure, of the time
within which settlers could apply for reappraisement of the capital
value of their holdings. A general right of appeal to the Land and


Valuation Court in respect of matters dealt with by the Local Land
Hoards under the Settlement Act was also conceded. The Surveyors
Act authorised the establishment of a Board to supersede the then
existing Board and the Real Property Act Board, with power to
control all matters relating to the profession of Surveyors of land,
and to admit Surveyors to practice. The Act also clothed the new
authority with power to prevent unregistered persons from practis-
ing as surveyors. The Prickly Pear (Amendment) Act extended
the power of the Destruction Commissioner to revise the conditions
attaching to holdings in the infected areas, the object being to im-
pose upon settlers pear-clearing conditions that were economically
possible of performance. At the same time generous compensation
was awarded in the shape of leases and reductions in rent and pur-
chase price.
CROWN LANDS ACT AMENDMENT
An important piece of legislation introduced by Mr. Ball was
the amendment to the Crown Lands Act. This measure authorised,
inter alia, the conversion of homestead farms and Crown leases in
their entirety, without restriction; the reappraisement of the capital
value of additional holdings, without the necessity of redetermining
the capital value of the original holding ; and the repeal of the pro-
visions which enabled the Minister to have the capital value of a
homestead farm or Crown lease and the rent of a settlement lease
redetermined in the event of transfer. It also provided for non-
convertible conditional leases to be declared convertible in certain
circumstances; for the conversion of Prickly Pear leases under the
Prickly Pear Act into homestead farms, Crown leases or conditional
purchase or conditional leases, and for the extension to 60 years of
the term of settlement leases not substantially in excess of home
maintenance areas.
WESTERN LANDS.
The amendment of the Western Lands Act was a notable fea-
ture of the Government’s land policy. At this time most of the
holders in the Western Division were in trouble financially. Many
of them were on the point of being driven off their properties.
Drought had played havoc with their stock and involved them in
heavy losses. To make matters worse, if that were possible, some of
the leases had so short a time to run that they were valueless to any
financial institution as security for a monetary advance.
It was to save the situation and to enable this type of settler
to obtain the financial assistance necessary to allow him to re-stock
and continue to work his holding that Mr. Ball framed his bill to
amend the Principal Act. Among other things the measure—and
this was a vital and most controversial provision—granted an ex-
tension of the term of the leases for a period of 25 years. It also
provided more land for holders whose areas were insufficient to
enable them to maintain themselves and their families. Under the
original Act no further land could be made available before 1943,
except upon payment of compensation. Under the amending bill
one-eighth of the larger holdings in the Walgett North district could


be withdrawn at the expiration of one year from the passing of the
Act, and further withdrawals might be made at later periods. As a
protection to the lessee no withdrawals could be made that would
reduce the capacity of the area held, when reasonably improved,
below 4,000 sheep in the Walgett North district and 6,000 sheep over
the rest of the Division. Where two or more leases, whether adjoin-
ing or not, were held in the same interest and were, in the opinion
of the Commissioners, reasonably capable of being worked as one
holding, the amending measure permitted the withdrawal to be made
from the total area and from any one or more of such leases.
Mr. Ball when piloting his bill through the Legislative Assembly
had to face a bitter attack from country members of the Labour
Opposition. They construed the lease extensions as a generous gift
by the State to large holders, and a callous disregard of the claims
of the small settler struggling against odds to eke out a subsistence.
They attacked the measure at every stage, and knowing that the
numbers were against them and defeat inevitable, threatened ‘hat if
and when returned to power one of their first acts would be to
repeal the obnoxious sections. After prolonged debate the measure
was passed by Parliament and was placed upon the Statute Book.
It is a matter of history that the Lands Minister of the Labour Gov-
ernment that succeeded the National Government in office lost no
time in giving effect to the threat previously made. A bill was
presented and carried that voided the lease extensions but made no
provision whatever to meet the crying needs of distressed settlers.
Almost before that law could become effective Labour gave way to
the first Stevens’ National Government; and as the principles em-
bodied in the Act of 1930 were accepted as those most appropriate
to apply to settlers in the Western Division it became the duty of
the new Minister for Lands, Mr. Buttenshaw, to introduce and carry
legislation that restored the status quo, and conferred the benefits
contemplated by Mr. Ball when he framed the original amendment.
That Act remains the law to-day.
The Crown Lands (Pilliga Scrub) Amendment Act was de-
signed to remove anomalies that had arisen out of the adjustment
of land accounts consequent upon the appraisement of the capital
values of holdings within the Pilliga Scrub area provided for in the
Act of 1928.
PUBLIC WORKS LEGISLATION
Two further records exist that furnish evidence of the extent of
Mr, Ball s contribution to the solution of problems concerned with
the National welfare, and of the appreciation of his services in pro-
curing for the country essential utilities. One is the list of mea-
sures he introduced and passed through Parliament, the other the
catalogue of presents that have been showered upon him in tropical
abundance. Preceding chapters have attempted to survey in broad
outlines the work accomplished by Mr. Ball during the years of his
Ministerial direction of great State Departments. They set out his
mam administrative acts and in particular the works, City and
Country, authority for the construction of which was obtained


through his instrumentality. Mr. Ball’s contribution to the schedule
of ameliorative legislation to meet pressing needs of the community
is a facet of his Ministerial activities that must not be disregarded
in any story of his achievements. Scores of bills were sponsored by
him during his term of office as Secretary for Public Works, Minister
for Railways and State Industrial Enterprises, apart from the en-
actments passed when he was administering the affairs of the Lands
Department affecting the control and use of the public estate. The
appended chronicle details some of the measures placed upon the
Statute Book by Mr. Ball during the reign of the National Govern-
ment :
Armidale Water Supply Act.
Blackheath Water Supply Act.
Border Railways Act.
Byron Bay Jetty Construction Act. .
Camurra-Boggabilla Railway Act.
Canowindra to Gregra Railway Act.
Cement Contract Ratification Act.
Cottage Creek Stormwater Channel Act.
Country Towns Water and Sewerage (Reduction of Debts) Act.
Country Towns Water Supply Acts (for the towns of Coota-
mundra, Murrumburrah, Stockingbingal, Temora, Barmedman, Wya-
long, Young and Grenfell).
Curl Curl to Freshwater Tramway Act.
George’s River Bridge Act.
Government Railways (Supply of Electricity) Act.
Government Railways (Amendment) Act.
Government Railways (Further Amendment) Act.
Grafton-Kyogle to South Brisbane Railway Agreement Ratifi-
cation Act.
Haberfield to Dobroyd Point Tramway Act.
Hawkesbury Agricultural College (Laboratory) Act.
Hunter District Water and Sewerage (Amendment) Act
Jerilderie towards Deniliquin Railway Act.
Katoomba Sewerage Act.
Lee Wharf Extension Act.
Lyons Road Tramway Act.
Manly Hospital Act.
Manly Water Supply (Panorama Estate Revestment) Act.
Market Street Realignment Act.
Merewether Street, Newcastle, Improved Wharfage Accommoda-
tion Act.
Metropolitan Water and Sewerage (Amendment) Act.
Metropolitan Water and Sewerage (Further Amendment) Act.
Metropolitan Water, Sewerage and Drainage Act.
Middle Harbour (The Spit) Bridge Bill.
Mittagong, Bowral and Moss Yale Transmission Line Act.
Molong Water Supply Act.
Moss Vale-Port Kembla Railway Act.
Prince Alfred Hospital (Isolation Block) Act.
Public Works (Amendment) Act.


Public Works (Country Towns Water Supply and Sewerage)
Amendment Act.
Queanbeyan Water Supply Act.
Rand to a point on Bull Plain Railway Act.
Regent’s Park-Bankstown Railway Act.
River Murray Waters (Amendment) Act.
South Coast Towns Transmission Line Act
Sydney Harbour Bridge Act.
Sydney Water Supply Act.
Sydney Water Supply (Amplification) Act.
Taree Water Supply Act.
Tempe-East Hills Railway Act.
Todman Avenue Tramway Act.
Undercliffe to Forest Hill Tramway Act.
Ungarie to Naradham Railway Act.
Uranquinty towards Moon’s Siding Railway Act.
Warwick Farm Railway Act.
Water (Costs Declaratory) Act.
Wollongong to Port Kembla Railway Transfer Act.
Wollongong Sewerage Act.
Wyalong towards Condobolin Railway Act.
A HARVEST OF GIFTS
As to the second record—the harvest of gifts—it is as much a
tribute to the esteem in which he is held as to the wide scope of his
activities. The commemorative gifts total more than seventy and
the occasions on which they were bestowed are associated with some
of the most vital undertakings embarked upon by any Goverment
for the development of the State. To recite them is to recapitulate
achievements already described. For example in the forefront of the
list stand the presentations made on the occasion of the launching
of that famous project, the Sydney Harbour Bridge. Mr. Ball was
the recipient of an inscribed spade and mounted model in silver of
a cantilever bridge when he turned the first sod on the northern side
of the Harbour on 28th July, 1923, and of a silver casket when he
laid the foundation stone of the south-east Pylon on March 26, 1925.
After performing the ceremony of laying the foundation stone of the
George’s River Bridge he was given a mounted gold replica of the
stone he had so well and truly laid; and on opening the completed
structure five years later (May 11, 1929) a life pass over the bridge.
Silver spades, suitably inscribed, recall the turning of the first sod
of the Moama-Balranald Railway (Sept. 28, ’23), the planting of the
Tocumwal Avenue of Honour (Aug. 23, 1918), the commencement of
the Richmond-Kurrajong Railway (June 2, 1923), and the Harbord
Tramway (Feb. 13, 1925). Other spades used to turn the first sod at
the Hume Reservoir, the Henty-Billabong Railway (May 11, ’18) and
the Mangoplah-PuUetop Railway (Feb. 15, 1923) went to augment
his accumulation of trophies. Residents in the 'Urbenville and
Woodenbong districts selected a similar memento for presentation
when Mr. Ball turned the first sod of the Border Road (Feb. 17, ’24).
A collection of silver trowels marks his official association with the


laying of the foundation stone of the Soldiers’ Memorial, Corowa
(June 26, 1922), the School of Arts, Martin’s Creek (Nov. 11, 1922),
and the Municipal Buildings, Queanbeyan (Nov. 17, 1924). The lay-
ing of the keel of Ship No. 41 at the Government Dockyard, New-
castle (Oct. 17, 1919) left Mr. Ball in possession of a silver hammer.
A Silver Tea and Coffee Service tendered to him after the Albury
State Election in 1901 testifies to the kindly feelings nourished by
his many friends and supporters in the constituency he first repre-
sented in Parliament. Scissors, both silver and gold, used to cut the
ribbon at the opening of the extension of the Tramway to Under-
cliff e, the new bridge at Wellington (Feb. 3, 1920) and at Cook’s
River bridge also find a place amongst the souvenirs. A gold key
is a lasting memorial of the opening of the new Pumping House,
Ryde Station (Nov. 28, 1916) ; a gold-mounted umbrella, the dedica-
tion of the new Reservoir, Potts Hill (Aug. 1, 1923) and three gold
watches the opening of as many country railways. A unique trophy
is a gold-mounted walking stick, fashioned from timber taken from
the old bridge at Wellington after 54 years of use. A replica of the
stick, it is interesting to know, was presented to the present King.
A gold-mounted fountain pen is linked with the opening of the
North Coast Railway to Kempsey (Nov. 28, 1917), a gold pencil with
the opening of the Rockdale Railway Bridge (Nov. 15, 1922). There
are mallets that were used at the initiation of the Bowral Water
Supply Scheme and the laying of the foundation stone of the Walla
Walla Institute (March 5, 1913). A pair of field glasses serve as a
reminder of the part Mr. Ball played at the opening of the Yarra-
wonga bridge over the Murray river. There are mementos also of his
official connection with other bridges spanning the Murray, built
under the terms of the Border Railways Agreement that Mr. Ball
so successfully negotiated. A silver cigar case presented by the
Board of Control of the Government Dockyard, Walsh Island
(April 20), sets of silver dishes, the gifts of Corowa admirers
(June 24, ’22 and July 7, ’35) and another silver cigar case and
wallet of notes from Lockhart friends (Aug., ’35) are included in
the list, as well as wallets of notes subscribed by Corowa friends
(July ’32 and ’35). On the occasion of the laying of the foundation
stone of the breakwater (June ’l7), the residents of Coff’s Harbour
presented to Mr. Ball a large framed picture. This by no means ex-
hausts the gifts that have been made. If it is permissible to give a
twist to an old saw Mr. Ball’s chickens are still coming home to
roost. There is an intention on the part of a number of Municipal
and Shire Councils on the Victorian and N.S.W. sides of the Murray
river to commemorate his official association with the inception of
the River Murray Waters Agreement and more particularly with
the progress of the key work, namely the Hume Reservoir, by pre-
senting him with an Album of views of the dam, at various stages
of its construction, and interesting local scenes. If the opportunity
offers, the presentation is to be made when the Governor-General
opens the Reservoir —a most appropriate time. The date fixed for


the official ceremony is November 21, just a week short of the date
of the cutting of the first sod by the Governor-General, seventeen
years ago.*
PARLIAMENTARY CAVALCADE
In rounding off this comprehensive review of the public life of
a notable Parliamentarian it is not inappropriate to epitomise the
surprising changes that have taken place, especially in the years
immediately following the war. As was written in an earlier chap-
ter, “much water has flowed under the bridge since Mr. Ball made
his first bow in the Legislative Assembly. Tremendous changes
have occurred in the social, industrial and political life of the State.’*
As to the changes in the social and industrial spheres there is no
space, indeed no need, to mention them; but it is permissible perhaps
to traverse the “ringing grooves of change,” so far as they relate to
political affairs of which Mr. Ball retains a fund of interesting
recollections. Not only has there been constant variation in the
personnel of Parliament but important and significant amendments
have been made from time to time in procedure. After each gen-
eral election the complexion of the House has suffered mutation
Old faces have disappeared, new ones have come upon the scene.
And to meet the exigencies of the moment Governments have devel-
oped a tendency to depart more and more from the traditional forms
and rules that apply to the work of the Parliament; and this in turn
has resulted in a regrettable loss of the dignity and decorum that
marked the proceedings in more orthodox days.
ELEVEN PREMIERS
During Mr. Ball’s representation of Albury, Corowa and
Murray in thirteen Parliaments, eleven Premiers have administered
the affairs of the State; Speakers to an equal number have guided
the proceedings of the Legislative Assembly. The first Premier —
he was styled Prime Minister then —he sat behind was Sir Geo. Reid,
leader of the Free Trade party. Mr. Ball, bridging the years, re-
members him as one of the most arresting figures in politics. His
very rotundities were a gold mine for the cartoonist and caricaturist.
A masterly tactician and a ready speaker, with a gift of repartee
that was a priceless asset on the floor of the House and on the hust-
ings. Reid was a bitter opponent of Parkes’ Federal plan, though
he later espoused the cause. As author of the first income tax levied
upon the people of New South Wales, he won notoriety if not re-
nown. But, alas, human greatness is a flimsy fabric. To the present
generation, if he is known at all, as used to be the case with a
famous make of motor cars, it is for the humourous stories told about
him, rather than for his services to his country. During the Lyne,
See and Waddell Ministeries that were in and out of office in the
five years from 1899 and 1904, Mr. Ball was without Parliamentary
membership. Returning after the general election in August of the
latter year, he found in command Sir Joseph Carruthers, almost the
last survivor of the old school of politicians. “Joe” Carruthers
received his training under Parkes and Reid in whose Ministeries
♦See Appendix.


he held the portfolios of Minister of Public Instruction, Secretary-
tor Lands and Colonial Treasurer. As might be expected of one who
had had these unique opportunities, Sir Joseph was an astute and
capable though perhaps, from a party standpoint, not popular
leader. Resigning the Premiership upon the expiration of Parlia-
ment he was succeeded by C. G. Wade, barrister, and new-comer to
politics, who had been his Attorney-General and Minister for Jus-
tice. Solid and dependable, but not a brilliant leader, Mr. Wade
more than compensated for the lack of this gift by his capacity as
Premier or as Leader of the Opposition, for hard work in the most
gruelling circumstances, and the endurance and self-control he
invariably displayed. It was in this Parliament that Labour began
to compel recognition as a force to be reckoned with. Thirty-two
members of the party, with James McGowen at their head, solidly
opposed the Government. Before the dissolution their numbers had
increased to 37 owing to the success of the party at by-elections.
From the 1910 elections Labour for the first time emerged triumph-
ant, Of ninety seats, they captured 46, with the chance of further
gains, for a new electoral system, introduced by the Liberals and
providing for second ballots, operated for the first time. As events
proved, the system, in operation, favoured the Labour party rather
than the Liberals. James McGowen, who was becoming a seasoned
Parliamentarian, met the House as Premier. As was his own plight
not one of his Ministers had had any prior experience in office. The
Opposition on the other hand embraced members of tried capacity.
An early problem confronting the new administration was the choice
of Speaker. Anxious to permit as many as possible of its supporters
to enjoy the spoils of office, J. H. Gann, an ex-Chairman of Commit-
tees, was selected for the position. This step—“our initial mistake”
a Labour commentator dubbed it —reduced the Government’s al-
ready tenuous majority to invisibility. The Liberal Opposition, led
by Mr. Wade, knowing how insecure was the Government’s hold,
lost no time in harassing it. Every opportunity was seized to bring
about the Government’s downfall and by the launching of frequent
votes of censure to increase the hazards of its hold of office. Only
by resort to all night and continuous sittings, and the free use of
the “gag,” was the Government able to survive. In the second ses-
sion of the Parliament, which lasted less than three months, a cen-
sure motion indicting the Government’s land policy led to the resig-
nation of two of its supporters. This robbed the Government of its
majority, and its downfall seemed inevitable. W. A. Holman,
acting-Premier in the absence of McGowen at the Coronation, sparr-
ed for time, and by clever manoeuvering managed to get the grant
of a prorogation to enable the by-elections to be contested. But the
fates were unpropitious. One of the two seats went to the Opposi-
tion. To try to save the situation, Mr. Cann vacated the Chair and
joined the re-formed Ministry, When the House re-assembled its
first duty was to elect a new Speaker. Again Holman outwitted his
opponents. By an adroit move he secured the election of Hemy
Willis, a Liberal with Independent views. When the Opposition
realised the trick that had been played upon them pandemonium


broke loose, and the ship of State was launched upon tempestuous
seas. In retrospect, that period becomes a bewildering phantasma-
goria. Resignations, the demise of members, by-elections, re-shuf-
fling of portfolios, censure motions and endless divisions —the Gov-
ernment was never allowed a moment 4 s respite. To make matters
worse, if that were possible, the Legislative Council if not exactly
hostile was certainly unsympathetic towards the legislation brought
down. Illustrative of the circumstances that conspired to wreck the
Government was the accident that temporarily deprived it of its
4 ‘majority.” “Jack” Meehan, shearer representative of the Dar-
ling, making a too obsequious bow to a Parliamentary officer who
was on his way down from the dining room, lost his balance, fell
over the low bannister, broke his thigh and was removed to the
Hospital next door. To save the Government at critical moments it
was necessary to transfer the patient on a stretcher from the Hos-
pital to the House so that he might record his vote.
It is safe to say that the three years of this Parliament (1910-
1913) were some of the most strenuous, exciting and exhaustive ever
experienced. After the lapse of twenty years it is difficult to un-
ravel all the complications of that turbulent time. It was one long
battle, a Avar of attrition —altogether a period of abnormalities. It
was mainly Holman’s strategy that enabled the Government to con-
tinue to the end of its Parliamentary term. The general election of
1913 clarified the situation. As the result of the polls Labour must-
ered 49 endorsed members and one Independent—enough to promise
them security of tenure. W .A. Holman, whose eloquence and talent
for organisation were potent factors in the campaign, assumed the
Premiership, with most of the old members of Cabinet in the Minis-
try, and a following that enabled him to face the House freed from
the worries and anxieties of the preceding Parliament. The gift of
oratory and his Parliamentary flair marked Holman out for high
office; but, as Mr. Ball estimates his qualities, he could lay no claim
to statesmanship, nor, as compared with others, was he an able
administrator. It was his personal charm, his Amice and his presence
that distinguished him. “Politically he Avas full of guile. No man
Avas more dexterous, or paradoxically more clumsy. The facility
with Avhich ho got into political potholes Avas paralleled only by the
dexterity with which he got out.”
To all appearances the Labour party Avas to be given a chance
at last to carry out the ambitious programme that had been placed
before the people. But men propose and Providence disposes. After
two short sessions, one of a Aveek, the other of just over a month’s
duration, Parliament entered upon its fateful and most momentous
meeting. Barely had the House settled down to business before the
astounding news was flashed that England had declared Avar against
Germany. Consideration of contentious measures Avas for the nonce
abandoned; a party truce was called ; the marshalling of the country’s
resources of men and money for the help of Britain became the para-
mount concern. About this time “Abolition of the Legislative
Council” was placed in the forefront of Labour’s fighting platform.
Who then could foresee that the attempt to enforce that plank


would involve the party in one of its worst disasters? The difficul-
ties created by the war, a split in the party over conscription, and
a growing army of unemployed heaped embarrassment upon the
Government. The party schism over conscription was so bitter in
fact that we had the extraordinary spectacle of members moving a
vote of censure upon their Ministerial colleagues. But for the aid
of the Opposition the Government would not have been able to avert
disaster. Turning the tables on his recalcitrant followers, Mr. Hol-
man reconstructed the Ministry, allotting portfolios to five members
of the Liberal party—Sir Geo. Fuller, and Messrs. Ball, Fitzpatrick,
James and Garland. The anti-conscriptionists, numbering less than
a score, had perforce to accept the role of an Opposition. To give
the Government a chance to consolidate its position, a special meas-
ure was passed to postpone the elections for twelve months—in
other words, to extend the life of Parliament until 1917.
The appeal to the electors in that year was an appeal to return
a “win the war” National Government. All other political issues
were subordinated to that need. The appeal met the mood of the
moment. National candidates were successful all along the line.
Parliament was convened for 17th April, but before the House
assembled, Mr. Holman had left the State for England, and Sir
Geo. Fuller was installed as acting-Premier. Right worthily he
filled the position and capably dealt with the problems that arose.
Labour after the debacle it had suffered, now entered upon an in-
tensive canvass of the constituencies in the hope of repairing its
losses at the election due in 1920. When the poll was taken in that
year, as is not the uncommon experience, the pendulum swing re-
versed the verdict of 1917, or nearly so; parties were equally
divided. Labour secured the commission to form a Government.
John Storey, like McGowen one of the stalwarts, who had been an
active member of the party for nineteen years, and whose claims
to preferment had been unaccountably overlooked, was given the
leadership. His Ministry elected—it included J. T. Lang, then in
his third Parliament, as Colonial Treasurer —he was faced with the
unenviable, the seemingly impossible task of carrying on. The
only hope of survival, once the House met, was to try to do as
Holman did and select for the office of Speaker a member of the
Opposition. John Storey must have been as greatly surprised as
his political opponents were when Mr. Levy accepted the offer of
the position. The path of the Government was still a thorny one
and the prospect of passing the legislation to which it was com-
mitted poor. Within eighteen months the “fell sergeant, death,”
strict in his arrest, had taken John Storey, the first Premier to die
in office; and Mr. Dooley, another Labour moderate, who had
handled affairs during the absence of his leader from the State,
unexpectedly achieved the Premiership.
For sixty days onwards the Government suffered Fortune’s
buffets before it succumbed. Sir Geo. Fuller formed a stop-gap
Ministry which lasted a few hours and then retired to allow Mr.
Dooley and his old team to face the music again. They managed
to cling to office for four mouths longer, but could not avoid a disso-


lution. The turn of the wheel restored to power Sir Geo. Fuller, a
leader whose bonhomie and conciliatory methods commended him
to supporters and opponents alike. The “Coalition” Ministry he
formed carried on for the full Parliamentary term. Then Mr. Lang
took charge and the din and dust of party conflict were at their
worst. Long before Parliament had run its course Mr. Lang was at
loggerheads with the Governor, Sir Dudley de Chair over the ques-
tion of appointments to the Upper House. His Excellency refused
to allow the Council to be swamped in order that the Government’s
highly contentious legislation might be forced through an unwilling
House. In the end the conflict became so critical that Mr. Lang was
allowed to retain office only on condition that he jettisoned his
extreme measures and sought a fresh mandate from the people.
Reconstructing his Ministry, five months elapsed before he tardily
redeemed his undertaking. Forced at last to go to the country the
people’s answer to his appeal was the Roman’s thumb down. Mr.
Lang and his comfortable majority were figuratively put to the
sword. No leader ever led his party to a worse electoral disaster.
A second National Coalition Government took possession of the
Treasury benches under the leadership of Mr. Bavin, Sir Geo. Ful-
ler’s ex-Attorney-General. Among the men he selected to form the
Ministry was Mr. Stevens, who had just entered his first Parliament
and who was awarded the position of Assistant Colonial Treasurer.
In reminiscent mood, Mr. Ball expresses his admiration of the per-
sonal qualities and political integrity and loyalty of his erstwhile
leader, Mr. Bavin, the splendid tolerance he always displayed and
his fearless stand for what he deemed to be the just cause. Mr.
Bavin certainly needed this excellent equipment for, though suffer-
ing from indifferent health —a handicap that should have won sym-
pathy from his opponents—no Premier was more persistently baited
by an Opposition.
All these kaliedoscopic changes but caused the political situa-
tion to become more and more complicated. The depression by this
time had the country in its grip. Though not altogether unforseen,
and though the Government temporized, it upset all calculations and
put upon the shoulders of the authorities a tremendous burden of
responsibility. The public mind, resentful of the precautionary
measures, and confused by the ominous outlook, sought relief in
change which was expressed in the return of Labour at the
1930 election Mr. Lang, again leader, having a sufficient
backing of followers, lost no time in re-submitting some of the
extreme measures embodied in the party platform and promised in
his policy speech. He also renewed his attack upon the Legislative
Council. There is no need to recapitulate the shocks to which the
community was subjected, nor to stir up the painful memories of
the chaos into which the affairs of the country were allowed to drift.
The Upper House refused to abolish itself at Mr. Lang’s dictation.
It continued to render all his Machiavellian schemes abortive. As
was the case when he was previously in power, Mr. Lang was soon
in conflict with the King’s Representative, Sir Phillip Game, and
Rred even worse than before. The culminant incident, one of the
most unsavoury in the history of Constitutional Government, pre-


capitated Ms dismissal from office. It is not difficult to find an ex-
planation of the episode. Mr. Lang brought catastrophy to his
Government not impulsively in a surge of righteous anger, but, it is
no travesty of facts to say, intentionally as the easiest way out of
an impasse.
Subsequent happenings come within the category of current
events. When on the very brink of disaster the people entrusted
the reins of Government to the National party. Staunchly assisted
by the Country Party, Mr. Stevens and his composite Ministry
travelled far along the road to rehabilitation and did much to place
the affairs of the country upon an even keel. As a party leader, Mr.
Stevens expands as his experience ripens. His strength, Mr. Ball
confides, lies in his forthrightness, his common sense and ability to
deal with high finance in terms understandable by the people at
large. He and his supporters have safely weathered two sequent
general elections —a thing unparalleled for many years. If the elec-
tors “know their own good, and knowing it, pursue,” they will
value at its true worth all that the Government has accomplished in
the face of almost insurmountable obstacles, to restore sanity and
decency in the conduct of public affairs, and award a third term of
office to enable it to complete its long range plans for reconstruction.
ELEVEN MR. SPEAKERS
Taking the holders of the high office of Speaker in the Legisla-
tive Assembly of New South Wales under whom Mr. Ball has sat,
the procession is headed by that fine Senatorial figure the Hon. Sir
Joseph Palmer Abbott. If Mr. Holman may be held up as the pat-
tern upon which hon. members should model their speech and de-
portment, Sir Joseph Abbott may be taken as the exemplar for suc-
cessors in the chair. Mentally and physically he was the ideal man
for the position. It is safe to say that the proceedings of Parliament
were never conducted with greater dignity and decorum. After
ten years of service he resigned, and the Hon. William McCourt,
father of the present Clerk of the Assembly, assumed the wig and
gown. Although not possessed of a legal training, Mr. McCourt had
gained experience of the Parliamentary rules as Chairman of Com-
mittees for a decade. His urbanity and fair dealing won the respect
of both sides, and for an unbroken term of ten years, regardless of
the changes in the political complexion of the party in power, he
was selected for the Speakership. These two men were the last of
the non-political appointees to the Chair. Next in the march came
J. H. Cann, the first member of the Labour party to occupy the posi-
tion. Thenceforward the spirit of partizanship prevailed; the office
became purely a party gift, and the man who filled it changed with
the varying fortunes of the two political parties. After eight
months Mr. Cann stepped down from the dais, in circumstances al-
ready related, to enter the Ministry, and supplement the Govern-
ment’s slender forces. And the Hon. Henry Willis filled the
vacancy. An ex-member of the House of Representatives, Mr. Willis
won a seat in the New South Wales Parliament. He was returned
as Liberal member for the Upper Hunter in 1910; and within a year


was foisted into the Chair by his political opponents under condi-
tions that were responsible for unparalleled scenes of excitement.
Once installed, he ruled the House, or rather the Opposition from
whose ranks he had been filched, with a rod of iron. It was a crafty
move in a strenuous game by a Government whose position was
parlous. Henry Willis had a distinct touch of a Caesarian lust for
power. Vested with authority, he played the part of a Roman
Emperor. No one acquainted with the proceedings of Parliament
during the two years of his reign will forget those hectic times.
Quiet certainly was enforced during debate, interjections rigorously
quelled, the courtesies of address insisted upon; but underlying the
air of quiet flowed an undercurrent which at unexpected moments
was liable to burst all bounds and develop in members of the Oppo-
sition a wild fury. The calm that pervaded the Chamber was the
menacing silence of the slumbering volcano likely to erupt at any
time, the stagnant hush before a thunderstorm. Infuriated elements
smouldered below the surface; when they blazed up the aid of the
police had to be invoked before the shouting died, and the tumult
on the left subsided. Removal of members from the House was a
daily occurrence. The atmosphere was always electric—hydro-
electric, Mr. Ball might feel tempted to say when he recalls John
Perry’s abortive attempt to assault with a water carafe the man who
sat Sphinx-like and completely oblivious of the turbulent Opposition
surging frantically about him. Throughout the turmoil, Mr. Wade,
their leader, in the face of what seemed to be a deliberate denial of
his rights, displayed wonderful self-control under great provocation
and so skilfully tempered his conduct to the rules of the House that
he escaped the indignity of removal in the custody of the Sergeant-
at-Arms. His colleagues, unhampered by any such repressions, con-
tinued to fulminate zestfully against the occupant of the Chair, and
pour contumely upon his head. The effective retort, in even tones,
was “Sergeant, remove the hon. member.”
Henry Willis’ rule ended with his resignation on the first day
of the fifth and final session of Parliament. Driven to resort to its
previous tactics, the Government managed to engineer another de-
fection from the ranks of its opponents. This time it was Harry
Morton, Liberal member for Hastings and Macleay, another new
member, who accepted the gift. His occupancy of the Chair was
short-lived. Within five months came a dissolution. The appeal to
the constituencies that followed restored Labour with a sufficient
majority to make it unnecessary to resort to intrigue. Without risk
the Government was able to elect one of its own supporters as
Speaker. Its choice fell upon a learned member, Mr. R. D. Meagher,
a prior Chairman of Committees, whose sesquipedelian style of ora-
tory had much impressed the Labour rank and file. From this time
onwards National and Labour Speakers alternated. Mr. Meagher
gave way to Mr. J. J. Cohen, another legal member. In less than
two years he retired, and was succeeded by Mr. Daniel Levy, also a
member of the legal profession. He retained the post until the dis«
solution. In the next Parliament —the Storey Labour Government be-
ing at this time in power—the ex-Speaker, Mr. Levy, accepted re-


election. His action was regarded as a piece of disloyalty, and
his colleagues did not refrain from telling him. Resigning a fort-
night before the termination of the final session, Mr. Simon Hickey
became Speaker for a day, or rather seven .days—long enough to
entitle him to have his name blazoned on the mural record. With
the advent of the Fuller Coalition Government, Mr. Levy was select-
ed for his old job, and he continued to serve until the Lang Ministry
ousted the Nationals from the front benches. With the change in
Government came a change in the Speaker. Mr. Dooley, ex-Premier,
was given the post. A turn of the whirligig, and Mr., now Sir
Daniel, Levy, was back in the Chair. Labour replaced him by Mr.
F. M. Burke. And then the Stevens National Government, after
making Sir Daniel Attorney-General and Minister of Justice, an
honour to which after thirty years of service he was justified in con-
sidering himself entitled, re-shuffled the Ministry, deprived him of
his portfolio, and caste him once more for the part of Speaker.
CHANGES IN PROCEDURE
Perhaps the most noticeable outcome of this alternation in
office of the two political parties has been the change in procedure
gradually brought about to expedite the passage of legislation, and
trim the claw T s of a too strong Opposition. External pressure but-
ressing the Government’s own desire to outvie the accomplishments
of its predecessors has led to the introduction of a spate of meas-
ures. There was a time when a whole session was not deemed too
long for the discussion of a single important bill. Now-a-days the
ambition is to pass a bill per diem. Thus the number of enactments
placed upon the Statute Book almost coincides with the number of
sitting days. This has been made possible by a process of speeding
up. What industry has attained in the way of increased output by
mechanisation, Parliament has achieved by the adoption of two
processes known respectively as the “Gag,” or the “Closure” as the
Standing Orders term it, and the “Guillotine.” The effect of each
is to curtail debate, one by enabling the Government whenever it has
the requisite numbers to at any time move “That the question be
now put; ’ ’ the other by imposing a time limit for the discussion of
a measure either in the House or in Committee. The effect of the
operation of these means of preventing discussion is that many bills,
and generally important ones, are passed without adequate consid-
eration. Both the “Gag” and the “Guillotine” are deliberately in-
tended to prevent a private member from tediously repeating argu-
ments already advanced and stonewalling a bill the Government is
determined to pass. His business is not to discuss but to vote —
which he usually does in a boisterous atmosphere at every possible
stage. To further defeat any attempt on the part of the Opposition
to retard the progress of a measure, opportunities that at one time
were allowed for leisurely discussion have been cut out, and the
stage made a mere formality. In other directions there has been a
rigorous pruning of the traditional procedure to check the “windy
turgidities and tedious pendiculations” of members. One result of
this tightening up is that the dignity, and in some measure the de-
corum that once clothed the proceedings of Parliament, has been


torn away. A change that is perhaps not without its compensations
is the altered sitting hour. For long years the usage of the House
of Commons was observed under which the Assembly met for the
transaction of business at half-past four and continued at work until
such time as the Government was satisfied with the progress made.
It was considered that this arrangement most convenienced mem-
bers who, during the day, were engaged in business or professional
pursuits. But when Labour, predominant, began to overhaul the
Standing Orders, and many old customs went by the board, the hour
at which the House had been accustomed to meet did not escape the
hand of the vandal. Viewing themselves as labourers in the politi-
cal field, and wishing to prove themselves worthy of their hire, Mr.
Lang and his followers adopted eleven o’clock as the hour of meet-
ing, with provision for an automatic adjournment at six o’clock.
Day sittings possibly had their advantages, but they had this
supreme disadvantage—they were extremely inconvenient for the
Opposition, who were mainly drawn from the ranks of commercial
and professional men. So that for some time the battle of the hours
was fiercely waged when the Sessional Orders came up for discus-
sion. Latterly there has been a compromise; the House meets on
two days at 2.30 o’clock and automatically adjourns at eleven, and
on the third day at eleven, adjourning at six.
SOME MEMBERS OF THE PAST
So much for the changes in procedure. As to the members
themselves, all sorts and conditions of men have appeared upon the
political stage, played their part and disappeared into limbo since
Mr. Ball entered upon the scene. In the case of many of them even
their name has been erased from the tablet of memory. Death took
a heavy toll, the vicissitudes of politics an even greater. It is almost
incredible that so many changes should have manifested themselves
in the political life of the State in the time. In the resulting con-
fusion it is not remarkable that it should be the trifling experiences
rather than the things that matter that are most easily recalled.
During the term of his service, Mr. Ball has rubbed shoulders with
many types. There have been members who, from the opening to
the close of a session never once addressed the House. John Bailey,
the “mystery man” of the Labour party, was the outstanding ex-
ample of the “silent” member. Other men displaying the reverse
capacity, have drawn out the thread of their verbosity beyond the
limits of endurance. The palm for long-windedness must go to John
Cash Neild, member for Paddington when Mr. Ball entered Parlia-
ment. For nine hours he talked upon the estimates —he would have
been an invaluable asset in an Opposition stonewall, but if one’s
memory is to be trusted he spoke on that memorable occasion from
the Ministerial cross-benches. Still others were chronic belligerents.
They fought the Government, they fought the Chair, and were not
subdued even when removed from the Chamber. There have been
members, too, like J. C. L. Fitzpatrick and John Haynes, who were
always ready with a quip to disconcert a speaker and “set the table
in a roar,” Another member developed an irritating idiosyncrasy.


Sitting in the House when there was no provision for automatic ad-
journment at a fixed hour, he had an uncanny knack of entering the
Chamber as it was about to rise; and inebriated by something even
stronger than His own verbosity, with devilish delight would keep
members on tenterhooks for an hour or two on the pretext that he
had some matter of public importance to ventilate.
This flux in the personnel of Parliament was accompanied by
frequent changes in party nomenclature. Political realignments
were necessary from time to time; and though the complexion might
be unchanged new names for the new combinations had to be
fashioned. The Free Traders and Protectionists who were in and
out of office when Mr. Ball entered the Assembly gave way to Lib-
erals and Democrats. These in turn were dissolved and their con-
stituent elements re-grouped as Liberal and Labour. With its emer-
gence as a separate political entity Labour, by diligent canvass and
rigorous organising, has sought to increase its influence with the
electorate. On occasions dissidents have crossed the floor and link-
ed up with the opposing party; but in the main, Labour remains
intact, retains its original title and a permanent place in the consti-
tution of the Assembly. The Liberals have been less fortunate.
Seeking to bring about a coalition of all anti-Labour elements, the
party appealed to the electors as Liberal and Reform and then, in
the War period, as the National party. Later still the increased
attention paid to country interests, land settlement and production,
developed in the man-on-the-land a greater appreciation of co-
operation and the power of combination for political ends. This
class consciousness brought about the subdivision of the Nationals
on City v. Country lines. The cleavage first manifested itself in the
formation of a “Progressive” clique which professedly espoused
the cause of the country man. From this humble beginning evolved
the present United Country Party, a powerful organisation with
Nation-wide ramifications, whose title leaves no grounds for
dubiety as to its main purpose and policy. The Nationals have be-
come absorbed in the United Australia Party, and in alliance with
the U.C.P. control the political destinies of the State. In the pre-
sent grouping there is no place for the Independent; he has depart-
ed from the scene. Mr. Ball, originally a Free Trader, followed the
fortunes of the Liberals and their rightful successors, and is now
ranged under the banner of the U.C.P. It is a natural evolution and
logical development in the outlook and principles of one whose
whole public life has been devoted to the advocacy and furtherance
of country needs.
Such is the background of Mr. Ball’s political life, the setting
in which, from his apprenticeship onwards, he has built up his fine
reputation and won the esteem of all his associates, and some of the
impressions garnered from the rich store-house of his memory.
Malvolio divided humanity into three categories, the men who are
born great, those who achieve greatness, and those who have it
thrust upon them. Mr. Ball belongs indisputably to the most worthy
class. “We are what we are by what we have experienced.” The
net effect upon his personality of his long and varied experience in


public life, both in the Parliament of the country and the sphere of
Local Government, has been to constitute him one of the bulwarks
of the State, and an ornament to the constituency he still faithfully
and efficiently represents. Parliament is indeed the richer for his
presence.
Appendix
(HUME RESERVOIR: ALBUM OF VIEWS)
The Album was presented to Mr. Ball on the evening of Friday,
20th Nov., 1936, at a Citizens’ dinner held in Albury in honour of
the visit of the Governor-General, Lord Gowrie. The Mayor of the
town, Aid. A. Waugh, presided over the function, which was one
of several arranged to mark the official opening of the Hume Reser-
voir. The presentation was made by the Mayor of Corowa, Aid.
John Chivell, on behalf of the interested Local Government bodies,
the Municipal Councils of Corowa and Albury, and the Shire
Councils of Coreen, Hume, Rutherglen, Wodonga and Yarrawonga,
and was intended to recognise Mr. Ball’s service to the district in
furthering the preliminary work, and his later association with the
construction of a great public undertaking. The book of views, in
addition to an explanatory inscription, contained the following
‘ ‘ Foreword ’ ’:
THE HUME RESERVOIR
FOREWORD
This brief description of the Hume Reservoir and historical sur-
vey of the River Murray Waters Agreement, under the terms of
which the Reservoir and co-related works have been constructed, is
intended to preface an Album of views that has been spontaneously
prepared at the instance of a number of Municipal and Shire
Councils on both sides of the Border for presentation to the Hon.
R. T. Ball, M.L.A., as a memento of his association with the first
steps to implement the Agreement, and a small tribute to the help
he rendered in resolving the many unforseen difficulties that stood
in the road of the carrying out of the largest and the key work of
those involved. Appropriately the presentation is to be made on
the occasion of the official opening of the Hume Reservoir by His
Excellency the Governor-General, Lord Gowrie, on November 21st,
1936.
The photographs that have been selected for inclusion depict
in contrasting sequence stages in the constructional progress of the


Dam, and some typical local views. They portray, much more
vividly than any words can do, the immensity of the work and its
present day impressive appearance.
‘‘First the blade and then the ear.” First the germinal idea
and then, given the will and the means to do, the fruit of achieve-
ment. That is the story of the great Murray Waters Conservation
Scheme. A quarter of a century has passed since an inter-State
conference of Engineers adumbrated the steps which, in their opin-
ion, were essential to the settlement of the vexed question of the
regulation and diversion of the waters of the Murray and its tribu-
taries, the utilisation of those waters, the development of the ad-
joining country and the provision for navigation of
the stream. In 1914 the Prime Minister of the Commonwealth and
the Premiers of the States of New South Wales, Victoria and South
x\ustralia, to whom the report of the Engineers was presented, con-
cluding that the time was over-ripe, resolved that joint action
should be taken on the lines recommended and signed the Agree-
ment that had been come to between them. In the following year
legislation Avas passed that ratified this Agreement and at the same
time brought into existence the River Murray Commission which
was vested with power to control the scheme. The immediate effect
of the enactment was to translate to the realm of reality what for
so long had remained a mere abstraction.
Two years later, in 1917, the Hon. R. T. Ball, M.L.A., member
for Corowa, became the Constructing Authority for New South
Wales by virtue of his elevation to the office of Secretary for Public
Works in the Holman National Government. And from then until
1925, with a brief interregnum, the projects to which this State was
committed came within Mr. Ball's purview and were the subject of
special concern; and he pressed forward with their construction to
the limit of the finances made available by the Government. So it
is with this as with another monumental work, the Sydney
Harbour Bridge, the name indelibly linked with it in the public
mind is that of the Hon. R. T. Ball —a man whose record of public
activities since he entered political life is unsurpassed.
Under the terms of the River Murray Waters Agreement the
signatory Governments contracted to carry out within their own
territorial spheres, either jointly or severally, an extensive pro-
gramme of locks and weirs at intervals along the course of the
river between Blanchetown and Echuca, and in the Murrumbidgee
River to Hay, as well as storages in the Upper Murray and Lake
Victoria. An ambitious, comprehensive and expensive scheme. The
monetary outlay involved was estimated at £4,663,000 —a sum re-
garded in those days as prodigious. Of this sum the Common-
wealth undertook to provide £1,000,000. Since the Agreement was
entered into it has been twice amended, first in 1923 to increase the
Commonwealth contribution to one-fourth of the entire cost, and
next in 1934 to greatly modify the schedule of works and to limit
the total cost of the scheme to £12,000,000. By that time the com-
bined expenditure of the contracting Governments had reached the
formidable sum of £10,000,000.


Most important of the many works set out in the schedule to
the Agreement was the Upper Murray storage. This excelled all
others in point of magnitude, cost, and the influence it was likely to
have upon the settlement and development not merely of the coun-
try contiguous but the country beyond. The Hume Reservoir, as
the storage has been felicitously christened, called for an expendi-
ture computed at £1,353,000, or nearly one-third the total expendi-
ture upon the entire scheme. It was designed to impound one mil-
lion acre feet of water and, it was anticipated, would take twelve
years to complete. Shortly after the Authorising Act came into
force, steps were taken by survey and boring to ascertain the most
suitable site for the Dam. Exhaustive tests showed the most appro-
priate to be immediately below the confluence of the Mitta Mitta
and the Murray, some ten miles from Albury and in the vicinity of
the spot where a century before, Hovell and Hume essayed their
first crossing of the main waterway. Designs were next prepared
by the Engineers, and as soon as approved a start was
made with work on the New South Wales side of the River. Bores
and shafts were sunk, a quarry site selected, roads of access planned
and an area of land set aside suitable for a new township to accom-
modate the army of workmen who would find employment on the
job. Within two years after the Act became operative—on 28th
November, 1919, to be exact —thanks to Mr. Ball’s pertinacity, the
first sod was turned, the Governor-General, Sir Ronald Munro Fer-
guson, performing the ceremony. From that time onwards the
enterprise so auspiciously initiated went steadily forward, under
the day-labour system without the intervention of a contractor, un-
til to-day, seventeen years later, despite the blows of circumstances
and financial stringency born of the Great War, it is happily con-
summated.
The Hume Reservoir stands high up in the list of the World’s
big Dams, and alone as largest in the Southern Hemisphere. The
structure, a bare mile in length (5,280 feet), holds behind it a stor-
age which has a spread four times that of Sydney Harbour. For
fifty miles up the Murray valley and twenty-five miles up the Mitta
Mitta, stretch out the conserved waters. The embankment at its
base has a width of 650 feet and at its top of 32 feet. From the bed
of the river to the crest of the Dam measures 132 feet, and the
maximum depth of water is 114 feet. The most notable feature pf
this striking structure is the 1042 feet concrete spillway and sluice
section. The sluice (284 feet) contains seven offlets to regulate the
flow from the Reservoir, three of which are to be used for hydro-
electric purposes. The spillway (720 feet) has a vertical face up-
stream and downstream is curved to conform to the flow of the cas-
cading flood waters. The lip of the spillway is 15 feet below full
supply level of 2,000,000 acre feet. On the crest of the wall rise
thirty piers whicli carry the roadway and also serve as abutments
for twenty-nine movable shutters, each of 20 feet clear opening and
15 feet rise, which can be lifted or lowered to control the discharge
of the flood waters.
Viewing the project in retrospect the difficulties that beset the


launching and building of a great public work reveal themselves.
It is seen that the estimates of both time and money fell far short
of the actualities. In 1913 when the estimates were prepared no one
could foresee the rise in wages and cost of and delay in procuring
materials that was to occur during the War years. The effect of
these unpredictable happenings was that the original allowance of
time for the completion of the storage works expanded from twelve
to nineteen years, whilst the actual expenditure, £5,872,000, exceed-
ed not only the original computation of cost of £4,520,000, but the
amgunt deemed sufficient to cover the outlay upon the whole of the
locks, weirs and storages comprehended by the River Murray
Waters Agreement. As to the volume of water impounded, the one
million acre feet has become in fact 1,250,000. Crest level which
corresponds with this storage, it should be recorded, was reached
for the first time at the end of 1934.
A feature of the completed Reservoir for which Mr. Ball is
responsible is the hydro-electric outlets. The probability that the
water in the Hume Dam might be utilised in the future for the
generation of electricity was realised early in the work of construc-
tion. The prospect excited the interest of the Local Government
bodies operating within the possible sphere of influence. All
authorities recognised the potential value of this source of cheap
light and power, the effect it would have upon the expansion of
existing industries and the establishment of new, and the welcome
improvement in the amenities of a large number of country towns
that would follow in its train. Mr. Ball’s sympathies were with this
development and his energies devoted to bring it about. Already,
when Minister for Public Works in 1919, apprehending that the
power of the future would be hydro-electric and that the abounding
resources of the State offered an ideal chance for the economical
generation of current for light and power, he had sponsored a Bill
to authorise the initial work of this character at the Barren Jack
Dam. So that when the advisableness of applying the storage of the
Hume Dam to the same end was urged three years later, he was not
without experience to guide him. But before sanctioning such an
important departure from the original plan, especially as no pro-
vision was made for it in the Agreement, Mr. Ball wisely remitted
the question to a body of experts for investigation.
It so happened that coincidently with this action the suggestion
was advanced that, before it was too late, the capacity of the Dam
should be amplified to fully safeguard the welfare and right of land
holders. This again was a question for the Engineers to settle.
Pending a settlement of the two points the building of the founda-
tions for the main portion of the concrete Dam was held in abey-
ance. Two recommendations were the outcome of the official en-
quiries: (1) That provision should be made for outlet works suit-
able for hydro-electric generation; and (2) that the design of the
Dam should be varied to permit of a maximum storage of two
million acre feet. Both recommendations were accepted by the con-
tracting Governments and confirmed by the River Murray Commis-
sion. And the Dam as it stands to-day, therefore, possesses the re-


quisite outlets and foundations of sufficient strength to allow of the
wall being safely raised, should the need arise, to increase the
volume of water impounded to the maximum mentioned. At the
moment, however, two difficulties, it appears, stand in the way of
augmenting the storage—the fact that the added volume would
necessitate the submersion of Tallangatta, and a doubt as to the
adequacy of the catchment area (6,000 square miles) to keep the
Reservoir in full profit.
With the completion of this great project, the men who have
settled in the Murray basin, and especially those engaged in pastoral
pursuits, will be put in a safe position against dry seasons and even
drought conditions. Furthermore, the increasingly important Irri-
gation Areas that have been established adjacent to and are
dependent upon the stream will be abundantly served. What
effect this assurance will ultimately have in promoting prosperity
in that remote portion of the State can only be conjectured; but it
is safe to predict that not only the present population but the new
settlers who must be inevitably attracted will find in it the prime
essential to material well-being, an incentive to increased produc-
tion and the opportunity most men vainly crave, to live their lives
in measureless content.
E.W.H.
November, 1936.
FINIS.


