

j \ pAMpHLET
W • ON
| " (The paraphra.'if'i."
l
I BY THE
I REV. JOHN I‘DONALD, B.D.
fe> ‘
ini up ifii ilia illi ii|ji ihi iip ifii ii|ii iHi iip ihi w ifii iifii iTg mm iHigy 11 n inyijuiiiLjii^
of the “Reformed Presbyterian
Witness.”
<Ssiineg ;
1887.
if
Extract from September Number (1886)
W. M. MACLARDY, GENERAL PRINTER, 319 GEORGE STREET,




THE PARAPHRASES
BY THE
REV. JOHN MCDONALD, B.D.
Many who object to human hymns in the worship of God as
being utterly devoid of Scripture warrant, have no objections
whatever to the “ Translations and paraphrases in verse of
several passages of sacred Scripture,” which are bound up with
our Bibles, and frequently used in religious worship. It is
regarded, in fact, as the ne plus ultra of religious bigotry to
breathe a word against them. Why, it is said, should they
not be used, and largely used, by all who delight in the worship
of God 1 Are they not founded on Scripture, agreeable to
Scripture, nay, directly drawn from Scripture 1 And what more
natural or fitting medium could there be for the worship of
God ? So it is said, and it is well for us to try and get at the
truth in this very important matter.
We account nothing of the fact, freely admitted, that multi-
tudes nowadays use the paraphrases. It is very common at
the present time, we know, even in the religious world, to
count by heads. The great cry in regard to many modern
innovations is—see how the great majority of good people-
have adopted them, and surely you would not insist on your
views in opposition to so many earnest and worthy Christians.
Such an argument, we would say, is the weakest and most
worthless of all arguments, for it would give us a new creed
and a new method of worship for every generation. No ;
orthodoxy in doctrine or in worship is not a matter to be
decided by arithmetic, nor is it the individual Christian’s duty
to be determined by the simple rule of addition. If we are to
go with the crowd we shall always be on the move. It is
within the memory of many now living, when hymns and
organs were shunned as a plague by every Presbyterian Church
in Britian ; and how fares it with them to-day—they are to be
met with everywhere. The same is true of paraphrases. A
century and a half ago they were rejected, and by some long


rejected; now they are in almost universal use. And what
does all this prove 1 Why, that it cannot always be a safe
thing to go with the crowd, for such a variable guide cannot
be an infallible one.
We object to the paraphrases, and the question comes,
why 1 If these paraphrases are, as they are declared on the
title page to be, “ Translations and paraphrases in verse of
several passages of sacred Scripture,” it will be asked, what
good reasons are there for their rejection from the worship of
that God whose word the Scripture is 1 We shall try to
answer the question.
There is another question, however, which is of far more
importance than that, and which must, from the very nature
of our inquiry, take precedence of it. That is, where is the
warrant and what is the reason for the introduction of para-
phrases ? When introduced, a hundred years ago, they were a
new thing,—a thing unheard of in the Church —an innovation,
and those who introduce innovations ought to be able to adduce
good Scriptural reason for them. And still farther. What is
the good end to be secured by these sixty-seven hymns which
are added as an appendage to the hundred and fifty sacred
songs received direct from the hands of God Himself 1 These
are questions that have never been satisfactorily answered.
We do not here propose an inquiry as to whether there may
not be songs of praise scattered throughout the Bible besides
the Psalms in the Book of Psalms, songs composed by the
inspired servants of God on great and memorable occasions,
and which might be sung by Christians now as they were
sung by believers and accepted of God long ago. On that
question it is not worth while to argue, inasmuch as in the
whole collection of paraphrases there are only four that
profess to be of this character, viz., xx., xxxii., xxxvi.,
and Ixv., and even some of these are very free paraphrases
of the Scripture text. But that is not the question,
for if it were a mere matter of using devotional songs which
either Old Testament or Hew Testament saints had used with
God’s approbation, there would be little if any ground of dispute.
The question is this : keeping in mind the fact that we have
in Scripture one whole book given for the express purpose of


providing a Psalmody for the Church; a book of praise
divinely rich in its matter, and wonderfully suitable for the
children of God in every age and amid experiences of every
kind ; a book that was used not only by saints of old, but by
Christ and His apostles to the exclusion of all else; and a
book, moreover, that has sustained the piety, and comforted
the hearts, and sanctified the lives of countless thousands of
God’s people now in the kingdom of glory; where is the
warrant or the authority for either the private Christian or
the “ Assembly of the Elders ” presuming to add to that rich
provision that God has made ? Are the songs of the Book of
Psalms not sufficient; aj;e they not rich enough; is their
spirituality not deep enough? In short, is there anything in
the Psalms themselves, or in the Word of God, that would
warrant for one moment the worshipper laying on God’s altar
anything which God Himself has not commanded ? We have
never seen such a warrant. If we had not had the book of
Psalms, or if our Lord had not put His imprimatv/r on the
songs in the inspired collection by His references to them and
His use of them, the anxiety for a modern book of praise
would have been more intelligible. But with such a manual
for the Church’s use in our hands, and with such a perfect
example as that of Christ before us, the safe and assured and
God-honouring course is to follow in His steps, and strive to
catch the spirit of those who, on the Psalms of holy writ,
have been wafted up to the better land.
Let us look at the force there is in the argument based
upon the fact that the paraphrases are directly drawn from
Scripture. These paraphrases, it is said, are portions of the
divine word turned into verse ; then why not sing them ?
Our first remark is, that this fact has no bearing whatever
on the matter in dispute. It is a case of begging the question,
for the thing taken for granted is the very thing that is to be
proved, viz.: that we are warranted to turn Scripture state-
ments indiscriminately into media of praise. If the whole
volume of Scripture may be a manual of praise, where was the
need for one special book being written for that purpose ?
David, who under God’s guidance wrote very many of the
Psalms, had in his hands the five books of Moses, and also the


writings of Joshua and Samuel. Why then did he not avail
himself of these and prepare them for the worship of the
temple? Why were not the opening verses of Genesis, for
example, which form the first paraphrase, turned into a
temple song ? Whatever the reason was, David occupied
himself with no such work. Had God intended the Bible to
be so utilised, surely there would have been indications of it
at such a time. But instead of that, God set apart David for
the work of preparing expressly a book of song for His
Church, to be used in that and all succeeding ages, and that
book we have in the “ Book of Psalms.”
Our second remark is, that the paraphrases are to be
rejected because they ar e paraphrases. Supposing it were to be
granted that we had a warrant to turn Scripture statements
into verse and sing them as praise to God, that does not infer
that we have a right to paraphrase Scripture—adding human
thoughts to the divine—and then present both as an offering of
praise unto God. That would be foisting the human under
the covering wing of the divine. It would be an offence
similar to that condemned in the old Levitical law, “Thou
shalt not sow thy field with mingled seed, neither shall a
garment of linen and woollen come upon thee.” And we
hardly need to prove that the paraphrases are not mere versi-
fications of part of the divine word. They are instead para-
phrastic comments on Scripture put into (we will not say
poetry but) rhyme; comments, moreover, that in many cases
only dilute and fritter away the stately majesty and meaning
of the original Take for example those familiar verses in
Isaiah’s prophecy, “ Can a woman forget her sucking child,
that she should not have compassion on the son of her womb ?
Yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold I
have graven thee upon the palms of my hands; thy walls are
continually before me.” There is divine dignity and pathos in
those words. What shall we say of the following versification,
which by the way, is by Watts :
Can the fond mother e’er forget
The infant whom she bore ?
And can its plaintive cries be heard
Nor move compassion more ?


She may forget, nature may fail
A parent’s heart to move ;
But Zion on my heart shall dwell
In everlasting love.
Full in my sight, upon my hands,
1 have engraved her name;
My hands shall build her ruined walls
And raise her broken frame.
If the words of the prophet are to be sung, then a thousand
times rather let us chant the prose than sing elaborate versifi-
cation such as this, which, for the sake of rhyme, mars the
beauty and simplicity of the original, and in the end actually
mistakes the prophet’s meaning. The idea in the last line
Watts must have evolved from the depths of his own
consciousness, for he did not find it in the utterance of the
prophet. The exigencies of his rhyme evidently demanded it.
This specimen just quoted from the paraphrases, and taken
at random, is, moreover, one of the least offensive illustrations
of the dangers of paraphrasing. In the first verse of the first
paraphrase we learn more than ever Moses told us ; and in the
thirty-fourth paraphrase words are attributed to Christ on the
sole authority of Blair, the author of “The Grave.” Blair
also improves somewhat on the original in the third verse of
the same paraphrase, in which he renders in his own way
Christ’s memorable words, “ I thank Thee, oh Father, Lord of
heaven and earth, because Thou hast hid these things from the
wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes.” He
puts it thus :
Thou to the pure and lowly heart
Hast heavenly truth revealed ;
Which from the self-conceited mind
Thy wisdom hath concealed.
Those who think that this is either an equivalent or an improve-
ment have a critical taste that is sui generis.
We may give the following as specimens of poetry which
the genius of paraphrasing has produced, and the only
comment we wait to make is, that the paraphrasing has so far
improved on the original as to crush out the true poetry, and


substitute, in some cases, the merest doggerel for the loftiest
announcements. We give isolated verses for brevity’s sake :
XXIII. Sing to the Lord in joyful strains,
Let earth his praise resound ;
Ye who upon the ocean dwell.
And fill the isles around.
XXVI. But far as heaven’s resplendent orbs
Beyond earth's spot extend ;
As far my thoughts, as far my ways
Your ways and thoughts transcend.
And as the rains from heaven distil,
Nor thither mount again ;
But swell the earth with fruitful juice ;
And all its tribes sustain.
XXXIX. The sacred year has now revolved.
XLII. There we shall meet to part no more,
And still together be.
XLIV. ’Tis finished—legal worship ends,
And gospel ages run.
XLVIII. Each future period that will bless
As it has blessed the past.
And what shall we say of Watt’s lines in the thirteenth
paraphrase—
There I was with Him when He stretched
His compass o’er the deep.
Manifestly he did not know the meaning of the words he
was versifying. The words in the original are, “ When He
prepared the heavens I was there ; when He set a compass
upon the face of the depth,” The word compass means circle,
and there is without doubt in this expression a reference to the
circular form of the earth. But Watts, although he thought
he could make David a better Christian than he was, proved
that he could not make David’s son a better philosopher. He
succeeded as well in the one object as in the other.
Apparently Watts had the idea in his mind of a pair of
compasses, for he speaks of “ stretching his compass.” And
yet this specimen of poetry and philosophy is sung by good
people as praise to God in lieu of heaven’s own inspired songs.


Our third remark is, that several of the paraphrases contain
no element of praise whatever. They may be pleasant to read,
but they are not suited for praise, and that for the sufficient
reason that the passages in the original were not intended for
praise. What praise is there in the fourth paraphrase 1 More
properly it might be called an ode to the grave. There is not
a solitary line in it of reference to Him who conquered the
grave. Not God nor Christ, but the grave is the object of
praise there. What praise is there in the twelfth paraphrase 1
It is an ode to industry and a call to the indolent. Not the re-
motest allusion in it to God, or Christ, or the Gospel. Solomon
assuredly, when he wrote such words of wisdom, summoning
man to activity, never dreamt that his counsels to men would
be turned into song as praises to God. What praise is there
in the seventh paraphrase 1 It is a statement of man’s sin and
God’s justice, but there is not a word in it either for the sinner
seeking salvation or the believer rejoicing in it. And so on we
might enumerate, but it is unnecessary. Such songs are
manifestly unsuited for the praise of God.
Our fourth and last remark is, that several paraphrases are
chargeable with actual and serious error. This remark calls
back our attention to the time when, and the men by whom,
the book of Paraphrases was produced. It was in 1781, forty-
nine years after the committee of preparation was first ap-
pointed, that the book first appeared, as it now stands, in our
Bibles, and the General Assembly of that year appointed it “to
be used in public worship, and in congregations where the min-
ister finds it to edification.” Every reader of Church history
knows that, during last century, the deadly reign of moderatism
was supreme in the Presbyterian Establishment of Scotland,
and it so happened that those parties in the Church who took
upon themselves the charge of editing the Paraphrases were
mostly moderates. This fact goes to explain our fourth re-
mark, that many of the paraphrases fail to bring out in all
their fulness the peculiar doctrines of the Bible, and some of
them are charged with actual error. The fifteenth paraphrase,
for example, contains a line which is untrue in fact—
But all the dead forgotten lie.
For “the righteous shall be held in everlasting remembrance.”


The twenty-seventh, which is a piteable rendering of a precious
truth, contains in the last verse the serious error of universal
salvation, or something which it would be very hard to distin-
guish from it—
With me dwells no relentless wrath
Against the human race ;
The souls which I have formed shall find
A refuge in my grace.
The doctrine of universal atonement is taught in the thirty-
fifth, in which words are put into Christ’s lips that He never
uttered—
My body broken, thus I give
For you, for all, take eat and live.
In the forty-seventh the doctrine of baptismal regeneration
never taught by Paul, is laid down by Watts—
When to the sacred font we came,
Did not the rite proclaim,
That washed from sin and all its stains
New creatures we became.
Our space will not allow us to make all the quotations that
might easily be made in proof of the fact that the paraphrases
are not worthy of a place in the Psalmody of the Church.
Warrant for making paraphrases at all there is none ; and least
of all, have we any warrant for singing in God’s worship such
paraphrases as are here made ready to our hands 1 Indeed, it
is a euphemism to call them paraphrases. A better and more
appropriate title would be, “ Precious portions of the Word of
God improved upon, carefully diluted, and turned into verse by
Messrs. Watts, Blair, Logan, Blacklock, Morrison, Cameron and
others.” We would recommend our readers to study these
paraphrases as a whole, and compare them, one by one, in their
language and teaching with the original passages on which they
are founded, and we guarantee that if they undertake this
interesting task for themselves they will rise from the study
with a clearer discernment and a stronger appreciation for the rich-
ness and fulness and spiritual beauty of the book of praise
which God Himself has given us, than ever they had before.
W. M. Maclardy, Printer, 319 George Street, Sydney.




