

p,. J'AercEß..
I -- ->1
4 J,ac
(Ekiaious Pn MS
#
i
*
Bo* M
Jt Jiwflttl
FOR OCCASIONAL USE.
Ji}
q GOD the Father Almighty, who wilt have all
men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge
of Thy truth.
Show us Thy mercy, and grant us Thy salvation.
O God the Son, our Advocate with the Father, and the
Propitiation for our sins.
Show us Thy mercy, and grant us Thy Salvation
O God the Holy Ghost, the Giver of Life, who helpest
our infirmities, and makest intercession for us.
Show us Thy mercy, and grant us Thy salvation.
i,
I*
O Holy, Blessed, and Glorious Trinity, who dwellest in
the Light that no man can approach unto.
Show us Thy mercy, and grant us Thy salvation.
From all hardness and deadness of heart; from thinking
lightly of the sacredness of Thy house, and of Thy word,


from drawing nigh to Thee with our lips while our hearts
are far from Thee.
Good Lord deliver us.
From setting up our idols in our heart, and putting the
stumbling-block of our iniquity before our face, when we
come to enquire of Thee.
Good Lord deliver us.
From all malice and uncharitableness, from all bitterness
and wrath, from all selfishness and indifference to the wants
of our fellow-creatures.
Good Lord deliver us.
From all impurity of thought, word, and deed, from in-
temperance and revelry, and from fleshly lusts that war
against the soul.
Good Lord deliver us.
From all deceit and insincerity, from all fraud and
dishonesty, and from taking a selfish advantage of the
ignorance of others.
Good Lord deliver us.
From all desire to speak evil of our neighbours, from
judging harshly of the conduct and character of others, and
from despising even the least of Thy children.
Good Lord deliver us.
From the eager pursuit of material riches, from avarice
and worldly ambition, from being overburdened with earthly
cares, and forgetting that Thou carest for us.
Good Lord deliver us.


O God our Saviour, who by Thy holy Apostle hast
taught us to make prayers and supplications and to give
thanks for all men, we beseech Thee to glorify the Name
of Thy Son, Jesus Christ, among all mankind; convert those
who are enemies to His Cross, and quicken those who are
dead in trespasses and sins.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
We pray for Thy Universal Church, that all who name
the name of Christ may depart from iniquity, and that the
multitude of them that believe may be of one heart and of
one soul.
We beseech thee to hear us, good Lard.
That it may please Thee to send upon the Church of this
diocese the healthful Spirit of Thy grace, and the continual
dew of Thy blessing.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
We pray for Thy servant the'Bishop, and for all the clergy
of this diocese, that they may be faithful and efficient as
servants of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
We pray for the members of this congregation, that all
may know Thee, from the least unto the greatest, and that
all may be doers of Thy word, and not hearers only.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
That the prayers and praises that are offered in this place
may be acceptable unto Thee, being offered up in spirit and
in truth.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
That all the work that is undertaken by this congregation


in Thy Name may be done according to Thy will.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
That the funds necessary for Thy work in this parish may
be supplied by Thy good providence, and that we may be
free from care, seeking first the kingdom of God and His
righteousness.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
We pray for all other Christian churches and congregations,
that they and we may be of one mind in the Lord, and
may shine as lights in the world.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
We pray for the people of this parish, that Thou wilt
grant them the spirit of repentance toward God, and faith
toward our Lord Jesus Christ.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
That Thou wilt have mercy upon all who are living in
wilful neglect of the means of grace, and in open violation
of Thy commandments, and turn them from their evil way.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
That Ihou wilt have mercy upon the slaves of intemper-
ance, save their families from misery, and their own souls
from ruin, and drive out from among us all that promotes
this sin.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
1 hat f hou wilt purge out from among us all covetousness,
fraud, gambling, profligacy, profanity, idolatry, and every
form of wickedness, and make us to be a people fearing
Thee, and working righteousness.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.


That Thou wilt bless every home in this parish, grant
that husbands may love their wives, and wives may reverence
their husbands, that children may honour their parents, and
parents may bring up their children in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Grant that our children may remember their Creator in
the days of their youth, and that by Thy Holy Scriptures
they may be made wise unto salvation, through faith in
Christ Jesus.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Grant that our sons may grow strong in spiritual grace,
and that our daughters may be adorned with the beauty of
holiness.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Grant that servants may be faithful to their masters, and
masters may be just and considerate to their servants, and
that households may dwell together in unity.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Grant that all the members of our families, whether far
or near, may he numbered among the family of God.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Grant that the rich may be poor in spirit, and the poor
rich in faith, and that all classes of society may love and
help one another.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Grant that the afflicted may know Thee as the Father of
mercies and God of all comfort, and that Thy chastening
may be for their profit to make them partakers of Thy
holiness.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.


Grant that the dying may know that God hath given to
them eternal life in Jesus Christ.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
That it may please Thee to have mercy upon all who are
in doubt and darkness concerning Thy Revealed Truth, and
give them to see the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Jesus Christ.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
That it may please Thee to hasten the fulfilment of Thy
promise that the Gospel shall be preached in all the world
for a witness unto all nations.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
That Thou wilt bless Thy evangelists, pastors, and teachers
in all parts of the world, arm them with the whole armour
of God, and make Thy grace sufficient for them at all times.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good I^ord.
For all churches and all individual converts gathered from
among the heathen, that they may be rooted and built up
in Christ, and fully sanctified through Thy truth.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
That it may please Thee to hasten the conversion of
Thine ancient people, Israel, and to establish and make
Jerusalem a praise in the earth.
We beseech Thee to hear tis, good Lord.
That it may please Thee to give to us and to all Thy
people such a measure of Thy grace, that denying ungodli-
ness and worldly lusts we may live soberly, righteously, and
godly in this present world, looking for that blessed hope,
and the glorious appearing of our great God and Saviour
Jesus Christ.


We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Grant that we may experience the exceeding greatness of
Thy Spirit’s power, enabling us to govern all the impulses
of our carnal nature, and filling us with joy and peace in
believing.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Grant that abiding in Christ, and Christ in us, vve may
bring forth much fruit to Thy glory.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
0 God of peace sanctify us wholly, and may our whole
spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
We beseech Thee to hear us, good Lord.
Our Father which art in heaven, &c.
O Lord our God, Who hast Thy dwelling so high, and
yet humblest Thyself to behold the things that are in heaven
and earth, we give Thee hearty thanks that Thou hast
inclined Thine ear unto Thy servants, who have made now
our united supplication unto Thee. Behold we have taken
upon us to speak unto the Lord, who are but dust and
ashes. But Thou art the Father of mercies, from whom
cometh every good and perfect gift. Now, therefore, O Lord
we. worship Thee and praise Thy glorious name, saying,
Bless the L,ord, 0 my soul, and all that is within me bless
His Holy Name. Bless the Lord, O my sold, and forget not all
His benefits. Blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto
Him that sitteth upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and
ever. Amen.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, &c.
M. C. MOTT, “GAZETTE” POINTING WORKS, PUCKLE STREET, MOONBK PONDS


