

A PAMPHLET
ON
CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM
AND
IN SUPPORT OF
Household Suffrage
Closer Settlement
Early Closing
Part XIX.
AND
Workmen’s Compensation
BY
THE RIGHT HONORABLE C.C. KINGSTON, Q.C.
Authorised by G. Sharp, Eagle Chambers, Pine-street; and printed by J. L. Bonython & Co., at
The Advertiser Office, King William-street, Adelaide.
A
CANDIDATE
FOR THE
CENTRAL DISTRICT OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
SEPTEMBER 1900.


Ladies and Gentlemen,
The time is too short and the District too large for
me to personally address Meetings at more than the Chief
Foiling Places in each Division. But lam fighting heart and
soul for the Constitutional freedom of more than 100,000 Men
and Women of this Colony who are declared by our Federal
Constitution to be entitled to full electoral privileges and yet
by our State Constitution are disfranchised and treated as Out-
landers. I have , therefore , decided to circulate the accompany-
ing Pamphlet. It deals with the following subjects
Chapter I.—The South Australian Outlanders.
Chapter ll—The Freedom of the Federal Voter.
Chapter 111 — The need of Legislative Council Reform.
Chapter IV- —Further illustrations of the need of Reform .
Chapter V. — Further illustrations.
Chapter VI. — Reforms rejected by the Council in the session
of 1899.
Chapter Vll. — The CounciVs treatment of Constitutional
Reform.
Chapter VIII. The CounciVs treatment of Closer
Settlement..
Chapter IX.—The Councils treatment of Part XIX ,
Early Closing and Workmen's Compensation.
Chapter X.—The Safety of Reform.
Chapter XI. The Present Position.
Chapter XII. —The best way of securing Reform.
Chapter XIII Summary.
I hope that some who may not be able to attend my Meetings
may find time to read what I have written and that the cause of
Reform may be thereby strengthened. If so, I shall not have
written in vain.
I am, Ladies and Gentlemen ,
Yours faithfully ,
C. C. KINGSTON.


Chapter I.—The South Australian Outlanders.
We must not forget these. They num-
ber more than 100,000 adult South Austra-
lians. Whilst South Australia cheerfully
joins in pouring out blood and treasure for
the enfranchisement of the Tranav'aai Out-
landers our disfranchised brothers and sis-
ters cannot be overlooked. Forty thou-
sand men and 60,000 women are here m
South Australia cursed by electoral dis-
franchisement for a Legislative Council,
without whose consent no law can be
made, and which, by stolid stupidity
or worse, may permanently impose on
all South Australians the continuance
of the most pernicious legislation which
disfigures our Statute-book. This electo-
ral ban is subject to no time limit, open-
ing, as in the case of Transvaal Outlanders,
the vista of freedom on prolonged resi-
dence. On the contrary, the pro liability
Of electoral outlawry is ever over the head
of all. Should misfortune come, even un-
avoidably, tiie necessity of economising in
house rent will disenfranchise even the
Legislative Council voter of to-day, or the
fall in the rental value of the house may
work the same result. Who are the
100,000 'South Australians thus banned and
barred from freedom’s rights? They are
registered voters for our House of Assem-
bly and residents amongst us for at least
six months. Yet they are selected lor
disqualification as voters for our Legis-
lative'Council. They are also voters in
{South Australia for both Houses of the
Federal Fartiaiment. But they are con-
demned as not fit to take part in returning
a single member for our comparatively petty
Legislative Council. 1 call upon every man
and 1 woman of these Outlanders to be up
and doing. “Who so base wa d be a
slave?” Who of tihese Outlanders, 1
ask, so craven as to cling to those who con-
stitutionallyl curse him, and record
a vote for either -House 'of the federal
Parliament or for our House of Assem-
bly for a candidate who would deny him
the right to vote for the Legislative Coun-
cil? The man who would be guilty of
■sudh meanness would fawn on the toot that
spurned him. Our women, too, are even
more interested in the matter than our
men for under our existing conditions te-
male franchise, so far as our Legislative
Council is concerned, is a sham. it is
only enjoyed by one out of every ten
women, and of these many are faggot crea-
tions by the rich. What being, worthy ot
the name of man, would not resent an
insult offered to his woman-kind { Yet
■vv'hat greater insult can be offered than to
mairk them out for electoral disqualification
.simply because their .husbands cannot
Transfer paltry allotments into their names.
Look at the language in which this msme
is conveyed. “Violence, outrage, and
robbery” are predicted in the Legisla-
tive Council as “the kind of liberality
likely to result from the success ot
Hinistera when advocating de limited
reform of household suffrage. What a
£r o , es outrage on the character of bouth
Australians. “But now’s the day, and
now’s the ’hour.”
Tfhe Federal elections are close upioai us.
Ldt the Ontllian'dens stick together. Let
them join hand's in (the common cause o±
the freedom Of each, and the removal of
all disabilities from the Federal voter.
Their cause is one. Let them be true to
it. 'it should be a test to every candidate
whether it be for Federal or local honors.
Let 'ft be put, “Will you give the franchise
for the Legislative 'Council 'to all voters for
the Federal Parliament?” If the answer
is in the affirmative, it may cover a multi-
tude of Other shortcomings. But if it is
in the negative, no sellf-respecting man or
woman amongst the Outlanders, and no
lover 'of demoonaicy or fair play, whoever
he or she may be, will record a vote for
or do aught but work night and day to
secure the defeat of the man who, seek-
ing the suffrages of the people, thus shows
that his heart is far from them, and that
he solicits their franchise for personal ad-
vancement and not for the popular good.
“He that is not for us is against us.
There are many signs of the coming Fede-
ral elections. Prominence is sought by
various contending candidates in different
ways. A subscription here, or a para-
graph or a letter there, all are intended to
help, but of what worth are trifles of this
sort save to expose the low opinion in
which the people are held by candi-
dates who seek to influence them by these
devices. I write that considerations ot
this sort may be rejected, and that all po-
pular elections henceforth may turn on
the question of the freedom of the people.
Ireland has elevated the question of Home
Eule into a test question. Why not we
in South Australia the principle of popu-
lar government ? Let the Irish example be
to us—
A shining light
To cheer us on to victory
And teach us to unite.
The united votes and voices of 100,000
Federal voters can do much. Let those
votes be exercised and those voices speak
at the Federal and Assembly elections,
and though the votes be denied let these
voices be heard at the Legislative Council
elections soon to be with us. Our cause
is just, and must prevail. Its first instal-
ment —household suffrage —cannot be long
delayed. But no efforts must be spared.
I ask no expenditure of blood or treasure,
such as is necessitated by the fight tor
the freedom of the Transvaal Outlanders.
We have no savage Boers to conquer, but
only to constitutionally drive the Pones
out of the kopje of the Legislative Coun-
cil. Our popular House has twice demand-
ed the reform; 50,000 voters have directly
recorded their votes in its favor. I ask
that legislative effect may ha no longer
denied to the popular will, and calling the
public attention to the opportunities that
exist for enforcing the general democratic
desire X am sanguine that 1 shall not ask
in vain. ... „. -


Chapter II.—The Freedom of the Federal Voter
This is the question of the day. We
have more (than 150,000 Federal voters in
South Australia. Every man and woman
of them is constitutionally declared to
be fit to vote for the Federal Senate.
Every man and woman of. them is con-
stitutionally declared to be fit to vote for
the Federal House of Representatives.
Every man and woman of them is 'con-
stitutionally declared 'to Oe fit to vote for
the State House of Assembly. But two
out of every three of 'these 150,000 Federal
voters are constitutionally declared to be
unfit to vote for our comparatively petty
Legislative Council. Fancy the
IGNOMINY AND IDIOCY
of the thing. More than 100,000 South
Australian men and women who are duly
qualified Federal voters are stamped con-
stitutionally as unfitted to be free. For
what is freedom? I take it that true
freedom consists of equal rights of self-
government to all who are of full age and
competent understanding, and who are also
untainted by crime. These are the privi-
leges which as regards all males were pro-
posed by the Liberals for the foundation of
our constitution more than forty years ago.
Unhappily it became necessary to compro-
mise with the Tories to the extent of re-
stricting the franchise for the Legislative
Council. The compromise of 1855 is the
law of to-day except as regards female suf-
frage. But it has endured too long and
MUST BE ALTERED,
and that right soon. The Federal voter
requires freedom, and will insist on free-
dom. Why should those who are trusted,
and fitted to be trusted, with the fullest
and equal rights in the broad arena of
Federal and national life, be disfranchised
for our relatively insignificant provincial
sphere? If fitted to be trusted with the
greater powers they are surely worthy of
the less. The reverse, which at present
obtains, is irrational, illogical, and intoler-
able. Its continuance must not 'be sub-
mitted to. No self-respecting Federal voter
will permit it. It is worse than a slap in
the face to any honest man who reflects
on his disfranchisement. For
WHAT DOES IT MEAN
as regards himself? Why, either that he
is criminally or wickedly disposed, or that
he is a fool, so that if he had the fran-
chise he would make a bad or foolish use
of it, and—to use the words of his Tory
foes —would bring about “violence, outrage,
and robbery." Whac does trie reiusai ox
the franchise mean as regards our women
Federal voters? Not one-tenth of them
have votes for 'the Legislative Council.
Nine out of every ten women in the colony
are subjected to this degrading disqualifi-
cation and denied' their rights for reasons
similar to t'ho&e which it is wickedly sug-
gested justify the disfranchisement of men.
Let each woman reflect what this means.
It must rouse her just indignation. Let her
appeal to her husband, if he has a vote,
to right her in this matter. He cannot
deny her if he is really a man. Let
her aid him all -she can. If he also is
disfranchised, let their poor home be a cen-
tre of can s'taut effort by both for the
common freedom. if Single or a widow
let her still (spare no effort for the hatred
cause.
Every help, if rightly given,
i Makes the impulse stronger;
'Twill be strong enough some day,
i j.. f .Wait a little longer.
By (the right of humanity arid reason let
each disfranchised Federal voter
CLAIM PROVINCIAL FREEDOM,
and, animated (by the keenest resentment
of the wrong itself, intensified 'tenfold by
reflections on the reasons which are fruit-
lessly advanced to justify alt, organise and
work till the constitutional salvation Of all
is accomplished.
1 dealt with this Isubjedt before. I make
no apology for referring to it again. It is
the question of the hour. The victory is
nigh. It will be as great a victory as
when by an amendment of the Common-
wealth dill it was declared that the people
of Australia should have the
RIGHT BY THEIR DIRECT VOTES
to elect both Houses of the Federal Par-
liament. This was in 1897. Since then our
House of Assembly, by constitutional ma-
jorities, has twice passed household suf-
frage, and a 50 per cent, majority of the
Seopie has declared that they will have it.
lot only this, but the people’s mandate
is So unmistakable that no Government
can live which does not favor reform. This
was recognised by the misbegotten Solo-
mon Administration. Its leader had pre-
viously protested has unalterable fidelity to
the old constitution in its every provision.
But his brief term of office sufficed to ex-
hibit not orily the weakness of this at-
tachment, hut also his keen appreciation
■of the position that
TO LIVE HE MUST REFORM.
If a new Government took office to-mor-
row, with the biggest Tory at .its head,
I venture to predict that it would favor
refbrtn, and that not less than £l5. But
household suffrage must toe trie first
breathing-place on the way to the goal of
the
COMPLETE FREEDOM
of the Federal elector. I write to empha-
sise 'the necessity for the co-operation of
the Federal electors to this ena at the
coming Federal elections. Let each can-
didate for the suffrages of the Federal
elector be questioned as to whether he
favors the enfranchisement of all Federal
electors. No doubt there will be a world
of shuffling. But the true test of the right
to the conridence and trust of the people
in the candidate is the
CONFIDENCE AND TRUST IN THE
PEOPLE BY THE CANDIDATE.
No candidate trusts them who refuses
them votes and freedom. If he will
not trust them, let them not trust him.
In this respect Federal and local politics
cannot and should not be kept apart. No
provincial Conservative can be Federally a
Democrat, and so worthy of democratic
support, nor can the reverse obtain. It is
the same people who are interested in both
federal and local legislation.. Let the peo-
ple beware of the Conservative who
FAWNS ON THE DEMOCRACY
whilst soliciting Federal franchises. If he
pledges himself to favor the freedom of
the Federal voter by the extension to them
of the franchise for our local Upper House
in the same manner as they enjoy it for
the Federal Upper House, well and good.
He is entitled to be heard on other points.
But if he refuses or trims, any Democrat
or disfranchised Federal voter who
CASTS A VOTE
for him would be a recreant undeserving
of the magnificent opportunity of advancing


The cause of freedom of all Federal
voters which the constitution of the Com-
monwealth of Federated Australia will
shortly present. I am happy to think
from my knowledge of South Australians
that there are not likely to be many such
recreants at the coming Federal elections.
The fewer the better. Let us stand shoul-
der to shoulder for the
FULLEST MEASURE
■of popular self-government. An unbroken
■phalanx of Federal voters enrolled in the
cause will strike terror into Tory hearts.
Under the hail of their ballot-papers the
Tory ranks will melt and fly, and the bat-
tle of freedom shall be won.
Onward whilst a wrong remains
To be conquered by the right,
Whilst oppression lifts a finger
To affront us by its might.
Whilst an error clouds the reason
Of the universal heart.
Whilst a slave awaits his freedom
Action is the wise man’s part.
Chapter III.—The Need of Lesgislative Council
Reform.
This is most palpable. It may be dis-
cussed from various aspects. Firstly, as
to the effect of existing conditions on our
people personally. What does the dis-
franchisement of two-thirds of our adult
population mean? Disfranchisement is
surely a brand of inferiority. The elec-
toral principle of regeneration by house
rent and sanctification by soil is an arbi-
trary and senseless selection of over
100,000 men and women as unfitted for
■complete citizenship. The result must be
and is demoralising. No doubt there are
those who, notwithstanding disfranchise-
ment, will yet stand erect in self-respect,
but evil must result from affixing to the
vast bulk of our men and women the
STIGMA AND DISQUALIFICATIONS
OF ALIENS.
It must and does degrade. I hold that
•crime only should disqualify British sub-
jects from the enjoyment of equal rights
in British colonies, and that even then
•sentence served or pardon granted should
restore civil rights. But under the present
■system men and women of unblemished
reputation and undoubted intelligence are
•selected for the disqualification of felons
simply because their rented houses are
worth less than £25 annually, and they
have no £SO freeholds. The strength of
a State greatly depends on the number and
repute of its citizens. Can men and
women be counted citizens in the highest
sense of the word who have not the
FULL RIGHTS OF CITIZENSHIP?
If we honor not each other, who shall
honor us? Is good citizenship fostered by
rendering its rights difficult or impossible
■of attainment? Surely not. Yet under
the present constitution, after nearly half
a century’s experience, it is established
that two out of every three of our adult
population,
CITIZENS OF THE COMMONWEALTH
OF AUSTRALIA,
are doomed to provincial disfranchisement,
and to denial by South Australia as a pro-
vince of the full electoral rights which Aus-
tralia as a nation freely confers on them.
Australians will always rise to the respon-
sibilities of their position and powers. The
■surest way to induce popular elevation
■and advancement is by the fullest consti-
tutional gift of popular freedom. As in
countries where woman is forbidden her
proper sphere in life her degradation ex-
tends the sphere of its evil influences be-
yond her sex, so where any considerable
section of the community is denied its free-
dom the
EVIL EFFECTS OF THIS WRONG
are by no means confined to such section.
No individual, the victim of an unjust de-
nial of civil right, can reflect with indif-
ference on his position. There are some,
no doubt, whose ap'althy is such that the ef-
fect may chiefly be to dull alike hope and
patridtiam. They may Stolidly submit to
the brand of comparative inferiority. But
■with what affection is it possible that
they can regard the country which so de-
grades and insults them? I hope and be-
lieve that there are few who are apathetic,
and it will not be my fault if the apathy
of some of those who read these pages is
not permanently dispelled. But as regards
the more active-minded Of our 100,000 (Jut-
landers, with whalt bitterness will they
resent their eleetbral chains? With what
vehemence will they struggle for freedom?
With what feelings must they regard tho.se
who, deeming themselves securely en-
trenched behind the
RAMPANTS OP CRASS MONOPOLY,
scoff at their efforts for emancipation, and
insist that, in addition to the ordinary na-
tural advantages accruing, both publicly
and privately, from the possession of
wealth, there shall be superadded the
double vote, enalbling a wealthy minority
to dominate the rest iof the community, to
placidly and selfishly veto reform after re-
form, and time and again to subordinate
the public gotad to sectional interests? I
unhesitatingly assert that the existing
condition of things has no health in it
It cries aloud for redress. As to its ef-
fect on individuals, it degrades in some
cases and incenses in others. Its bur-
then and insult rest motSt 'hardly on our
•Women, who it chiefly disqualifies. As
to those whom it unduly favors, and Who
by reason of greater riches need it least
for sellriprPteotiion, it induces on inclina-
tion to distrust and disdain the disfran-
chised, Which is alike indefensible and de-
structive of the goodwill and peace of the
community.
The power to do ill deeds
Makes ill deeds done!
I 'shall hereafter quote many instances of
injustices arising from Legislative Council
disregard of po'pular interest. But it will
suffice just now to point to the general
result. Class hatred and jealousies reign
supreme. The struggle between the section
who dominate and the mass Who are domi-
nated ever rages in our mid-Jt. It divides
the community into hostile camps.
ONE ADULT ONE VOTE
for the House of Assembly is reduced to
a sham. It is nullified by the second vote
for the Legislative Council. The Legisla-
tive Council fails to effect its purpose as a
Chamber of second thought in the inte-
rests of all. It« very nature compels this


failure. Its limited franchise limits its
constitutents to a minority of the people,
and its care to the interests of this mino-
rity. Its members, elected by this mino-
rity, are too often recruited from derelict,
distrusted, and defeated Liberals con-
verted into Tory hulks whose presence,
as the Hon. Gregor McGregor aptly
puts it, referring to the Hon. Ebenezer
Ward, “constitutes a perpetual menace
to the navigation of the seas of progress.”
The present limited franchise for the
Legislative Council mars our constitution.
It sets the
HANDS OE A CLASS ON THE THROAT
OF THE COMMUNITY,
and stifles the breath of popular aspira-
tions for reform. It permits a Tory majo-
rity in the Council, the representatives of,
say, 25,000 Council voters, to defeat the
wishes of, it may be, 125,000 of Assembly
electors, however clearly and repeatedly
expressed. I feel warmly. I hope that
I write forcibly. Certainly I spare no ef-
fort in that behalf. Liberals have too
often been accused of stirring up strife.
Under some circumstances this may not
only be proper, but necessary. The Lord
of loving kindness Himself came not to
bring peace, but a sword. I quote in all
devoutness. I urge the people to fight for
a reform which will remove a constant
source of strife and friction. Let the
Council be made more representative of
all. Let the sectional character of its
franchise be abolished. Let this be done,
not by taking away from any voter any
vote to which he is at present entitled,
but by the immediate extension to those
who are the
MAINSTAY OF THE PROVINCE
-—our householders and their wives—of the
blessings of equal freedom so properly
recognised by the latest effort of Aus-
tralian statesmanship—the Commonwealth
Bm.
The most casual study of the Common-
wealth Bill must convince provincial
statesmen of the need for reform in the
direction of bringing local Upper Houses
into touch with the people. Australian
experience of Parliamentary friction and
deadlocks has not been without its salu-
tary lessons. If the people of any Austra-
lian colony were now to be given the full-
est freedom to frame a State constitution,
either they would make no provision for
any Upper House or, if one were provided
for, it would undoubtedly be established
on the same franchise as the popular As-
sembly, and popular control would be
otherwise amply provided for. This was
proved by the proceedings of the recent
Federal Convention. Federation was con-
sidered to necessitate two Houses, but the
same extended franchise was provided for
both. To further secure the
SUPREMACY OF THE PEOPLE
express provision was m'ade for the joint
sittings of both Houses, which would
swamp an obstructive Senate, and for a
reference of constitutional amendments
by the popular Chamber to the people di-
rect over the heads of a refractory Senate.
These provisions have been deliberately
introduced into the constitution of Aus-
tralia as essentials for the harmonious and
effective working of the Legislative ma-
chine. They have been accepted by the
Parliaments and peoples of the federating
colonies. This, too, although the electors
for both Houses being the same entire
people, the probabilities of disagreement
between the Chambers or the Senate and
the people are thereby minimised. Our
local constitution contains no provision
for a joint sitting to settle a deadlock,
more’s the pity. Further, no alteration in
our constitution can become law without
the assent of both Houses. How much
more, therefore, is it necessary in the in-
terest of good government and progress
that all our people should for each House
be conceded the franchise as they have
it for both Federal Houses. The study of
the constitution of Australia thus empha-
sises the need of reform. Innumerable in-
stances might be cited of the evils result-
ing in other colonies from the
ABSENCE OF POPULAR CONTROL
of Upper Houses. In Westralia the Legis-
lative Council has contemptuously rejected
all proposals to allow the people to decide,
as in other colonies, for or against Federa-
tion under the Commonwealth Bill. They
have further stereotyped the existing con-
ditions of undue representation of Perth
and the West at the expense of the East-
ern goldfields. As a result the East clam-
ors for separation, and Westralia is likely
to be rent in twain. In Victoria the
arrogance of the Council in days gone by
produced a “black Wednesday” and talk
of “broken heads and flaming houses.”
To-day, though the agitation may just now
be less acute, provocation of the grossest
kind is not wanting on the part of the
Legislative Council. The Bill for female
suffrage, twice passed’ by the Assembly
with an intervening dissolution, has been
twice rejected by the Council, and with
highly discreditable insults to its lady
advocates. To cap all, if the Right
Hon. George Reid had not had and
exercised the power of dominating his
Council by the addition of new members,
Australian Federal union must have been
defeated or postponed for years. His
Council were opposed to it. They re-
fused to let
THE BILL GO TO THE PEOPLE.
They hardened their hearts, and were
deaf to persuasion. The existence of
the power had not the slightest moral
effect. It was necessary to exercise it.
Without its exercise New South Wales
could not have federated. Without
New South Wales, what would Australian
Federation have been worth? We have
no power in our provincial constitution
similar to that by which Mr. Reid rescued
Australian union from Legislative Coun-
cil destruction. What risks, therefore, do
we not run from the absence of such a se-
curity for the public welfare and regard
to the popular wish? Neither have we, as
already pointed out, tihe other safeguards
provided by the Commonwealth Bill for
the salvation of popular interests from
sacrifice on the altar of sectional re-
presentation and class interests. The
most recent history of other colonies thus
warns us of our danger, and speaks elo-
quently of the need for reform. No true
Australian will turn a deaf ear to these-
warnings. Let us
Be warned in time!
”Tis madness to delay.


Chapter IV.—Further Illustrations of the need
of Reform.
These might be multiplied innumerably.
I shall cite a few 'only of the more recent.
But first I assert that the Legislative Coun-
cil as at present constituted has egregi-
ously failed in its constitutional purpose of
preventing unnecessary expenditure. As
a property House it has exhibited the most
shocking selfishness. It readily ac-
cepted most proposals lor public expendi-
ture increasing the value of property.
There is no public work on which money
has been wasted to which it has not as-
sented. Yet it has steadily resisted nearly
all proposals for the
TAXATION OF PROPERTY,
even to pay the necessary interest. This
is a serious charge, hut it is established by
the clearest testimony. The late Hon.
Boyle Travers Finniss, our first Chief Sec-
retary under responsible government, writ-
ing in 1886, thus expresses himself: —“The
Upper House never opposed themselves to
any expenditure that tended to enhance
the value of property. . . . But they were
careful to protect property whenever any
taxation Bill was proposed, and whilst
profiting largely by the value of the un-
earned increment they held their citadel
to the last extremity against taxation of
property.” I would be prompt to resent
any undue taxation, but I condemn as ut-
terly dishonest the conduct of men who
sanction
EXPENDITURE BENEFITING THEM-
SELVES,
and yet refuse to contribute fairly to the
revenue required to recoup the outlay. Yet
such, as pointed out by Mr. Finniss, haa
been the action of the Council. Its persis-
tent rejection of the Boucaut stamp du-
ties proposals cannot readily be forgotten.
Here I desire to expose the falsity of the
charge that since payment of members and
the election of Labor members to the
Council the public debt and loan expendi-
ture on public works have largely in-
creased. The reverse is the case, as ap-
pears from the following:—Labor mem-
bers were first elected to the Council in
May, 1891. Our public debt then amount-
ed to £21,657,300. For the 15 years pre-
viously its annual increase had averaged
£1,224,793. For the eight years since the
return of Labor members the average an-
nual increase of the public debt has been
only £407,376, or less than
ONE-THIRD OF THE PREVIOUS
RATE.
What, then, becomes or the charge of
waste against Labor members? We have
thus nailed another Conservative false-
hood to the counter of public contempt.
It is with difficulty that I refrain from
dilating on the iniquity of a system which
promotes public expenditure for the bene-
fit of a class, and unjustly relieves that
class from its fair proportion of taxation
in return. The evil is, however, suffi-
ciently patent. Nothing could be better de-
vised to set class against mass and to pro-
mote the exploitation of the people for the
benefit of a bastard plutocracy. Nothing
is more likely to be productive of the
direst social and financial results. Sec-
tional hatreds and revenue difficulties are
inseparable from such a system. But 1
muSt pass on. I can only glance at the
fact that in 1890 the Legislative Council,
in regard to Federation, exhibited a most
inexcusable greed for further power. The
Federal Council was then the only existing
Federal body. Incomplete as it was, it
was considered desirable that South Aus-
tralia should be represented in it by two
members. But the Council, not content
with sharing this appointment with the
Assembly in a joint sitting of both
Houses, set up a claim that they should
have the exclusive right to one of these
appointments. Sooner than abandon this
preposterous position they
DELIBERATELY SACRIFICED ’
the Bill, and the only form of Federation
then practicable.
I wish, however, to deal with more
modern Must rations of the evil of exist-
ing conditions. Recent instances appeal to
a larger audience and more forcibly. Un-
happily the pages of our latest history are
blotted everywhere with examples. The
fact is that the passing of female fran-
chise has undoubtedly afforded opportuni-
ties for Tory additions to Council voters,
which have been greedily availed of. No*
doubt in many cases the means adopted,
have been Sufficiently honest. Women of
property have registered, ais they were en-
titled to in virtue of property possessed
before or legitimately acquired after the
passing of the Act. But in Other instances
this has not been so.
FAGGOT VOTES HAVE BEEN
CREATED.
There have been various hokus-poku-s ar-
rangements by which husband and wife
are both legally registered in respect of
tobe siame bonne. It ibais ateo frequently
happened since the Adult Suffrage Act
came into operation that Tory property-
holders, professing to be consumed by un-
controllable natural love and affection
have transferred freeholds to female rela-
tives, who forthwith register as Council
voters. Members of the Tory party in the
Council itself have been actually person-
ally concerned in these transfers. How-
ever it may be, the result of female fran-
chise on the Council rolls is that only
8,000 women are registered as voters. There
are 80,000 adult women in the colony. Out
of every ten women only one has a vote-
and she is too often a Tory, and some-
tiimes a faggot voter, the creation of some
colorable
TRANSFER FOR ELECTORAL PUR-
, POSES.
Consequently, the Liberals have been
weakened, and the defeat of progressive
candidates has been secured. The proba-
bility ot this result was foreseen in Parlia-
ment when adult suffrage was proposed. It
was sought tb be provided against by some
Labor members, who contended for an ex-
tension of the Council franchise in the
ease of women. This was, however, suc-
cessfully resisted by Tome's who had pre-
viously advocated female suffrage for the
Assembly as regards, those women only
who possessed Council franchise qUaliffca-
tion. May no time be lost in rectifying
the error by which
NINE OUT OF EVERY TEN OF OUR
WOMEN ARE DISFRANCHISED,
and the vote for the Council is conceded
only to a very limited and highly illiberal
minority. _ Small as this minority un-
doubtedly is, it has been sufficient to turn
the scale against liberalism at more than
one election. The time was when it was
boasted that in the Legislative Council
there was a Liberal majority. It was for a
little while only, and that good time has
passed. May it be our proud privilege to
aid in securing its early return.


Chapter V.—Further Illustrations.
Now as to the most recent illustrations
of the need for Council reform. I hold
that it is the fundamental principle of true
democracy that the will of the people must
prevail. No Upper Chamber has a right
to resist the permanently and clearly ex-
pressed demands of the people through
their representatives in the popular Cham-
ber. Reforms so demanded should and
must be conceded to avert the gravest mis-
chiefs. This is the simplest and most ele-
mentary constitutional law. I might cite
authority after authority to this effect.
One will suffice. I quote from Sir Richard
Hanson, our late Chief Justice and the Ad-
vocate-General at the time of the passing
of the Constitution Act. He compares the
Imperial and Local Parliaments, and re-
fers to our Council like the House of Lords
“as representing the Conservative interests
of the community as
OPPOSED TO THE POPULAR
representing the progressive spirit of the
time and the feelings and sympathies of
the nation at large.” Further he says—
“lf a difference takes place in which
neither Chamber is disposed to yield,
we have no other remedy than' an
appeal to the people as the source
and origin of all our powers.” He is
further responsible, in the famous privilege
debate, for the weighty statement—“lt is
not to be expected that the House of As-
sembly can give -way to the Legislative
Council.” The supremacy of the people is
here recognised; in the clearest and most
unmistakable terms. The right of an Up-
per Chamber is to a suspensory veto only.
The House of Lords has never claimed the
right to permanently refuse effect to the
well ascertained public wish. It may re-
ject a measure if it is doubtful whether
it is sustained by public sentiment. It has
been well said that the House of Lords is
entitled to one dissolution of the Commons
to enable the popular decision to be given
on any difference between the Houses.
Once that decision has been, unmistakably
pronounced
ALL MUST BOW TO IT.
Our local House of Lords, however, recog-
nises no such law. It is a law unto it-
self. It delights to scoff at and reject the
popular wish and mandate. Unwittingly
it never neglects an opportunity to further
the case for its abolition or reform. Time
and again have measures passed the As-
sembly, after endorsement at general elec-
tions, only to be contemptuously rejected
or mercilessly mutilated in the Council.
I print below the leading lines of the
Liberal measures it has rejected m the last
session only:—
HOUSEHOLD SUFFRAGE.
CLOSER SETTLEMENT BY COMPULSORY PUR-
CHASE OF LARGE ESTATES AT FAIR
VALUES.
PART XIX, F
EARLY CLOSING.
WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION.
What a massacre of the innocents! How
terrible a holocaust of popular hopes. By
the light of the above particulars you will
be assisted to appreciate the justification
which exists for strong
CONDEMNATION OF THE COUNCIL.
Nearly every one of those measures has
been twice or more frequently passed by
the Assembly, and has received the popular
endorsement at general elections. The
work of the last session, so far as the As-
sembly was concerned, was the work of
men fresh from the people. It was marred
in the Council. How long are the people
to be dominated and tyrannised over by a
section of the community! This state of
things would be intolerable in England. Is
it to be endured here? Let us recollect the
words of Sir Richard Hanson, “It is not
to be expected that the House of Assembly
can give way to the Legislative Council.”
Were the men of Sir Richard’s day made
of sterner stuff than we? Have we less
regard and love for constitutional right
and freedom? Surely not. It is the same
Council which
TO-DAY DEFIES US
that includes in the sum of its iniquities
the heartrending delay of Bundaleer, the
rejection of necessary seamen’s legislation,
the refusal to abolish objectionable forms
of local plural voting, the denial
of law reform, and the threa-
tened starvation of Civil servants
to prevent the Assembly from con-
sulting its constituents by a referendum?
Further, the mischief consequent on the
distaste of the Council for popular mea-
sures is not limited by the number of re-
forms it has actually rejected. Govern-
ments delight to pass their proposals as
best they can, consequently very undesir-
able Council amendments are sometimes
submitted to in order to avoid the loss of
a Bill. Further, the
INTRODUCTION OF OTHER REFORMS
is not proceeded with in view of certain
Council rejection. Thus the defeat, muti-
lation, and delay of popular measures all
call for reform, and establish the necessity
of bringing the Upper Chamber into touch
with the popular House —from which _ it
has so fatally separated Itself —and which
has been so well described by Sir Richard
Hanson as “representing tne progressive
spirit of the time and the feelings and sym-
pathies of the people at large.” “The
people”—to further employ Sir Richard’s
chaste and forcible language—“the source
and origin of all our powers,” have de-
clared for reform. Who, then, shall be
heard to say them nay?
Chapter VI.—Reforms rejected by the Council
in the Session of 1899.
Umfy M print again
leading of «. terrible IM.
I want the public to think well
over this. It is the list of liberal
measures rejected in the Council


Let one and all study them. Here they are
again:—
HOUSEHOLD SUFFRAGE,
CLOSER SETTLEMENT BY COMPULSORY PUR-
CHASE OF LARGE ESTATES AT FAIR
VALUES,
PART XIX.,
EARLY CLOSING,
WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION.
Let us deal with these separately. Let
us first take household suffrage. I give it
the greater prominence because it is the
key to all the rest. I do mot regard it as
the final goal of popular reform. That is
ADULT SUFFRAGE FOR BOTH
HOUSES
on the basis of one adult one vote. This
is what is provided for as regards both
Houses of the Federal Parliament in the
Commonwealth Bill. The Commonwealth
of Assembly will be entitled to vote for
papular House in each State shall be the
franchise for both Houses of the Federal
Parliament, and that no elector shall have
more than one vote. So in South Australia
every adult entitled to vote for our House
of Assembly will be entitled to vote for
both Houses of the Federal Parliament. In
other words, every adult in South Aus-
tralia will by six months' registration as
a voter for our House of Assembly acquire
the right to vote not only for the Federal
House of Representatives, but for the
Federal Senate also. What nonsense then
to 'suggest that voters who can be trusted
to return members for both Houses of the
Federal Parliament should not be fitted
to vote for members of both Houses of our
State Parliament. Let us put it in an-
other way. There is an analogy in some
respects, 'though not in all, between the
Federal Senate and the States' Legislative
Councils. The Federal Senate will un-
doubtedly be of infinitely greater dignity
and importance. It may be termed the
National Upper House. Legislative Coun-
cils may be considered Provincial Upper
Houses. What idiocy therefore to
BRAND THE MEN AND WOMEN
who are fitted to vote for the Federal
Upper House with unfitness to vote for
the comparatively petty State Upper
House. Yet this is the present position.
There is no getting away from it. It is
hideously absurd and absolutely indefen-
sible. If a new constitution were being
framed to-day for any State, and more than
one House were provided for, no publicist
of any repute would dare to propose for
either House a franchise such as tnat wtucn
disgraces our constitution in relation to
our Legislative Council. The right of
Australians to be trusted in the fullest de-
gree by the grant of the fullest measure of
popular self-government has been amply
considered in Australia during the last de-
cade. It was forced on the attention of
all in connection with the Federal move-
ment. In 1891 an Australian Convention
sat in 'Sydney and framed the original
Commonwealth Bill. This provided for
two Federal Houses of Parliament. There
was
NO PROPERTY FRANCHISE FOR
EITHER.
But the Bill did not go far enough in
the direction of cons'titutiionial freedom, for
it was declared that the Senate should be
elected in each State by the loteail' Legis-
latures. Not only did 'these Legislature®
in s'ome cases include nominee Upper
Houses, but no provision wlais made as in
America, enabling popular Houses by'
means of joint sittings to dominate obstruc- -
tiive Upper Houses, and solve deadlocks on
the question of appointment of Senators.
These provisions and omissions constituted-
grave defects in the old Bill, against which
a few Radicals protested in vain. Their
protests could hardly have been expected
to be successful. The fact was that the Con-
vention to which they were addressed was
strongly Conservative. It was elected by
thte local Legislatures, 'and it Was faith-
ful (to thte cry by which it was sought
to justify the creation of one Senate by the
local Legislatures and to deny to the people
the
RIGHT OF ELECTING SENATORS
by their direct voltes. That cry was for
the elect of the elected, or, in other words,
choice by the people's representatives and
not by the people themselves; but though
that cry (triumphed at the time it assisted
to wreck the Bill. Ttoe Bill lacked true
democratic Inspiration. It was received
with no enthusiasm. The people had not
been consulted as to its terms or the ap-
pointment of those by whom aft was
framed. It made little or no provision
for the increase of democratic power. As
a result, where active hostility was not ex-
hibited, indifference generally prevailed.
It was seen to be hopeless to look for its
popular acceptance. So when in 1895, at
the instance of the Premier of New South
Wales, a Premiers' Conference was held in
Hobart to further the question of Federa-
tion, the Federal Enabling Bill, then pre-
pared by Sir George Turner and myself
and adopted by the Conference, provided
for the avoidance of the errors of the past.
Ten representatives of each State,
DIRECTLY CHOSEN BY THE PEOPLE,
were to be entrusted with the framing of
the Bill, and not one line or letter of the
Bill so framed was to become law without
the direct approval of the people. The re-
sult was what might have been expected,
viz., a very different and much more accep-
table Bill from the popular standpoint. It
might possibly have been more so had the
electors fully roused themselves to an ap-
preciation of the opportunities offered
them for controlling the matter from the
democratic standpoint. But they were not
wholly neglectful of these. The candidates
who solicited their suffrages recognised
the necessity of promising some regard to
the popular wish for the purpose of secur-
ing their return. The members also who
were returned, faced with the folly of
drafting on Conservative lines a measure
intended for
DEMOCRATIC ACCEPTANCE,
exhibited a degree of liberality in the Con-
vention which could not have been secur-
ed under other circumstances. The result
of their labors, in the shape of the revised
Commonwealth Bill, I described as Presi-
dent of the Convention, speaking from my
presidential chair, “as the most magnifi-
cent constitution into which the chosen
representatives of a free and enlightened
people have ever breathed the life of na-
tional sentiment and of popular hope.” It
has since been accepted by the Parliament
of every State to which it has been re-
ferred, excepting only Western Australia,
where all Federal proposals have been
wrecked in a Legislative Council consti-
tuted on lines somewhat similar to our
own, and like our own entirely unrepresen-
tative of the great body of the people, and
out of touch with their desires.


Chapter VII.—The Council’s treatment of
Constitutional Reform.
Not only has the Amended Common-
wealth Bill received Legislative approval in
all the States except Western Australia,
but lit has also been accepted by the direct
voltes of the people of Ausaralia, to whom
it has been referred, by a majority of
377,301 to 131,352, or almost three to one,
and by peoples of each of the different
States by the following majorities:—New
South Wales, 107,420 to 82,741; Victoria,
152,653 to 9,805; Queensland, 38,488 to
20,996; South Australia, 65,990 to 17,053;
Tasmania, 12,750 to 767. So we ‘have the
GdmmOnwealth Bill, the great charter of
Australian 'liberties, framed by 50 men of
Australia, picked by (the people of Austra-
lia, accepted agaiitn by the Parliaments of
Australia, and confirmed by the
DIRECT VOTES OF THE. PEOPLE
themselves. Surely in a measure of this
sort, where every precaution has been
taken to secure its fullesit consideration at
every stage, nothing is likely to be found
from which Australian interests are likely
to suffer, or which Australia need hesitate
to accept? Who shall be heard to dare
to say that the Convention, Parliaments,
and peoples who have combined bo devise
and ‘ accept this supreme instrument of
national government were traitors to their
trust? Yet what does this, the greatest
and most recent charter of Australian
liberty tell us? It speaks all powerfully,
and in trumpet tones declares that the
people of Australia are fated and fitted to
be free, and that property franchises for
either House of an Australian Legislature
are indefensible and muislt never more pre-
vail; that sedtional domination and class
tyrannies, with their resulting hatreds and
jealousies, shall henceforth be abolished;
that
THE PEOPLE SHALL AND MUST BE
FREE
in thalt sense of freedom which gives to
each human being amongst us, untainted
by crime and owning allegiance to the
same throne, constitutional equality, so
that there shall not be added to the sum
of ordinary woridly-disltressing differences
in sort or condition the insupportable in-
justice of deprivation of electoral rights as
an aggravation of what may be unavoid-
able poverty and misfortune. I claim that
the Commonwealth Bill is good, not only
in itself, but as a model by which pro-
vincial constitutions mulSt be fashioned and
reformed. I note with pleasure that Mr.
V. L. Solomon, the present leader of the
Opposition, honours with me in referring
to it as a model. It is, in addition, a
pleasure to observes that he spealrs ol cue
people of South Australia, by force of their
magnificent
SYSTEM OF PUBLIC EDUCATION
as being fitted for the freest government
the world has ever seen. I emphasise
this, and challenge comparison even with
sister States. But with the Common-
wealth Bill as a model for adult suffrage
for both Houses of our Federal Parliament,
and with the admission of the leaders of
the Tory Party that the education of our
people
SPECIALLY FITS THEM FOR THE
FULLEST MEASURE OF SELF-GO-
VERNMENT,
with what measure of righteous indigua-
tion must all be con burned when we find
the lesser reform of Household Suffrage
persistently and ruthlessly slaughtered bj
the Legislative Council, and appearing an-
nually in its (butcher’s bill of popular re-
forms. . ,
Yet such is the fact. It is accompanied
by many circumstances of aggravation.
Not only is there the national precedent
for the grant of the freedom sought, but
the people of South Australia admittedly
entitled to the greatest possible measure
of self-government, have time and again
demanded reform only to be refused. In
1894 the Legislative Council wrecked a
Bill for the extension of its franchise.
They repeated the offence in 1895 and 1896.
This was the proposal for the reduction to
£l5. Their first opportunity for
WRECKING HOUSEHOLD SUFFRAGE
came in 1898, when the Bill was carried
through its final stage in the Assembly by
a majority of 34 to 17, representing as
regards voters returning the members
voting on each side 66,895 against 22,838.
Moreover, the Bill provided that it was
not to become law until after it had beer
adopted by a popular referendum at the
general elections. This provision had been
inserted by the Kingston Government to
meet the idle cry that the people did not
wish the reform. But what they wanted,
or did not want, was a matter of sublime
indifference to Messrs. Stirling, Ward,
Warren, Tomkinson, and 'Co. The Tory-
knife was speedily applied to the throat
of the reform lamb, and the Government
were thus refused the Council consent to
ascertaining the
VIEWS OF THE PEOPLE
by their direct votes. You well know
what followed. The Government de-
cided to refer the matter to the people
without the consent of the .Legislative
Council. These worthies promptly went
on strike, and by the adjournment of the
Appropriatiou Bill and of their Chamber,
threatened to stop supplies, and thereoy
wreck the Civil Service, and starve the
Government into submission. 'The As-
sembly backed up the Government, fnd
the Council were compelled to climb
down after recording some harmless and
ridiculous resolutions. The referendum
was taken at the general elections, yea or
nay, on the simple question of the Bill. It
resulted in a
MAGNIFICENT TRIUMPH FOR THE
BILL
and the Government. There were 49,208
affirmatives and 33,928 negatives. The ma-
jority which ■ finally carried the Amen-
ded Commonwealth Bill in New South
Wales was less in proportion. Yet this
was properly regarded as all sufficient and
convincing. The popular support of the
Bill was further evidenced by the fact that
the affirmative votes cast in its favor con-
siderably exceeded the affirmatives record-
ed on the first South Australian referen-
dum on the Commonwealth Bill. This,
too, though a special holiday was pro-
claimed for the taking of the vote, and
the agitation and organisation in favor of
Federation left nothing (to be desired. To
cap all, twenty out of twenty-seven dis-
tricts for the House of Assembly by their
direct votes


ACCEPTED HOUSEHOLD SUFFRAGE
by an aggregate majority of 17,508. But
the Tory party in the Legislative Council
cared for none of these things, and again
prepared the shambles for the lamb of re-
form. One thing, however, despite their
protestations to uie contrary, terrified
them. This was the knowledge that an-
other rejection of the lull whilst the King-
ston Government was in power would have
resulted in the dissolution of Doth Houses.
This was the only constitutional way of
solving the deadlock. I had practically
pledged myself to exercise it. It would
have resulted in the extermination of the
Tories in the Assembly and their more
than decimation in the Council.
THEY DREADED THE PEOPLE.
They had good cause to. They had seldom
overlooked an opportunity to flout and in-
sult them. So whilst they falsely bragged
of their carelessness of results they were
very careful not to give the Kingston Go-
vernment an opportunity for dissolving
both Houses, and they dared not throw out
the Bill until caballing and the fear of a
dissolution secured them a majority of one
-and the fall of the Kingston Government.
Then, and not till then, when Mr. Solomon
was in power, did the Tory courage suffi-
ciently revive to reject the Bill, not having
the fear of a dissolution and of the people
before their timorous souls. It was by a
majority of one only that the Bill was lost,
eleven to ten, but it was the same No. 1
Room and Thirteen Club which were at
the bottom of it, two of the members of
the room and club being absent. Mr.
Solomon’s Government came and went,
the creatures of a week. Their brief life
only served to prove the folly of their
previous protestations that no constitu-
tional reform was wanted. They them-
selves
PROPOSED REFORM
and gave up the whole of their previous
contention for the maintenance of the old
constitution. What they proposed was
insufficient, and they left. With Mr.
Holder’s Government it became possible
to put to the proof the sincerity of the
oft-repeated Council cry that if properly
approached they would do anything in
reason. So a proposal for the £l5 reduc-
tion qualifying both man and wife was
submitted in his most seductive and con-
ciliatory style by the Hon. J. H. Gordon,
and the Hon. E. Ward submitted an
amendment, the proposals of the Solomon
Government. Both were promptly re-
jected. So no reform lamb of any descrip-
tion can, under existing circumstances,
hope to safely depasture on the Council le-
gislative paddock. The only occasion when
the presence of the pretty innocent was
suffered for a little while was when it en-
tered protected by the Kingston Govern-
ment by threatened resumption of the lease
of the paddock in case it was interfered
with. So soon as this threat was with-
drawn the lamb of 1899 went the way of all
its predecessors, selfishly slaughtered by
sectional representatives and selfishly sacri-
ficed on the altar of
HATRED AND CONTEMPT OF POPU-
LAR WISH.
How magnificent and typical! a leading line
in our Legislative Council’s butcher’s bill
of popular reform. WhlaJt case-hardened
contempt for a measure founded on the
model of the latest and greatest chatter of
the liberties of Australia —'the constitution
of our Commonwealth! How sublime an
indifference and disregard for the wishes of
the people manifested time and again, not
only indirectly through their representa-
tives and by a general election, but also
directly by their votes on a ref erendum and
in every possible why in which the will of
the people can be legitimately expressed.
So much for the present on the first item
of the butcher’s bill —Household Suffrage.
Chapter VIII.—The Council’s treatment of
Closer Settlement.
_ The next victim to the Legislative Coun-
cil’s dislike of popular reforms is
CLOSER SETTLEMENT BY COMPUL-
SORY PURCHASE OF LARGE ES-
TATES AT PAIR VALUES.
It dis only second in importance to the
question of constitutional reform. It may
be that we Shall never get it until the
Legis'Kative Council is reformed. Its neces-
sity makes the dem'anld for Council re-
form all the more urgent. The prosperity
of our country depends On the develop-
ment Of our resources, 'amid, above all, on
the cultivation of the soil. It is of the
utmost importance it halt the land should be
unlocked. The quantity of good land in
Australia is hot unlimited. Its fullest uti-
lisation is imperative. I have the greatest
sympathy with everything that tends in
that direction. The agricultural, pastoral,
and mineoM interests Should be fostered in
every reasonably conceivable way. lam
proud to reflect on the fact that the King-
ston Government has done much towards
this. Their agricultural, pastoral, and min-
ing legislation readied a degree of liberality
never before attained. 'Their provision,
through the State Bank, for cheap money
has facilitated the profitable occupation
and utilisation of land when otherwise it
would have been impossible. To some ex-
tent Shyiock’s occupation is gone. The
State Bank 'has supplied money to bor-
rowers on terms on which they could not
previously obtain it. By its competition
and example it has also induced a lowering
of rates even when recourse has not been
had to its direct aid. Cheap money is an
undoubted boon to the producer. So also
it is an advantage to producers that they
should be able to procure land from the
State at reasonable rents. The State can
profitably borrow money for the purchase
of land, and let the land to producers on
terms far more liberal than are or could be
extended to them by private individuals
whose credit is less, and whose interest is
to exact the highest possible rental. It
is to the public interest that large estates
which are not fully utilised should be ac-
quired by the State on fair terms, and let
out in smaller holdings to induce closer
settlement and greater production. The
test of the right and duty of the State to
interfere is simply whether or not the in-
terference is for the public advantage. At
the same time there should be no mterfer
enee without full compensation for any
interference with existing rights. It is al


ready recognised that subject to this duty
to compensate, the fcvtate may for various
public works, in the public interest, such
as railways, tramways, roads, docks, and
many others, either compulsorily acquire
private land or properly endow local autho-
rities, companies, or even private indivi-
duals, with powers of compulsory purdhas*
to this end. Now what has been the prac-
tice in this respect for years past in this
and other colonies ana countries is pro-
posed to be extended to the unlocking of
the land by the purchase and subdivision
of large estates for closer settlement. No
greater scheme was ever more properly
commended for Liberal support. At the
present there are many estates which are
lar from being fully utilised, which produce
only a small portion of >the produce which
might be fairly gathered from them. They
are held by monopolists, with the idea of
some day reapinp- a rich reward in the
shape of unearned increment. They afford
scanty employment to very few. _ They
are almost a curse to the district in
which they are situated. They are a
blight on adjoining townships. They are
capable not only of yielding greater pro-
duce, but of supporting scores of families,
and being made a blessing and a profit
to the community and locally. Yet,
while they are so held comparatively
idle, farmers and farmers sons are
seeking in vain for means of employ-
ing their industry and agricultural
knowledge, and thousands and thousands
of acres of good agricultural land are
left untilled, whilst they who would
most willingly till it on fair terms are re-
fused the opportunity of tilling it on con-
ditions on which they could live, and are
compelled to leave our colony. This
exodus of industry is much to be deplored.
It is everywhere recognised that large
estates which are not fully utilised are a
calamity. Our tax on unimproved land
values, adopted in 1884, was designed to
some extent to impress upon landowners
the duty of utilisation. This duty was em-
phasised in 1894 by a doubling of the fax,
so far as regards estates of more than
£5,000 of unimproved value. The evil still
continued, and in 1898 our Closer Settle-
ment Act, permitting the Government to
purchase land for closer settlement, was
passed. Large estates still remain unuti-
lised, and not infrequently they pay less
land tax than they ought to on account of
low assessment. The agriculturists cannot
secure any portion of these estates at fair
values, and when the Government ap-
proaches the large landowners for the pur-
pose of purchasing these estates in the
public interest, at fair values, their object
is defeated by the demand of huge sums
far beyond reasonable values, exhibiting a
striking disproportion as compared with
the assessments on which the owners pay
tax. This is an undoubted evil, and one
which would have been dealt with by the
Kingston Government Bill in a mode high-
ly beneficial to the community, and alto-
gether just to the individual. But the Bill
was slaughtered by the Council. I think
the Bill itself was plain and simple. It is
to some extent based on New Zealand
legislation, which has been found to work
most admirably. Under such legislation
the Cheviot and other estates have been
acquired by the Government, and a thriv-
ing population settled in districts which
had been previously most sparsely popu-
lated, and on land which, having the capa-
city of a garden, was little more than a
wilderness. The South Australian Bill is
iramed with the utmost clearness. In al-
most its initial clause its objects are de-
clared. These are defined as “the encou-
ragement of closer settlement in the public-
interest by facilitating the acquisition of
large estates at fair values for subdivision*
and for letting for agricultural purposes at.
reasonable rents. What more noble object
could possibly occupy Parliamentary at-
tention or command public support?
Closer settlement in the public interest I
Purchase of large estates at fair values!
Letting for agricultural purposes at reason-
able rents! Let us scrutinise these pro-
posals more closely. We have heard a deal
about the policy of taking away the whole*
of a man’s estate, or depriving him of
■his dwelling - house. The whole of
a man’s estate or his dwelling-
house might at present he compulsorily
taken for the purpose of a railway or
many other public works in this and many
other civilised communities. If the public-
interest requires it and full compensation,
is made what abjection is there to such
taking? The interest of the individiial is
subordinate to the good of the community.
It is not Sacrificed because he is paid its-
full value to the uttermost farthing. But
whilst matters of this sort are raisedi by
Tory critics for the purposes of prejudice,
they have no relation whatever to the Bill
in question. It is declared by section 6 ;
that no dwelling - house occupied l by am
owner shall he touched. Further, the Bill
only applies to “large estates,” and large l
estates are so defined that not one penny-
worth of land can be taken from an owner
unless there is left to him land of full
£IO,OOO worth of unimproved value. Sure-
ly that should suffice him when others have-
none. Is it to he tolerated that the bone-
and sinew of our country are to he forced
to leave our Chores and settle in Queens-
land or New Zealand because monopolists-
here are not content with estates compris-
ing £IO,OOO of improved value, and will
neither themselves put the excess to its-
best advantage or allow others to have it
at fair prices so that they may use it? Is
a dog in the manger policy of this descrip-
tion to be silently encouraged, and our
reformers who seek to alter conditions of
this description to he in the-
monstrous terms which are sometimes ap-
plied by Tories to the supporters of
this measure? How many farmers who-
are legitimately using their land have more
than £IO,OOO unimproved value in land,
or would oe interfered with in the slight-
est degree by the proposed Bill? But not
onlly has £IO,OOO of unimproved value to-
be left to the owner, hut, he is further
protected hyjhe declaration that before his
estate can he acquired both Houses of Par-
liament must he supplied with the certifi-
cate of the 'Surveyor-General that 'the I'ands-
proposed to he taken are 'suitable and re-
quired to be taken, for closer settlement.
This will amount to a declaration that
they are not being put to the 'best use, and
that they are not carrying the population'
they ought to carry, and that the puhlic-
inlterest requires subdivision and more ac-
tive utilisation. Further, the Surveyor-
Generars certificate must be accompanied
by the certificate of the Commissioner of
Crown Lands that the Crown has attempt-
ed to purchase and has made a written offer
to the owner, and that a purchase at a
fair value has been found to he impossible
of arrangement. By these conditions the
owner is surrounded with every reasonable-
protection. It is only after compliance
with the foregoing conditions that the Go


vera or may for one year apply the Act to
the land which the Government desires to
acquire. This means that whether or not
the owner wishes to sell he will during that
time Toe hound to sell if the Crown insist,
but he must be paid in hard cash the fair
value, and fair value is by section 4 de-
clared to mean the total of the unimproved
value of his land, and of the value of the
improvements to the land, and 10 per cent,
added both to the value of such land and
improvements. What more can human in-
genuity devise for the good of the commu-
nity, and to prevent the slightest injustice
to the individual? I hold that landowners
have duties as well as privileges. None
would subscribe to the proposition that
it is defensible that South Australia should
be thrown out of occupation at the will
of anyone who might happen to possess
the freehold. What is true of the coun-
try as a whole is true also of it as re-
gards any considerable area. What is true
of its practical depopulation in some degree
applies to its non-utilisation. A noted land
reformer once heard the boast of a critic
that he would be careless as to who owned
all the land in the world so long as he
owned the money. His reply was, But
where would you be if the. landowner gave
you notice to quit?” In some measures
our large landowners ,are giving our agri-
culturists notice to quit the colony. It is
a notice on which many have acted. The
exodus has begun. We must stop it. We
cannot stop it one moment too soon. There
are districts in which the difficulty is keen-
ly felt. Some of the best men are gone.-
The idle land still remains. The township
languishes. All suffer. Can it be cured?
New Zealand shows that it can. The ne-
cessity for the application of the remedy
was not so great in her case as in ours, in
this respect, that she had much more good
land. But she had applied the remedy,
and her prosperity advances by leaps and
bounds. Why should we hesitate? The
Bill is founded on the principles of eternal
justice. Nothing is to be taken, except
when the public interest requires it, and
nothing is to be taken for which compen-
sation is not paid to the uttermost farth-
ing. Fair value means full value and 10
per cent, added, subject only to this limi-
tation, that the improved value is to be
taken on the unimproved value on the
basis on which the landowner has dealt
with the State so far as its assessment and
the computation of his land tax are
concerned —in other words, on the same
basis that he treats the State in
computing unimproved value he will
be treated. In order that he may
not suffer by any oversight in permit-
ting an unduly low assessment he is given
the right of appeal against any error of this
description. It may be that assessments
of large estates for land tax have been too
low. The representatives of the owners
have mostly been responsible for such re-
sults. Appeals, or the threat of appeals,
have induced leniency and forbearance
which were possibly more than just. Pro-
bably the provision in the Bill binding
the landowner to an assessment for
which he is responsible and prevent-
ing him from paying the State on only
half the value when land tax is calculated
against him, and claiming double the
amount when the State seeks to buv, may
induce greater individual honesty by the
individual in his dealings with the State,
and consequently greater contributions to
the revenue to the relief of poorer and per-
haps more honest taxpayers. But however
this may be, when the owner by the con-
ferring of the fullest power of appeal is
given the right of raising the assessment to
its full value, he cannot complain if he
omits that opportunity, that the assess-
ment on which he pays the State should
be the assessment on which the State pays
him so far as unimproved value is con-
cerned. The above are, shortly, the provi-
sions of the Bill. Some Liberals object to
conferring upon the State the right to pu
chase land, while it retains the power to
sell it. The sale of land has, however, been
practically stopped in South Australia,
though the legislative enactment of its pro-
hibition has been prevented by the gross-
est backsliding. I hold the Bill wff not m-
crease the sale of land. It Provides that
the lands purchased shall be let tor ag
cultural purposes. I take it; that_if Mffi
sale of land were the policy of the Govern-
ment of the day it would be mischievous
to endow them with the power of buying it
only to sell it again. This cannot be the
result when not only is the stoppage
of sales the policy of the Government,
but the land purchased cannot be sold
So from my point of view the Bill s not
nnlv wisely conceived in the public in
terest but it is altogether fair m its every
detail But what was the reception accord-
ed to it by the Tory section of thc Legisk;
live Council? The pages of Hansard,
mav well be studied for the required in-
formation. Never, I venture to say, wa
a more chilling reception given to any mu.
It is a matter of course to grant the leave
tn introduce any Bill for which a Govern-
meS irSSbk. But toe every .<*■
stacle was opposed to the introduction,
and time and again _ the ™°tion f or leave
to introduce was adjourned. They dared
not vote against the leave, but they de-
layed it in every conceivable way. Lven
when the Bill was at length permitted to
be introduced no opportunity was lost to
prevent the progress of the measure, and
even its discussion in the ordinary way.
Tactics of this sort succeed to prevent any
definite expression of opinion the
term of office of the Kingston Adminis-
tration, but so soon as that Government
expired the courage of the faint-hearted
revived, and the Bill, at the Tory instance,
was thrown into the waste-paper basket.
These be the Conservative Gods. These are
the men who oppose constitutional re-
form. These are the men who know their
occupation as Conservative obstructionists
of Liberal measures would be gone were
the people in the fullest sense of the word
allowed the same opportunity of electing
the provincial Upper House as they will
have an opportunity of electing both
Houses of the Federal Parliament. They
are ever loud in their protestations of sym-
pathy with the desire of the farmer and
producer for opportunities for the profit-
able exercise of his industry, knowledge,
and experience. Yet they adopt every
conceivable mode of refusing to make such
professions good when a practical oppor-
tunity is afforded them. Land is wanted.
The farmers want it. It is good that they
should have it. It is at present practi-
cally unused. Large estates afford an op-
portunity for supplying the wants of the
farmers, whilst leaving the owners ample
for their requirements, and giving them
compensation in full measure and running
over for every acre off land taken. But
still the Tories say them nay. How long
is this state of things to continue? The
people will have an opportunity of ex


pressing their opinion. I only ask in this
connection that when farmers, who are the
mainstay of South Australia, suffer, and
the community suffers through them, that
in a consideration of the indictment which
I frame against the Legislative Council as
at present constituted for their butchery
of popular measures during the session of
1890 then may not 'be forgotten their con-
temptible and contemptuous rejection of
the Bill to further closer settlement by
the compulsory purchase of large estates
at fair values.
Chapter IX.—The Council’s treatment of Part
XIX., Early Closing, and Workmen’s
Compensation.
Herein I deal with the sacrifice of Part
XIX., and of the Early Closing and Work-
men’s Compensation Bills on the altar of
sectional legislation and class interest.
First, let me refer to Part XIX. Its
principle •is recognised in our taxation of
unimproved values for national purposes,
adopted in 1884, at the instance of the
Colton Government, of which I was At-
torney-General. It is now accepted as
absolutely sound in principle. So far is
this the case that the principle has been
adopted in the legislation of other colo-
nies, and is stoutly contended for else-
where. Stated broadly, the idea is that
landowners, who chiefly benefit by un-
earned increment derived from public ex-
penditure, should refund to the State
some proportion of the benefit thus con-
ferred. This principle is undoubtedly fair-
ly applicable to municipal expenditure,
which .specially benefits owners of land with-
in the municipality. In each case it is ob-
vious that to exact a penalty from the
landowner who improves his land, and to
allow the landowner who displays no such
enterprise, but allows his land to lie idle,
is utterly indefensible. Yet such is the
condition under the legislation which at
present applies to municipalities. By the
taxation of improvements rates are col-
lected for improved land, from which the
idle land is free. It is to the interest of
a municipality that land should be im-
proved. It is to the credit and advantage
of the town. What would be thought of
a landlord who increased his tenant’s rent
because he improved his land? What
should be thought of a municipality which
doubled or quadrupled, or even to a
greater degree increased the rates of an
occupier because he improved the land
within the municipality? Yet this is pre-
cisely what happens under existing con-
ditions. So long as land is left unbuilt
upon, and an eyesore to the city, depreciat-
ing even the value of other land in the
locality, the person who is responsible for
this waste of opportunity for municipal
improvement escapes all but the most pal-
try taxation. But let him, either from pub-
lic-spirited or personal motives, spend
money in the improvement of his pro-
perty, and immediately the amount of that
expenditure is counted' not for but abso-
lutely against him for municipal purposes,
and he is bound to pay rates in respect
of it to the uttermost farthing.
What is popularly known as Part XIX.
proposes to remedy this, and to give to
municipalities the option, if they choose
to exercise it, of rating the ratepayers on
the unimproved land values, instead of,
as at present, compelling them to rate both
land values and improvements. If, hav-
ing this power, they choose to exercise it,
then the result will be that municipal
owners, each having the same land value,
will pay the same. No enterprising owner
who 'spends money in improving his land
will be penalised for his enterprise, nor
will his idle neighbor, who now reaps
his profit in the exertions of others, be en-
couraged in and given a premium for his
selfishness and neglect. The history of the
Bill hate been instructive. The scheme first
made its appearance in a Municipal! Cor-
porations Consolidating Bill, drafted by
Mr. Nesbit, Q.C. The Bill was divided
into parts, and the scheme wais contained
in the nineteenth part. Hence its name.
For one reason or another it failed to be-
come law, but eventually, in 1893, the King-
ston Govemmeht .succeeded in piloting it
through both Houses of the Legislature.
Its success was greatly owing to the care
and ski'll of the present Premier ('the Hon.
,F. W. Holder), then, as now, the Trea-
surer of the province, who tod charge of
the measure in the Assembly. But it did
not escape amendment at the hands of
the opponents during its passage. Some
of these amendments amounted to mutila-
tions. Their effect was not altogether re-
cognised at the time. However, the posi-
tion now stands thus —that to secure the
adoption of the scheme by any munici-
pality an approving resolution has to be
carried at a poll at which at least half
the total number of ratepayers must vote.
Experience has shown how difficult this is
at attainment. It enables lethargy and
supineness to triumph, and the ratepayer
who does not vote hate his vote counted
against reform in default of aits exercise. It
might be that wheret here are 1,000 rate-
payers, 490 vote for the reform, anld none
against it that the affirmative votes re-
corded would be utterly worthless to effect
their object. In no other condition of our
public life is such a thing tolerated. When
polls are provided for the majority of those
who vote should, and do decide, whatever
their number. Holw often does it happen
that members have been returned to Par-
liament when they did not even represent
a majority of the votes recorded? lam
not concerned to defend this, indeed, I
sympathise with the idea of some reform.
Bnt I altogether disbelieve in a system
which proceeds in the assumption that
everyone is supposed to be opposed to re-
form in default of not voting to the con-
trary, and that 'his assumption is to be
acted upon under all circumstances to the
negativing of affirmative votes of all but an
absolute majority of possible voters. The
Bill chiefly proposes to alter this defect in
the existing Act. It will thus enable the
ratepayers to solve this question by them-
selves in the usual way by a majority of
votes recorded. Just as they elect their
mayor and councillors, and decide their
municipal questions, so the majority of
those who vote will, by the alteration now


proposed, be permitted to decide the
question as to whether or not the munici-
pality shall have the benefit of unimproved
land values taxation, to the exclusion of
improvements from penalties. One other
point is dealt with by Part XIX. as now
proposed to be carried. The Bill was un-
fortunately altered by its opponents so that
on the taking of the poll no one is counted
to be a ratepayer entitled to vote unless he
is the owner of the land, or is liable for the
rates under agreement. The result is ri-
diculous and disastrous. Either directly or
indirectly the occupier pays rates. It mat-
ters little whether he pays them direct to
the corporation by agreement with his
landlord, or whether the landlord pays. In
any case the result is the same, for if the
tenant pays the rates direct to the cor-
poration he pays a lesser rent to the land-
lord ; if he does not pay direct to the cor-
poration he pays a greater rent to the land-
lord, and the landlord, through the rent, is
able to discharge the rates. It makes no
difference to the tenant whether he pays
£ 10 rent, the landlord paying £1 in
taxes, or whether he pays £9 rent and £1
the taxes. Yet when the result is thus
precisely the same to both landlord and
tenant, a total payment of £lO by the
’tenant, and a net receipt of £9 by the
landlord, the present condition is such
•that in the one instance the tenant is not
counted a ratepayer and the other he is.
Ten pounds will not give him the
right to vote, but £9 rent and £1
taxes will. The position is only to be
understood to be exposed in its full ab-
surdity. It is simply for the purpose of
remedying these things that Part
XIX. is now advocated. Again and again
it has passed the Assembly, and again and
again it has been rejected by the Legisla-
tive Council. It was cast into the waste-
paper basket in 1898. It had a similar
fate in 1899. There are members in the
Council now who only recently returned
have toyed with it. Their utterances
have raised high hopes of their sup-
port being accorded to the measure. None
of these have been realised. Let the elec-
tors see to it. The remedy is in their
hands. But what can be expected from a
Council constituted as we have it to-day?
So also with the question of early closing.
This has been advocated time and again in
the interests of health, happiness, and hu-
manity. We have the experience of other
•countries to guide us. Victoria and New
.Zealand led the way; even Western Aus-
tralia has an Act of her own. Mr. Lyne
has signalised his advent to power by the
passing of a Bill dealing with the subject.
He is justly held as a great emancipator.
Are there no white slaves amongst us who
are entitled to a similar emancipation?
Surely South Australia will not long lag
behind the other colonies in this great
humane reform. The sin, the shame of it,
■does not rest upon the representatives of
the people in our Assembly. It lies en
tirely at the door of the Legislative Coun-
cil. We all know that there is no neces-
sity for the long hours to which shop as-
sistants are subjected, sometimes under
■difficult and almost insanitary conditions
in our most trying climate. All business
that has to ue done could be and would
be transacted within shorter hours were
it only known that shorter hours were the
rule. No one really defends long hours.
Those who shop late and thereby encou-
rage long hours do it from no necessity or
wanton cruelty, but simply from want of
tnought. How truly and how often it has
been said, “More evil is wrought by
want of thought, than ever by want of
heart.” It is in our cities and centres of
population that the evil chiefly exists. How
great the boon of reasonable time for re-
creation and enjoyment! What advantages
this secures hoth to mind and body. Is
South Australia different from other colo-
nies regarding the necessity for this legis
lation? Is her climate less trying? We
know in many respects it is more so. Are
all shop assistants so situated that they can
dispense -with the rest which others need,
and is accorded to them elsewhere. How
many of us delight in_ the Saturday half-
holiday and in the relief from the week’s
toil which should come at midday —a relief
rendered all the more intense by the op-
portunities for recreation which the Satur-
day afternoon and no other part of the
week affords, and by the reflection that the
relief will continue to the Monday morning,
when with mind and body fully refreshed
the shop assistant, like other more favored
workers, should be able to resume her or
his weekly toil. There is_ no doubt about
the necessity of legislation in South Austra-
lia in this respect. It has been evidenced
in a variety of ways. Ten years ago a Se-
lect Committee of the House of Assembly
investigated the matter, and by a majority
recommended legislation in favor of early
closing. I was the chairman of that Com-
mittee. The late patriot, Tonn A Mc-
Pherson, was one of its members, Sir John
Cockburn, Hon. R. S. Guthrie, and Mr.
Brooker were also responsible for the find-
ings. It was established to the complete
confidence and satisfaction of that Commit-
tee that whilst South Australian employers
were generally Humane, there were not
whitting exceptions, and
mane were exposed to unfair competition
with men who owned no duty to their em-
ployers. Eurther, it was shown that ani
agreement for early closing dependent
onlv on mutual understanding and incap-
able of legal enforcement, hung upon a
thread which rendered it of little worth,
exposing it to the risk of destruction
by secession or even by the advent
into the district, where early closing
obtained, of a new-comer, Who was
no party to the agreement. There were
agreements at that time, whicn uung up-
on this thread. Since then the tnread
has snapped, and they have been broken.
It would have been well had the efforts
•at legislation been crowned with success
before this disaster happened. But they
are none the less necessary now. We have
the experience of other countries. the
Earlv Closing Association are entitled to
the greatest credit for their efforts.to se-
cure this reform. Through their aid there
have been collected reports of the highest
authorities bearing upon the subject, and
the evidence of scientific men and philan-
thropists, doctors, clergymen, employers,
and workers alike, tell me here, and
both hemispheres., of the benefits of early-
closing, and of the necessity of legislative
aid to secure it. The Bill 1S recommended
to the South Australian Parliament by the
signatures of almost 20,000 petitioners and
to their credit be it said, many of these
petitioners are shopkeepers, both m ™e
citv and suburbs. Under such circum-
stances. a duty was imposed upon the re-
nresentatives of the people to do their
best to legislate the question. They have
done well. The Bill was first passed in
1896 by a House fresh from the country.
The votes were 30 to 15. It was thrown out
in the Council. It was again passed in


-1898. It was again rejected in the Coun-
cil. In 1899 it was again passed 'by the
House of Assembly fresh from the coun-
try. It was again thrown out in the
Council. How long is this sort of thing
to continue ? It is difficult to speak of it
calmly. 'South Australia is defiled by the
stigma of a refusal to listen to the
strongest humanitarian appeals, not be-
cause its people are insensitive to the dic-
tates of humanity, but because a House
representing a section only of the commu-
nity delights in persistently refusing the
advent for reform rightly conceded else-
where. The Bill is of the most reasonable
character. It is simply an extension of
the principles of local self-government. It
is only proposed to be applied to the
metropolitan area, in which the evils at-
tending upon late shopping .are at pre-
sent seriously felt. The metropolitan area
includes the seven electoral districts of
North Adelaide, East Adelaide, West Ade-
laide, East Torrens, West Torrens, Sturt,
and Port Adelaide. There is no doubt
about the want of legislation here. Not
only have we the evidence of the charac-
ter already quoted having particular appli-
cation to popular centres such as these,
but the fact of the necessity of legislation
in this is almost unanimously attested by
the 14 members who represent the seven
districts constituting the area. Twelve
or 13 out of those 14 members are warm
supporters of the proposal, and the other
is Mr. John Darling, the junior represen-
tative for East Torrens. All that is pro-
posed, even as regards the metropolitan
district, is that the hours of closing should
be, as regard's each week —
NINE O’CLOCK ON ONE EVENING,
SIX O’CLOCK ON FOUR EVENINGS, AND
ONE O’CLOCK ON ONE AFTERNOON,
and that until the shopkeepers in the district
should desire an alteration, the 9 o’clock
should be on Friday, and the 1 o’clock on
Saturday. Every facility is provided for
ascertaining the wishes of the shopkeepers.
No others are allowed to vote. As to
the country, where the necessity for early
closing is not the same, the Bill will have
no application unless the majority of the
shopkeepers in any municipal corporation
or district council wish it, and establish
this position by a poll. Then, in such
case it will be in the power of the shop-
keepers in such country district to fix their
closing times as they desire, but so that
closing shall not be insisted on earlier than
6 o’clock, except for one day, when not
earlier than 1 o’clock may be appointed.
A schedule of exemptions in the case of
such shops as chemists and druggists, but-
chers, bakers, and refreshment shops, and
others which supply the necessities of the
hour is provided for. But as regards the
exempted shops, the hours of the employes
are limited to 48 in the case of women and
children, and 52 hours in other cases, with
powers of extension on notice to an inspec-
tor of factories. Nothing can be fairer.
It is a matter in which the country dis-
tricts are not so much concerned as the
metropolis. In the city the evil undoubt-
edly exists. It has been proved in every
conceivable way. The remedy provided is
no more stringent than is necessary or than
obtains elsewhere. IMo one can deny that
early closing is a good thing. It can only
be effectually secured in popular centres
by means su'eh as are proposed. What shop
is there which is not exempted in Avhich
all legitimate business cannot be readily
transacted with’n the prescribed hours:’
Then as regards The country the same diffi-
culty does not exist. The Bill has been?
framed to meet this point of view. It only
applies automatically to the metropolitan
area, where the necessity for it has been
established. It has no application to the
country districts unless the people desire-
it. The working of the Act is chiefly con-
fided to the shopkeepers themselves. It.
is only the shopkeepers who can decide in
the metropolitan area whether Saturday or-
some other day shall be the half-holiday.
It is only the shopkeepers who in a coun-
try district can require the application off
the Act. It is simply an extension in a
modified form of the principle of local self-
government, giving to the shopkeepers, the-
persons chiefly interested, the chief con-
trol of the machinery provided by the Act.
There are some who say that whilst they
favor early closing they object to legisla-
tive interference in the matter. I hold
that legislative interference is justified’
whenever it can be shown that it will be
for the good of the community. NoXindi-
vidual will be prejudiced, all are treated
alike. But in my opinion the dictates of
humanity would be allowed to prevail, and*
the generous desires of the great body of
South Australian employers Would be
achieved by their freedom from a cruel
competition, which penalises them for
hulmane and generous consideration of the
health and happiness off their employes. I
intend to put it to those who deprecate-
legislative interference, would their objec-
tions extend to legislation intended to pre-
vent the desecration of the Sabbath, say
by the unnecessary opening of our shops on-,
that day? I trow not. I discuss the question
from no Sabbatarian grounds. It i:s un-
necessary to refer to them. The keeping-
of the Sabbath, the seventh day, as a
day of rest, is a great social institution,
which is accorded, and well accorded,,
ample protection, not only by the popular-
sentiment, but by legislative provision, -and'
this capacity for further legislation would',
undoubtedly be exerteised, and properly
exercised, if necessity demanded it. May
not a few other hours in the week in the-
interests of Workers, who require protec-
tion, be made the subject of legislative ap-
propriation for the purpose of resit and!
recreation, nartioularly When such appro-
priation is desired, both by employer and
employed, in the interests, I again say, of
health, happiness, and humanity. _ Surely
the day is nigh when success Will crown
the effort's off those Who struggle for this
reform, and the members off the Legisla-
tive Council be made to see that right,
must be done. Yet the Early Closing Act
was again numbered last year aJmongst the
innocents slaughtered by the Legislative
Council. ‘So also ate regards the Workmen’s
Compensation Act. Passed in 1897 and
1898, and rejected by the Legislative
Council. Passed again, in 1809 by the House
of Assembly, and again rejected by the
Legislative 'Council. An election had inter-
vened. There was no doubt really as to
the popular wish, neither ate regards the
Early Closing Bill nor the Workmen's
Compensation Bill. Indeed, Ho well was.
this known to the Tory party that they
were afraid to challenge either off these
Bills in the House of Asembly, and thus-
allowed them to pass without a division
on either the second or third reading. The
Workmen’s Compensation Bill was found-
ed on the Bill nassed by the Imperial Par-
liament in 1897. This was a measure for
which Mr. Chamberlain was chiefly respon


‘aible. It was introduced and carried by
a Tory Government and by the Tory party.
It cannot therefore be suggested that it
was so liberal in its proposal that it was
unworthy of popular acceptance. But
what was good enough for the House of
'Commons and the House of Lords was alto-
gether too good for our House of Lords,
and it has been twice sacrificed. It is
expressly declared that the Act is not to
apply to workmen engaged in agricultural
■or pastoral pursuits, except when steam or
various other forms of mechanical power
are used in the work. Its chief provisions
• declare that when a workman is injured in
the course of his employment, except
this part, he is to be entitled to compensa-
through serious and wilful misconduct on
rtion from his employer, subject to certain
limitations. That provisions of this sort
can safely be adopted has been proved by
the working of the existing Imperial Act.
Care has been taken to avoid some of the
• defects of the Imperial legislation, but the
Imperial legislation is good in principle, as
proved within the last fortnight by the
acceptance by the Imperial Government of
a private members Bill for extending the
application of the Act, and by the fact
that both sides of the House of Commons
joined in supporting this proposal, and
passed the second reading without a
division. This is manifestly no case in
which opposition may be entered against
rash experimental or foolish legislation.
Surely members of the South Australian
Legislature may safely follow in the paths
trodden by members of the House of Com-
mons and the House of Lords at the Tory
instance. At the least in doing so they
cannot well be charged with rash incur-
sions into the realms of radical legislation.
Yet the Legislative Council to the sum of
its already counted sins in the butchery of
reform has added the offence of including a
Bill on the lines of Imperial legislation of
three years ago, now so properly proposed
to be considerably extended. It is a fitting
time to recapitulate the chief items of
lost reform in the record of one brief ses-
sion of legislative mischief by the present
Legislative Council of South Australia.
They are as follows:-—Household suffrage,
closer settlement by compulsory purchase
of large estates at fair values, Part XIX.,
early closing, workmen’s compensation. Is
aught else wanted to make good the case
against the existing conditions. I trow
not. I shall shortly address myself to the
task of showing that the reform I am ask-
ing for can be accomplished, not only with
ease, but safely.
Chapter X.—The Safety of Reform.
XVlany profess anxiety about this, some
dn all sincerity, others simply from a de-
sire to defeat reform. To my mind there
is no doubt that the people can be safely
Trusted with the control of tneir own in-
terests. There is a spirit of fair play and
reason W-lljcJi is possessed by the commu-
nity, and is the monopoly of no section of
it. It may be that selfishness is general.
Certainly no section of the community is
free from it. But is it well, when all are
amenable to reason, and none are free
from selfishness, to give one section of the
community absolute control over the
others? Yet this is the existing condi-
tion of affairs, 100,000 electors are disfran-
chised for the Upper House, and placed at
tne mercy of less than 50,000 voters who
possess the franchise for the Council. Thus
a majority of Council voters, say, 26,000,
can control the destinies of the entire pro-
vince and permanently nrevent tlie accom-
plishment of all much desired reforms,
such as those wnich were slaughtered last
session by the Legislative Conner. If a
double vote were justified in any case, it
ds surely the less necessary for the protec-
tion of the wealthy classes wnose means
will always give them an influence in ex-
cess off that exercised by most of their less
fortunate fellows. Education and intelli-
gence will always command their proper
sway, independent of iShe personal voting
power exercised by their happy pos-
sessors. It is the poor and less fortunate
who stand most in need of electoral power
for the amelioration of their condition,
■often attributable to their conditions aris-
ing out of no fault of their own. Yet to-
dav to him that hath in the shape of
wealth of power there is given the double
vote, and from him that hath not is taken
.away that which he ought to have and
which is more necessary to him by reason
of his lacking wealth and power, namely,
the equality of electoral right. Authorities
might be quoted over and over again in
■support of the above statements, and on
the point of the soundness of the popular
judgment. Let me quote Burke. He says;
—“The heart of youth may be wiser than
the head of age: The popular judgment
may be sounder than that of classes far
better educated and informed.” Glad-
stone thus expresses himself: —“The whole
history since the peace of 1815 shows that
me popular judgment on these broad is-
sues have been more nearly just and true,
and has gone more to tne root of the mat-
ter than that of the higher orders.”
No less an authority than H. it. Hutton,
summing up half a century of British his-
tory, declares as follows: —“In most great
questions of national importance the 'po-
litical judgment of the House of Commons
has proved itself sounder than mat of the
House of Lords. The judgment of the
Reformed House of Commons has been
more superior to that of the Lords than
that of the same body when unreformed,
and the general political judgment of the
masses has been more correct and reliable
than that of their representatives. Moral
qualities, it is shown, are always an ele-
ment in sound and mental judgment. The
masses have not mental gifts so high as the
minority, but their moral judgment is
always more honest, simply because it is
not warped by the subtle forms of self-in-
terest, which tempt the minority to pre-
serve their class privileges, even at the ex-
pense of justice.” What higher authorities
than these can be quoted in favor of the
incontestable proposition that the people
—that is the whole of the people-
can well be trusted with full political
power, and that with better and far better
results than may be expected from a con-
fidence and power fully bestowed on only
a section. Yet, whilst I cite these writers
with the confidence that their great names
inspire, it is not necessary to rest our
case solely on their great testimony. No
reform in the way of increased confidence
of the people was ever proposed without
being met by the most direful prophecies


of resultant evils. IS one of these have
been realised. Who in these days in Eng-
land would seriously contend that as good
work was done by the House of Commons
when unxeformed. It. is suggested that
the broadening of the franchise of the
Council will sap and undermine its autho-
rity, and render it powerless for
good. 1 have no fear of that.
It will destroy its power for evil.
It will confer on its members
a freedom from sectional influences to
which to-day they are unhappily subjected,
and will inspire them with a desire for
good, of the entire community, and a power
to advance it, of which to-day they are not
all possessea so fuliy as they should be.
I delight to quote the utterances of my op-
ponents to their confounding. The Hon.
Sir John Downer, when speaking in the
Australian National Council, iu Adelaide,
referring to our Eegislative Council, ex-
pressed himself as follows: “Lower the
franchise a little more, as it probably will
be as time goes on, and the authority of
the Council will become greater and
greater. The independence of the members
will be more and more their strength
and determination will vastly increase.” To
all this, I say most heartily, “Amen. Ibe
Council will be greater and more respected
because it will represent the people and
interpret their will. It will cease to be a
sectional House, it will be representative
of them all. It will be a Chamber of Re-
view, and of second thought, in the best
sense of the word. The power of review
and the second thought will be exercised
not for the frustration of measures, de-
vised for the public good by the popular
House, and for their mutilation in the in-
terests of any class or section, but for then
perfection to the end for which they were
framed, the advancement of South Aus-
tralia, and justice to all. There are many
I know who contend that no second Cham-
ber is necessary. I am, however, strongly
of opinion that it is desirable. I think
that members for the Upper House should
be elected as at present, by larger districts,
and for longer terms than members of the
House of Assembly. I believe that by this
means they will enjoy a freedom from
parish influences and an independence from
temporary clamor which cannot well be
otherwise fully secured. lam not dis-
posed, to favor the abolition of tne bi-
cameral system, if the Federal model can
he followed to the extent of assimilating
the franchise for both Houses. I am not
prepared to admit that a second House is
useless, if both are founded on the saine
franchise. If such an argument held good,
it would in some degree apply to the Fede-
ral Constitution. But apart from the dii-
ferences introduced by ttie different group-
ing of the constituencies, the longer term
of office of the members, full and
fair consideration should undoubtedly
in all cases precede legislative enact-
ment. Hasty legislation and. ill-considered,
legislation is to be deplored, though it
may be far preferable to inexcusable de-
lay, for a legislative machine which works
quickly will be as quick to correct a mis-
take as to make it. We take great Precau-
tions to secure full consideration. The va-
rious stages of a Bill are designed to this
end. There are not many who would pro-
pose to dispense with these safeguards. No
doubt it is good that the members of a
House should he afforded more than one
opportunity of considering a Bill in any
one session before it finally passes from
their hands. I think that good - ould also
result from giving similar opportunities in.
regard to the same (Bill to members of a
second Chamber, so long as representing
the same people they exercise these powers
in the interests of all ana not of a section
as at present. But whilst preferring the bi-
cameral system I by no means share the
gloomy forebodings which are entertained;
by some as regards the mischiefs likely to
result from a single Chamber. Ontario ha®
only one Chamber, so also Manitoba and
British Columbia. The population of On-
tario almost equals the combined popula-
tion of 'New South Wales and Victoria.
Yet though this State has never had a
second Chamber, its prosperity is undeni-
able, and illustrations of this sort expose
the fallacy of declarations of the absolute
necessity for a second Chamber. But, re-
turning to the question of the safety of
bi-cameral constitutions, in which both
Houses are founded on the same franchise,
we have the example of the United States,,
a country which claims our respect and at-
tachment in a degree only second to that
of a British community. In no single
state in the whole Union is there any dif-
ference in the franchise for the Houses of
the state Parliaments. Both are elected
on manlhod suffrage. Roger Hotter, of the
New York bar, one of the highest Ameri-
can authorities, writing so
recently as 1896, in his wdrk on the Ameri-
can constitution, dedlared himself as fol-
lows: —-“Universal manhood suffrage i®
now the rule in nearly all the states of
the Union, and there is at least a tempo-
rary tendency towards the further exten-
sion of the right to women. Prophecies of
resultant evil have been frequent, and op-
position to each extension has been made
from those of the community with the
largest wealth and the deepest learn-
ing. But they have not been justi-
fied. History proves that in all ages
wherever power has been invested in
a class no matter how intelligent they
have exercised it by legislation op-
pressive to those Who were disfran-
chised, and that even if selfishness can be
eliminated ignorance of the way® of the
disfranchised produces similar results.”
How admirably this quotation applies to
the South Australian of to-day. Have
not the disfranchised been oppressed? Can
selfishness be eliminated? Further, the
learned writer proceeded as follow®;
“The possession of wealth does not de-
stroy selfishness, nor the study of books
give knowledge of human nature. The in-
stincts of the people are usually broader
than the theory evolved in his library by
any philosopher.”
Thus, in support of my contention as to
the safety of trust in the people entirely,
I have used arguments Which, I think, ap-
peal t;0 all, and I have cited authroities
Which all must respect. I have referred
also to the experience of British colonies
and American states by way of illustra-
tion of the security of similar confidence.
But I put the case on the highest ground
of all .when I say that in the constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia, framed
by the picked men of Australia, endorsed
by the Parliaments, and finally accepted
by the people of the federating States,
there has been embodied for all time the
magnificent declaration that in the high
arena of national life, the people of Aus-
tralia are fit to be triisted with the unre-
stricted control and management of their
own destinies, each voter for the popular
Assembly in each State having one vote,
no more and no less, whatever his or her


rank -or condition, for both Houses of the
Federal Parliament. That supreme charter
of Australian self-government has now re-
ceived the legislative seal of the Imperial
Parliament. With such a declaration of
the high electoral capacity as Federal
voters of every man and woman in our
midst, who should be heard to say
that any Federal voter should be dis-
qualified, and declared incapable of
safely exercising the franchise for some
local legislative council, having jurisdic-
tion only in the minor sphere of provin-
cial life? Yet at the present more than
100,000 Federal voters are thus disfran-
chised, and it is our business to put
this right. I appeal to all to
assist in this great work. The enormity
of the position is so monstrous that it
only requires to be recognised to be re-
medied. I have heard it urged that the
result of the proposed reform would be to
place all political power in the hands of
the working classes. It has been seriously
contended that all but Labor members
would disappear. Equal electoral rights
could at the best only secure due regard
to the will of the majority. The highest
aim of legislation is properly described as
the greatest good to the greatest number,
which, I take it, will always be the sub-
ject of qualification that justice may be
done to each and all. No one will se-
riously contend for the right of the minor-
ity to govern the majority. Yet this is
the effect of existing conditions so far as
all progress is concerned, for it is stayed
in obedience to the behest of the sectional
Chamber. But will Household Suffrage
give the control of legislation entirely to
the working classes and enable Labor mem-
bers to sweep the polls to the exclusion of
the fair representation of other interests?
Our opponents know that it will not.
Either they speak out of ignorance, or
worse. In either case the-position is the
same. There is no truth in the cry. It
is not a question for idle speculation. We
have precise illustrations before us of the
working of broader franchises. At the re-
cent Federal election the franchise in
South Australia was broader than House
hold Suffrage. It was adult suffrage pure
and simple, and the voting throughout, the
province oemg in one district, it was not
uui.y oue auun one vote, but also one vote
one value. Many Labor representatives con-
tested cue election. mere were '66 can-
didates aitogetner; 10 were required to be
returned. Not one Labor member was
amongst the successiui 10. No doubt va-
rious circumstances contributed to this re-
suit, but widen we are told that with
Housenoid Suit rage U/abor memoers only
can be returned, the illustration 1 have
statea demonsurates tne utter falsity of
the statement. As was the case in South
Australia, so was the case in all the other
federating States, except in Victoria,
where Mr. Trenwith, a highly capable and
respected Liberal leader, was successful,
100 circumstances like this justify the at-
tempt to scare the people by suggestions
of labor domination, and intolerance re-
sulting from reform? Further, in our
own local House of Assembly adult
suffrage prevails. Has labor any undue
representation? Certainly not. Out of
a total of 54 members, 11 at the most are
direct Labor members. Hardly more than
one-fifth of the entire number. Here, again,
we have an exposure of the fallacy of Tory
argument. So ‘to the many who, in this
matter prompted by a sense of justice and
disposed to favor the reform, yelt remain
halting between two opinions, doubting
whether it is safe, and asking, Is it safe?
I say, “Yes, undoubtedly.” It is safe. Safe
by the light of reason in the people that
may be trusted with the control of their
own destines. Safe by the light of
authorities such as I have cited, and which
are second to none of modern time. Safe
by the light of the experience of other
countries —British and American —which
have successfully adopted these great re-
forms. Safe by the history of your own
country, in that the prophecy of evil re-
sulting from confidence in the people has
ever proved to be unfounded, and safe
above all by the latest arid greatest char-
ter of Australian liberty, the constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia, than
which there can never be a more emphatic
declaration of the capacity of each adult
Australian for full and equal electoral trust
and confidence.
Chapter XI.—The Present Position.
The Conservatives have now abandoned
their cry of unalterable attachment to the
old constitution framed by a Parliament
45 years ago, which consisted of 24 mem-
bers, of whom one-third were nomines's of
officials. My father, who was the elected
representative of the Burra in that Parlia-
ment, then fought for the suffrage oi both
Houses, to be extended to all men untaint
ed bycrimie. But he was compelled to
accept a compromise on the lines of the
franchise then adopted for the Council.
This has served its day, and with the aa
vent of Federation must be reformed. All
recognise this. It is necessary to keep
faith with the people as regards promises
of reform and economies consequent on
Federation. Nearly all the other colonies
possessing Upper _ Houses elected on a
property qualification recognise this. Tas-
mania asks for reform; Victoria clamors
for it. The Victorian Assembly, at the
instance of Mr. Higgins, has within the last
fortnight, unanimously adopted a resolution
demanding the introduction of a scheme
of Council reform before the Federal elec-
tions. The “Age,” the great Victorian
daily and Liberal journal, denounces
the attempt to continue Tory fran-
chises for State purposes to be an “outrage
on decency,” in view of the popular fran-
chise for both Houses, provided by the con-
stitution of the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia. So the Tories offer what they call
reform. It is not reform, but a miserable
and worse than useless subterfuge. In the
insolence of the power which a majority in
the Council gives them, and which they
have only lately utilised, to pack the Court
of Disputed Returns with followers of Mr.
Stirling, they have taken the control of the
business out of the hands of the Govern-
ment, and are proceeding with their so-
called reform, which is no reform at all.
They have mutilated the Bill most shame-
fully. It is no longer a Household Suffrage
Bill. Every reference to householder has
been purposely struck out. The clause pro-
viding for the enfranchisement of
school teachers, station-masters, miners,


and other Civil and public ser-
vants and private employes, who by vir-
tue of their employment occupy premises
which are really their homes, has been ruth-
lessly excised. The chief cry for real re-
form has properly emanated from occupiers
of homes which may be worth £24 a year,
and who have no vote, because £25 per
annum is, under our constitution, the
lowest enfranchising value of a house. The
cry for reform of these “Outlandeys” 13
treated with the utmost disdain. It is diffi-
cult to believe, because it is so outrageous,
yet it is a fact that, whilst Mr. Stirling
and his followers refuse to meet the case
of these householders who are thus dis-
franchised, and who have nothing under
our existing constitution, they propose to
double existing inequalities by giving a vote
for the Council to the -wife or husband
of any man or woman who already has
a vote. So the chief Tory idea of reform is
to double the qualifying power of a £25
house or a £SO allotment. The mutilated
Bill is not worth a moment’s serious con-
sideration. The Government have most
properly abandoned it. It is a disgrace
to the legislative files. The sooner it is
east into 'the outer darkness the better
for the reputation of Parliament. It is no
longer a measure of reform, but of retro-
gression. The following letter, appear-
ing in “The Advertiser” of the 11th instant,
emphasises the position:—
A MAGNIFICENT MUDDLE.
To the Editor.
Sir —If the Franchise Bill passes in its
present mutilated condition it will be a
magnificent muddle. There was some sense
in the old Bill, which provided that hus-
band and wife, living together in the one
house, should both be considered house
holders, and should each have a vote what-
ever the value of the home. When living
together they may be regarded as having
a mutually qualifying interest, and as one
in the eve of the law and of the constitu-
tion. But as the Bill stands now, not
even an outward semblance of mutual in-
teiest or show of decency is required. Hu-
band and wife may not have seen each
other for years; each may be living in open
and shameless vice, yet if the wife keeps
a disorderly house, rented at 10/ per week,
her husband, so long as she is not ejected,
is to be qualified to vote for the Council,
and similarly if he has somewhere £SO
worth of land, so long as he retains it,
even though she should descend to the
lowest depths of infamy, spending, say,
half her time in gaol, she cannot
lose her vote for the Council.
Purely provisions of this sort are
preposterous. They make one inclined to
regard as comparative trifles one or two
other extraordinary features in the
reform (?) for which Mr. Stirling
and ihis party are contending. One
is that whilst votes are denied to all
householders who pay only £24 per annum
rent, say, 5 per cent, interest on £4BO, two
votes are to be given to the man and wife,
either of whom has a £SO freehold worth
at 5 per cent., £2 10/ per annum. Thus,
whilst £24 per annum confers no vote, £2
10/ per annum can confer two, or, from
the Conservative standpoint, £1 5/ for
vote-giving purposes is more than equal
to £24. Again, whilst £24 per annum
house rent shall nought avail, and a £SO
freehold must be unencumbered, £l5O worth
of improvements shall do the needful, even
though they may be mortgaged to ten
times their value. One would have thought
that the occupation of a £l5O house at a
rent would have been equally effectual.
But, alas! according to the National De-
fence League, there is no electoral health
in any householder who pays less than 10/
per week rent; and by doctrines of this de-
scription the disfranchisement of tens of
thousands of our most deserving house-
holders is fruitlessly sought to be justified.
—I am, &c.,
EQUITY.
I forbear to deal with the other work of
the Council during the present session.
They are toying, or worse, with popular
measures. Already emasculating altera-
tions have been made in the Early Closing
and Workmen’s Compensaiton Bills, and
there is no hope pending reform for either
Part XIX. or any scheme of closer settle-
ment by compulsory purchase of large
estates at fair values.
Chapter XII.—The Best Way of Securing
Reform.
The people are bound to win in this
struggle. Time and right are on their
side. The question is how soonest and
best can reform be accomplished. I counsel
three modes of enforcing recognition of
the popular right. They are as follows: —
1. The rejection at all Federal elections
of ail candidates who seek the suf-
frages of Federal voters, and at the
same time insult 'them by refusing votes
for State purposes to the great majority
of their number. There should be no dif-
ficulty in ascertaining Who are for or
against us. No self-respecting man or wo-
rn m can cast a vote for a candidate who
practically declares that the voter, whilst
properly trusted with full and equal power
for national purposes, should be consider-
ed an Outlander and an alien in the
State. The above should be all-powerful
as regards aspirants for Federal honors.
2. A double dissolution of both Houses
to take effect approximately at the ordi-
nary Assembly elections, so that the House
of Assembly, Which works the popular will,
may not be unduly penalised, and me
people may have an opportunity of dealing
with the present parties to the dispute.
Had the Kingston Government remained in
power and t'he Council rejected the House-
hold Suffrage Bill, as they did during the
brief term of the Solomon Government,
the Gordian-knot, I venture to think, would
have been cut long since. "Reform would
have been accomplished, and the public
business would be progressing satisfactorily,
instead of being at a standstill as it is at
present.
3. The summoning Of a popular Conven-
tion to draft a Constitution for Australia
with full power to give effect to the popu-
lar wish for reform. I think that by this
mode reform could best be accomplished.
It would avoid the heat and conflict in-
separable from the other courses I have
suggested, but which should be unhesita-
tingly and determinedly adopted if the re-
cognition of the right of the people to
freedom and citizenship cannot otherwise
be secured. A popular Convention was the
mode by which we secured the Constitution
of the Commonwealth of Australia, than
which no more splendid instrument of popu-
lar self - government has ever been devised.
I am hopeful that by similar means a


similarly beneficial Constitution for South
Australia may be provided. Such a Con-
vention would afford a means of solving a
present most embarrassing deadlock. In
addition it would give the country an op-
portunity of further expressing its views as
to its precise wants, and of selecting
the men by whom it wished the
Constitution to be iramed. It would
remove these questions from the em-
barrassing influence of side issues with
which ordinary political questions are in-
extricably involved. At ordinary Tariia-
mentary elections it would undoubtedly
facili'tate agreement. It is, I believe, the
readiest and most effective mode by which
the constitutional alterations and econo-
mies consequent on Federation, and pro
raised to the people in every State, can
best and earliest be secured. The Bill
introduced by the Holder Government
dealing with this question has, therefore,
to my mind, much to recommend it. and
if it can be carried this session so that the
necessary elections may take place—about
the time of the Federal elections—reform
/might be regarded as secured. But, in
view of the usual Conservative tactics and
attitude I have little hope of this, as the
Conservatives have flouted the result
of the referendum and trifled with
the oft-repeated request of the popu-
lar Chamber for a measure of true reform.
So I fear that this will now add to the
sum of their misdeeds by refusing
this proposal for a constitutional and
amicable, settlement of a, great question,
and will continue to attempt to foist on a
disgusted people that which they cal' re-
form, but which is really the reverse, and
a gross intensifying of existing unjustifi-
able inequalities. Should I find myself
mistaken in this I shall be delighted, and
I shall offer myself as a candidate for
election to the Convention now proposed
by the Holder Govemmenlt. But, from
past experience. I have little hope, of such
gracious recognition of popular rights by
the Hon. J. L. Stirling and his followers.
So therefore I strongly counsel the Fede-
ral voters and the people of South
Australia to lose no time in getting
ready at ail Federal and State elections to
mark their resentment of the intolerable
disfranchisement to which the Tory party
insist that they shall continue to be un-
justly subjected. A few wholesome ex-
amples will work wonders for reform.
Chapter XIII.—Summary.
The only alternative to household suf-
frage is the continuance of the present
miserable condition ol affairs. The flimsy
proposals of the Solomon Government
were laughed out of the House. Mr.
Stirling's present suggestions, as I have
shown, are still worse. N o true .Liberal can
or win seriously entertain tnem. mere are
some who Say tnat tne reumotion oi the
trandhise to £lO occupiers would suffice.
Let me put this position as clearly as can
be, It might meet in some octree me
case 01 metropolitan constituencies but it
would be grossly unfair lor country dis-
tricts. lire reason is piain. Vv mist there
are comparatively few no uses whicn do not
command 6/ per wee it rent m the city and
suburbs, there are many in rural consti-
tuencies whicii are not worth so mucin,. The
reason is patent. Land is more valuable m
and about the city and townships than it
is in less popular centres, so rents are
higher m the town than tney are in the
country. Thus, a three or four-roomed cot-
tage in West Adelaide or Kent Town will
command a higher rent than a house af-
fording similar accommodation in, say,
"Wallaroo or Fort Augusta districts. The
occupier, therefore, 01 tne West Adelaide
or Kent Town cottage may have a vote for
the Council when none will be given by the
constitution to the occupier of a cottage
affording the same aocommodationi in Port
Augusta or Wallaroo. A £ls franchise,
therefore, whilst benefitting populous cen-
tres would not meet other cases. It
would favor the town against country.
Everyone who considers the question will
see this. Lven Tories admit it. Conserva-
tives of undoubted clear-sightednesis, such
as Mr. William Copley and Mr. John Bar-
ling, jun., have declared in the plainist
terms that household suffrage is undoub-
tedly preferable to the £ls franchise in the
interests of the country. The fact is that
any arithmetical limit is not only logically
indefensible, but it tells in favor of the
town against the country on account of the
lesser value of the country houses. So we
find to-day that in country constituencies
the proportion of Legislative Council
voters to the total number of Houses is
by no means so great a propor-
tion as exists in the city and
suburbs. The figures are somewhat diffi-
cult to ascertain, -as no census of houses
has been taken since 1891. But add-
ing, in all eases, a similar percentage for
houses erected since, we find that North
Adelaide has about 3,237 houses and 3,072
Council voters, or, speaking roughly, 17
voters for 18 houses. Fast Torrens has
similarly about 5,700 voters to 6,000 houses,
or, roughly, 19 voters to U 0 houses. Sturt,
on the same basis, has 4,580 houses and
4,300 voters, or say 11 voters to every 12
houses. On the other hand, Wallaroo, with
3,500 houses, has only 1,200 voters, or about
one voter to every three houses. The
Burra, with 2,650 houses, has 1,466 voters,
or about one-half. Other country districts
would work out equally disadvantageously.
The case is even worse so far as women are
concerned, for whilst North Adelaide, East
Torrens, and Sturt have respectively 958,
1,451, and 1,327 female voters, Wallaroo,
the Burra, Yorke’s Peninsula, and Noar-
lunga have only 156, 236, 50, and 167. No
doubt in some cases the disparity is owing
to the fact that rich people, by the transfer
of paltry 'allotments to their female rela-
tives in consideration of professed natural
love and affection, have contrived to en-
franchise them. This has been a system of
creating faggot votes. This reminds me
again of the monstrous position by which
the ownership of a freehold of the capital
value of £SO confers the franchise for the
Council, it may be on some comparatively
worthless fellow, whilst his worthy neigh-
bor has no vote in respect of a home worth
9/ a week. The allotment may be unin-
habited an unimproved, an eyesore or
worse, but if it is of the value of £SO, or
rather if the owner declares it is of that
value, he gets the vote. This brings me to
the further arguments attaching to any
arbitrary arithmetical limit that not only is
any,attempt at such limit utterly illogical
as constituting a distinction between those
who should and those who should not
have the Council franchise, but it en-
courages falsehood. No enquiry is, can, or
will be made by the State into the


value of the declared qualifica-
tion. The claim of the would-be elector
is accepted ini every ease. It would
require an army of inspectors to correct
the abuses which have crept in in the way
of false declarations supporting claims. The
conscientious man Who forbears to declare
a value of whidh. he is not certain, gets no
vote, even though he may be entitled to it.
The unscrupulous man, who recklessly or
wickedly makes a claim, gets a vote, even
though he may not be entitled to it. I
have contended, and Still contend, that the
ultimate goal of reformers should be adult
suffrage for both Houses of the local Par-
liament, just as we Shall have it for South
Australia for both Houses of the Federal
Parliament, but we might well immediately
direct our chief efforts to the attainment
of that measure of reform whidh is marked
by household suffrage. Let us concentrate
our energies on this at the present moment.
It is well within our grasp if reformers
keep together, and do not allow themselves
to be divided. It has been put to the
people. They have declared that they will
have it now. Let us abide by their de-
cision. What does it mean? It means
this, that for the 'Chamber of review and
of second thought, the occupation of the
home, whatever its value, shall be
the true test of electoral right, and that
this occupation shall extend to the en-
franchisement not only of the householder,
but of his or her wife or husband, Who may
also be a resident in the home. No one
will get a vote in any case until after six
months’ registration, as at present. Who
do we propose to trust? # Our householders.
What has South Australia to fear from
them ? To whom would South Australia
chiefly rely in time of need? Her house-
holders. We sing of “Home, sweet home.
We speak of the defence of our hearths
and homes. Are words of this character
only to apply to homes of certain value:
Surely the patriotism of our householders
is affected by no consideration of rental
value. As we could With certainty look
to them for the protection of the common
interest in time of need, so l let us in time
of peace, by the very essence of our con-
stitution, see that they shall have an equal
share of the protection which our
laws afford, and an equal voice
an framing those laws for rich and the poor
alike. I am not asking now for the lull
measure cif justice accorded by the I ederal
Constitution to our entire adult popula-
tion. But I do plead for the completest
recognition of the rights of our house-
holders, too long constitutionally denied.
This is saidi to be a free country. Let us
make it so in very truth. I have showd
that under existing conditions the people
are not tree to work even their reasonable
and well-considered will. 1 have shown also
tuatc tins domination of vast majority by
a section exists in a degree which does
not apply in the old country, i have
snovvn aiso that tins domination has
been recently exercised witn tngntiui per-
xo uie puunc lima, to tne lloUting
of the popular wisli, to the undue advan-
tage oi a »bcuon, ito me prejumce oi the
community, to me engendering ot class
jediousiea aim sectional hatred. Who is
there amongst us, man or woman, who
leeis mat lie or she could not justly ue
trusted with the voter it sueu mere be
1 am content that his or her influence
snouid ue exercised against retorm. -but,
to my mind, there are no people who are
more fitted to he free than tne people oi
bourn Australia. We have enjoyed an
immunity trom conditions in our earliest
history which were to the serious disad-
vantage ot other less favored countries,
Uur public system of education has per-
haps qualified the present generation lor
the exercise of self-governing powers in a
degree which has never previously been ex-
ceeded. Each one of us in his or her heart
of hearts feels undoubted capacity for the
fullest electoral rights, and what each con-
siders true of himself is true also of his
neighbor. 1 know that appeals in opposi-
tion to the reform will be made to selfish-
ness and ail the baser motives. Your fears
will be attempted to be excited. 1 have
shown the baselessness of these suggested
fears. It will be put, though not openiy, to
those who now have the second vote to
the Legislative Council, keep that you
have, why share it with anyone else? its
value will be lessened. Appeals of this
description made to our selfishness
baser nature, may sway an individual here
and there, but 1 appeal with the greatest
confidence to the community on the
ground of justice. Is it right that on ac-
count of the comparative poverty of the
home any householder should be longer
denied an equal share in framing the laws
under which we live. 1 trow not. Ihe
people of South Australia have already de-
clared on the side of reform. I am now
appealing ro a Legislative Council consti-
tuency to say that their wishes should be
no longer denied, and if any act or word
of mine contributes to the advancement of
the cause of popular freedom, which I have
so much at heart, I shall be more than re-
paid for the risk I have voluntarily in-
curred in resigning my ses-t in tne popular
House.
c. C. KINGSTON.
September 12, 1900.


