

A PASTORAL ADDRESS
TO THE
INHABITANTS OF GREEN- PONDS AND THE
ADJOINING DISTRICT.
My dear Friends,
As a minister of the Church of Christ I cannot but feel it
my duty to forward, to the utmost of my power, the spiritual welfare of all
within my reach; but especially of those who have been more immediately
committed to my charge. From whatever cause it happens that so very small
a portion of this township and neighbourhood attend the Services of the Church,
this lamentable state of things renders the instruction there given comparatively
inefficient; while the means of pastoral communication, beyond that which is
afforded by the pulpit, is necessarily limited, not only by reason of the extent
of the district, but from other causes sufficiently obvious. These considerations
have been to me, since I came to reside among you, a constant source of deep
and melancholy regret ; and I have therefore determined to adopt the present
mode of calling your attention to a few points of vital importance connected
with your moral and religious state. I trust that you will receive my admo-
nitions in good part, and as a pledge of my sincere regard for your happiness,
both temporal and eternal.
First then, I would earnestly entreat those who never attend a place of
worship, to reflect upon the fatal consequences of profaning the Sabbath. It
may perhaps be alleged, and unhappily with truth, by many, that the great
distance at which they live from the township makes their attendance at
Church impossible, or nearly so; and I shall lose no tune in making the best
arrangements in my power to mitigate, though I can scarcely hope altogether
to remove, an evil which is necessarily incident to a Colonial Church in its
infancy. In the mean time, families so situated ought never to omit the read-
ing of the Scriptures and the worship of God at home. With shame, however,
and with sorrow I am constrained to say that there are hundreds in this Parish
who spend God s holy day in drunkenness and vice: and the devout worshipper,
as he approaches the house of prayer, is not unfrequently shocked by the sight of
a reeling drunkard, or the sound of unholy revelling. Such practices are not
only a grievous sin, pregnant with the most dreadful consequences, both to
those who are guilty of them, and those who minister to them; but they are a
scandal to the whole colony. They ought to be repressed by the severest
penalties which the law can inflict; but, as the law is less stringent than it
ought to be in this respect, I would fain persuade you by the fear and the love
of God to shun the tap-room, at least on the Sabbath, and worship the Lord,




to tire former. We shall yet, I trust, have reason for not despising “ the day.
of small things,”
Although an address of this nature is less necessary in the case of those who
are regular in their attendance upon public worship, than of those who seldom
or never “ trouble the Church”—a favourite, but withal a very blasphemous
expression, which passes current in this district, —there are yet two points to
which I would nevertheless direct their attention. In the first place, there is
an apparent apathy and want of devotion in some of them, which betokens a
wandering of thought from the service in which they are engaged: while the
irreverent practice of sitting during the prayers is—though I am pleased to say,
by no means generally, yet—frequently prevalent. Be assured that God will
not accept the service of the lips without that of the heart; and that man can
have but a poor notion of his dependence upon his Maker,, who prays for his
daily bread with less semblance of humility than if he were receiving his daily
wages. Age or infirmity may excuse a man from kneeling ; and indeed any
service, which is incompatible with ease, and would therefore impede devotion,
is not required by God: but those who caw kneel have no excuse for standing;
and he who can stand, can scarcely expect his prayers to be heard, if he is too
idle, or, rather, too presumptuous, to do so.
The other point to which I would direct attention, is the necessity of frequent
communion., I have addressed you repeatedly upon this subject; but as yet,
I am grieved to say, with', little apparent effect. The excuse, constantly
alleged, is that oi. unfitness.. Now he that is unfit to receive the Sacrament is
unfit to die, —unfit for heaven. Why do ye not, therefore, repent and amend?
I would, however, briefly mention that the Lord’s Supper was not instituted
for glorified saints, but for miserable sinners ; and as Baptism is the rite, by
which Christ ordained that we should be admitted into the Christian Covenant,
so are we by the other Sacrament from time to time confirmed therein. Great
reason have I to fear that even the Sacrament of Baptism is wofully neglected;
but it would exceed my present space to enter further into this subject: and I
will merely add that I shall be ready at all times to converse with any of you
respecting the receiving of the holy Communion, with a view to dispel your
doubts, and, without under-rating the sin of partaking unworthily, to assist
in your preparation for a worthy reception of it.
I would now address a word to another class of my Christian brethren. Of
the scruples of those who dissent from our communion, I should be the last to
judge uncharitably; and although I believe them to be mistaken, I would pity,,,
rather than censure, their delusion. If in any way, “ whether in pretence, or
in truth, Christ is preached, I therein do rejoice, yea, and will rejoice;” and,
saving in the essentials of salvation, I would be “ made all things to all men,.,
that I may by all means save some.” A downright honest schismatic I can
understand and bear with; but alas! for those who profess to belong to. us,; and


holiness. If, however, you
have no fear of God before your eyes, and no love of him in your hearts, let
common decency deter you from outraging the feelings of others, who do enter-
tain a reverence for holy things. I would remind you also of the hour of death,
and of the awful doom of those who enter the Church for the first time in their
coffins. Be warned in time, and turn from your wicked ways to serve
your God.
In the conversations which I have had with many of you respecting non-
attendance at Church, the pressure of domestic cares is the ordinary excuse,
where any excuse is attempted, for staying away. Mothers, with very young
children, cannot certainly be expected to be so regular at Church as those
without such a charge; but surely arrangements might generally be made for
each parent to attend once in the'day. Can you expect the Almighty to bless
your endeavours to provide for your families, if you live altogether unmindful
of the care with which he regards his faithful servants ? Some of you send
your children to School and to Church, while you remain at home yourselves:
and I have even heard a merit made of caring for their souls though you neg-
lect your own. This is either self-deceit, or an attempt to deceive others; —
for how can you suppose that the example which you set in your own persons
will fail to lead your children, as they grow up, to do as you do. If they were
kept in proper order at home, and constrained to be regular in their attendance
at school, they would derive much greater apd more enduring benefit from the
instruction there given; and if they were accompanied by their parents to Church,
they would conduct themselves with greater reverence within the sanctuary. I
entreat you, for the sake both of your children and yourselves, to look to these
matters. If you do not, your children will grow up to be a curse to you, and
not a blessing.
While upon this subject, permit me to say a word or two upon the very
slender and irregular attendance at the Sunday School, which I have sought
to set on foot. A school, in fact, it is not; but a mere mockery of one. With
one or two exceptions, you seem to imagine that you confer a favour upon
those who aid in the instruction of your offspring; and so, in a certain sense,
you do, for they rejoice in teaching them their duty to God, to their parents,
and to their neighbours; but, believe me, that you still owe to them a debt of
boundless gratitude. Could you only be led to appreciate the extent of the
kindness shown to you, and the advantage which ypur children may derive
from the religious training of a Sunday School, there would be twenty scholars
for every one, and a goodly increase of the members of the Messiah’s Kingdom.
You know full well the efforts, the disinterested efforts, which have been made
for the establishment both of a Sunday and a Day School; and, though I am
at no great loss to account for my failure, at least for the present, in respect of
the latter, I am both grieved and surprised at the carelessness evinced in regard




yet are sowing dissension among us. It is good for us, though sad for them, •
that they can do so only by “bearing false witness;” and, “ halting as they do
between two opinions,” it is no wonder that they dread a punishment, which I
have neither denounced, nor feel myself authorised to denounce. God forbid
that I should limit God’s uncovenanted mercies; his covenanted grace is another
matter. What Ido teach is this:—-That the sin of our first parents involved
the whole race of Adam in its fearful consequences; that every one who is
bom of woman is conceived in sin and shapen in iniquity; that the Son of God,
the only begotten of the Father, took upon himself our nature, in order to
make a full, perfect, and sufficient atonement for the sms of the whole world;
that the Holy Spirit, the third person in the ever-blessed Trinity, sanctifies the
heart of the true believer; that without his preventing and cooperating grace
we can neither will nor do any good thing; and that finally, with this grace,
and through the merits and mediation of Jesus Christ, those who faithfully
accept the conditions of the Gospel,—“ submitting themselves” to them who
are duly commissioned to “watch for their souls as they that must give
account,” —will then , and then only , attain to the happiness of Heaven.
Such is my profession of faith; however it may have been misrepresented:
and in the firm conviction of the soundness of this faith, I shall always be ready,
through God’s assistance, to labour for the temporal and eternal welfare of all
within the limits of my charge, I cannot, of course, be held responsible for
such as reject my ministry; but nothing will afford me greater joy than to see
all around me walking in the faith of Christ, united In the bonds of Christian
charity, and “ perfecting holiness in the fear of God.”
I am, my dear Friends,
Your faithful and affectionate Pastor,
W. TEOLLOPE.
Green-Ponds, V. D. L.,
May 4th, 1853.
MINTED BY WILLIAM MATT AND SON, ELIZABETH STEEET, HOBAET TOWN.
