

copy corrected by the author
A PERSIAN FORERUNNER
OF DANTE
BY
REYNOLD A. NICHOLSON
EMERITUS PROFESSOR OF ARABIC IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE




A PERSIAN FORERUNNER
OF DANTE
BY
REYNOLD A. NICHOLSON
EMERITUS PROFESSOR OF ARABIC IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF CAMBRIDGE
PRINTED BY J. WYNN WILLIAMS
TOWYN-ON-SEA, N. WALES
1944




THE following abridged version of a 12th century Persian
mystic’s description of his journey to the spiritual Paradise
was first published in 1943 in the Transactions of the Bombay
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. Subsequently I learned
that owing to war restrictions no offprints could be obtained
from India. Apart from any artistic merit that the little work
might claim, its ideas and the form in which they are cast seemed
to me peculiarly significant. Arrangements therefore were made
to issue a small privately printed edition which would enable a
certain number of copies to be distributed among friends and
other persons interested in the subject, including some eminent
classical and medieval scholars known to me personally or by
reputation.
R. A. NICHOLSON.




A PERSIAN FORERUNNER OF DANTE.
During the twelfth and thirteenth centuries of our era the
Sufi doctrine was moulded into new literary forms by three great
poets—Sana’!, Faridu’ddin ‘Attar, and Jalalu’ddin Rumi—whose
work is so original and creative that we may justly regard this
period as the Golden Age of Persian mysticism. Sana’i, the
oldest of the three, died circa 1150 a.d. Concerning his life very
little is known; it was mainly passed at Ghaznah, where he
found patrons who could appreciate his religious poetry and also
his skill as a professional encomiast. He has recorded the names
of some of them, including court dignitaries, and extolled their
virtues in his most famous work, the Hadiqatu’l-Haqa'iq or
“ Garden of Realities ”, which he dedicated to the Ghaznavid
Sultan Bahramshah. The Hadiqah is a long versified homily,
made up of the same miscellaneous ingredients as the prose dis-
course or sermon which had been already elaborated by Sufi
Shaykhs for the instruction of their disciples. It is hardly too
much to say that Sana’i was the father of Persian religious and
philosophical poetry in the only form that allows room for any
full and coherent exposition of the subject. The family likeness
of the Hadiqah to the Mathnawi is unmistakable. Jalalu’ddin
often quotes and imitates “ the Divine Book” (Ilahi-namah)so
he calls it —of the Sage {Hakim) of Ghaznah. Western readers
who find the Hadiqah uninteresting may be surprised by the ex-
tracts given below from one of the author’s minor works, a short
descriptive poem bearing the title Sayru’l-‘ Ibad ila'l-Ma 'ad, “ the
Journey of God’s Creatures (mankind) to the Afterworld ”. In
this masterpiece of grotesque imagination Sana’i depicts the re-
turn of the fallen soul to its Divine origin and ultimate home.
Dike Dante, he tells how in the dark wilderness he met a Guide
who escorted him through all the limbos of mortal anguish and
terror that must be traversed ere the goal is reached. By way of
prelude he traces figuratively the first movements of the ascend-
ing soul —its evolution from the vegetive and animal natures into
the rational faculty which constitutes its true being. Only then
can the “ traveller ”, i.e. the reasonable soul, enter on the mystic
path of self-purification under the auspices of a Shaykh inspired
by Universal Reason.
Though faithful so far as it goes, the following translation
covers but a small number of verses selected for the purpose of
exhibiiting the poet’s ideas and illustrating his treatment of the
topic. It is impossible to read the Sayru’l- 1 Ibad without being
reminded of the Divina Commedia, especially the Inferno. The


parallelism of thought, diction and structure is not accidental.
There are curious details which point to a common source and
confirm the now prevailing opinion that Dante, by whatever
means and through whatever channels his knowledge was ac-
quired, drew considerably upon materials preserved in Islamic
legend and tradition.
I
Cast out from Heaven, in thraldom miserable
I came to this low world and found a Nurse 1
Coeval with the motion of the skies.
Adam of old she fostered, and hath charge
To lead his children up the scale of life
According to their measure and degree.
She is the Whole to which all things that grow
Belong as parts, the primal stock whence all
Draw power to grow and propagate their kind.
’Tis she that bids the cypress rise unbowed ;
Nay, Man himself, for whom the heavens were made,
She, moving sap-like, makes erect and tall.
Long did I roam those deserts dark and wild,
Those mountains haunted by fierce beasts of prey,
Till loathing filled my heart and hungry eyes.
Then woke in me a sense of vision high.
The Reasonable Soul displayed her face
And I was lifted up from earth to heaven.
But still my baser self would drag me down,
And I became a devil and beast again,
Tugged to and fro between contending sides.
Bewildered, leaderless, no help nor hope,
At last I ran as from a house on fire
Into the narrow upward-winding Way—
i The vegetive soul, whose functions are growth, assimilation, and re-
production.


A Way right perilous, the Summit far.
Thou who hast none to guide thee but a beast,
What is thy journey’s happiest end ? The grave.
II
Amidst the gloom I spied an aged man
Of radiant aspect, venerable, calm,
Like the true Moslem in a faithless land.
“Dark was the night”, I said, “and 10, the Moon !
Dire was the fever, at thy touch it fled.
But who art thou ? Declare thine origin.”
“I am beyond all substance and all space :
My father God’s own chiefest Minister,
Eternity’s first-fruit, Creation’s cause. 2
’Tis not from foolishness ; for reason good
By His command I stay, a prince no less,
In this abode of grime and fetid air.
Oh, leave the charnel-house to curs fed full
With rotting bones. Step out upon this Path
Back to the ancient City, thy lost home.
Come, seek a Sage who can protect and guide.
To him cling fast, tread down the beast within,
And so deliver both thyself and me.
Fear not this tribulation will consume
Thy strength: a fire it is, and yet a fire
Whence springs the Water of Eternal Life.
The earth-soul dies, the angel-soul is born.
Be thou a lowly foot to follow me,
So wilt thou gain the headship spiritual.”
2 The reasonable soul, symbolized by the Stiff spiritual guide {ptr, murshid)
describes itself as the child of the Logos (Universal Reason), which is the
final cause of creation and which Moslem mystics identify with the pre-existent
“ Reality ” or “ Spirit ” of Mohammed.


With many a silent word unsyllabled
He gave me heart and light and eyes to see.
Together we set out upon the Way.
11l
The first day brought us to a noisome hill,
An ash-heap overrun by herds of wolves,
Their toothless jaws befouled with carrion gore.
Condemned to fight the shadows of themselves,
Still do they snarl and mumble bones and live
For ever hungry, miserable, inane.
And there I saw a viper with four mouths
And seven faces in a single head,
Gulching at every breath what prey it found.
“This is the mortal nature”, said my Guide,
“Devourer of the pilgrims on the Way;
This is the dread that halts the Caravan.
Soon would it rob thee of thy light and life
But courage! Thou art safe with me, who bring
The emerald to burst this viper’s eye.” 1
He spoke and set his face towards the hill.
When the brute saw him, in a trice it turned,
Swept with its tail the road and slunk away.
Thence came we to a vale where I descried
Many a fiend whose eyes were in his nape
Asquint, and in his heart a spiteful tongue.
From that foul haunt of Malice we sped on
To Greed made visible in savage forms
And faces murky with the smoke of Hell—
i An allusion to the old belief that if a venomous snake looks at an emer-
ald, its eyes start out of its head and it becomes totally blind.


Baboons long-handed : some ran furiously
To seize, while some on haunches heavy as lead,
Casting dull looks at one another, cowered.
“Master”, said I, “this region full of bane
Who holds in fee ? ” “A dotard”, he replied,
“Numbering a hundred thousand years and more.
Ugly, cantankerous, miserly and mean,
Naught but a sour grimace hath he to give,
As though his hoards lay in the farthest sky.”
Gnashing our teeth, we left these apes behind
And gained the shore of a vast gulf that froze
My blood, so terrible the passage seemed.
“Forward with firm undaunted heart! ” said he ;
“Beside thee here is Moses, rod in hand,
To part the sea where many a Pharaoh drowns.
But thou must chain all devils, spawn of clay,
And straightway purge thyself of passion vile :
So wilt thou voyage safely and arrive.”
Then he became the pilot, I the ship;
He Jonah, I the Fish in that dark sea,
Till land we touched ; and 10, my feet were dry.
“And now we mount”, he said. I stood amazed,
Seeing nor earth nor water any more,
Nothing but empty unsubstantial air.
Methought, to mount in air is dangerous.
Can wingless body do the work of mind
Or follow where imagination soars ?
“Nay, leave the bow of mind unstrung”, said he ;
“Be a straight arrow, not a crooked bow,
And fly towards the mark on feathered feet.”


Even so I did and set my face to Heaven,
Like Nimrod whom the vultures bore aloft. 1
Soon rested we within a realm of light,
Cold, silvery, that waned and waxed anew.
“The Sultan’s courier”, 2 said my Guide, “reigns here,
Running to serve him, speedier than fire.”
And, farther,on, I saw in a green isle
A castle tenanted by sorcerers
With heads of dragons and with fishy tails,
Who made the evil things appear as good ;
Dunghills their art could change to roseries
And dress the raven in gay plumes of gold.
All lusts and sensualities were seen
Pictured, as in Zalikha’s secret bower
What time she would have lain with Joseph there. 3
Through flaming pits that house the scorpion-brood
Of Anger, Concupiscence, Pride, we passed.
“This”, said my Leader, “is the purge for souls,
The best and wholesomest in all the world.
This poison thou must swallow fearlessly,
’Tis freedom, health, and hidden strength and life.”
When midst the dark I drained it to the lees,
Night vanished, and I saw glad rays of dawn
Break of a sudden over distant hills.
My eyes were opened to a Paradise
Of azure ports and towers. He bade me look.
“ Time’s end ”, he said. “ Death cannot touch thee
now.’’
1 Nimrod, it is said, attempted to fly to Heaven in a chest borne by vultures
for the purpose of making: war on the God of Abraham.
2 The Moon..
3 These lines refer to an episode in the Moslem story of the temptation of
Joseph by Potiphar’s wife.
