

A PIONEER.
MEMOIR OF THE
REV. JOHN THOMAS.
G. STRAINGER ROWE.




[?]young[?]




A PIONEER.
A Memoir
OF THE
REV. JOHN THOMAS,
MISSIONARY TO THE FRIENDLY ISLANDS.
BY
G. STRINGER ROWE.
LONDON:
T. WOOLMER, 2, Castle Street, City Road, E.C.,
And G 6, Paternoster Row, E.C.
1885.


“THEN SAID I, AH, LOUD GOD ! BEHOLD, I CANNOT SPEAK :
FOR lAM A CHILD. BUT THE LORD SAID UNTO ME, SAY NOT,
I AM A CHILD : FOR THOU SHALT GO TO ALL THAT I SHALL
SEND THEE, AND WHATSOEVER I COMMAND THEE THOU SHALT
speak.”— Jeremiah i. 6, 7.


CONTENTS.
CHAP. PAG L
I. The Forge and the Call 1
11. The Missionary and his Mission—The Journey . 14
111. Beginnings of the Work 26
IV. Apparent Failure, and a New Start ... 36
V. At Haabai 55
VI. At Nukualofa 74
VII. At Vavau 89
VIII. Return to Nukualofa 109
IX. A Visit Home, and Return 120
X. At Tonga again, and Final Fap.ewkll . . . 125
XI. At Home: Last Days 132




A MEMOIR OF
THE REV. JOHN THOMAS.
CHAPTER I.
THE FORGE AND THE CALL.
HAW) by the riclily wooded slopes of the beauti-
ful Cleut Hills, there lie close together, about
three miles from Stourbridge, the two villages of
Hagley and Clent; and at the crossing of the
Kidderminster and Bromsgrove roads, there still stands
in Hagley the forge where one generation after
another has brought its smith’s work to be done and
its horses to be shod.
In the summer of the year 1824, a young man
may be seen at work in this smithy, as, indeed, he
may have been on almost any working day for the
last dozen years, save when he has been forced, as
he would tell you, “to play ” because of sickness.
He is twenty-seven years of age, and is well skilled
in the ancient craft of a shoeing and jobbing smith,
handling his tools like one who not only understands
but likes his business. As you watch him at his
labour, you feel that he is far from reaching your
A


ideal of a son of Vulcan. He is somewhat spare in
build, and lias the look of a man who knows what it
is to suffer; and, in fact, his health is by no means
robust, as you would judge from an almost dejected
look that sometimes settles in his eyes. But got
him into conversation, and his aspect brightens, and
you find him well worth both talking and listening
to. Hot that you have by any hap here lit upon a
hidden genius. He would shrink, in scared modesty,
from any claim to such a title, just as any one who
knows him would smile at the idea of so distinguish-
ing him. You find that he is a Methodist local
preacher, and that in his case the name represents
a very extensive reality of work. Thus he will tell
you, not as an extraordinary thing, that last Sunday
he borrowed a neighbour’s pony and rode to Tipton,
where he preached four times, and that he now feels
somewhat tired, as he had preached every night in
the week before, chiefly out of doors. If you
sympathize with the simple devotion of a Christian
service like his, you will be interested in his story,
which, having made sure of your sympathy, he is
quite ready to tell you.
John Thomas —such is his name—was born in
the cottage of a working man in the neighbouring
village of Clent. His schooling meant that he was
taught to read and to write fairly well; and it
meant scarcely anything more. The boy, not being
as robust as other village lads, shows a liking for
quieter enjoyments than they, and, when the rare
chance comes, gladly betakes himself to books.


Still, on fine Sunday evenings, lie accompanies the
others, as a matter of course, in the games for which
this was the chosen time. Looking hack, he can
now interpret some things which befell him in his
narrow life of thought and feeling in those boyish
days. His conscience troubled him again and again,
when he had been led into that which he knew to
he wrong. On one Sunday evening he and his
companions, who were at their sports in a meadow,
were greatly terrified by what they described as the
fall of a fiery body apparently in the field where they
were. The fright caused by this meteorite—for
such it seems to have been—had a lasting effect
upon his mind, insomuch that he cannot recollect
that he ever joined in the Sunday play again. He
sang in the choir of the village church, and in due
time was “ confirmed.” When in his eighteenth
year he was accustomed to shut himself up with a
large old Bible, and with The Whole Duty of Man.
There was but little light to help him in the parish
pulpit; and he had no friend to whom he could
trust the secret of his trouble. Indeed, he had a
great dread lest any one should suspect that he was
addicted to prayer. His parents told him that it
was high time for him now to accompany them to
the Sacrament. So he went, having read carefully a
Companion to the Altar ; and thenceforth his honest
wish to do right and live well became a greater
burden and perplexity to him than ever. Thus he
grew joyless and shrank from society, betaking him-
self at early morning into the solitude of the woods,


where he read and sometimes prayed. So things
went on until lie was twenty-two years of age, hy
which time a Methodist chapel had been built in his
native village of Clent, and he, having had now a
long choral experience at Hagley Church, felt some-
what pleased at being asked to give occasional help
in the singing at the new chapel. The preaching
which he heard here seems, for some time, merely to
have produced a general impression on his mind that
he was listening to the truth. As he became more
attached to the preachers, and more convinced of the
sincerity of the little band of Christian people
amongst whom he now frequently worshipped, he
was led without much difficulty to join them more
intimately by attending a class-meeting. In the
course of a few weeks afterwards he lost the burden
he had so long carried, and found peace with God
through faith in Jesus Christ.
Together with the liberty and gladness which he
had gained there came the longing to do good to
others; and he waited, wondering much if it would
ever be possible for him to work for the Lord after
the manner of those good men to whom he owed so
much. One of his first decided steps in the direction
of practical service was to introduce family worship
into his own home. He had to conduct it himself,
a task which was made harder by knowing that his
parents and other members of the family, though
giving their consent, had at that time very little
sympathy with him.
The next advance was the beginning of a weekly


prayer-meeting in Hagley, in the house of one Mrs.
Melley, which John Thomas conducted; and here it
was that he made his first essays in public speaking,
in the way of addresses generally founded upon some
passage of Scripture. Then he attempted to gather
children together on a Sunday afternoon for teaching,
and with some success. But at this point he found
himself in collision with the rector, who sent for
him, and took him severely to task for having for-
saken, as he said, the Church, and having asked
people to send their children to be taught to read.
The clergyman further insisted that he should at
once give up his evil ways in visiting the sick and
the ungodly in his parish, and threatened that, unless
he adopted a different course, steps should be taken
to stop him. Upon all this the young blacksmith’s
simple remark was noted in his little diary: “ May
God pity him, and help me to go on! ”
And he did go on, being soon found addressing
the people out of doors in neighbouring villages, and
taking part in an attempt made by a zealous local
preacher to establish Methodist preaching in Hagley,
an attempt which was opposed by vehement abuse,
and by “a rabble shouting, cursing, and singing
lewd songs, drumming on tin cans, and laughing
uproariously.”
In due Methodist course Mr. Thomas was admitted
into the honourable number of local preachers, and
did good work, taking long journeys and holding
many services up and down the wide Dudley Circuit,
and strengthened by manifold evidence that his


labour was not in vain. For this work he made the
best preparation in his power by prayerful study of
the Scriptures, and the reading of Wesley’s Works
and some of the writings of Doddridge. When
opportunity served, he went to hear famous preachers.
Thus, in 1821, he was present at the Missionary
Anniversary at Wednesbury, where he listened to
the Eev. Joseph Taylor and Robert Newton, and
was greatly moved by all he heard at the public
meeting which followed. Already his heart had
been strangely stirred by reading the Life of Henry
Martyn, which had wrought in him emotions and
longings which he could not understand. As he
begins his twenty-fifth year, he writes: “ This day,
in reading the missionary accounts, my heart flows
with love to God for His work. It is glorious news
to me. I know of nothing that gives me such de-
light as the spread of the Gospel of Christ, and to
hear of the care of God over His dear servants in
all their difficulties and dangers.” He goes on to
record that these things “ raise desires in me ; ” and
then checks himself abruptly, adding, “ But why do
I give way to such thoughts ? It seems to me
impossible.” At another time, he thus notes his
communing with himself: “ What is the cause that
I feel so anxious to engage in this important work,
I cannot tell. When I read or hear of missions my
heart is cheered within me, and my soul seems
elevated at the prospect of enjoying the privilege of
sharing the blessing of the Gospel with some dark
and idolatrous people. What to do in it, I do not


know. I feel so ignorant; and it seems so unlikely
to me, that I am ashamed to speak to any of God’s
ministers about it.”
Together with these hardly defined and diffident
hopes, there were frequent disturbing thoughts in
the mind of Mr. Thomas on account of his apparently
insurmountable bodily ailments. Weakness, often
attended with pain, subjected him to much depression
of feeling, and again and again he records his appre-
hension that his course will end in an early death.
In 1823 he was altogether laid aside from work by
extreme feebleness, loss of appetite, much drowsiness,
and pain in the head, accompanied by stupor, which
prevented his reading and made continuous thought
impossible.
In the early part of 1824 he seems to have gained
some strength, and once more his mind is fixed on
the mission work. To this he was much stimulated
by his attending the annual missionary services at
Dudley and Birmingham, and especially by hearing
the Eev. Eichard Watson’s great sermon on Mic.
v. 2—4.
Such is the story of this young man’s life. His
heart is still continually drawn to the idea of
employment in the mission service abroad; but a
shrinking sense of unworthiness and unfitness holds
him back from making known his feelings and hopes.
So he goes on working at the forge, and finding time,
as we have seen, for much faithful employment in
preaching, Sunday school teaching, and visiting the
sick and dying, furnishing Ins mind .by diligent


use of all opportunities of good reading: and thus,
in the only right way of waiting, he waits to see
what the Lord would have him to do.
One day in August, 1824, as Mr. Thomas was
returning from a service at Clent, in company with
the preacher, the Eev. James Kosser, who was then
the junior minister in the Dudley Circuit, he for the
first time lets the long hidden secret of his soul utter
itself, and tells how ho cannot rid his mind of the
thought that the Lord is calling him to further
service, and that the impression grows more distinct
that he should offer himself for mission work. To
him the young minister gives a kind hearing and
wise counsel.
During the next three months a very important
step was taken. So fully is Mr. Thomas possessed
by the belief that he is somehow to become a
missionary, that his plans begin to arrange them-
selves about this central thought, and he enters in
his diary various reflections upon the matter.
Amongst them he notes the conclusion that, if he
went abroad, he should not like to go alone, and adds
that he knows of one, whose name he will not let
himself commit even to paper, who, he judges, would
be a suitable person for a missionary’s wife. He has
formed a high opinion of her Christian devotion, but,
with characteristic self-diffidence, thinks it would be
presumptuous and hopeless for him as a mere
mechanic to try to win her; yet he believes that the
inducement of occupation in the mission work would
plead for him where other arguments would fail. A


few days afterwards he is able to record that his
unnamed “ friend ” has consented, which he accepts
as a fresh token that he is taking the right path in
approaching the foreign work.
The friend in question was Miss Sarah Hartshorne,
who for several years past had, all unknown to him,
been longing for employment in missionary service,
and, seeing no likelihood of this, had given herself
with great energy to church work in her own neigh-
bourhood, where she led two classes, one at Old
Swinford and one at Stourbridge, and was a diligent
collector for the funds of the Wesleyan Missionary
Society. She saw in Mr. Thomas’s proposal an
indication of the Divine will, and eventually became
his wife, serving with him faithfully and devotedly,
to his great help and comfort, in the work of the
Gospel for nearly forty years.
Towards the end of 1824, the Dev. Joseph Sut-
cliffe, the Superintendent of the circuit, having
conferred with Mr, Dosser, sent for Mr. Thomas to
come and see him at Dudley, and his offer as a
missionary was fully and kindly discussed, and much
fatherly and prudent advice given. A few days
afterwards, in the early morning, Mr. and Mrs.
Dosser appeared at the smithy door at Hagley, and
found the object of their search busy at the forgo
making horse-shoes. Their message effectually put
an end to his work; for they had come 'to tell
him that the Missionary Secretaries had sent word
that they wished to see him in London at once.
Hereupon, like certain other disciples who, at the


Master’s call, “ straightway forsook their nets, and
followed Him,” he, having, as he described it, “ worked
the near side of a pair of saddle - horse - shoes,”
left them unfinished, and, doffing his leathern
apron, accompanied his visitors into the house, where
the unexpected news was made known to his
parents.
Those horse-shoes were left to some other work-
man to finish; for Mr. Thomas was obliged to set
himself forthwith to- prepare for a walk to Dudley,
where he was to take the stage-coach for London the
next day. On the following morning, at five o’clock,
he started on the top of the coach, and after a cold
ride found himself in London at eight in the evening,
and received a kindly welcome from the Eev. George
Morley at the Mission House in Hatton Garden. It
was Saturday night; and one of the first things he
heard was that he was to preach at Chelsea on the
next evening. This appointment he fulfilled; and
at the close of the service was greatly surprised to
find that he had been preaching a “ trial sermon,”
and that the Eev. John Mason, another of the Mis-
sionary Secretaries, had been amongst his hearers,
and now waited in the vestry to accompany him
to the Mission House.
Before the end of the year Mr. Thomas had ap-
peared for examination before the Committee; and, a
cordial' recommendation having come from the
Dudley Circuit quarterly meeting, he was told that
his probable destination would be the Eriendly
Islands. After a few days spent at home, for


making final arrangements, he hastened hack to
London, in order that he might receive some little
instruction and preparation for his work. Once
more he returned home; and when next he appeared
at the Mission House he was accompanied by his
wife. They were told that they might reckon upon
sailing about the middle of March; and the interval
was diligently turned to a good use. One Sunday
they heard Dr. Adam Clarke preach, and were
immeasurably delighted. In the afternoon they
attended a service in St. Paul’s; and Mr. Thomas
came away thinking that he preferred “a simple,
earnest, spiritual service in a Methodist chapel.”
While waiting to start upon his voyage, the time
for which was postponed again and again,- Air.
Thomas wrote: “ I am now going to encounter new
and untried difficulties, first at sea, a long sea
voyage, with strange and possibly worldly and wicked
people; and this is only preparatory to my taking
up my abode amongst rude and barbarous tribes, far
beyond the bounds of British protection, where I
have' to, live, and labour, and suffer, and possibly to
die.
“ I was never so conscious of my own utter unfit-
ness for this great undertaking, or of my own
nothingness. The question is, then, why do I
attempt to go ? What is my object ? If Ido know
anything of my own heart, it is that I may teach
the heathen of the Friendly Islands the way to
heaven. I love their souls. They are in error.
Darkness has covered their minds. I do not go


alone. The promise is, ‘ Lo, I am with you alway,
even to the end of the world.’ ‘ Say not, I am a
child: for thou shalt go to all that I shall send thee,
and whatsoever I command thee thou shalt speak.
Be not afraid of their faces; for I am with thee to
deliver thee, saith the Lord.’ ‘My presence shall go
with thee, and I will give thee rest.’ A blessed
sense of His presence I now have while writing, and
have had for some time; and I can say, Through
Christ strengthening me, I can do all things; and,
Lord, I am ready to go with Thee to prison and to
death.”
On March the 22nd, 1825, Mr. Thomas was
ordained at the Poplar chapel. The Eevs. John
Gaulter, George Morley, and Eichard Watson took
paid in the service, and the latter delivered the charge.
At the same time two others were set apart for the
work of the ministry, being designated to missionary
service. One was Charles Bates, who, after sixteen
faithful years spent in Newfoundland and the West
Indies, died in Tortola, saying, “ I am on the Hock
Christ Jesus. I cleave to God.” The other was
Thomas Turner, who spent the next sixteen years in
Canada, and then returned home, continuing in
active work in various circuits until 1861, when he
died in great peace.
After much vexatious delay in the sailing of
their vessel, Mr. Thomas, who had been attending
the six o’clock morning service at Great Queen
Street, where young Eichard Treffry was the preacher,
received intelligence that the ship was lying oil’


Gravesend, whither he and his wife at once hetook
themselves, accompanied by Mr. Mason and by Mrs.
Harrison, Mr. Morley’s daughter, whose kindness very
deeply impressed them. Finding that the vessel,
after all, would not sail until the next day, they
remained on shore for the night, being hospitably
entertained by the llev. E. Gower, for whom Mr.
Thomas preached in the evening. On the following
morning they went on board, and the vessel got
under way in fine weather and with a fair wind.


CHAPTER II.
THE MISSIONARY AND HIS MISSION—THE JOURNEY.
miIUS John Thomas and Ins wife are fairly
JL embarked on their great sacred adventure;
and, in the enforced leisure of a long voyage, as they
detach themselves, by daily lengthening distance,
from the scenes of their past life, are able to take a
more and more complete survey of that past; while,
far away before them, hidden in a haze of distant
mystery, lies their remote destination, with all its
certainties of toil and its possibilities of suffering,
and peril, and death. So far as the foregoing brief
record enables us, let us seek to enter into their
thoughts, and make clear to ourselves their posi-
tion.
The first thing that strikes us is that the brief
history already sketched is, if uncommon facts are
sought for, about as flat and featureless as a history
well could he; and we must further acknowledge
that this man, separated for a prodigious enterprise,
stands out in no one particular from the most
ordinary level of mankind. Indeed, in very many
respects, he must needs suffer by comparison with
others. His natural endowments are in nowise re-
markable ; and his physical condition, much affecting


his mental vigour, is uncertain and often feeble. In
negative addition to these drawbacks, the man is
without education and wholly illiterate. At this
moment, as, in intervals of rest from sea-sickness, he
tries to enter in his journal his impressions of the new
life in which he finds himself, he is not able even to
write his own language correctly. Neither has he
that buoyant self-confidence which enables many, as
heavily weighted as he, to rise above their disad-
vantages, and not only to hold their own, but make
it worth holding. He has a painful, shrinking sense
of his want of fitness for the position he has now to
occupy, and will carry that distress of consciousness
with him unabated to the end of his days. Yet
good and wise men, and men of culture and largo
experience, have, with deliberate counsel, entrusted
to him the carrying out of a great and costly under-
taking, about the conditions of which scarcely
anything is known, except that it is encompassed
with enormous difficulties and great danger. With
the completed record in our hands, it is easy to say
that the result justified their act; but at this
particular moment, what can be said for it ? It has
only one plea in its defence, and that a plea which
ordinary prudence would not recognise. They not
only admit it, but find it all-sufficient. They have
before them evidence that the Lord has called this
village blacksmith to do His work, and has already
used him for that which, without Divine help, no
man could accomplish. If any one object that the
man lacks power, and training, and experience, they


are ready to reply that they have had manifold
proofs that still, as in the beginning, it pleases God
to choose the foolish, and weak, and base things of
the world, and things which are despised, to work
out His purposes. Had a more gifted and cultivated
agent been at hand, they would have thankfully
employed him; but they hold, without any misgiving,
that the choice is not theirs, but is made for them,
and now shown to them by the Lord Himself, as
certainly as the apostles believed when “ the lot fell
on Matthias.”
There is not much to record of the voyage. The
vessel in which Mr. and Mrs. Thomas sailed was the
Andromeda, of four hundred tons, which left Graves-
end on April 28th, 1825, and reached Sydney on
October the 14th. They had with them a man who
had accompanied the Eev. Walter Lawry from the
colony to the Friendly Islands, and was now engaged
to act as a servant to the mission; also a native boy,
Tamma, whom Mr. Lawry had brought away with
him. From this boy Mr. Thomas hoped to get much
information during the voyage concerning the Tongan
language, but found him far more troublesome than
helpful, as he got into frequent mischief, being a
source of much amusement to the other passengers, who
took great notice of him, and taught him a good deal
which very much hindered the worthy missionary’s
attempt to keep him in order. Upon the whole, it
was a good voyage, with no unusual proportion of
foul or light winds, and with very little beyond the
ordinary incidents. To our travellers, who had


scarcely if ever seen the sea before, everything was
strange and wonderful. Mr. Thomas’s forebodings
as to his fellow-passengers were not altogether ful-
filled ; for they seem to have generally treated him
with kindness and respect. This took him by
surprise, as he was so painfully aware of his social
disadvantages that he expected to be at least passed
over and neglected. The first time he preached on
board was a sore trial to him; but there were some
who evidently thought better of the sermon than did
the preacher himself; and afterwards he preached
frequently, and sometimes with comfort. He sought
also, in various ways, to do good amongst the crew.
On the whole, bis time on board the Andromeda was
not very happy. He records the belief that there
was not another religious person on the vessel
beside himself and his wife. Passing suddenly out
of the simple life of his village home, he felt acutely
the change which threw him unprepared into a
society, all whose methods of thought and living
were strange to him. Some of the passengers were
people of good education; and this abased and
troubled him most of all, as each day’s intercourse
with them disclosed to him his own deficiencies.
Then there were times when his old bodily weakness
returned, accompanied as usual with much depression
of feeling. At such moments there is no wonder
that he debated anxiously with himself as to whether,
after all, he might not have served God better by
remaining at Hagley, and working at the forge.
Yielding to despondency, ho cannot find words
B


sufficiently doleful to describe his condition and
forebodings. Again the cloud lifts, and things look
bright again.
Soon after they had passed St. Antonio, one of
the Cape de Verde Islands, having been thirty days
out, a schooner was seen astern, and gaining upon
them. At the request of the passengers, who hoped
to get fruit and fresh provisions, the captain con-
sented to lay to, and let the vessel come up with
them. Hereupon, to the captain’s surprise, the
stranger slackened sail; and, while all sorts of con-
jecture went on as to her meaning, she made
known her intentions by firing a gun at the Andro-
meda. All sail was now hoisted, and the chase
began in earnest. The two big guns on board were
got ready for action; and, no shot being found at
the moment, were loaded with bundles of large spike-
nails. Cutlasses were given out to the men, and
firearms of all kinds were looked up. Mr. Thomas
had a fowling-piece and a brace of pistols, and these
were loaded in readiness, “ for the use of those,” he
writes, “ who may think it their duty to use them.”
It is very clear, however, that he had made up his
mind that, whatever happened, this would not be his
own duty. While all on board were in a great
excitement of preparation, casting bullets and getting
arms ready, he betook himself to prayer. The
breeze freshened, and, after two hours’ chase, another
vessel came in sight* which bore down towards the
pirate as if on friendly terms with her. Shortly
after the first vessel fired another gun, but to leeward,


which was taken as a friendly signal; but the
captain, instead of bringing up in response, kept on
all sail, and soon lost sight of the suspicious craft
which had caused so much consternation. That the
suspicions were well-founded was proved by their
falling in, about a week afterwards, with a Swedish
brig, last from Cadiz, laden with salt and Catalonia
wine, which they found had been boarded and
pillaged by the crew of evidently the same vessel
that had chased the Andromeda.
On reaching Hobart Town, it was a great relief
and delight to go on shore; and Mr. Thomas was
greatly helped and strengthened there by happy
intercourse with the Eev. Benjamin Carvosso. It
was also no common pleasure to meet here Mr.
Hutchinson, who was appointed to accompany Mr.
Thomas to the Friendly Islands.
On the 6th of October they left Hobart Town to
resume their voyage to Australia, and on the 14th
reached Sydney, where they were detained until the
end of the following May, finding great difficulty
in getting a vessel to take them to their destination.
In the meantime Mr. Thomas preached frequently,
but seems to have been painfully impressed with
the low and feeble religious condition of Method-
ism in the colony. Here the other missionary to
Tonga, Mr. Hutchinson, joined them; and on
May 31st, 1826, the mission party sailed from
Sydney in the Elizabeth for their new and
unknown home. As they pass out of sight
of the friends who have gathered to bid them


God-speed, let us learn what we can of the scene
and story of the mission into which they are going
to enter.
The Friendly Islands, so named by Captain
Cook, on account of the good treatment he received
from the people when he first visited them in 1773,
stretch almost directly north and south between lat.
18 and 23 S., and long. 173 and 176 W. They
lie about one thousand miles nearer to the equator
than New Zealand, and are separated from Fiji on
the W.N.W. by two hundred miles of open sea.
They consist of some two hundred islands and islets,
less than forty of which are inhabited. They are
arranged in three sub-groups. The principal of
these is the southernmost, and takes its name from
the chief island Tonga, or Tongatabu—sacred Tonga
—which frequently now gives its title to the whole
archipelago. Next, at a distance of about thirty
miles, comes the Haabai cluster; and then, about
sixty miles still further north, the Yavau or Haaful-
uhao group.
Of the people it was reported by voyagers that
they were a fine and handsome race, speaking a
beautiful language, and cultivating to a high degree
the fertile soil of their islands. But they were
withal much given to war, which was carried out
with horrible cruelties, and, in many cases, accom-
panied by cannibalism, though never to so great an
extent as in Fiji or New Zealand. The religion
of the people was made up of dark superstitions
which held them in terror, and led to much cruelty


and suffering. It was hard to define the distinction
between the great chiefs and the gods of Tonga; the
idea of chieftainship always partaking very largely of
a sacred character.
Amongst these people there was made a very
remarkable experiment in the way of Christian
teaching, by the London Missionary Society in 1797.
A great expedition, including thirty missionaries, was
sent out to occupy different posts in the South Seas.
Nearly all of these were Christian mechanics of
approved piety, who were thus sent forth with the
idea of converting the people to Christianity and
civilisation at the same time. Ten of the number
were landed in the Friendly Islands. The oft-told
story need not be repeated here. The enterprise
ended disastrously. Many causes combined to pro-
duce this result, not the least of which was that the
Christian messengers found their work hindered by
a fierce revolutionary war, in connection with
which some of their number were put to death;
and those who were left, save one, who proved
faithless and remained amongst the natives, retired
from the group altogether about three years after
their arrival.
Twenty-two years passed away without any
attempt to renew the mission, and then the Wesleyan
Conference, in 1822, put the Friendly Islands into
its list of stations, followed by the words, “ Two to be
sent.” While the Missionary Committee were looking
about them for opportunity and agents to carry out
the policy thus avowed, and, indeed, at the very time


that the Conference was making the announcement,
the work was being actually begun. The I!cv.
Walter Lawry, in New South Wales, greatly moved
by the news of abundant missionary success in
Tahiti after many years of weary waiting, and
especially incited by conversations with the widow
of one of the members of the ill-fated expedition in
1797, offered to go to the Friendly Islands. So
earnest was he in the matter that no difficulties were
allowed to hinder him; and he even bore personally
a large share of the cost of chartering and fitting
out a vessel for Tonga.
Mr. Lawry landed in Tonga tabu in August, 1822.
At first the conduct of the chiefs and people greatly
encouraged him; but within a short time there was
a painful change, and obstacles of all sorts were
thrown in the missionary’s way. He built a mission
house with offices, and a blacksmith’s shop, and
planted ground with fruit-trees, and stocked a small
farm with cattle and poultry brought from New
South Wales. But in less than fourteen months
after his arrival, before he had been able to over-
come the initial difficulties of his work, the health
of Mrs. Lawry compelled him to leave. Thus
once more was the enterprise broken off; and
now, after an interval of nearly two years, a
new expedition was on its way to take up the work
again.
About a week out from Sydney, the Elizabeth
encountered very bad weather, and was once in


imminent peril from a waterspout, which dispersed
just before it reached the vessel. After sighting and
passing New Zealand, they found better weather;
but the winds were light, and therefore the progress
slow. As they got further north, an incident
happened which, in several ways, tended to make
the mission party uneasy. A number of muskets,
cutlasses, and bayonets were brought out and ar-
ranged conveniently at different parts of the deck,
so as to be at hand in case of any attack by the
islanders.
When about 130 miles from her destination, the
Elizabeth seems to have been caught in nearly the
centre of a furious storm. Heavy clouds, with
frequent lightning and thunder, shut down suddenly
upon her in terrible blackness, and a fierce gale from
the north-east split two of her sails; then, in an
instant, the gale came from the south-east, and
cau'dit the sails aback. Had she not answered to
O
her helm just at the critical moment, and, with the
little sail left, come to the wind, she must have been
wrecked.
After a boisterous night, the hilly island of Eua
came in sight on June 23rd; and in the afternoon
of the same day the missionaries got the first
glimpse of Tongatabu. On the next morning, as
they approached the small island of Eueiki, two
canoes put out from it to the vessel, bringing yams,
bananas, and sugarcane for sale. Then from the
same island came an old chief, Nuku, who proved to
be a man of some importance. He dined on board


and stayed all night, leaving a favourable impression
on the visitors.
It was not till three days later that the vessel,
hindered by strong and unfavourable winds, came to
anchor. In the meantime the missionaries had seen
Charles Tindall, one of the two white men whom Mr.
Lawry had left in the islands, and were thankful to
find that he had held his ground as a Christian.
The intelligence which he gave them about the ill-
treatment which he and his companion had received
from Palau, the chief under whose protection Mr.
Lawry had lived, led them to look towards some
other part of the island as their first station. They
went ashore, while the Elizabeth, which was in
wretched trim, and, being close reefed because of the
strong breeze, kept falling off to leeward, still stood
off at a distance. They met with a very kind recep-
tion from Ata, the chief at Hihifo, who freely gave
them permission to settle on his territory, and
promised them full protection of their persons and
property, and entire liberty to carry on their work.
Before they left, a piece of land, in a very favour-
able position, was marked out and presented to
them.
On the 28 th of June the vessel anchored in
Maria Bay, and preparations were at once made for
landing the mission property, in which the natives
cheerfully assisted with their canoes. The work,
however, was much impeded by stormy weather
and heavy rains. At last, on the sth of July, Mr.
and Mrs. Thomas went on shore, Mr. and Mrs.


Hutchinson having landed the day before. That
night they spread their mattresses on the floor of
Tindall’s little house, abundantly thankful to sleep
on land for the first time for six weeks. A day or
two after, they took temporary possession of a native
hut.


CHAPTER III.
BEGINNINGS OF THE WORK.
JULY 9th was Sunday, and the little band of
Christians joined in worship, one missionary
preaching in the morning and the other in the
afternoon. Very few natives came near, as they
had been told that it was the Sabbath, and that no
business would be done. Another week of hard
work followed, during which the remaining goods
were got ashore, and the land which had been given
to the mission was cleared, and a shed put up as a
store. Then came another Sunday, with the same
simple observance of united worship. On the follow-
ing day the Elizabeth sailed for Valparaiso.
Left thus alone in their remote dwelling-place,
and not knowing when they might have means of
again communicating with the world, out of which
they seemed to have passed, the mission families set
themselves to make a home in Tonga. They had
brought a large wooden framed house with them
complete from Sydney; but when they came to put
it together, some important parts were missing,
which they found afterwards had been stolen by the
natives. They were, however, nearly all recovered.
It evidently struck Mr. Thomas with surprise


that the people were so much like civilised folk
that they wished to he paid for their labour; and
that they would look on complacently while the
white men toiled, and would not offer to help unless
regularly hired.
The demand for wages certainly was not exor-
bitant, and food could generally he procured at a
cheap rate. Thus they bought a pig for a plane-
iron, an egg for a blue bead, four fowls for a
pocket-knife, and forty yams for a chisel. For one
case-knife, one pocket-knife, and two pairs of scissors,
they got a kitchen built. Indeed, every article in
their possession was an object of strong desire on
the part of the people, and it required incessant
watchfulness to keep the property from being stolen;
and, with all their care, the missionaries lost much
by the pilfering of the natives. They would have
lost a great deal more if the chief Ata had not given
orders that their goods were not to be stolen. Ho
gave Mr. Thomas full permission to shoot anybody
that he caught on his premises for a dishonest pur-
pose. The good man kept a gun loaded, and, at one
time, went about his work with a sword in his hand;
but he takes pains to note distinctly in his journal
that he did it only to frighten the people, and would
suffer anything rather than do them harm.
It was, of course, a great drawback, that, through
ignorance of the language, the missionaries could
have very little effective communication with the
Tongans. The two or three white men who had
been in the group for several years acted as inter


preters; but they were illiterate, and learned what
they knew of the language simply by ear. There
was no grammar or other book to aid them. In
fact, the language had, as yet, never been reduced to
a written form. Mr. Thomas began to pick up a few
words; but his attempts to represent them phoneti-
cally show how great were his difficulties, and how
those difficulties were seriously magnified by his own
want of previous education.
In the meantime he was getting to know the
people better than their speech, by means of daily
intercourse with them in the building of the mission
premises, which proved to be a very tedious business,
extending over three months, which were full of
worry, anxious watching of unhoused goods, and
much severe toil. In the midst of all this he writes
—as, indeed, ho frequently wrote to the same effect:
—“ I hope to spend at least one hour each day in
the study of the Tonga language, so that as soon as
possible I may preach to them in their own tongue
the unsearchable riches of Christ. I had much
rather deprive myself of a few earthly comforts for
a time, than that these people should be kept from
the blessings of salvation. It would be better for
me to live on the floor, to be annoyed by rats and
lizards, to bo exposed to wind and rain and robbers,
than that any one soul from this island should
perish through my indulgence.”
On Sunday, October Ist, the little mission
party partook together of the Sacrament of the
Lord’s Supper. There were but four communicants;


but the very smallness of their number in the midst
of a heathen population made the service the more
impressive, and nerved those who took part in it for
a more faithful and self-denying following of the
suffering Saviour. The next day the Quarterly
Meeting was held. Hereupon Mr. Thomas reflects :
“We had peace and harmony. But what a contrast
to what I have witnessed at Dudley, when wo have
had four travelling preachers and forty-four local
preachers, beside leaders and other pious friends!
Those were days of marrow and fatness. But God
does not despise the day of small and feeble things.
We have been kept through this quarter, thank the
Lord! ”
On the Same day he records as follows : “ The
chief sent to obtain the loan of our wheelbarrow, to
wheel his wife in about two miles. This was a
novel thing. Baba herself (the wife) shouted and
laughed aloud, she was so pleased, though at times
almost thrown out; for her attendants knew not
how to balance or guide the carriage. I went some
distance to show them how to use a cord to assist
them in wheeling. The chief appeared much
pleased. He took hold of my hand, and uttered
expressions of love.”
Notwithstanding, however, these expressions of
love, and occasional acts of apparent kindness, it
soon became clear to the missionaries that Ata’s
affection was more fixed upon their property than on
themselves. Some few of the natives had begun to
attend the worship at the Mission House; but now


Ata forbade their coming, and threatened to punish
them with death if they disobeyed. He would seat
himself near the gate on these occasions, and warn
away any whom he saw coming. Still he gave per-
mission to the children to attend; though it was
very little that could be done in the way of teaching
them as yet.
Thus, in patient working and waiting, the year
1826 came to an end. Since the missionaries
arrived, no vessel had touched at any part of the
group which was accessible to them. They still
found great difficulty in getting hold of the language ;
and the chief, Ata, by his capricious treatment and
greedy exactions, caused them much trouble and
anxiety. The hot season had now thoroughly set in,
and was found to be so enervating as to make con-
tinuous work very difficult. A few minor chiefs
showed the missionaries much kindness, and some
seemed to manifest an honest wish to inquire into
their religious system; hut they feared to commit
themselves to any definite course, lest they should
come under the displeasure of Ata. Now and then
the Mission House was visited by the chief from
Nukualofa, and hy some of his people. At this
place, on the north coast of the island, some Tahitian
Christians had settled, and were endeavouring to
teach the doctrines of the Gospel. Many things had
hindered them, especially their - ignorance of the
language; but they seem to have succeeded at least
in this, that they had awakened and fostered a kindly
feeling towards their-religion amongst the natives.


During the earlier months of 1827, very little
advance, if any, seems to have been made ; and poor
Mr. Thomas was sometimes brought down to almost
the lowest point of despondency, which was aggra-
vated, no doubt, by occasional returns of his old bodily
weakness and pain. His colleague in the mission
became very ill, and once or twice seemed near to
death. Between the two men thus shut up together
in the loneliness of this distant service, there had
been, unhappily, from the beginning, a lack of hearty
sympathy, which evidently was made more painful
by Mr. Thomas’s quick sensitiveness, coming, by a
process often to be seen, from a distressing con-
sciousness of his own lack of education and other
equipment for the work. One would gladly pass by
this element in the good man’s life ; hut it occupied
so large a space therein, and helped so effectually
to mould some of its most marked features, that
it cannot be left out of this record without a
considerable sacrifice not only of fidelity, but of
completeness.
Let him speak for himself. “ I have been engaged
to-day chiefly in my study. Had I possessed more
information, and a more competent ability for this
great work before I left home, then I might have
spent more time in the study of the language than I
can now. . . . What a raw, weak, uncultivated wretch
was I when I left old England! And though I
have by study, sorrow, and deep distress, learned
something, yet, even now, how little I know that I
ought to know, and must know before I can be


deserving of the name of a preacher of the Gospel,
much less of a Methodist,, and a Methodist
missionary! ... It is a subject, however, that very
much humbles me, when I see that, through my
inability, the success of the cause is retarded, that
the salvation of souls is possibly delayed. 0 Lord,
do Thou have mercy on me, and on these people !
May they not perish through my weakness and
inability for this work ; but while, through Thy help
and grace, I am using the means, in order to be more
fully qualified, do Thou work upon their hearts,
and incline them to Thee, and let them be a people
prepared for the Lord. 0 let Thy word live
amongst them for ever ! ”
A few other extracts from the journal will be of
interest here, as showing the character and surround-
ings of the mission work at this period.
“April 16th (Easter Monday). — This morning we
were visited by the greatest woman in Tonga. She
is called the Tui Tonya Fifini, and is the sister of
the late Tui Tonya Tanyala, or king ; and the person
who is now called Tui Tonga is her son or nephew.
She is a woman about seventy years of age, very fat
and stout, of a pleasant countenance and speech, and
apparently very mild. About eight years she has
been blind, or dark, as they call it here. She gave
her dress to Mr. Hutchinson. This is the Tonga
fashion, to give the dress away. She had several
aged chief women with her —one to lead her. We
gave her as a present about nine yards of common
print, and about a quarter of a pound of beads, with


which they were well pleased. She wondered that
the people should want to go to the papalangi (foreign)
country. She said it was like it here, meaning there
was so much print and property. The China
umbrella we gave her, she said, was of the same kind
that Captain Cook brought. She calls him Tooti, by
which name ho is known in Tonga.
“ I*l th. —This afternoon our end of the island rang
with the loud and bitter cries of the women here.
A chief woman died, of the name of Manau. She
was wife to Maafu, an old chief, and the mother of
one of Hohila’s wives. The crying continued at
intervals for many hours, in a heartrending manner;
but the people cannot say of this person that the'
lotu (religion) killed her. At an early cava 1 meet-
ing this morning, the spirit, which is said to come
into Fihana, told the people that it was not good to
let the boys or people come to our worship, or learn
to read. As the children had begun to attend again,
this makes them afraid again, through this weak
and foolish woman. 0 Lord, do Thou observe the
movement of the enemy, and inspire us witli hope
concerning Thy cause in this place !
“ This evening Tubou, from Nukualofa, with
Hohila, and a number of men, came to see us.
Tubou would say but little while the men were
present; but he talked freely after they went. He
appears to rise above many of his countrymen as to
1 Cava is a drink, prepared with much ceremony, from a chewed
root, having narcotic properties. It supplied an important feature
in many native feasts and observances.
c


denying himself, and as to property and the favour
of man. He is displeased with his countrymen for
their treatment of us at this part.
“ ISth. —About the middle of the night, the corpse
was removed towards Tiku, where she was to be
buried. The cries were heard for some time.
Tubou came to hid us good-bye. I showed him
some portraits I had in frames. As soon as he saw
one, and knew that it was a minister, he said, ‘ I
wish I was as wise.’ He seems athirst for know-
ledge, and that of God.
“We had rather a good prayer-meeting this
evening. I felt it good to draw nigh to God.
Hohila and two of his wives were present.”
On the next day came news from Nukualofa,
that a ship had come to anchor off the coast; and
as the weather was very stormy, the mission party
were full of fear lest she was in danger. Later on in
the day they heard that the vessel belonged to the
French navy; and on the next day Mr. Thomas
started, at three in the morning, across the bay to
Nukualofa, where, by walking and wading, some-
times above his waist in water, he arrived in three
hours, and went on in a canoe to the ship, which
proved to he the Astrolabe, Captain D’Urville, on a
voyage of discovery. She brought letters from New
Zealand, which cheered the hearts of the mission-
aries, to whom this was the first communication
with the outer world for the last ten months. The
Astrolabe stayed a month at the island, during
which time the officers were several times enter


tained at the Mission House, and showed much
kindness in return in the gift of necessary stores.
But the reckless immorality of the crew caused great
grief to the missionaries, and their trouble was
increased by the French commodore thinking it
necessary to open fire upon one of the native towns.
And now, to add to their distress, Ata forbade his
people to trade with them ; and they were getting
into straits for want of certain articles of food.
Indeed, the whole aspect of affairs was so dis-
couraging, that the entire abandonment of the
mission was seriously considered. In regard to Mr.
Hutchinson, it was now pretty well settled that the
state of his health demanded that he should leave at
the first opportunity. If Mr. Thomas proposed to
leave also, the fear was lest the chief should refuse
permission for the removal of the mission property ;
and various articles were packed secretly, to be in
readiness when a vessel came from Sydney.


CHAPTER IV.
APPARENT FAILURE, AND A NEW START.
IN July, 1827, a small vessel arrived, and the
chief was told that the missionaries were
going to leave his land altogether. He seemed
startled and grieved by this abrupt announcement;
hut, to their astonishment, instead of putting difficul-
ties in the way of their removal, gave orders to his
subordinate chiefs to help in the carrying of goods
on board. A number of cases were thus safely
shipped; but it was soon made evident that the
vessel was too small to accommodate the mission
families ; and, with great reluctance, they gave up
the project of taking passage in her to the colony.
Letters were sent, announcing that the mission must
be given up, and begging that a suitable vessel
should be sent with all speed to fetch away the
members of it and their property. As the vessel
left, Mr. Thomas wrote : “If I believed it was the
will of God for me to continue, and even to spill my
blood in this place, I trust I should be willing to
remain. * But because I cannot see what good would
be answered by remaining, and because I believe it
is God’s will that I should not remain, though I
may be blamed for removing, yet, if a suitable oppor


tunity offer, I expect to go. 0 that the Lord would
frustrate my designs in this, if they are not agreeable
to His will! ”
Thus the mission party remained to struggle on
with their difficulties, having the hope that in about
ten weeks more a ship would come to carry them
away. In the meantime their troubles would be
aggravated by the fact that they had just returned a
number of their goods to Port Jackson. So they
tarried and suffered, counting the days until the
longed-for deliverance.
At this time Mr. Thomas records his settled
conviction that the conversion of these islanders
is impossible, unless missionaries can be found
who will be willing to go alone; for it is not fit
for civilised women to accompany them. They
must, he believes, be ready to dress and fare
like the natives in all respects, and to take no
property with them, which would only excite the
cupidity of the people. They would have to de-
pend for their sustenance upon the bounty of the
chief under whose protection they put themselves,
“ which at times,” he adds feelingly, “ will be very
scanty.”
At last, after an anxious waiting for sixteen
weeks, news came that a vessel was in sight. The
missionaries hurried to the point from which she had
been seen, that they might put off to her; but, on
reaching it, they saw a boat coming ashore. And
now a great surprise awaited them. Here was the
long and eagerly expected vessel, which was to be


an ark of refuge and deliverance. As the boat
approached it was seen to contain other missionaries,
who, on landing, announced that the committee in
New South Wales, instead of retiring from the
mission, had sent them to investigate its affairs, and
to continue and reinforce it. With this object the
Eevs. Nathaniel Turner and William Cross proceeded
at once to fix upon their place of abode, and very
promptly selected Nukualofa, where the Tahitian
teachers, notwithstanding many drawbacks, had so
far influenced the people as to get a considerable
number of them to join them in the worship of God ;
and the chief, Tubou, had become apparently a sincere
friend of Christianity.
Within six days after their landing, all the new
missionaries’ goods were brought ashore, and the
vessel was on her way back again to Sydney. Tubou
helped them in every way; but soon found that he
was getting into trouble, as the other Tonga chiefs,
under cover of resenting his connection with the
lotu, gave very angry expression to their jealousy of
the advantages which would come to him through
his white guests. An assembly of chiefs was held
near the Mission House at Hihifo, to discuss the
matter; and in the end Tubou yielded on the under-
standing that, if he abandoned the lotu, he should be
elevated to the royal dignity of Tui Kanokuljolu,
which made him supreme in the land. Although,
however, he thus outwardly broke with the Christians,
he remained secretly attached to their teaching, and
quietly awaited an opportunity once more to join


them. In the meantime, he continued to show the
mission families much kindness.
Mr. Turner, who had spent several years in the
Hew Zealand Mission, found his knowledge of
Maori a great help to him in acquiring the Tongan
language, with which it has very close affinity. His
progress, of course, greatly helped his colleagues; and
Mr. Thomas, .although still doubting at times whether
it was a wise policy to continue the attempt just then
to christianize the Friendly Islanders, began to take
heart, as he was furnished with valuable grammatical
clues whereby to find a way through the confusion
of fragmentary knowledge which he had been slowly
gathering. Thus, early in the following year, 1828,
we find the public worship varied by the reading
of a prayer in the native tongue, and even by the
singing, to the “ Old Hundredth ” tune, of a verse or
two of a Tongan hymn. Some important steps were
also taken at the same time to provide elementary
lessons and books for use in school work. Every
advance of this kind made Mr. Thomas more rest-
lessly anxious to be able to talk freely with the
people, while there were times when it threw him
into deeper despondency at his own conscious want
of aptitude to learn the language.
Mr. Hutchinson, whose health had grown worse,
had now left the Islands, and Mr. Turner came to
live in the part of the Mission House at Hihifo, which
was thus vacated. This arrangement was a great
comfort to Mr. Thomas, and helped and encouraged
him in many ways.


In March of this year there took place a very
noteworthy visit to Tongatabu, though its importance
was little understood at the time. Still, it is ex-
ceedingly interesting, in the light of following events,
to read what Mr. Thomas says as to the possible
results of the visit'. There came to the island the
supreme chief of the Haabai or central cluster of the
group. This Taufaahau, who in after years, as
George Tubou, was to become the Christian king of
the whole group, is thus described by Mr. Thomas:
“He is a very stout man, about six feet high, and
about twenty-five years of age. He looks like a
savage, and is reported to be very skilful in
war.
“He came to visit us, and says he wants a
missionary to accompany him, that he and his
people may learn to lotu, or pray. We talked to
him about the vessels that had been destroyed at
their land. He acknowledges that it was wrong;
but says it was their covetousness, and not hatred to
Englishmen, that led them to do it; that they learned
it from the Tonga people; but they see it is wrong,
for, instead of getting more property by it, they get
less, as vessels will not call there. We told him to
wait a little. We must see and hear more from his
place before we could send for a missionary. We
gave him a present. He sat for some considerable
time, and then departed.
“ This man has got the position he now fills
through his skill and prowess in war. He is said
to be respected at Haabai. It might appear, some


time, that God, who overrules all things to advance
His own glory and the good of His cause, has some-
thing to accomplish by this man. The Lord has
used him to chastise the Tui Tonga, and to strip him
of his power. And through his relationship to
Tubou, the Tuikanokubolu, and to many of the
respectable people of Tonga, the way might open
for a mission station at Haahai.”
Thus unconsciously and timidly docs the good
man sketch out beforehand the first steps in that
wonderful history of success which he was afterwards
permitted to witness, while, for the present, his ex-
perience of Ata’s treachery and cupidity fills him
with profound distrust of all native chiefs and their
friendly offers and promises. Ata, indeed, continued
to forbid his people to attend the Christian worship, and
permitted the attendance of hoys at the school only
because he thought the matter to he of no serious
consequence. The missionaries seldom saw him or
heard from him, except when he wanted to exact
property from them.
It was, therefore, no small trial to Mr. Thomas
when it was decided that Mr. Turner should return
to Nukualofa, as soon as a home could he got ready
for him, thus leaving him alone at Hihifo; for, not-
withstanding all discouragements, it was resolved
that the station should not yet be abandoned.
Just at this time another event happened, ■ the
full significance of which appeared only after many
days. A few weeks before, a canoe had sailed from
Nukualofa to Vavau, the principal island of the


northern cluster of the group. This canoe took a
young chief, Tuhou Toti, who had been under
Christian instruction, and was now the bearer of a
message from the Tuikanokubolu to Finau, the
Yavau king, who was related to him, urging him to
abandon the old heathen superstitions and to accept
the lotu. So well and zealously did Tuhou Toti ac-
complish his errand, that, after ten days’ pleading
and argument, he prevailed upon Finau to declare
his readiness to take the step which he urged, and
to ask for a missionary to be sent to him. In his
reply, now brought back by the young Nukualofa
chief, he said to Mr. Turner, “ I am tired of my
spirits. They tell me so many lies that, since Tuhou
Toti has visited me, I am sick of them. I am so
uneasy that I cannot sleep for fear that the time
will be very long before missionaries can get here.
But if a vessel should come to Tonga, be so good as
to send me one of your missionaries, to let my
people see that I have turned my evil spirits away.
My island, sir, will turn to the great God, because I
am the only chief here. I have no one to control
me. When I turn, my people will all turn.”
Commenting upon this, Mr. Thomas writes : “ It is
our opinion that these are favourable omens. A
canoe is about to visit Yavau. Ulaki (a friendly
chief), who is called the father of Finau, will go;
and we think that either Brother Turner or two of
our party should accompany him, and see the place,
that we may know what to do. If the report be
favourable, and the chief at Hihifo continue to


oppose us, we shall certainly give up our premises
here. We have a good house, etc., but ten such
houses, I think, might be given up, rather than
remain here doing so little, when we are invited to
so promising a field. I trust I shall prefer the
prosperity of the good cause to my chief joy. 0
may the Lord teach us in all His will! ” In the end
it was determined that Ulaki should go alone to
Yavau, carrying a present from the missionaries to
Finau.
Although Ata allowed one of his people to sell
land to the mission, and gave permission for a school
to he built thereon, he continued to actively oppose
the lotu, and violently beat his own son because the
boy was beginning to pray to God. Yet the
prospects of the work were gradually brightening.
Mr. Thomas was getting hold of the language, work-
ing day by day in collecting and classifying words
and arranging sentences, and was able to say, “ I
begin to understand most that is said in the native
language.” At Nukualofa there was great encourage-
ment in the fact that Tuhou announced that he was
prepared, at all hazards, once more openly to abjure
the native superstitions, and to declare himself a
worshipper of the true God. On Sunday, June Ist,
having ordered the roads to he cleaned on the day
before, he came to the chapel at Nukualofa, attended
by a great many of his people, and Mr. Thomas was
requested to conduct the service. “ I did so,” he
says, “ feeling my ignorance and inability for the
work, but at the same time was much encouraged by


the attention of the people and the help of the
Lord. It was a solemn time. I believe the people
felt it so as well as I.” It was noted as a remark-
able thing that, though Ata and certain other chiefs
were very angry at this step, yet no measures were
taken to interfere with Tubou.
On a Sunday in August, Mr. Thomas makes this
record of a day at Hihifo : “We have had about
fifty persons each time at worship to-day at chapel.
Some are from Yavau, some from Fiji, and. some
from Nukualofa, —a few from Hihifo. All were
attentive, and I had a good time. I was enabled to
speak a few words to them in addition to what 1
read.”
In the following October, Mr. Thomas had a
sharp attack of illness, which, from his description,
appears to have been pleurisy. Mr. Turner came
over from Nukualofa and bled him freely. He was
confined to the house for more than a week, and
afterwards recovered strength hut slowly. Before
the month was out he performed the same operation
upon Mr. Turner.
In November, Mr. Thomas contrived to give huge
offence to Ata’s principal wife, Baba, by refusing to
let her bring a number of strangers in to inspect the
house. These visits of curiosity were exceedingly
troublesome, and led to much waste of time, and some-
times to loss of articles which could be but ill spared.
Late in the afternoon Ata sent one of his officers
with orders to Mr. Thomas to leave the house im-
mediately, and not to dare to take anything away


with him. To this a reply was sent that he could
not leave until he had conferred with his friends at
Nukualofa. His friend Ulukai came in after dark,
and very kindly offered to sleep in the house that
night. Early the next morning the chief sent a
messenger repeating the order, and insisting upon
their immediate departure. Accompanied by Ulukai,
Mr. Thomas went to the chief, and found him sur-
rounded by a number of his men, preparing to drink
cava. The missionary reasoned and expostulated,
apparently without avail. Then one and another
spoke quieting words to the great man; and the
sister of Finau, king of Yavau, who was present,
seems to have made a very effective and conciliatory
speech. Ata refused to give any further answer;
but Ulukai saw how matters stood, and told Mr.
Thomas, as they came away, that the storm had
blown over.
Thus things wont on month after month. At
times the chief was somewhat gracious, especially
when he had received a present; but he remained
firm in forbidding his people to become Christians.
So Mr. Thomas went patiently on, gathering a know-
ledge of the language, and spending much labour in
writing out lesson-books for his school, where a
small and varying number of children came to be
taught by him and Mrs. Thomas. He also prepared
prayers and short addresses, and made attempts. at
translating portions of Scripture, and even at con-
structing Tongan hymns, with the full consciousness
that the work done was all very imperfect, and


would have to be done over again in the light of
fuller knowledge. A good deal of time was spent,
to his great distress, in the secularities of the mission,
as all food and other necessaries had to be procured
by barter; and yams, bananas, fish, cocoa-nuts, an
occasional pig, and firewood were purchased by
“ trade,” such as fish-hooks, knives, axes, and other
iron tools, calico, prints, beads, and various goods.
Then there was much manual labour in the way of
constructing and repairing buildings, raising provisions
in the garden, and preparing iron work, wherein his
old experience at the forge proved of great value.
In the way of progress in his directly religious work,
the obstacles were as great and numerous as ever;
and the conviction became more and more distress-
ing that a mistake had been made in settling at
Hihifo. As yet he could not see that this long
pause at the very outset of his great enterprise was
invaluable in the way of preparation, both by the
learning of the language, and, not least, by the
discipline of his faith.
In the somewhat dismal history of those days
there is at least one gleam of light. Mr. Thomas
was permitted to share the better success which was
being reaped at Nukualofa; and, on the first Sunday
in 1829, he conducted the native service at that
place, after which “ seven persons were admitted into
the Church of Christ by baptism. These are the
first adults ever baptized in Tonga. 0 that God
would grant that it may be the first-fruits of a
glorious harvest! ”


At Hihifo, a young man named Lololiea, a son of
the chief, had for some time shown great interest in
the school, and in the Christian worship. About
seven months before this date, he was laid aside by
illness, and frequently visited by Mr. Thomas, to
whose teaching he listened with increasing docility,
and became an earnest seeker of salvation. On
his return from the memorable baptismal service at
Nukualofa, Mr. Thomas again went to see Lolohea.
“ I found him,” he says, “in the house in the chief’s
yard, from which he had been ordered away because of
his praying to our God. Baba, his mother, sat close to
him, fanning him. She was in tears. Near him sat
Filiana, the old spirit-woman; and several others were
about. He soon fixed his eyes on me, but seemed very
weak, and much altered. The spirit-woman gave
way for me; so I sat near him. He then began to
tell me that the women said that I did not want to
come over and see him. This much affected him, and
the tears trickled down his poor pale face. I assured
him that I wanted to come, but had been detained.”
Mr. Thomas then told him of the service at
Nukualofa, and asked him whether he wished to be
baptized. He eagerly assented. His mother also
gave her consent. “In the afternoon,” continues the
journal, “ I revisited, and found him very weak. I
read to him, and conversed about the Lord our God.
His mind seemed calm and collected. He was very
attentive to all I said, and said that he longed to de-
part, and to be with Jesus Christ. While he talked,
the pleasing expectation of his soul of being soon


with the Lord seemed to sparkle in his eyes. I
then read to him some questions in reference to In's
views on divine things. This I did more for his own
satisfaction and those about him than for my own;
for I had many opportunities of hearing him express
himself about God, Jesus Christ, and the Holy
Spirit, and repentance, faith, and obedience. . I have
long considered him a very sincere man, fit for
baptism; but through my deficiency in the Tonga
language, fearing lest these things should not bo
understood, but be abused by our enemies, I have
been prevented from administering it.” Two days
afterwards Mr. Thomas, accompanied by his wife,
went to the house where Lolohea lay, and he was
baptized. “We then prayed,” says the missionary,
“ and found the season solemn and profitable.
Around us were some of our bitterest enemies, but
God was in the midst, and we could not fear. All
was seriousness and peace. His mother is generally
in tears.” In another three days the end came.
Mr. and Mrs. Thomas were present. “We sat some
time. I perceived a change in him. He spoke once
or twice, as though some one had asked him some-
thing. Ata now came in. He did not notice him
until we told him he was there. He then said to
me, 1 Speak to Ata.’ He repeated this two or three
times. I wished to know what I was to say, but he
did not answer my inquiry. I suppose lie meant
that I should talk to him about the lotu. His
mother now kissed him. So did Ata.” When told
that, according to custom, they were going to carry


him to die in a little hut near the Fitoca, or bury-
ing place, he said immediately, “ Yes, let us go.”
They bore him to the place of death, where he lay
awhile, surrounded by his family and friends, and
then peacefully expired.
So the first convert from Hihifo passed into Para-
dise ; and the servants of the Lord were greatly com-
forted and strengthened in their troubles and manifold
discouragements. And surely they stood in need
of something to cheer them ; for the conditions of
their work remained as difficult as ever. When the
returns of the year were made up, the mission at
Nukualofa showed very good results ; but poor Mr.
Thomas could report at Hihifo, after nearly three
years’ work, only three members on trial. The chief
and his principal wife were as resolutely opposed as
ever to the lotu; and the people were told again and
again that, if they became Christians, they would
certainly be killed. Very unwillingly Mr. Thomas
began to look at the possibility of abandoning Hihifo
in favour of some more hopeful place ; and, as the
year 1829 advanced, he felt himself compelled to
consider the question, although as yet he had never
discussed it with his colleagues. In July, the king
of Haabai once more visited Hihifo, and, accompanied
by another chief, came to the Mission House. Ho
then pressed for a teacher to be sent to his islands,
saying that, although now he continued to observe
the Tongan customs, he was quite ready to turn
openly to Jehovah, to whom already he secretly
prayed, and to bring his people with him. He
D


pointed to the determined opposition which arrested
the work at Hihifo, and held out to the missionary
the inducement of perfect freedom, which, as supreme
chief, he was able to guarantee at Haabai. It is not
to be wondered at that Mr. Thomas’s experience had
made him slow to believe in chiefs. He put it to his
visitor that, if they quitted Hihifo, they would have
to leave their house behind them; and that it was
far from unlikely that Ata would prohibit the
removal of their stores, so that they might possibly
come to Haabai homeless and impoverished. The
king at once replied, “ I will be thankful for your
body only ; and I will clothe you in native cloth if
you will wear it. I will feed you free of expense.
You shall not trade. I will build you a house, or
get one moved directly for you. I will build you a
chapel, and come to it myself, and send all my
people to be taught by you; and, if you wish to go
away, you shall take away whatever you please, and
go whore you please.”
Moved by a prospect so alluring, and so widely differ-
ing from his present surroundings, Mr. Thomas laid
the proposal formally before his brethren at Nukualofa,
that ho should leave his post on Tongatabu, and open
a mission at Haabai. After long deliberation, and
much time spent in prayer for divine direction, the
plan was adopted. Then came the difficulty with
Ata. But, to the wonder of all, he put no obstacle
in the way. He affirmed that he had always loved
the missionary, but that he remained a stedfast
worshipper of the gods of Tonga, and should always


oppose the new religion. He even supplied
help for carrying out the removal, and furnished
canoes to take the goods across the bay to
Nukualofa.
Thus, on July 28 th, after three years’ residence,
and unremitting toil, which had apparently been
almost fruitless, Mr. Thomas left Hihifo, to begin
an altogether new work upon another island. He
was not, however, to enter upon this new work
immediately. Various things combined to keep him
waiting at Nukualofa for six months. But, though
he could not always be as patient under this long
delay as he felt he ought to be, it really was very
valuable to him. In daily association with his two
colleagues, he made much more rapid advance in the
knowledge of the Tongan language, in the study of
which he could now command the willing service of
natives who took a lively interest in his progress.
His faith and hope, too, were braced by his taking
constant part in a successful work. He describes
thus the first love-feast held in Tonga ; “ About 150
were present; and about 40 spoke. Many more
would have spoken had we allowed them; but we
thought it better not to be too long. The first who
got up was Joseph. Peter and Barnabas spoke.
The Tui told us he had been very foolish and wicked ;
but he had cast away his sin and his lying gods, and
turned to Jehovah, who was his only god. Uhila
said no one had been so wicked as he; and
Yakatuhola spoke, and many others, and it was a
good season. They attributed their conversion to


the word of God, which they have heard from us.
Pdessed be God for what He has done, and for what
He is doing among the people of Tonga. May they
go on and prosper! The people here are disposed
to labour for the Lord. They ask what they shall
do. It would do the hearts of the friends of missions
good to hear what we hear, and to see what we see.
To God be all the praise ! ”
About two months after this there came a notable
day in the history of the. mission. After long in-
struction, and jealous pastoral watching, it was
determined to administer baptism to a number of the
people, who gave good evidence that they had sin-
cerely accepted the Christian doctrine. The event
was of so great interest and importance that the
natives regarded it as a festival, which, to their
minds, necessarily included a feast; and a great deal
of food was specially prepared for the occasion.
This was a feature which the missionaries would
gladly have left out; but they felt themselves com-
pelled to proceed cautiously with the great changes
through which they were conducting the lately con-
verted islanders. At the Sunday morning service the
men were baptized, and in the afternoon the women ;
eighty-four in all. Afterwards a service was held, at
which was solemnized the marriage of seventeen
couples, who had been living together, but now,
upon their becoming professed Christians, were thus
formally united.
On the next day Mr. Thomas writes : “We have
heard from several to-day that their hearts were


filled with love to God, and that they could hardly
sleep last night, because of what God had done for
them. In the class, several more said they were
filled with love to God, so that they could not
speak of it, they were so happy, believing that God
has washed their hearts, and that they were now
His people.”
While these things were being done, the Haabai
king had returned to his own islands; and as, for
the present, things were .not deemed ready for the
reception of a missionary, he took with him one of
the best instructed converts at Nukualofa, who had
been baptized in the name of Peter about twelve
months before. This good man, accompanied by his
wife, thus went forth, the first of a long and noble
line of Tongan messengers of the Gospel of Christ.
His work was cldefly to begin to teach the people
to read and to write, in which they had already
had some imperfect instruction from an English
sailor.
Early in January, 1830, a canoe came from Haabai
to Nukualofa, bringing Peter, who was commissioned
to convey the missionary without further delay.
Peter brought good news. The king, he said, was
anxiously awaiting their arrival; and hundreds of
the people were offering themselves for Christian
instruction. The king had burnt down the houses of
their gods, because they were liars, and was ready to
build a large house for the worship of the Lord, as
soon as Mr. Thomas should arrive. He was also
diligently learning to read.


On the Sunday after this canoe arrived, Tuhou
was baptized, and four of his children ; and after-
wards he was married by religious rite to Mary,
who had been his only wife for some months
past.


CHAPTER V.
AT HAABAI.
OH Monday, January 25 th, Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas embarked at sunrise for their new
station. They started in a small canoe, the larger
canoe lying waiting for them at a. small island at
some distance. By the time they had got out of
sight of Tonga, the wind and the sea were so high
that they were compelled to put back, and managed
to make the little island of Atata in safety. Here
they landed, and stayed over the next day, a heavy
gale blowing all the time. On the following day
they got back again to Nukualofa. After two days’
waiting for the weather, another start was made ;
and twelve hours’ very rough passage took them to a
small outlying island of the Haabai group, where
they landed for the night. About noon on the next
day they reached Lifuka, the island on which the
king lived, and, on going ashore, went immediately
to pay their respects to him, and met with a kind
welcome. A temporary house was assigned to them;
and they at once began to get tilings a little in order
for the next day, which was the Sabbath. The
following is Mr. Thomas’s record of his first Sunday’s
work at Lifuka: “ About 8 o’clock we met for


divine worship. I took my stand at one end of the
large house upon a kind of seat, on which the king
sat. We sang, and I then prayed, and, after singing
again, addressed them from Isaiah lv., on seeking the
Lord. I judge that from three to four hundred
were present; hut the house was not full. All
were very attentive ; and I hope they understood
what was said. In the afternoon I spoke upon the
fall of man, our corrupt state, and recovery by Jesus
Christ. There were more present than in the morn-
ing. The Tui also was present. There is a fine
field here open for instruction. The Lord grant that
we may he spared to be a blessing to them. At
night we had an English service [there were two or
three Englishmen on the island], and I spoke a few
words from Josh. xxiv. 15. I felt much tired at
night. The exercise was considerable, and I was
weak through sea-sickness. 0 may this feeble
beginning he followed with the divine blessing ! ”
o o o
In the following week he began a school, attended
by 110 men and hoys, out of whom he selected a
few who knew the alphabet to aid in teaching the
rest. In the afternoon Mrs. Thomas entered upon
the same work with 95 women and girls. From the
very first days of his residence here, the missionary
found his time and resources heavily taxed by
appeals for medical help. His scanty knowledge
and very slender pharmacopoeia reduced his system
of treatment to a wonderful simplicity. The cardinal
point in his system appears to have been that, as a
rule, the first thing to he done in every case was to


bleed the patient. After this, the remedies were
almost entirely confined to Epsom salts, calomel, an
opiate, and “ half a pint of sea-water,” with opodeldoc
and bread-poultices for external application. The
quantity of blood which the good man shed day hy
day is appalling; and the general success of his
treatment goes far to confirm one’s faith in the
comforting doctrine of a special providence. 1
The native house in which he lived was a miserable
exchange for the good wooden dwelling he had left
at Hihifo. The windowless walls of reeds, and
leaky thatch, and damp earthen floor covered with a
mat, gave but little comfort; and the house had no
door until, three months afterwards, he found time
to make one. All these inconveniences were cheer-
fully borne, as well as an almost unvarying diet of
pork and yams,—not unfrequently minus the pork,—
in consideration of the perfect liberty in which the
mission work was done, contrasting as it did so
favourably with the unrelenting opposition which
had miserably hampered him at Hihifo. Still, now
that-he was actually in the Haabais, the prospect did
not look so full of promise as when he regarded it
hopefully from a distance. He soon found that so
far, though the lotu meant a forsaking of the old
idolatrous observances, its positive good was very
1 It should he stated here that the missionaries did not introduce
this system of treatment into the islands. The native doctors prac-
tised it to a large extent, and had a mode of cupping of their own,
in which they had great faith. In those early clays of the mission
it was a rare thing to find man or woman who did not hear the
scars of this kind of surgery.


superficial. The habitual vices and licentiousness
of the people were left all but untouched ; and the
stern fact, that a conscience in regard to these evils
had to be called into existence, met him at every turn.
The amount of various work which these early days
of their enterprise put upon the missionary and his
wife was sometimes overwhelming. Every alphabet,
and lesson-book, and catechism, and Scripture portion
for the schools had to be written; and Mr. Thomas
speaks of writing a hymn-book for the chief, and
sending it to him as a present on one Saturday for
the next day’s services. Then there was the daily
toil in acquiring the language, greatly increased by
the difficulty of getting the natives to appreciate the
requirements of one who was anxious to learn their
soft and musical tongue. Mr. Thomas notes in his
diary, again and again, with joy as over some great
success, that he had that day got so many “ new
words.”
As to the chief himself, there is no doubt that
the missionary was a good deal disappointed during
the first few months of his residence with him;
and there seems as little doubt that Mr. Thomas
sometimes failed to understand and appreciate
him. His wretched experience with Ata had
evidently made him almost incurably suspicious
and incredulous in regard to chiefs in general.
The truth seems to have been that, in Taufaahau,
the Tui Haabai, he had come into contact with a
phase of the native character he had not met with
before. In a very general way, the young king


had become convinced that Christianity was far
better than the old religion, with its many spirit-
gods, and cruel and degrading superstitions. Acting
upon this conviction, he had openly cast himself
adrift from the former faith, such as it was, and
asked for some one to come and instruct him and
his people in the doctrine of the true God. From
this point he advanced with very slow steps, and
with a cautious deliberateness to which Mr. Thomas,
in his eagerness, hardly did justice at first.
But the course of the chief at this crisis was
being watched by other eyes with the greatest
possible interest. He was a man of great import-
ance, not only in his own proper dominions, but
throughout the whole group. His family relation-
ships opened before him the possibility of extended
power both in Yavau and its associated islands, and
in Tongatabu itself. Every step that he took,
therefore, in so important a matter as an entire
change of religion, was regarded very jealously by
other chiefs who, like Ata, remained as yet resolutely
opposed to Christianity. About two months after
Mr. Thomas’s arrival, Finaii, the Yavau king,
accompanied by several of his chiefs, paid a formal
visit to Taufaahau, for the express purpose of
dissuading him from going further in the direction
of the lotu. He treated his visitors with all
respect and deference, but declined quietly- and
firmly to go back to the old worship, or to rebuild
the spirit-houses which he had burnt down.
On June 2nd, 1830, the chief took another and


important step. Having first consulted Mr. Thomas,
he rose after the public service, and, for the first
time, addressed the people who were present. He
reproved them for their sins and inattention to the
worship of God, and exhorted them to do better.
If they did not, he told them, they had better leave
him; for he did not want a great many people, hut
those who would serve the Lord in truth. He said
they were not obliged to pray. It was their own
free choice. Why, therefore, did they not do it in
earnest ?
During this month H.M.S. Seringapatam visited
the islands; and the commander, the Hon. Mr.
Waldegrave, did good service by strongly advising
the chiefs to show all kindness to the mission-
aries, and pay attention to their instructions. He
also removed from Yavau some runaway English
sailors, who had been doing much harm among the
people. Just after this visit, Mr. Thomas writes:
“ I called upon the chief, and found him busy
writing. In looking round I perceived five wooden
images, or Tonga gods, suspended by their necks to
the side of his apartment. I smiled when I saw
them, and asked if he had been hanging the gods.
He said, Yes; that he had hung them up that the
people might see that they were dead. He said he
would take them to the house we worship in.
I told him it would he well, and to heap them
together, that the people may see them, and learn
that they yielded to the worship of God. The
chief laughed heartily at these idols, which are


now fallen into disgrace.” Here is another day’s
record:
“ June 14. —When I returned from the school, I
found the chief at our house, having come for a
book, he being about to go to the islands a-fishing,
and therefore wanting something to read. I got a
few now words this morning, by the assistance
of Faoni, with which I am well pleased. It is
matter for joy when I find out words that will serve
to give a just view of God’s word to the people.
Faoni is a young chief belonging to Yavau, who is
content to live in a state of poverty here, and serve
God, rather than go to his property and friends at
Yavau, to give up the worship of the true God. In
the course of the day I have visited two or three
that are ill. One poor man I think too ill to give
him the calomel; of the others I have hope.”
On the Sunday after the chief returned from Iris
turtle-fishing, which had been very successful, he
again addressed the congregation at the morning
service, in the same strain as before. Mr. Thomas
was greatly struck with his tone, which was at the
same time firm and gentle, altogether different from
the way in which chiefs were wont to talk to their
people. He writes, little thinking how abundantly
his hopes were to be fulfilled: “Is it possible that
the great Head of the Church has designed this great
man for a messenger of mercy ? What! the .king ?
Glory to God! I have a hope that He will make
him a preacher of righteousness, and that he will be
the honoured instrument of good to many. While I am


now writing, my ears are greeted by the voice of
singing. It is the people of different dwellings who
are at their family worship. The night being still,
and our house being on a rising ground, we can hear
them from eight or ten houses. This is very
pleasing and encouraging to us in our toil, and to the
friends of missions, who pray for us, and care for us.
All praise be to Him who giveth the increase! ”
“ Monday , 21.—We had upwards of seventy at
school' this morning. The chief was one. It is
pleasing to see the king of these islands standing up
with his people to be catechised, and to hear him
answer the questions in common with little children,
and with so much simplicity. To God be all the
praise! ”
The attendance at public worship continued to
increase; and, before September, as many as a
thousand persons had assembled in one congregation
to hear the word of God. Thus the year went on,
bringing much to help and cheer this devoted couple
in their service, but, with the success, adding con-
tinually to their toil. In the preparation of books
for the schools the work was fast getting beyond
their power to accomplish all that was needed, as
every word had to be written by Mr. Thomas and
his faithful wife. The people proved apt to learn,
and the schools were largely attended, chiefly by
adults.
Before the close of the year, the missionary and
his wife had the benefit of a trip to Tonga, to attend
the district meeting at Nukualofa. In many ways


the visit did them good; and the advantage of being
able to compare translations and discuss their
several researches in the language was very great.
In the early part of 1831, Mr. Thomas had a
sharp attack of illness, which compelled him to lie
by for a month. The evidently affectionate anxiety
of the people on his account was a great comfort
during his convalescence.
If Mr. Thomas and his colleagues had regulated
their work upon the principles adopted by some, who
have left on record histories of marvellous missionary
success, they might at this period have easily
numbered their baptized members by thousands.
But they advanced with most jealous caution. Out
of the great numbers who now attended the public
worship, and came to the schools, a few were selected
who showed tokens of sincere desire to learn and
accept the Gospel. These were formed into classes
which met weekly; but.the members were kept long-
under this discipline of teaching before they were
admitted to baptism. The anxiety to learn to read
and write was spreading on all hands; and already
some had so far advanced as to be able to render help
in the copying of lessons and portions of Scripture for
the use of others. Mr. Thomas records this fact
with joyful gratitude, and, at the same time, writes
very clearly his views and methods in regard to those
who were under special religious instruction. “ I
have seen many whose eyes were big with tears
while I have been addressing them; but I want to
see tire waters flow. Well, nothing is too hard for


the Lord. His truth has much to remove in their
dark and polluted and depraved hearts. Some, I
hope, begin to feel after God: hut I suppose they
see men as trees walking yet. 0 that they may soon
see clearly, and experimentally know the' truth ! At
this time we have 144 in society, some of whom
I think of selecting, and putting them under instruc-
tion for baptism.”'
In March, 1831, a vessel called, bringing letters
and supplies. The letters brought the first news
received from England for twenty-two months; and
the goods, especially the clothes and shoes, were very
acceptable, “ as I was,” says Mr. Thomas, “ nearly out
of such things; and Mrs. Thomas would have been
barefoot ere this, but a sailor made her a few pairs of
slippers some weeks ago.” It was a very interesting
fact that the natives, in trading with this vessel, had
purchased a considerable number of slates on which
to learn to write.
On April 10th, 1831, the new chapel, which the
chief and his people had built, was opened for
worship. Hitherto the services had been held in the
large assembly-house. On this memorable Sunday
more than two thousand persons were present at both
the morning and afternoon service. Mr. Thomas
preached with much liberty, and the people listened
with deep attention and lively interest. On the next
day the inevitable feast was held to celebrate the
chapel-opening. About two o’clock the chief sent to
the Mission House “a roasted hog, and about forty
yams, together with a basket of faikalcai, a kind of


pudding.” After Mr. and Mrs. Thomas had eaten a
little of this ample present, the rest was divided
amongst some men who were at work upon the
premises.
During the same month another very important
event took place. News of the fair promise of the
work in the Friendly Islands had reached England,
and it was determined that the mission should be at
once strengthened. And now the Eev. Peter Turner
and his wife arrived to join Mr. Thomas in the
Haabais. A very notable portion of the reinforce-
ment which had been sent was a printing-press, with
its necessary type and materials. This was set up at
Nukualofa; and before the month was up Mr.
Thomas was made very happy by the arrival of
alphabets and lesson-books printed at Tongatabu.
For some time the supply was not sufficient to meet
the growing demand; but it very much lessened the
labour of writing, in which several native youths
were now constantly employed.
In May, the king, who had been on a visit to the
northern group, brought back word that the chief of
Yavau, Finau, and his people had declared their
readiness to renounce heathenism and worship the
true God. Finau also sent an earnest petition that
he might have a missionary, or, if that was at
present impossible, a native Christian, to teach them
the right way. This was joyful news to the workers
at Lifuka, who determined to send one Daniel, a well
approved Christian, to join a baptized man named
Paul, who was already at Yavau. The following
E


entry in Mr. Thomas’s journal is of great interest, as
describing the small beginning of a very great work :
“ I hastened to write a short letter to the king at
Vavau, and one to Paul, who is to be David’s fellow-
labourer. I then gave David and his wife a few
articles of trade, which will be useful to them at
Yavau. I furnished David with a few books, viz.,
about 100 First Books, printed at our press, and
some catechisms, Scriptures, and seventeen sermons,
the Book of Jonah, and the fifth chapter of Matthew’s
Gospel. These, with paper, pens, ink, pencils, etc.,
made up his outfit. I then talked with them both,
Peter and Samuel being present. We then kneeled
down, and I commended David and his wife and
Paul to the Lord, praying that He would preserve
them both by sea and by land, and that they might
be a blessing to the people at Yavau. We parted.
David was in tears. We all felt much: but the
Lord will take care of them.”
In August, the king, Taufaahau, who had shrunk
from offering himself for baptism, lest he should not
prove faithful afterwards, at last declared his wish to
be baptized into the Christian faith. On Sunday,
August 7th, 1831, Mr. Thomas makes the following
record; “We had a very large assembly this morn-
ing. When we got to the chapel, the chief and his
three children were ready seated on the right hand
of the pulpit, all very neatly dressed. I preached on
Acts ii. 32-41. I endeavoured to lead them to
Christ. I exhorted them to repent and be baptized,
every one of them. After the sermon the chief stood,


and, in a very humble and becoming manner, made a
confession of his faith and his purpose to give him-
self and his children to Christ. He thanked the
Lord, and the people in England, who had thus sent
the good word to him and his people, and exhorted
his people to give themselves to the Lord. After-
wards he came and kneeled, and I baptized him in
the name of the Sacred Trinity. He had chosen for
a name, George, or, as we write it, Joaji. This is out
of respect to our good old king [George III.], whose
name and memory are cherished in these islands.
His three children are baptized as Charlotte, or
Salote, David, or Tefita, and Josiah, or Josaia. The
season was solemn and profitable. The Lord grant
the chief his heart’s desire, to be baptized with the
Holy Ghost, and to have a new heart! ”
This decisive step, taken by such a man as the
king, proved a great help to the mission work. His
sincerity was made evident to all the people by his
devout attention to Christian worship, his diligence in
seeking instruction, his anxiety to conform his own
personal life and the exercise of his power to
Christian principles, and his many acts of kind
consideration for the mission families.
Greatly encouraged and cheered, Mr. Thomas
filled up his time with various toil. Hardly a day
passed now without some portion of Scripture being
turned into the Tongan language, together with the
revision of former translations by aid of increasing
knowledge. Smaller towns and outlying islands
were visited, and native teachers trained to occupy


them. The congregations at public worship continued
to be very large, and the number of persons enrolled
as church members steadily increased. The pastoral
care of these, so recently recovered from the utter
moral darkness of heathenism, involved much watch-
ful solicitude, and frequently brought the bitterness
of disappointment.
This year of 1831 was to be further marked by
events of much importance. A great change had
come over the northern group of the Friendly Islands,
of which Yavau was the principal. The head chief,
Finau, who formerly had opposed the lotu, and had
striven hard to prevent the Haabai king from
becoming Christian, had yielded to better influences,
and had received a native teacher, who had begun to
instruct him and his people in reading, and in the
rudiments of the truth. Circumstances had recently
occurred which convinced the missionaries that it was
important that one of them should visit this people;
and in October, Mr. and Mrs. Thomas set out in a
canoe for Yavau, which, after the usual delays and
discomforts, they reached in safety, and were wel-
comed by Finau. The doings of the first Sunday
after their arrival are thus recorded;—
“ After family prayer and breakfast, an old boiler
having been struck as a bell to give the people
notice, they assembled for divine worship. I took
my stand upon a plank put for the purpose under a
large tree, the people sitting all round me; and such
a congregation I have not seen at the worship of
God since I left old England. It is difficult to say


how many were present; but I judge there were at
least four thousand souls; and, notwithstanding the
king’s sister lay a corpse, nearly all the great people
were present, and much attention was paid to every
part of the service. Great joy beamed on almost
every countenance while we joined to praise the
Lord of earth and heaven, Who, I believe, was
present to bless His people. After a short address
I preached to them upon ‘ Eepent, for the kingdom
of heaven is at hand.’ I believe all could hear, and
that some will bring forth fruit to His glory. I
hardly knew when to leave off, knowing the needy
state of the people. After singing again, David
prayed, and I concluded the service.” After this
service Mr. Thomas buried the king’s sister, Faga-
bulotu, in the presence of a great multitude, who
afterwards, at the chief’s bidding, quietly dispersed.
“ What a mighty change,” writes Mr. Thomas, “ has
the Lord wrought in this people in a few months!
Had this funeral occurred a few months ago, the air
would have been rent with their cries and bowlings,
their shouting and singing, for at native funerals
they cry and laugh all in a few minutes. Some
would have cut themselves in such a manner that
they would have been covered with blood; and in a
few days I should have seen many heads shorn of
all the hair, others cut and mangled in a curious and
ridiculous style. All the relatives would burn their
cheeks until they blister, and then rub the blister off
with a little rough berry, until it bleeds, and the
blood is smeared over the cheek as large as a crown


piece. Beside these things, many false and vain
customs are practised, all of which tend to injure the
health and shorten the life of the people, to waste
their property and consume their time, and, much
worse, to degrade their morals, and make them more
like the devil, the father of lies and promoter of all
that is injurious to man. But now we say, with de-
lightful astonishment, in reference to Yavau, ‘ What
hath God wrought! ’ . . . After being refreshed a
little, and the boiler having been again struck, we
assembled where we were shaded by the trees from the
rays of the afternoon sun. I judge we had as many
as we had this morning. After singing and prayer, in
which they seemed heartily to join, I read to them
Acts xvii. vers. 22-31, declaring the true God. I
was wishful they should know the God whom at
present many of them ‘ignorantly worship.’ They
were very attentive; and I hope many of them will
practise what they have heard. At the close of the
service Jelemaia prayed, and I concluded. At five
o’clock I preached in English on Matt. vi. 33. I
had, beside ourselves, the king of Yavau, three
Englishmen, one Portuguese, and one Prenchman. I
felt a pleasure in endeavouring to bring these
wanderers to Christ, who has thus sent them the
bread of life. I spoke in a plain and faithful
manner; and I believe they understood me.”
Eight days after this, Mr. and Mrs. Thomas,
having received many expressions of affection from
the king and his chiefs and people, set out on
their return to Lifuka, where they arrived in two


days, part of the voyage being very rough and
dangerous.
Before the end of the month messengers arrived
with news that Finau was ill, and begged that King
George and a missionary would come to see him.
On 2nd November, Mr. Thomas accompanied the
chief on this - errand. On the voyage he makes this
entry in his journal, which, being now read in con-
nection with subsequent events, has a peculiar
interest; “By the assistance of the Fiji chief, Nau-
livou, who is with us, I began writing some Fiji
words, as I did yesterday; but my teacher is soon
tired. He informs me that there are three or four
languages at the Fiji Islands. But I thought it best
to begin with that of the island to which we have
easy access, which is Lakemba. I find I could soon
learn the Fijian language if I had a proper teacher.
1 see that the Tonga people cannot speak many of
the Fiji words. In the Fiji language they have the
sounds of r, ih, and some others which are not in
Tonga, and which the Tonga people cannot pro-
nounce.”
On arriving at Yavau they found the king suffer-
ing from a severe cold accompanied by fever. Mr.
Thomas’s medical treatment seems to have been
successful; for Finau got rapidly better during
the few days that they remained with him.
On the return voyage the canoe was steered
by the missionary’s compass; and the king and
his sailors were greatly delighted with the result,
and forthwith requested him to order a large


number of compasses from England for them to
purchase.
On Sunday, November 27th, he writes: “After
I had rested about an hour, the hell was rung again,
and our baptized people met at the chapel to partake
of the Lord’s Supper. This is the second time we
have given it at this place. At the first time, which
was April 3rd, we had twenty-seven native com-
municants. To-day we had upwards of 140, the
king being one amongst them. We found it a
solemn and profitable time. Brother and Sister
Turner and Mrs. Thomas took the Sacrament with
me and the natives. I trust the good of this will be
found after many days. The chief came up this
evening, and we talked together, and were glad for
what the Lord had done.”
And now Mr. Thomas’s stay at Haabai was to
come to an end. His presence was required at
Nukualofa on Tongatabu, to take principal charge of
that important mission, with Mr. Woon, who managed
the printing-press, as his colleague. It was with
much regret that he left a scene of so much success,
and a people whom he had learned to love. Upon
December sth he thus reviews some of the results
of the work; “I find that 276 adults and 92
children have been baptized in the year, and that
102 couples have been married. In the society we
have 149 members, and 408 on trial, of whom -146
are baptized, making a total in the classes—now
28 in number—of 452. The schools at this station
are 6; scholars, 1037; teachers, about 71. As


regards the cause generally, I judge that, at the least,
1000 souls in this group have turned to God in the
past year. To God be all the praise! ”
On the morning of their departure, December 20 th,
Mr. Thomas says: “We received a present of
twenty large yams, and a piece of native cloth from
the chief. Many expressed their love, who had
nothing to give. After breakfast we prayed with
Brother and Sister Turner and some of the friends
who were present. We then left the Lifuka house,
and called upon and prayed with the chief. He
accompanied us to the beach, where some hundreds
were gathered together. We took an affectionate
leave of Brother and Sister Turner, and our friends
and brethren at Lifuka. We were carried on board,
and in a few minutes we pushed from the shore,
hoisted sail, and bore away to the south.”


CHAPTER VI.
AT NUKUALOFA.
OX December 22nd, 1831, the District Meeting
was held at Nukualofa, and Mr. Thomas, pain-
fully oppressed by a feeling of his unworthiness and
unfitness for the office, was called upon to preside.
It was decided that Mr. Watkin should go to fill up
the vacancy at Haabai, and that Mr. Cross should
take charge of the new station at Yavau.
In writing as follows in his journal, Mr. Thomas
little thought how sadly his forebodings rvere to
be fulfilled. “Dec. 29.—Lauji and others have ex-
pressed their wish to sail to-morrow. We are there-
fore getting all ready, and Brother Watkin’s things
are being carried down. Brother and Sister Cross
will not proceed with them, but will wait until the
chief Tubou has prepared his large canoe, and they
will then go in that. The chief and his people are
busy at work at it, and they say it is nearly ready.
Our brother Cross is pleased with this canoe, and
because the chief says it is very strong he thinks it
very safe. But, for my part, I much prefer a small
canoe. I believe that any small Jcalia is safer than
a large one in case of strong winds. Also this kalia


of Tubou’s is, in my opinion, rotten. It is a very old
canoe.”
On Monday, January 2nd, 1832, Mr. and Mrs.
Watkin and their child started for the Haabais; and
on the following Saturday Mr. and Mrs. Cross
embarked for Yavau on board the chief’s great canoe.
On the Monday after, while Mr. Thomas was meet-
ing a class in the afternoon, a Christian chief, Uhila,
suddenly entered, bringing terrible news. The great
canoe was wrecked. Mrs. Cross and many of the
crew were drowned, and Mr. Cross was then being
brought from Hihifo. Mr. Thomas, having prayed
with the weeping members of the class, hurried off'
to see the chief, and gain more intelligence. While
there, a messenger arrived to tell him that Mr. Cross
was at the Mission House. There he found him,
utterly exhausted, and still in his drenched clothes.
A few moments were enough to tell the dreadful
story. On the day they left Nukualofa, the weather
became very rough, and their mast and sprit were
broken, and they were compelled to work the canoe
with oars. On attempting to return, the unwieldy
craft became unmanageable, and was driven violently
on a reef in the dark night, above a mile from the
shore, off Atata. Here she speedily went to pieces.
Mr. Cross, clinging with one hand to pieces of the
wreck, held his wife in his right arm, where she was
beaten to death by the heavy seas. He himself,
with some of the crew, got upon a raft which had
been lashed together, and drifted to a small island
about three miles away. Word was now brought


that Mrs. Cross’s body had been washed ashore at
Hihifo, and men were at once despatched to fetch it.
While Mr. Cross, overcome with fatigue, slept, after
having been two days and nights without rest, pre-
parations were made for the burial. About one
o’clock in the morning the men returned with their
lifeless burden, together with the body of a little
girl who had been lost at the same time; and the
missionaries and Mrs. Thomas, with breaking hearts,
put the corpse of their dear sister into a coffin which
was made during the night. Before noon she was
committed to the grave, at which Mr. Thomas read
the English burial service. “ This,” he writes, “is
the first breach which has been made upon our little
mission band here. 0 may the Lord spare us, that
we may see His salvation! Our dear Sister Cross
has been afflicted on several occasions, and near
death; but the Lord has again and again restored
her. She has proved herself a helpmeet for our
bereaved brother, and has been full of good works,
and unwearied in doing good to the people among
whom the Lord placed her. And now she is gone
to receive the reward of her labours and her suffering
for Christ’s sake and for His cause.” It was after-
wards ascertained that fourteen men, five children,
and one woman were also drowned in this wreck;
and a dark shadow was upon homes in Nukualofa,
as well as upon the mission houses, for many days.
In March news reached Mr. Thomas that his old
friend and enemy, Ata, the Hihifo chief, was very
ill and wanted to see him. He went back with the


messengers, and found the poor chief in a sad plight.
The doctor on board a whaler had, with ill-judged
kindness, made him a present of some calomel, of
which drug, not feeling well, he had taken a large
dose, and now was so miserably salivated that he
could scarcely articulate. Mr. Thomas explained to
the sufferer the reason of his condition, and gave the
best directions he could for his relief; and then, of
course, took the opportunity to once more exhort
him and his family to turn to the Lord. He found,
however, that he and his wife Baba, and his sister
Faihana, a heathen priestess, were as firmly fixed as
ever in their old ways. In June he visited them
again, and, though received with a kind welcome,
found the opposition to the lotu unabated. He went
to look at the forsaken Mission House, on which he
had spent so much labour. The growth of the trees
which he had reared, amongst them an English oak,
greatly surprised him; but all around were signs of
feebleness and decay. The steady persecution of all
who showed a leaning to the lotu had driven many
of the people away, so that the country had a deserted
and impoverished look. Leaving it with a warm
prayer that “ Hihifo may soon stretch out her hands
unto God,” he returned to his hard but welcome
work at Nukualofa.
At the end of June, Mr. Thomas writes.; “It is
now six years since we arrived at Tonga. In the
course of that time, what has God wrought! From
eight to ten thousand have renounced heathenism,
and about fifteen hundred are in society. The work


of the Lord continues to prosper. Glory be to God !
0 may we live to advance His cause! and may we
gain access to every soul on these islands! ”
In September a canoe arrived from Yavau, bring-
ing letters full of good news. About a thousand
persons had joined the church at the Haahais, and
five hundred at Yavau, where the chief Finau had
been baptized. A number of short letters also came
from native friends at Haabai. “These are expres-
sions of their love,” writes Mr. Thomas, “ and good
wishes. We bless the Lord for all these tokens of
His favour. But 0 how unworthy we are of such
distinguished mercies! I feel my soul almost over-
whelmed. I know not how to bear up under such
love. 0 God, do Thou enlarge my heart! ”
The beginning of the year 1833 found Mr.
Thomas at Haabai once more, where he went for a
short time in order that Mrs. Watkin might have
the kind offices of Mrs. Thomas as a nurse. His
stay at Lifuka, and visits to other places and adjacent
islands, were very cheering and encouraging; and the
evident affection with which the king and his people
received him amongst them once more greatly de-
lighted him. By the end of January he was back
again at Nukualofa.
A few weeks later he and Mrs. Thomas went to
see Ata again, and met with the usual kind welcome,
but found the same immovable opposition to the
lotu. Their visit to the forsaken Mission House was
one of much melancholy interest. They found it
generally in good condition. The thatch had been


injured by storms; but the chief had kept the reed
fences in repair. There, with strange feelings, and
vivid recollections of the hopes and disappointments
and sufferings of their first years of residence in
Tonga, they went to spend the night. “We were
followed by some of Ata’s people, who brought us a
good baked hog and some cooked yams. I gave
them a small present; and they returned. After
supper we sang and prayed. Some of our company
then left us, and we prepared to rest. We were a
little disturbed in the night by the rain pouring
through the thatch on our bedding. In the- late
storm the thatch was very much injured, and has
not been mended since. We moved our bed to a
dry part, and thus lay until morning; but as we lay
on the floor we did not rest much.”
On the 10th of March, Ata died as he had lived,
an unchanged heathen; and at his funeral there
were observed all the cruel and revolting ceremonies
of the old religion. This man’s determined and un-
yielding hostility to the lotu is a striking feature in
the history of those eventful days. As one puts
together this story from the missionary’s journal, the
question presents itself as to whether this Tongan
Ahab was not like the recreant king of Israel, “ whom
Jezebel his wife stirred up.” His head wife, Baba,
seemed from the first to be untouched by the gentle
influences of Christian truth, and clung obstinately
to the native superstitions. His sister, too, was a
priestess of great repute, and jealously resented
everything that would tend to lessen her mysterious


power. It was now to be seen how it would fare
with the good work at Hihifo when the great hind-
rance had been removed.
Before the end of the month news came of another
death, affecting yet more widely the welfare and
destiny of the whole group. Fin an, the Christian
chief of the northern islands, died, having named
King George of the Haabais as his successor. This
appointment was gladly accepted by the people; and
thus the supreme power over two-thirds of the
Friendly Islands came into the hands of the young
king, whose fidelity to the Christian religion and
anxiety to rule according to its principles had been
abundantly proved.
During the remainder of 1833 little of special
moment took place in Mr. Thomas’s history, or in
that of the mission as he was more directly connected
with it, except the very welcome arrival of Mr.
Hobbs and Mr. Tucker. Each day brought its own
work, sometimes in the presence of difficulty and
discouragement, and sometimes with enheartening
success. Translation work and the preparation of
books went on steadily; and the pastoral care of the
growing societies, and oversight and training of
native helpers, brought increasing toil.
In January, 1834, Mr. Cross, who had been away
from the islands for some months, returned, and was
accompanied by another missionary, Mr. Cargill, from
England. These reinforcements greatly lightened
the heart of Mr. Thomas and his colleagues, but
added considerably to the burden of his labour for


some time. A great deal of time was occupied in
providing for the comfort of the new arrivals, and
especially in teaching them the language, while the
daily claim of duty in other ways went on
unlessened.
This year was to witness later on one of the
brightest epochs in the history of the mission. Mr.
Thomas makes the following record:—“ Oct. 6,
Monday. —To-day three canoes arrived from the
islands, by which Ulakai and his people have come,
also the chiefs Maletau, and Bubunu, and Joeli
Mafileo. We have received letters from our brethren
at Yavau and Haabai, giving us an account of a
most glorious outpouring of the Holy Spirit upon
them and their people: and the consequence is a
blessed revival of vital godliness in the hearts of the
people. At Yavau more than 2200 have been con-
verted to God; and some have received the blessing
of a clean heart. It broke out first at Yavau, and
then reached the Haabai group. A canoe came over
from Yavau to Haabai; and the Lord, who had so
powerfully wrought at Yavau, began to work at the
Haahais also. It began at Lifuka on the 9th of
August. The 10th was a memorable Sabbath. Great
power rested upon the people; and the slain of the
Lord were many. It is said that about 2000 at the
latter group have found pardon. It has been ex-
tended to every island in the group; and almost
every individual, high and low, saint and sinner,
young and old, has more or less felt the blessed
influence. This is most welcome news to us ; and
F


we most earnestly pray that God would pour out His
Spirit upon us and the people of our charge. At
our public prayer-meeting the Lord was pleased to
manifest Himself. Towards the close of the first
prayer one from the Haabais broke out crying for
joy, and then another. In the meantime a general
murmur was heard in the chapel, occasioned by the
private prayer of the people. 0 may God grant that
His kingdom may now come even to Tonga! May
these be as drops before the shower! ”
On the following Sunday the congregations were
very large, surrounding as well as filling the chapel.
During the morning service “ there was a trembling
amongst the people, and some few cried aloud.” In
the afternoon “ a few were affected. At the close
we held a prayer-meeting, and the Lord was present.
Many cried bitterly, and some were made happy.
Some returned from the chapel crying, and would
not be pacified. For these things we bless the
Lord. At the natives’ family worship many cried
much this evening, especially at the chief’s place.
Blessed be God for what we see and hear! 0 may
the work go on and prosper! ”
On the next afternoon a prayer-meeting was held
from three to eight o’clock, where the same things
O ' O
took place in a yet greater degree. When the meet-
ing was closed the people gathered for prayer in
their own houses, from which, far into the night,
there were to be heard the voices of those who cried
for mercy and of those who rejoiced. Many never
slept that night for gladness. Day after day the


same scenes were repeated. There was also “ a great
shaking” at a service held at a place called Havelu.
One morning two men, Uhila and Ulakai, called on
Mr. Thomas for advice. They told him that Ilisabeti
Lugu, who had shared the recent blessing, had told
them that Jesus Christ bade her tell Ulakai that he
was to go to all the chiefs in Tonga and tell them of
Christ’s greatness and power, and charge them to
turn to Him. They had already launched a canoe,
and now only awaited the missionary’s sanction to
start upon this errand. Mr. Thomas told them that,
without any word from Lugu, it was undoubtedly a
good thing for them to do all they could to make
known the truth concerning the Saviour. In simple
faith the good men started on their mission.
The entry in the journal for November 4th is:
“ Eose at three o’clock, and at four set off for Foui,
where I preached to a large congregation. After-
wards I baptized seventeen adults and fifteen children.
We had a good time. The Lord gave to some of
them His Holy Spirit, so that they could not stand
to answer the questions, but wept aloud. I then
married three couples. We then spent some time in
prayer, and the Lord gave us a refreshing season.
Several were powerfully wrought upon, and cried
aloud in their distress. Amongst these were one or
two of the exhorters, and the wife of Laubo. After
the service we took our leave of some of the people,
and proceeded with others of them to Beka, where,
after a short time, the people assembled together, to
whom I preached the Gospel. After the sermon I


baptized twenty-three adults, amongst whom was the
chief of the place, and eight children. The Lord
was present with us, and while we continued in
prayer many were powerfully wrought upon, and
cried aloud. Others fell down as though dead. We
wrestled with God, and were blessed, and praised His
glorious name.”
This great and spreading activity in the good work
could not go on longer without exciting the violent
opposition of the powers of darkness. The Inaji, a
heathen feast of the first-fruits, was being held at
Mua, and word was brought to Nukualofa that the
chiefs there assembled had threatened to punish the
Christian village of Talafoou, because the teacher
there had upbraided a spirit-man, or taula, with
deceiving the people, and had further reasoned with
some Hihifo people upon the folly of taking offerings
to the Inaji. A day had been fixed for Mr. Thomas
to visit Talafoou, to administer baptism to a number
of persons who had been for some time in course of
instruction and preparation. Before daylight lie
started, accompanied by Ebelehami (Abraham) and
Semi (Shem), who was a chief of high rank. The
party went in two small paddling canoes, and made
a rapid passage. Just before the sun rose, they saw
clouds of smoke coming up from the place whither
they were going. At first they thought it 'was from
the cooking ovens, but immediately fierce high flames
told them of a great conflagration. They then per-
ceived some women approaching them on the small
island of Oneata, and altered their course to speak to


them. They found that they were from Talafoou,
and had been driven away by the heathen chiefs,
and, with such goods as they could carry, had waded
across to Oneata for safety. One of the chiefs,
Yahai of Hihifo, was at that moment on the main-
land opposite, halting on his journey home from the
Inaji. He, though one of the bitterest of the perse-
cutors, now expressed a most virtuous indignation at
what had been done at Talafoou. Ebelehami and
Semi, with some others, went on to the scene of
destruction. Presently several small canoes came in
sight, crowded with people. These were a number
of the refugees, headed by their young chief, Seteleki
Mumui. Then followed a larger canoe, bringing the
aged, and sick, and feeble, and one who was blind
all burnt out of their • homes for Christ’s sake.
Many swam alongside of the canoes, the morning
being very fine, and all landed at Oneata in safety,
warmly welcomed by the missionary, who felt more
than he could put into words. Some of those who
arrived were heathen neighbours of the Christians,
who chose to suffer exile with them. While prepara-
tions were being made for the journey to Nukualofa,
the shouts of the heathen could be heard triumphing
in their work of destruction. Some of the party
started in canoes, and the rest waded to the main-
land, the tide being very low. Looking back, they
saw the smoke rising wider and blacker from their
ruined homes. All reached Nukualofa in safety. As
it was reported that the same fate had been decreed
against all the Christian places upon Tonga except


Nukualofa, the chief, Tuhou, sent messengers to them
all, bidding the people to come at once to him,
and telling them that they were on no account to
offer any violent resistance to their persecutors. In
the course of the next day a great many came in
from the threatened places, some of them, as in the
case of the Matahau and Teekui people, bringing news
of the burning of their chapels. On Sunday, No-
vember 9th, the congregations were very large. Mr.
Thomas preached twice. He says: “ A mighty influ-
ence was imparted, so that many cried aloud and were
carried out of the chapel. After the first service
the people retired to their dwellings, and again
assembled to hold prayer-meetings. The Lord visited
them, so that scores fell down as dead, who, being
carried out, soon after revived, and were filled with
peace and joy. Nukualofa is now full of people, and
the people are full of life. Blessed be the name of
the Lord for ever! ” On the following Sunday the
people from Talafoou received baptism who were to
have been baptized on the day when their homes
were destroyed. The good work went on, and on
the last Sunday in the year the Lord’s Supper was
administered to more than 600 communicants.
On December 31st the Tonga missionaries started
for Haabai, to attend the district meeting. At night,
after a very rough passage, they reached the island
of Namuka, where they found very scanty fare, as
the island had been visited with great scarcity of
food. However, they came in time for the watch-
night service which the people had arranged to hold,


and Mr. Thomas preached to them. He went with
Stephen the teacher to his house, where he refreshed
himself with some roasted bananas, and “ drank a
little cocoa-nut.” They then went to the chapel, and
had a good service. The scene must have been very
picturesque. Nearly every person brought a lamp
made of the half of a cocoa-nut, with the pure white
nut left in the shell, which was then filled with oil,
in which a wick was fixed. Two such lamps were
placed, one on each side of the pulpit, upon stems of
banana trees cut to imitate ornamental pillars. On
the next day he reached Lifuka, and had a warm
greeting from the mission families and the natives.
January 2, 1835, when the district meeting was
held, is a date well worthy of record. Those who
took part in it, though men of faith, whose faith had
recently been greatly strengthened by the wonderful
work which they had witnessed, could little foresee
or even imagine the grand results of the counsel
which they then adopted. After stating that they
decided that he himself was to remove to Yavau,
and Mr. Watkin to replace him at Nukualofa, and
that they should recommend the committee to begin
a mission in the Navigators’ Islands, Mr. Thomas
makes this simple record; “We determined upon
commencing the Fiji mission as soon as an opportunity
offers of going there. Brother Cross offered himself
for the Fijis. His offer was accepted, and it was
judged proper that Brother Cargill should be stationed
with him. Brother Turner is appointed to the Samoa
or Navigators’ Islands.”


After the close of the district meeting, Mr. Thomas
returned to Nukualofa, where, he says, “ we were met
by many on the canoe, who embraced us with tears
of joy and many kisses, and, when carried to the
beach, we found hundreds of our people, who had
collected together to welcome us back. Here also
I found my dear wife. We walked home, the
people, some accompanying us, and others meeting
us to express their joy.” All rejoiced together in the
good tidings which were brought from the district
meeting, that during the last year there had been
an increase at the three stations, Tonga, Haabai, and
Yavau, of 3995 members.


CHAPTER VII.
AT VAVAU.
ON March 21st,Mr. and Mrs. Thomas left Nukualofa
for their new station at Yavau. The parting
with the people was painful, and many tears were
shed. After a comfortable voyage in an American
whaler, though slow by reason of light and contrary
winds, they reached their destination on the 25th,
and in a day or two Mr. Thomas was in full and
regular work. The first local preachers’ meeting was
held on the 4th of May, when a faithful inquiry dis-
covered no case in which a charge could be brought
against the moral character of any of the teachers.
“ Fourteen persons,” says Mr. Thomas, “ have been
proposed and accepted as teachers. Some of them
are very promising persons. Three or four are
chiefs, and all are deeply pious. Amongst them is
Sailosi (Cyrus) Faone, my old friend and teacher
when I lived at Lifuka four years ago.”
In May, a new delight came to Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas in the birth of their first-born son, whereat
the father’s heart rejoiced with much tenderness and
devout praise. Month after month passed in patient
and unremitting toil. The translating work, with
growing familiarity with the language, advanced


more and more rapidly. The number of converts
steadily increased.
On October Bth Mr. Thomas records: “ Brother
Watkin left us this morning and sailed for Lifuka.
Also on the same day sailed Brothers Cross and
Cargill for their station at the Tips. We accom-
panied them on board, and parted with many tears.
The natives wept aloud.” Seventeen days afterwards,
news came of their safe arrival at Lakemba.
June 14, 1836, was an exciting day of great
gladness. Just as the English prayer-meeting was
about to begin, one came running in with the news
that a vessel had arrived with five missionaries on
board, and amongst them the Eev. Stephen Eabone,
who had married Mr. Thomas’s sister. Mr. Thomas
set off at once to the beach, accompanied by the
king, on whom he had called with the good tidings.
Canoes were launched, and, though it was getting
dark, and the vessel had not yet come to anchor,
they were soon alongside, and standing on the
crowded deck with the newly-arrived friends. The
meeting with Mrs. Eabone was with almost over-
whelming emotion. The brother and sister had not
seen each other for more than eleven years, and the
news had reached him that, on the voyage out, she
and her husband had suffered shipwreck. Accom-
panied by Mr. and Mrs. Eabone and their babe, the
others remaining on board for the night, Mr. Thomas
returned to shore. He says: “We then got into
the boat. The king sat in the head of it, and I in
the stern, the canoes paddling after, bringing the


friends who had accompanied me. On landing at the
beach some hundreds of the people were assembled
to bid them welcome. Though it was dark, we
walked up as soon as we were able, and on reaching
our house, where my dear wife had been anxiously
awaiting their arrival, the scene of weeping was
again renewed. Our feelings were unutterable. 0
bless the Lord that we have been spared to see this
day ! We partook of some refreshment, and praised
the Lord for His goodness, and then continued in
conversation until a late hour. We were thankful
to find that our dear parents were alive and well.”
With this large reinforcement, the missionaries set
to work with new courage and devotion. At the
quarterly meeting held a few days afterwards, it was
found that in the one circuit of Varan there were
now 152 local preachers, and eighteen on trial, by
whom thirty-five places were supplied with preaching
three times a week.
On August 10 th the large new chapel at Heiafu,
Haafuluhao, Mr. Thomas’s station, was opened for
public worship. He thus describes the important
event: “ Kose at four o’clock, and at seven tire
people assembled together at the new chapel. The
sun had risen about a quarter of an hour. On ap-
proaching the chapel, we found it quite full, and the
ground for many yards round it covered with people,
a space being left open for us to walk in. We
entered, and, as it devolved upon me to take the first
service, I ascended the pulpit, and gave out a hymn,
which was sung by the congregation. In prayer,


many were affected and cried aloud. After prayer I
read the 2 9th chapter of the First Book of Chronicles,
from the Ist to the 25 th verse. Afterwards I
preached on vers. 13-18. The Lord made the
service a blessing. In the last prayer many cried
aloud, and many hearts rejoiced. From two to three
thousand were present.
“ We returned home after the service, and at eleven
o’clock assembled again, when the king took the
pulpit. He read the greater part of the Bth chapter
of the First Book of Kings, and commented upon it,
and then made a close application of several plain
truths to the hearts of the people. He then said,
‘ Let us sing,’ and pitched the tune of ‘ The Voice
of Free Grace.’ He called upon me to pray. The
Lord was present, and several began to cry aloud.
After some time I began to sing ‘ Hallelujah,’ and
was joined by several, when, in about a minute,
nearly all in the chapel seemed to be deeply affected,
and cried out for joy. After the service we returned
home again. The king and queen took a little
dinner with us, after which I presented them each
with a copy of Matthew’s Gospel, now complete,
previous to their leaving us for Haabai, also to com-
memorate the opening of Ebenezer Chapel, for so we
named the new building.” At half-past two another
service was held, conducted by the Eev. John
Hobbs.
The year 1837 opened in gloom and trouble. A
war, which had long threatened, at last broke out
in much fury upon the great island of Tongatabu.


Here, where the mission had first begun, the old
heathenism had maintained its resolute and defiant
opposition to the new religion, and frequent outrages
had been, from time to time, committed upon the
Christians, who were still far outnumbered by the
heathen party. Nukualofa, the headquarters of the
lotu, was fortified in expectation of an attack. The
king, Josiah Tubou, who had early become Christian,
was a man of feeble character, and but ill fitted to
champion any cause. When matters came to the
worst, he sought the aid of King George, who landed
at Tonga with a number of followers on the first day
of the new year, and, within a few days,' active
hostilities took place in a contest which was, from
first to last, in all its avowed motives and aims, a
war in which the Christian people were forced into
active self-defence. It had become a fight for very
existence. While the missionaries were compelled
to acknowledge this stem necessity, they saw with
great pain the injury which such a state of things
must needs inflict upon their work. Although Mr.
Thomas was at the point farthest removed from the
seat of war, he had thus to endure the suffering
which hurt him the most. His noble band of native
helpers was almost entirely withdrawn, being sum-
moned to join the force which their king was leading
to succour their Christian friends in Tonga. Thus
for a time nearly all the preaching places in his
circuit were closed, while he and his colleagues
supplied the principal chapels as far as they could,
and watched over the flock still left in their hands.


In one respect good came out of the evil. The perils of
the time urged the people tofrequentand earnest prayer.
Again and again there were appointed days of fasting
and supplication, when meetings were held attended
frequently by more than two thousand persons.
Now and then news came of successes won by the
Christian forces; but the joy was sadly tempered by
the accompanying report of useful and devoted lives
lost in the bitter contest. In one thing only those
days of trouble brought their peculiar gift of satisfac-
tion to our missionary. He got more leisure now
than he had been ever able to secure before for his
translating work. Thus he notes joyfully the fact
that, in two weeks, he had been able to complete a
translation of fifteen chapters of St. John’s Gospel.
In February a calamity of another kind befell the
islands, in the perils and distresses of which the
missionaries had their full share. The following is
Mr. Thomas’s own account of the visitation: —
“ March 7, Tuesday. —Fast day on account of the
war. We held a prayer-meeting at daylight, and
had a good time. Afterwards I was engaged in the
house. At three o’clock wo attended the chapel
again to hold a prayer-meeting. After the meeting
the wind was freshening, and the sky began to look
rather wild, and a large sea-bird was hovering near
the chapel. I was led to think we should have a
storm. The wind was from the south-east. At
night we held our English prayer-meeting. The
wind increased. We retired to rest about ten
o’clock, hut as the wind blew hard and carried away


some of the thatch over the study, and the rain
began to pour in, I got up twice for the purpose of
removing some of my hooks. Bth, Wednesday. —At
daylight this morning the wind had risen to a great
height, so that, to all appearance, much damage
would be done. As the day advanced the gale
seemed to strengthen, until about ten o’clock, when it
ceased very suddenly. Before it the land was as the
garden of Eden; after it, it was a desolate wilder-
ness, every fence blown flat down, and in many
places torn all to pieces. Eighteen houses out of
every twenty blown down, cocoa-nut and bread-fruit
trees, as almost every other, blown up by the roots
or broken asunder. Five outhouses on my premises
were blown down. My study was all but destroyed.
The top was blown off it, and the rain poured in
upon my books and papers. Some of the shelves
fell down, and there was the greatest imaginable
confusion. Our dwelling-house shook to its centre,
but yielded to the blast like a basket, and, being
well braced, it kept together. After a lull for about
half an hour, the wind came round to the west, and
in a short time we had as heavy a hurricane from
this quarter as we had before experienced. It swept
the whole land with awful fury. It blew the top
off our dwelling-house, and the rain poured in in
torrents. Mrs. Thomas had now left it in search of
one more safe, but I and some natives continued in
it, to do anything we could to hold it up. At length
one of the cross beams got loose. On seeing this,
we fixed a rope across to keep the sides together and


prevent its falling. The gale blew with awful
violence for a few hours, and then began to abate.
Some few houses that were nearly blown down by
the wind from the east, were now blown up again,
and some of them were blown down in the opposite
direction. Others continued to stand, though almost
all to pieces.
“ Our large, beautiful chapel was seriously injured
by the wind from the east, and forced out of place.
When the wind came round, it was blown back
again, and the west end of it blown in. Several of
the large beams also were broken, and two fell down.
The old chapel, which we used as a school, is blown
down. All the king’s houses are down; so is
the Large House, called Boono. By a note I have
received from Feletoa, I find that Brother Bmbone’s
house is down; also the chapel at Feletoa, and Bagai,
and nearly all the houses in the village.
“ After the wind had ceased, the scene at Neiafu
was truly awful; and', if we may judge of the effects
of the tornado elsewhere by what we see here, not
five houses in a hundred will he found standing
through the whole group. The effects upon the
bananas, bread-fruit, cocoa-nut, and other fruit trees
are terrible. In a few hours the face of the country
was quite changed, and those trees which were not
blown down were so lashed by the wind and rain
and sea, that they looked like trees in England killed
by the frost—all the leaves withered up. Several
persons have been hurt, either by the falling of
the houses or trees: but I have not heard of


any one having been killed. To God be all the
praise!
“ Such a hurricane the oldest men on the island
never saw before. I have not yet heard how many
chapels have been blown down. I have heard of
two only which are standing. Towards afternoon it
began to clear up, and Mrs. Thomas and our dear
hoy returned. But our house presented a sad
picture, much like that of a house that had been
saved from a destructive fire by several fire-engines
playing upon it. My books and papers were very
wet, and many of them will be utterly spoiled, and
much of the mission property destroyed.
“ Brother Spinney’s house fell, and so did the
printing-office; but we thank the Lord the press is
not broken, though much, very much confusion has
been caused among the type, so that Brother Brooks
will be a long time before he can get it all right
again.”
On April 8 the welcome news came that the war
in Tonga was at an end, having resulted wholly in
favour of the Christian party. A few days later
canoes began to arrive, bringing back the people who
had gone on the late expedition.
It seemed to be important that at this eventful
crisis Mr. Thomas should visit Tonga, and he went
accordingly. He rejoiced to find that the victory of
his friends had been altogether complete; and that
the power of the heathen party was effectually
broken. Idolatrous shrines had been destroyed, and
sacred places cleared and planted with useful fruit
G


trees. While in the island, he visited Hihifo, where
his missionary life began in much suffering and dis-
appointment, nearly eleven years before. Baba, the
widow of the late chief Ata, and now wife of his
brother and successor, still lived, and gave Mr.
Thomas a kindly welcome; and the reigning chief
also named Ata, received him with every mark of
respect, and, at Josiah Tubou’s request, consented to
receive a missionary. It is a curious fact that,
firmly as he had carried out his predecessor’s policy
of uncompromising resistance to the lotu, and had
actively persecuted the Christian converts, yet, during
the late war, he had refused to join the heathen
party, and had even arrayed his power on the opposite
side. Mr. Thomas again visited the mission-house
which he had built, and was greatly pleased to find
it still in good repair. He saw, too, with delight,
the well-grown trees and hedges which he had
planted, finding special satisfaction in the survival
of a sturdy young oak—the only one in the islands
—raised from an English acorn. Tt was afterwards
resolved that Mr. Eabone should go from Yavau to
reoccupy the station at Hihifo.
Some two months after his return to Yavau, Mr.
Thomas had the great joy of seeing an important
Hihifo chief, Ahomea, who was visiting King George,
make a public profession of Christianity. “He came
to chapel, and we prayed for him. He bowed to the
true God for the first time; and several others also
have turned. For these things we bless the Lord.
I have prayed for this man many times, and when I


lived at Ililiifo I often tried to bring him to God.”
Thus writes the missionary, and on the next day:
“ Ahomea came to see us, and several of his people
with him. I gave him a most hearty welcome, and
was thankful to God on his account. He appears
quite firm, and I hope will continue so. I gave him
a small present, and a few books. Glory be to God!
The seed sown with tears ten years ago is not dead.
Some is springing up even now.”
A simple account of the ordinary Sunday’s work
of a Tongan missionary may here be given from
Mr. Thomas’s journal. “Sept. 10.—Eose early. Set
off at half-past four o’clock for Ealeono. Got
there at daylight. After partaking of a little hot
cocoa-nut water, I preached to a large congregation,
on 1 Pet. ii. 25. The people were very attentive;
and I hope the word was made a blessing to
them. I baptized one child, and after the service
partook of an excellent fowl and yam, which the
friends at this place had prepared. After this the
chief Eliesa lent me his canoe, and assisted me over
the shoals to the deep water. He then returned,
and we went on to Tuanekivale. I reached this
place by nine o’clock, and found the people waiting.
The old chief had died since I was with them last;
and their beautiful new chapel, which had cost them
so much time and pains, was blown down in the
hurricane in March, since which time the people
have been so much employed as not to have had
time to build another, but have fitted up a house
near the sea-side, where they now worship. Hero


I preached on Heb. xiii. 14. I had a good time;
and the people found it good. From thence I was
paddled to Koloa, where I preached on James i. 25.
We had a good time, and I hope the word will
live in their minds. After the service, I returned
home much tired. I called at the Ebenezer Chapel,
and stood outside and heard Brother Brooks read
his native sermon. A few words he blundered over,
but, on the whole, he managed pretty well. At
night we held our English prayer-meeting, and many
of the strangers were present.”
Soon after this entry, we come upon one which
gives a fair idea of the difficulties and perils which
disturb travelling arrangements in these insular
districts, and are not easy to be understood by
people who have grown accustomed to shape their
plans with time-table regularity. The district
meeting was appointed to be held at Haabai. After
waiting several days for a fair wind, Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas and their child started one morning in a
canoe at half-past four. Against an almost head
wind they cleared the reefs and got twenty miles
out to sea; but the weather became so bad, that
they were obliged to put back; and, after nine
hours’ tossing, they reached home again. Four days
later another attempt was made, with the same
result. At last Mr. Thomas started without his
wife and child. This time they could make but
little way for want of wind, and, after forty-eight
hours’ tedious passage, landed at Haabai at half-past
five on the Sunday morning. After all this, Mr.


Thomas preached at nine o’clock in the large chapel,
and again in the afternoon. He thus describes the
journey back again. “Eose early, and set off back.
The wind was fair but light. We sighted Yavau
about four o’clock ; and the wind freshened as the
sun went down. It became dark, and the wind
was getting strong. We ran, as was supposed, for
the proper passage, but, all of a sudden, reefs were
seen ahead, the white foam on which, and the roar,
alarmed us. The rope which supports the sail
having been made fast, we had well-nigh struck
before the sail was down. It was a fearful time
with some, as in a few minutes we were almost
surrounded with breakers, and hardly any one knew
where we were, the natives being confused. We
were through mercy kept from wreck. After a
time, and much noise, we checked the canoe, and
found she was going off from the reef. We proceeded
to paddle the canoe, and, after some time, got to
anchor between Gaunaho and Kalia. Here, the men
all being tired, we lay down and slept about three
hours. At four o’clock I woke them up, and we
set off, and reached Xeiafu by six, to the no small
joy of our friends, and thankful to God, who had
saved our lives from destruction.”
On reaching home the missionaries found that a
vessel had arrived, having on board a Eoman
Catholic bishop and some mission priests. The
bishop had already visited the king and requested
permission to leave some teachers with him, but
was told that he could give no answer until the


missionaries returned. The bishop, therefore, sent
a very polite message seeking an interview, and
presently came accompanied by his priests. He
could not speak English, but there was a French
sailor at hand who had lived in the islands many
years. This man translated the bishop’s words into
the Tongan language, and thus a conversation was
carried on. Mr. Thomas’s particular account of it
is, for many reasons, of such great interest, that it
is here given in full.
“ His lordship first offered to supply us with any-
thing we were in need of from on board the vessel.
I thanked him for his very kind offer; hut we did
not need anything. He then informed us of his
wish to leave two persons here, and wanted to
know whether we had any objection. We asked
the object of their remaining here. His lordship
informed us that it was merely to stay here. We
then told him that it was for the king, and not for
us, to decide in such matters. He said that the
king had referred him to us, and that we could decide
it. I then requested his lordship to let us know his
object, as we understood that he had missionaries on
board, and, if he proposed to leave missionaries here,
we most respectfully objected, as our people were
all Christians and under our care, and to have
missionaries of another creed and discipline would
not be for the good but harm of our people.
If, however, his lordship merely wished to leave
two persons on shore here, we begged to say again,
it was for the king to decide, and not us.


“ The bishop regretted that we should object to
his leaving missionaries here, and said that, were he
in our case, he should not do so. He was sorry
to say that they had met with much discouragement
where they had called. I told him it was the good
of the people that I sought, and I was sure it would
not tend to edification hut confusion if there were
other missions here, as the people were one, under
one king, and of one family. Also we had come
to them in their heathen state, had sought them,
and brought them to the paths of truth and glad-
ness, and it was only just that we should keep them,
as they were our children, the fruit of our labour
in the Lord.
“ His lordship then assured us that he did not wish
them to act as teachers, neither should they interfere
with religious matters at all but at our request, also
they should be sent away whenever we thought
proper.” After some more to the same effect, the
missionaries accompanied the bishop and his com-
panions to seek an audience of the king. Mr.
Thomas remarks with much simplicity, “ There was
a great contrast between us. His lordship was
richly dressed and ornamented with golden cross,
etc. So were the priests.” This imposing display,
however, proved to be a failure, and was so unlike
all that the Yavauans had been accustomed to see
in their religious teachers, that it excited their
contempt. The party found the king sitting on
his mat, and Mr. Thomas, according to Tonga
fashion, sat beside him, but the bishop and his


companions stood. A very similar conversation
then took place to that already held; but the king
made a very shrewd addition; he said he could
not believe that they would not interfere in religious
matters, “ for,” said he, “ you have already interfered
by telling me, before the missionaries came home, that
yours was the old religion, and therefore the true one,
and that what they taught was new and lately
sprung up.” The king thereupon told the bishop
that he was not to leave any one with them, as
they were not needed, but had better depart at
once, while they had a vessel to carry them. So
the interview came to an end, and his lordship
had to go away without gaining his point. Looking
back at the whole scene through events which have
happened since, it is invested with singular im-
portance, and the requests and declarations of the
French bishop are peculiarly interesting.
The missionary meeting held at Xeiafu in 1838
was a great occasion, and it is somewhat amusing to
note how closely were observed the formalities of
such a meeting as it would he conducted in England.
In one feature, at least, the Tongan anniversary
excelled. At daybreak there was a preaching service
attended by two thousand people. “ A blessed
unction,” says Mr. Thomas, “rested upon us, and
after the sermon several prayed, and hundreds
wept aloud for joy. 0 may the benefits of this
service be lasting as eternity! It was an over-
whelming time.
“ At half past ten o’clock we commenced the public


meeting. After singing and prayer the king was
called to the chair. I judge that from three to
four thousand persons were present. The king gave
us a very appropriate, pious, and fervent opening
speech, after which I rose and read the report, and
called over the names of those who had contributed
of their substance to the good cause, together with
the amount of cash which had been received, includ-
ing our own subscriptions, amounting altogether to
rather more than £lO. Beside the cash, the people
had given native cloth, mats, native fish-hooks,
baskets, shells, whales’ teeth, and walking-sticks.
Three persons gave live hogs, two of them large ones.
A number of the people have cultivated yams for us;
others have built a house, and one chief and his people
made me a pig-stye. The king has rendered much
service by his canoes, also by sending us food, such as
fish, yams, pigs, etc. The meeting was addressed by
the following local preachers, most of whom are
chiefs: Osaiasi Yeekuni, Tiofilosi Kaianuanu, Sailosi
Fatafehe, Jobe Soakai, Akabusi Ugouga, Juliasi
Xaulevou, Joani Tifita, Aisea Vovole, Joeli Bulu,
Hekeai Segi, and Mosese Xaulco. We were together
six hours. The different speeches were listened to with
the most marked attention, and a blessed influence per-
vaded the meeting. On several occasions they cried
aloud. After the thanks of the meeting were offered
to the royal chairman, we sang, and the chief Dalai as
Yuki prayed in a most fervent and devout manner,
and I concluded the meeting. To me and my dear
wife it was highly interesting. There were persons


present from Yavau, Haabai, Tonga, Fiji, Samoa,
Nina, Niuafoou, Wallis’ Island, Ilotuma, Tahiti, and
I know not where else; and the power of the Lord
was present to bless His people, and do us all
good.”
During this year Mr. Thomas visited the distant
outlying islands of Niua, or Keppel’s Island, and
Niuafoou, or Broby’s Island, where the mission
work had made considerable advance under the care
of native teachers sent from Yavau. He was accom-
panied on this journey, which was made in an
American whaler, by his wife, and by King George
and some local preachers. They sjnent three days at
Kina, preaching twice a day, and holding meetings
of the teachers and leaders in charge. Mr. Thomas
also married sixty-one couples, and baptized thirty-
seven adults and sixty-four children. After three
days’ sailing they reached Niuafoou, where they
stayed nine days. Here also two services were held
daily, at one of which Mr. Thomas preached, the
other being conducted by King George or by one
of the local preachers. Two hundred and five
couples were married, almost all of whom had been
living faithfully together for some time, and were
members of society; but no minister had visited
the island to marry them by a formal religious
service. Mr. Thomas also baptized 741 adults, in-
cluding the king, Fotofili, and his wife, and 339
children.
On reaching home after their long absence, the
travellers were met by the sad news that their


fine new chapel at Neiafu had been destroyed
by fire. Within three days the king called an
assembly of the people, and gave orders for the im-
mediate building of another and larger chapel. The
man who had set fire to the other was then brought out
as a prisoner, and, after being flogged, was banished
from the island. This was on September 7 th. On
November 28th the new chapel was finished and
opened for public worship—the finest chapel, Mr.
Thomas says, in the Friendly Islands, “ large, strong,
and very elegant.”
Wednesday, March 20th, 1839, was an important
day in Yavau. A great assembly was then held,
whereat the king formally enacted the code of laws,
which had been prepared nearly twelve months before,
and were now printed. The same laws were to be
observed also at Haabai. In tbe framing of them
Mr. Thomas had taken an important part.
On November 7th, his journal says: “At two
o’clock Mr. and Mrs. Brooks took dinner with us, it
being my birthday. We prayed together; and I
hope I gave myself afresh to God. I feel myself a
very unprofitable servant. I have now completed
my forty-second year in this world of trial and
labour. Sixteen years I spent at my trade, and
fifteen years I have now been called a missionary.
I seem scarcely to have entered into my work fer-
tile Lord. 0 how little I have done, and how many
faults I have been guilty of! ‘lt is of the Lord’s
mercies I have not been consumed. They are new
every morning. Great is Thy faithfulness.’ My


ignorance, and want of proper qualifications for the
great work to which I have been called, have been a
burden I have always groaned under; and at times
I find it almost intolerable. What I have done, I
have done; and as to most I can say, I have done
what I could ; and I feel encouraged to lay myself
and my feeble doing at the feet of my most indulgent
Lord, who has deigned to call me to labour for Him.
“ ‘ Small as it is, ’tis all my store :
More sliouldst Thou have if I had more. ’ ”
The year 1840 was one of constant and faithful
labour, and passed without any extraordinary events
affecting the life of Mr. Thomas, except that, war
having again broken out in Tonga, he paid a visit to
that island, and, as he had secured the respect of
some of the heathen chiefs, used all his influence to
bring hostilities to an end. Before he left, he had
the satisfaction of seeing peace restored. During
the year he completed the translation of those parts
of the New Testament which had been apportioned
to him, Matthew, John, Eomans to Colossians, and
James to Revelation. He also translated part of the
Pentateuch, and carefully revised a translation of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, beside preparing catechisms
and other small books.


CHAPTER VIII.
RETURN TO NUKUALOFA.
IN March, 1841, Mr. Thomas left Vavau, after six
years’ residence there, and returned to Tonga,
towards which his mind and heart seemed continually
to look with a peculiar affection. His work, however,
for a long time was very difficult and disappointing.
The war had greatly injured the religious life of the
Christian people, while it made the heathen suspicious
and inaccessible. The want of faithfulness and
decision on the part of the king, Josiah, was a source
of incessant trouble and difficulty; and the spirit of
the missionary at times was almost broken. Further-
more, to add to his perplexity, a Eoman Catholic
priest was introduced, during 1842, among the
heathen people at one part of the island, who had
been moved by promises of large presents of firearms
and ammunition, if they received the priest. When
they found that, after waiting some time, there were
no signs of the expected gifts, they showed but little
inclination to listen to the religious teaching of their
visitor.
In 1843, Mr. Thomas, accompanied by Mr.
Wilson, made a long and important tour of visitation
of some of the distant stations. They sailed in the


missionary schooner Triton, on March 10th, and
were away about eleven weeks, calling at Nina, or
Keppel’s Island, and at Muafoou, where they found
a French priest at work. At both islands the
Tongan teachers who had been sent had done good
service, and were greatly cheered by this visit.
Thence they made their way to the distant, lone
island of Rotuma, detained continually by the
wretched sailing qualities of the Triton, which rolled
like a log, and made two knots to other vessels’ four.
After this they visited some of the Fiji Islands, and
got hack to Tonga on the 29 th of May. Mr. Thomas
had agreed with his little boy that a certain flag
should be hoisted as a signal on board when he re-
turned, and, as they neared Nukualofa, this was done.
A boat came off to meet the vessel, and a letter was
handed to Mr. Thomas, bringing the bitter news that,
during his absence, his hoy had sickened and died.
He told the captain to lower the flag, and went
ashore with a breaking heart. Upon the beach
there were waiting for him the king and a number
of the people, who met him in weeping silence, as if
awestruck by his great sorrow. And so he betook
him to his bereaved home, where the stricken mother
met him, saying, “ I could not keep him,” and was
able to say no more.
Writing a month afterwards, Mr. Thomas says:
“ His soul had been in heaven more than five weeks
when I got home. 0 what did I feel when told
that my dear boy was gone ! And what have I felt,
and still feel since, in this sorrowing home, at the


absence of my only child! I have much pain at
heart. I have indeed mourned for this my first-born
and only son, the son of my hope. 0 may the
end designed be fully answered in me and in my
dear wife ! ” Again, still later: “ Grief has almost
broken my heart. The Lord has permitted me to
see sorrow, and to feel the emptiness and vanity of
the creature. Every source has at times been dried
up —all failing—so that I have cried out, with a
heart almost ready to burst with grief, ‘ Lord, I am
oppressed: undertake for me ! ’ My brethren have
been a comfort to me by their kind and sympathiz-
ing letters. Several of the Vavau leaders have also
now written to me. They are my spiritual children.
They were dumb with astonishment for some time,
but now write to comfort me.”
In July the missionary’s heart was greatly cheered
by the opening of a new chapel at Hihifo, his first
station, and the scene of long years of apparently
all but fruitless toil. He writes: “We found that
people had collected from all parts of the island,
professors and heathens; and great provisions had
been made.
“At about ten o’clock we assembled for divine
worship. The chapel was filled, and many sat out-
side. After singing and prayer, and the reading of
the lesson, I preached on Isaiah xxv. 6,7, 8. The
people were attentive. 0 that good may be done!
At the close of the sermon a number of adults stood
up, and answered the usual questions prepared
previous to administering the ordinance of baptism.


Amongst them were the chiefs Yahai, Mometo, their
wives, attendants, and children. These kneeled down
before the rail of the pulpit, and I baptized them in
the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
“ This is a memorable day, and a great day here.
The persons now received into the Christian Church
were amongst those who stood out against the Lord
and His truth! but they have now cast away the
weapons of their rebellion, and taken the Lord for
their God. The chief Ata, and his wife Baba, who
is King Tuhou’s sister, received baptism at my hands,
a few years ago, at Yavau. 1 Ata’s sister, Faiana,
who was the devil priestess at this place, I baptized
last year at Nukualofa. Several prayed at the close
of the meeting; and the people responded with
hearty Amens.
“ After the service, the food was collected together.
There were more than 200 roasted pigs, beside fish,
etc., a vast quantity of yams, cava, and other things.
Not less than 250 pigs have been dressed on the
occasion; and such cheerfulness and good feeling
were manifest as have rarely been witnessed.
“ Sixteen years ago we were preparing to leave
Hihifo through the constant opposition of the chiefs
and people, thinking that we could not endure
long such a state of things. The Lord, however,
prevented us from going away at that time. When
we did leave Hihifo, which was in June, 1829, it
was to begin the Haabai station; and that was not
1 During the last war, Ata was deposed from his chieftainship,
and removed to Vavau. He had now returned to Hihifo.


until a seed was raised up at Hihifo, which was the
nucleus of the present society, which has about 500
members.
“ I think about five-and-twenty must have been
baptized. We waited upon the chief Ata, and Baba,
his wife, and were glad to see them so well. They
both sympathized with us in our loss ; and Ata sent
Baba over to my dear wife with a mark of their love
at the time.”
The sorrow caused by the death of his only child
lost little of its bitterness as time went on; and
during the next two years this wrought with other
things to produce great dejection and discouragement.
The presence of the Eomish priests on the island, and
their efforts to destroy Mr. Thomas’s influence with
the people, by covert attacks upon his reputation,
caused him sore distress, and excited into painful
sensitiveness his consciousness of deficient training
and knowledge. Then the island of Tonga was the
only important part of the group where the old
heathenism formed a distinct and formidable party;
and its customs and observances were perpetual traps
to catch those whose attachment to Christianity was
of only a superficial kind. In this respect the
missionaries had great reason to complain of the
Tonga king, Josiah Tubou, whose rule was feeble,
and his influence on behalf of the religion into
which he had been baptized was used in' a half-
hearted way, while he gave at least a tacit sanction
to some heathen practices. Mr. Thomas had been
compelled to remove him from office in the Church;
H


and hardly a week passed without some fresh trouble
caused by the king’s weakness and inconsistency.
In November, 1845, Josiah was seized with fatal
illness. During his last hours he was very penitent,
and freely acknowledged his faults. Mr. Thomas,
who was with him to the end, had good hope that he
died fully trusting in the Saviour. He was buried
with simple Christian rites; and it was remembered
by some, as a notable contrast, that a few days
before his father, Mumui, died, in 1797, one of his
sons, Kulilala, a fine healthy young man, was
strangled to propitiate the gods, also a woman named
Bohua. After his death the cutting of their own
bodies by the mourners had been practised to a
horrible extent.
During Josiah’s illness he had nominated George,
the king of Haabai and Yavau, as his successor, and
news of his approaching death was despatched with
all haste to the king, who could not arrive, however,
in time to speak with the dying chief. The scene
of his landing was very impressive. Early in the
morning a fleet of seven canoes was seen in the
distance, and towards noon some of them, among
which was the king’s canoe, brought up close to the
shore. On land no one was to be seen. Even the
children were hidden away. Then a great procession
of the people, headed by the principal chiefs, slowly
marched down to the beach, all having their hands
clasped, and wearing the vala tauagaa, or mourning
dress.
On the shore they all sat down silently, facing the


sea, and bowed their heads to the ground, the king
and his attendants, on board their canoe, sitting also
with bowed heads. After a while the late chiefs
brother was sent to tell the king that Josiah Tubou
was dead and buried. Receiving the message of
death the king uttered a cry, which was taken up,
repeated, and prolonged in all the canoes. After a
considerable time, King George landed with his
queen, and went to his own house.
The chiefs having decided to confer upon George
the title of Tuikanokubolu, and thus make him
supreme in Tonga, a day was appointed for his
formal installation, which, according to ancient
precedent, took place at Hihifo. Thus the kingship
of the whole group came to be vested in the Chris-
tian chief, henceforth known as George Tubou, who
still, in venerable and honoured old age, rules over
the people.
As the time passed on, month after month found
Mr. Thomas quietly pursuing his way of duty,
watching with jealous fidelity over the members of
the Church, bewailing the weakness and wayward-
ness of some, and rejoicing greatly in those who
stood fast, and grew in Christian knowledge and
zeal. In the course of 1846 he again visited
Hihifo. “At daylight,” he says, “ I preached to a
very large congregation on 1 Cor. xv. 58: ‘ Therefore,
my beloved brethren, be ye stedfast, unmoveable, ahuays
abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye
know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord! I
felt it good while thus engaged.”


Ko doubt he did. Standing in the presence of
that “ very large congregation,” and looking back,
through long years of patient faith and toil and
suffering, to those early'days of his mission, when the
difficulties in the way of success seemed to be insur-
mountable, he would testify, with a devout triumph,
to the truth of the word which he preached. On the
next day he wrote; “ Yesterday I took up the first
volume of my journal, to see how it was with us
at Hihifo twenty years ago; and under the date
September 26, 1826, I had written thus: ‘Another
week of precious time is fled for ever. We have got
on tolerably well with our house this week. But how
little have I done towards the conversion of these
heathens ! 0 when shall the time once arrive when
these people shall hear and believe the blessed
Gospel ? Ours is a work of patience, and a labour of
love. 0 may we be stedfast, unmoveable, always abound-
ing in the work of the Lord !
“ ‘ The chief has behaved rather better to-day.
Thank God, we have a gleam of hope, even here in
the land of heathenish darkness, that our lives will
be preserved, and that good will be done. 0 Lord,
do Thou arise, and maintain Thine own cause ! ’
“ At that time there was no king at Tonga, but
each chief acting as he thought best in his own place.
The chief under whom we then lived was strongly
opposed to our object, and did what he could to
annoy us. But God was for us. . . . To-day, for the
first time, a public missionary meeting was held in
their fine new chapel,—its third anniversary,—King


George, now head of the Friendly Isles, in the chair,
the chief Ata, and the other chiefs of Hihifo, with
their children and people, being present, all having,
at least nominally, embraced Christianity, and many
of them being truly converted to God. They have
also given of native produce, and of such things as
they had, to some extent. Also their hearts appear
to he in it. Thus the contrast is very great; and
again we are led to exclaim, ‘ What hath God
wrought! ’ Yes, this is the Lord’s doing, and it is
marvellous in our eyes. . . . God be praised, that
He has permitted us to live to witness such a blessed
change, not merely at Hihifo; for the Gospel is
preached in many other places round about, the chiefs
and people of which were present.”
In May, 1848, Mr. Thomas left Tonga, and took
temporary charge of the Lifuka Circuit in Haabai.
Before removing thence, a year later, for Yavau, he
says : “ I have spent a remarkable year at Haabai.
As to labour, I never went through so much in any
one year since I came out. God has also blessed
my feeble labours to the good of souls. To His
name he all the praise ! ”
For some time past he had felt that the strain of
his long mission service was telling upon his strength
and his power of endurance; and it became clear to
him that the day must not he very far postponed for
his return to England. Gradually he had been
arranging his work with reference to this ; and, while
awaiting the arrival of the John Wesley, he writes :
“ After more than twenty-three years of active labour


in these islands, in the blessed work of reclaiming sinners
to their Friend and Saviour, I feel much at leaving the
thousands who have been brought under the sound of
the Gospel, not to say those who have felt its saving
power. And a goodly few are seals to my own
ministry, souls whom the Lord has graciously given
me. I am now about to retire from these dearly
beloved fields of happy and successful missionary toil.
I have confidence that God is with me, and that He
will be with me, and that He will guide all my
steps.”
In December, 1849, he was still waiting, not in
idleness, but filling up each day with its full measure
of customary toil. He then wrote: “ This morning
I waited upon the Lord, and found it good to do so,
and was able to commit all my way to God my
Saviour. Though lam nothing, have nothing, and
can do nothing, yet the Lord careth for me. I take
Him for my all in all. Friends, brethren, fellow-
labourers, chiefs, people, spiritual children, labours, —
all, all I give up to my blessed Lord! I prefer Him
to all, and above all! lam deeply sensible that I
am a very unprofitable servant; but lam His. Here
I rest. He said to me more than twenty-five years
ago, ‘ Say not, I am a child: for thou shalt go to all that
I shall send thee, and whatsoever I shall command thee
thou shalt speak.’ . . . My call was extraordinary;
and my work has been so too. So have my aid and
support been. lam not ashamed of my Lord, but of
myself, that so good a Master and so good a cause
have been put off with so mean a servant, so feeble


a labourer. But I have done what I could, and
leave my work and my reward to my God. I am
conscious of my very many defects, failings, sins,
and infirmities, for which I pray God to forgive me
for Christ’s sake.”
At last the mission brig came, and Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas saw their goods—they were not many—
carried on board. On February 21st, 1850, they
embarked. A crowd of the people were on the shore
to say farewell, many of whom wept, and some, as the
boat put off for the vessel, cried aloud. For that
faithful, simple-hearted man and woman, who thus
left the scenes of their life’s work, it must have been
a moment of strange feeling as, through many tears,
they watched the well-known shores lessening in the
distance. On the next day they passed Tonga, but
did not go ashore. “ I should have liked,” says the
good man, “ to go once more to the grave of my own
dear son.”


CHAPTER IX.
A VISIT HOME, AND RETURN.
OF the voyage home there is not much to be
recorded. They called at Auckland, and,
after spending eight days here, trans-shipped to the
schooner Isabella, which reached Hobart Town sixteen
days afterwards. Here they remained more than
nine months, waiting for an opportunity to take
passage to England. During this time Mr. Thomas
preached frequently, and freely put himself at the
service of the ministers in that part of Tasmania.
On January 11th, 1851, they embarked on the
Wellington. The voyage was without special incident.
After the usual hindrances of foul winds and calms,
they sighted the Scilly Islands, in fifteen weeks and
two days after leaving Hobart Town; they had not
seen land since passing Cape Horn, eleven weeks
before. On Saturday, May the 3rd, the Wellington
was off Gravesend, where she was taken in tow,
and the next day at noon was safe in the London
Docks.
On the following day the annual meeting of the
Wesleyan Missionary Society was held at Exeter Hall.
It was a very memorable meeting. The Society had


scarcely emerged from the fierce storms which had
recently assailed it; and the fidelity of its friends was
roused to the very highest enthusiasm. Mr. Farmer,
the treasurer, was chairman, and Dr. Candlish and Dr.
Duff stirred the great assembly mightily by their
fervid oratory. Amongst other speakers were Peter
Jacobs, the North American Indian, and Walter
Lawry from the South Seas. Mr. Thomas got in
unnoticed at the back of the platform; and the
multitude who listened with delight to Mr. Lawry’s
wonderful story of the triumph of Christianity in the
Friendly Islands, little thought that the pioneer of the
great work was there amongst them ; for the speaker
had not heard of his arrival in England. And thus,
unrecognised, and overwhelmed with a feeling of
strangeness, the veteran missionary sat alone amidst
the crowd till the meeting was closed. A warm
greeting from Dr. Newton, and from the President,
Dr. Beecham, then lifted him up wonderfully ; and he
went in search of his wife, for whom a seat had been
found in a distant gallery. He discovered her in
conversation with her own brother, who had found
her; though, when he accosted her, she entirely
failed to recognise him.
It very soon became evident to Mr. Thomas that
he could neither work nor rest in England. He had
been so long out of the busy world that its ways
bewildered him, and he found more oppressive than
ever his ignorance of the things which interested the
people about him. He felt utterly unable to take an
appointment to an English circuit; and, though he


did abundant and useful service in pleading on behalf
of the mission work in many parts of the country, he
shrank from preaching, with a timid and painful
persuasion that he could never meet the requirements
of the congregations. Then, after the summer passed,
he suffered greatly from cold, and was compelled to
keep himself shut up a great deal within doors. No
wonder, therefore, that his desires soon began to return
to his old work ; and we find him writing : “ All I
now experience I was led to expect before I left the
Friendly Islands. Yet I thought it was my duty to
leave, not, indeed, for a final departure. I thought I
might have to return. Now, may the Lord, who
knows all ray faults and my defects, as well as what
is best for me, do that which is pleasing in His sight,
and help me to say at all times, ‘ Not my will, but
Thine be done.’ lam not able to feel at home in any
part where I go. The Friendly Islands seem my
home. There my people are—my spiritual children
for whom I have laboured, over whom I have watched,
and amongst whom I have lived for so many long and
happy years. Their interests are still very dear to
my heart; and I long after them as a fond father
does after his children. This, I may be told, is my
weakness. Be it so. Still it is a fact; and I cannot
get rid of it. But it may be said, ‘ Your services are
not now needed. There are other labourers there ;
and your place is filled up.’ If so, still I must love
them, and love them in a way that others cannot.
And if I must not see them again in the flesh, nor
again live amongst them, nor labour for their good,


this will be my trial, and I will, through grace, say,
‘ Good is the will of the Lord.’ My prayers shall he
daily offered to God on their behalf, until I meet them
where there shall never more be any painful parting
between them and me.”
After remaining three years in England, Mr.
Thomas obtained his wife’s consent to his offering to
go out again to the Friendly Islands, and wrote accord-
ingly to the Missionary Secretaries. Eventually this
offer was accepted, and once more, against the advice
and remonstrances of their relatives, this devoted
couple prepared themselves to journey to the
Antipodes. When they went before, all was strange
to them, and they did not know what awaited them
at their far-off destination. Now they knew all, and
could count the cost thoroughly. Their hearts were
in those distant islands; and while friends looked
only at the difficulties, privations, and perils to
w r hich they would expose themselves, those true
missionaries saw, through all, the work they loved
so well that life itself seemed incomplete without
it.
On December the 19th, 1855, they sailed from
Gravesend on board the Crystal Palace, and reached
Tasmania on the 14th of April, 1856, having had a
great deal of bad weather on the voyage. On May
17 th they left Hobart Town in a steamer, and arrived
at Sydney on the 19th, where they were amazed at
the growth and improvement of the place since they
were there twenty-nine years before. They embarked
on the John Wesley on June 14th, and called at New


Zealand on the 28th, where they stayed until July 9th,
when they left Auckland for the islands, and came
to anchor off Nukualofa on the 26 th, having been
absent from the group for a little more than six
years.


CHAPTER X.
AT TONGA AGAIN, AND FINAL FAREWELL.
FIVE days after his arrival, taking advantage of the
presence of the John Wesley, Mr. Thomas set off
on an important visitation tour. He called at Haahai,
where, he says, he “ attended a native prayer-meeting.
The Lord was with us. Many thanks were offered,
and with deep emotion, that their old missionary had
returned to them, and that they saw his face again
in the flesh. This feeling appears pretty general.
To God be all the praise! ” They next visited
Yavau, where, writes Mr. Thomas, “many natives
came to meet me, some of them my old and dear
friends, who know and love the Lord. A thrill of
joy seems to go through the whole place. Also
the Lord is now reviving His work here. Many
souls have been saved. Blessed be the Lord for
this! ”
From Yavau Mr. Thomas started on a voyage to
Samoa, the largest of the Navigators’ Islands. He
had been appointed at Sydney to call' there and
make inquiry about the mission work, which had
long been the occasion of much perplexity, and had
caused him great distress for some years past.


In 1835 a missionary had been sent from the
Friendly Islands to take charge of the work, which
had already been begun by native teachers on Samoa.
This work prospered wonderfully, and a large number
of people were gathered into the Church. Without
discussing the merits of the case, it is enough here
to record, that an understanding was come to at home
with the London Missionary Society that the Samoan
Mission should be left exclusively to them, while the
Tongan and Fijian Missions were to be thus com-
mitted wholly to the Wesleyan Missionary Society.
In accordance with this agreement, orders were sent
out that the missionary was to be withdrawn from
Samoa, and all the fruits of the mission handed over
to the missionaries of the other Society. It need
hardly be said that these orders were obeyed with
very sorrowful reluctance; and the feeling caused
thereby was deepened as time went on by hearing
that the converts, in large numbers, steadily refused
to unite themselves with the other mission, and as
messages and deputations came again and again to
the Friendly Islands from Samoa imploring that the
people, who had learned to love the Wesleyan
missionary, should no longer be forsaken. No one
felt a deeper or more painful interest in this history
than Mr. Thomas, who had watched it and taken
part in it from its beginning. Now, by the direction
of the committee at Sydney, he was on his way to
make personal inquiries on the spot concerning the
present aspects of the Samoan Mission. The question
was thus reopened in consequence of the Wesleyan


missions in the South Seas having been taken
over by the newly established Australasian Methodist
Conference.
Mr. Thomas’s visit was limited wholly to the
purpose of inquiry, which he accomplished as fully
as the time at his disposal would allow. It resulted
in the discovery that the reported anxiety of the old
Methodist members to retain their connection with
the Society still existed in full force. At one meet-
ing of chiefs called together to discuss the matter
in the presence of Mr. Thomas, they were quite pre-
pared to give practical demonstration of their wishes
by forcibly retaining him amongst them, a decisive
policy which was sot aside only by the missionary
representing that he had a wife waiting for him in
Tonga, as well as important work that would require
his presence there. It may be added here that, in
consequence of the report sent in by Mr. Thomas,
the committee in Sydney recorded their conviction
that the compact made between the two Societies in
1837 had not been followed by the benefit which
was expected from it, but had, in some respects,
worked mischievously; and they resolved to inform
the committees of the two Societies that they were
about to send a missionary to Samoa as soon as they
were able.
Mr. Thomas’s second residence in the Friendly
Islands was but short. It soon became clear that he
and his devoted wife had undertaken more than their
growing infirmities would permit them to accomplish ;
and in a little more than three years after their


arrival, they were compelled to prepare for another
voyage home. As the time drew nigh for their
departure, he wrote ; “ I have avoided preaching fare-
well sermons this time, lest I should be thought to
preach myself and not Christ. I wish Christ to be
known, believed, trusted in, loved, and adored,
honoured and obeyed by all, at all times, and to the
end. And as to myself, who am I, and what am I,
that I should be thought anything of, except so far
as I have followed Christ ? I am deeply conscious
of my own great unfitness for the work in which I
have been engaged. That others should think so
also need not surprise me. I love the natives, and I
believe many of them love me, and I hope to meet
them again.
“A love-feast was appointed for this day, that the
members of various places around, with the local
preachers and leaders, might attend without distrac-
tion, and that we may thus have an opportunity of
meeting in love before the Lord before I part with
them. We assembled (at Nukualofa) about eleven
o’clock. Many were present, and the Lord was with
us. I was deeply humbled before the Lord when I
was obliged to hear that such a worm as I feel my-
self to be has been so condescendingly employed by
the blessed Lord as a means of good to so many
souls. All glory be to God, both now and for ever!
Sinners have been saved, and backsliders have been
brought back, and everywhere the Lord is prospering
His work. We could hardly break up. It was a
blessed time.”


“November 19 (1859). —This morning was spent
in completing our packing. It was difficult to get
done, as people kept coming in. But all was got on
board the John Wesley in good time. At length the
hour came, and our garden and house were filled
with the natives, who had come to bid us farewell,
to shake hands, and many to help to carry us down.
Amongst the chiefs, Junia Mafileo was most zealous
and forward to help us, and to testify his love.
Some rain having fallen, the roads were rather wet.
As soon as we could get free from shaking hands and
embracing those who had found their way to the
house and garden, Mrs. Thomas was seated, in an
arm-chair fastened to poles, and, being taken up, was
carried by the friends. I walked, but a chair was
taken down for me to be carried over the shoals to
the boat. The road was lined with persons waiting
to shake hands, and to bid us good-bye, and many
wept. On reaching the sea-beach, Mrs. Thomas
wished to visit the grave of our dear son. The
natives, being informed, carried her there; and as
they came near the sacred spot, all stood and put
down the chair. We then ascended to the elevation
and viewed the dear place, which is now surrounded
with new palisades, and the stone is fresh painted.
We could not forget that here lies the dust of our
only son and first-born. We wept afresh at parting
from his dear remains. This over, and a few grains
of coral-sand gathered up by a beloved fellow-
missionary and put into Mrs. Thomas’s hand, and as
the natives were all silently and attentively waiting
I


in the road, we left the place, and the natives carried
Mrs. Thomas down opposite to where the boat was.
Again we were met by scores of people to shake
hands, embrace, and bid us, with tears, farewell.
This continued until we were put in the boat at the
edge of the reef.
“ A young chief, who has long been in a very
doubtful state, before parting with us at the boat,
lifted up his voice and wept aloud. He told us that
the Lord has made us the instrument of the salvation
of his soul. He wished me to know it, for my con-
solation, before I left. Blessed be God for this'
His wife is one of the leaders. She is called the
sister of the king, and was the first woman that
came to meet in class, in 1830, at Lifuka, Haabai.
Many others had to take leave after we were in the
boat. At length we pushed off, but it was almost
dark. Our hearts were nearly broken in parting
from our dear people here.
“20 th. —At peep of day this morning I looked
towards the shore, and saw natives hurry about; and
in a short time the boat with the missionaries was
alongside, and several of the people to greet us
again, and to bring us new proofs of their love.
Their services were cheerfully given in assisting to
raise the anchor, and to get the vessel under
way, which was speedily done after daylight; and
we took a final farewell as our brig bore away for
Fiji.”
After calling at some of the stations in Fiji, the
Wesley made a good passage to Sydney, reaching it


just in time to enable Mr. Thomas to attend the
Conference then about to assemble in Melbourne.
On March 2, 1860, he and Mrs. Thomas left on
hoard the Daplmc, and, after a voyage of ninety-six
days, arrived safely in London.


CHAPTER XI.
AT HOME: LAST DAYS.
ME. THOMAS, being sixty-four years of age,
now retired from regular ministerial service,
and became a supernumerary, making his home at
Stourbridge, in the neighbourhood of his native
village. Here he found abundant employment in
the meeting of a class, and leading the early Sunday
morning prayer-meeting. He preached occasionally,
and attended frequent missionary meetings. His
visits were a comfort to many in sickness and
trouble. One of the great joys of his life was the
arrival of the Australian mail, bringing him letters
from the missionaries in the Friendly Islands and
Samoa, and often from the native Christians them-
selves.
Three years later he had a severe illness, which
kept him closely imprisoned for ten weeks, during
which he was greatly comforted by the.“patient love
and attentions ”of his faithful wife. After four years
more she was stricken by the severe winter cold,
in December, 1867, having long been crippled by
rheumatism; and in a few days, while her husband
was away at a missionary meeting, her devoted life
came to an end. She had proved, in all respects, a


“ help meet for ” him, and with quiet and unremitting
fidelity had shared his toils, and consecrated her
whole self to the sacred work in which he was
engaged. Her death afflicted him with a deeper
sense of loneliness than ever, and the contrast
between his late busy occupation abroad and his
present comparative withdrawal from active employ-
ment seemed to lose nothing of its painfulness as
time went on.
It was a singular gratification to him—oppressed
as he was perpetually with modest self-depreciation
—when a chapel was built in his native village of
Clent, as a memorial of God’s goodness to him, and
of the great mission work he had been raised up to
accomplish. Within this little chapel is a tablet
bearing the following inscription :
TO THE GLORY OF GOD
THIS CHAPEL WAS BUILT A.D. 1869,
AS A MEMORIAL OF THE MISSIONARY CAREER OF TUB
REV. JOHN THOMAS,
WHO WAS BORN NEAR THIS SPOT.
HE WAS APPOINTED IN THE YEAR 1824 TO THE
FRIENDLY ISLANDS,
AND, WITH lIIS DEVOTED WIFE, LABOURED
THERE FOR THIRTY YEARS WITH GREAT SUCCESS.
SARAH, HIS BELOVED WIFE, DIED IN THE LORD
AT STOURBRIDGE, DECEMBER 9, 1867, AGED 75 YEARS.
THEIR MUCH LOVED SON DIED AT TONGA, 1843,
IN THE BTH YEAR OF HIS AGE.
In seclusion, but in devoted service to the full
measure of his failing powers, the years of the good


man’s old age passed quietly on. He spent much
time daily in direct communion with God, in His
Word and in prayer, taking into his earnest interces-
sion the ground he could no longer occupy with his
personal toil. Among the entries in his journal,
which were now few, and often separated by long
intervals, the following is found, which is descriptive
of his general mood of heart during his later life:—
“ I woke at three o’clock this morning, but could not
sleep again, various thoughts crowding in upon my
mind. I rose, got a light, and entered my study
and waited on the Lord, pleaded His promises, and
found Him faithful to His word, as I have always
done throughout my rather long and tried life.
When at sea or on shore, in calm or in storm,
amongst saints or savages, friends or foes, God—my
most gracious, loving God and Almighty Saviour—
has always helped me, blessed and delivered me.
And the hour spent this morning was most blessed
to my soul. Glory, glory, glory be to God for ever!
I record this, but it is not a solitary case. Ho,
He blesses me every day. May my life praise Him,
and, when He has tried and tested me, may He, by
His rich, free, and abundant grace, bring me to His
glory! Hay, He will, for He hath said it.”
Thus watching, praying, searching the word of
God with growing appetite, and ministering, so far as
opportunity and strength were given, to the good of
others, the old missionary went on, waiting on the
Lord. Feeling keenly his lonely condition and in-
creasing need of loving nursing, he had married


again. In liis last years he seems to have enjoyed
generally better health than in youth. He watched,
with an interest which seemed to quicken and
strengthen with his years, the progress of the Church
of Christ at home and abroad, but evermore reserving
his tenderest solicitude for the good work yonder in
the South Seas.
Neither was he forgotten there. When the
jubilee of the introduction of Christianity was cele-
brated in the Friendly Islands, and a large fund was
raised by the cheerful thank-offerings of the people,
the first charge upon it, at King George’s special
request, was a present of one hundred pounds, to be
sent as a love-gift to Mr. Thomas, to show him that
he was still held in grateful remembrance in the
islands, where he had done the pioneer work of
Christianity. It need not be said that this token of
affection filled him with abounding thankfulness and
joy, while it largely helped to smooth into comfort
the declining steps of his life.
The account here given of Mr. Thomas’s last days
was prepared by the Eev. J. E. Sawtell, who was at
the time one of the ministers in the Stourbridge
Circuit.
“At the New Year’s services of 1881, Mr.
Thomas, being in the 85 th year of his age, was seen
in his accustomed place in the Stourbridge chapel,
worshipping with his old fervour and delight. The
severe frost in January laid him low with an attack
of pleurisy. As his illness assumed a more serious
aspect, he arranged his temporal affairs, and calmly


resigned himself to the Lord’s will. The firmness
and strength of character which had always distin-
guished him still remained. No gloom was on his
spirit, and he was ever thankful for the attention of
his friends. His confidence in the Saviour’s love
was firm and unwavering, and his affection for the
Saviour’s followers seemed to increase on every
occasion of the visits of the Eev. R. Graves and
myself.
“On the Thursday before his death he said, ‘ I
have seen my Tongan friends. What a joyful meet-
ing there will he! ’ Thus he anticipated being
welcomed to the better country by glorified converts,
the fruits of his early missionary toils. On my
taking his hand he said, with a bright and eager
gaze, ‘ You have been a missionary ? ’ ‘ Yes,’ I
replied. ‘ Bless the Lord ! Pray and praise ! ’ was
the joyful answer, and with fervent ‘Amens’ he
united in the prayer for all the Lord’s servants
among the heathen.
“Early on Saturday morning, January 29, he bid
farewell to those belonging to him, and said, ‘ Let
me go.’ Shortly after, with his usual strength of
voice, he exclaimed, ‘ Come, Lord Jesus ! ’
“ Then, while earth’s shadows fled away in the
light of the dawn, his ransomed spirit escaped from
its enfeebled body, to join the spirits of just men
made perfect’’


Books about Missions, Missionaries,
and the Mission-Fields.
Fiji and the Fijians; By Kev. Thomas Williams; and Missionary
Labours among the Cannibals: By Rev. James Calvert.
Revised and Enlarged. Edited by Rev. G. Stringer Rowe. With
a Preface by C. F. Gordon Gumming, Author of ‘ At Home in Fiji. ’
With Maps, Portrait of Thakombau, and other Illustrations. Crown
Bvo, price ss.
Life of the Rev. John Hunt (Missionary to the Cannibals of Fiji).
By Rev. G. Stringer Rowe. Illustrated. Crown Bvo, price Is. 6d.;
superior paper, 2s. 6d.
Memoir of Mary Calvert. By G. Stringer Rowe. Crown Bvo,
cloth, price Is.
Joel Buln; The Autobiography of a Native Minister in the South
Seas. New Edition, with an Account of his Last Days. Edited by
Rev. G. Stringer Rowe. Foolscap Bvo, cloth, price Is.
Fiji and the Friendly Isles: Sketches of their Scenery and People.
By S. E. Scholes. Fifteen Illustrations. Royal 16mo, price Is.
‘We warmly recommend this little volume to readers of every sort.’— Hastings
and St. Leonard's News.
A Pioneer: A Memoir of the Rev. John Thomas, Missionary to the
Friendly Islands. By the Rev. G. Stringer Rowe, With Portrait.
Crown 8vo; price 2s.
Memorials of Mrs. Jane Tucker. By Mrs. White. Edited by Dr.
Williams. Crown Bvo, price 2s. 6d.
Memoir of Mrs. Scarborough, of the Hankow Mission. "With Intro-
duction by Rev. E. E. Jenkins, M.A. Crown Bvo, price Is.
The Willow Pattern: A Story Illustrative of Social Life in China.
By Rev. Hilderic Friend. Numerous Illustrations. Crown Bvo,
cloth, gilt edges, price 2s. 6d.
* A very charming and instructive little book—furnishes all kinds of information
about Chinese life.’— Daily Telegraph.
London: T. WOOLMBR, 2, Castle Street, City Road, E.C.,
and GG, Paternoster Row, E.C.


The First Year of my Life. A True Story for Young People,
illustrative of Life in China. By Rose Cathay Friend. Twelve
Engravings. Royal 16mo, price Is.
‘ The strange sights and customs of that strangest of all countries, China, are
described in a fashion which will interest the reader.’ —Irish Evangelist.
Our Indian Empire: Its Rise and Growth. By Rev. J. Shaw
Banks. Thirty-five Illustrations and a Map. Imperial 16mo,
price 4s.
‘A well condensed and sensibly written popular narrative of Anglo-Indian
history.’ —Daily News.
Glimpses of India and of Mission Life. By Mrs. Hutciieon.
Eight page Illustrations. Crown Bvo, price 2s. 6d. ; gilt edges, 3s.
‘ A well written account of Indian life in its social aspects, by the wife of an
Indian Missionary.’— British Quarterly.
Life of Mrs. Mary Cryer, of Manargudi. By Rev. Alfred Barrett.
Royal 32m0, price Is.; gilt edges. Is. 4d.
Old Daniel; or, Memoirs of a Converted Hindu. With Description
of Village Life in India. By Rev. Thomas Hodson. Coloured
Illustration. Crown Bvo, price Is. 6d.; gilt edges, 2s. 6d.
Two Standard-Bearers in the East: Sketches of Dr. Duff and Dr.
Wilson. By Rev. J. Maeeat. Eight Illustrations. Foolscap Bvo,
price Is. Gd.
* It is well for our youth to be stimulated to holy enterprise hy such lives as
these. The book is profusely illustrated. ‘—Sword and Trowel.
Woman’s Work in India. By Rev. Wm. Arthur, M.A. Crown
Bvo, paper covers, price Gd.; limp cloth, 9d.
Tales and Poems of South India. By Rev. E. J. Robinson.
Crown Bvo, price ss.
In the Tropics; or, Scenes and Incidents of West Indian Life.
By Rev. J. Maeeat. Illustrations and Map. Crown Bvo, price
Is. Gd. ; gilt edges, 2s. Gd.
Punch! Nona: A Story of Female Education and Village Life in
Ceylon. By Rev. Samuel Langdon. Numerous Illustrations.
Crown Svo, price 2s.
BOOKS ABOUT MISSIONS, MISSIONARIES, ETC.
London : T. WOOLMER, 2, Castle Street, City Road, E.C.,
and 06, Paternoster Row, E.C.


The West Indies: their History, Geography, Climate, Productions,
Populations, Mission History, etc. etc. By Rev. W. Moistee.
With Map and Illustrations. Crown Bvo, price ss.
The Colony of British Guyana, and Its Labouring Population.
Containing a Short Account of the Colony, and Brief Descriptions
of the Black, Creole, Portuguese, East Indian, and Chinese Coolies,
their Manners, Customs, and Religious Notions, etc. Arranged
by Rev. H. Y. P. Beonkhcest, Wesleyan Missionary. With
Frontispiece. Crown Bvo, 480 pp., price 10s. 6d.
‘ Contains a vast amount of interesting information. It has hardly a dull page
throughout,’ —English and Colonial Merchant.
Robert Moffat, the African Missionary. By Rev. J. Maerat.
Illustrated. Foolscap Bvo, price Is.
David Livingstone, Missionary and Discoverer. By Rev. J.
Mareat. AVith Fifteen whole-page Illustrations. Price Is. 6d.
• The story is told in a way which is likely to interest young people, and to
quicken their sympathy with missionary work.’—Liferary World.
Scenes and Adventures in Great Namaqualand. By Rev. Benjamin
Ridsdale. Crown Bvo, price 3s. Gd.
‘Most interesting and instructive, and will well repay perusal.’ IVUnes'-
Newspaper.
A Brief History of Methodism and of Methodist Missions in South
Africa. With an Appendix on the Livingstonian Mission. By
Rev. AV. C. Holden. Bvo, price 10s. 6d.
British Rule in South Africa: Illustrated in the Story of Kama
and his Tribe, and the AYar in Zululand. By Rev. AY. C. Holden.
Crown Bvo, price 4s. Gd.
The Past and Future of the Kaffir Races. By Rev. W. C. Holden.
Bvo, price 7s. Gd.
Gleanings from the Mission-Fields about Children. Profusely
Illustrated. Royal IGmo, 432 pp., cloth, price 2s.
BOOKS ABOUT MISSIONS, MISSIONARIES, ETC.
Loudon : T. AVOOLMER, 2, Castle Street, City Road, E.C.,
and 60, Paternoster Eow, E.C.


Forty Years in New Zealand: including a Personal Narrative, an
account of Maoridom, and of the Christianization and Colonization
of the Country. By Rev. James Bcller. Bvo, price 10s. 6d.
The King's Messenger; or, Lawrence Temple’s Probation; A
Story of Canadian Life. By Dr. Withrow. Illustrated. Crown
Bvo, price 2s.
‘A capital story, told with great power; the language is as beautiful as it is
forceful.’— Sword and Trowel.
Wesleyan Missions: their Rise, Progress, and Present State. By
Rev. W. Moister. Crown Bvo, price 3s.
The Heathen World; its Need of the Gospel, and the Church’s
Obligations to Supply it. By Rev. G. Paterson, D.D. Crown
Bvo, price 4s.
The Missionary Problem: A History of Protestant Missions; with
Historical and Statistical Accounts of the Rise and Progress of
Missionary Societies in the 19th Century. By James Croil.
Crown Bvo, price 4s.
The Macedonian Cry: A Voice from the Lands of Brahma and
Buddha, Africa, and the Isles of the Sea. A Plea for Missions.
Crown Bvo, price 4s.
Missionary Anecdotes, Sketches, Facts, and Incidents, relating to
the State of the Heathen and the Effects of the Gospel in various
parts of the W r orld, By Rev. William Moister. Eight page
Illustrations. Imperial 16mo, price 4s.
‘ The narratives are many of them very charming.’— Sword and Trowel.
Missionary Stories, Narratives, Scenes, and Incidents, in connec-
tion with the Propagation of the Gospel in Heathen Lands. By
Rev. W. Moister. Eight page Illustrations. Crown Bvo,
price 3s. 6d.
‘ Intensely interesting.’ —Methodist New Connexion Magazine.
BOOKS ABOUT MISSIONS, MISSIONARIES, ETC.
London : T. WOOLMER, 2, Castle Street, City Road, E.C.,
and 60, Paternoster Row, E.C.
