

'?SVA
*^u
Wns*'
•Si •& *
' C'K--»
A rL E A
‘ *oh Til h:
AB-ORKJINES
NR W SOUTH 'WALES,
j. B. GRI3BIE.
187 9 .
.T K7ii;,iji:ri(K :
I swArincr. (iii.iv x co., cjkxeka l naKTiius !
'p ' • ".*!
*». ■
*< <V * ss




HKSST/P/o^a
<5 ■< a -71
A PLEA
I'OTl THIS
ABORIGINES
NEW SOUTH
WALES.
The present deplorable condition of the Aborigines of this
colony appeals to the deepest sympathy of all Christian
hearts, and crys aloud to us to arise and come to the help of
those who “ are ready to perish.”
Stationed, as lam, in the far interior of the colony, I am
frequently brought into close contact with the extreme phy-
sical wretchedness and. deep moral degradation of the rem-
nants of this unfortunate race.
Some of the associations of their existence are exceedingly
repulsive to the contemplation of a sensitive Christian mind.
Drink is their great curse, and this their deadliest foe,
they can get, without the least restraint, at anv of the
bush grog-shops ; and, in order to furnish the means to
obtain intoxicants, the females of the race are subjected'to O''
the most horrible treatment. The virtue of girls -of.
years (and many of them arc almost white) is freely'.bartered.
As a rule, every girl is destroyed by white men, go-called, at,X<L


■thirteen or fourteen years of age, consequently there is now
rapidly growing up in the very midst of our professed
Christian civilisation a race of half-castes, more white them
black. And what, I ask, is to becomei of these unfortunate
creatures if left to- their own dread resources, God only
knows
Poor old creatures (made prematurely old by drink and
other vicious habits) arc to be met with in the camps desti-
tute of proper food and clothing, and enduring all the hor-
rors of a lingering death.
lhat the condition of the blacks in this colony has been
sadly neglected will be Apparent to every unprejudiced mind,
lor while praise-worthy efforts have been put forth in the
sister colonics to reclaim the old race nothing in the shape of
comprehensive organisation has yet been attempted within our
border. The Colonial Secretary (Sir Henry Parkes) in Lis
reply recently to a deputation which waited‘upon him in the
inteiests of the Aborigines, said ;—“lt must be confessed to
our shame that the Aborigines of the country had received
little consideration at our hands at any time. Not only so,
but wo had communicated to them vices which had a great
effect in lowering their condition and diminishing their num-
bers. Anything that could be done now he really thought
should be gone. The question was one of so much import-
ance that it ought not to be longer neglected, and he would
bo quite prepared upon the petition presented to him to give
the subject Uio best consideration he could, and in all pro-
bability invite the Legislature to deal with it in some prac-
tical form.” 1
During my sojourn in Piverina I have done all in my
pow’er to arouse the attention of the Christian public to the
vastj importance of this question, and I have received great
encouragement. Many have candidly acknowledged their
utter ignorance respecting the awful state of the blacks ; and
.Pelf 1 ) uilly persuaded that if the matter is only properly
vemik'tcxPa general Christian sympathy will be awakened


tuul earnest effort put forth to save those poor children of
the Australian bush.
I have prevailed upon a number of the black girls and
their half-caste chilurou to quit their miserable gunyahs on
the'Murrumbidgee, and have sent them down to the Maloga
Mission bchool, on the Murray, where, I am happy to say,
they have become attached to’tho new order of things, and
are doing well under the instruction of Mu. and Mas. Mat-
thews. I have recently brought down from Darlington
1 ciint two black youths and a half-caste girl, who has just
given birth to a fine male child. As soon as opportunity
presents I purpose conveying them to Maloga,
I have secured the confidence of many of the Murrum-
hidgeb blacks, and several of them have expressed their de-
sire to give up their roving life for u settled home ; and if I
only had the means to provide such a boon for them numbers
wuld easily be gathered, and, with the blessing of God,
might ere'long be reclaimed.
' The £ distance between Maloga and the Murrumbidgee
•—two hundred miles—deters many from going, and more
than that I find Mu. Matthews has quite enough to do
to attend to the requirements of the blacks around him.
Hence I am forced to sec the necessity for a Central Station
on the Murrumbidgee,
So deeply am I impressed with the necessity for this work
amongst the blacks that after months of consideration and
prayer, I have decided to give up the regular work of the
Christian Ministry to devote my life to it. lam well aware
that the work will involve much self-denial and hardship,
but the “ love of Christ constraincth me,” and I would
simply enter upon the work trusting.to the faithfulness of
Hun who has said, “ inasmuch as ye have done it unto one
ot the least of these my brethren ye have done it unto me,”


OUR PLAN.
Our contemplated plan of operations is as follows ;—A3
soon as wo obtain permission from the Minister for Lands,
we purpose erecting on some suitable site on the Murrum-
bidgee, a dwelling-house and a school-room, into which we
shall gather as many of the Aborigines (especially the
half-caste children and their young mothers) as we may
have means to support. The inmates will be properly fed,
clothed, and educated. Feelings of self-respect and habits
of industry and economy we shall diligently strive to incul-
cate. We shall do all in our power to reclaim the older
blacks from drink and its revolting associations. But our
primary object in starting the Mission will be to reach and
save, by the various appliances of education and the Gospel,
the unfortunate children and endangered youth. Our aim
will be to make the establishment a home—that the blacks
mice there may feel that it is their permanent place of abode.
To this end, as God provides the means, all the associations of
a home will bo secured. Each day will be opened and
closed with family worship.
A certain portion of each day will be devoted to instruc-
tion, and two half days in each week will bo given up to re--
creation. Every Sunday Divine Worship and Sunday
School will be conducted.
The female portion of the community will ho Under the
direct supervision of Mrs. Gribhle, the male portion under
my own.
The station will bo worked as inexpensively as possible.
In its developcment black labour will be utilised as fa" as
may bo found practicable.
When the above plan has, with the Divine blessing, been
executed, wc shall then turn our attention to the erection of


NOTE.
a large Imt for unmarried men, and several cottages for
married couples.
Our endeavour will be to make Ike station reproductive,
and this may be done if a sufficient area be granted for the
.running of stock, as the climate is unfavourable to agricul-
tural pursuits.
As regards the erection of the buildings, I purpose
employing several young halt-caste men who are at
present at the Maloga bchool, and who will be available as
soon as arrangements can be made for a commencement.
There being a good supply of timber in the neighbourhood
we shall confine our attention as much as possible to it,
and for finishing requisites we shall Lope in God to send
us the means.
In conclusion. Feeling myself called to (Ills work by an
irresistable impulse (which I believe to be of God), having
committed myself to it, I dare not “ look back,” and would
simply take every future stop relying upon the sure word of
Him who lias said—“ My presence shall go with thee.”- “ I
will bring the blind by a way that they know not, I will Lead
them in paths that they have not known.”
With reference to the number of blacks in the colony, I
find a great mistake was made in submitting the returns
at the last census. The number then given was 9Sl>. This
return I feel persuaded must only have comprised the waifs
and strays of the race in the move settled districts, .Between.


the Murray and Murrumbidgee alone I am of opinion that
000 may be found, while in the far interior, up the Darling
in particular, I have heard on good authority there are mul-
titudes, and, alas, the same dreadful state of immorality be-
tween the blacks and whites exists there, as is to bo met
with in the more settled parts.
P.S.—Any word of sympathy or practical suggestion wilt
he heartily received.
JOHN B. GR IBBLE,.
Jerildcric, November, 1870.
. lel Gill oh Co., Riuntexis, Jeiulukiiie.
