

pprr/)
Kftj
214(,
No. 13.]
[Second 'thousand.
A Plea
ON BEHALF OF
THE WORKINGCLASSES,
for the immediate establishment of
A VICTORIAN SUNDAY LEAGUE,
to counteract the immoral teiidences of
“THE SUNDAY OBSERVANCE SOCIETY”.
(icuc iocfi
A treatise on -
The commonly misapprehended 4th Commandment; un
The Christian abrogation of the intire Mosaic code of Laws ; on
The fallacy of Jesus’s ever having endorsed the Decalogue; on
The Sabbatist’s bugbear —“the Continental Sabbath”; on
The bounden duty of Governments
to instruct the Young and educate the Adults, making
Secular-instruction compulsory , while leaving Religious-education ;
Opening all Educational-institutions on Sunday, such as
Public Libraries, Museums, Galleries of Art, etc. also,
the Parks and Gardens belonging to the People,
and permitting the running of Railwaytrains, Steamboats, etc.
together with unrestricted access to the Telegraphwires :
B. S. NAYLER,
supported by the authority of
Jesus and his Apostles, by the Fathers of the Church, by the Reformers,
by Clergymen and Dissenting Ministers, by Moralists,
Philosophers, Statesmen, Philanthropists, and by
Commonsense.
I write as to persons of understanding, judge ye what I say.
Printed by Evans Brothers, 44 Collins Street, West, Melbourne.
Published, Gratis, by B. S. Nayler, 35 Stephen Street,
From a Fund voluntarily subscribed by Promoters of the Cause,
1871.
"U.


An Appeal to the Coramonsense ot Victorians,
on the long-vexed Sabbath-question;
elucidating- both
What the Fourth Commandment Is, and What it la Xot,
To all whom it may concern. We are on the eve of a g-eneral
Election of Legislators; and it behooves the Workingclasses especially,
to elect such Members of Parliament as may faithfully represent their
interests in the Councils of the Colony; pleading for the enactment of
New laws, and urging- the abrogation of Old ones, as circumstances
may demand.
One of the many subjects expected to engage the attention of the New
parliament, is the consideration of the so-called Sabbath-question, in
which the masses of the people are particularly interested; as they have
already been defrauded of their rights as men, and robbed of their
privileges as citizens, by the interference of an influential but lamentably
uninformed clique of Sabbatarian Idolaters ; who,' blinded by prejudice
and stimulated by fanaticism, have most unhappily succeeded in effect-
ing the spread of immorality in our midst, to a deplorable extent; and
who, through the agency of an intolerant “ Sunday Observance Society,”
operating on the mental weaknesses of the populace, are now plotting
(either in ignorance or in wickedness) to render the poor man’s Sunday
the most insufferable day of the week, instead of its being the happiest
and least immoral day of all the seven —such as Moses designed it, and
such as Jesus taught it should be; a day of rest and recreation, set
apart for man’s rational enjoyunent, whereon he may lawfully indulge
in whatever innocent amusements fall in his way. And as all the
fanaticism of Pulpits, and all the mistaken Legislation upon the Sabbath-
question are chiefly attributable to ignorance—to misconceptions of its
nature and import —now is a fitting time to place this important subject
in its proper light before Victorians of every grade.
The Sabbath-question is environed with a diversity of opinions; most
of which have arisen from the Prejudices of Education; for, generally
speaking, we are what our nurses, our parents, and our friends have
made us; we having passively adopted the notions of those with whom
we happened to be associated; many of us not yet having arrived at
that state of manhood which prompts us to think and judge for ourselves
—in fact, we are little else than Copies of those by whom we have been
casually surrounded. We are romanists or protestants, calvinists or
arminians, Trinitarians or Unitarians (or anything else) from no other
cause, and for no better reason, than that we were accidentally brought
up in the belief of such sentiments ;' for, but very few of us ‘dVQwbnt we
are from conviction; thinking (alas) being the least exerted privilege


of even cultivated humanity ! Had we been born in India, Turkey, or
China, in all probability we should not now be ranked union"' Christians;
and those of us who are today essentially different from what we once
were, owe that difference to our having taken the liberty of thinking
for ourselves.
I certainly ought to take shame to myself, if, at 75 years of age, and
after all the peculiar advantages which have fallen to my lot, had I not
now an opinion of rny own; and I should assuredly be a moral coward,
were I afraid of expressing my convictions, because of the currency or
multitude of other men’s sentiments. I have read scores and hundreds
of theological treatises holding forth, as veritable doctrines, a vast
variety of conflicting and for ever irreconcilable dogmas ; most of which
I now consider as not only demonstrably erroneous, but exceedingly
uncharitable—inasmuch as they unceremoniously condemn me for not
believing each and all of the diametrically opposite tenets ; and as I
cannot any longer pin my faith on anyone’s sleeve, I plead in extenua-
tion of what some may deem an unauthorized liberty (the liberty of
thinking’for myself) the f undamental principle of Protestantism, expressed
in these memorable words ipr En -h man's own judgement is to Himself,
though to nobody else, the Standard of Truth! ”
I was brought up a pretty stanch Sabbatist; but, on mixing with
men of other nations, many of whom entertained views widely different
from mine, Light gradually dawned on my benighted mind, and much
of what I had been taught to accept as Christianity, I discovered to be
little else than Judaism or Paganism. I have undergone many
conversions ; among others I long since renounced my early cherished
Sabbatism, and conscientiously became a Sabbath breaker—that is, a
Sabbathbreaker in the eyes of those who esteemed one day above
another; and I occasionally broke the sabbath of set purpose, in imita-
tion of Jesus, who, as everyone knows, was a notorious Sabbathbreaker,
and who had the boldness to maintain in the very face of the Pharisees,
that he had a rig'ht to break it; asserting, that the Sabbath was made
for Man, not Man for the Sabbath ! In short, when I was a child, I
spake as a child, I understood as a child ; but, when I became a man, I
put away childish things; and not being any longer partial to what
Paul terms ‘‘ the weak and beggarly elements,” observing’ u days, and
months, and times, and years,” I got rid of the Sabbath-incubus despite
the powerful prejudices of rny education, and was thoroughly’ persuaded
in my own minif, that Every man shall give an account of himself to
God. I then cast all denominational creeds and liturgies and dogmas to
the moles and the bats, in the fullest assurance that He who feareth
God and worketh righteousness is accepted of Him, no matter by what
name he may be called, Jew, Turk, Infidel, or Christian ; all of whom
are the Children of one God —our Father who is in heaven.
To all who quote scripture in support of a sanctimonious Sunday, I
may safelv say what Jesus said to those who sought to perplex Him
with quotations from Moses, Ye do err , not knowing the Scriptures”
(that is, while acquainted with the words, they did not apprehend their
import ) for, neither the Old m*r the Mew covenant countenances our
keeping such puritanical Sundays as Sabbatists would tyrannically
impose upon us; and i hesitate not to declare (in biblical phrase) that
a 2


our rigid Melbourne Sabbatists are “ Drunk ! though not drunken
with wine”—but, drunk with bigotry and superstition, and some of
them even Mad with fanaticism and intolerance—as manifested in their
over-righteousness and unchristianlike persecutions.
I must not, however, deal too harshly with our Sabbatarian Opponents,
as many of them may have been educated (as I was) in sabbatical
notions, and drilled from infancy in puritanical absurdities; many (like
myself) erroneously taught to “keep holy the Sabbath day”—that is,
trained to believe that holy in the 4th Commandment means holily in
English; whereas, there is not an iota of holiness in it or about it—
there is no more holiness connected with the Sabbath than with the
holy Jlesh, the holy linnen, the holy oil , the holy place, the holy mater,
and other holy things mentioned in the Bible.*
Bishop Hare, after urging the necessity of the scriptures being
properly understood, and without which, as he justly observes, they are
a rule of faith in name only, adds—
For, it is not the words of Scripture, but the sense which is the rule ; and so far as
that is not understood, so far the Scriptures are not our rule, whatever we pretend,
hut the sense men have put upon them —men fallible as ourselves, and who were by
no means so well furnished as the learned at present are, with the proper helps to
find out the true meaning of Scripture.”
To make this matter plain—my having believed for 25 or for 50 years,
that holiness was inseparably associated with the keeping of the Sabbath,
did not make holiness a constituent part of the Sabbath—the belief of
my parents and predecessors for the long space of 500 or 5,000 years,
neither the accumulated beliefs of all Christendom, can invest the 4th
Commandment with a particle of holiness, if there was not any holiness
connected with it at the time Moses delivered it at Mount Sinai—neither
time nor numbers, neither belief nor disbelief, can change the 4th
Commandment from what it originally was, nor can an Error be changed
into a Truth by the unanimous belief of all the inhabitants of the earth—
In short, what the Commandment was, it now is, and ever must be!
What was, anti wliat is, the fourth Commandment?
In our bible the passage ought to have been translated, Remember
the Sabbathday to keep it separate (to set it apart) for that is the
English meaning. Never mind what it means or is made to mean in
Latin or in Greek, in French, German, or Italian, what we need to
know is, simply the English meaning of the Hebrew word hadesh-, for,
all the fuss and botheration, all the theological quarrels and perse-
cutions, all the cruelties inflicted on individuals, families, and states, all
the imprisonments and deaths, consequent on the intolerance of
* One of the nicest and most agreeable money-making holies I know of, is the holy ground which
Priestcraft can manufacture out of any sort of rock, clay, or soil, immaterial in what country or
clime it may be. Holiness of character in the Priest, however, has not any effect upon the ground ;
as the most upright and godly man in the church, if below the dignity of a Bishop, might repeat the
magical words till he became black in the face, without the earth’s feeling any holy influence; but,
let any graceless Bishop only mumble the words of conversion, and straightway certain previously
measured-off grounds belonging to churches, chapels, cemeteries, etc. become holy unto the Lord, and
bring pounds, shillings, and pence into the Priest’s pocket—if the ground happen to have been twice
consecrated, double fees are exacted for anyone’s being buried in a doubly-safeand doubly-comfortable
spot! This solemn mockery of dedicating tit bits of land, and making them holy unto the Lord,is
carried on in open day even in Victoria, as if we knew not that “ The earth is the Lord’s, and the
fulness thereof”!


Sabbatists, are ascribable to either the misunderstanding , or the wilful
misinterpretation of a single word in the Original text — kadesh.
If pardon can be found for professed religious instructors in con-
sideration of their Ignorance, I confess my nature will not permit me to
indulge in the forgiveness of those who knowingly deceive their con-
gregations; who believe one thing and teach the very opposite;
following the abominable practice of several Church-fathers, who (in
imitation of Paul) scrupled not “to Lie for Truth’s sake”; and that
such despicable characters have infested the churches in all ages, no
well-read man will venture to dispute. Mosheim assures us (vol. i. p. 130)
“that it was not only lawful but commendable, to Deceive and Lie
for the sake of Truth and Piety , among the Christians of the second
century”; and that “pious frauds and impositions were among the
causes of the extension of Christianity! ” See p. 155. And I am
thoroughly convinced, that several Melbourne Sabbatists “do evil, that
good may come;” quieting their accommodative consciences with the
unctuous proverb, “the end justifies the means.” I, for one, do not,
cannot believe it possible, that our Pulpit ministers are so ignorant as
not to know, that every time they repeat “keep holy the Sabbath day”,
they propagate & false dogma!
In the XX chapter of Exodus, stands— Remember the sabbathday to
keep it holy; and in the V chapter of Deuteronomy stands— Keep the
sabbathday to sanctify it; yet, it must be well known to our Sabbatists,
that the word which may be called the pivot whereon the Sabbath-
question turns, is a false translation; I cannot believe that scholars
can be so ignorant as not to know, that holy, sanctify , hallow , ought to
have been rendered by our word separate; and well-read theologians
must necessarily know, that scores and hundreds of learned writers,
including doctors of divinity, archdeacons, deans, bishops, and arch-
bishops, have in their published works repudiated holy and substituted
separate in its stead.
“ The word holy signifies separate. The Hebrew is kadosh, “to set apart.” Park-
hurst renders it “ to separate, or set apart from its common to some higher use or
purpose ; ” and describes it as corresponding with the word badil, which signifies
divide, and first occurs in Genesis I. 4, “ God divided the light from the darkness.”
The vessels of the Sanctuary were to be “ holy unto the Lord; ” that is, they were
to be kept strictly separate for the service of the Sanctuary. The 4th Command-
ment of the Decalogue may therefore be rendered, Remember the Seventh day to
keep it separate: and these terms convey its full meaning.
An Inquiry into the Origin of Septenary Institutions.
Tell me, Is there one among our xtnco guid Melbourne sabbatists,
who is not aware that Calvin was as thorough an Anti-sabbatist
as his fellow-reformer Luther ? Is there one among them, who is not
aware that whenever they mention Calvin as a supporter of Sabbatism,
they grossly misrepresent him ? Is there any one among them who
dares to put in print but a tithe of the nonsense and fallacies and lies
they utter from their Pulpits respecting Calvin’s authority for keeping
“ the Lord’s day strictly holy 1 ' ’! I cannot think any one of them so
ignorant of Calvin’s detestation of Sabbatism, as to hold them guiltless
of cool, deliberate, wilful lying, when representing Calvin as a puritan-


ical Sabbatist. In 1860 I reviewed a clever work,* by that prince of
Anti-sabbatists, Robert Cox of Edinburgh, wherein he has collected
all the various passages relating to the Sabbath and Sunday, which lie
scattered up and down the 24 volumes of the Reformer’s works—
with that book in my hand, I should be able to silence every canny
lying Sabbatist in Melbourne.
Not to waste paper over what every well-read theologian knows,
accept a couple only of extracts from his Commentaries in proof of
Calvin’s repudiation of the botheratious word holy —
Kadesh, with the Hebrews, is to separate from the common number. God
therefore sanctifies the seventh day when he renders it illustrious, that by a special
law it may be distinguished from the rest. Gen. ii. 3.
If anyone wishes to render sanctify by one word, it will be to separate. Ezek.xx. 12.
The colossal Calmet interprets to sanctify or hallow, by to set apart,
to separate.
Bishop Horsley, by far the most able among the recent Advocates of
“the Christian sabbath,” observes on “ He hallowed it, that God dis-
tinguished this particular day, and set it apart from the rest.”
“ How sweet to him, who all the week
Through city crowds must push his way,
To stroll at ease through fields and woods,
And hallow thus the Sabbathday.”
Readers of theological writings know as well as Cranmer, Ridley,
Chilling-worth, Jeremy Taylor, Warburton, Paley, and Arnold knew,
that holy does not mean holy in scores of passages; and honest preachers
ought to tell their congregations so, and not bamboozle them with
incongruities and lies : they know, for instance, that kudesh is applied
to the men selected for soldiers, men set apart to cut each others
throats—a nice sort o t holy men truely !1 he english word holy has been
employed by our translators (but improperly so) to represent qualities
which are not holy in themselves, as in JJeut. xxiii. 14—
The Lord thy God walketh in the midst of thy camp, to deliver thee, and to give
up thine enemies before thee; therefore, shall thy camp be holy: that he see no
unclean thing in thee, and turn away from thee.
Evidently the word holy ought to have been rendered clean —and
cleanse to have been used instead of sanctify in Exodus xix, 10—
The Lord said unto Moses, Go unto the people and sanctify them today and
tomorrow, and let them wash their clothes.
Even the great stickler for Sabbatism, Dr. Wardlaw, says in his Dis-
courses on the Salt hath (p. 185) The primary import of the word holy
is, that the day is set opart.”
See Dr. Campbell’s Translation of the Gospels; the Epistle to the
Romans, by Dr. Chalmers—and hundreds beside, all m opposition
to the employment of the word holy by Sabbatists.
It is surely high time that the lovers of Truth should tear off the
robes of imposition and deceit with which our Melbourne puritanical
* The whole doctrine of Calvin about the Subbath and the Lord’s day: extracted from his Coimuer.-
taries, Catechisms. and Institutes of the Christian religion. By Kohert Cox. April jtiuu. Simpkin,
Marshall, and Co. London.


wolves (in sheep-clothing) have invested themselves; and show to the
Workingclasses especially, the genuine meaning- of the 4th Command-
ment 5 which, if properly kept, would prove a general blessing (not ,a
curse) and render Sunday the most gladsome day of the week; when
man may rest from his 6 days fatigue, recruiting his strength by parti-
cipating in the allowable pleasures of a recreative and exhilarating 7th
day—such as Hebrews delight in, and such as Jesus and his Apostles
have taught, we Christians may lawfully and innocently enjoy. There
are thousands of thousands who would heartily trample all the irksome
restrictions of a puritanical “ Lord’s day” under their feet, if once con-
vinced that such “ Sabbaths” have not anything whatever to do with
Christian duties on Sunday; and it is impossible that all classes of
Victorians should thoroughly apprehend the 4th Commandment, while
so many Pulpits knowingly and of set purpose misrepresent it —or (pos-
sibly) do not understand its meaning themselves. .
Why the 7th day should be kept separate, set apart from the other
days of the week, is so explicitly pointed out in the Commandment
itself) that it requires some pains to misrepresent it, or even to receive
it in the false light in which our Pulpits and Prayerbooks have con-
trived to pervert it; here it is—
Exodus xx. 8,9, 10, 11.
Remember the sabbathday to keep it
holy. Six days shalt thou labor, and
do all thy work; but, the seventh day is
the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in it
thou shalt not do any work— thou,
nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy man-
servant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy
cattle, nor thy stranger* that is within
thy gates: for, in six days the Lord
made heaven and earth, the sea, and all
that in them is, and rested the seventh
day : wherefore the Lord blessed the
sabbathday, and hallowed it.
* Thy stranger— that is, thy bondman, thy stave.
Deuteronomy v. 12, 13, 14, 15.
Keep the sabbathday to sanctify it,
as the Lord thy God hath commanded
thee. Six days thou shalt labor, and do
all thy work; but, the seventh day is
the sabbath of the Lord thy God: in
it thou shalt not do any work —
thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter,
nor thy manservant, nor thy maid-
servant, nor thine ox, nor thine ass, nor
any of thy cattle, nor thy stranger that
is within thy gates; that thy manservant
and thy maidservant may rest as well
as thou. And remember, that thou
wast a servant in the land of Egypt,
and that the Lord thy God brought thee
out thence, through a mighty hand and
by a stretched out arm: therefore the
Lord thy God commanded thee to keep
the sabbathday.
In the first insertion we are told, that the 7th day was to be set apart
because the Crenter rested (fetched breath is the accurate translation)
on that day from bis laborious work of creation; but, in the second
record we are told, that the seventh day was to be set apart as
a rememberancer of Jehovah’s having delivered the Israelites out of
Egyptian bondage; which, If the true cause of the institution of the
law contained in the 4th Commandment, then, I ask, in the name of
commonsense, What have Ito do with that law. How can that law


possibly affect me? lam not an Israelite, nor was I ever a slave in
Egypt; consequently that ceremonial law (like all other laws given hy
Moses) is not, cannot be binding upon me— neither will I submit to it!
Notwithstanding the reason assigned in Exodus for setting the 7th day
apart , differs (irreconcilably*) from the reason given in Deuteronomy,
still, both Copies of the Decalogue agree that rest constituted the grand
object Moses had in view—nor is there the least intimation in either of
them, of anything relating to holiness or to worship —the two prominent
misrepresentations uttered Sunday after Sunday in all our churches and
chapels!
The Greeks (renowned for their wisdom) counted their month (lunar
month) by 3 periods of 10 days each; and the Romans (celebrated for
their practical measures) kept every Bth day as a marketday; yet,
neither of these highly lauded nations ever proclaimed a day of rest —
never ordered a cessation from bodily labor—never appointed fixed
seasons of recreation for the people at large: but, the clear-sighted
Moses perceived the physical need of man's weekly recurring rest , and
considerately instituted the unappreciable blessing of the recreative
Sabbath—whence we derived our inestimable Sunday’s cessation from
bodily fatigue, of the full and allowable enjoyment of which, the unco
guid have already robbed us to a monsterous extent, and are now
plotting how they may successfully deprive us of the few lawful and
innocent gratifications yet left us —“ Shame burn their cheeks to cinder! ”
Although Moses may not primarily have intended that the Sabbath
should be so strictly observed as the words literally imply, yet, his
having issued the Decalogue to the Israelites with the imposing assurance
of the words having been written on the tables of stone, “ with the finger
of Godf Moses could not do otherwise than enforce the Law of the
Sabbath in its rigor, even to the stoning of a poor fellow to death, for
having merely gathered a few sticks upon the sabbathday—which simple
act of gathering , Moses and Aaron (after consultation) decided to be
a species of work; and as all work was rigidly forbidden on the 7th
day, the people brutally stoned the man with stones untill he died!
“ Six days shall work be done, but, on the seventh day there shall be to you an
holy day, a sabbath of rest to the Lord: whosoever doethwork therein, shall be put
to death, f Exodus xxxv. 2.
Moses, great as he was as a Lawgiver to a barbarous race, overshot
his mark in the stringency of many items of his Code; and was, I think,
rather too fond of hanging and burning and shooting and stoning the
pitiably ignorant Israelites, for mere trifles —-just as I have seen men,
women, and children, strung up on the gallows in England, when
British Statesmen valued human life at ss. a Head!
The Laws of Moses underwent several modifications in the succeed-
ing ages of the more enlightened Prophets; yet, there have ever
•Believers in plenary inspiration must admit, however unwillingly, that the 22nd verse of the Vth
ch. of Deuteronomy impugns the authority of the 11th verse of the XXth ch. of Exodus. And what
can they say to the unmistakable words, He added no morel Who then added the extra words ?
f “Six days thdu shalt work; but, on the seventh day thou shalt rest: in earing time, and In
harvest, thou shalt rest” Yet, in the face of this Mosaic command, archbishop Cranmer (author of
the XXXIX Articles of the church of England, and chief compiler of the Book of Common Prayer)
directed his Clergy to teach the people—“ They would grievously offend God, if they abstained from
uorkiny on Sundays in harvest time.” See Visitation Articles.


existed those banes to society the unco guid, whose inhumanities have
been branded on every age of the world—and, would it were not so,
they are visible in Victoria! Fortunately, we are not without our Ezras
ana Nehemiahs and Levites in Melbourne, who are capable of instruct-
ing the people in the true meaning of the words and texts of scripture,
which are too often strangely and perniciously warped in churches and
chapels. When the Hebrews had become wretchedly Priest-ridden,
and were depressed beyond longer endurance, they called for Ezra to
bring forth the Book of the Law of Moses; and Ezra brought the Law
before the congregation in the street; and Ezra stood upon a platform
of wood, made for the purpose; and Ezra opened the Book in the sight
of all the people; and Ezra, with others, read therein, from the morn-
ing untill midday—
“ So they read in the Book of the Law of God, distinctly, and gave the sense,
and caused them to understand the reading.”
Whence we gather, that the Readers were not mumblers, like the
generality of our Pulpit gentry in 1871, who cannot read a chapter in
the Bible intelligibly; for, it is written, they read distinctly, and in
such an effective manner, as to give the sense —which, to their shame be
it said, but very few Melbourne ministers are capable of doing—easy as
the Art of good-reading is of acquirement, and unpardonable as bad-
reading is, when it can be cured in the short space of a few days only!
But, to proceed with this interesting biblical account, as recorded in
the YHlth chapter of Nehemiah—And Nehemiah, and Ezra, and the
Levites that taught the people, said unto all the people—This day is
holy unto the Lord your God; mourn not, nor weep (for all the people
wept, when they heard the words of the Law) then he said unto them,
Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet; and send portions unto
them for whom nothing is prepared; for, this day is holy unto our
Lord; neither be ye sorry, for, the joy of the Lord is your strength !
So the Levites stilled all the people, saying, Hold your peace, for, the
day is holy; neither be ye grieved.
Hence we learn, that the people had been misinformed as to the
nature and purport of sabbaths , and holy days , and holy weeks, and
holy years, which Ezra and Nehemiah and the Levites taught them to
appreciate rightly, as days and times and seasons of pleasurable rest,
innocent recreation, and rational enjoyment; for we read—
And all the people went their way to eat, and to drink, and to send portions, and
to .nake great mirth; because, they had understood the words that were declared
unto them.”
And, rely upon it, as soon as our Victorian ascetics (whether preachers
or catechists) shall themselves have learned the biblical import of the
Sabbath, they too will teach the people that Sunday was made for Man’s
recreation, not for Man to be put into a moral prison once a week,
confining him in closely pent up places of worship, wherein he may
regale himself with psalmsinging, muttering heartless prayers, and dozing
over dry-as-dust theological disquisitions.
Theology is a thing of the head, while religion has its seat in the
heart. Religion cannot be bought or sold; but there is a roaring trade
driven in Theology— it is one of the best-paying trades a-going.


“ Go thou and seek the House of Prayer 1
I to the Woodlands wend, and there
In lovely Nature see the God of Love.
The swelling organ’s peal
Wakes not my soul to zeal
Like the wild music of the wind-swept grove.
The gorgeous altar and the mystic vest
Rouse not such ardor in my breast
As where the noontide beam,
Flashed from the broken stream,
Quick vibrates on the dazzled sight;
Or, when the cloud-suspended rain
Sweeps in shadows o’er the plain ;
Or, when reclining on the cliffs huge height
I mark the billows burst in silver light.
Go thou and seek the House of Prayer!
I to the Woodlands shall repair,
Feed with all Nature’s charms my eyes,
And hear all Nature’s melodies.
The primrose bank shall there dispense
Faint fragrance to the awakened sense;
The morning beams that life and joy impart,
Shall with their influence warm my heart,
And the full tear that down my cheek will steal,
Shall speak the prayer of praise I feel 1
Go thou and seek the House of Prayer I
I to the Woodlands bend my way
And meet Religion there!
She needs not haunt the high-arched dome to pray
Where storied windows dim the doubtful day :
With liberty she loves to rove
Wide o’er the heathy hill or cowslipped dale,
Or, seek the shelter of the embowering grove,
Or, with the streamlet wind along the vale.
Sweet are these scenes to her; and when the night
Pours in the north her silver streams of light,
She woos Reflection in the silent gloom,
And ponders on the world to come! Southey.
That holy days ( festivals) are common among Hebrew families, is
well known. I have been a frequent participater in their 7th day
festivities, and also in several of their special ceremonial gatherings;
and I embrace this opportunity of recording, that Hebrew celebrations
of holy days and holy seasons , partake of much more genuine con-
viviality, and considerably less of irreligion and indiscretion, than
similar" feasts among Christians. During upwards of a quarter of a
century’s residence on the Continent of Europe, it was my good fortune
to spend several hours every week in company with Hebrews; and I
now bear testimony to their outshining most Christians in decorum,
and several of the boasted Christian virtues—especially in family
affection, and in humane feelings—“ Honor to whom honor is Due!”
Although Melbourne and its suburbs may boast of a long list of
“religious teachers” who would as soon think of going to a rrichet-
match, a boat-race, or a bonding-green on a Sunday, as to a convivial
■party, yet, when their acknowledged Lord and Master was invited to a
festival on the 7th day, He not only accepted the invitation, but went—
Jesus went to the feast on the Sabbathclay. Perhaps, if .lesus were
to make his appearance in Melbourne, and be known as Jesus by our
unco guid, and our worthy Governor were to invite Jesus and all our


Pulpit ministers to a Sunday festival at Toorak, most of them would
turn their backs on Jesus, when they saw him going’ to the feast; i or
they preach and print, that “ there is nothing- worse could befall us,
than the introduction of Continental Sabbaths; nothing- worse than the
Continental desecration of the Lord’s day”—but, I maintain, that there
are many worse things alread} r among us ! Our priests, parsons, and
preachers trafficking in superstition, is worse ; their trading in men and
women's mental weaknesses, is worse; their proclaiming' the infallibility
of creeds and canons and beliefs, is worse; their anathamatizing and
persecuting all who differ from them in opinion, is worse; and their
thwarting the spread of knowledge, by debarring- the masses of the
people from being- instructed in school acquirements, and educated in
our museums on Sundays, is worse, considerably worse; and if our
colonial iS'ewspapers have not reported infamous scandals and arrant lies,
then, several of our “ religious teachers ” and “ pious instructers ” have
done deeds that are a hundred, a thousand times worse ! Our can-
tankerous Sabbatists should remove the splinters out of their own eyes,
before they presume to attempt taking- motes out of the eyes of their less
guilty neighbors. But, our unco gmd, like certain gentry mentioned
in the Bible, strain out gnats and swallow camels.
When seen from a political and special point of view, the Laws of
Moses merit our approbation; lor, with all their defects and deformities,
they extort our approval of their general aptness; yet, excelent as they
were in their day, they certainly are not suited to the advanced minds
of 1871; they are not sufficiently refined: for, even much of their
Morality, is gross Immorality with us; despite all our shortcomings, we
have progressed far beyond the condition of the barbarous Israelites
when Moses conducted them out of the land of Egypt, where they had
long been held in bondage and steeped in ignorance. JVeither the world
nor the people in it, have been at a still-stand during the centuries that
have elapsed since the framing of the Mosaic laws; many of which were
laws of expedience, laws of dire necessity, not even in accordance with
the view's and sentiments of the better-informed Moses, but given in
statesmanlike consideration of the extreme hardness of heart peculiar to
that stiff-necked race.
The Prophets, in succeeding ages, modified the Mosaic Code; and
1800 years ago, incomparably superior Laws were given from Mount
Olivet, by him who spake as never man spake, and who for ever abolished
the Laws given on Mount Sinai—at least for those of us who are not
Hebrews; as the old dispension of Moses ceased, and the new dispensa-
tion of Jesus commenced; consequently, Christians have no more to do
with the laws in the Pentateuch, than with the laws in the Zend-Avesta
of Zoroaster, or, the laws in the Koran of Mahomet.
Hence, the glaring impropriety of Sabbatists striving to force upon
us the observance of a mere ceremonial Hebrew Jaw, contained in the
4th Commandment —rendering the enforcement tenfold more censurable
by the.r attaching to that law a meaning which all their sophistry
cannot establish. Many of them know' perfectly well, that rest, and
rest only, was the special object of that law; they know that the 4th
Commandment has not so much as the shadow of a shade of holiness
implied in it; yet, like thousands of their predecessors, existing Pulpit


teachers continue to promulgate known error, and hesitate not, under
Church sanction, to “Lie for Truth’s sake;” and, for the sake of their
darling Sabbatism, commit “pious frauds” to their own lasting disgrace,
and the perversion of genuine Christianity!
The Melbourne “ Sunday Observance Society ” is a standing reproach
to our avowed “Christian denominations,” and a withering sarcasm on
our pretensions to civilisation and intellectual improvement; for, that
Society is an amalgamation of Mosaic commands and Christian precepts;
a hodge-podge of retrogradation and advancement; a sickening mixture
of sense and nonsense, perfectly disgusting to every lover of social,
political, moral, intellectual, and religious culture!
Yet, let us not huddle up all Pulpits in one enormous mass of enmity
to human progress, as there are many honorable Exceptions among our
religious teachers; brave men and true, whose adamantine virtues
preserve the mass of priests, parsons, and preachers from being utterly
washed away by the floods of righteous indignation!
As to the 4th Commandment’s instituting the 7th day as a “ Day of
Worship, requiring all Christians to assemble themselves together in
churches and chapels, for prayer and praise,” there is not a syllable
about worship, or anything akin to it, from beginning to end! ’Tis
true, we have been told, that
“The most prominent and characteristic duty of the Sabbath, is
the duty of attendance on the public worship of God in the
sanctuary ”*—
but, I fearlessly pronounce that so-called duty , a degradation of the
4th Commandment itself, which teaches no other duty than that of
refraining from work; and those who would impose upon us the duty
of public worship on the 7th day, need to be reminded of IJeut. iv, 2
Ye shall not add unto the word which I command you, neither shall ye
diminish ought from it,” etc. Did the Israelites ever conceive it to be
their duty to spend the Sabbath in religious exercises? No ! Did the
Pharisees? No! Did Jesus? No! Did his Apostles? No! Is
there any record in the bible of the Hebrews ever having been charged
with dereliction of duty by not performing acts of devotion on the
Sabbath? No! Is the profanation of the Sabbath ever represented in
scripture as anything else than work? No! Then why are we to be
pestered by a parcel of Bible-improvers who neither understand the
words nor apprehend the meaning of the Decalogue ?
I am credibly informed, that some of our Melbourne unco guid pulpit-
ministers are indignant at the change which has of late years been
manifested by several ministers in Scotland, who have gradually swerved
from their rigid Sabbatarian prejudices, and become lenient towards
those of liberal sentiments. Our canny Melbourne sabbatists deeply
regret “the good old times,” when persecutions by fine, imprisonment,
and floggings, were the order of the day for all who “ profaned the holy
Sabbath ”
“ Because of the contempt of the Word, and evil keeping of the Sahhath, the
Session ordains, that the maister and maistress of every house, and sa mony as are
of years of judgement (except when need requireth otherwise) shall be present in
* The Duty and Privilege of Keeping the Sabbath, p. 57.


the Kirk in due time every Sabbath to hear the sermon before and after noon,
under pain of 12d. the first, 2s. the second, and for the third ss. also 6s. toties quoties
thereafter ; as also for the third fault, to be debarred fra the benefits of the Kirk
till they make repentance as the Session sail enjoin.”
“ An abstract is given of cases of Sabbathbreaking, found in the Record of the
Session of St. Cuthbert’s, Edinburgh. In 1587, David Dugall is censured for going
to Cramond on the Lord’s day morning with shoes —a delightful walk, by which he
must have been greatly refreshed, and probably was enabled to visit his relations :
repeating the offense in 1595, he is publicly rebuked, and obliged to find surety that
he shall never be guilty of a similar offense, under a penalty, for the first trans-
gression, of 205.; for the second of 405.; for the third, of banishment from the
parish. In 1598, several persons in West Port, Potterrow, and Water of Leith, for
profaning the Sabbath by May games, were referred to the Bailies of their respec-
tive districts. In 1599, five persons, for drinking in the country on the Lord’s day,
were admonished, and obliged to find security for their good behavior in future,
under a penalty of 40s. In 1602, David Ochiltree “ for fishing on Sabbath, and
other crimes,” was delivered over to the civil magistrate. In 1605, David Knipper
was “ set at the pillar ” for playing at bowls on Sabbath. In 1610, three individuals
were referred to the Session for Edinburgh, for playing at the “Pennystones ” on
Sabbath. In 1614, several were fined 20s. each for playing at football on that day.
In 1619, this penalty was imposed upon two women for “ flyting ” [scolding] on the
Lord’s day; and in 1625, upon three men for selling bread, one of whom was
“ imprisoned because he could not pay his fine.” In 1630, several persons were
fined 20s. for taking “laverocks” [larks] on Sabbath. In 1631, several, for fishing
on Sabbath, were fined 20s. each, and imprisoned.” In 1652, John Coutts and
others were fined 40s. each “ for selling milk on the Lord’s day ” —But enough I I
can quote scores of pages of Scotch intolerance, such as would delight the
hearts of some of our Melbourne canny Sabbatarian Evil-doers to see re-enacted
in this colony !
But, quitting- the 4th Commandment, I proceed farther, and pro-
nounce, without fear of rational contradiction, that All the laws of Moses,
without exception , were totally annulled upwards of 1800 years ago —
Controvert this who can!
It is an insult to commonsense, it is degrading- to us as men and
Christians, that a handful of Melbourne Sabhatists should take upon
themselves the re-introduction of Laws, for our observance, which
scores and hundreds of the most erudite and celebrated theologians
have for ages declared obsolete; and if pardon can be found for the
consummate impudence of our Sabhatists, it can only be in consideration
of the profundity of their ig-norance. But, the day has arrived when
these reckless Sabbatarian Pests to Society must he told in plain terms,
that Jesus and his Apostles maintained the abrogation of All the laws
of Moses —that the Church-fathers maintained their abrogation- —that
Clergymen and Dissenting-ministers have long maintained their abro-
gation —that Moralists, Philosophers, Statesmen, Literati, and Philan-
thropists, have never ceased maintaining- their abrogation —the full and
complete and intire abrogation of All the laws of Moses—and that
wide-awake Victorians, repulse with scorn and contempt all efforts of
the “Sunday Observance Society” to bring them into subjection to laws
which are not suited to our conditions as a people—capable of thinking,
judging, and acting for ourselves ! It is preposterous to think that
manhood should learn of infancy; that comparatively civilized Christians
should learn of barbarous Hebrews ! Out, I sajq upon all the meddle-
some and mischievous and mendacious crimpers of our rights as men
and citizens ! Out upon all who would deprive us of our privileges as
Christians ! Out upon all Sabhatists, from the least unto the greatest!


Passing 1 over more Anti-sabbatists in number than all the Pulpit-
teachers in Melbourne put together, I shall quote, very briefly, from a
few only, in support of my assertion.
The great and indomitable Luther, in his “ Explanations of the ten
Commandments,” writes as follows—
We must remark at the outset, that the X Commandments do not apply to us
Gentiles and Christians, but, to the Jews only—in the New testament, Moses comes
to an end, and his Laws lose their force —He must bow in the presence of Christ —
Moses died, and his government terminated when Christ came”—Etc.
The celebrated Hooker, a host in himself, writes in the IV book of
his “ Ecclesiastical Polity”—
They which honor the Law as an image of the wisdom of God himself, are }
notwithstanding, to know, that the same had an end in Christ .”
That favorite child of Genius, Jeremy Taylor, bishop of Down and
Connor and Dromore, avers—
The Lord’s day did not succeed in the place of the Sabbath, for, the Sabbath was
abrogated. The Lord’s day was merely an ecclesiastical institution.”
The prince of theologians, Milton, is as curt as he is decisive on
this point—
On the introduction of the Gospel, or New covenant through faith in Christ, the
whole of the preceding covenant —in other words, the intire Mosaic Law was
abolished! ”
The Rev. H. W. Parkinson exclaims—You may read those Commandments in
churches, but, Ido not care, I will pay no attention to them. All Christian precept
is summed up in this, “ Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
thy Neighbor as thyself.” Ido not find any morality in the Decalogue at all; I
find it only in the words of Jesus. The Jewish Sabbath has passed away—Christians
do not observe the Sabbathday, do not begin to rest at sunset, do not refrain from
every manner of work. Seeing then, that the Old testament Sabbath is repealed,
does the New testament appoint one ? No! a hundred times No! a thousand
times No! There is no day now sanctified and set apart by Divine appointment.
The Christian dispensation does not recognize distinctions either of place or of time.
All places and times are alike in its eyes, and God claims them all. Under the
Mosaic economy, Jerusalem was holier than any other city, and the Temple holier
than any other place in the city, and the Sanctuary within the veil holier than any
other place in the Temple. All that has passed away. Men try to perpetuate
Jewish notions by consecrating churches and cemetaries, and all that nonsense, but,
this great truth overrides them all—“ The earth is the Lord’s, and the fulness
thereof.”
A little consideration would teach all who are willing to learn, that
our “Sunday Observance Society” has been established in Ignorance
and continues to exist solely by the prevalence of Superstition ; for,
“ Were the Lord’s Dag a real substitute for the Sabbath, not the rattling of a
wheel, not the clang of a horse’s hoof would be heard on that day in our streets,
from sunset on Saturday night to sunset on Sunday evening; not a fire would burn
during that period on any hearth, nor a streak of smoke hover over any chimney;
for, it is clearly and distinctly prescribed by the law, “ That thy cattle, and thy


male servant, and thy female servant shall fast”—and again, “ Ye shall not kindle
a fire in any of your habitations on the Sabbathday.” The Jewish Chronicle.
The Rev. Dr. Hook, Vicar of Leeds (after the Sabbatists had dis-
graced themselves by their riotous conduct) preached a sermon in the
parish church, on the Observance of Sunday, from Col. 11. 16, telling
his hearers—
I. That the Jewish Sabbath, as a divine institution was abrogated by Christ and
his Apostles;
11. That the modern Sunday is simply an ecclesiastical ordinance ; and
111. That Recreation is not only allowable but desirable on Sunday, as maintained
by the Eeformers, by Matthew Parker (the first Protestant archbishop of Canter-
bury) by Aylmer (bishop of London) and many others.”
In 1858, the Scotch Presbytery took into serious consideration, the
most effectual means of preventing “ the frightful desecration of the
Sabbath by the people walking out, to the great scandal of godly
persons” ! and we are now told that our “ Sunday Observance Society”
is endeavoring to prevent the citizens of Melbourne from any longer
taking a walk with their wives and families in any of their own parks
and gardens on a Sunday! What next? Should these over-righteous
Sabbatarian robbers succeed in their unwarrantable attempts, we shall
soon have a repetition ot such insufferable enactments as the following—
“ No man shall run on the Sabbathday, or, walk in the garden, or elsewhere, except
reverently to and fro from Meeting.
“ No one shall travel, cook victuals, make beds, sweep house, cut hair, or shave,
on the Sabbathday.
“ No woman shall kiss her child on the Sabbath, or Fastingday.
“ If any man shall kiss his wife, or wife her husband, on the Lord’s day, the party
in fault shall be punished at the discretion of the Magistrates”
The whole doctrine of the Sabbath.
Such are some of the blessings the “ Sunday Observance Society ”
has in store for us. Confound their vigilance ! the mischievous members
of the Melbourne “Sunday Observance Society” have not only closed
our Public Libraries, our Galleries of Art, and our Museums against
us, and are now plotting to shut us out of our Parks and our Gardens,
but, what is more, not satisfied with pulling the wires which make their
own Puppits dance, they are at this very time contriving how best they
may pull our Telegraph wires out of the hands of the Public, and are
assiduously exerting their influence to curtail, if they cannot at once
succeed in robbing us of all the pleasurable advantages we derive from
our Steamboats, and our Railroads on Sunday! I trust, however, that
as soon as ever the masses of the Workingclasses shall become thoroughly
persuaded that Sunday was made for their rational enjoyment, and
they themselves not made to be the slaves of a parcel of canting, whin-
ing, sycophantic Sabbatists, that Petitions from all parts of the colony
may be poured into our Houses of Legislature, praying for the redress
of grievances indicted upon Victorians by the pernicious “ Sunday
Observance Society”—and that the Sunday-question may be used at the
coming Elections as one of the touchstones whereon to try the sincerity
of Aspirants to seats in the New parliament, as true Representatives of
the People,


It is provoking to hear Clergymen, and other so-called Expounders
of the scriptures, annexing precepts and commands (which are restricted
in their very nature to but One class of persons) to any and to all classes
indiscriminately; reminding me of a judicious observation in the writings
of that chief of the Swiss divines, Ostervald—
It is a great fault, not to expound the Scripture according to the true scope of it;
instead of applying all that it contains to all sorts of persons, without distinction.”
When certain busybodies told the Gentile converts, “ Except ye be
circumcized, after the manner of Moses, ye cannot be saved;” sturdy
Peter would not stand their superstition and fanatical nonsense, but
manfully opposed their subjecting Gentiles to the ordinances of Moses,
saying—
Why tempt ye God, to put a yoke upon the neck of the Disciples, which neither
our fathers nor we were able to bear ? We believe, that through the grace of the
Lord Jesus Christ we shall be saved, even as they.”
And the decision of the Apostles and Elders at the notable Council in
Jerusalem, with James as chairman, was—that Gentiles were not to be
annoyed by having the Mosaic laws thrust upon them ; neither will we
Victorians" permit our Sabbatarian busybodies to palm the abrogated
laws of Moses upon us !
Paul, more than any other of the apostles, strove to eradicate Mosaic
doctrines out of the Christian churches, and to get rid of the trammels
of the Laws, and the authority of Moses: to the Romans he wrote—
One man esteemeth one Day above another; another esteemeth every Day alike .
Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. He that regardeth the Day>
regardeth it unto the Lord; and he that regardeth not the Day, to the Lord he doth
not regard it.”
To the Galatians he wrote —
Now, after that ye have known God—or rather, are known of God, how turn ye
again to the weak and beggarly elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in
bondage ? Ye observe days, and months, and times, and years —I am afraid of you,
lest I have bestowed upon you labor in vain! ”
To the Colossians he wrote —
Let no man judge you in meat, or, in drink, or, in respect of a holy day, or, of the
new moon, or of the sabbath days, which are a shadow of things to come —but, the
body is Christ.”
Were Paul to visit our Victorian churches and chapels, he would be
shocked on discovering that we are so enamored of the “beggarly
elements;” still clinging to worn-outlaws; still groping in Egyptian
darkness, after the lapse of 18 centuries !
But, what said Jesus ? Has he thrown any light on the darkened
Sabbath-question ? Can we gather anything definite from Him, regard-
ing the abrogation of the laws of Moses ? He said—
Think not that I am come to destroy the Law, or, the Prophets ; I am not come
to destroy, but, to fulfil.”
Short, but, pithy; containing a volume of matter for our consideration—
“l came not to destroy , but to fulfil ” —Did he fulfil the law? or,
did he not ? If he did not fulfil the Law, then, was his coming


abortive, his mission vain ; but, if be accomplished his object, then, was
the Law fulfilled; the Mosaic dispensation closed , and a New dispensa-
tion opened —Law was superseded by Grace; and all the laws in the
Pentateuch annulled, abrogated, abolished, at once and for ever!
Clearly, the simplest and the most judicious thing for those to do who
find themselves nailed by the cogency of reason, is—frankly to acknow-
ledge that the Law was given by Moses, and that Grace and Truth
came by Jesus; and, like sensible converts to a more rational doctrine,
let them, with all their heart and soul and strength, shovel the Rabbin-
ical Sabbath out of the way, with the rest of the Puritanical rubbish,
and follow him who not only broke the Sabbath, again and again, and
said he had a right to break it, but, who fearlessly declared, that
the Sabbath was made for Man!
There is no convincing men against their will; and as soon as one
objection is overthrown, another starts up, untill one gets tired of
knocking Sabbatarian antagonists down. After all that I have advanced,
I may still be told, with more assurance than modesty, that “ the Deca-
logue at least is still in full force, having been endorsed by Christ , over
and. over again .” No such thing; Jesus never endorsed the Decalogue;
and it is a calumny to assert it,! As a Hebrew he was bound to respect
it, and as the Fulfiller of the Law, he could not have done otherwise ;
but, having fulfilled it, as a matter of course it was at an end, utterly
abolished—except to Hebrews alone. I am told by an out and outer,
that, ‘‘when asked, What good thing shall I do, that I may have
eternal life? Christ answered, If thou wilt enter into life, Keep the
Commandments; and by that reply, Christ endorsed the Decalogue.”
I repeat, Jesus never endorsed the Decalogue; the inferences drawn
from that dialogue are false, and cannot bear scrutiny —here it is :
Behold one came and said unto him, Good Master, what good thing shall I do,
that I may have eternal life ? and He said unto him, Why callest thou Me good?
there is none good but One, and that is God: hut, if thou wilt enter into life, keep
the Commandments. He saith unto him, Which ? Jesus said, Thou shalt do no
murder, Thou shalt not commit adultery, Thou shalt not steal, Thou shalt not bear
false witness, Honor thy father and thy mother, and Thou shalt love thy neighbor
as thyself. Matt. XIX.
But, these Commandments, instanced by Jesus, do not constitute the
Decalogue; and the last, the most important of them, is not in the
Decalogue at all. More than this, in the Commandments quoted by
Jesus, there is not a syllable about either of the 2 precepts, the puncti-
lious observance of which, the Pharisees attached the most weight—
neither the making of graven images, nor the keeping of the sabbath,
are so much as even hinted at —therefore, I again repeat, Jesus never
endorsed the Decalogue!
In XXII of Matt, we have a still more remarkable allusion to the
Commandments, thus recorded—
A lawyer asked him a question, tempting him, saying, Master which is the great
Commandment in the Law? Jesus said unto him, Thou shalt love the Lord thy
God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind ; this is the,


first and great Commandment; and the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy
neighbor as thyself—on these 2 Commandments hang all the Law and the Prophets! ”
Here we have a marked token of disrespect paid to the Decalogue, by
Jesus, who quoted 2 precepts which arc not in the Decalogue, as con-
stituting the pith of the whole Law (Love to God and Love to Man)
therefore, I once more repeat, defying the “ Sunday Observance Society”
to convict me ot error, Jesus never endorsed the Decalogue!
In Mr. J. Baxter Langley’s able reply to a Sermon, preached by the
Rev. Robert Maguire (1857) occur the 2 following paragraphs—
The Sabbath is a ceremonial ; it can be kept by those who have no religion in the
heart. In this, it is essentially Jewish, and opposed to that deeper religion that has
no external forms, but which leads the heart to worship God in spirit and in truth,
and which teaches that “a broken and a contrite heart” is more acceptable than all
“ burnt offerings and sacrifices.” The observance of the Sabbath is not moral in
itself ; and hence, the greatest Sabbatarians were not the best men, nor always good
men. Sir John Dean Paul and his fellows, with Redpath and others, were strict
Sabbatarians; and the most Sabbatarian city in the world, is the most drunken ,
If anyone would carefully read Deuteronomy IX. 9, 11, 15, and also Deut. X. 4,
comparing these passages with Exodus XX. 18, they will see that the 2 tables of
stone contained the 10 Commandments only; that these alone were given with
such terific display of thunder and lightning and fire. Now, if reference is made
to the 2nd. Corinthians 111. the Apostle will be found instituting a comparison
between the new epistle of Christ, written “not on tables of stone, but in the fleshy
tables of the heart,” arid describing that which was written on tables of stone as
“the ministration of death,” “the ministration of condemnation,” as “that which
is done away,” and as “ that which is abolished.” Similar views are expressed in
Colossians 11. 14. It is clear from this passage, that St. Paul regarded the X Com-
mandments as abolished, and, with them, the Sabbath.”
Another objection to our spending a rational Sunday, is that frightful
bugbear “the continental sabbath”! just as if the modes of
keeping Sunday on the Continent of Europe, could vie with the
drunkenness, debauchery , and vice practised in Australia! just as if
England, Ireland, and Scotland, did not cast France, Germany, and
Holland quite into the shade in the committal of hypocrisy, superstition,
and crime! just as if we British subjects were not immeasurably deeper
sunk in domestic strife, social deprncity, and flagrant immorality, than
any of the nations held up to our abhorrence by the slanderous Sunday
Observance Society! ”
None but those who have never seen with their own eyes, neverheard
with their own ears, could so expose their ignorance, so calumniate
others much less guilty than themselves, so unblushingly and wickedly
hear false witness against their neighbors ! Did space permit, I could
bring scores of eyewitnesses and earwitnesses to confront the infamous
representations of the foul aspersers connected with the u Sunday
Observance Society,” which would stamp them as execrable defamers of
men much better than themselves !


Dr. Copleston (Bishop of Llandnff) wrote home from Shaffhausen;
much that would put our “ Sunday Observance Society” to shame;
and, among other things, he stated—
In all places of worship I have attended (except One) I must say, that there was
greater appearance of devotion, than the English church ordinarily presents. The
people seemed to make it more their own business. They come before the Service
begins; many sit there an hour with their books, and seem to be engaged in private
prayer. I confess, I cannot understand the ground upon which the English boast
themselves to be a peculiarly religious people. I observe on the Continent, Sunday
{s regarded as a festival, and all sorts of innocent amusements go on in the evening
after divine service is over. This is the case as much in Protestant as in Catholic
countries; and I believe Heylin (in his treatise on the Sabbath) is right, in saying
that the Day was never, in the History of the Church, considered as profaned by
the practice, till about the latter end of our Elizabeth’s reign, when the puritan
notions began to prevail.”
The Rev. Dr. Guthrie informed his canny countrymen (in his Plea,
1850) that he spent some months in Paris; and although his avocations
led him frequently through the worst parts of the city, ana occasionally
late in the evening (a city then containing a population 6 times larger than
Edinburgh) he saw “but One drunken man, and No drunken woman”!
But, this is not all the Rev. Dr. told his toddy-loving countrymen; he adds—
We stepped from the Steamer upon one of the London quays, and had not gone
many paces, when our national pride was humbled, and any Christianity we may
have had was put to the blush, by the disgusting spectacle of Drunkards reeling
along the streets, and filling the air with strange and horrid imprecations. In one
hour we saw in London —and in Edinburgh, with all her schools and churches and
piety, we see every day—more Drunkenness than we saw in five long months in
guilty Paris! “Tell it not in Gath; publish it not in the streets of Askelon.”
Surely these facts disclose a state of things for which British Christians ought to
blush.” P/ea on behalf of Drunkenness, etc.
Dr. Guthrie, to show his calumnious Sabbatarian countrymen that
France is not a solitary instance of superiority in this respect over Scot-
land, quotes other examples; one from a gentleman presiding over the
Horticultural Gardens in Ceylon, who published a book of Travels in
he Brazils, in reference to which the Rev. Doctor observes —
Most people know the low state of morality in the Brazils, that there, the
marriage tie is almost intirely loosed, and that Priests and People are one swelter-
ng mass of corruption. This gentleman, glad to breathe once more the pure air of
religious land, reached Liverpool on a Sabbath morning; but, what was the scene
which met him on his native shores ? On that sacred day, ere he had spent as many
hours in Liverpool as he had spent years in the Brazils, he saw more Drunkards
than he had seen during his whole sojourn in a country where the ordinary decencies of
life are laughed to scorn ! Whether our*nation is or is not the most Drunken nation
in the world, we leave others to settle; but surely, these are facts which ought to
fill us with shame.”


Let us now take a peep at Amsterdam, the capital of Holland, where
it was my privilege to reside upwards of a quarter of a century; and
how, think you, do the Dutch spend Sunday ? I’ll tell you.
With the Dutch, Sunday is a day of rest and worship, and social
enjoyment, interspersed with a variety of innocent pleasures and lawful
gratifications —the most agreeable day of the week, welcomed by all
grades of society. Although the 4th Commandment does not enjoin,
does not so much as intimate anything about Worship , yet, the Dutch
scrupulously set certain hours apart on their leisure-day, to acknowledge
and adore Uncreated Beneficence; the Ministers of the various Sects
joining their Congregations in the innocent amusements commonly
indulged in there, on Sundays.
After morning service, it is customary to stroll from church or chapel
into the Botanical, Zo-ological, and other Gardens, to admire the
Greater in his manifold works; or, to enter the Galleries of Art; or, to
delight in other pleasurable and instructive sights; making Sunday (as
30,000 Hebrews in Amsterdam make Saturday) the most gladsome of
days, recruiting themselves from the fatigues of the week, and gathering
fresh energy for the prosecution of their avocations in life.
The afternoon services are only partially attended, as the generality
of persons prefer paying family or friendly visits, to dozing after a com-
fortable dinner, under the nap-stimulating influence of a prosy sermon.
Generally speaking, the evening services are not so thronged as those
of the morning; many persons, male and female, being more inclined
for walking out, to see and to be seen; or, sitting by the sides of the
river Y, or the river Amstel; or taking* excursions on the Water; or,
by Rail; or, surrounding the detached tables in some of the many Tea-
gardens in the vicinity of the city, where, listening to various species of
Music, they can breathe the invigorating air, delighting in each others
company—talk, sing*, gambol, swing, run, dance, or play, as their
inclination dictates. But observe—and it is worthy of every Australian’s
observation, I cannot call to mind a single instance of anyone’s being
Drunk in any of those places of pleasurable resort and convivial gratifi-
cation, except my own Countrymen !
I have traversed Holland, have spent days and weeks in the different
Provinces of the Netherlands, have witnessed hundreds of popular
gatherings, and several National festivals; } r et, during the long space
of 28 years, I saw not Half the licentiousness , rioting , and drunkenness ,
which may be seen any day and every day in Melbourne alone ! Let
me not be misunderstood, neither misinterpreted —l have seen more
immorality in a single Day in Melbourne, than I saw during my 28
years residence in Holland !
Read this, and blush if you can, ye calumnious and lying defamers
of “ Continental Sahhathhreahers ” as ye piously designate those
Foreigners, the latchets of whose shoes ye are not worthy to unloose!
Out upon your “ Sunday Observance Society” ! which, under the cloak
of morality , is a fruitful source of immorality, by your closing the
public Educational Institutions on the only day in the week when the
Workingmen, with their Wives and their Children, can conveniently
visit them; where Lecturers might teach them how to look through


Nature up to nature’s God; elevating and humanizing the masses of
the people, and clearing the streets of Melbourne, on Sundays at least,
of both Loafers and Larrikins. Throw but open all the public Schools
of Instruction (Libraries, Galleries of Art, Museums, etc.) and the
Magistrates will soon have “ nothing to do ” in the Police Courts on
Monday. A man's wife and family are his best safeguards against
immoral and brutalizing tendences and temptations; just as lawful and
elevating Enjoyment is the surest way to prevent unlawful and
debasing Gratifications.
SIIMHABY
Of th« Pieceding: Observation*.
I, The 4th Commandment has not anything to do with holiness , in
the English acceptation of the word; nor has it any relation whatever
to worship: all that it enjoins, is, total cessation from. work.
Pulpits may preach what they please, but, after a careful perusal of my Bible, I
assure the doubtful reader of these pages, that the Laws of Moses did not appoint
Public Worship to be performed by the Hebrews on the Sabbath; and, what may
be more startling still, Jesus never imposed any such duty on his followers, either
by precept or example! In all the writings of Moses, you cannot find that he ever
taught the Israelites anything concerning a future state; neither did he ever hold
out to them as inducements to Obedience, any other than temporal rewards and
punishments: but, Jesus brought life and immortality to light , through the Gospel;
and, ere long, thousands of thousands shall discover that the 4th Commandment
does not form any portion of the Laws of Jesus.
Therefore, as Scripture does not impose upon us the duty of observing a puritan-
ical Sunday, of esteeming one day above another, of abstaining from rational
recreation on the first, the seventh, or any other day in the week, let us shake off
the superstitious shackles of our predecessors, and, like reasonable beings, enjoy
our weekly holiday to our hearts content, conformably with the dictates of our
understandings and with consciences void of offense before God and Man !
11. All the Laws of Moses were abrogated, abolished, done away
with, to all intents and purposes, at the instant that Jesus fulfilled the
Law; consequently, the Mosaic Code is for ever a dead letter to all—
but Hebrews.
Should the authorities quoted for the abrogation be insufficient for any reader,
I have scores and hundreds more, ready to produce, from the writings of distin-
guished men of many denominations.
111. The Decalogue never was endorsed by Jesus.
All the Pulpits in Christendom cannot substantiate the silly assertion, that “ the
Decalogue remains in full force, in consequence of its having been endorsed by
Jesus” ; for, Jesus never did endorse it; but, on the contrary, He paid it signal
disrespect.
IV. The Sabbatist’s bugbear— Continental Sabbathbrcaking!
As a matter of course, I can quote the testimonies of numerous recent Travelers
in different countries, against the members of the calumnious “ Sunday Observance
Society,” who are incessantly croaking forth their false accusations against those
who arc considerably less guilty of “ Sabbath desecration ” than themselves.


Having cleared the way towards introducing the grand object of this
Pamphlet, I may now enter upon it without further prelude.
The bounden duty of the Government
Instruct every Individual in the Colony.
Professor Austin, in his celebrated work on Jurisprudence, maintains,
One of the weightiest of the duties which God has laid upon Governments, is the
Education of the People;”
and Barlow, in his Advice to the Privileged Orders, tells them,
It may be safely pronounced, that a State has no right to punish a man , to whom
it has given no previous instruction
while the great Sir Thomas More asks, in his too-little known Utopia,
which the world is now first beginning to appreciate as it deserves,
If you suffer your People to be ill-educated, and their manners to be corrupted
from their Infancy, and then punish them for those Crimes to which their first
Education disposes them ; what else is to be concluded from this, but that you make
Thieves, and then punish them ? ”
And Aristotle confidently asserts, that
All who have meditated on the Art of governing mankind, have been convinced,
that the fate of Empires depends on the Education of Youth.”
“In whatever light we view Education, it cannot fail to appear the most
important subject that can engage the attention of mankind. When we contrast
the ignorance, the rudeness, and the helplessness of the savage, with the knowledge,
the refinement, and the resources of civilized man, the difference appears so wide,
that they can hardly be regarded as of one and the same species. All the difference which
is afterwards to distinguish them, depends upon their Education. Dugald Stewart.
Instruction is the younger sister of Education; and if Governments
do not and will not teach the Rising generation the rudiments of
Knowledge, do not and will not decellop the understandings of the Adult
portion of the community, they are remiss in the performance of the
most important duly belonging to Legislation—the instruction of every
young, and the devellopment of every adult member of the State !
“If we may give credence to the records of remote antiquity, the Institutions of
one ancient nation, in order to obviate the mischiefs produced by the ignorance or
the inattention of Parents, provided, by compulsory laws, for the Public education,
according to an established system of all children born within its precints ; and
there have not been wanting Philosophers, both of ancient and of modem times#
who, maintaining the principle that a State has a paramount interest in the welfare
and good conduct of those who are born within its limits, have vindicated and
applauded such Institutions. Shepherd and Joyce’s Systematic Education
And if our Legislature does not at once set about the Reformation of
this Colony, by instituting compulsory instruction on all children
between 5 and IT years of age, it will be chargeable with gross derelic-
tion of duty as a Government; and every inactive Member of Parlia-
ment will deserve to be booted in the streets, as a driveler, by every
Constituent who is a friend to Humanity !


Without occupying-100 pages, in controverting the 1,000 Objections
which have been raised against Compulsory Education, I shall assume,
that all intelligent minds in the Colony allow of the propriety, and that
all real friends of the rising generation admit of the necessity of Educa-
tion, and that all legislators who have examined the question will give
their support to the most eligible measures which may be brought
forward in our Houses of Parliament—and as not anything short of a
compulsory measure can possibly reach every individual in the State,
I shall assume, that
Compulsory Instruction will he instituted in Victoria:
how it is to be carried out, is a secondary consideration; nor will it be a
thousandth part so difficult to arrange the performance, as conflicting
Sects and Parties imagine. But, that I may not be misunderstood,
Secular, not Religious education, must he Compulsory.
Here, of course, a hue and cry will go forth, among the various denom-
inations of the colony, shouting at the top of their voices, that
Secular instruction cannot he separated from Religious education !
but, I say it can, and ought, and must. For upwards of a quarter of a
century, I have witnessed the combination and separation of Secular
and Religious instruction carried out with unexceptionable propriety
and admirable effect ; and if our Statesmen be not too wise to learn, I
shall show them how Secular instruction may be communicated to all
the Children of the State, without obtruding sectarian principles on any
recipients of the rudiments of education.
Some time ago, I furnished Messieurs Higinbotham and Fellows with
a sketch of the Dutch mode of simplifying the intricacies of what is
called National Education; and although I never received so much as
an acknowledgement, from either of the gentlemen, of the receipt of the
Pamphlet* handed to them (by a mutual acquaintance) I can perceive
the effects in the turn which has been given to the Educational-question
now before the Colony.
Chambers (in Tract 44) has related the result of his ‘‘Visit to Hol-
land,” undertaken for the express purpose of satisfying himself as to
what he had heard of the practicability and expediency of the Dutch
method of carrying out “ united yet separate Instruction, under legal
sanctions, in connection with National Education”; and if our legislators,
our sectists, and our writers for the press, would only be at the pains of
reading the communications of Chambers, they would not talk and write
so much arrant nonsense, on a question they are but partially acquainted
with. Climbers recounts his visits to various Schools in Holland, his
conversations with the Teachers, his examination of the Pupils, and
closes his interesting and valuable Tract in the following words— l came
away with the impression, that a Problem, which has long vexed States-
men in England, had, by our intelligent neighbors, been happily
solved ! ”
And though some Englishmen and Australians may “turn up their
noses” at my recommending the Dutch mode of imparting National
* “The Age we Live in.” Published at '65 Stephen Street. Price 6d.


Education, I venture to tell such contemners, that those who taught us
Navigation, are, to my knowledge, equally capable of teaching us how
to manage Public Instruction.
The paramount duty of the State is, to effect what the enlightened
Pius IX was prevented (by the machinations of Priestcraft) from carry-
ing out at the commencement of his career — u not to have a Child in
his dominions, that could not read , write , and cipher”; which is simply
Secular instruction. This is the first and grand requisite; and this
fairly established, all other concomitants must follow in due course.
But, if you wait untill all obstacles be removed, and all exactions on
theological grounds be satisfied, you may wait till doomsday; and the
Children of the State will continue, age after age, defrauded of their
legitimate right to rudimentary Education.
Christianity, as you are aware, has been split up into upwards of 600
different and contending Sects; and each Sect would gladly have the
unrestricted controll of the Religious education of all the children in
the Colony; fancying, that the most direct road to heaven, is through
their own wicket; and that all other roads lead to inevitable destruc-
tion —very few of them being liberal enough to admit that whosoever
feareth God and worketh righteousness is accepted of Him, and that all
are the children of one beneficent Father.
If we are to credit all that our Newspapers report, the Roman
Catholics* are at present highly incensed against the Bill expected
shortly to occupy the attention of our Legislature; conceiving, that
should the measure be carried, great injustice will be done to their
particular denomination : other Sects are not less alarmed, fancying,
that should Romancatholics succeed in monopolizing the instruction to
be dealt out to the rising generation, incalculable injury to all other
denominations would be the result.
In Holland, Presbyterians and Baptists and Lutherans and Hebrews
and Moravians, etc. are promiscuously associated together in one and
the same Class, all receiving the same Secular instruction, unmixed with
sectarian dogmas, and free of all petty jealousies; the Teachers leaving
to the Ministers the duty of inculcating the lessons of religion, agreeably
with the particular beliefs of the parents: the children usually assembling
at their respective Clergymen’s houses, at stated times. The School-
master’s business is to attend to the head —the heart he leaves to the
care of the Ecclesiastic; they never interfere with each other’s depart-
ment, and wrangling is never heard of!
Our Legislaters will not, cannot, be so unwise as to place the Religious
instruction of all the Children in the colony in the hands of any One
*“ Roman Catholics I have spoken with several intelligent Romancatholics on the subject of
National Education, and I am bound, in common justice towards that numerous and highly respect-
able body, to insert, in a Note, that I am of opinion, it is hut a clique, calling themselves Members ot
the “ Society of Jesus,” who are making themselves so vexatiously busy and troublesome on the
present occasion. Every well-read man knows, that the Jesuits are, and always have been, the bane
of every community wherein they got footing; and that, despite all their professions of good-will
towanis men, they have ever been the most ai rant pests to society ! I know them personally, and I
know their history from Ignatius Loyola down to the present day ; and I know that they have been
spurned, cast out, bani.-hed, from every community, east and west, north and south; and I know
that none have been more inveterate against them, than the Romancatholics themselves —bishops,
archbishops, cardinals, and popes! Therefore, do not impute to the great body of respectable
Romancatholics, the machinations of the clique called Jesuits; for, the better informed of our
Romancatholic citizens, are perfectly ashamed to be thought of having any immediate association
with such a pestilential race of “ Corrupters of Youth,” and “ Disturbers of the public peace.”


Sect whatever; for, what is bishop Perry in the estimation of Romanists,
but an apostate from the true church, and a poor deluded heretic ? and
what is bishop Goold in the eyes of Protestants, but a tool of the scarlet
whore of Babylon ? and what are both those trinitarian bishops in the
appreciation of the Rev. Mr. Higginson, but a couple of idolaters, wor-
shiping more Gods than one? Let the Ministers of each Sect look
after their own flocks, and each inculcate what seemeth unto him good,
without let or hinderance; for, all have an equal claim to religious
freedom, and an equal right to private judgement—but, let not any
Sect thwart the Government in carrying out Compulsory Secular
Instruction , which must necessarily be established, sooner or later; the
Age requires it, the Welfare of the masses of the people demands it,
and Justice insists on its immediate accomplishment!
In addition to the Instruction of Youth , our Legislators are bound to
Educate the Adult; for, every Individual in the colony has an
undoubted claim on the protection and assistance of the Government.
What though the tens of thousands of our Workingclasses cannot
now be put to School, cannot now be taught to read, write, and cipher,
under similar arrangements as those adapted for the Rising generations;
still, much may yet be done towards developing the minds of Adults,
and raising them very considerably in the scale of Humanity. We have
a variety of public schools in Melbourne, wherein adults might be taught
numerous pleasing and useful lessons, without putting the State to any
expense; but, unfortunately, the doors are closed against the Laboring-
man on the only day in the week when he can conveniently visit those
schools, with his wife and children; and as those schools are not private
but public property, belonging to the poor as well as the rich, I cherish
the hope that our New parliament may be induced, for the Public
good, to open our
Public Libraries, Galleries of Art, Museums, etc.
ON SUNDAYS.
Tell me not that our Adults are incapable of being enlightened and
elevated by beholding the thousands of objects contained in those
Schools, and by listening to explanatory lectures Ifom qualified men ;
for, their lack of scientific education will not prevent them from deriving
incalculable benefit: and, in the course of time, our Australian populace
may rival the ancient Athenians, who are allowed to have been the most
intelligent community the world has ever seen; yet, what were their
scientific acquirements ? why, there were but few among those who
gazed on the Parthenon, few who listened to Pericles, few who were
enraptured with Eschylus, and few who applauded Sophocles, who knew
either to write or to read! And why should not unlettered Australians
have their minds enlarged ? tneir thoughts develloped ? their tastes
cultivated ?
Besides, the peace, safety, and general welfare of the State would be
insured, by raising the low and disorderly members into sober and well-
behaved citizens; for, as Everett has observed—
An intelligent class can scarce ever be, as a class, vicious; never as a class,
indolent: the excited mental activity operates as a counterpoise to the stimulus of
sense and appetite;”


corroborating the shrewd remark of Austin, that—
An enlightened People were a better auxiliary to the Judge, than an army of
Policemen.”
Did my pecuniary circumstances allow it, I could furnish scores ot
valuable opinions on this point, far outweighing the opinion of thou-
sands who have never seriously examined the subject; such, for instance,
as that of the able Curator of the British Museum, who, in his evidence
before the Fine Arts Committee, said—
I do not anticipate any difficulty in making arrangements for Opening on Sunday
afternoon. The same assistance by the Police as on great Holidays, might be
adopted. If the British Museum were Open on the Afternoon of Sunday, many
Men who now go alone for pleasure trips to the country, would accompany their
Wives and Children to the British Museum; and I see no objection to the admission
of Children with their Parents. Judging from the attention on the Holidays, when
the Husband and Wife visit the Museum together, there is evidently a great desire
to avail themselves of the Instruction which the place affords. The behavior of
the people is very good. lam delighted to see the manner in which they examine
the Collection on Holidays. The Mechanics appear much interested in the Speci-
mens, and, frequently, One who knows more than the others, will demonstrate for
the rest of the party. Great advantages are derived from the perusal of the
Collection. It gives the mass of the people a general taste for the study of Nature ;
which must be highly advantageous to their Morals. I consider the Museum one of
the greatest educational establishments in the country, and one of those
places where people may gain sound knowledge. Galleries of works of Art, I regard
in the same light; and, I think, they ought to be as free as possible. Having formerly
practised as a Medical man in one of the largest districts of Spitalfields, I am well
aware there is a mass of people who have no opportunity of visiting the Museum,
or any Gallery of Art, save on the Sunday; and many of whom would rather spend
their Sunday afternoon in that manner, than as they have hitherto been accustomed 1 ’’
Such was a part only of the evidence given by one of the clearest-
headed men in London, Dr. Grey; and Sir Joshua Walmsley, on intro-
ducing the subject to the House of Commons, told the Members, that
“He regarded this Motion as purely an Educational one; and he should indeed
rejoice, could he induce others to look upon it in that light. It was Educational,
in the most impressive sense, and would extend that blessing to tens of thousands
whom the millions spent on a Church establishment had not yet leached I
I have scores and hundreds of extracts from the speeches and letters
of other Advocates for the rights and priviliges of the Workingclasses;
such as Mr, Heyworth, who says —
I believe, that by Opening the British Museum and the National Galleries to
the multitude, on the Sabbathday, a source of knowledge would be made available
to them, from which they are now virtually excluded. Thus the eyes of their
understanding would be opened, and the mental darkness of Ignorance, which now
obscures the perception of the pure light of the Gospel, would be expelled.”
But, to proceed still farther, going out of the boundaries of Educa-
tion into the territories of pure Gratification, I insist on the expediency
and strict religious propriety of our enjoying every rational .Recreation


that may fall in our way on Sundays, whether on foot or in vehicles,
whether on land or water, whether in steamboats or railcarriages, the
Sabbath having- been made for Man, not Man for the Sabbath; in which
expediency I am countenanced by men more celebrated in the religious
world, than any of our “Sunday Observance Society;” such as Dr.
Arnold, who, in his letter of 1 April, 1840, writes —
That Sunday should be a day of greater leisure than other days, and of the
suspension as far as may be of the common business of life, I quite allow ; and if
the Railway enables the people in the great towns to get out into the country on a
Sunday, I should think it a very great Good.”
The Rev. John Griffith, Vicar of Aberdare, in a letter published 27
Nov. 1852 (in the Cardiff and Merthyr Guardian) after expressing his
hearty approval of the proposed Opening of the Crystal Palace on
Sunday afternoons, as a means of diminishing drunkenness, gambling ,
and fighting among the lower orders, proceeds in the following words—
It is the same thing with Sunday Trains. A great outcry has been raised against
them. I say it, with every consciousness of the responsibility I incur, as Incumbent
of one of the largest parishes in Wales, and with abundant opportunity of testing
their usefulness —that, were it not for Sunday Trains, we should have Ten times
more Sabbathbreaking in this country than we have now. I can hardly conceive a
greater calamity, in a moral point of view, to a parish like mine, with its 16,000
workmen, than if some Puritanical panic were to seize the Directors of the Taff
Yale and Yale of Neath, so that all the Sunday Trains were to be stopped! There
would be no living on the Sabbath here. Let the Sunday Trains run as now,
resting during Church service, and they will effect, as they are constantly effecting,
a great Moral change in the people I I have spoken my mind honestly on this
subject, because I think it is time the Clergy should speak. I will yield to none in
doing all and everything to “Keep holy the Sabbathday;” and I am quite sure my
Parishioners will bear me witness in this. But, there is a vast difference between
keeping this day holy, and that rigid Sabbatarianism which has well-nigh
threatened, more than once, to bring back the vapid emptiness of the days of the
Roundheads. The question is not one of desecration of the Sabbath, but the
enlightenment, the recreation, the rest, the elevation of the Workingman. Lord
Derby has done a noble act, and I trust he will be supported in it. I fear nothing
of “Continental desecration;” I fear nothing for Religion, or, the Church 1 Open
people’s Minds ; and let us, the Clergy, pray God to open ours as well:
and “ the city that is set on a hill, can never be hid ”1
I cannot resist making room for a few passages, at least, out of Lord
Stanley’s clever, liberal, and statesmanlike address on the Sabbath-
question, in the House of Commons —
“He apprehended, the Object of the Resolution before the House, was not to ask
for liberty to stay away from the British Museum or National Gallery on Sunday
that they had already. The opponents of the Resolution, asked «o<to be allowed
to keep the'Seventh day in their own way, but, to have power placed in their hands
to compkl all others to do the same. In doing that, He believed, they mistook not
only the theory of Government, but, the nature of a religious duty. If the whole
question at issue, were merely the Opening of One or Two institutions, he would
admit that the object was scarcely worth the effort it cost; but this was not simply


a question of maintaining new privileges—it was rather one of keeping those which
the public already possessed. There was no arguement against the Opening of
the Museum, wmcn did not apply with equal force to excursion Trains; and which,
urged to its legitimate limits, would not go to the closing of places of refreshment,
the stopping of omnibuses, and the laying of an embargo on river steamers. This
city was, from east to west, six miles across, and a man living in the centre, could
not take his family into the country except by employing some cheap public con-
veyance. On what pretext of fair play, or, common humanity, could they shut up in
Shoreditch or Bethnal Green, on a Sunday, the thousands who populated those
districts, when they knew that every man who had a sick child would hasten, let
the day of the week be what it might, to remove it from the smoke and filth of
London to the pure, fresh breeze of the country ? He did not wish to raise the
cry of one law Jor the rich, and another for the poor; but, if this was the spirit in
which the House of Commons was going to legislate for the country, that cry,
depend upon it, would be raised sooner or later, and in tones louder than had yet
been heard. [Hear, hear] Another arguement against the resolution was, that it
would impose compulsory labor on the Government officials. He could not very
well understand the force of this objection, for they had no particular tenderness
for the Police, to whom Sunday was a day of labor, and not much sympathy for
the Clerks in the Post Office. But the difficulty, such as it was, might be evaded
by two methods. It would be easy to exempt, with proportionate deductions,
those who had a conscientious objection to work on Sundays—he did not believe the
number would be very great; and, on the other hand, it would be quite practicable
so to arrange the relays of the service, that no official should be employed to super-
intend any public building on more than one Sunday out of three or four. [Hear,
hear] With regard to the objection, that this measure would interfere with religious
worship, he did not believe that it would have any such operation. He would not
dwell upon the fact, that a large majority of the workingmen in this metropolis
did not attend any place of worship whatever; and that if they should be disposed
to do so, there would not be Churches enough to hold them. He would not dwell
on that, for the state of things which it - indicated, might only be temporary,
although it did seem hard to say, that one generation should be left to pass their
Sunday in the pot-house in order that the next generation may have rather less
inducement to stay away from Church. But, they would do well to remember,
that an intire day passed in mental attention to abstruse subjects was difficult, even
to the educated, and to the untaught or half-educated, impossible. [Hear, hear]
There was time on Sunday, both for religious worship and for innocent recreation.
There need not be any competition between the Church and the Museum. He
hoped that between the Museum and the Publichouse there would be much com-
petition. He did not expect that the Resolution would command a large amount of
support in that House ; but, of this they might be assured, that If they legislated
in their present temper —if they continued old restrictions and created new ones,
they would make religion unpopular, and throw back education. The clergy would
gain nothing—the people would lose much; but, one class, he admitted, would
thank them for their efforts —they would have swelled the profits and gladdened
the hearts of every brewer, distiller, and publican in the United Kingdom.”


Pursuing the subject still farther, I come to the Parks and Gardens
belonging to the Public, which the mischievous Members of the “Sun-
day Observance Society” are now striving to Close on the only day in
the week when they are most needed to be Open. It is monsterous, that
a handful of Sabbatarian Evil-doers should presume to prevent all the
the inhabitants of Melbourne and its suburbs from enjoying the fresh
air on a Sunday in their own Gardens ! To whom do those Parks and
Gardens belong? to the Public at large ? or, to a clique, a sorry, an
insignificant, a pitiable clique of Sabbatists ? And who has the charge
of our Parks and Gardens? the “Sunday Observance Society”? or, the
Government ? And can the Government sacrifice the well-being of the
many , to the superstition of a Jew? It cannot be ! It must not be !
Not only should our Gardens be open, but, they should be made
attractive; resounding with music; enticing our tens of thousands away
from closely pent-up localities ; and providing innocent amusements, to
allure even the lowest of our Loafers and Larrikins from the scenes of
wretchedness and crime in which they drag out the most blessed day of
the week. Depend upon it, the way to make men letter , is to make
them happier. If such men as Calvin, bishop Aylmer, and archbishop
Laud, could play at bowls on Sundays, why should not our unlettered
masses be indulged in such innocent amusements ? Even our ascetic
archdeacon Denison (notorious for his illiberal prosecution of Colenso)
has recently declared his readiness to participate in such innocent games
“ after Service on Sundays ”! And if the Members of our New parlia-
ment of 1871 will but take the trouble of ascertaining the Opinions of
the more advanced Members of the British parliament, on the Sabbath-
question, they will pause before curtailing the gratifications of the public
of Victoria on Sundays. Accept but half-a-dozen (abbreviated) opinions—
Lord Palmerston (when Prime Minister) expressed himself as follows—
I concurred in the arrangements for performances by military bands in Kensington
Gardens and in the Parks, for a couple of hours on Sunday afternoons, after divine
service; because, I thought that those arrangements would afford the inhabitants
of the metropolis innocent intellectual recreation, combined with fresh air and
healthy exercise; and such recreation did not seem to me to be at variance with
the soundest and purest sentiments of religion. Such was my opinion, and such is
my opinion still; for, I have heard nothing on the part of those who object to these
arrangements, which has altered my view of the matter.”
Sir Benjamin Hall repeatedly spoke, as well as acted, in favor of
Sunday bands ; and when the Discussion on the notorious Memorial,
signed by the Reverend Secretaries of three metropolitan mosaic Asso-
ciations (styling themselves Christians ) for what they were pleased to
term “the" better Observance of the Lord’s day,” took place in the
House of Commons, Sir Benjamin said—
“He had frequent reports from the Park-keepers, and from the Superintendent
of the Parks; but, he had not heard of a single complaint of the conduct of the
people—on the contrary, he believed that the cases before the magistrates on
Monday had materially diminished. [Hear, hear] Last year, during the playing of
the bands sanctioned by the Government, upwards of 200,000 people visited the
Parks on one Sunday; and yet, not a single case arising out of the Bands, came
before the magistrates, [Hear, hear.] The Times, 11 Aug. 1867


In an article on the Sunday Band Question the Weekly Dispatch says—
When we surveyed the vast mass of persons assembled on the sward, we were
amazed at the orderly conduct that prevailed. Every one seemed delighted with the
Music, and at the opportunity thus afforded them of listening to its delightful
sounds. We could have wished the presence of those sanctified mortals who lately
petitioned the Legislature for a better Observance of the Lord’s day, and bored
the Minister, through deputations, to prevent every species of amusement taking
place. They would have witnessed such a scene as would have convinced them (if
they are at all open to conviction) that Sunday recreation of the kind vouchsafed
to the public by Sir Benjamin Hall, is neither offensive to common decency nor
displeasing to the Deity. We are quite sure, that if her Majesty (the most reli-
gious and virtuous queen that ever sat upon the throne of these realms) imagined
for a moment that it is a desecration of the Sabbath to allow the band to play In
her palaces and in the grounds surrounding them, on Sundays, the practice would
immediately be discontinued. But the Queen views the question in a different and
liberal light. Seeing that recreation is essential to the toiling millions, her Majesty
patronizes those amusements which she thinks best calculated to raise the standard
of morality, and she seeks that object by proclaiming to her people that innocent
Sunday recreation is, of all things, best calculated to elevate the mind and make
the future man.”
Such readers as are aware of the interest taken in the Sttndny enjoy-
ments of the people, by the Earl of Derby, Lord Palmerston, and Lord
Stanley, will not be surprised at the declaration of Lord John Manners,
on Sunday Bands—
I may now be permitted to say a few words in reply to the question which has
been put to me by Mr. Stevenson, in reference to the playing of Musical bands upon
the Sabbath. The subject is one to which my attention has not yet been particu-
larly directed; but, so far as I can now form a judgement with respect to it, I see no
reason to depart from the arrangement which existed last year, under the direction
of Sir Benjamin Hall.” The Times. 9 March, 1858.
Lyndhurst, the venerable recent Lord Chancellor of England, ex-
pressed to his Peers an unequivocal approval of the Music for the
gratification of the people—
I consider the performance of the bands in the Victoria and Regent’s Parks of
Sundays, a most excelent and laudable establishment.”
In a couple of sheets only, it is not possible to meet every Objection
liable to be made against this Plea, neither to quote authorities substan-
tiating every point; for, the subject is voluminous: but, having heard
a few remarks while the Pamphlet has been passing through the press,
I may as well notice them.
The objection against ray treating on theological subjects, “because I
am not a Clergyman,” Mdton (himself a Layman of much profounder
biblical learning than any of the Clergy of his day) has answered fully;
and Watson, the bishop of Llandaff (1787-1810) told his Clergy, that
Laymen are as much interested in the truth of Christianity as Churchmen are,
and in this enlightened age, are as capable of seeing what is revealed in their
bible.”


Luther and Calvin—that these two Reformers (like all the others)
were Anti-sabbatists is no doubtful matter. Luther (1483-1546) writes
All days are holy days, as Isaiah had prophesied. And, on the other hand, all
days are working days. Yet, rest is necessary. Keep the Sabbath holy for its use
both to body and soul; but, if anywhere the day is made holy for the mere day’s
sake; if anywhere anyone sets up its observance upon a Jewish foundation ; then
I order you to work on it, to ride on it, to dance on it, to feast on it, to do anything
that shall reprove this encroachment on the Christian spirit and liberty.”
And Beza (1519-1605) who was associated with Calvin) (1509-156)
has left it on record, that a Proposition of Calvin’s was discussed by the
Geneva Protestants, for holding- their religious services on a Thursday ,
rather than on Sunday or Saturday ; that they might more effectually
discourage the notion of any one day , under the Christian dispensation,
being more or less sacred than any other day: and Calvin himself writes,
Paul informs us, that Christians are not to be judged in respect of its Observ-
ance; because, it is a shadow of something to come. Col. ir. 16. And, accordingly,
He expresses a fear, lest his labor among the Galatians should prove in vain,
because they still observed Days. Gal. iv. 10 11. And he tells the Komans, that it
is superstitious to make one day differ from another. Rom. xiv. 5.”
Tyndale or Tindale (b. 1477—martyred, at Antwerp, in 1536) whose
Name is the greatest in the History of the English Reformation, writes
plainly—
As for the Sabbath, we be lords over the Sabbath, and may yet change it into
Monday, or into any other day, as we see need; or, may make every Tenth day holy
day only, if we see cause why. Neither was there any cause to change it from
Saturday, but to put a difference between us and the Jews; neither need we any
holy day at all, if the people might be taught without it.
Tyndale's Answer to Sir T. More.
It is sheer nonsense to call Sunday the Sabbath , or the Lord's day ,
or the Christian sabbath, as heard from Pulpits; Constantine called it
“ the venerable day of the Sun,” and it was first appointed to be kept
as a day of rest from labor in the year 321, confirmed in 325; yet,
Pulpits pretend that the Apostles changed the day of rest from Satur-
day to Sunday—no such thing! It is equally absurd in Christian
ministers (in their prayers and sermons) to lard their English with
Hebraisms, calling churches and chapels and meetinghouses, tabernacles
and temples and sanctuaries ; Pulpit teachers ought to call things by
their right names. Professor Newman saj^s,
It is truely vexatious, 1800 years after Paul’s career, to have to fight Paul’s
battles against those who profess themselves not only his grateful children, but his
unreasoning obedient disciples. It is, indeed, superfluous here to prove, what is on
the face of the New testament, that Sundays are not Sabbaths, that Sabbaths are
no part of Gentile Christianity, and that Sundays have in the Scripture nothing to
do with abstinence from worldly business. The Puritan school of England and
Scotland shuts its eyes to the plainest facts, because it believes it to be useful to
hold that Sundays Sabbath, and Sabbath binding upon us. In vain shall we point
to Paul’s contemptuous disavowals of Sabbaths, and to his declaration that He


who disregards sacred Days is justified, so that He only disregard them to the Lord _
In vain may it be proved from the Christian history, that untill Constantine, Sunday
was a working-day with Christians. In vain will it be shown, that all the great
Reformers held the ancient and catholic doctrine, that the observance of Sunday
is a mere ordinance of the Church, not a command of God; and that untill the
English and Scotch Sabbatarians (late in the 16th century) invented the Puritan-
ical doctrine on this subject, it was unknown to the Christian church. As long as
Englishmen care more for supposed Expediency than for Truth , they will, through
thick and thin, stickle for a divinely obligatory Sabbath, unless one show them
that this falsehood has its evil and dangerous side. p. 121.
Our ears are dinned with the false cry, “ The Sabbath, the boon of the Work-
ingman 1” In many cases, say rather, his bane. More sin of every kind in Eng-
land and Scotland is committed on Sunday, than on any other Day of the week;
and of this, the (so-called) Sabbatical Institution is in great measure guilty, p. 122
“ Sundays are now a political institution; no one can propose to abolish them:
but let everyone try to make the best of it. I. By abandoning the false pretence
of their observance being a Divine command—itself an intrinsic incredible absurd-
ity, as well as without a shadow of New testament proof. 11. By encouraging
mental cultivation of the largest and most liberal kind on that day , and greatly
shortening the prayers—but of this more will be said. 111. By facilitating and
inviting attendance at Church, wherever masses of people are disposed to flock for
the recreation of country air; as at Richmond and Greenwich near London, and
many other places near to great cities. IV. By solemnly urging, that Religion
demands the whole heart for God on every day, and that no compromise can be
made by looking grave or dressing clean for One day. p. 122.
Justly, then, do I hate the Sabbatical fiction, as a caum of real Sin to the anxious
and well-intentioned, as well at to the careless and uncontrolled, p. 123.
The Soul; its Sorrows and its Aspirations Ed. of 1858,
What I have written, I have written; and though hastily, not
unadvisedly. Should my efforts on behalf of the Working-classes prove
beneficial, this Plea shall stand me in the stead of glory, be the delight
of my age, and an additional consolation at the close of my earthly
existenctf—the prelude to those ineffable gratifications which await me
on my transition into that other and better world, where I shall mingle
with Immortals in ever-during and ever-increasing bliss.
B. S. N.
Courteous and Humane Reader,
if you think that the dissemination of the preceding pages is likely
to be productive of Good and not Evil, then, I call upon you, in
the name of Humanity, to assist me, by your Contribution (check,
stamps, or cash) to issue this pamphlet gratis far and wide, to
both rich and poor—but, do it quickly, or your assistance may be
for ever too late.
Those who favor me with their address (plainly written)
shall receive pamphlets (free of expense) for distribution.
*
EVANS BROTHERS, PRINTERS, 44 COLLINS STREET WEST, MELBOURNE,
■.• • f
/ ■■■' ’ 3
