

A PLEA
FOR THE
NEW SOUTH WALES
CONSTITUTION.
BY W. A. DUNCAN, Esq.,
Principal Officer of Customs at Moreton Bay, and a Magistrate
the Territory.
"Hsec si qnovis alio quam h me, scribi velirn ; a me potins'quam a neroine.”
Sglm*S ;
WAUGH AND COX.
1856.




A PL E A
FOR THE
NEW SOUTH WALES CONSTITUTION-
An old Colonist, whose pen, though now disused for
two lustres, had no inconsiderable share in the earlier dis-
cussions that prepared the way for our recent political
changes, presumes to address a few words to his fellow
electors on a subject of vital importance to us all. A
great experiment is about to be tried in New South
Wales; an experiment involving the future peace and
welfare of this noble territory, and the success or
failure of which must decide the long agitated question
of the fitness or unfitness of its inhabitants for the
enjoyment of the full privileges of the British Consti-
tution. In the minds of many I have no doubt that
this question is already favourably decided. The fitness
of a, people, under any circumstances, to govern them-
selves, appears to have become a first truth in politics,
an axiom which no one considers it necessary to
prove, and I am prepared to hear the charges of pre-
sumption and inconsistency brought against me for
throwing a doubt upon that subject as regards our-
selves. I nevertheless believe that there exists danger
to the success of constitutional government in the sug-
gestions of certain vocal and literary organs of public
opinion, in the colony, and 1 will endeavour to point
out that danger, in the hope that some good effect may
/9 3'90


result from my humble effort, and in the belief that, at
least, my honest intention will secure for my argument
a fair and impartial consideration.
One of the countless advantages of the British Con-
stitution is the means it affords for its own gradual
amelioration, so as to adapt it to the peculiar wants of
each successive age. So also, the Constitution granted
to New South Wales provides for its own future amend-
ment. Changes in the former have, however, been ex-
ceedingly few ; centuries have usually elapsed between
each successive alteration; and such, when at last
made, have been made most slowly and reluctantly.
Even the revolutions which have changed the ruling
dynasty from Saxon to Norman, from Plantagenet to
Tudor, from Tudor to Stuart, from Stuart to Guelph,
have all failed to change the substantial principles, or
even the material forms of that venerable Constitution;
so that from the issuing of a writ to the royal approval
of a bill, all is done in the same form that obtained in
7 r
the days of the Plantagenets. And when it has become
necessary, from time, to time to effect certain reforms
in the Constitution—from the Charter of Runnymede
to the Reform Bill—t ie cry of Englishmen has always
been, in substance, “nolumns leges Anglise mutari”—
“give us our ancient rights, we will not have the
English Constitution changed.”
It is this unexampled stability of their Constitution
—this veneration for the past which is the best gua-
rantee for the future—that has given to Englishmen
that character for solidity, and sterling worth which
they boast, and maintain, indeed, without challenge,
among the nations of Europe. Of that character we
are justly proud, and if we wish to hand it down, un-
tarnished, to our descendants in this colony, it would
seem that we cannot do better than to inspire them
with a proper veneration for that noble constitution,
which if it partakes of the imperfection of all human
institutions, is yet admitted, on all hands, to be the
most perfect combination of the three elements of


government that has yet been devised. A government
combining the elements of monarchy, aristocracy, and
democracy was the Utopia of the ancients; a thing to
be admired, but not hoped for;* and yet that combina-
tion which was regarded by them as desirable, but
impossible, has been fully realised in the British Con-
stitution. Now the Constitution that has just been
granted to us is, in every essential respect, a copy of
the British Constitution. The democratic element is
strongly developed; the ministry is responsible to the
legislature; the public revenues are entirely at their
disposal; a check on hasty legislation is provided in an
Upper House, and the monarchical element is repre-
sented by her Majesty’s representative. If there be
any difference between the two, it is that in ours the
monarchic and aristocratic elements are more subdued
than in the original type, and that the ecclesiastical
power, so important in the latter, is in our constitution
altogether ignored.
It would, indeed, seem, that if the object of a con-
stitutional government be to maintain a due balance
between the various elements of which society always
lias been, is, and always must be, composed, any more
subdued scheme of aristocracy, than that which our
New Constitution embodies, must be totally inadequate
to its purpose; must fail to check the rashness ol the
popular element; and must speedily be absorbed by the
latter, which, after playing its usual tragic part, would
give place in its turn, as all history witnesses, to an
undivided despotism.
In the majority of the ancient states, no form of
government endured for any considerable time, because
in none were the three elements of government pro-
perly balanced. Each element struggled, not for its
legitimate place in the government, but for the mastery;
and each, accordingly, became the master in its turn,
abused its power, and yielded it up, in due course, to
* Taciti ; lib. iv.


its antagonist element. Thus we have a rapid succes-
sion of despotisms, oligarchies and republics, but no
constitutional government. Sparta and Rome present
exceptions to this perpetual circle of ancient revolutions,
and it cannot be doubted that they owed their greater
duration to their political constitutions, in which the
three elements of constitutional government are clearly
recognised, however imperfectly balanced. The former
of these States, at length yielded to the power of the
latter, which after conquering the world fell a prey to
its own dissensions. The struggle for mastery between
its patricians and plebeians (each forgetting that both
were equally necessary members of the Roman Consti-
tution) was at length settled by a military despotism,
apd that deference and respect which were denied to a
mixed polity were prostituted to a Tiberius, a Nero,
or a Caligula! The historian Tacitus, whose noble
work is at once a record of the destruction of the Roman
Constitution, and a lamentation over its fall, clearly
saw the cause in the want of a proper balance between
the elements of monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy,
and although he doubts the possibility of establishing
such a permanent balance, he had the sagacity to see
and suggest the very system of a mixed government
which was long afterwards so happily realised in
the British Constitution.* The Spartan Legislator,
Lycurgus, had indeed preceded him in a partial appli-
cation of the same principle, with a permanency of
success then unexampled.f
To us, the colonists of New South Wales, after a
struggle of more than twenty years, the full benefit of
this all but perfect system of government is for
the first time extended; and well will it be for
us, if we have the wisdom to preserve it in
tact. Fhe Magna Charta, which our ancestors re-
garded with an almost idolatrous veneration, was
• Taciti, Lib. ir.
t Polybii, lib. &, c. J.


not so perfect; the “ laws of the good King Ed-
ward,” which they clamoured for when under oppres-
sion, were far from being so well matured. Yet
painful it is to observe in newspaper paragraphs and in
conversation, what appears, assuredly a great falling
off from the wisdom of our ancestors —a determination
on the part of some, at least, to destroy the balance of
our Constitution before it has received a single year’s
trial! When the principles of the Constitution were
being debated in the Council, it was just and right that
the question of a nominated or elected Upper House
should receive due consideration; and the great ability
displayed on both sides in that debate will always
reflect distinguished honor on that body ; but now that
the question has been there legally settled, and the
principle recognised by the Queen and the Imperial
Parliament, it does seem to me a degree of fickleness
and folly quite unaccountable, that men should begin
already to talk of changing its principle before the first
writs of election are issued. Even if the principle
were an untried one, it would be unwise at this stage
to refuse it a trial; but being, in all its features, essen-
tially a copy of the well-tried Constitution of Great
Britain, the most perfect and lasting that has ever
existed, surely no apology can be offered for the haste
with which it has been proposed to alter, and as I shall
now endeavour to show, spoil it.
The subject of complaint is that, by the present Con-
stitution, the Upper House is nominated by the Crown,
whereas it should, according to these publicists, be
elected by the people. But why ? Is its British pro-
totype elected by the people ? Does there exist a single
successful precedent for an elective Upper House ? The
case of the United States forms no such precedent,
because that government, being a federation of some
thirty and odd republics, each with its separate govern-
ment and houses of legislature, has an additional and
powerful check in the Congress, which would be totally
wanting to us. But even if it were otherwise, it has


for some time been clear to all men of observation, that
Uiat great Union contains within its bosom, in the undue
preponderance of its democratic element, the fas-
shooting germs of a not distant dissolution. All the
great statesmen whom that nation has produced, Wash-
ington, Hamilton, Adams and the rest, foresaw the
consequences likely to arise to America from the over-
whelming powers of her democracy, and endeavoured,
vainly, it is feared, to warn their fellow citizens against
: len }' r JVl t 0 John Adams, one-of the Presidents of
die United States, that we are indebted for the history
0 tho P ri pcipal Republics of the world, in three octavo
volumes, in which he proves to demonstration that a
pure democracy is the worst possible form of govern-
ment ; that it is but another word for anarchy ; "that it
is inconsistent with the security of society and property
and that it cannot endure for any length of time The
predictions of this able writer are, by the accounts of
all recent travellers, being rapidly verified in the great
Republic which he once governed. Nor ought the ex-
periment of an elective Upper House, which some of the
neighbouring colonies have adopted, to be any guide to
US. It Will be time enough, as it will be easy enough
lor usto adopt their scheme, when it is shewn that it
works more successfully than our own, which has the
merit of being a tried system. If they succeed, which
18 more tlian doubtful, wo can lose nothing by waiting*
a few years for the result; and if they fail, which is
mr lrom improbable, we shall have had the wisdom to
escape their misfortune. Even if both systems were
equally experimental, which is not the case, it would
be interesting to watch the working of both, in colonies
similarly circumstanced, and adjoining each other and
to judge of each by its fruits.
While waiting for these results, if we consider what
are the object and intent of an Upper House of Legis-
lature, we shall have little difficulty in coming to the
conclusion, that we, in New South Wales, have chosen
the wiser scheme j and that in so far as w T e are seeking


to destroy this noble work, we are plunging into an-
archy, and proving our unfitness for that responsible
government we have recently attained.
The necessity for an Upper House of Legislature
arises from a principle of human nature, which, in all
ages and countries has developed itself in the gradual
establishment of a superior class of citizens, to which,
whether the distinction may have arisen from great
talents, eminent public services, or from whatever
other cause, the general designation of Aristocracy is
applied. The fact that in all civilized nations such a
body has existed is one that cannot be disputed. In
America, where law and public opinion are both op-
posed to it, the distinction is said to I>e already nearly
as strongly marked as it is in the oldest state in
Europe : and in New South Wales, if the elements are
still fermenting, there arc unmistakeable signs that
when the fermentation subsides, the division will be
not less marked than elsewhere. The aristocratic
element is one of Nature’s wise provisions; it exists
everywhere, for useful ends, and as the democratic
element cannot be ignored with impunity, so neither
can the other. Both are good in themselves, and both
liable to abuse. The only modern constitution makers
who ignored altogether the aristocratic element, were
the French Revolutionists * They began by insisting
on the amalgamation of the different orders; they
decreed the abolition of titles; established one only
house of legislature; and they ended by murdering
the mildest of sovereigns, and afterwards murdering
each other. The American revolutionists were some-
what wiser than this. They indeed anticipated the
French in decreeing the same false principle of the
rights of man, and the sovereignty of the people,
but they had the wisdom not to confide all power to
one popular assembly. “ Pennsylvania,” says Do
Tocqueville, “ was the only State which at first at-
tempted to establish a single House of Assembly;
and Franklin himself was so far carried away by tb*


necessary consequence of the principle of the sove-
reignty of the people, as to have, concurred in the
measure; but the Pennsylvanians were soon obliged
to change the law, and to create two Houses. Thus
the principle of the division of the legislative power
was. finally established [throughout the States], and
its necessity may henceforward be regarded as a demon-
strated truth.” No doubt in America both Houses
are elective, and this is the principle that it is sought
to engraft on our constitution. We are told that the.
Upper House should not be nominated by the Sove~
reign, like the British House of Lords, but elected by
the people like the American Upper Houses. But.do
the advocates of this principle see, its inevitable ten-
dency ? What are the objects of an Upper House?
Its establishment is no doubt, founded in abstract
justice. It represents a class who would otherwise be
unrepresented; in Britain its high honours are an ad-
mirablq means of rewarding distinguished merit in
forum, flood or field; in art, science, or literature ; but
in the work of legislation its most useful purposes are
to serve as a check upon the hasty legislation natural
to a popular assembly; and to break the force of the
concussions that must frequently arise between the
Assembly and the Executive ; were there no interme-
diate, body between them. No, government can be
useful unless it is sufficiently strong to carry on its
measures with vigour and some degree of independence.
But if there existed no intermediate body between the
Government and the Assembly, the former would ne-
cessarily be the piere, instrument of the latter, and the
whole power of the State would be absorbed therein,
In a word, anarchy would be the infallible result,. If
the Upper House were an elected body like the Lower,
it would naturally partake of alt the feelings and
passions of the Lower; and its chief end and object
would be lost to the country. And this is in ,fact the
case in the United States. Let us again hear the
philosophic I)e Tocqueville. “ The legislative bodies


daily encroach on the authority of the government;
and their tendency, like that of the French Conven-
tion, is to appropriate it entirely to themselves. Under
these circumstances, the social power is constantly
changing hands, because it is subordinate to the power
of the people, which is too apt to forget the maxima of
wisdom, in the consciousness of its strength ; and
thus its vigour, and not its impotence, will probably
be the cause of its ultimate destruction.” The same
distinguished Writer, and every recent traveller in
America, state the alarming fact that the more respect-
able classes in AUicrica take no part whatever in
political affairs. With them it seems
“ The post of honor is a private-station.”
“ The earlier American statesmen clearly foresaw the
tendency of a legislature wholly elective to weaken the
executive power; and they endeavoured in vain to
remedy the evil. “In a country like ours/’ says
Washington, “ a government of as much vigour as is
consistent with the perfect security of liberty is indis-
pensiblo. Liberty itself will find in such a govern-
ment, with power properly distributed and adjusted,
its surest guardian. It is indeed little else than a
name, when the government is too feeble to withstand
the enterprises of faction.” .
George Washington was surely no enemy to popular
liberty* and yet the language in which he denounces;
in his letters, the proceedings of the democratic socie-
ties that sprung up shortly after the establishment of
American Independence, is of the strongest kind.* It
is known to have been the intention of this great
chaUipion of American liberty to establish an order of
nobility in the United States to serve as a counterpoise
to the popular element. Even Jefferson, the most
powerful advocate of Democracy that ever existed, was
not unaware of the downward tendency of the American
* See Mb Life and Correspondence by Uphani.—Yol. ir.


legislative system, for he says—“ The executive po
in our government is not the only, perhaps not even
the principal object of my solicitude. The tyranny of
the legislature is really the danger most to be feared.”"
If such a man as Jefferson, at the very commencement
of American legislation—in spite of his ultra demo-
cratical principles—was forced thus to record his mis-
givings,—misgivings that subsequent history has but
too well verified; and which a few short years threaten
still more strongly to confirm, it is surely wise to pause
before we needlessly plunge into a system pregnant
with such consequences, when we are already in pos-
session of a scheme which has secured a rational liberty
to our forefathers for many centuries. And hero 1
would wish to guard my reader against the supposition
that lam an enemy to popular rights. The best part
of my life was spent in advocating to the utmost of
my poor ability the rights of the people; beginning
with the Reform Bill in Great Britain, and ending with
popular education and the crown lands question in
Australia. My principles are still unchanged. But
now that the rights of the people are fully conceded;
now that every householder in the colony has a voice in
its legislation; now that lbe Executive Government
is responsible to the people’s representatives, I do
observe with regret that the people, or some portion of
them, at the bidding of ill-advised leaders, still express
discontent, and seek to absorb in the popular element
another element equally necessary and essential to
good government. For I maintain that the conserva-
tive element is just as necessary to correct the rashness
of the democratic element, as the latter is necessary
to check the overbearing selfishness of the former.
Both are equally good and necessary when established
as an independent check on each other; both equally
bad when unchecked by mutual action on each other,
and on the monarchic element, which is the moderator
of both.
* Letter to Maddison,


The only objection of moment that I have heard
against the present Constitution of the Upper House
is, that we have not in this colony the class of persons
from which a 1 louse at all resembling the House of
Lords can be selected; and it is undoubtedly true, as
Earl Grey is reported to have remarked on this subject,
that there is no assembly on earth like that noble
House. But if we had waited for a Constitution till
we w T ere in a position to elect an Assembly like the
House of Commons, the present generation might have
been spared the agitation of the last twenty years.
If the objection applies to the Upper House, it applies
also to the Lower; and if the same degree of states-
manship were necessary here that is required in Great
Britain, we might exclaim with Shakspeare—
“ A plague on both your houses,”
And give up the matter in despair; for assuredly
nothing that we can either nominate or elect will come
up to such a mark. But neither is it necessary. Our
public men, far as they are below such ;i criterion, will
not suffer by a comparison with those of any other
colony in the world, and among them, and the other
colonists of education and character who have not yet
figured on the political arena, there might undoubtedly
be selected a score or two who would not be absolutely
out of place even in that noblest assembly on earth—
the House of Lords. The first selection indeed in-
volves a fearful responsibility; and on it will greatly
depend the degree of respect in which the Upper House
will be held ; but I believe the duty has fallen into safe
hands, and although some few errors may be committed,
the general result will, I am confident, not disappoint the
public. In any case it will be a wise policy if the
colonists, in judging of their personal merits,
“ Be to their faults a little blind,
And to their virtues very kind
in order that we may all pull together cheerily, and get
the new state-vessel under weigh.


Objections, mixed with ridicule, have also been
urged against the titled of honor proposed to be“con-
ferred on the members of the Upper House. But is
there any real sincerity in such objections ? Is there a
man among the objectors who Would nOt grasp at the
monosyllabic prefix, were it Within his reach ? or a
woman among their wives and daughters who would
despise the corresponding dissyllable ? Oii the con-
trary, I believe, and I have'been a traveller in my time,
that there is not a country in the world where social
rahk is so much coveted as in New SoUth Wale's; arid
Ido hot mention this as a fault, but the reverse. If
anyone thinks such grapes sour, it tnust be because
they are distant. Those who profess to be above
human nature arc self-deceivers at best, if not hy-
pocrites. T .
It has been further objected that the nominatiou of
the Upper House wOuld give Undue weight to the
Government, such as no British Government ever pos-
sessed. This would be a fatal objection if it had any
practical reality, but it is not so. After the first
nomination the members would be perfectly indepeh-
dent of any future administration, and the subsequent
nomination of individuals, as vacancies might occur
by death, would be quite insignificant. Were it other-
wise, however, the objection would cut two ways.
We, reformers of 1832, made no objection to Earl
Grey and Lord John Bussell when they swamped
the House of Lords to carry the Reform Bill. These
objectors forget that the government are virtually re-
sponsible to the people for their nominations to the
Upper House,’as well as for all their other acts.
Such are the only objections I have heard to the
nomination of the Upper House. The objections to
an‘Elective Upper House arc much more serious. It
must be constituted, I conceive, in one of three ways;
it must be elected by the same constituency that
returns the Lower House; by a constituency with a
higher property qualification, or by some system of


double election through the medium of the Lower
House. All three appear to me objectionable.
Ist. If both houses were elected by the Same con-
stituency, they would naturally represent the same
feelings, interests and prejudices; and for all purposes
of public usefulness they might as Veil sit in one
chamber as in two. And not only this, but they might
at once be invested with the power of choosing the
ministry, and performing all the executive functions of
government. For it must be apparent to every one
that with a responsible government* and two houses of
legislature popularly and similarly constituted, the
monarchic element Would be a perfect cipher in the
state. In such a government there would be neither
monarchy nor aristocracy, f but a pure and Unmixed
democracy* the first fruit of which would be anarchy*
and the second despotism. Even the warmest advo-
cates of an Elective .Upper House appear to have seen
the folly of a second chamber constituted exactly like?
the .first, and their favorite scheme seems to be, 1
2nd i A high property qualification for the consti-
tuency of the Upper Home, or for the candidates for
seats in it, or for both. But have they duly weighed
the result of such a scheme ? Are they prepared to
say that the wealthier men in New South Wales are,
in general, the best qualified persons to elect or be
elected to the aristocratic chamber ? Has personal
character nothing to do with such an assembly ? I
am. the last man who would offer offence to any class
of respectable citizens who have obtained the reward
of honest industry, but neither would I flatter the
assumptions of vulgar wealth; and I am sure ths-t
many of the wealthiest persons in this colony would,
themselves, feel the awkwardness of being thus con-,
stituted the peer-makers of the counHy j its aristo*
cracy in fact; and such of them as, with less judgment
should appear flattered by the distinction, would soon
bo made to feel, by their neighbours, the constituents
of the Lower House, the invidiousness of their posb


tion. Thus would be thrown between the rich and the
poor, which in this colony is no criterion of actual
social position, a hone of contention which ' would
shake the foundations of society, through the length
and breadth of the land. If the advocates of an
Elective Upper House see such difficulty in selecting
from the whole of the respectable colonists a few
persons qualified to represent with dignity the Con-
servative element, what are we to expect as the result
of an election by a mere plutocracy ? Is there the
least probability that such a house would command
equal respect with one constituted by the sworn
advisers of the crown, and selected, not from this or
that local clique, but from the educated, wealthy, and
respectable colonists, generally ?
3d. The scheme of double election, or nomination of
the Upper House by the Lower, is liable, though not
perhaps in the same degree, to the objection urged
against the first, namely, that it ignores the aristo-
cratic element altogether, and reduces the monarchic
element to a mere cipher, making the representative
of the sovereign the mere registrar of the acts of the
democracy. Houses so constituted, although they
were composed of the very best men in the country,
would become the veriest slaves of the unenlightened
mass, as led by the popular demagogues of the day.
Two other forms of an Elective Upper House were
suggested some years ago, one by Chief Justice
Sir Alfred Stephen, and the other by Mr. Justice
Dickinson. The work of the Chief Justice displayed
the well known ability and acuteness of its distin-
guished author, and proposed an Upper House to con-
sist of thirty members, namely, the three Judges; the
two Metropolitan Bishops : five holders of office; and
ten independent gentlemen nominated by the crown ;
and ten gentlemen of large property either elected by
the counties, or by the Lower House.* Much might
* Thoughts on the Constitution of a Second Legislature, by Sir
Alfred Stephen, Knight. Sydney, 1853.


be said in favor of this ingenious scheme; the prin-
cipal objection —one indeed anticipated, but not I think
fully answered by the learned author —is, that one
portion of the House owing its origin to the Crown and
the other to the people, the two would not, it is pro-
bable, act harmoniously. If the taunt of “ nominee”
should ever be bandied from one side of the House to
the other, as we have been accustomed to hear it, in
the old Council, the Upper House could hardly preserve
the dignified position which should be one of its dis-
tinctive attributes.
I have just read for the fourth time the letter ad-
dressed by Mr. Justice Dickinson to Sir Charles Ni-
cholson on this subject," and I will only say that if
the more tried and venerable scheme of a Nominated
Upper House, were not already the law ; or if the
fickleness of public opinion should yet disturb the
existing Constitution ; I would humbly, but earnestly
recommend that scheme to my fellow colonists. It has,
under such circumstances, a merit possessed by no
other scheme yet promulgated; it gives every voter
for the Lower House, that is every householder in the
colony, a direct voice in the election of every member
of the Upper House, while it preserves the Conserva-.
five element, (absolutely essential to constitutional
government,) intact. Judge Dickinson proposes the
creation, partly by the crown and partly by purchase,
of one hundred baronets of New South Wales ; that
either these shall elect from among themselves thirty
baronets to serve in one Parliament; or that the electors
for the Lower House shall elect thirty baronets to form
an Upper House; such house, in the latter case to serve
during three parliaments. For the details of this plan
must refer to the pamphlet itself, which, if it some-
what startle at a first reading, will improve after
* Sydney, Piddington, 1852.


a second and a third, if the reader be prepared by
previous study to discuss this most difficult and im-
portant subject.
I now submit the following conclusions to my fellow
electors :
Ist. That in all ages and countries civilized society
has been divided into distinct classes, having separate
tastes, prejudices and interests. In the whole history
of mankind, no civilized nation can be pointed to, as
an exception to this rule, which has its origin in the
very nature of man.
2nd. That a state governed, exclusively, by any one
of these classes has always been, and must in the
nature of things be, misgoverned; and that no such
exclusive system of government, whether democratic or
aristocratic, can be lasting.
3rd. That government by an absolute sovereign, in
like manner, degenerates into a tyranny. The lives of
a few good princes furnish slight exceptions to this
rule, but the proposition is still true. There is no
result of human action more certain than that wherever
great power exists, unchecked-—whether it be in the
hands of prince or people—it will be abused.
4th. That a government to be good and lasting must
be composed of all three elements, each duly recog-
nised, strong and independent in its action within its
legitimate boundary, but each balanced, checked and
controlled, without that boundary, by the other two.
sth. That the Legislative and Executive functions
of government are distinct. In the latter unity of
action is necessary to that strength without which the
sovereign would be powerless to promote the welfare of
her subjects at home, or command respect for them
abroad. This unity of action is effected by confiding
the executive functions of the government to the
monarch; the legislature abstaining from any direct in-
terference with such functions; but ensuring a propel!
discharge of them by its powder of compelling the rel


signation at any time of the ministers chosen by the
sovereign to execute them. There can never arise any
necessity for collision between the three orders thus
nicely balanced. When any difference arises, the re-
tirement of the ministry is the safety valve which
restores harmony to the troubled elements.
bth. That the Executive Government should possess
the power of conferring high and permanent marks of
distinction on subjects who have rendered distinguished
services to their country. This is not only just in
itself, but is of great public utility in stimulating others
to noble acts.
If thes e doctrines be true, it follows, that those in
this colony who seek to give a decided preponderance
to the popular element and to depress the two others,
are unconsciously destroying the balance of the consti-
tution, and hastening a revolution. I say, unconsciously ,
because although I know that there are some mis-
guided persons who wish to sever our connection with
great Britain, I do not believe that they have yet any
great weight in the electoral body; but let the still
loyal majority beware how they, by weakening the
conservative branches of the constitution, serve, with
equal effect, the cause of revolution and. anarchy. And
even to the republicans I would say, that if a revolution
were as desirable, as it is the reverse ; were the Bri-
tish authority at an end to-morrow in the Colony, all
the arguments for a threefold government with its
checks and balances, would be equally cogent as they
are now.
I believe our New South Wales constitution to be a
well considered and well adjusted measure ; the best by
far of those that have recently been established in our
different colonies. While it possesses in a subdued
character the conservative checks above described, the
democratic element is as strongly developed as is con-
sistent with safety to the people themselves. Surely
this ought to satisfy their wishes. A constitution is


not like a “ Scab in Sheep Bill” or a “ Vagrant: Act,”
to be altered every session. Years and many years
must elapse before the best constitution that ever
human wit devised can be brought into perfect opera-
tion. Many errors will probably be committed ; many
unforeseen difficulties may arise; much new expe-
rience will have to be gained, on all sides, before con-
stitutional government can for the first time be per-
fectly established in any colony. If then our public
men, instead of devoting their energies to worK the
constitution, such as it is, waste their time in attempt-
ing to bring it into some popular state of utopian per-
fection, the certain result will be that the wdiole in-
stitution will be a complete failure, a consummation
surely to be deprecated by every right minded colonist.
The constitution may be imperfect. All human things
are so ; but it is modelled on the best constitution that
ever existed, and few 7 of the civilized countries of Eu-
rope have ever possessed one so liberal. Let us not
fill into the error of others who, aiming at an ideal
perfection which exists not, rejected a constitutional go-
vern ment, because it w r as not “ hammered on their own
anvil.” The celebrated French Assembly contained
some of the ablest men and greatest orators that ever
existed, and many of them doubtless w r ere quite sincere
in the wish to give their country a perfect constitution.
The great democratic statesman Jefferson, wdio was re-
siding at Paris at that crisis, will be an unsuspected
witness of the result of their error in attempting to
carry abstract notions of human freedom into practical
operation, without regard to those checks which human
imperfection render necessary in working them out.
“I was much acquainted,” says Jefferson “ with the
leading patriots of the Assembly. Being from a
county widch had successfully passed through a similar
reformation, they were disposed to my acquaintance,
and had some confidence in me. I urged most strenu-
ously an immediate compromise; to secure what the


government was now willing to yield, and to trust to
future occasions for what might be still wanting. It
was well understood that the king would grant at this
time, 1. Freedom of the person by Habeas Corpus ; 2.
Freedom of conscience ; 3. Freedom of the press; 4
Trial by jury ;5. A representative Legislature; f.’An-
nual meetings ; 7. The origination of laws; 8. The ex-
clusive right of taxation and appropriation ; and 9. The
responsibility of ministers; and with the exercise
of these powers, they could obtain in future what-
ever might be necessary to improve and preserve
their constitution. They thought otherwise, how-
ever, and events have proved their lamentable error.
For after thirty years of war, foreign and domestic, the
loss of millions of lives, the prostration of private hap-
piness, and the foreign subjugation of their country
for a time, they have obtained no more, nor that even
securely.”*
Well might he say u nor that even securely” ! And
had Jefferson lived to witness three more French Re-
volutions which we have seen, and to compare the
degree of liberty offered to Frenchmen, in his day, as
above stated, before a drop of blood was shed, with the
small measure of freedom they are now said to enjoy
after four blood-stained revolutions, his gradually
cooling, if never extinct, faith in unmixed democracy
must have been shaken to the very foundation. And
if this is the most modern and striking instance, it is
by no means the only one presented to us by history
as a warning against confiding the government of states
to the unrestrained popular will.
It is to warn my fellow electors against the error
committed by the French, and other patriots, of aiming
at too much, and thereby losing all, that I have ventured
to put these thoughts together, and lay them before
* Memoirs of Thomas Jefferson, Yol. I. p. 8.


the public. lam no candidate for their suffrages, nor,
probably, would the promulgation of these opinions
serve me as such. But I have a common interest with
them in the general welfare. An ardent admirer of
constitutional liberty from my earliest youth, when J
found this colony struggling to emerge from its degraded
state of a penal settlement, the rights of its people had
no more active and willing advocate during seven years
of that struggle. But I believe that every really valu-
able right has now been conceded. There is little or
nothing now wanting to us that loyal subjects can
desire. The abstract rights that some profess to ad-
vocate are incompatible with the very existence of civil
society. “ How” says Burke “can any man claim,
under the conventions of civil society, rights which do
not suppose its existence ? Men cannot enjoy the
rights of a civil and an uncivil state together
that he may secure some liberty he makes a surrender,
in trust, of the whole of it.”
This is the political philosophy that the constituency
should now be taught, instead of the new career of
agitation that has been suggested. The time for legi-
timate agitation, on this subject, has gone by. There
will of course be always parties and party questions in
our little state, as in greater communities : each party
will have its struggle for place and power, in its turn;
but the Constitution should be held sacred on all sides.
It may, in the lapse of ages, require some slight reforms.
New cities will arise to be enfranchised : Gattons and
Old Sarums may have to be disfranchised, but not even
then will the well tried principle of our Constitution
require material alteration. That principle, revered
and guarded by Britons for centuries, has made the in-
habitants of a small Island the greatest nation in the
world; and the same principle, if handed down by us
to our children intact, and if they are taught to venerate
it as wo have been taught to venerate its glorious pro-


to type, will, there is every reason to hope, secure for
them the same high place among the future kingdoms
of the South, which their forefathers have long enjoy-
ed among the older nations of the world.
James Swan, Printer, Brisbane-


BI6UO
p tfS
A/ c£f
