

A PLEA
FOR THE
Abolition of the importation
OF
OPIUM.


A PLEA
FOR THE
ABOLITION OF THE IMPORTATION
OF
OPIUM
By QUONG TART.
Sold in Aid of the Bulli Relief Fund.
*
SJtttaws*
JOHN SANDS, PRINTER. GEORGE STREET.
1887.




A PLEA FOR THE ABOLITION OF THE
IMPORTATION OF OPIUM.
By QUONG TART.
(The Profits on the Sale of this Pamphlet will be handed to the
Committee for the Relief of the Sufferers by the recent mining
disaster at Bulli.)
During the year 1884 a petition was presented to the Honorable
the Executive Council of N.S.W. praying for the abolition of the
importation of opium to this colony, except for strictly medicinal
purposes ; but the reception it met with was not nearly so favorable
as was anticipated, notwithstanding the fact that the petition con-
tained upwards of 4,000 signatures of every nation and creed. No
doubt 4,000 is a small number compared with the whole population
of the colony, but be it understood they consisted of the names of
the principal clergy of every Church, members of Parliament, nearly
seventy mayors and aldermen, besides other leading residents of
N.S.W, the Press, and over 500 Chinese.
Mr. Hardie, who was then mayor of Sydney, and the Rev. Dr.
Steel accompanied me when I presented the petition, in the presence
of the Hon. G. R. Dibbs, to Sir A. Stuart. Sir Alexander was
quite in favor (as regards himself) of the abolition of the opium
traffic, but he looked at it in this way :—Were it not imported into
this colony it would be smuggled into it from the various other
colonies ; consequently, he said, “ the smoking would not cease, but
still the colony would lose the revenue, which is considerable.”
Our interview terminated by Sir A. Stuart promising to enter into
communication with the adjoining colonies in order to ascertain
whether they would do all in their power to suppress the trade. I
fancy, however, that the other duties which our Parliament had to
perform were regarded as of more importance and the opium ques-
tion was forgotten, for nothing more has come of it, and the result
of the action of those who interested themselves in the matter has
been nil. Ido not feel at all disheartened over that attempt, but
intend to use all the personal influence I possess, and with the
assistance of my friends to make another attempt.


The Hon G. R. Dlbbs, assisted by Inspector Seymour and his
officers, certainly deserve great praise for the manner in which they
went with me to the various common Chinese places, to look into
the condition of affairs for themselves Some persons were caught
indulging in the use of the juice, while others heard of the intended
visit and were prepared. I really think that official visit in the
city, Mr. Inspector Brennan’s exertions in the country, and my own
(the time I was sent by Inspector-General Fosbery to investigate
the Chinese camps) frightened a number from commencing to
smoke and restrained those who had just begun. But now, through
the matter being allowed to lie in abeyance so long, they are, I am
sure, as bad if not even worse than before.
I wish to make it as clearly understood as possible that were a
law to be passed against the importation of the juice, it would not
only be an inestimable blessing bestowed upon the Chinese in
general but upon all classes of the community, for this drug, when
indulged in by any person a few times, has such seductive qualities
that it is almost an utter impossibility to keep it from him so long
as money can procure it. It is not to be compared with intoxicating
liquors, for people often turn against drink, but opium they never
take a dislike to —not even in their dying moments ; and the only
way to prevent indulgence is to put it quite beyond the reach of
those who have become slaves to it, and that can easily be done by
allowing none but chemists to sell it, and then to those only who
produce a note from a duly qualified medical practitioner. It may
be mentioned that that sold by chemists is vastly different from that
used by the Chinese—it undergoes a different preparation, and it
would be of no use to them for smoking.
There would still be a slight revenue upon opium, so that the
Government would not lose all revenue derived from it. Then
again, the Chinese who were in the habit of smoking it would
smoke tobacco instead, and that would give an additional revenue in
another direction. But I am sure none of the worthy gentlemen
comprising our present Parliament would say “import opium for the
sake of the revenue,” because such broad-minded and highly princi-
pled men as we have amongst our freetraders and protectionists
would consider the saving of souls long before the mere question of
£s. d. I feel positive that there is not one gentleman who would
like to see anyone belonging to him using this slow poison, but if it
is not stopped, they are sure, some of them, sooner or later to be
trapped. Then why should they not put themselves together
as a body and stop it at onee ? Now is the time and the best
time, while we have such a noble Governor as Lord Carrington,
in the jubilee year of our most gracious Sovereign’s reign. What
more notable event could New South Wales do or have in
this year than the “ Abolition of Opium Importation ? ” I am


sure every sensible and well-thinking man will say “ None.” I
am almost certain that if New South Wales showed the example by
stopping the traffic, Victoria would follow suit, judging from the
way Mr. Service, who was then Premier, the Hon. Graham Berry,
several members of Parliament, and the Inspector-General of Police
treated me while I was trying to get an insight into the state of
affairs as regards opium-smoking in that colony. They took an
active part with me in visiting some of the Chinese places in Mel-
bourne. We were a little baffled in onr first visit, but the second
proved more successful, for we caught some (consisting of European
women and Chinese) in the very act of smoking. The whole of the
newspapers of that colony were in full favor of my exertions, as were
also the leading Chinese merchants ; and in Ballarat a meeting was
held and everyone present supported the movement to stop the trade,
and promised to do all that could be done to help me when called
upon. That in itself speaks volumes.
When opium was first imported into China (by the East India
Company), the authorities of that country did not see the evil, but
as soon as they discovered it they tried to put a stop to it. Alas !
it was too late, for they were prevented by international agreements,
and all they could do was to shut their eyes and say no more. It is
a most lamentable sight to view the misery existing in some of the
habitations in China, caused simply by the use of opium. Homes
that once were happiness itself, and supplied with every comfort,
were denuded even of furniture of any description—all had been
sold or disposed of by other means simply to gratify a taste for this
cursed drug. I know of one case where the father of a family who
used to be pretty well to do took to opium-smoking. His means
ran short and he sold all he could, leaving the family quite destitute,
to get money to buy opium. One of his sons became seriously ill
and died. He had no means to bury him, and when he asked people
for assistance he was refused, for no one in China will look upon or
help an opium-smoker—no matter what his troubles may be. The
mother, when things were in this terrible plight, gave to him some
money (she had saved by her own hard industry, unknown to him)
to go and get their son a coffin. The father when he got the
money, instead of putting it to the use intended, took it off to an
opium-house and smoked it all away. The mother anxiously waited
for his return, but no. A messenger was despatched, who soon
returned with the news that her husband was housed in an opium-
shop, and had never been near the undertaker. This is only one
case out of hundreds similar. Why not then try to stop it in this
young country, before it reaches a state equal to what I have
described ?
Evidences of the evils caused by opium-smoking were given me
by Signor Eaimondi, the Boman Catholic Bishop of Hongkong,


during a conversation the other day. The Bishop has lived in
China more than twenty-eight years, moving from one province to
another, and he says it is totally impossible to thoroughly describe
the miseries the families of Chinese opium-smokers undergo. He
goes further, and says he would not agree to opium being brought
into this colony even for chemists except in a liquid condition.
Any Chinaman known to use opium is not admitted to the Church.
I think I can safely say that in twelve months’ time after the pro-
hibition of the importation, all gentlemen who have spoken publicly
against the Chinese would speak very differently. Words cannot
express how dreadfully hurt the respectable Chinese feel when things
are said publicly against them, for the gentlemen who denounce
make no allowance but class all alike, although that is anything but
fair, for no criminal case against the Chinese has ever come from
any of the respectable business houses, large or small, but has in
every case originated in places where opium is used. I had a con-
versation lately with some of the large Chinese importers, and they
admit it is a cursed evil, and would be pleased to see it stopped from
coming into the colonies. They said, “ But as long as it is allowed
to be imported, why should we not benefit as well as any other
man.” It is through this opium that ths Chinese get indolent—in
some eases too lazy or weak even to keep their persons clean ; that
they crowd together in very badly ventilated rooms, where a number
can, as they think, enjoy the poison together, and that horrible smell
so many people complain of is caused. Then again—and worse
than all—these men lose all inclination for work of any kind, and so
commence that wicked and pernicious vice gambling, simply because
they can do it with little exercise of strength. I don’t say for
one moment that the police have not done their duty as far as
hunting some of these gambling dens out, but, I do say there are a
number of places that are still to be found. Why not save the
police this “ blind man’s buff” work by stopping the opium. Then
the gambling would cease ; and more than that, the Chinese, if they
intend to remain in the colony, would completely reform with the
assistance of the different Chinese clergymen (Church of England,
Wesleyan, Presbyterian, and Roman Catholic), and become more
attached to the European customs, and in time form a splendid
addition to the workers of this colony. Then some of the better
class of people in China, when they find that the Chinese are being
appreciated and held in a higher estimation by the people here, will
cast in their lot among us. Whereas at present we have coming to
the colony a very mixed class, for in numerous cases people are sent
here by their relatives or parents because no good can be got out of
them through their having taken to opium. I heard and saw (while
on a visit to China in the year 1881) of some cases where the
parents went so far as to threaten to murder their sons unless they


gave up smoking opium, but even that did not frighten them—in
fact, took no effect ; so rather than see them go to ruin the parents
gave them some money and sent them about their business. And
where did they go? Well, to the place where they knew they could
get any amount of opium without any remonstrance from anyone.
At the time of the general outcry against the Chinese, the
Government had a thorough investigation made of the Chinese
camps in Wagga, Narrandera, Deniliquin, Albury, and Hay, in order
to find out the cause, and it was the outcome of these men using
opium. Not only the Chinese in these five places visited were found
to use this drug, but also seventy-five European women, and out of
the seventy-five fifty were confirmed smokers. Now, readers, you
can imagine for yourselves the results, when so many were found in
five places alone.
If the Government had stopped the importation then, the cry
would have ceased ere now, and as long as the use of opium is
legalised, why cry out against the Chinese ? Cry out rather against
the Government for not stopping it, for the power is theirs and in
their hands.
During my last attempt to get this curse removed, numberless
squatters and other gentlemen wished me every success, for they have
had in their employ Chinamen who smoke and those who do not.
Speaking from experience, they said “ Get the traffic stopped for all
that is good, because it is a cursed evil. I would sooner employ a
drunkard any day than an opium-smoker.” So I pray that all will
with one voice cry “ Stop the importation and if anyone be found
after a certain date selling the opium, except chemists, let a very
heavy fine be inflicted or a long term of imprisonment. The
smuggling would be very slight, and could be easily detected—if by
no other means, the smell. The present large importers would have
more honor than disgrace themselves by importing after the law was
passed prohibiting its sale.
I wish all to understand that I have no other motive for taking
up this great cause than true wishes and good feelings for the benefit
and good of all, this generation and succeeding ones, living in New
South Wales and even over the whole of Australia.
The following is a copy of a petition about to be presented to
the Honorable the Speaker of the House of the Legislative Assembly
of New South Wales :
The Petition of the undersigned Citizens of the Colony of New
South Wales, and also of Chinese Residents within the same :
Humbly Shbweth :
1. That your Petitioners, having in view the well-being of
this community, regard with feelings of alarm the largely
increasing consumption of opium by Chinese residents of the
colony.


2. That the use of opium is exceedingly hurtful to those
persons who habitually indulge in that narcotic ; and also to
the general population, for the following reasons, namely :
(a) That the constant use of opium is calculated to
impair the moral and physical systems, and consequently
to induce habits of indolence.
(b) That by reason of the indolence so produced, per-
sons are unfitted for and undesirous of pursuing any
mechanical or other useful occupation ; and to this cause
are to be attributed the gambling and criminal propensities
of those Chinese who consume opium.
(c) That the conditions under which opium is con-
sumed in this community cause large numbers of Chinese
to assemble in ill-ventilated and crowded apartments,
whereby, in addition to the essential evil arising from the
use of the opium, these resorts are turned into hotbeds for
the generation of fevers and cognate diseases.
(d) That many European girls and women, after being
induced to use the narcotic, become habitues of the same
resorts, and scenes of the grossest immorality ensue.
3. That your Petitioners desire to point out that the use of
opium in China is confined to the very lowest orders of Chinese
society, and that those using it are unfavorably regarded by
their fellow-countrymen.
4. That in the event of the introduction of opium into New
South Wales being prohibited by law, there will be very little
inducement for its consumers to come to this colony ; while on
the other hand, Chinese of a superior class, recognising that
under the altered conditions their presence on these shores will
be more favorably regarded, will, in all probability, cast in their
lot among us.
Your Petitioners therefore humbly pray :
That at an early date a measure may be framed and laid
before Parliament, prohibiting the importation of opium into
this colony, excepting for medicinal purposes ; and that such
measure may also provide against the sale of opium excepting
for medicinal purposes, and where the purchaser produces a satis-
factory prescription or certificate from a duly and legally qualified
medical practitioner requiring that the same may be supplied.
And furthermore that the said measure may be so framed
as to come into operation at the expiration of six months from
the passing thereof.
And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray, &c.,
&c.
Dated at Sydney this fifth day of April, in the year of our Lord one
thousand eight hundred and eighty-seven.
