

PURITY SERIES No. 6.
AUSTRALASIAN WHITE CROSS
LEAGUE.
A PLEA FOR
SANITARY
AND MORAL
PROPHYLAXIS
FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION.
BY
PRINCE A. MORROW,
M.D.


Australasian White Cross League.
OBJECTS.
PROMOTING-
I. Purity among Men and Boys.
11. —A Chivalrous Respect for Womanhood.
111. —The Preservation of the Young from Con-
tamination,
IV. A Higher Tone of Public Opinion.
The Society emphasises obligations already bind-
ing on Christians ; it does not impose new ones.
"THE WHITE CROSS OBLIGATIONS.”
1. To treat all girls and women with respect,
and endeavour to protect them from wrong and
degradation.
2. To endeavour to put down all indecent language
and coarse jests.
3. Tf maintain the law of purity as equally binding
on men and women.
4. To endeavour to spread these principles among
my companions, and to try and help my younger
brothers.
5. To use every means to fulfil the command,
“ Keep THYSELF pure.”
.■ ' :


INTRODUCTION.
THIS pamphlet, with which a certain
liberty of amendment and omission
has been taken, is reprinted for the
benefit of Australian readers with the permis-
sion of the writer, Prof. Prince A. Morrow, a
distinguished American surgeon. It is not
intended that this pamphlet should be cir-
culated indiscriminately. The Committee of
the Australasian White Cross League reprint
it with the hope that it may find its way into
the hands especially of ministers, teachers,
and legislators.
Of its value it is needless to speak. The
facts contained in it, which apply with equal
force to Australia as to the United States,
should be known to all who hold positions of
responsibility with regard to the young, and
who are interested in their welfare.
A perusal of it will surely convince many
of the value of the work of the White Cross
League, and will lead to more generous sup-
port being accorded to this work.


A Plea for Sanitary & Moral
Prophylaxis.
At first glance it might appear that the'
prevention of the diseases which have their
origin in the Social evil, as of other infec-
tious diseases dangerous to the public
health, lies exclusively within the province
of the medical profession. But experience
has shown that this class of diseases cannot
be dealt with as a purely sanitary problem;
they are not susceptible to the application
of the sanitary methods ordinarily employed'
against contagious diseases. The cause of
these diseases resides in social conditions
which the sanitarian cannot control and their
communicative mode cannot be reached by
the strong arm of repression.
In their essential nature they are not
merely diseases of the human body, but
diseases of the social organism. The pro-
blem of their prevention or control involves-
not only questions of hygiene, but questions


of morality—questions affecting the most in-
timate relations of our social life. This pro-
blem is most difficult and delicate and re-
quires for its solution not only a thorough
knowledge of existing evil conditions, but a
largeness of ideas and a breadth of view
which is not possible to those who look at it
from the sanitary side alone.
That there is a need, and a most urgent
need, for strenuous effort is abundantly evi-
dent from a consideration of the following
facts :
It is now generally recognized that the
class of diseases comprehended under the
general term venereal , together with alcohol
and tuberculosis, constitute the three great
modern plagues which afflict humanity.
Tuberculosis has been subjected to sanitary
control, leagues have been formed against
alcohol, and legislative aid has been sought
to limit its evil influence, but the venereal
plague is practically ignored and its ravages-
are unchecked and apparently unnoticed.
THE MAGNITUDE OF THE VENEREAL PERIL.
The significance of syphilis as a social dan-
ger has long been appreciated by the medical


profession. Years ago Prof. Gross declared
that “a greater scourge than yellow fever,
cholera and smallpox combined is quietly in-
stalled in our midst, sapping the foundations
of society, poisoning the sources of life, ren-
dering existence miserable, and deteriorating
the whole human family.” According to Sir
Thomas Watson, “it counts its victims not
only in the ranks of the vicious and self-in-
dulgent, but among virtuous women and in-
nocent children by hundreds and thousands.”
When this was written, less than a genera-
tion ago, it was not known, even by the
medical profession, that under the guise of
what was considered a simple local disease
there lurked an infection which, respect
to the character and sum total of its dan-
gers, is a greater curse to the human family
than syphilis. Modern science has shown
us that gonorrhea, which is regarded by the
bearer as of no more significance than a
common cold, which is treated as a joke or
with the contempt of ignorance, is the
greatest social pest of the age.
Since these diseases are not subject to
official registration the amount of venereal
morbidity does not admit of mathematical
expression. But in Europe it has been esti


mated by a distinguished authority that fully
75 per cent, of the adult male population
contract gonorrhea, and that from 10 to 15
per cent, have syphilis. Venereal morbi-
dity is larger in urban than in rural popula-
tions, but everywhere its incidence falls most
heavily upon the young.
EFFECTS UPON THE INDIVIDUAL.
The large proportion of individuals in-
fected by venereal disease get well, some of
them die, many of them suffer for years
or during their entire life from its conse-
quences.
Syphilis is a far more serious disease than
was formerly supposed. Every year adds to
our knowledge of the number, variety, and
gravity of its far-reaching complications and
especially its morbid determinations to the
internal organs most essential to life. Many
affections of the brain, the cord, the liver,
the heart, and the arterial system have their
origin in syphilis. Of all the internal organs
the brain is the most frequently affected by
syphilis, and paralysis is the most common
termination. While syphilis, in the adult,
is not a frequent cause of immediate death*


/he changes set up in certain organs or sys-
tems of organs are often the essential cause
of death at a more or less remote period.
Syphilis kills people to-day as it did in the
16th century.
Gonorrhea is an infection which, in addi-
tion to its local inflammatory complications,
which often render the individual sterile, is
capable of causing constitutional complica-
tions of a serious or even fatal character—
such as deforming and incurable inflamma-
tions of the joints, pericarditis, meningitis,
peritonitis, etc. The scientifically demon-
strated danger of gonorrhea is especially
manifest in its serious effects upon the pelvic
organs of women. It is the most common
cause of inflammatory affections peculiar to
women, which ruin her health, extinguish
her conceptional capacity, and condemn her
to a life-long invalidism or the sacrifice of
her reproductive organs to save her life.
The chief significance of these diseases as
a social danger arises from the fact that they
specifically affect the organs of generation—-
they damage or destroy the functions
through which life is perpetuated, and thus
defeat the social aim of marriage.


EFFECTS UPON THE FAMILV.
Pinard found that in 10,000 consecutive
cases of abortions, 42 per cent, were caused
by syphilis; the remaining 58 per cent, due
to all other causes combined, artificial or
otherwise. The destructive effect of syphilis
upon the offspring is still further manifest
in children stillborn at full term or who die
shortly after birth. The mortality from
hereditary syphilis ranges from 60 to 80 per
cent., while those who survive are affected
with various organic defects and degenera-
tive changes which unfit them for the battle
of life. If they reach maturity and marry
they may transmit to their descendants—the
third generation—the same class of organic
defects which they have inherited.
It has been computed that at the very low-
est estimate, hereditary syphilis kills every
year in France alone, 20,000 children, which
represents per cent, of the mortality from
all causes combined. It may be said that it
is better that these children should die than
survive as a race of inferior beings; it is to
be remembered, however, that but for the
fact of syphilis in the parents these children
might have been born in conditions of vita-
lity and physical vigour.


Gonorrhea is an even more potent factor
of depopulation than syphilis, from its
greater prevalence and more frequent intro-
duction into married life and its inhibitory
influence upon the conceptional capacity. It
is computed that 50 per cent, of gonorrheal
women are absolutely sterile, and that
gonorrheally infected men are responsible
for 20 per cent, of sterile marriages, when
the sterility is not of choice, but of in-
capacity.
While gonorrhea is insusceptible ot here-
ditary transmission, the child born of an in-
fected mother is exposeo to inoculation of the
eyes with the virus, resulting in the terrible
affliction of blindness. Eighty per cent, of
the blindness of the newborn is caused by
gonorrhea, while it is computed that from
20 to 30 per cent, of blindness from all causes
is due to gonorrhea.
FREQUENCY OF MARITAL CONTAMINATION.
The amount of venereal morbidity in mar-
ried life is an unknown and unknowable
quantity. The germs of gonorrhea may re-
main latent for years in the male urethra, giv-
ing rise to few or no symptoms, and yet re-
taining their power to produce infection in


others. Thousands of married women are in-
fected without knowing or even suspecting
the name or nature of the disease. The in-
sidious character of the infection, especially
of gonorrhea, favours dissimulation, and
when known, every motive—pride, self-re-
spect, shame —prompts to its concealment.
Jt may he a startling statement , hut never-
theless true y that there is more venereal in-
fection among virtuous wives than among
professional prostitutes in the United States.
Noeggerath stated that of every thousand
men married in New York 800 had latent
gonorrhea from which their wives became in-
fected. Admit that this is an exaggeration
—a gross exaggeration, even—say 8 per
cent, instead of 80 per cent.; of the 16,000,000
married women in the United States 8 per
cent, would give over one and a quarter mil-
lion infected from gonorrhea alone.
Unfortunately, the diseases of vice when
transplanted to the bed of virtue develop their
worst effects. The function of marriage is
to create life, and in fulfilling this function
the individual danger of the disease, especi-
ally of gonorrhea, is greatly accentuated.
Pregnancy often transforms a latent and
hitherto inoffensive gonorrhea into an in


tensely virulent infection, and the process of
parturition opens the way to its upward as-
cension to a vital organ —the peritoneum—
with results dangerous to life.
We are accustomed to recommend mar-
riage to young men as the surest preservative
against venereal infection. Can we with a
clear conscience recommend to young
women marriage with men who have led dis-
sipated lives? Surely there is something
rotten in a social system which places no
restriction upon that individual liberty which
permits men to poison their wives with
venereal disease —which throws no sanitary
safeguard around that relation which society
has instituted for its own perpetuation.
Certainly there can be no severer arraign-
ment of that false system of education which
directly fosters, and even renders compul-
sory, the ignorance which is largely respon-
sible for these social crimes.
It cannot be gainsaid that the vast ma-
jority of infections in married life are effected
through ignorance—the opinion of all physi-
cians who have had much to do with this class
of cases is concurrent upon this point. The
average man is not a criminal —he does not
wreck the life and health of his wife and


children knowingly and wilfully. In most
cases he does it through ignorance of the
nature and terrible consequences of his
disease —ignorance of the prolonged duration
of its contagious activity, and, especially,
ignorance of the fact that it is often infectious
after apparent cure.
REMEDIAL MEASURES.
The cardinal principles of prophylaxis are,
(1) To preserve the healthy from infection;
(2) To prevent those already infected from in-
fecting others.
It is the concensus of opinion among those
who have studied this subject that a general
diffusion of knowledge, respecting the dan-
gers, individual and social, of venereal
diseases, their modes of communication,
direct and indirect, would constitute the most
efficient means of prophylaxis. This know-
ledge would be of inestimable benefit to the
young in preventing ignorant and reckless
exposure to dangers which many of them do
not even know exist. Of all the young men
in Australia, between the ages of sixteen
and twenty-one years, how many have re-
ceived even the most elementary instruction
in the physiology of the organs of genera


tion? They are launched into the world
without any knowledge of the hygiene of the
sexual function or the dangers which attend
its irregular exercise. They have been
taught nothing of the diseases which are
almost inseparable from commerce with bad
women, or of the serious consequences to
their health which those diseases may entail.
It is believed by medical men who are most
competent to judge these questions that
ignorance is responsible for a large propor-
tion of infections among the young, and
that education would preserve thousands
from exposure.
To whom this education should be ad-
dressed —what should be its scope or extent,
and how, or through what agencies, it should
be imparted —are subjects for the most ear-
nest consideration. As regards the latter
point, it might be assumed that this en-
lightenment should come through the agency
of the medical profession. But the physi-
cian’s opportunities for this educational work
are comparatively restricted. He rarely
comes in contact with the young man except
in his capacity as a patient, after the harm
is already done. The mode of this education
cannot be individual , it must be collective


and conveyed through means of lectures,
conferences, tracts, or circulars. The
physician cannot organize popular lectures;
he may write papers exposing the dangers
of venereal diseases, but they never reach
the general public.
The White Cross League seeks to be a
centre for the diffusion of this enlighten-
ment; to become an influential force in effect-
ing a reform in an educational system which
now neglects all instruction in the hygiene
of one of the most important functions of the
body ; and to propagate the idea that this
hygienic education forms the most essential
part of the training of the morals of young
men.
Whatever may be the value of education
as a preservative against exposure to infec-
tion, it will certainly constitute a valuable
prophylactic measure against the introduc-
tion of these infections into marriage. Medi-
cal men now look upon certain marriages
as moral crimes. When the plea of ignor-
ance can no longer be invoked to' shield
those who carry disease and death into their
families they should be declared legal
crimes, involving not only civil but penal
responsibility.


In fulfilling the second indication, the
most valuable prophylactic measure is the
prompt sterilization of sources of contagion
by efficient treatment. To accomplish this
object the treatment should be gratuitous
and available to all —not so much in the in-
terest of the individual as in the interest
of otlv rs he might expose to infection.
Without entering fully into this sub-
ject, it may be said that the provisions for
the treatment of this class of sufferers are
notoriously inadequate, restrictive, and not
adapted to the nature of the disease. Vene-
real patients are usually debarred entrance
into our general hospitals, and discriminated
against’ in various ways.
ATTITUDE OF SOCIETY.
In the presence of this peril which so
seriously menaces the public health and is
fraught with such momentous consequences
to the family and the race, the social forces
are apathetic and inactive. Society does
not seek to deliver itself from this evil, its
only preoccupation is to cover up and con-
ceal, to shut its eyes to its existence. From
the mistaken idea that these diseases are
always contracted through voluntary expo


sure and bear the stamp of immorality, their
victims are without the pale of public sym-
pathy or public protection. The public does
not know that the immense majority of in-
fections occur in the young, the inexper-
ienced, and the irresponsible through ignor-
ance and lack of moral training; it has no
conception of the number of innocent wo-
men and children who are infected in the
marriage relation.
It will be seen then, that the diseases which
it is one of the chief objects of the White
Cross League to prevent are pre-eminently
Social Diseases—they aftect the dearest in-
terests of society, they enter into the most
sacred relations of human life, they ser-
iously menace the welfare of the family and
the future of the race, they constitute a
social danger of the greatest magnitude.
They are diseases from which society suffers,
and yet society views them with indifference,
while the medical profession regards them
with the deepest concern, and seeks to limit
their spread. But the medical profession
recognizes its inability to cope successfully
with conditions which lie entirely without
the sphere of sanitary influence or control.
We ask all earnest minded people—whose


position in the community commands res-
pect, whose opinions carry weight, who can
influence public sentiment, institute educa-
tional reforms and secure needed legislation
—to co-operate with the White Cross League
in combating this Social Peril. This move-
ment, which has for one of its chief objects
the preservation of the youth of this coun-
try from ignorant exposure to infection and
the safeguarding of marriage from the des-
ecration of loathsome and dangerous dis-
eases, appeals to that humanitarian instinct
which prompts protection to the irrespon-
sible ignorant, as well as the innocent and
helpless members of society.
Note. —Further information on this subject
can be obtained in Professor Morrow’s book,
“Social Diseases and Their Remedy.’’
William Brooks & Co., Ltd., Printers, Sydney.


Aids to Health and Chastity.
/he following suggestions are supplied through the
courtesy of a Doctor of Medicine, who is also a
Fellow of the Royal Society :
Moderation in eating and drinking. Avoid late suppers, and
the use of intoxicants
Sleep on a hard bed, and on your side —not on your back.
Too little clothing rather than too much, and keep your bedroom
window open. In the morning get up as soon as you awake. If
you awake in the night, to urinate is sometimes a good plan.
There is no greater aid to chastity than plenty of cold water.
If possible, take a cold bath every morning ; failing this, sponge
locally, or better still —all over w ith cold water, and dry yourself
energetically with a rough towel, rubbing the limbs towards the
extremities. Keep all parts of the body perfectly clean, and to
prevent irritation, remove all accumulation under the foreskin.
The bowels should be opened regularly every day.
Take plenty of exercise, and let your time be fully occupied.
Breathe through the nose, and accustom yourself to fully inflate
your lungs.
If you are troubled with night discharges, and they do not
occur more than once or twice a fortnight, there is no cause for
alarm. Should you wish for advice, visit a properly qualified
medical man, and under no circumstances go to quacks.
The pernicious habit of self-abuse is ruinous both to the
body and the mental powers. No one can hope to obtain to a
virile manhood who indulges in this debasing practice.
To gain a mastery over the body, the mind must be kept
pure. Don’t think of wrong things, or read or look at anything
that excites impure thoughts. Try and put down all smutty
talk, and if coarse jests are made, do not laugh.
The prevalent habit of cigarette smoking is injurious to all—
especially is it to be avoided by youths, in whom it undoubtedly
induces a lack of proper sexual control.
The best way to overcome your passions, is to be filled
with a noble passion for saving others.


White GmsPublications.
s. d.
I. What isthe White Cross League
Bishop Barry 0 I
11. Purity and Impurity— for lads 15
years ..... 6 1
111. The Choice Between Purity and
Impurity— for men --.01
IV. The Training of Children in Purity
—for parents - 0 1
V. True Manliness — for men, /. E. H. 0 1
VI. A Plea for Sanitary and Moral
Prophylaxis. By Professor Bruce
Merried, M.D. - 0 1
VII. Needs and Methods of Purity
Teaching 0 1
“ The Power of Womanhood : or
Mothers & Sons,” Ellice Hopkins 1 3
“The Story of Life,” Ellice Hopkins - 0 9
Dr. Sperry’s Confidential Talks with
Young Men 1 3
Dr. Sperry’s Confidential Talks with
Young Women - - - - 1 3
Australasian White Cross League,
56 ELIZABETH STREET, SYDNEY.
