

AUSTRALIAN
ABORIGINES PROTECTION SOCIETY
A PORTION OP THE
PUBLIC MEETING, held on FRIDAY, Oct. 19th, 1838,
in the Hall of the Mechanics’ School of Arts,
Containing the SPEECH of
G. A. ROBINSON, ESQ.,
Commandant of Flinders * Island, and Chief Protector of
Aborigines in the Colony.
REPRINTED FROM THE "COLONIST,” OF OCT. 31st, 1838,
Bx NOYES & SON, BLADUD LIBRARY, BATH, ENGLAND.
1865.




REPORT.
The adjourned public meeting of this Society was held on
Friday, October 19th, 1838, in the Hall of the Mechanics’
School of Arts. The attendance, particularly of ladies, was,
if possible, more numerous and respectable than at the former
meeting. The important statements of Mr. Ho bin son were
listened to with the deepest interest, and appeared to produce
a profound impression. The speeches of the Hev. Messrs.
Saunders and Hunt also produced a powerful effect.
Alexander M‘Leay, Esq., took the chair at seven o’clock,
and immediately called upon G. A. Horinson, Esq., Com-
mandant of Flinder’s Island, and Chief Protector of Aborigines
in this colony.
Mr. Robinson (who was received with loud applause)
moved the fourth resolution :
“That it is no less our interest, than our duty, to raise the
“ Moral and Civil Condition of the Aborigines of this Colony,
“ by which alone mutual aggressions, which lead to the cora-
“ mission of the most revolting and atrocious crimes, can be
“ restrained.”
He observed that during the last ten years of his life he had
been more associated with savage than civilized life, he must,
therefore, bespeak the indulgence of the meeting while he
ventured to address them. It had been suggested to him
that he should give an outline of his proceedings in connexion
with the removal of the Aborigines of Van Diemen’s Land,
and their location on Flinder’s Island. It had been stated on
a previous evening (by Dr. Lang) that \ an Diemen s Land


had formerly been populated with four nations, who each held
a particular portion of the island. This opinion must have
originated in the circumstance of his having stated that he
had necessarily learnt four languages in order to make himself
understood to the natives generally. But, as regarded nations,
he could truly say that the Island of Yan Diemen was divided
and sub-divided by the natives into districts, and contained
many nations. Their divisions he intended at some future
period to point out, as he intended to execute a map of the
island on Aboriginal principles, with the Aborigines names
for mountains, rivers, and localities. Maria Island, and the
whole of Tasman’s Peninsula, had also been inhabited, but the
different tribes spoke quite a different language; there was
not the slightest analogy between the languages. He should
first refer to some official documents which would illustrate
the dreadful state of the colony prior to his going out on his
first mission, owing to the savage character of the Aborigines ;
he should next narrate his proceedings on the different mis-
sions he undertook for their peaceable removal to Flinder’s
Island ; and he should then be able to describe the results of
those measures which had been adopted for their civil and
religious improvement. lie might, however, first advert to
the character of the natives in their pristine state. It had
been stated by all the voyagers who had visited the island
prior to its colonization, that the natives were perfectly harm-
less and inoffensive. It became, therefore, important to trace
out the causes which led to the dreadful animosity which pre-
vailed between the blacks and the whites; and on this there
could be but one opinion—the outrages committed by the
blacks were solely occasioned by the dreadful cruelties prac-
tised upon them by the depraved portion of the white
community. He had numerous documents in his possession
which would illustrate and prove this statement, but he
preferred taking as his text book the volume of official
documents which he held in his hand, published by order of
the House of Commons. The Deport of the Yan Diemen’s
Land Aborigines Committee contains the following passage: —
“It is undeniable that in many former instances cruelties
have been perpetrated repugnant to humanity, and disgaceful
to the British character, whilst few attempts can be traced on,
the part of the colonists to conciliate the natives, or to make
them sensible that peace and forbearance are the objects
desired. The impressions remaining from earlier injuries are
kept up by the occasional outrages of miscreants, whose scene


of crime is so remote as to render detection difficult; and who
sometimes wontonly fire at and kill the men, and at others
pursue the women, for the purpose of compelling them to
abandon ■ their children.” Mr. Robinson then proceeded to
refer to many acts of gross cruelty committed by white
persons on the Aborigines. In the first encounter between
the settlers and the Aborigines, soon after the formation of
the colony, between forty and fifty natives were killed by the
military. Several witnesses stated to the committee that the
natives gave no provocation for this attack, and that this
outrage was the origin of all that happened afterwards. On
a later occasion, a party of military and constables got a
number of natives between two perpendicular rocks, on a sort
of shelf, and killed seventy of them, dragging the women and
children from the crevices of the rocks and dashing out their
brains. The Richmond police, in 1827, killed fourteen of the
natives, who had got upon a hill, and threw stones upon them.
The police expended all their ammunition, and then charged
with the bayonet. The stockmen used to shoot and hunt the
natives. One of them boasted that he had thrown a woman
upon the fire and burned her to death. Another, named
Carrot, having killed a native in his attempt to carry off his
wife, cut off the dead man’s head, and obliged the woman to
go with him, carrying it suspended round her neck. Another,
named Ibbens, had killed half the eastern tribe, by creeping
amongst them, and firing amongst them with his double-
barrelled gun. It was stated to the committee that the worst
characters were the best to send after them. Lemon and
Brown, the bushrangers, committed every species of cruelty,
upon the natives ; they “ used to stick them, and fire at them
as marks while alive.” A respectable settler, examined by the
Committee, gave it as his opinion that the natives should be
captured or extirminated ; that Sydney natives, or blood-hounds,
would contribute to their capture —had heard it proposed that
decoy huts, containing flour and sugar, strongly impregnated
with poison, should be used. The sealers in Bass’s Straits
stole the native women from the main—some of them had
three or four native women ; they frequently shot the men,
and carried their wives away. A man, named Harrington,
procured ten or fifteen women, placed them on different islands,
and left them to procure kangaroo skins for him; and if, on
his return, they had not procured enough, he tortured them
by tying them up to trees for twenty-four or thirty-six hours
together, flogging them at intervals. He and others, not


unfrequently, killed the women in cold blood if they were
stubborn. He (Mr, Bobinson) had had an opportunity of
witnessing the atrocious conduct of the sealers in Bass’s Straits
within a recent period, having been employed by the Colonial
Government of Van Diemen’s Land to effect the liberation of
several women kept by the sealers in a state of abject slavery.
He visited, on that occasion, Port Phillip, from whence some
of their women had been stolen, and he considered it very
desirable that some natives of that place should have accom-
panied him in his expedition, because it would have tended to
suppress a system of lawless aggression upon the New Holland
Aborigines, than which no system of slavery can possibly be
worse. In addition to this, it would have been desirable that
some of these Aborigines had visited the settlement at
Hinder’s Island, to have witnessed the comfort, the security,
and enjoyment under which the Van Diemen’s Land natives
were now placed. This example might have led to similar
results as regarded themselves. He repudiated the notion
that the same effects might be produced by the example given
them at Port Phillip. No such advantage had resulted from
the promiscuous intercourse oT the Aborigines with the Euro-
pean inhabitants, either in Yan Diemen’s Land, or New South
Wales. It was an indubitable fact that, at Port Phillip, Port-
land Bay, and other recently formed settlements along the
south coast of New Holland, the Aborigines had been most
harshly treated, and experienced a series of persecutions from
the sealers, whalers, barkers, stockmen, and others, and from
men whom a different line of conduct might have been
expected. Their wives and children had been forcibly taken
from them, and sent into captivity in distant isles. A few
weeks previous to his visit to Port Phillip, at the beginning
of 1837, some shepherds had barbarously murdered a male
Aborigine at a sheep station on the Barrabool Hills, binding
him to a tree, shooting him through the back, and afterwards
through the head. This circumstance, with other wanton
outrages previously committed, # and many others whispered
as having happened, had engendered a spirit of dire animo-
sity in the minds of the Aborigines. Their retaliations
for these merciless cruelties too often fell upon innocent par-
ties. This was the case with that much respected gentleman,
Mr. Franks, who, with his shepherd, had been murdered by
the Port Phillip Aborigines ; and he might add, Mr. Gellibrand
and Mr. Hesse, who had experienced a similar fate. Intem-
perance was making rapid strides among these people, and he


was much distressed to find many of the Aboriginal females,
some of whom were mere girls, suffering from a loathsome
disease, contracted from the depraved whites. Mr. Eobinson
then recurred to the state of Van Diemen’s Land, prior to his
going out on his first mission to conciliate the native tribes.
The settlers and the natives were in a state of incessant hosti-
lity. Military parties were sent out against the Aborigines in
the course of the year 1828, who drove back the natives for a
time; but, on the 31st October, in that year, the Executive
Council declared in their minutes, —“ That the outrages of the
Aboriginal natives amount to a complete declaration of hosti-
lities against the settlers generally; the civil powers, even
when aided by the military, are insufficient to suppress them.”
Martial law was again proclaimed in October, 1830, against
the natives; and the Governor, Sir G. Arthur, at length deter-
mined to call upon the inhabitants to take up arms, and join
the troops in forming a military cordon, by means of which he
proposed to drive the Aborigines into Tasman’s Peninsula.
[Mr. Eobinson here exhibited and explained a field plan,
illustrative of the military movements.] The inhabitants
responded to the call, and an armed force of between 2000
and 3000 men were in the field from the 4th October to the
26th November, but the attempt entirely failed. “Previous
to this,” said Mr. Eobinson, “ I had formed a plan to conci-
liate and subdue them, not by the force of arms, but by the
force of reason. I had long considered the subject, which was
a fertile topic of speculation amongst the Colonists, and I
had come to the conclusion that the subjugation by force of
arms was impracticable, on account of the peculiar formation
of the country, and the insidious character of the Aborigines.
I considered the natives of Van Diemen’s Land rational
creatures—that they were God’s creatures—called into exist-
ence by the same omnipotent power that gave me being,
and created for the same wise purposes—and that, although
they might, in their savage notions, oppose violent measures
for their subjugation, yet, if I could but get them to listen to
reason, and persuade them that the Europeans wished only to
better their condition, they might become civilized, and ren-
dered useful members of society, instead of the blood-thirsty
ferocious beings they were represented to be. This was the
principle upon which I formed my plans. I considered them
as rational and accountable creatures, and I treated them as
such. This was the sole secret of my success, if there was any
secret in it, the secret is now out.” (Loud applause.) He


weighed the plan in his own mind repeatedly. There were
many powerful reasons against his entering on such an enter-
prise ; he had a wife and seven children dependent on him;
but his mind was under an impression which he could not
resist. He reasoned the matter over with Mrs. Robinson, and
with difficulty obtained her consent. He then proposed the
plan to the local government to set out on an experimental
visit to the natives at Port Havey, and through them to make
himself known to those in the interior, which was acceded to
by Governor Arthur, notwithstanding the public voice was
raised against the enterprise, which was denounced as that of
a mad enthusiast. “ But, Sir,” said Mr. Robinson, “ I would
not give a fig for the man who enters upon any enterprise of
moment, unless he possesses some enthusiasm.” (Loud ap-
plause.) He regretted that public opinion operated against
his equipment, but it did so ; he took leave of his friends, never
expecting to see them again. It was necessary that he should
take supplies with him, but all the assistance he could get for
that purpose was a long boat risen upon one or two streaks,
and rigged, to go round the south-west Cape of the island.
The boat was stranded, and most of his supplies were lost.
He had been furnished with a smaller boat, which he might
have sent back, but for the first time he was afraid of the
enterprise. He was not, however, afraid of the danger, nor of
the blacks ; but he was afraid to return for more supplies for
fear that the Government should refuse to let him proceed;
accordingly he pursued his journey overland to Port Davey,
fell in with a tribe of blacks, and made an appointment to
meet them at a particular mount on the following day. He
repaired to the appointed spot, taking with him two out of the
five of the natives of Brune Island who accompanied him.
The tribe he fell in with were very suspicious, having been
fired at by the Europeans; and although he carried no arms
—nothing, in fact, but a knapsack, containing bread —and
endeavoured to explain to them his pacific intentions, they left
him on these occasions without any sign of desiring to repose
trust in him. He then determined to bring them to an under-
standing or relinquish his design, as he found that, if he
wasted so much time unsuccessfully, his tour oi the island, in-
stead of occupying twelve months (the time allotted), would
last seven years. Accordingly he assembled them together,
and told the chiefs that he did' not like their proceedings, and
should leave them; he requested that they would furnish
him with guides across the country, and he set off at twelve


o’clock at night, and was guided by some of the tribe to a dis-
tance from their camp, where he bivouacked. On the following
morning the whole tribe joined him, and he thus led them on,
and conciliated them, until they were joined by his own people
at Macquarie Harbour. Before the military operations to
which he had alluded commenced, he had made the demi-
circuit of the island; and when he heard of these intended
operations he immediately rode across the country and confer-
red with Colonel Arthur, who expected he was about to go to
his home and give up the project; but he was determined to
complete his experiment. Colonel Arthur said that Captain
Harvey, of the Nimrod, had related that he had seen 700
natives assembled at Cape Portland; he (Mr. Robinson)
replied, that the Governor might rest assured that there were
not 700 in the whole island. Colonel Arthur gave him the
assistance he required, and he proceeded with his plan; and
here, said the speaker, (laying his hand upon a map of Yan
Diemen’s Land which was spread out before him,) I wish it to
be known that all this extensive tract of valuable land, called
the new country, was discovered by me. In 1830 he succeeded
in establishing thirty-four of the natives on Swan Island, and
he then proceeded to explore the islands, crossing Banks’
Strait in a five-oared whale boat, and succeeded in emancipat-
ing several native women who were kept by the sealers, and
conveyed them also to Swan Island. The "Government then
furnished an armed cutter and boats for a second trip amongst
the islands, whither he accordingly went for the purpose of
further exploring the islands, and liberating any women who
might still be held in captivity there by the sealers. After
this he returned to the main for the purpose of resuming his
mission, and the Government offered high rewards to any
other respectable inhabitants who would join in the under-
taking. Ho person, however, offered to go on the service, and
the duty of conciliating and removing the remaining tribes
devolved again solely on him. He removed the Stoney Creek
tribe, and then proceeded in quest of the Big River and Oyster
Bay tribes, two of the most savage tribes in the island; and
in six weeks after his communication with Colonel Arthur he
came up with them, and succeeded also in removing them to
Hobart Town, whence they were removed to Gun Carriage
Island. In effecting these removals he made use of no com-
pulsion ; it was done with their own free consent; in fact, it
was not possible to subjugate them by force. In Ins evidence
before the Council, he went so far as to say, that the whole


British Army could not have effected it; at any rate the mili-
tary force of the colony could not. The great military opera-
tion to which he had before alluded cost the Government
£30,000, and the entire cost to the Colony was upwards of
£70,000, and the result was, the capture of one black. (To
elucidate these military operations, and the difficulties that
presented themselves to his own undertaking, Mr. Robinson
read extracts from Col. Arthur’s dispatches on the subject.)
Col. Arthur had stated in one of his dispatches that no under-
taking could be more arduous under any circumstances, or in
any country, than to capture savages; and the difficulty was
greatly augmented in that colony, the country being, perhaps,
the most rugged on the face of the earth. It had a larger
extent, in proportion to its area, of wild, unproductive, imper-
vious, rugged mountains and dense forests, than any other
country with which he was acquainted. The meeting could
have but a faint idea of the toils and privations he had
endured; but some persons present might know that the
climate was intensely cold and humid, the rains falling gene-
rally for six or eight months in the year, and when he assured
them that he had been for days without a dry shred to his
back, subsisting on fern roots, and the pith of the shrub, the
meeting might have some idea that his undertaking was none
of the easiest. Had he been intent on the survey of the coun-
try only his condition would not have been so bad, as he could
have halted at leisure, and he would have had the company of
his countrymen, and been provided with dogs and fire-arms
to contribute to his subsistence; but in his undertaking he
was forced to submit to the greatest privations if he had any
hope of succeeding. Dogs would have frequently prevented
him communicating with the natives, and fire-arms would
have prevented their trusting him when he did obtain inter-
views with them. In all his difficulties his sole dependence
was on the Omnipotent Being, and he might truly say that
he was led in paths which he knew not, and preserved in
dangers by His power alone. Frequently had he seen the
sun go down without any expectation of beholding it rise
again in the morning; and he had been surrounded by savage
blacks with their spears presented at him, and had been
spared when all hope had fled. He then had his hand on a
place in the chart of the colony where he had a narrow
escape. One evening he discovered some fires of the natives
at a great distance, and, accompanied by some of the natives
of his party, he set out and travelled during the night


through swamps, up to his middle in water, and arrived near to
where a tribe was encamped. In the morning he went down
to the camp, and the natives immediately began collecting
their spears, and evinced hostile intentions, which, probably,
would have terminated fatally but for his decision ; the blacks
belonging to his escort, who saw that the tribe were unfriendly,
immediately possessed themselves of some of the spears, and a
fight seemed inevitable. He stepped forward between them,
took the spears from his own men, returned them to their
owners, sent his escort to a distance, and stood in the middle
of the tribe unarmed and ready to meet death; the result was,
that they became pacified, and, after a short intercourse with
them, put themselves under his protection and followed him
quietly. In the subjugation of the Oyster Bay and Big Biver
tribes the dangers were far greater ; they were known to be a
furious and blood-thirsty people, and in this matter also it
seemed that Providence interposed between him and the
savages. On approaching the place where they were encamped,
they rushed down the hill, their spears poised, and shouting
the war cry; Manalargana, the chieftain, fled; the women
began to cry, and the yells of the hostile tribes became dreadful.
He knew it was little use to run, had he been so disposed, as
the blacks would have soon caught him ; so he confronted
them and awaited their arrival, looking calmly on. A parley
ensued, and they very shortly placed themselves under his
direction. Mr. Robinson begged to explain that they had
heard of him, that he was the blacks’ friend, from other tribes,
and so were prepared in a manner to treat him kindly. Ho
accompanied them to their camp and spent the evening with
them, making himself understood as well as he could, and
acquainting them with his intentions—and a more pleasant
evening he never remembered to have spent in his life, from
the consideration that these savage tribes had also yielded to his
persuasions. They showed him their scars, and there was
scarcely one among them —man, woman, or child, but had
been wounded by the whites. The next day the chief gave
up to him all their spears, and about sixteen stand of fire-arms
taken from the whites ; and then the whole tribe accompanied
him to Bothwell, the nearest settlement, carrying the fire-arms
with them. On entering the place the strangers were not at
all daunted ; they bivouacked opposite the military barracks.
He (Mr. Robinson) was asked if he wanted assistance to keep
the natives ? he said, no. He himself went to an inn, and
slept without any fear that they would leave him ; there they


remained, perfectly quiet and peaceable, until they finally
removed with him to Hobart Town, a march of eight days.
After he had succeeded with these tribes he thought that his
work was done, and told Colonel Arthur that the natives he
had brought in, few as they were, had done all the mischief
which had caused such consternation in Yan Diemen’s Land ;
Colonel Arthur could scarcely credit it, and it was generally
doubted. The only reply he could make was that, time would
show, and time had show r n. After he had effected the removal
of these tribes he started to the Arthur Diver where it was
reported that a tribe was out, and here he had another
miraculous escape from being killed. It appeared that the
blacks had meditated his destruction, and laid their plans
for preventing his escape by placing sentinels all around
him. He was with them when he observed an unusual excite-
ment amongst them; they were agitated, and employed
sharpening their spears and other instruments of war. He
addressed them, stating that he could not, nor did he wish to
compel them to go with him, against their wills, and if they
did not like to accompany him, they might remain where they
were. They began to encircle and close in on him, when for
the first time since he had undertaken the mission, he fled
from them. He overtook a black woman, at a wide and rapid
river, which he must cross to escape from his pursuers, and
as he could not swim, he hardly knew what to do. The
woman advised him to hide himself in the bushes, but he knew
too well the keenness with which the blacks tracked the
smallest object to trust to that; and as his only hope, he
launched a log of wood, on which he leaned, and the kind
hearted woman jumped into the water and swam across,
drawing the log with her. He could truly say, that in all his
troubles the poor black natives had consoled, fed him, and
contributed in all they could to his comfort. After being out
hunting for a long time, they would perhaps return with a
single kangaroo ; they would bring it and lay it before him.
At other times they would go and fish among the rocks.
What they caught they would bring to him, and would not
taste a bit until they were told so to do by him. They carried
his supplies, sympathised with him in his troubles, and cheered
him in his solitude. And here he begged to observe that
the country through which he travelled, bore no resemblance
to the fine open country of New Holland. Great part of the
country was a dense forest, the trees in some places being
sixty feet in circumference and 250 feet high, interwoven


with an almost impenetrable brush at the bottom; and for a
long time, in traversing these wilds, he was dependent for
sustenance solely on the blacks who accompanied him, who
caught badgers, porcupines, and he not unfrequently had to
live upon fern roots, pith of the fern tree, and on grubs. He
also begged to correct an erroneous conception which had been
formed with regard to the Sydney blacks, who were forwarded
to Van Diemen’s Land to assist in the capture of the Van
Diemen’s Land natives. He had never received any assist-
ance from them, and had from the first set his face against
their being employed, because they knew nothing of the
language or habits of the Van Diemen’s Land blacks, and
would consequently have been a burden, rather than any
assistance in the expedition. He would now proceed to the
result of his undertaking —previous to which, however, Mr.
Parker, one of the Assistant Protectors, would read some
extracts from the records of the establishment on Flinders’
Island, illustrative of the state and condition of the na-
tives on the island previously to his (Mr. Robinson’s) taking
charge of it.—(lt appeared from the testimony of the Store-
keeper, the Medical Attendant, and the Catechist, that before
Mr. Robinson went among them they were in as wild a state
as when in their own country, much angry feeling existed
between them, and it was feared that the hostile tribes would
come to blows. No attempt had been made to civilize them,
and their wretched habits and ill course of living had hurried
many of them to the grave. The place exhibited more the
appearance of a menagerie, than the habitation of human
beings. The arrival of Mr. Robinson, however, among them
had caused a new face of things to spring up. The attesta-
tions of these officers were highly flattering to Mr. Robinson’s
management.) —Mr. Robinson then resumed—He had not
brought these attestations before the meeting with any inten-
tion of affixing blame to his predecessors, but simply to show
that the blacks were not the degraded, abject beings they
were represented to be, but capable of moral attainments ; and
he drew a deduction, by analogy, that the New South Wales
blacks, who had been equally misrepresented, were equally
susceptible of high moral culture. The Aborigines of Van
Diemen’s Land had been represented as the lowest in the
scale of humanity, differing little from the brutes; but it had
devolved upon him to discover and lead them forward in the
scale of civilization, and he had met with flattering success.
He would, as the time was short, briefly touch on the measures


he had taken to bring them to their present state of moral
and physical improvement at Flinder’s Island, where the
remnant of the whole black population was now located.
Their present condition could best be described by reading
some extracts from his replications to certain queries which
had been addressed to him by the Government. The minds
of the Aborigines were beginning to expand; they had more
enlarged views of their present situation, and were grateful
for the favours conferred upon them. In their intercourse
with each other they were affable and corteous ; the tribes for-
merly most opposed to each other were now the most friendly.
If excited to anger, a look was sufficient to allay their feelings.
They were placed under no kind of restraint, but enjoyed
every degree of personal freedom, consistent with a due regard
to their health, and the formation of religious civilized
habits. They were instructed in the Christian religion ; two
services were held on the Sabbath, —a catechetical examination
for the natives on Tuesday Evenings, and on Saturday even-
ings a religious exercise conducted by the natives themselves.
These services were conducted in the English language which
the natives well understood ; their attendance was perfectly
voluntary —all, however, attended, and their conduct would be
a pattern to many congregations of civilized Europeans. In
sacred melody they had displayed great proficiency; and Mr.
Robinson read the commencing lines of several hymns which
they were accustomed to sing to regular tunes, the men and
women taking their respective parts. He had established
three schools on the settlement —a day school for boys, a day
school for girls and women, an evening school, and a Sunday
school, which was generally well attended ; the civil officers,
their wives, and his own family, acted as teachers, and they
found the natives willing and anxious to receive instruction—
by which they improved rapidly. (Mr. Robinson read some
extracts from the periodical examinations of the schools.
From these extracts it appeared that some of the native youths
were able to answer questions in the leading events of Scrip-
ture history —Christian doctrine and duty —arithmetic—the
principal facts of geography, and also on several points of
general information. Some very fair specimens of their hand-
writing were also exhibited: one in particular attracted our
notice—an original address from the writer (a native youth,
fifteen years of age, who was employed by Mr. Robinson in
his office) to his countrymen ; it was expressed in simple and
tolerably correct language, and breathed a warm spirit of


gratitude to Mr. Robinson. In the schools they had been
taught various handiwork, such as knitting in worsted, sewing,
Ac., and they proved to be apt and industrious scholars. The
work produced to the meeting was the sort of work they were
chiefly employed in ; and in making shirts, trousers, and other
articles of comfort, which they coveted and enjoyed highly.
(A quantity of caps, braces, and stockings, of good workman-
ship, was presented to the meeting as the work of the natives
of Flinders’ Island; also, a very neat looking braided tunic
made by one of the Aboriginal youths, who, it was stated, had
been instructed in tailoring, and was able to do an equal
quantity of work with an ordinary workman.) They had neat
stone cottages, with gardens in which they raised their own
vegetables, with cooking utensils, and other useful articles,
and they conformed in every respect to European habits, and
were particularly careful in copying every domestic arrange-
ment which they observed with the Europeans. He had
established an Aboriginal Fund, which was raised from
the proceeds of work done by them, and the sale of certain
commodities prepared by them, such as salted mutton, birds,
birds skins, &c., which were sold at Launceston. He had also
formed an Aboriginal police to preserve order amongst
themselves, and to decide all disagreements which might arise
amongst them. He had appointed three of the Chiefs consta-
bles, who, with himself, formed a court, before which all their
differences were brought, and to the decisions of which they
all acceded. Of the efficiency of this police he had had
frequent experience, in the successful pursuit and capture of
runaway convict servants. He had also established a circu-
lating medium amongst them, which had been attended with
the happiest effects, as it gave them knowledge of the right of
property; and lastly, and consequent of the latter, he had
established a market, to which they brought thier produce, and
disposed of it to each other, and to the officers of the settlement.
They thus acquired the habits of civilized life, and felt an
interest in the acquisition of property, which rendered them
industrious and cleanly. Independent of their other employ-
ments, the men had, in three years, cleared the forest, and
made a good road, nine miles in length, into the interior of the
island, which was thus thrown open to enterprise. The women
also, besides their usual avocations, had collected many tons of
grass for the use of the settlement. For all their labour they
received a pecuniary reward. The only drawback on the
establishment, was the great mortality amongst them, but


those who did net survive were now happy, contented, and
useful members of society. He regretted that time did not
permit him to go further into detail as he had intended, and
for which he had ample materials, but he could no longer
trespass on their attention. In conclusion he must remark,
that their duty to the Aborigines of this country was to be
found in the Bible contained in every page, and written in
every line.
[Mr. Robinson’s address which occupied nearly three hours,
was listened to with the deepest interest, and at its close, he
sat down amid the heartfelt and universal plaudits of the
