

Mr. Fisher’s Policy Speech
GYMPIE, MARCH 30, 1909.
GYMPIE (Q.), Tuesday.—The Olympic Theatre was crowded
with an audience of about 2000 persons to-night, when the
Prime Minister (Mr. Andrew Fisher) delivered his policy speech.
Mr. Fisher, on making his appearance, was received with a
loud outburst of cheering. He said : I had no difficulty in
selecting Gympie as the place for this address, because, 16 years
ago, the electors did me the honor to send me to the State
Parliament, and gave me my first opportunity of. public life.
Eight years ago, when I thought it well to become a candidate
for Wide Bay in the Federal Parliament, the electors of Gympie
endorsed my candidature by a large majority. I feel, therefore,
that lam amongst friends. My political career is divided into
two periods of eight years each, in State and Federal Parlia-
ments. Just look at the increase in trade during those periods.
The imports and exports from 1893 increased from £102,286,000
to £204,268 000 in 1908. I mention these figures to show that
a country that is making progress in that way is a country that,
if well governed, will see to it that every person honestly able
and willing to work should be able to earn sufficient to enable
him to keep his wife and family in comfort.
Manufacturing Industries.
During the last four years the number of factories had increased
by 1004 ; the number of employees by 53,031 ; and wages and
salaries by £4,253,977; an average annual increase of factory
employees of 13,258, and of wages £1,063,494. I mention these
figures to show the great production of wealth in this Common-
wealth, bringing before the minds of the people here the question
that we have dealt with in the Federal Parliament in these
recent years, that is new to and outside the ordinary sphere of
polities in any other country in the world.
The Power of Parliament.
The Commonwealth Parliament has power to deal with Customs
and Excise; it has power to put on a protective tariff; it has,
rightly or wrongly, settled on a policy of protection for Australia,
and I think it is the intention of the people that that policy


-should continue. Further, we have laid down the principle that
the protection shall not be exclusive, but it shall be in favor of
the employees as well as the manufacturers. With the limited
powers of the Federal Parliament some of us endeavored to
incorporate that principle in the legislation of the country. We
were able to ensure a judge of the High Court sitting as a judge
in the Arbitration Court to give his decisions according to equity
and good conscience. We were able to pass an Excise Act to
provide that when any manufacturer paid a fair and reasonable
wage he would be relieved of excise, which others had to pay
who did not give such wages. The result of that action has
been that Mr. Justice Higgins was called upon to adjudicate in a
case brought by the employees of the McKay Harvester Com-
pany. Mr. Justice Higgins, after an exhaustive hearing, came
to the conclusion that the wages paid by the firm were not fair
and reasonable, and they were therefore called upon by the
■Government of the time to pay the excise, as people who had
defaulted. Notwithstanding the pledge they had given before
the passing of this Act, the firm declined to pay. They said
that the Commonwealth Parliament had no legal power to force
them, and they appealed to the High Court on the point of law.
“The Rights of the Toilers.’’
Before I go cn to the decision of the High Court I want to lay
before you a remark made by the judge who presided in the case,
which, in my opinion, lays down an absolutely new charter of
the rights of the toilers of Australia. He said, “ The provision
of fair and reasonable remuneration is obviously designed for
the benefit of the employees in the industry, and it must be
meant to secure to them something which they cannot get by
the ordinary system of individual bargaining with employers.
If Parliament meant that the conditions shall be such as they
can get by individual bargaining—if they meant that those
conditions are to be ‘ fair and reasonable ’ which employees will
accept and employers will give, in contracts of service—there
would have been no need for this provision. The remuneration
could safely have been left to the usual but unequal contest, the
‘ higgling of the market ’ for labor, with the pressure for bread
on one side and the pressure for profits on the other. The
standard of fair and reasonable must therefore be something
else” ; and “ I cannot think of any other standard than the
normal needs of the average employee, regarded as a human
being, living in a civilised community.” (Cheers). That was
set aside by the High Court. The men who thought of that
legislation, the Parliament that passed it, and the declared
will of the people of Australia were all defeated because the
Commonwealth had not power to give effect to this legislation.
I am going to ask you to-night, and the people of Australia, to


give the Federal Parliament equal powers with the States to
ensure it giving effect to industrial laws, and to ensure that
when a judgment is given by the Court in favor ot employees it
will have the same enforcing powers as that given by Parliament
in favor of employers.
New Protection.
As regards the Federal Parliament, every party in it says that
the new protection principle is a good one; but all parties do
not say they are prepared to see it carried out. The other day
you may have read of the trouble at Brcken Hill because the
men thought the conditions were unfair—and what the chairman
of the great Proprietary Company stated, that the directors were
willing to put the difference between the claims of the men and
the employers into a trust fund pending the decision of the
Arnitration Court. He is also reported to have stated that
7s 6d a day was a fair wage for the workmen at Broken Hill.
Mr. Justice Higgins, after an exhaustive inquiry at Broken Hill
and Melbourne, decided that 7s 6d was not a fair and reasonable
wage at Broken Hill. (Applause). His Honor fixed it at
8s 7fd a day. (Applause). You expected that the company
would have accepted the verdict. (Applause). But it did not.
It is taking the same legal process that McKay took to upset
that verdict on a point of law. (Cries of “ Shame.”) Mr.
Justice Higgins is emphatic that 7s 6d is not a fair minimum
wage for white man at Broken Hill, the company says it is, and
there the matter rests. The company will thus lay up the mine
as long as it pleases, hoping that the pinch of poverty will
compel the me-n to accept what is not a fair and reasonable
wage. I trust none of them will give in, and I don’t believe
they will give in. (Applause). I propose to introduce into the
Federal Parliament a Referendum Bill by which the people will
be able to decide for themselves whether the Federal Parliament
should have the power beyond all legal doubt to enforce that
question—(loud applause)—and as soon as that verdict reaches
the people lam sure they will decide it in our favor. (Applause).
Old-age Pensions.
Another matter of importance is that of old-age pensions.
The people of Australia have never decided any question more
unanimously. (Cheers). We were prevented in the Federal
Parliament from giving effect to the people’s verdict on that
question through financial limitations. In 1907 on my own
motion the House of Representatives decided the matter was
urgent, and Parliament»set aside certain funds so as to enable
old-age pensions to be established at the earliest possible moment.
That Surplus Revenue Act was passed, and also the Old-age
Pensions Act, to commence on July lof this year. The


former Act enabled Parliament to also set aside £250,000 for
coastal and naval defence. I mention this question just to say
that whatever difficulties the Commonwealth might have regard-
ing its financial position as between States, and between the
people and the Federal Treasury, I am here to say that every
act that this Government can do to ensure carrying out the
principles of the Invalid and Old-age Pensions Act will be done.
(Applause). Whatever financial embarrassment we may meet
with that will be carried out to the letter. Once inaugurated,
we shall be able, in the not far distant future, perhaps, to give
effect not only to the old-age pensions, but to the invalid pensions
as well, lam sorry I cannot tell you now that the invalid
pensions will be brought in immediately.
Naval Defence.
I now come to a matter that is exercising people’s minds
perhaps more than anything else at the present moment. The
industrial life of Australia is dependent on its coastal and over-
sea trade, the value of which approximates £170,000,000 per
annum. In the possible absence of the Imperial Squadron this
vast trade would be exposed to attack, which could easily be
effected by cruisers from beyond the range of guns at the forts.
We feel that there is a deeper obligation than even the protection
of property, and consider that the time is drawing near—if it
has not arrived—that there would be undoubtedly danger to
delay—and we have made it part of our policy to say that we
propose, in addition to the three destroyers we have already
ordered, and for which we have been severely criticised, inaugu-
rating a much larger policy in the near future, if Parliament and
people endorse it. Two of these boats will be built in Scotland,
and the third will be sent out in parts and put together here.
They will be specially adapted to Australian conditions. Their
radius of action will be 8000 miles at 10 knots, 2400 at 14
knots, and capable of 26 knots when required. These are of the
“ river” class. They are to be the same as those purchased by
the British Government. I mention that because some of our
critics, including the leader of the Opposition, stated that
although he condemned the order of the three destroyers ha
would withdraw that condemnation if he discovered that these
boats were approve! by the Admiralty. I am able to tell you
that not only are they approved by the Admiralty, but by the
leading naval engineers and shipbuilders of the world. All the
boats on the new programme are to be built in Australia and
will include four ocean destroyers of larger type and greater
speed, carrying heavier armament, probably able to steam up to
38 knots an hour ; and also 16 other “ river” class destroyers,
making a total (with the three on order) of four ocean destroyers
and 19 “ river” class ; or 23 in all. This flotilla would for all


practical purposes of coastal defence release the naval squadron
now maintained at a cost to the Admiralty of about £590,000 a
year. We are also prepared to provide and maintain a suitable
boat for policing the South Sea Islands. Our programme also
includes the urgent necessity for bringing the fixed defences and
forts up to-date with efficient guns. Australia is an integral
portion of the British Empire and any naval force must therefore
be a portion of the sea power ot the British Nation. Our policy
is considered in that relation. It must completely meet local
needs and be a valuable auxiliary and supplementary force for
co-operation with the Royal Navy. We must make a beginning.
Not a Policy of Hysteria.
We hold out a reasonable hope to you that, if the people
respond to our call to them to provide for an effective
Australian defence of its own, we expect to find the means to
carry it out in three years’ time. (Cheers). I believe that
sooner or later the people will not begrudge the expenditure
indicated as soon as it is shown that it is absolutely necessary,
and that it will give the help to the Mother country that she
has the right to expect from a wealthy and prosperous descen-
dant. We have at present a number of boats of our own.
They are ineffective and quite incapable of carrying out
the work they have to do. Our own Australian people man
them. One of them, the Cerberus, has to be towed into action
by a tug boat. (Laughter). It is no laughing matter. Al-
though I have not the honor to be Australian born, I would not
continue for one moment a state of affairs like that if I could
prevent it. This is not a policy of hysteria, such as we have had
lately, but a policy that would begin in earnest, and continue in
earnest, and would entirely depend upon the patriotism of the
country and the spirit of our youth and manhood to defend their
country as they ought to do. (Cheers). I have been asked for
the authority we have for taking these steps. I will read the
opinion of the First Lord of the Admiralty, Lord Tweedmouth,
at the Colonial Conference. He said : *• I understand that in
Australia particularly, and in South Africa, it is desired to start
some naval service of your own. Perhaps I might suggest that
if the provision ot the smaller craft, which are necessarily
incident to the work of a great fleet of modern battleships, could
be made locally, it would be a very great help to the general
work of the navy. You cannot take the small craft, such as
torpedo boats and submarines, across the ocean. For warships
to arrive in South Africa, or in Australia, or in New Zealand,
or in Canada, and'find ready to their baud men well trained, in
good vessels of this kind, would be an enormous advantage to
them; it would be an enormous advantage to find ready to their
hand men well trained ready to take their part in the work of


the fleet. There is, I think, the further advantage in these
small flotillas that thev will be an admirable means of coast
defence; that you will be able by the use of them to avoid
practically all danger from any sudden raid which might be
made by a cruising squadron. I believe myself that the pro-
vision of submarines, and all the smaller torpedo destroyers and
boats would be of the greatest help to the navy supposing it
were —as 1 hope it may not be —drawn into a war abroad.”
When the man who was charged with the protection not only of
Great Britain, but of the whole Empire, says to the Colonial
Conference that these are the best help that can be given to the
British Navy, surely we have proved our case. I could also give
quotations from Mr. Balfour and Mr. Arnold Foster in support
of our attitude in this matter. If the people of Australia, instead
of accepting ihis policy of naval defence, say that we are to
proceed on the lines of making a further monetary offer to Great
Britain, then I think they would entirely fail in their object.
Don’t Want a Dreadnought.
I said in Melbourne, as I shall always say, that the only way
in which we can do this is the way we propose, or some modi-
fication of that proposal. When we were asked to offer a
Dreadnought, I said that that was not a policy at all. I said it
was merely a spectacular display. (Cheers). You could not
encourage your young men by giving a Dreadnought to Britain.
The chances are that the Chancellor of the Exchequer and Lords
of the Admiralty would say “ we don’t need that ship for this
year’s programme.” That would be a hint broad enough, surely.
I feel that we could not have justified ourselves as a Government,
and I certainly would not have done it, even if those who desired
to make the offer of a Dreadnought were in a large majority,
because I believe it is on wrong lines. (Cheers). I hope the
lines I have enunciated will be endorsed by the people. If not I
shall accept my fate cheerfully. I would rather be out of public
life altogether than yield to such a clamor. (Cheers). Although
the Admiralty have not distinctly endorsed this, it is the view of
some experts that Australia should be the naval base of the
Empire in the South Pacific, We have no assurance at all that
next year, or the year following that, the centre of gravity mayfl
be in the Near East; and I feel that the sooner we have the
provision of this naval base, with all that light flotilla, which
will be protection for the larger ships when they come here, the
better service it will be, and this is one very great reason why I
am asking for your concurrence in our plans. My aim has
always been to try and awaken the patriotism of Australians. I
hope that the call of the sea may be heard more and more in
the future by our young men.


Details of the Naval Programme.
Now, our programme for the provision of vessels over a period
of three years will be as follows:—In the first year, 1909 10,
there will be the half cost of two ocean destroyers, £230,000,
and the half cost of 10 river destroyers, £420,000; total,
£650,000, Id the second year there will be the completion of
two ocean destroyers, £230,000; the completion of 10 river
destroyers, £420,000 ; and the half cost of two ocean destroyers,
£230,000 ; total £BBO,OOO. In the third year, the completion
of two ocean destroyers will cost £230,000, and provision for
the remaining sis river destroyers will be £so4,ooo—total
£734,000. If the vessels are constructed in Australia—and that
is our policy—there will be an advance of 16 per cent on the.
prices named, which are the prices for construction in England.
In 191011 the maintenance of the two ocean destroyers will be
£68,0C0, and of the ten river destroyers £IOO,OOO, total
£168,000; in 1911-12, the maintenance of the four ocean
destroyers will be £136,000, and of the ten river destroyers
£IOO,OOO, total £236,000. In regard to policing the South
Seas, it must be understood that it applies strictly to work within
that definition, though it might include surveying duties.
Provision will be made for the purchase or hire of one coasting
steamer of 2000 to 3000 tons, to be manned by a ship’s company
having an available landing strength of 100 men, and having a
complete outfit of boats—steam and others—for shore service.
This vessel will be armed with quickfiring guns, and the annual
cost of it, with sinking fund, will be £30,000.
The Compulsory Training Scheme.
But what I have indicated is only one part of our national
defence policy. We propose now that we shall have compulsory
military training, beginning with boys in school after 10 years,
and ending at 20 years. There will be associated with this
military training, as far as regards boys at school, efficient
medical inspection. This medical inspection will also apply to
the girls at school, and will, I believe, result in the saving to
Australia of many valuable lives. (Applause). We have re-
ceived from the State Premiers and others very many encourag-
ing letters of accord. From 10 to 14 years the boys will be-
physically trained. Under this compulsory universal training
scheme junior cadets from 10 to 14 years would have two hours’
weekly training ; senior cadets, from 14 to 18 years, would have
12 half days and 24 night drills throughout the year; the-
military forces—all corps from 18 to 20 years—would have 12
half days and 24 night drills, as well as 16 days’ continuous
training at camps each year ; the scientific corps—from 20 to 21
years—would have 10 half days and 10 night drills, as well as.


16 continuous days’ training in camp ; other corps from 20 to 21
years, would have 12 halt days and 24 night drills, and 7 days’
continuous training in camp. The voluntary military forces
from 21 to 30 years, would have 7 continuous days’ training in
camps each year. Turning to the total military training—the
compulsory attendance of Senior Cadets, in the equivalent of
whole days, is 48 ; the compulsory attendance of military forces
in the equivalent of whole days, is 75. In formulating this
scheme we are acting on the best advice that our officers are
able to give. There will also be a scientific course, including
special training.
Volunteer 1 System to Continue.
In addition it is our intention to continue the volunteer
system for those over the ages specified. We hope that many
will continue in the forces after reaching the age of 21 years.
There will be a preparatory outlay of £580,000. The scheme
will cost in the first year £1,200,000, as against £1,097,000
proposed in the scheme of the late Government. The second
year will cost £1.248,000, as against £1,021,000 proposed in the
scheme of the late Government. The third year, by way of
similar comparison, gives £1,801,000 and £1,074,000. Our
scheme the fourth year will cost £1,825,000; the fifth year,
£1,899,000; and the sixth year, £1,407,000 ; and the latter
would be the maximum. If the militia in country districts be
retained, about 5000, mostly Light Horse, at the same rates, it
will be necessary to add £25,000 in the second year, and £50,000
afterwards. The difference in the present expenditure, in 1912,
and this proposal (and we shall have a force six times as large
as the present forces) will be only £600,000 additional. (Ap-
plause). While in camp the boys from 18 to 20 years will
receive not less than 10s a week, and those whose ages range
from 20 years upwards will be paid not less than 12s 6d a week
each.
Gun Factories
The number of men available in the first year, 1910-11, will
be 88,000; the second year, 51,000; the third year, 63,000;
the fourth year, 81,000; the fifth year, 99,000 ; the sixth year,
116,000; and the twelfth year, 219,000. We associate with
this scheme the establishment of a gun factory, a small arms
factory, and ammunition factories. (Applause). We think
these things are absolutely inseparable from proper defence.
{Applause).
Nationalisation of Industries.
As regards the iron industry—nationalisation is the policy of
the Labor Party. (Applause). It is necessary for defence and
ether purposes. We were not able to do it last session. I hope


and desire that the iron industry shall be nationalised soon.
(Loud applause). I doubt whether at present we have the
power; but I hope the people will give us that power in addition
to the other powers we seek. My personal regret is that the
iron industry is not too well established; but lam happy to be
able to say that the iron we do produce is equal to anything
produced in the world—(applause) —and I do sincerely trust that
the company now working it will be prosperous while they have
it. (Applause).
The Finances—No Money Left.
During 1907-8 the amount of £191,854 was credited to the
old-age pension fund. The amount of £410,810 was included
in this year’s Budget for payment to the fund. I found, on
taking office, that in order to provide this amount of £410,810
the Estimates of expenditure had been out down so severely that
it was impossible to carry on the services with the amounts
provided. Mj predecessor, who framed these Estimates, stated
to Parliament that he bad to cut down the postal estimates alone
by over £BOO,OOO, and there is ample evidence of a severe cutting
down in other services. The result of this drastic reduction was
that, since taking office, I have bad an unending series of
applications, mostly from the Postal Department, for funds in
addition to those provided in the Appropriation Act. I do not
refer now to the very large amounts which have been stated to
be necessary to bring the telegraph and telephone services
thoroughly up-to-date, but to the demands made for funds stated
to be absolutely necessary for carrying on the services of the
current year. The Postal Department alone has asked, since 1
took office, for additional tunds amounting to the large sum of
£220,000. In passing, 1 may remind you of complaints wo
have heard of Commonwealth extravagance. Ido not say that
extravagance is never practised by an officer of the Common-
wealth, but I do say that—Whatever may be said of the adminis-
tration of the Commonwealth departments—extravagance is the
last word that should be used.
Reduced Balance for the States.
I will now attempt to forecast, as well as can be done at the
present time, the result of the financial transactions of this
year. The Customs and excise revenue was estimated at
£11,040,711. I now estimate it at £10,800,000. There is no
doubt in my mind that last financial year imports were in excess
of requirements. The inter-State adjustments have been in-
creasing this year in amount, whilst the revenue has been going
down, showing that the goods imported last year into Sw


South Wales and Victoria are this year being transferred to the
other States. My forecast is ;
Revenue.
Customs and Excise Revenue .. .. £10,800,000
Postal Revenue .. .. .. .. 3,400,000
Miscellaneous Revenue, such as Defence, Patents,
Trade Marks, (bo. .. ... .. 42,000
Repayment by States, of their proportion of Pensions
to Retired Officers paid in 1908-09 . .. 25,000
TOTAL REVENUE AS NOW ESTIMATED.. £14,267.000
Expenditure.
As set forth in Original Estimates,
dated 14/10/1908 .. .. £6,513,579
Less Net Savings .. .. 30,000
— 6.483,579
BALANCE RETURNABLE TO THE STATES £7,783,421
instead of £8,068,692, as estimated by the Treasurer when
delivering his Budget Speech on October 14, 1908. I have
included in the revenue an amount of £25,000 repayment by the
States of their proportion of pensions paid to retired public
officers during the current financial year. Hitherto we have not
called upon the States for this amount although under the
Constitution they are directed to pay it, but as for the first time
in our history we shall have a difficulty in complying with
section 87 of the Constitution—the “ Braddon” clause—it is
my intention to ask the State Treasurers for this sum. The
net saving of £BO,OOO may be explained in this way : 1 antici-
pate savings in expenditure of £200,000, but already funds have
been either advanced or credited to the departments on the
authority of the Treasurer’s advance to the amount of £140,000.
Additional expenditure, at present unforseen, will undoubtedly
have to be made, so I set down the net saving at £30,000.
The Constitution Must be Obeyed.
I consider that I am making a conservative estimate when I
say we shall have £7,788,421 to return to the States. A short
calculation will, however, show that this will not comply with
section 87 of the Constitution (Braddon clause); —
Customs and Excise Revenue as now estimated .. £10,800,000
Less Cost of Collection ~ .. .. 289,000
£10,511,000
Three-fourtbs of this amount is .. .. 7,883,250
But I have shown that the balance which will be
available for payment to the States will be only £7,788,421
So that in all probability we shall, on June 80, find ourselves
£IOO,OOO short. Now, whatever happens, the Constitution


mast be obeyed, and the fall three-fourths of the net Customs
and excise revenue must be paid to the States. Three courses
are open :
(а) To out down expenditure.
(б) To impose additional taxation.
(c) To reduce tbe amount payable to the Old-Age Pensions Fund.
Now, as to the first course, I have shown how exceedingly
difficult it is, considering how the votes were cut down this year.
As to the second course, the collection of revenue by additional
taxation during the current year is not practicable. However
regrettable, it may be necessary to adopt to some extent tbe
third available course, viz., to reduce the amount payable to the
old-age pension fund, but if that is done I say, once for all, that
—whatever the state of the fund may be on June 80—the old-
age pensions will be paid in full from the first of July next.
The necessary steps have already been taken to give effect to
this.
The Hobart Proposals.
I now desire to define the attitude which the present Govern-
ment takes up with regard to the proposals made by the Pre-
miers and Treasurers of tbe States at the recent Hobart
Conference. The proposals were:
1. That Clause 87 of tbe Constitution be amended, and provision
made, without limit as to duration, that of the gross revenue of the
Commonwealth from duties of Customs and Excise, not less than
three-fifths shall be annually returned to the States. Provided that
not less than £6,750,000 be returned to tbe States in any one year.
2. Of the amount returnable to the States under tbe terms of the
preceding paragraph, a special payment shall be made annually by
the Commonwealth to tbe State of West Australia, commencing at
£250,000, and diminishing at the rate of £lO,OOO per annum. The
balance of tbe amount returnable to tbe States, after the special
payment is made to West Australia, shall be distributed amongst
tbe States on a per capita basis.
3. In order that the Federal Government may obtain, as early as
possible, a substantial increase of Revenue, and thus be in a posi-
tion to meet tbe cost of Old-Age Pensions, and provide for further
expenditure, the State Governments are agreeable that immediate
steps shall be taken, by an amendment of the Constitution, to give
effect to these proposals.
Under these proposals the Commonwealth is to receive two-
fifths of the gross instead of one-fourth of the net Customs and
excise revenue. Under section 87 of tbe Constitution the
Commonwealth now has available for its own expenditure one-
fourth of the net Customs and excise revenue, viz:—
Customs and Excise Revenue, as estimated October
Id last .. .. .. .. £11,040,711
Less expense of colleetion .. .. .. 289,122
NET CUSTOMS AND EXCISE REVENUE .. £10,751,589


One-fourth of net Customs and Excise Revenue avail-
able for Commonwealth expenditure .. £2,687,897
Under the Hobart proposals there would be available
for Commonwealth expenditure, if no minimum
payment to the State were agreed to, two-fifths
of £11,040,711, viz , .. .. £4,416,284
Leas Customs Expenditure .. .. „ 289,122
£4 127 162
GAIN TO THE COMMONWEALTH IF THEBE ’ ’
WERE NO MINIMUM.. .. .. £1,439,265
This year the Commonwealth Treasurer estimated
(on 14/10/1908) that he would return to the
_ States .. ~ .. .. £8,063,692
Rut the Premiers propose that the minimum amount
to be payable to them shall be .. .. £6.750,000
SO THAI THE COMMONWEALTH WOULD
GAIN, WERE THE MINIMUM PAYMENT
AGREED TO .. .. .. £1,313,692
Now let us see whether the Commonwealth could finance
itself if it agreed to proposals which would give it £1,813,692
more than it would otherwise have been entitled to. As these
proposals are to last for all time, the idea being to amend the
Constitution so as to make the system of distribution binding
on future Commonwealth Parliaments, let us look a few years
ahead and see if this additional amount will give the Common-
wealth the funds which it requires.
Needs of the Future.
First, let me say that the estimates of Customs and excise
revenue for this year, viz., £11,040,711, will not, according to
the present outlook, be realised by about £200,000, and that I
am of opinion that it would not be prudent of a Treasurer to
estimate a greater Customs and excise revenue for the Common-
wealth, at least for some years to come, than £11,000,000.
Assuming that this revenue of £11,000,000 will be realised, ;the
Commonwealth Treasurer will be called upon in the next few
years to meet the following additional expenditure:—
Old-Age Pensions (not including Inva-
lid Pensions) ~ .. £1,750,000
Less provided tbia year .. .. 4X0,810
„ . . , „ , £1,339,193
Extra Annnal Postal, Telegraphic, and Telephonic
Expenditure .. .. .. 100,000
(This is lor the Ordinary Expense of the De-
partment, the amount provided this year having
been proved to be insufficient. In addition to
amounts voted, £BO,OOO has already been ad-
vanced this year to the Department for abso-
lutely necessary expenditure. The Department
has asked for £220,000. It does hbt include
AW provision (or bringing the Telegraph and
Telephone Services up-to-date. It has been


estimated that £1,800,000 would be required for
this purpose.)
Additional Defence Expenditure :
Naval .. .. .. £750,000
Military .« .. .. £400,000
Additional Bounties .. .. .• 25,000
Election Expenses (one-third oost) .. .. 17.000
Census (one-fifth of cost) .. .. -■ 24,000
Advettising Resources of the Commonwealth ~ 25,000
Lighthouses, & c., .. .. •• 35.000
Addi ional Payment for Mail Contract .. 45,000
High Commissioner, Staff, and Expenses .. 20,000
Papua .. .. .. .. 5,000
Quarantine .. .. .. .. 8,000
Other Increases and New Services, say .. .. 100,000
£2,893,190
This does not include expenditure for the Northern Territory)
which may amount to £200,000 per annum, nor for Trans-
Australian railways, nor for Federal capital site, etc. The
figures, however, show conclusively that if the Commonwealth
were to gain, by the adoption of the Hobart Conference pro-
posals, £1,313,000, or even £1,439,000 per annum, this would
not enable it to meet an additional annual expenditure of mote
than £3,000,000. Besides this, there is a radical objection to
the scheme proposed by the premiers at Hobart in that its
adoption would hobble the Commonwealth for all time, as for
every £2 required by the Commonwealth it would have to raise
a Customs and excise revenue amounting to £5. The only
alternative would be direct taxation. The Premiers’ proposals
would perpetuate the objectionable feature of the Braddon
clause, under which the Commonwealth has now to raise £4 in
Customs and excise revenue for every £1 which it requiies for
its own expenditure.
An Offer 1 to the States.
But the great disappointment I feel in connection with the
recent conference is in the fact that the State Premiers seem to
have lost sight, for the present at least, of the great advantage
to be gained by the Commonwealth taking over the State debts.
Every Commonwealth Treasurer who has studied this subject
has been of the same opinion. Sir John Forrest pointed out to
the Brisbane Conference that, in the opinion of the directors of
the Bank of England, the London and Westminster Bank, the
late Lord Goschen, the Imperial Treasury, and a number of
other financial authorities, the security of the Commonwealth
must be better than that of the States, and that, as time goes
on, the securities will command a higher price. Even if an
advance of only J per cent in the price of sleek were gained, by
the time the last loan fell due, the Commonwealth would have


gained a profit of £26,000,000 for the people of Australia.
Supposing that the States remain averse to the taking over of
the loans by the Commonwealth, I would be prepared, as an
alternative, to promise on behalf of my Government that a
minimum annual amount of £5,000.000 be paid over to them,
with an additional amount of £250,000 to West Australia, the
latter amount diminishing annually on a sliding scale. I make
this promise simply to relieve the apprehensions of some who
seem to fear that the Commonwealth will, on the expiration of
the Braddon clause, absorb for its own purposes the whole of the
Customs and excise revenue. I was asked at the Hobart Con-
ference to explain more fully the scheme suggested by the Labor
Conference held at Brisbane. Perhaps the wording of the
proposals was not as clear as it might have been. The main
intention was to discover a “ fixed sum” to be returned to the
States on a population basis, the payment of additional amounts
to be left to the Commonwealth Parliament.
A Plan of Distribution.
The total amount to be distributed was to be ascertained in
the following manner :
Average total of Customs and Excise Revenue of five
representative years op to 1910 .. .. £10,066,336
Deduct average total of Commonwealth Expenditure,
apart from Reproductive Services for the same
representative years, viz., .. £2,098,828
Invalid and Old-Age Pensions .. £2,000,000
Additional Sum for Expanding Neoes
sities of the Commonwealth .. £1,000,000
Balance .. .. .. £4,967,508
The above figures have been based on the years 1905 1906,
1906-1907, and 1907 B—three8 —three of the period of five years.
Dividing the balance of £4,967.508 by the average population
during the same period, viz., 4,122,998, the result is that the
amount returnable to the States is ascertained to be £JL42OS per
head. Assuming that the new system of distribution came into
operation in 1909, the aggregate amount to be returned to the
States would have been £5,229,017, which would be a fixed
amount returnable annually to the States. An additional
amount, say £250,000, was to be returned to West Australia,
diminishing annually on a sliding scale. In an interesting
article contributed to the Sydney Daily Telegeaph on September
7, 1908, Mr. Dugald Thomson approached the subject from
quite a different point of view, viz., the respective necessities
of the Commonwealth and the States. Mr, Thomson arrived
practically at the same result. That is, he estimates that the
Commonwealth should contribute £5,258,000, or £5,562,000 at


the most, towards the interest payable by the States on their-
debts.
A Generous Parliament.
In leaving this subject, I desire clearly to state that the
Commonwealth is not bound to limit its contributions to the
State funds to any amount that may be agreed upon. It may
be taken for granted that the Commonwealth Parliament will
be fully aware of the necessities of the States, and that it will
not permit any extravagance in Commonwealth expenditure, and
that it will endeavor in the future, as in the past, to hand over
to the States not only as much as it is bound to do, but to
supplement such amounts whenever it is possible. Finally,
with regard to the Hobart Conference, I consider that a distinct
advance has been made, as the Conference appeared to consider
the necessities of the Commonwealth more than any previous
Conference did. Further than that, I congratulate the Confer-
ence on having arrived at a decision that the bookkeeping
system should be abolished, and that the surplus should be
divided on a population basis, with a special concession
to West Australia. I am sorry that some of the-
earlier schemes for taking over the debts of the
States have not been approved by the Premiers, but
that was their business. At the Hobart Conference I made
the following statement :—“ I view with horror another, making
a seventh, borrower in Australia. I have not been able to
consult or look up any authority which does not say that the
Commonwealth handling of the debts would be far cheaper than,
the States continuing to handle them.” I repeat the statement
now. This statement has been challenged, therefore I would
like to quote the following statements. Mr. J. Gardner, at the-
Melbourne Conference, 1904, said :—“ Had it not been that the
Treasurers, seeing that they are to a certain extent faced with
almost immediate conversions, saw some possibility of making
better terms through the Commonwealth than the States could
make independently, I do not think we should have had a
conference at all.”—Mr. Kidston, again, at the Sydney Confer-
ence, 1906, said: —“ It would create an Australian stock and
make the Federal debt an investment which would at any rate-
bring better prices to the sellers.”
Cheaper Borrowing.
Last, but not least, Sir George Turner also endorsed that
view—that we could borrow cheaper by having one borrower.
Now let us see what this small percentage means. I will not
say that the Commonwealth credit will be even a half per cent
better than the States’ at the present time; but if we have one
stock, one denomination, one borrower, we will probably in Id


years be able to borrow a half pec cent cheaper than the States
can borrow to-day. And what would that mean ? It would
mean that by payiog that sum to a sinking fund at 3 per cent
compound interest, in 66 years you would be able to pay off your
whole indebtedness of £250,000,000 sterling. Take it at a
-quarter per cent, the indebtedness would be paid off in 87 years.
Is that worth thinking over ? Is it worth striving for ? Is it not
worth pointing out seriously that there is a great loss yearly
going on ? I feel that the States, once they understand this
■question, will declare themselves in favor of one borrower, and
that through the Commouwealth Parliament, (Applause).
On the question of borrowing, this Government, I say, will
not go on the money market on any condition whatever, until
there is some settlement of this important matter. Federation
was first for defence, and secondly to prevent the States com-
peting aud raising the prices of money. What a humiliating
policy for the rest of the world to see that the only effect is to
add another borrower to the six we have had before. Whatever
the consequences, whatever the stress may be, barring danger to
the preservation and protection of the Commonwealth or the
Empire, we shall not go in for a borrowing policy. We shall
have to seek some other means.
Immigration and Advertising.
We feel that we should have a High Commissioner in London,
and a bill will be introduced next session to give effect to that
desire. There is also the question of the cost of immigration.
We have the effect of the States each advertising its own part of
the Commonwealth. To give one or two instances 1 will quote
from the official handbook of West Australia, issued in 1908, as
follows : —“ The violent fluctuations due to variability of the
seasons in other States have not affected this State. Our flocks
and herds have gone on increasing steadily, when those of the
eastern States were decimated by the great droughts.” Tas-
mania says:—“ The dreaded fruit fly, which is doing so much
damage on the mainland, is unknown here. Other States have
occasional droughts, and in summer there are several weeks of
intense heat.” Erom New South Wales advertisements I
read :—“ Speaking of free grants in other States, it will usually
be found what costs nothing is worth nothing.” The last thing
I read about New South Wales’ applications for land was that
there were 700 applicants for 40 lots. Victoria says :—“ Mel-
bourne is the most populous city in Australia,’’ and so on.
These are only little side-lights on the important matter of
advertising.
Northern Territory.
Another matter I wish to refer to is the Northern Territory.
"That Territory is larger than France, Germany, Belgium,


Switzerland, and Italy put together, and 1 feel that it is the
duty of the national Parliament of Australia to take over that
vast tract. I admit that the taking over is full of difficulties ;
but we are prepared, as a Government, to submit a scheme
approved by Mr. Price, Premier of South Australia, and Mr.
Deakin, to the Federal Parliament, and ascertain whether we
can come to some agreement to take over the Territory, and, by
doing so, find some means of settling and protecting it. I have
great hopes of being able to do something with that part of
Australia, and I do so because many here will remember that a
great number of our best citizens in Queensland thought it was
absolutely impossible for white people to cultivate this part of
the State. We have compelled those people to reluctantly admit
that 500 miles further north they can cultivate the land and do
better than any other race in the Northern Territory. I hope,
by better bousing, medical inspection, and other civilised
methods, that our own race will be able to live in tropical parts
of Australia in comparative comfort. For that reason I and my
party proposed to go on with the matter.
Federal Capital.
In regard to the Federal capital site, I see no reason to alter
the view that the Government of the Commonwealth should have
its own house and its own country ; and, for that reason, wo will
proceed with the building of the Federal capital as soon as the
proper place for it has been ascertained.
Trans-Australian Railways.
I feel that while the matter of the trans-continental railways
is in the future —perhaps in the distant future—still the people
of the Commonwealth should be educated regarding them. I
shall be pleased if the survey of the West Australian line is of
such a character as will enable Parliament to come to the con-
clusion that the line should be constructed. In visiting West
Australia some time ago I felt that the people were as surely
Australians as we were, and the nearer we link them to us the
more closely associated we will be with them in the matter of
sentiment and defence. It involves a large sum of money, and
for that reason we must proceed with the necessary caution.
Agricultural Bureau.
We want an Agricultural Bill to provide for a bureau for the
investigation of agricultural matters and the dissemination of
information in regard to these matters.
Other Bills,
We also want an amendment of the Old-age Pensions Act, to
make it as favorable as any in the Commonwealth or New


Zealand. Other Bills to be brought forward are the Norfolk
Island Acceptance Bill, Bills of Exchange, Marine Insurance,
Bankruptcy, Electoral Amendment. Public Service Amendment,
Seamen’s Compensation, Customs Act Amendment,
and I have no doubt some other bills will be discovered to be
necessary.
To Raise Revenue —A Note Issue.
I now want to say to you that it will be necessary to raise
■revenue for the services I have indicated. I propose to submit
to you a proposition for a Commonwealth Note issue for Aus-
tralia. (Applause). I was in Parliament in 1893, when that
■cautious Treasurer. Sir Hugh Nelson, passed the Treasury Note
Acts, I gave him support. It has been a great success. No-
body is afraid of accepting those bits of paper as legal tender,
and how much better it would be if we had a paper issue on the
same principle for the whole of the Commonwealth. People on
each side of the border would not have to pay exchange. For
that reason I think the time has arrived when the Common-
wealth should have a note issue of its own. Some of the critics
will try to raise a scare, saying this is the Labor Government
again meddling with finance, which they know nothing about.
If they do, I am hoping to direct them to the troublous part of
the history of Australia in 1902 1903. When the banks closed
their doors, much of their paper was temporarily at a discount;
but there had never been any destructive criticism of the Trea-
sury note, and I venture to state that there will be no criticism
of the Commonwealth note.
Silver Coinage.
The Imperial Government have agreed to the Commonwealth
getting the profits arising from the minting of silver when it
-undertakes that. We propose to mint silver at the earliest
possible moment after the Act has been passed by the Federal
Parliament. There can be no cry of disloyalty here, because it
has the endorsement of the Imperial Government. I expect the
note issue to give us about £IOO,OOO per year, and the silver
coinage to turn in £90,000 per annum to the Commonwealth.
Land Tax and Absentee Tax.
I cannot close without mentioning an item which is probably
expected by you, and the people of Australia. We propose to
submit, to Parliament a bill to provide for the taxation of unim-
proved land values—(cheers)— with a £SOOO exemption, and
that exemption is the same as that in force in New Zealand.
We propose, further, as regards absentees, that they shall have
have to pay, in addition to the tax specified in the schedule I
-shall read, an additional one penny, so that absentees, living in
other countries and owning large estates here, shall pay more


Value
Bate
Tax on
largest
Estate of
each class.
To £5,000 exempt..
..
£5,000 to £10,000
,
Id
£20 16 8
£10,000 to £15,000
•
.. Hd
£52 1 8
£15,000 to £20,000
,
2d
£93 15 0
£20,000 to £30,000
,
.. 2Jd
£197 18 4
£30,000 to £40,000
,
.. 3d
£322 18 4
£40,000 to £50,000
.. 3*d
£468 15 0
£50,000 and above
.
4d
£635 8 4
than those living in the Commonwealth and helping to develop
it by their own presence and labors. The effect will be seen in
this schedule :
The last-named amount represents a tax on estates of
£60,000. Absentees would be charged Id extra in each case,
with no exemption. It is a fair tax, a reasonable tax, and a
necessary tax, if Australian lands are to be developed as they
should be. This is not a popular policy ; but it is because it is
a sound policy that lam submitting it to you. Whether the
life of this Government is to be long or short, the only privilege
it has at present is to perform the public duty lying nearest to
it—that is, to submit a policy to the people, which may be
slightly in advance of their ideas, but in its main principle is as
sound as any we have submitted during the past 20 strenuous
years. During that period we have seen, so often, proposals
vilified, then accepted, then claimed as part and parcel of the
Conservatives’ programme. (Cheers). I think some of you will
live to see the same in this instance. We think that land
should not be a private monopoly in this country so long as
people are desirous of using it. In some of the rural districts
in Victoria there are far fewer people than there were 20 years
ago, and I trust that if this policy is accepted it will do some
thing to prevent that state of affairs continuing.
The Sugar Industry.
My last reference is to the sugar industry. We have made a
success of the white-labor policy. Nearly all our sugar now is
produced by white labor, and we have largely helped to populate
500 miles of the north coast of Queensland by people of our own
race ; and by that means we have helped to defend that part of
the Commonwealth. It is worth the money for alone.
The success of this only helps to assure us that, when making
future propositions against great opposition, we should not be
discouraged by opposition if convinced we are on the right track.
Also I asked the Premiers at Hobart would they allow the
excise sugar duties to be paid into a trust fund, and to allow
the bounty to be paid out of that fund, and distribute the


balance —three-quarters to the States and one-quarter to the
Commonwealth—but so far they have never said a word
about it. Still, don’t you think that a fair proposition t
I got a telegram to day from Mr. Wade stating that if the
Commonwealth offered a Dreadnought to Britain he would
allow the New South Wales portion to be taken out of the State’s
three-fourths ; and if the Government intended to increase the
naval subsidy he would do the same. I say, would it not be
much more reasonable for them to consider the question of
giving to the Commonwealth its legitimate share, which it has
sacrificed to establish a white labor sugar industry. I believe
that this ease has only to be stated to the people and they will
induce their State representatives to recognise the reasonable-
ness of the proposals, and see to it that the Commonwealth will
not be a loser of its money by reason of this. I hope that
justice will be done to the Federal finances whoever is to carry
on the Government of the country. (Loud cheers).




