

USE FRY’S MALTED COCOA.
PRIEST’S
SECRET,
EDMUND FINN,
Author of “ The Hordern Mystery “ The Story of
Her Life, dee.
X
SSN
U-
5
00
Ul
ONE SHILLING.
Spbneg;
ALEX. M'KINLEY & CO., PRINTERS, 51 HUNTER STREET,
n
M DCCCLXX XVIII.








ADVERTISEMENT,
ißMluntnitc
(ENLARGED AND IMPROVED)
The Leading Comical and Satirical Journal
of Australia;
THE RECOGNISED SOCIAL AND LADIES PAPER
OF AUSTRALIA;
The Only Complete Record of the Theatrical
Events of Australia.
“MELBOURNE PUNCH”
IS ISSUED
mrwmww nraw4¥,
AND EACH NUMBER CONTAINS
Political and Social Cartooijs
Portraits of Celebrities of the Day
TOPICS OF THE WEEK & FASHIONABLE NOVELTIES.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
REAL JAPAN
LIQUID
As guppHeil to tile times
DAY & MARTIN.
Californian fitters
CHALLENGE COMPARISON AS
A TONIC LIQUEUR!
AN UNRIVALLED APPETISER !
A CONSTITUTIONAL RENOVATOR!
A PERFECT STIMULANT!
AN UNFAILING EXHILARANT !
SOLD EVERYWHERE.


A PRIEST’S SECRET.
“ UNDER SEAL OF CONFESSION.*’
EDMUND FINN,
Author of “ The Hordern Mystery,” “ The Story of Her
Lifef &=c.
MELBOURNE:
ALEX, M'KINLEY & CO., PRINTERS, 59 QUEEN ST


AD VEBTISEM ENT.
WHAT WILL IT COST TO PRINT ?
THE
Centennial Ipnlilislring Cotnpng
Undertake to Revise and Prepare
MANUSCRIPT FOR PUBLICATION,
EITHER IN SERIAL OR BOOK FORM.
ESTIMATES & DESIGNS FURNISHED.
Printing Contracts Entered into on
TERMS SPECIALLY ADVANTAGEOUS TO AUTHORS
AND OTHERS.
EDITORS :
GARNET WALCH and NAT. J. BARNET.
MELBOURNE:
PREMIER CHAMBERS, 7 COLLINS STREET WEST.
SYDNEY:
Commercial Chambers, 311 George Street.
ADELAIDE: King William-street. LONDON: 37 Walbrook.


CONTENTS.
The Priest of Bluegum ... ... n
The Priest’s Sister ... ... ... ... ... 22
The First Link ... ... ... 32
What the Priest saw on the Mountain Road... 38
Committed for Trial .. , ... ... ... 44
The Man Who Killed John Dromane ... ... 50
Father Dromane Passes a Sleepless Night ... 57
Priest and Penitent... ... ... ... ... 62
Sentenced to Death... ... ... ... ... 73
In the Darkness ... ... ... ... ... 79
A Last Resource ... 88
The Priest’s Secret ... ... ... ... ... 94


ADVERTISEMENTS.
CHILDREN
JEN & WOtyEN
THE
STRUGGLE FOR THEM,
lohdoh & mmsa
SUPPLY STOBPS
Tell you how to SAVE THEM, and help you to do it by asking only small
profits and nothing more. Their stock of
Tweeds, Coatings, Hosiery, Scarfs, Ties, Shirts, Hats»
Trunks, Bags, Umbrellas, &c.,
Is the Largest and Finest in the (City, and the prices asked are lower than
ever heard of before.
You are asked to Buy from this Stock because it is
LARGEST mil 771 LARGEST
FINEST, I H r j FINEST,
BEST. BEST.
Selected with the greatest care and known to be just what is wanted in
this community.
BOURKE ST. EAST, WAXWORKS
A. W. FERNE, Director.


A PRIEST’S SECRET.
“Under Seal of Confession.”
CHAPTEPx I.
The Priest of Bluegum.
It is not necessary to say how, or from whom,
the account of the circumstances about to be
narrated came to me. It has come, how-
ever, and has remained unpublished until now.
A previous publication might, I feared, have
inflicted pain upon innocent persons, to whom a
cruel reminder of former suffering would have
meant a repetition of the original anguish.
There are sensitive, loving natures for whom
time’s healing power lies only in a resolutely-
forced forgetfulness. Anything that recalls the
past renews the pang. Years after the death
of some sicldy, deformed child, when the turf


has grown over the mound in the graveyard, the
mother may believe that the grass of time has
completely covered up the furrow in her heart.
It is not so —the accidental finding of some for-
gotten relic will lay the scar open again as a
gaping wound. The old grief is renewed, and
her eyes fill with the rising tears, through
whose dim haze she sees the empty cot, the
unused toys, and the white, worn face, now for
ever vanished, of the sickly mite who in life was
dearer to her than any of her handsomer,
healthier children.
So far as those concerned in “ A Priest’s
Secret,” the use of fictitious names, though suffi-
cient to conceal identities to the outside world,
would have been useless so far as the chief
characters were concerned. To them, at any
rate, the story would be their own, and the
remembrance bitter.
One by one, however, the few principals have
passed away to distant countries or to another
world. The recent death of the dishonoured
and disgraced man, who caused so much suffer-
ing to others, leaves me free to speak. There
may be one or two persons still alive in Victoria
who at one time knew the whole story. Their


connection with the incidents and the actors
must have been so remote that the probability
is that the lapse of over a quarter of a century
has caused all recollection of the circumstances
to have long since faded from their minds.
Though the facts came to me at a much later
date, they came from the lips of one of the
principals, so that each part of the story was
strongly and ineffaceably impressed upon my
memory, and 1 feel certain that I shall omit
nothing of the story, however feebly 1 may tell
it.
Those who, now-a-days, visit Bluegum see a
strange place. It consists of a few scattered
and almost deserted townships, languidly living
in the mountains that surround them as if in
pity to cover up their nakedness and hide the
destitution of these once-prosperous places from
the world. The world, indeed, knows little, and
cares less, about the existence of Bluegum. No
Ministerial banquets are ever held there —in
electoral divisions it is absorbed almost to non-
entity, in a far extending area compared to
which it is as a drop in a bucket of water. The


railway, that now goes everywhere, contemp-
tuously declines to go near Bluegum, and the
human beings who live there do so on compul-
sion. They cannot get away, and therefore eke
out a primitive kind of existence by living on
each other. A few Chinamen still fossick about
with their sluice-boxes in the creek, content to
live on what the Europeans have thought worth-
less. In the myriads of abandoned claims and
mounds of valueless washdirt scattered all
round, in the unused streets and the many
houses tottering in their decay, it is easily seen
that Bluegum is a dead town. The grand old
trees alone survive the general ruin, and when
the wind whistles around their heads, and makes
them shake their leafy locks, they seem to bend
over, looking down at the remnants of past
splendour, and murmur—
“ Ichabod ! Ichabod !”
Those sturdy children of the forest had seen
the day when Bluegum was occupied by more
than thirty thousand men of all nations, of all
creeds, of all ages, and of all colours, but with
one single object—the pursuit of gold ! The
short-sighted, eager miners imagined that the
wealth hidden there was inexhaustible, and


hotels, houses, shops, and concert-halls (rough,
but sufficient for their purpose) rose rapidly—as
rapidly as the fortunes of the lucky diggers.
Even a photographer built a “ studio” there,
and made a considerable sum by selling the
diggers those little brass-bound glass-positives
that were in vogue before cartes-de-visite came
into fashion. The lucky digger who wanted his
picture taken thought nothing of giving a small
nugget for it. The men who reaped the golden
harvest were, however, the brandy-sellers, who
retailed a poison that maddened the brain, whilst
it scorched up the stomach. The diggers paid
freely with their “dust” until they became
stupid. Then the shanty-keepers robbed them
of their nuggets, and turned them out with
aching heads to seek for more. Those were the
grand old times, when Ballarat and Bendigo
were supposed to be but temporary El Doradoes ;
and Bluegum was to go on for ever, robbing even
Melbourne of its pride of place as capital. But
the change soon came.
It was just before Bluegum began to have a
downward tendency that Father Drornane came
to the place. He was a young Irishman, who
had come out as a boy with his father and his


sister in the still earlier days. Old John
Droman e had that strong desire so characteristic
of the Irish —a wish to make one of the family
a priest. Hard times and the death of his wife
decided him to emigrate to Australia, and he
came out, bringing with him his son Maurice,
and his young daughter Kathleen. The
southern climate did not, however, change the
Irish nature of John Dromane, and he still
fondly clung to the hope of making his boy a
priest. The boy himself was passionately
desirous of taking orders, and in due course it
came to pass that Maurice Dromane was
ordained, and the dearest wish of his father’s
heart was fulfilled.
“God bless and prosper ye in your holy
mission,” said John Dromane, as, with tears in
his eyes, he kissed his son, a priest. “ I could
now die happy ”
Better, perhaps, that he had died then. His
daughter had then been spared long nights of
grief—his darling son had never known the
terrible secret that aged him before his time, nor
been forced to fight the dire struggle between
duty to his God and duty to his fellow-man.
Happily ignorant of the future, father, son and


daughter felt no cold chill of the coming shadow
that was soon to darken their lives.
They stood together, the blood of each warmed
with an honest fire, the father and the sister
radiant with happy innocent pride—the young
priest glowing with faith and a religious deter-
mination to obey faithfully the vows he had
taken.
Bluegum w~as the first parish assigned to the
Reverend Maurice Dromane, and to Bluegum
7 O
he went. There were but two places in the
world to old John and young Kathleen—one
where “ the priest ” was, and the other where he
was not —so the father and sister went to Blue-
gum with the priest. Kathleen could keep
house for him, and John Dromane could manage
to live as well in the mining town as in Mel-
bourne.
To the two young people, Maurice and his
sister, Bluegum seemed a strange and terrible
place. Reared in a quiet Irish village, where
peace and poverty were plentiful, the wild law-
lessness, the drunkenness and the utter disregard
of the value of money struck them with wonder.
The three lived together in a little rudely-built
wood cottage close to another equally rude wood


building that was the chapel. Father Dromane
soon forgot his wonder at the strangeness of the
place, for he threw himself into his duties with
all the impulsiveness and ardour of an Irish youth
There was work not for one clergyman but for a
dozen of them in Bluegum, for the devil and
half of his imps seemed to be possessing the
miners to drink, to rob and even to murder
More than one body was found with a bullet
hole in it, but as there was no clue to the
assassin, the diggers presumed that it was that
of some thief who had been shot by the man he
had attempted to plunder. So the body was
buried in due course and forgotten.
After Father Dromane’s arrival there was a
decided change for the better, at any rate, at
Limerick Point. This was a large flat, round
which the creek wound, and which the Irish
diggers had monopolised. To enter there meant
severe ill-usage for an Englishman. Indeed, it
was darkly hinted that the only one who
attempted to occupy “a right” on Limerick
Point had disappeared the very first night, and
was never heard of again. Hie young priest
knew the peculiarities of his countrymen. He
knew with what awe they regarded a priest, or, as


they called him, the soggarth, or “ his reverence ”
Into their wildest orgies and fiercest drunken
brawls Father Dromane intruded without the
slightest fear of personal violence. If words
were insufficient to stop a fight, he would him-
self by force part the combatants, who would
sulkily or shame-facedly desist and go to their
tents It was not a matter of courage or bravery
upon the part of the clergyman, but he knew
that reverence for the clergy was next to
inseparable from the Hibernian nature He
knew that on Limerick Point, drunken, lawless,
and reckless as it was, the life of a man who
raised his hand against a priest was not worth
ten minutes’ purchase ; he would have been torn
limb from limb. The clergyman was a strong
disciple of Father Mathew. He made many of
those reckless miners sign the pledge, and, what
was much better, looked them up frequently to
see that they kept it. The brandy-sellers hated
<( the smooth-faced young son of a wretch,” who
interfered with their business.
They asked contemptuously, “ What goods a
blooming priest or parson on a diggins’ ? People
there don’t think of going to heaven —they
want to go to hell in their own way.”


But Father Dromane heeded not the scowls
and mutterings of the sly-grog sellers, so long as
he saw the attendance at mass in the rude little
chapel increase every Sunday, and found a few
of those he had led to sobriety coming to their
“duty.” It was recognised by all that he was
effecting a reform on the diggings. He did not
accomplish very much perhaps, but it was a
wonderful thing to accomplish anything in such
a place. Consequently, the less reckless of all
creeds respected him and honoured him, none
more so than Stephen Goble, one of the store-
keepers in the place. Stephen was one of those
young men who came to the diggings like others
to “make his pile,” but not like others to waste
it in debauchery. Nor did he mean to allow the
sly-grog sellers to steal it from him. He was
no bigot, and, in his quiet, observant way, he
noted the control the priest held over the Irish
miners and the good use to which he put it.
“That clergyman,” said Stephen, “is a good
man, be he papist, Protestant or heathen ”
Strong as the respect Stephen Goble held for
f ather Maurice JDromane, it was weak compared
to the affection which he felt for the priest’s
pretty sister ? Kathleen Dromane. From this


love of the Protestant Stephen for the Catholic
Kathleen, serious consequences afterwards
ensued.


CHAPTER 11.
The Priest’s Sister.
Stephen Goble was not the stamp of man to
fall in love at first sight. His firm self-control,
his recognition of the fact that life was a stern,
hard battle, in which the one was opposed to
the many; and his steady-going, temperate busi-
ness-like nature prevented him setting his life’s
happiness upon so trivial a cast as a pretty
woman’s smile or frown. He was not a man to
give his heart away lightly, or without mature
consideration, but once having given it, it
was an irrevocable gift. He would fall in love
but once in a lifetime, and that love would
terminate only with his life.
Hitherto he had been heart-whole. The
women who were to be found about the
diggings in those early days were not such as
were likely to tempt him into love or marriage.
When Kathleen Dromane came with her
brother and father to Bluegum, Stephen Goble


did not incontinently fall in love with her. He
would have done so had he been a hero in a
novel, but being only a hard-working store-
keeper in a new country, he simply admired her
chiefly because she was so different to the
other daughters of Eve that he saw in his daily
life.
Kathleen, it may be said, was not one of
those perfect beauties upon whose featuies
artists are supposed to dwell. She was a
pleasant faced, lithe-limbed girl, with dark
brown hair, and that soft grey eye fringed with
dark lashes, so characteristic of Irish female
beauty. Whatever charm her face possessed
was due to those lustrous Irish eyes. They
were the eyes that could flash with anger at
times, but their natural expression was one of
a tender sadness that seemed to enlist the
sympathy, if not the affection of the beholder.
Such eyes must have inspired Moore when he
wrote the sweet yet sad, melodious yet plain-
tive, songs of his native land. Her quiet
manner, reserved, but by no means shy, seemed
to accord with the soft grey orbs, whilst her
voice had just sufficient of the brogue to make
her sentences fall musically upon the ear.


Stephen admired her, liked her, took pleasure
in her society, and slowly and not unwillingly
drifted out into the deeper water of love. Long
before he felt that his happiness was bound up
in the priest’s sister he knew what the result
would be. He did not disguise to himself that
he thought too much by day and dreamt too
much at night of this pretty Kathleen. But it
was pleasant to dream, even though the awaking
should bring with it heart-burning and dis-
appointment.
“’Tis better to have loved and lost
Than never to have loved at all,’
Stephen Goble used to hum to himself when at
times he looked seriously forward to the future
and saw an almost insuperable bar to their
marriage. It was the bar that had caused
unhappiness and bloodshed since time imme-
morial—a difference in religion. Stephen Goble
knew that John Dromane had a fiercely unreason-
ing hatred of all who did not belong to his own
ancient faith. John Dromane could be per-
suaded that a camel might contrive to go
through the eye of a needle, but the possibility
of a Protestant going to heaven was one of
those wild and incredible mysteries of which he


could not be convinced. As to seeing his
daughter joined in marriage to one with “ the
black drop” in him, the idea was preposterous.
He would rather have seen his child laid out in
her shroud than robed as a bride to wed a
Protestant. Stephen also felt that the Rev.
Maurice Dromane would be averse to the
match—not from bigotry, like the father, but
from a conscientious belief which the priest
entertained that mixed marriages were not, as
a rule, productive of happiness. The priest,
too, although a liberal-minded and sensible man,
could not but feel that the marriage of his only
sister with one outside the pale of his church
would partake of something in the nature of a
mild scandal. On the whole, then, Stephen’s
love affair did not wear the brightest of
prospects. Nevertheless, he loved on, and
dreamed and hoped, for he felt that his affection
was returned.
Kathleen Dromane never for a moment
suspected that she was falling in love with the
handsome young storekeeper. She liked his
society. His conversation was pleasant, and
his manners gentle, two attributes not very
common amongst the male residents of


Bluegum. That they called each other by their
Christian names went for nothing, —it was the
custom of the place. Stephen allowed himself
to drift into his love for Kathleen, knowingly.
The simple-hearted girl fell in love with her
Protestant admirer unknown to herself. 11
seemed neither strange nor wrong that Stephen
should pass the little presbytery every evening
and find her there, unconsciously to herself,
expecting him. It seemed but natural that
when she went into the township, or took a
stroll through the gullies in search of some rare
ferns, Stephen Goble should cross her path and
see her home.
This pleasant way of life went on for months,
until Stephen felt that whatever difficulties
there might be to their marriage, he had at least
secured her love. But when was lover ever
satisfied with the mere knowledge, however
certain ? He wanted the sweet confession from
her own lips. H e had but little hope of
succeeding in obtaining her father’s or her
brother’s consent, but he had a vague idea that
things would come all right some day if Kath-
leen loved him. He determined to speak to
her upon the subject. He was not so ignorant


of woman’s nature but that he knew that the
honest love of man was dear to a woman. He
knew also that his avowal would linger in
Kathleen’s mind, producing, if not love at first,
that pity which is akin to it.
“ Kathleen,” he said to her one day when
they had met by the usual premeditated acci-
dent, “ you are too sensible a girl not to have
seen how much pleasure I take in your society.”
“ And I in yours, Stephen,” replied Kathleen,
with a frank smile.
“ But, my girl,” he continued, taking her
hand, “this cannot go on always thus. Igo
out of my way each evening to pass the
Presbytery —to see you. I call in frequently to
talk to your brother upon imaginary business, or
to give him unimportant news —to see you. lam
ever on the watch in the township, and too fre-
quently rambling through the gullies —to see you.
Do you know what that means, Kathleen %
The girl did not answer, but the frank smile
had faded from her face, her cheeks were crimson
and the soft grey eyes, shaded by the dark
lashes, were fixed upon the ground. She would
have withdrawn her hand, but he held it in a
firm though gentle clasp.


“It means, Kathleen, that I love you,” he
exclaimed. “ Don’t speak,” he continued,
hurriedly, as she was about to interrupt him.
I know what you would say. You would
speak of the difference in our religions, but we
are not children to wreck our lives for a question
of creed. Was it not one of the poets of your own
land that wrote
“ What matter that at different shrines
We knelt unto one God V
We worship the same Creator, we have the same
beliefs, we say almost the same prayers, though
yours are offered up in a chapel and mine in a
church. Shall this bugbear of mere form—this
unsubstantial bogey of a mere name—stand be-
tween us and a life-long happiness ? Kathleen,
I do not believe that I am a vain man, but it
would be mock modesty on my part to conceal
from myself that you do like me.”
“ I do, indeed, Stephen,” was the reply, spoken
in a low, tremulous voice, as she raised her eyes
from the ground and looked him in the face.
Those eyes he saw were now dimmed with
tears.
“ I knew it. I felt that the pleasure I took


in being with you—the love I felt for you must
beto some extent reciprocated.”
“ Stay, Stephen,” said Kathleen, resolutely
withdrawing her hand. “Do not let us talk of
love. I like you too well to deceive you for an
instant. It may not be very womanly for me
to admit that I like you—perhaps even love you.
| do not know—but if to watch for your coming
with eagerness, to feel happy when you are near,,
and sad when you go away, be the signs and
tokens of love, then I love you.”
“My darling,” cried the enraptured lover,,
attempting to embrace her. She waved him off
quietly
“Do not let us deceive ourselves, or each
other,” she said calmly. “It is only to-day that
I have come to recognise how deep is the affec-
tion that I feel for you. I can never love
another, but I can never marry you.”
“ hut why, since you admit you love me T
he asked, pettishly.
“ 1 would not marry against my father’s will,
and you know he would never give his consent
to my marriage with a Protestant.”
“ Well,” said the lover, “ I am content to wait..
The old man can’t live for ever.”


“ Stephen Goble !”
“ I beg your pardon, Kathleen,” he said
hurriedly. “I did not mean that. I did not
know what I was saying.”
u Even supposing that I had not to consult
my father’s wishes.” continued the girl, “you
forget that my brother is a priest.”
“But he is a sensible man for all that,” said
Stephen. “I am sure that I could argue the
point with him priest though he be.”
“You do not know,” said Kathleen sadly,
“ how he and his father have laboured for him
to attain the cloth. I can remember in Ireland,
before my mother died, how the two old people
would comfort themselves in their trials and
troubles with that one thought, ‘ Maurice will
be a priest ’ Ever since he was born I believe
thev had devoted him to the church. All their
plans, all their hopes, all their ambition moved
round that one shining centre —that one star
whose light brightened their dark pathway —
Maurice should be a priest. That ambition has
been attained, and amongst our people at any
rate my marriage with you would create a scandal.
The time will come some day, 1 hope, when
mixed marriages will not be regarded as sinful,


but that time has not yet arrived. My mother’s
spirit would haunt me, and my father’s curse
follow me to my grave, if I did that which would
cause Maurice to be pointed at as the priest
whose sister married out of the faith. Stephen,
as honestly and as unreservedly as I tell you 1
love you, so frankly and truly I tell you that
we can never be anything to each other but
friends.”


CHAPTER 111.
The First Link.
Silently the dejected lovers took their way to
Kathleen’s home. It was dusk when they
reached the Presbytery-gates. She held out
her hand to him.
“ Good night,” she said.
He did not speak, but drawing her unresist-
ingly to him, he kissed her on the cheek.
“ is’ ot good night,” he said, as he turned away.
“ I shall be back at the Presbytery within an
hour.”
A s he strode with a firm step down the road
to the township, he muttered through his set
teeth —
“We shall be more than friends, Kathleen,
in spite of all the creeds ever preached by priest
or parson.”
Stephen Goble’s mind was made up Having
learnt from Kathleen’s own lips that he had


won her heart, he determined to make a bold
bid for her hand, and at once.
“ Her brother,” he thought, “ is a good man
and a sensible fellow, and though it may cost
him a pang to have his only sister wedded to a
husband of another creed, he is too fond of her
to place any serious obstruction in the way of
her happiness. Iby no means feel so certain of
her father. lam afraid that he comes of a stiff-
necked stock. He is an uneducated man, and
as a natural consequence a bigoted one. lam
doubly ineligible to marry into his family, for I
am an Englishman and a Protestant—darkly
stained in his eyes with two black and inefface-
able dyes. H owever, I must try and argue with
him. He, too, loves his daughter dearly, and
when he knows that his refusal to give his con-
sent to our marriage will mean life-long misery
for his child, he will give in. Faint heart never
won a fair lady, so for weal or for woe, I will
make the essay this very night. J shall not be
able to sleep until I have made the attempt and
learnt my fate.”
Punctually within the hour he presented
himself at the Presbytery. As Kathleen
admitted him, there was a puzzled look.


half of fear and half of enquiry, upon her
face.
“ My brother is not in, Stephen,” she said.
“It does not matter, Kathleen,” replied her
lover. “ I have come to speak to your father.”
She led the way into the little apartment
that served for a dining and sitting-room,
where John Dromane was. She was then
about to retire, but Stephen stopped her.
“ You had better stay here, Kathleen. What
I have to say concerns you as deeply as it con-
cerns myself,”
There was a frown upon old John Dromane’s
face when he heard this. He had a half sus-
picion of what was coming, and it made him
uneasy. He did not dislike Stephen Goble as
a man, but as a Protestant he was a black
sheep who could never be welcome in that little
fold.
Stephen Goble did not waste time in beating
about the bush. In a manly, outspoken way
he told the story of his love, of Kathleen’s
reciprocating affection.
“ I know,” he continued, “ that you are an
honest believer in your creed as I am in mine
Were I to offer to become a convert to


Catholicism, I know that yon and Kathleen
would feel the same contempt for me as I would
feel for myself, for my conversion would not be
the result of honest conviction, but an acted lie
to gain your daughter’s hand. Therefore, Mr
Dromane, I come frankly to you, and as a
Protestant ask your consent to my marriage
with your daughter.”
“ And that consent,” said John Dromane,
“ I refuse.”
“ But,” Mr. Dromane, cried Stephen Goble,
appealingly.
“ Father,” said his daughter
“ Hold your tongue!” exclaimed John
Dromane, angrily. “ What suggestion of the
devil put it into your head to think that I
would ever give ye my consent to marry
Kathleen. Do ye think that I would bring
disgrace upon my holy church, upon her dead
mother, and upon her brother, who is an
anointed priest, by letting her marry a
Protestant—”
“ But, Mr. Dromane,” interrupted Stephen
Goble, “ if you refuse you imperil the happiness
of her whole life.”
n What is her earthly happiness,” cried John


Dromane* working himself into ungovernable
rage, “to her crown of glory in the next world?
How could Father Maurice stand before the
world and look it in the face as a priest of God
if his sister married out of the only true faith ?
Whether she is fond of ye or not doesn’t matter
to me. If she disgraces her religion and her
brother’s cloth by marrying ye, may my eternal
curse, and the curse of her dead mother—”
“ Hush, father; be calm,” cried Kathleen,,
throwing her arms around him. “ Sure you
know I would never marry without your consent
and that of Father Maurice. Without that I
wouldn’t feel that the marriage was a holy one
in the sight of heaven.”
Stephen entreated, prayed, argued, threatened,
but in vain. The more he persisted the angrier
John Dromane became. They got to high words,
and Stephen, losing his temper, became as
passionate as the old man.
“Leave this holy house,” cried John
Dromane. “It isn’t fit that the dwelling of a
Catholic priest should be defiled by the likes of
a Protestant such as you.”
Enraged at his defeat, and beside himself with
passion, Stephen Goble made a couple of strides


towards the old man, but recollected himself and
turned to the door.
“ Good night, Mr. Dromane,” he said. “ The
after-result of this night’s work be on your
head.”
Then, without even a glance at the weeping
girl, he strode from the place and down the road
to the township. It was night now —dark night,
and the thick mist seemed to clino- round his
O
form and envelop him in its gloom.
With rage and grief in his heart he strode
on to his lonely store, little dreaming that he
had that night forged the first link in the chain
that was to bind him hand and foot in a felon’s
cell.


CHAPTER IV.
What the Priest saw on the Mountain
Road.
Life amongst the diggers on Bluegum went on
the same as usual. They made money and
spent it in wild carousal as heretofore, taking
little heed of Stephen Coble and his sorrow.
They had heard the story of his love for
Kathleen and its result, for John Dromane was
so enraged and indignant that he could not
refrain from telling the particulars to his
co-religionists. Such of the diggers as heard the
tale pitied poor Stephen in an easy-going way,
but judging his nature by their own, surmised
that he would soon get over his disappointment.
As for Stephen Goble, he grew moodj and
reserved, neglected his business, and spent
most of his time rambling in an abstracted and
melancholy way about the mountain gullies. He
never went near the Presbytery now, and had
not seen anything of Kathleen since that


unpleasantly eventful night. Stephen seemed to
have lost all interest in life, save when the name
of John Dromane was casually mentioned.
Then he would burst into a paroxysm of rage,
uttering vague and incoherent threats against
the intolerant old bigot, as he now called him.
“ That young fellow is going mad,” said one
of the miners who had been present at one of
these outbursts. “ I shouldn’t care to be in old
Dromane’s shoes, for one of these days when
Goble isn’t master of himself he’ll do the old
fellow a mischief.”
“ Stranger things than that have happened,”
acquiesced another of the diggers of Bluegum.
Father Maurice Dromane had of course heard
the whole story from his father He felt sorry
for Stephen Goble, for he entertained a sincere
regard and admiration for the steady and right-
living young storekeeper. Still he could not
but approve his father’s decision. Asa priest,
he knew that mixed marriages, though not
absolutely forbidden by his church, were inad-
visable Though he dearly loved his sister, he,
as a churchman, vowed to celibacy, knew nothing
of that dearer, tenderer, and more enduring
affection that takes possession of the human


heart. Woman’s love to him was but a passing
fancy that would soon die out, when it was
known to be hopeless.
Yet Father Maurice Dromane was not alto-
gether easy in his mind. Although Stephen
Goble kept out of his way, the priest could not
but hear of the changed manner and the vague
threats of his sister’s lover. Nor could Father
Dromane fail to notice that his sister was
genuinely unhappy. She never cared to go out,
and moved about the house in a pre-occupied
manner. He thought, too, that she was be-
ginning to look pale and worn. He commenced
to wonder whether his father and himself were
right after all, in thus making two young
persons who were, but for that bar of creed,
eminently suited to each other, miserable for
life.
When a fortnight had passed since the night
on which Stephen Goble had been ordered out
of the presbytery, the priest had come to the
determination that he would have a serious
consultation with his father on the subject.
“ His chief objection is on my account,” he
soliloquised, “ but I feel that I have no right to
bring sorrow into Kathleen’s life. If I am


willing to yield, I feel sure that my father
cannot refuse his consent.”
A priest’s life in a country district is by no
means a bed of roses. His time is never his
own, for his duty often calls him away at all
hours of the day and night for a lonely ride of
many miles. Such a demand upon him pre-
vented his carrying out his resolve that evening.
A messenger rode in post haste to the little
presbytery.
“ I have to go to a sick call,” said the priest
to Kathleen, “ I shall get back as soon as I
can.”
As he saddled his horse and rode off with
the messenger who came for him, he thought to
himself—
“ Poor Kathleen ! She is growing paler and
thinner. I cannot allow this state of things to
go on. I’ll speak seriously to my father
to-morrow.”
To-morrow ! “ Never shall sun that morrow
see.” A deeper grief, a greater sorrow was to
come to Kathleen with the morning’s light.
The priest and his companion rode off along
the road that wound round the mountain side.
Naught disturbed the stillness of the night but


the sound of the horses’ hoofs as they cantered
along. The messenger had a superstitious awe
of the priest, and considered himself lucky that
his reverence did not cross-question him as to
how often he went to his “duty.” Father
Dromane remained silent, for he was thinking of
the pale face of his sister, and endeavouring to
master the strong aversion which he felt towards,
her marriage with a Protestant. Not a word
was spoken by either horseman during that
eight miles’ ride until their destination was.
reached. Here the brother became absorbed in
the priest, and Father Dromane had forgotten
all about father and sister when he took his seat
by the bedside to shrive a dying man
His duty over, the priest started off alone
upon- his ride homewards. Again he relapsed
into reverie, allowing his horse to canter on. So
deeply absorbed was Father Dromane in his own
thoughts that his horse strayed from the broad
track, and had come to a puzzled standstill
before his rider discovered that they were lost
in the bush.
The discovery, however, did not cause much
uneasiness to the priest. He had been suffi-
ciently long at Bluegum to have learnt the bush


compass of the rocks. id e knew that the honey-
comb in the huge masses of stone that the
volcanic action of ages before had upheaved ran
due noith and south, Jhe moon was iust rising
, , J o’
and by its aid he knew in which direction to
make. Guided thus by the honeycomb of the
rocks, visible every few hundred yards, he was
delighted, after half an-hour’s ride, to find him-
self upon the mountain road, not above half-a-
mile from Bluegum.
“ The dear old dad and Kathleen would be
anxious if they did not find me at home in the
morning,” he said, with a smile.
Just then he turned the corner of the moun-
tain side, and the smile faded from his lips as
he beheld the white, terrified, horror-stricken
countenance of Stephen Goble. The latter did
not see him—his eyes were fixed on something
at his feet.
“ My God !” screamed the priest, as he flung
himself from his horse and looked down upon the
livid, distorted face of his dead father, John
Dromane.


CHAPTER V.
COMMITTED FOR TRIAL.
It is hardly necessary to inform the reader what
he has already guessed, that Stephen Coble was
not the murderer of John Dromane. Had he
been, it would have been unnecessary at this
late date to write this simple tale, for the very
sufficient reason that there would be nothing new
in it. Murders committed by men in a frenzy of
madness, or in revenge for real or imaginary
wrong suffered at the hands of their victims, are
unfortunately too common to form the ground
work of a story. As the writer proposes to tell
what he knows as briefly, and with as little of
the novelist’s claptrap as possible, he may set
down here that it was because Stephen Goble
did not kill John Dromane that this tale is
deemed of sufficient interest to be written and
printed.
But though the reader is aware of that fact,
the people on Bluegum at the time of the


discovery of the crime were by no means
inclined to believe that the storekeeper was an
innocent man, around whom a chain of circum-
stantial evidence was wound Nineteen -
twentieths of the people on the goldfield had
not the slightest doubt that John Dromane
was murdered by Stephen Goble in revenge for
the old man’s refusal of his daughter’s hand in
marriage. Certainly the case looked very black
against Stephen. There were many who were
astounded that the quiet, good-natured store-
keeper would commit such a terrible crime, but
they remembered that since that night of the
altercation he had become almost melancholy
mad, and they knew that insanity changes a
man’s nature, as brooding over wrongs develops
intensity of passions hitherto undreamt of.
Many would willingly have believed him guilt-
less of the old man’s blood if they could—but
they could not.
The chain of evidence, certainly, created more
than a strong suspicion against the man. Every-
thing pointed to him as the murderer. The
quarrel, the vague threats, and above all, the
discovery of Stephen Goble standing over the
body of John Dromane, seemed to leave no link


wanting in the chain of circumstances. Father
Maurice, who was the last one in the world to
think harshly of anyone, especially of the man
who had won his sister’s heart, could see no
way of escaping from the conviction that forced
itself upon his mind—that Stephen Goble had
done the deed. What the priest’s feelings
were towards the storekeeper none could tell.
That impenetrable mark, a Roman Catholic
clergyman’s face, gave no token to the outer
world of what was within his breast. Whether
he was sufficiently human to desire the punish-
ment of his father’s murderer, or whether he
preferred to leave the criminal to the acute
torture of his own conscience, none knew, none
would ever know. That he felt his father’s
death keenly was seen by all in his careworn
look and abstracted manner, but he never spoke
of the tragedy to others, nor ever mentioned
Stephen Goble’s name. Those who observed
him most closely read only the sorrowful resig-
nation of one who kept his grief to himself, and
who in the solitude of sleepless nights cried out
to his Creator, “ Thy will be done.”
The innocence of Stephen Goble found only
one believer—the daughter of the murdered


man, Kathleen Dromane did not weigh proba
bilities. When she recovered from the first
tenible shock of her father’s murder, she did
not sift out the circumstantial evidence as others
did. .Nothing would make her believe that her
lover, under any circumstances, would injure a
relative of hers. The chain of circumstances
might have each link as strong as triple steel,
but love shattered them as though they had been
made of brittle glass. When Kathleen ceased
to weep and mourn at brief intervals, she tried
to think who could have committed the foul
deed. She sought in vain to recollect any
person upon the diggings who could have a spite
against her father. She knew of no one, and
distracted and bewildered in the hopeless task
of finding some clue to the perpetrator of the
ciime, she could only relapse again into tears
and unavailing lamentations over her irreparable
loss. Anything like a serious thought as to the
possibility of Stephen Goble having struck the
blow she did not entertain for a moment. Ker
woman s reason admitted but one argument.
He loved her, therefore he could not have killed
her father.
Such illogical arguments, however, do not


weigh with the officers of justice. Suspicion
pointed directly to Stephen Goble, and he was
at once arrested The coroner’s jury, with very
little hesitation, found that the deceased, John
Dromane, had been murdered by Stephen Goble.
He was charged with the capital crime before
the police court. The miners who had heard his
threats gave evidence, and Father Dromane was
also called as a witness to testify to what he saw
on the mountain road that fatal night. Kath-
leen was spared the painful ordeal of appearing
against her lover for the present. Father
Dromane’s influence had procured this favour.
“You see, your reverence,” said the police
sergeant, who was conducting the case, “ the
accused is sure to be committed for trial. I
never saw a clearer case against a man, and
sorry I am for that same, for he always seemed
a decent, well-behaved kind of a boy. We
needn’t have your sister as a witness now, but
the Crown Law officers will insist upon having
her at the sessions.”
Father Dromane felt that this must be so, and
was thankful to the sergeant for the temporary
respite granted to his sister.
The sergeant was correct in his forecast as to


the result of the police court inquiry. The
justices did not require any time for deliberation.
A prima facie case was made out, and Stephen
Goble was committed for trial, bail, of course,
being out of the question in a charge of murder.
When the decision was announced the prisoner,
who had asked the witnesses no questions,
turned to where the priest was and said—
“ Father Dromane, you at any rate do not
believe that I was capable of committing this
cruel, bloody deed.”
“ I pray fervently, Stephen Goble,” said the
priest, sorrowfully, “ that you may be able to
prove your innocence.”
The policeman tapped the prisoner upon the
shoulder. Stephen cast an appealing look at
Father Maurice; then, heaving a deep sigh as he
read the priest’s belief in his guilt, he turned
and followed his gaoler.


CHAPTER VI.
The Man Who Killed John Dromane.
One of the many remarkable characters who had
drifted to the diggings upon Bluegum was a man
named Martin Sullivan. His was a sad, but by
no means an uncommon history. Well-educated,
he had been destined for the church, but his
tastes and inclinations were of too worldly a
nature to permit him to take orders. As a
young man his educational attainments, added
to a handsome face and fascinating manner,
made his society much courted. When quite a
young man in Dublin he was somewhat of a
lion in society. As a “ coach ” and tutor he
made “ bread and butter,” whilst his contribu-
tions to the newspapers and periodicals of the
Irish capital brought in sufficient to keep him
in those little luxuries which a man of fashion is
apt to regard as greater necessities than the
necessaries of life.
People prophesied great things for the dashing


and accomplished Martin Sullivan. He had a
future before him, everybody said, and he was a
man who would make a brilliant mark in life.
With him, however, as with many others, it was
the unexpected that happened. As a young
man, at any rate, he was as frank and honest-
hearted as he was open-handed. A great
favourite with the daughters of wealthy men,
the thought of marrying for money was totally
repulsive to him. He might have made what
the world would have called a brilliant match,
and so have secured affluence and position at a
bound. But when Martin Sullivan married, he
declared that it would be for love. He did
marry for love a penniless girl, whose only
dower was her pretty face, her true heart and
her implicit belief that Martin was the greatest
and best man that had ever lived. Her husband
loved her as devotedly as his nature would
permit. The fact was that the flattery of partial
friends had somewhat spoiled him, and the quiet
joys of humdrum matrimonial happiness scarcely
compensated for the loss of the wine-inspired
wit of the festive boards and the pleasant praises
of admiring boon-companions. He drifted back
gradually to his old ways and his old friends.


His affectionate wife beheld with alarm that he
was not contented to remain at home, but she
sorrowed in secret. Her love and admiration
for him was so great that she could not find it
in her heart to reproach him. When she could
no longer conceal from herself the conviction
that he was beginning to take too much wine,
she feebly remonstrated with him, but he only
laughed off her fears of the future, and kissed
tier with a warmth that was as much due to
liquor as to love. When she reproached him
more strongly, he grew ill-tempered, and spoke
harshly to her, so that she was fain to hold her
peace, and weep and hope, and still love on.
The usual sequel followed. The uncomplaining
wife found it difficult to make both ends meet,
for her husband’s drinking habits grew upon
him like a parasite creeper, paralysing his
energies and sapping his strength. His pupils
grew fewer and fewer, and at last ceased
altogether. His summer friends deserted him,
and he was obliged to rely solely upon his pen
for a living. He might still have earned a fair
income had he resolutely refrained from his vice.
When his employers upon the Press found that
they could not rely upon receiving his articles


at the time promised, and when he wmuld come
staggering to the newspaper offices to give
imaginary reasons for disappointing them, his
literary orders dropped off. To the proprietors
of newspapers and periodicals the services of
less brilliant but more reliable men were more
valuable than those of a gifted but drunken
genius like Martin Sullivan. Poverty and hard-
ship became the lot of him and his wife, and at
length there was nothing left for them but to
emigrate and live—or die—in some new country
where they were unknown. Fortunately, they
had no children, so that one pang of poverty at
least was spared the wretched, loving wife.
What vicissitudes and fortunes they went
through for a couple of years after they left
Dublin is unknown. When they came with the
“ rush ” to Bluegum they were both sadly
changed from the handsome young couple who
had taken each other “for better for worse” ten
years before. He had grown bloated and un-
healthy- looking, and appeared to have become a
confirmed drunkard, while it was easy to see that
the vulture-sorrow was slowly but steadily
pecking away at the heart of his wife. Selfish
and sottish though he had become, morose and


cruel to her in his cups, and still more heart-
lessly cruel to her when he was suffering the
horrors of a recovery from a prolonged debauch,,
she still loved him ; whilst others spoke of him
with contempt and in anger, she, who suffered
most at his hands, had for him only kind words
and a pleasant smile—a feeble smile, it was true,
the ghost of a long-vanished happiness. He
might be a drunkard and a blight upon her life,
but he was still her husband—the man to whom
she had in the old days sung the melody,
“ Oh, what was love made for if ’tis not the same
Through joy and through torment, through glory and shamet
I know not, I ask not, if guilt’s in that heart,
I but know that I love thee, whatever thou art.”
Martin Sullivan worked irregularly as a miner.
When all his money was spent in drink, he was
forced to become sober until he made more, when
he would again go off upon a debauch, finishing
up with an attack of delirium tremens , from
which he recovered more broken in health and
more shattered in nerves than before. He
would sometimes be away from his hut all
night, and his wretched wife would start off at
daybreak to bring him home from the grog
shanty, or find him a half-madman in the fern-


clothed gullies. The events that took place
around them had no interest for the drunkard
and his wife, and the fact that the priest’s
father had been found murdered made little
impression upon Martin Sullivan, who was at
the time dazed with liquor, or his wife, whose
life-sorrow left no room in her heart for the
griefs of others.
A few days after the committal of Stephen
Goble, Mary Sullivan went as usual to look for
her husband, but found him not. In the
evening the miners carried him home. He had
staggered into a shallow shaft the night before,
and had been discovered only the following
afternoon. He was stupid from drink, and the
bush doctor, who called to see him, pronounced
him as good as dead. His loving wife tended
him as well as she could, and consciousness
slowly returned. She did not dare to tell him
of the doctor’s opinion, but with kind and
soothing words worked upon his nature or his
weakness —for when prostrate with illness he
was weak mentally and bodily—to allow her to
send for the priest. Father Maurice Dromane
came, and told Martin Sullivan what his wife
dared not speak—that his days on earth were


numbered. A terrible change came over the
drunkard when he heard this. Fear and re-
morse took possession of him He cried like a
child, and was only too willing to give an
attentive ear to the priest when that clergy-
man besought him to make his peace with
heaven.
* *- * *- * *
When Father Maurice Dromane left the hut
after hearing Martin Sullivan’s confession his
head was drooping on his breast. His lips were
bloodless, and his face was ashen pale. A
strange, frightened look was in his eyes, and he
staggered like a drunken person.
He had heard the confession of the man who
had killed John Dromane on the night that
Father Maurice rode home by the mountain
road.


CHATTER VII.
Father Dromane Passes a Sleepless Night.
Father Dromane’s brain was in a whirl as he
walked up the hill to the presbytery. A thou-
sand thoughts chased each other confusedly
through his mind, depriving him of the power
of thinking calmly. Possible complications
that unnerved him, and a sore trial, under which
at times he almost doubted his own strength,
rose up before him, and confronted him with
the terrible question —“ What will you do V
He had been so dazed by what he had heard,
and his penitent was so weak and feeble, that
the priest had been unable to bring him to that
all-important evidence of his contrition, the
public avowal of his guilt, that would make the
innocent Stephen Goble a free man.
What if Martin Sullivan should die, and
carry his secret with him to the grave ?
It was this contingency that rose up like a
haunting spectre before Father Maurice


Dromane, and bade him sternly look into him-
self and define his duty. The secret that had
been confided to him under the seal of con-
fession was as sacred as if Martin Sullivan had
never spoken it. No earthly power, no fiendish
torture, could wring that awful piece of intelli-
gence from that inviolable casket, a priest’s
breast.
If Stephen Goble should be found guilty !
What was his duty then, supposing the real
criminal’s lips to be stilled in death'? Could
the priest speak out to free the innocent when
the guilty was beyond the reach of human
judgment and human punishment ? Did not
the end in extreme cases justify the means, or
were there no circumstances when the sacred
seal of confession might be broken ?
These, and a thousand such questionings,
drove all thoughts of sleep from Father
Dromane this night as he sat in his bedroom
with his throbbing head resting upon his
feverish hand. Sleep ! the very word suggested
peace and rest. Father Dromane’s heart and
brain were racked by a conflict of emotions.
Ever and again he would seize his breviary, and
in its pages force his thoughts into something


approaching calmness. Then he would throw
himself upon his bed, but only to toss uneasily
upon his pillow, distracted by the ever-recurring
question that his conscience put to him—
“ What will you do if Martin Sullivan dies ?”
“If Martin Sullivan dies,” he mused. “If
Martin Sullivan dies.” Be kept repeating the
words to himself with painful iteration, though
every repetition served only to renew his mental
torture.
“ But Martin Sullivan must not die!” he
cried, fiercely, and falling on his knees by his
bedside, and uplifting his clasped hands, he
prayed, “ Oh, God, let not Martin Sullivan die!”
When the first streaks of morning light stole
over the tops of the tall trees, that like sentinel
grenadiers kept watch over Bluegum, they looked
in at the window of the bedroom and saw the
figure of a priest still kneeling by the bed—a
priest with anxious, haggard face and tearful
eyes, praying fervently that God would spare
the life of the man whose hands were red with
the blood of the supplicant’s father.
No thought of justice, of vengeance, upon the
assassin found harbour with Father Bromane.
No bitterness against him who had slain his dear


father had possession of his breast. Vengeance
is mine, saith the Lord. Nor would bitter
reproach and unavailing grief bring back the
dead to life. I n the priest’s breast there was an
all-absorbing passion for present action, in which
all other feelings were merged. The life of an
innocent man hung trembling in the balance.
Two persons alone could save him, and of these
one must be forever dumb, whilst the other lay
in a stupor in his wretched hut, and was not
expected to live for four-and twenty hours
longer. It was little to be wondered at that
the morning sunbeams brought neither warmth
to the priest’s body nor light to his mind. One
single gleam illumined the darkness—the hope
that heaven would hear his prayer, and that the
Fountain of Mercy would decree that Martin
Sullivan’s life would be spared until he had
made the only reparation in his power, and
spoke the words that would dispel the shadow
of suspicion which now darkened Stephen
Goble’s fame and threatened his life.
“If Martin Sullivan dies and Stephen Goble
is found guilty, what will you do ?” He could
not banish the thought that still would rise up
and haunt him.


Was the priest’s secret to be kept, as it had
been given, in trust for the Almighty, or was
the priest’s vow to be broken, his holy chuch
disgraced, his cloth dishonoured ?


CHAPTER VIII.
Priest and Penitent.
Martin Sullivan did not die. For once the
doctors science was at fault, and the strong
constitution, though seriously shattered by the
dissipated life he had been leading, triumphed
over the injuries sustained by his fall into the
shaft. His enforced abstinence from liquor, and
the careful nursing of his affectionate wife, had
brought him out of the very jaws of death. The
doctor, who had never expected to see him
again alive, called now every day, and beheld
his patient coming rapidly on towards conva-
lescence. To Mary Sullivan her husband’s
accident brought more of happiness than she
had known for many a day. To the sick man,
lying too weak for speech upon his rude bed,
there seemed to have come back some of the
old affection that he had felt for the trusting
girl ere liquor had soddened his nature, and
drove from his heart all love save that debased
craving which caused him to drink in a wild and


unreasoning way to quench a fierce and un-
assuageable thirst. Though he could speak but
little, his hand would rest caressingly upon that
of his kind wife, and he would look at her
frequently with a gentle pitying glace that made
her inexpressibly happy Then at odd times he
would shudder, and try to shut out her face
from his sight, moaning piteously the while—
“ Oh, if she only knew—poor girl, poor girl.
What is to be the end of it all ?”
“Health and strength soon, the doctor says,
darling,” Mary Sullivan would reply, “and a
better and happier life for the future. Don’t
torment yourself about the past, asthore ;
nothing will mend that, and if I can forgive,
surely you can forget. What care we about the
rest of the world ?”
“ Aye,” he answered, feebly, u what care we
for the rest of the world? Poor girl—she must
never know—l have embittered her life too
much already.”
The neighbours were kind in their way to the
sick man, and let him want for nothing. They
did their little kindnesses in compliment to the
brave little woman who stood by her husband
through thick and thin. For Martin Sullivan


himself there was but little sympathy amongst
the people of Bluegum, and even his boon
companions agreed that if his accident were to
result in his death “he wouldn’t be much loss
anyway.” Foremost amongst those who pre-
pared and brought such little delicacies as were
obtainable upon the diggings was Kathleen
Dromane. She felt a deep sympathy for Mary
Sullivan, for, like herself, the shadow of the
valley of death was over the man she loved. A
fellow-sorrow drew these two womanly hearts
together, and made them like sisters. Scarce a
day passed but Kathleen brought some little
dainty or luxury for the invalid, who had been
hovering between life and death. Mary
Sullivan’s heart went out in gratitude to Kath-
leen, and she welcomed her coming with a
thankful smile and a loving kiss What would
have been the feelings of those two women
could they have guessed the dread secret that
was known to but two persons in the world—
those two persons, Mary’s husband and Kath-
leen’s brother ?
As eagerly as Mary Sullivan did Father
Maurice Dromane watch and pray for Martin’s
return to health and strength. Day after day


he called to inquire about him, but the doctor’s
order and the invalid’s weak state precluded the
possibility of an interview. At length health
had sufficiently returned, and Martin Sullivan
and Maurice Dromane met face to face. It
was a painful scene Doth men were worn and
pale, the one from bodily and the other from
mental strain, and both were strung to the
highest pitch of nervous excitement, as they
stood gazing at each other, the self-confessed
criminal and the accuser, who must be dumb
before the world.
“ Martin Sullivan,” said the priest, his voice
trembling with emotion, “ when you lay at the
point of death, and any hour might have hurried
you into the presence of your Maker, you told
me ”
The other man trembled as the priest spoke,
but assuming a resolute defiant air he broke
in
“Stop, Father Dromane. What I said in a
state of mental weakness or delirium, I know
not. lam not responsible for my words, and if
unknowingly I spoke strange, wild things, forget
them, for they were the illusions of a disordered
fancy. There was no foundation for them.”


The priest seized him by the arm and looked
him steadily in the face.
“ Martin Sullivan,” he cried, sternly, “ look
me fair in the eyes and declare to me before
your God that what you told me when you were
brought home almost a corpse was untrue. But
no, man, put not such a terrible perjury upon
your guilty soul. Your downcast look, your
trembling hands, render no second confession
necessary. lam answered.”
He loosed the arm which he held, and the
miner, cowed and abashed, sank into a sitting
posture upon a stool. A long pause was broken
by Father Hromane.
“Tell me this, and tell me truly—Do you
know whose body it was”—the priest’s voice
quivered as he spoke —“ that was found on the
mountain road, and who found it ?”
“ No,” said the other, sullenly, without raising
his eyes. “ 1 was in a fit of the horrors that
night, and was on the drink for some time aft er-
wards—in fact, until I met with the accident.
I don’t know any of the ghastly particulars,
and ” —this with a shudder—“ I don t want to
hear any ”
“ But you must hear them,” said the priest.


“ and from my lips It was I. returning from
a sick-call late that night, who saw the dead
body lying on the roadway.”
“You?” cried Martin Sullivan, hoarsely,
looking up at his companion in unfeigned
surprise.
I, icpeated the other. “ Heaven knows,
Martin Sullivan, that it would ill become my
cloth to talk of vengeance I have schooled
myself, as far as weak mortal can, to drive all
earthly passions from my breast, and if I do not
arrogantly misjudge myself, I stand here declar-
ing before my Maker that T have forgiven you
foi that night’s work. I pray fervently that
heaven forgives you, for I believe you knew not
what you did.”
A puzzled look was on Sullivan’s face as he
muttered half aloud, “ Vengeance-forgiveness
—I do not understand.”
“ 1 forgot,” said the priest, with a weary sigh,
you do not know. The man who met a violent
death that night was my father.”
Martin Sullivan sprang from his seat., his
whole frame quaking with terror.
Your your father ?” he gasped.
Aye, my father, John Dromane.


Martin Sullivan sank upon his knees a piteous
object before the priest.
“ Oh, Father D roman e,” he whined, in abject
terror, “ I didn’t know who it was, I declare
that solemnly before heaven. Kill me if you
will, for I deserve it at your hands.”
“ Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord,” replied
the priest, in a low tone.
“Oh, Father Dromane, think of my wife.
For her sake, if not for mine, you will not
denounce me to the law T
“ God help me, I cannot,” said the priest.
“ There is no power on earth to force from a
Catholic clergyman that which comes to him
under the seal of confession 1”
The kneeling man drew a sigh of relief as he
rose to his feet. Father Maurice noted this
with a sad misgiving at his heart as he said—
“ Martin Sullivan, you have more to learn
yet in connection with this sad tragedy.”
The priest then related briefly the circum-
stances surrounding the finding of the body, the
mass of evidence against Stephen Goble, and
the latter’s committal for trial. When he con-
cluded he looked at Martin Sullivan, as if
expecting him to speak, but he was silent.


“Martin Sullivan,” said the priest, “you
heard what 1 have said. An innocent man is
charged with your crime. The evidence is so
strong against him that it is said his conviction
amounts to a certainty.”
Again the clergyman paused.
“ What would you have me do ?” asked
Martin feullivan, in a low voice.
“Your duty,” answered the priest. “Your
duty to him, to yourself, to Heaven. Free this
innocent man, and avow yourself the guilty
criminal.”
“*o no, shouted the other, in terrified
tones, “It is impossible. I could not do it.
They cannot find him guilty. They must acquit
him, and if—but no ! I cannot, will not, accuse
myself.”
The worst that the priest had feared had
happened. Martin Sullivan was not equal to
the demand made upon him.
“ Are you, then, so cowardly and so callous ?”
said the priest, “ that you shrink from the only
atonement in your power, and calmly contem-
plate the commission of a second and greater
crime. When you killed my father you knew
not what you did, and were not master of


yourself. If you give Stephen Goble to the
gallows, you commit a deliberate murder in
cold blood.”
“ Father Drornane,” said Martin Sullivan,
fiercely, “ let there be an end to this Once
for all, I tell you I will not do what you ask, I
may shrink from it from personal cowardice—
think so, if you will—but i believe that in—
in (he shuddered slightly) leaving Goble to his
chance, I am chiefly actuated by something of
another feeling.”
“ What do you mean ?”
“ 1 have a wife whom I have wronged deeply
—more deeply than I wronged you when I
killed your father. Our married life for her has
been one continued death in life. Since my
accident I have seen myself as 1 have been,
vile, cruel, guilty ; and I have seen her as she
has been, pure, innocent, and affectionate.
In her eyes, at any rate, I am guiltless of
absolute crime, and whilst I can I will keep her
in ignorance. Did she know me for what I
really am, it would break her heart. I have
blighted her life too much already, and I will
inflict no further pain upon her. So far as lies
in my power, the rest of her life shall be free


from care. I can and will work, and from this
time forth no drop of liquor shall pass my lips.
I may be tortured by remorse, and my life may
be one long hell on earth, but she shall never
know it,”
“ But, Stephen Goble,” cried the priest, “ the
innocent man who is accused of your crime
will you allow him to be murdered ?”
“ Aye,” shouted Martin Sullivan, “ I would
sacrifice fifty lives rather than give that suffering
woman another pang. I have no hope in the
future. Mine has been a wasted life. I have
thrown away the possibilities for good that were
in me, and an additional crime is of little
consequence to me.”
Take care, Martin Sullivan,” said Father
Gromane. “ W eigh well the words you say.
The consequences may be dreadful.”
“Pshaw!” said Martin. “ What do I care
for consequences ? Excommunicated from the
church ? Excommunication has no terrors for
me, for my own acts have already excommuni-
cated me from heaven. I have fear of no
consequences save those which would arise from
my wife learning the truth.”
“ And if she should learn,” said the priest,


determined to try a desperate ruse. “If I
should tell her all ?
Martin Sullivan laughed.
“ You The said. “ Father Dromane, 1 have
no more fear of you than I have of the child
unborn. Though I killed your father, and
though I break your sister’s heart by allowing
her lover to be convicted of my crime, you at
least are powerless. Though Stephen Goble
stood upon the scaffold, and you were by his
side administering the last consolations of
religion to him, knowing him to be innocent
and me to be guilty, jou could not speak one
word to save him. The priest’s secret learnt
under the seal of confession goes with him to
his grave,”


CHAPTER IX.
Sentenced to Death.
A s the time for the trial of Stephen Goble drew
near, Father Dromane grew more and more
disturbed by the weight of the terrible secret
which he was compelled to keep to himself. The
trial excited considerable interest at the time,
for the love between the supposed murderer and
the daughter of his victim was intimately con
nected with the story of the crime, as it furnished
one of the links by creating a motive for the
deed. The court was densely crowded, and
when in the course of the trial it became
necessary for Kathleen to detail the damning
evidence of the quarrel between her lover and
her father, women in the gallery sobbed aloud,
and even men were considerably moved. To
the prisoner the sight of Kathleen in the witness
box was an extremely painful one, and at his
request no questions were asked her by his
counsel. One query alone was put to the Rev.
Maurice Dromane by the prisoner’s request.


“ Do you believe that the prisoner at the bar
murdered your father,”
“ No,” replied the witness, emphatically, “ I
do not.”
A thrill ran through the court at this, and
those who heard the priest’s words thought him
a forgiving Christian who would not willingly
consign a fellow-creature to an ignominious
death. None knew how fervently the clergy-
man believed his own assertion.
a I must protest,” said the Crown Prosecutor,
“ against such questions. What a witness does
or does not believe is immaterial. It is not
evidence ”
The judge concurred, and the trial proceeded.
No witnesses were called for the defence.
Stephen Goble’s counsel could produce nothing
that could controvert the testimony given for
the prosecution. Indeed, all the facts testified
to by the witnesses were admitted by the
prisoner himself. The commission of the deed
he strongly denied, but the evidence given as
to all the surroundings which pointed to him
as the criminal was true as gospel. The judge
summed up fairly, neither for nor against
the prisoner. He placed the evidence before


the jury plainly and impartially, and asked
them to say as twelve rational men upon oath
whether the circumstantial evidence tendered
by the Crown was such as to leave no doubt in
their minds as to the guilt of the prisoner. If
they had any doubt whatever they should with-
out hesitation give the prisoner the benefit of it,
and acquit him.
U hen the jury retired to consider their
verdict Father Dromane insisted upon his sister
leaving the court. She had begged piteously to
be allowed to remain, and her brother had been
compelled to submit rather than make a scene in
public. Now, however, he almost forced her
from the place.
“ You shall know as soon as possible after the
jury bring in their verdict,” he promised her,
and she was fain to be content.
Father Dromane himself could not, however,
resist the terrible fascination which drew him
back to the court. Ke felt, as indeed all who
had heard the evidence could not help feeling,
that there could be but one verdict. Still, the
suspense was agonising. Fie hoped against hope
that the jury would not agree, for in his most
sanguine moment he could not expect an


acquittal. Pale and outwardly calm, though
internally racked by hopes and fears, he waited
in the court.
“ The jury have agreed,” the whisper went
round about half-an-hour after the retirement.
The judge took his seat, the prisoner was
placed at the bar, and the jury filed into their
box. Father Dromane bit his lip as his
impatience increased at the slow torture of
these proceedings.
“ Gentlemen of the jury,” said the Associate,
in what appeared to the priest an unnecessarily
measured tone, “ answer to your names.”
One by one the names were called and
responded to by the jurymen.
“ Gentlemen of the jury,” continued the
Associate, “ have you agreed upon your
verdict ?”
“We have,” replied the foreman.
“ How say you ? Do you find the prisoner
at the bar guilty or not guilty of the murder of
John Dromane T
“ Guilty,” said the foreman.
“ So say you all T queried the Associate
The jurymen bowed in acquiescence.
The prisoner, the least moved in that assem-


blage, was asked if he had anything to say why
sentence of death should not he recorded against
him.
“ Your Honour,” he replied, calmly, “ I could
expect no other verdict. The evidence against
me was overwhelming, and I shall die an
innocent man, murdered by a fatal and irre-
sistible chain of circumstances. The whole of
the evidence is true, the conclusion to which it
points —namely, that I committed the murder—
is false. Whilst rambling about the hills on
that awful night I came upon his dead body,
and had not recovered from my horror at the
discovery when the Kev. Maurice Dromane
rode up and found me. I declare before heaven
I know no more than the priest himself who
killed his father.”
Father Dromane started at this reference to
himself.
“ I hated the dead man,” continued the
prisoner, “ because he stood between me and
happiness, but his death, instead of removing
the bar, placed a still more insuperable obstacle
in the way. I feel that the jury have only
found according to the evidence, and I will not
detain your Honour longer from the painful


duty which you have now to perform. I can
only repeat, however unavailingly, that I am
innocent ”
Few in the court believed the prisoner. The
evidence was too conclusive, and even the most
charitably-minded presumed that Stephen Goble
must have committed the murder during a
period of temporary insanity, and, having no
recollection of the circumstances, believed him-
self innocent. One person in the couH, how-
ever, believed every word that the prisoner
uttered. Father Dromane felt bis brain on fire
as the judge pronounced sentence of death. As
the words fell in low, measured tones from his
Honour’s lips, the priest trembled in every limb.
His sight grew dim; the court appeared to
swim around him ; his hands clutched nervously
at his coat; he seemed as if he would speak, but
the white lips and dry, parched tongue refused
their office.
“ And may the Lord have mercy upon your
soul.”
“Amen !” hoarsely gasped Father Dromane,
as he half-rose from his seat and fell to the
oround in a swoon.
O


CHAPTER X.
In tee Darkness
The state of Father Dromane’s mind may be
more easily imagined than described. His
perplexity drove him to the verge of madness.
He strove to think calmly, and time after time
he sat himself down to endeavour to map out
his duty. He had never foreseen—for he never
could have imagined—the possibility of his duty
as a priest being in direct conflict with his duty
to his fellow-man. Yet here was the unforseen
possibility an actual fact, a stern, terrible reality,
which now met him face to face.
Two courses lay open to him, one of which
he was compelled to adopt. He was one of
those men who disdain to palter with them-
selves and excuse themselves by calling things
by soft names. He fully recognised the fact
that if he allowed Stephen Goble to be executed,
he was morally guilty of his murder. He knew
him to be innocent. He indulged in no sophistry


to argue with himself that he had no evidence
beyond the confession, that Martin Sullivan
was the guilty person. That evidence, could the
priest have given it to a jury, would not have
been sufficient to secure a conviction, but it
would certainly have been enough to have
gained for Stephen Goble the benefit of any
doubt. Father Dromane did not follow out
any of these nice trains of thought. He only
saw a man condemned to death, and knew that
man to be innocent. Could he remain silent
and allow this murder to be committed ?
On the other hand, his holy church rose up
before him. Never had he heard of an instance
in which the sacred secrecy of the confessional
had been broken. Had the stain of such a sin
rested on him alone, he might not have been
long in coming to a decision ; but he felt that by
revealing a secret learnt under the seal of con-
fession he cast disgrace over the Roman Catholic
religion in all parts of the world, for the boasted
inviolability of its most sacred institution would
be held up to the wondering scorn of unbelievers.
How could he bring his ancient faith into con-
tempt ?
To add to his distress his sister Kathleen was


so prostrated by the nervous shock of the trial
and its result that she was laid on a sick bed,
suffering from brain fever. With all his troubles
thick upon him, the priest would inevitably
have gone mad but for the kind attention of his
sister’s self-constituted nurse—Mary Sullivan.
Not unmindful of Kathleen’s sympathy and
assistance in her time of affliction, she now
returned the debt with interest, tending and
caring for her sick friend with sisterly affection.
Father Dromane was grateful for her kindness,
yet the sight of the kind-hearted Mary was
inexpressibly painful to him, for her face was a
constant reminder to him of her husband, the
man for whose crime Stephen Goble must
suffer death, unless Father Dromane broke the
sacred vow of his priesthood. Again and again
it came up before him to torture him—that
horrible alternative.
To his high-strung nerves and feverish mind,
every circumstance, great and small, seemed to
weave itself into some connection, near or
remote, with the one secret that oppressed
him the knowledge that an innocent man was
about to suffer a felon’s death. When the doctor
told him that he was doubtful of Kathleen’s


recovery, the information seemed scarcely to
carry its full import to his dazed mind. The
thought that occurred to him was —
“ Will she live long enough to hear of
Stephen Goble’s death ?”
The clock that ticked upon the mantelpiece
seemed to him to be telling off in seconds the
fleeting hours of Stephen Goble’s last days on
earth. As he sat in painful reverie before the
fire, and gazed upon the huge burning logs, he
saw flame-pictures that well nigh drove him
mad. Fascinated by the tortures he inflicted
upon himself, he seemed to find a morbid
pleasure in tracing out dreadful panoramas in
the embers. One black log would seem to shape
itself into the form of the gallows, and beneath
it he would see the mute, appealing face of
Stephen Goble, whilst the wind roaring up the
chimney and amongst the trees outside sounded
like so many accusing voices, crying—
“ Knowing him innocent, will you let him
die ? Does a Christian faith countenance, does
a Christian priest commit murder ?”
Murder ! The word seemed to be ever ringing
in his ears. When he looked into the fire and
saw Stephen Goble standing on the drop, he saw


that one of his own faith and cloth stood beside
him adjusting the rope around the condemned
man’s neck. When he looked more closely he
saw that the features of the hangman were his
own. He could see the sheriff standing near,
directing the bloody deed, and could hear him
saying, in cold, official tones —
“ Maurice Dromane, priest and hangman, do
your duty.”
His duty—always his duty ! What was his
duty ? That was the question, to answer which
Father Dromane would willingly have sacrificed
his life. He would gladly have given up life,
honour, everything, to save Stephen Goble.
But these would not avail. To save him he
was called upon to sacrifice more than life and
honour—he must disgrace his faith.
“ I’m thinking that I’ll be having to nurse
you, too, your reverence,” said Mary Sullivan,
when she saw how worn and harassed the priest
was growing under the mental burden that
robbed him of his nightly rest.
“ No, Mrs. Sullivan,” said Father Dromane,
“it is nothing. lam just a little out of sorts.
I shall be all right in a day or two.” Then as
the all absorbing trouble again took possession


of his mind he asked suddenly, “ Where’s your
husband ?”
“ Sure he’s at work, your reverence,” replied
Mary Sullivan, “ Ever since you came to him
that night when he was lying between life and
death Martin is a changed man. Ah, Father
Maurice, God’s blessing be upon you and yours
for that happy night’s work. It was yourself
that brought peace to my heart that blessed
evening.”
Father Dromane shuddered. It was upon
that night that peace was for ever banished
from his own troubled breast.
“ He has been a changed man since then,”
continued Mary, “ quite his old self, kind,
loving and tender to me. He never touches a
drop now, and I am happy as the day is long,
and I owe it all to you, Father Maurice.” As
she spoke she burst into tears, and falling on
her knees seized the priest’s hand and kissed it.
Father Dromane looked down upon the
kneeling form of the grateful woman, and a sob
of agony broke from his lips.
“ Don’t kneel to me,” said he, raising her.
“ Give your thanks to heaven. Tell me, Mrs.
Sullivan, does Martin, your husband, ever


speak of me to you ? He never comes to see
me.”
u No, father, he doesn’t speak about you,
except when I tell him how grateful we ought
to be for our changed life, and he says that he
is very thankful for all your kindness, and then
goes off to talk about business and our plans for
the future. He wants to get away from Blue-
gum and the bad associations of the past—”
“ What associations ?” quickly asked the
priest.
“ Sure, the drink and the brawling com-
panions,” replied Mary.
“ Ay! ay ! to be sure. I had forgotten
them,” said the priest, with a sigh of disappoint-
ment.
For an instant he had hoped that Martin
Sullivan had confided his secret to his wife, and
that she would come to ask counsel from the
priest, but Father Dromane now saw that such
was not the case. Whatever was to be done
must be done by the priest himself.
IS early a week had passed since sentence of
death had been passed upon Stephen Goble,
and the priest still remained in his state of
perplexity. He could not hope that remorse


would drive Martin Sullivan to confess his guilt,
for, judging by Mary’s words, the guilty man
was already meditating escape from the scene of
his crime. Upon Father Dromane alone, unable
to seek advice or counsel, devolved the duty to
speak out or to remain silent—which ?
This evening he did not go through the form
—a vain one for some time past —of retiring to
his bed, but sat in his chamber communing with
himself through the long dark night. The guilt
of Martin Sullivan seemed to have been trans-
ferred to his shoulders, and to plunge him in
gloomy despair. Ever and anon he would rise
and pace his room with troubled steps, pausing
before the window, and looking out into the
black night. Its darkness was like his own
despair, and he turned from the casement to
kneel by his bed and pray for light.
When again the sun rose over Bluegum the
figure of Father Maurice Dromane was stretched
upon his couch in peaceful slumber. There was
a placid expression upon his thin, worn face, and
he was happier in his sleep than he had been
any night since his father’s murder.
He rose refreshed, and, comparatively speak-
ing, cheerful, for he had resolved upon his last


resource. Stephen Goble should not die. To
the mental darkness of the young priest the
light had come.


CHAPTER XL
A Last Resource.
Father Dromane went straight to Martin
Sullivan’s dwelling, and was fortunate enough
to find him at home. The miner’s brow darkened
when he beheld his visitor, for he felt that the
priest had come to renew a painful subject Nor
was he mistaken.
“Martin Sullivan,” said the clergyman, “I
have come to make one final appeal to you for
justice for that unfortunate man who lies under
sentence of death.”
“ Father Dromane,” returned Sullivan, dog-
gedly, “ I have already given my answer. I
will not change places with Stephen Goble.”
“Martin Sullivan,” said Father Dromane,
“are you human? Have you no fear of a
hereafter that you can calmly consign a man
whom you know to be innocent to the gallows ?”
The person addressed made no answer, but
fidgetted about uneasily, as if at any moment he


would break away from his companion and so
terminate the interview.
“ If you have a heart/’ continued the priest,
“ 1 can faintly imagine what your feelings of
remorse must be. I, who am but the repository
of your guilty secret, have suffered as I did not
think it in human nature to suffer and live. The
knowledge that an innocent man was to be
murdered, whilst I was powerless to save him,
has tormented me, waking and sleeping, until 1
have felt my reason going, and I have under-
stood the feelings of men who commit suicide.
I will not speak to you of the agonies that I
have suffered in the conflict between my duty as
a priest to you, and my duty to that unfortunate
fellow-creature whom you are about to murder
in cold blood.”
Hard words seemed to have no effect upon
Martin Sullivan. Had the priest intended to
goad the miner into conversation, argument,
anything upon the vital subject, he was dis-
appointed, for Martin Sullivan remained sullenly
silent.
“You,” continued Father Dromane, “who
can allow another to suffer death for your crime,
could not understand the torturing remorse that


racks me at being compelled to stand silently by
and see this fearful, this accursed wrong perpe-
trated. I have scarcely slept at nights since
Stephen Goble’s trial, and I have prayed to
heaven with the fervent earnestness of a despair-
ing soul to be shown some way to save Stephen
Goble’s life, and I thank the great God who has
shown me that way.”
Martin Sullivan’s dogged manner changed in
an instant to one of anxious interest, his face
plainly showing the fear that had taken posses-
sion of his heart. Father Dromane noticed it,
and his lip curled in scornful contempt.
“You need not tremble for your cowardly
life,” said the priest. “ Heaven will take the
will for the deed with you. The sin will lie as
heavy on your soul. It will be murder at your
hands, not the murder of Stephen Goble, but of
Maurice Dromane !”
“ What do you mean ?” asked Martin
Sullivan.
“ What I say/’ replied the priest, solemnly,
“As a priest I cannot speak the words that
would give you up to justice ; as a man I cannot
allow Stephen Goble to die a felon’s death.
Heaven in its wisdom has seen fit to place a


bitter trial upon me, but I thank God and the
kind, murdered father (the Lord be merciful to
him) who brought me up to be brave enough to
prefer death to dishonour, that I am sufficiently
strong at this supreme crisis to choose to be a
martyr rather than a scoundrel. If I leave this
house without your sacred promise to give your-
self up to justice, I shall go straight to the
authorities and confess that I, myself, murdered
my father.”
Martin Sullivan stared at the priest in blank
amazement, as if he scarcely comprehended the
clergyman’s words.
“You will naturally say that no one will
believe me,” said Father Dromane. “ I have
thought of that, and will take care to make a
sufficiently connected if somewhat horrible story
of parricide. Kemember that it was I who
discovered Stephen Goble bending over my
father’s body. I will invent a motive, and will
relate all the fictitious circumstances so minutely,
that it will be impossible to doubt my tale, for
no one but yourself will understand why I
should accuse myself if I were not the really
guilty wretch. I swear solemnly to you, Martin
Sullivan, that I will do this, unless you speak


the words that will set Stephen Goble at liberty.
I now make this last appeal to you. Think,
Martin, what it is you are about to do. You
are driving a priest of your own faith to appear
before the world as a parricide, and to die a
felon’s death with a lie on his lips; for, believe
me, after what I myself have suffered, I dare
not inflict similar agony upon a brother-priest
by confessing to him the truth. I must go out
of the world protesting my guilt. May God
forgive me for the lie, and may the sacrifice that
I make to save an innocent man find me
absolution!”
The priest hid his face in his hands and wept
like a child. Martin Sullivan, pale and
trembling, gazed upon the bowed form of the
priest in wonder. Such self-sacrifice was unin-
telligible to him. It was not human, it was
godlike. Martin Sullivan felt a cold tremour
through his frame, for he felt that he was in the
presence of some unearthly being.
The sound of footsteps outside roused the
priest. He brushed the tears aside, and was to
all appearance a calm, impassive man when the
door opened, and Mary Sullivan entered the
house.


Father Dromane turned sadly to leave the
place when Mary Sullivan entered.
“Stay, Father Dromane,” said Martin
Sullivan, “ I had hoped that she might have
been spared this last drop in her cup of bitter-
ness, but it is better that she should know
all.”


CHAPTER XII.
The Priest’s Secret.
“ What I am about to tell you, my girl,” said
Martin Sullivan, addressing himself to his wile
and taking no notice of the priest, who remained
standing and silent, apparently an unconcerned
auditor. “What lam about to tell you will
give you a far greater sorrow than any your
unfortunate life has yet known. 1 would have
kept it from you if I could, and so have spared
you your crowning grief, but the unselfish
sacrifice of one man wrings from me, not the
atonement he would have me make, but a
confession that will make you the judge
between us, that will place the issue of my
life or death in your hands.”
Mary Sullivan’s expressive face showed all
the puzzled astonishment she felt.
“ I do not understand you, Martin,” she said.
“ But if a judgment affecting your life could by
any possibility rest in my hands, sure, you need
have no fear for the result. Are you not my


husband, dearer to me than all the world ?
Have you ever done a wrong that I did not
freely forgive—can you do a wrong that I
could not forgive ? If there is any trouble
hanging over you, let me know it. Trust me,
ctccushla, it will be as safe in my keeping as
if you had given it in confession to Father
Dromane.”
Both men started at her words. The chance
remark seemed like an omen. Neither of them
doubted what her decision would be.
“Listen, then,” said Martin Sullivan, fixing
his eyes upon the ground, not daring to look
at his wife or the priest, and speaking with
painful effort. “On that night—the night
when I met with the accident—l had been
drinking. I was half mad with the horrors, for
I had gambled away what little money I had,
and I was ashamed to come home to meet the
pale face of my wife. Not that she ever
complained to me, but in her very silence and
her vain attempts to look bright and cheerful
there was a more cutting, bitterer reproach than
in tears or hard words. Coward that I was,
instead of coming home, I drank more deeply to
drown thought. But I had become so liquor-


hardened that this night the drink seemed to
have lost its power to numb my brain and
brace up my nerves. Alcohol appeared to have
become a poison pure and simple, without
intoxicating, or narcotic effect. The more I
drank the more despondent I grew. What
hour of the night it was that I had wandered
out into the bush I don’t know. I only knew
that I was tortured by remorse, that my wasted
life rose up before me like an accusing angel to
madden me with reproach and shame. Where
I went, I knew not. I was flying from myself
—from my conscience. Vain flight! There
was only one hope of escape for me—only one
way to free my wife from the incubus that was
dragging her down to a premature grave. I
need hardly say that 1 meant to commit suicide.
Do not think that these thoughts passed through
my mind in the way in which I relate them.
All was confusion, for my brain was in a whirl,
but I can remember sufficient of the hell that
was in me to know that I contemplated suicide.
Whilst I was looking around me for some
means whereby to put an end to my miserable
existence, * I heard footsteps coming along the
bush road and some devil tempted me and


turned the current of my murderous thoughts
from my own life to that of another.”
There was a look of horror upon Mary
Sullivan’s face, but the priest’s wore the same
impassive cast that usually characterised it.
Martin Sullivan’s narration was, to Father
Maurice Dromane, a twice-told tale. The
speaker saw neither of the faces of the listeners.
Still looking at the ground he continued ;
“ In far less time than it takes me to tell you,
terrible thoughts flashed through my mind.
The approaching steps were possibly those of
some lucky miner, whose wealth, I knew too
well, they generally carry concealed about
them. If he were found injured by the
roadside, plundered of his gold, there would
be a little outcry, but not much, for such
affairs were of no uncommon occurrence. I
had not thought of the possibility of his
recognising me ere I had robbed him, but so
far as I can recall my thoughts on that terrible
night, I believe I can conscientiously say I had
no serious intention to take his life. It was a
moonlight night, but just as the traveller drew
near to me, the moon was hidden behind a bank
of clouds. The wayfarer passed close to me,


and, in a wild frenzy, I cried out, ‘Your money,
or your life, 5 and sprang upon him.. He must
have recognised my voice, for as lie struggled
to free himself he called me distinctly by name.
Surprised and maddened at being recognised, I
lost all thought of my original purpose. From
a criminal I became a madman. There was a
desperate struggle, but he was no match for
me, strong of limb and nerved with tho
superhuman strength of a maniac. My fingers
clasped his throat and tightened there.”
He paused, and wiped the cold perspiration
from his pallid brow.
“When when —” he continued, in a husky
voice, “he ceased to struggle and fell to the
ground, I was about to see who it could have
been that knew me, but my quick ear, strained
by fear, caught again the sound of footsteps. I
turned and fled through the fern and scrub,
whither I knew not. For days, I know not
how many, I was in a drinking bout and used
to wander about trying to fly from myself. It
was in this state that I met with the accident
of which you are aware. I had fallen down a
shaft. The rest of the story I need not tell.
I did not know for some time afterwards


that I had killed the man, and that his name
was—”
“John Dromane? Not John Dromane ?”
screamed Mary Sullivan.
“Yes, Mary,” said her husband. “It was
I who murdered John Dromane, and his son,
Father Maurice, has known it since the time
you brought him here to see me after the
accident.”
“ Oh, Father Dromane,” cried Mary. “ You
have known this, and not delivered him over to
justice.”
“ It was a priest’s secret,” quietly replied the
clergyman.” “My lips were sealed.”
“ 1 have but one word more to add,” said
Martin Sullivan, “ and then my wife shall decide
my fate. The approaching footsteps that had
caused me to fly in terror from the scene of my
crime were, as I now know, those of Stephen
Goble. He was discovered near the body by
Father Maurice, and surrounding circumstances
pointed to him as the murderer. So strong
was the presumption of his guilt, he was
condemned to death. So far as the world is
concerned lam safe from punishment. Father
Dromane has urged me to confess my guilt. I


will not tell you what his last resource has
been. It has been sufficiently powerful to
compel me to confess to my wife, to whom I
know I am dearer than life, and to leave my
fate in her hands.”
He ceased, and the priest looked curiously
and wonderingly at Mary Sullivan. What
would she do ?
She, the arbiter of life and death, stood pale
and motionless as a statue. What she had
heard seemed to have turned her to marble.
When she spoke it Avas in a mechanical way, as
if her tongue, unconsciously to herself, reported
her thoughts.
“ John Dromane was murdered by Martin.
Stephen Goble is condemned to die for the
crime of Avhich he is innocent. Kathleen, who
was kind to me and mine in my time of trouble,
is in love with Stephen, and will not long
survive him. To save them, Martin, my
husband, must confess his guilt, and I
With a passionate sob, she covered her face
with her hands, and burst into tears. Both men
moved towards her, but she Avaved them back.
« Stop !” she cried, “ don’t speak to me. Let
me think it out as calmly as I can.”


After a long pause, she continued—
“ Martin, you are my husband, and I can
truly say that I love you more dearly than my
life. I told you that there was no crime that I
could not forgive, and I spoke the truth. I
forgive you freely what you have done, and will
pray to heaven to forgive you, too. But I
should be no true wife to you, no Christian
before heaven, if, by my advice, you placed
another sin upon your soul. Oh, Martin,
darling, it’s bard to part now, when life to me
had become so much better and brighter—but
the will of God be done.”
She flung her arms about him and sobbed
bitterly.
Martin Sullivan sighed heavily, then, as his
hand patted her head caressingly, he said to the
priest:
“ You hear what my wife says, Father
Dromane. She has decided. Let me have
to day with her, and to-morrow r I will go and
repeat my confession to the authorities.”
Martin Sullivan was as good as his word.
He confessed to having slain John Dromane


and Stephen Goble was released. Certain
difficulties in the way of proving the murder
were alleged to be the reason that Martin was
charged with the lesser offence of manslaughter,
but it was shrewdly suspected that Father
Dromane’s influence had something to do with
the lightness of the punishment meted out to
the man who killed his father. Martin Sullivan
received a sentence of five years’ imprisonment.
What mental suffering was the portion of his
true-hearted and faithful wife during those long
years may be imagined, but she never once
regretted the step she had taken in advising her
husband to confess his guilt. She counted the
hours of his sentence, and met him upon its
termination with a genuinely bright smile and
an honestly happy heart. For some years
afterwards ; indeed, until death parted them ;
Martin Sullivan and his wife lived in peaceful
and contented, if not absolutely happy security.
There is little left to add. Love so far
-conquered Kathleen’s scruples that she was
willing to marry Stephen Goble if her brother
gave his consent, and the clergyman felt that
so much by way of compensation was due to
the innocent man who had suffered so greatly


Father Maurice performed the marriage cere-
mony. The little chapel at Bluegum was
crowded, and all eyes were centred upon the
bridegroom who had gone through the terrible
experience of a sentence of death. Few paid
any attention to the young priest, gray-haired
before his time, for none in the little chapel
knew of the cross that he had been called upon
to bear. What he suffered in those hours of
darkness and mental agony can be known
only to himself and to his God.
THE END.


33 PRIZE MEDALS.
PURE. REFRESHING.
J. S, FRY & SONS,
BRISTOL, LONDON. SYDNEY,
And MELBOURNE.
