





A PROPOSAL FOR THE
CONFEDERATION
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES,
WITH
PRINCE ALFRED,
DUKE OF EDINBURGH,
AS
KING OF AUSTRALIA.
BY A COLONIST.
“Politics ought to he adjusted, not to human reasonings, hut to human nature; of which
reason is but a part, and by no means the greatest part.”—BURKE On the State of the
Nation, vol. i., p. 1.3.
Sydney:
J. J. MOORE, GEORGE STREET (OPPOSITE THE CATHEDRAL).
melbourne:
GEORGE ROBERTSON, ELIZABETH STREET.
1867.
Price One Shilling.


A PROPOSAL FOR THE
CONFEDERATION
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES,
WITH
THIS SEDITIOUS PAMPHLET WAS QUICKLY SUPPRESSED.
THIS COPY IS THE ONLY ONE PRIVATELY OWNED.
AS
KING OF AUSTRALIA.
BY A COLONIST.
“ Politics ought to be adjusted, not to human reasonings, but to human nature ; of which
reason is hut a part, and by no means the greatest part.”—Oa the State of the Nation:
vol, i., p. 113.
■Sgßiieg :
J. J. MOORE, GEORGE STREET (opposite the Cathedral).
Melbourne:
GEORGE ROBERTSON, ELIZABETH STREET.
1867.


A PROPOSAL FOE THE
CONFEDERATION
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES,
WITH
PRINCE ALFRED,
DUKE OF EDINBURGH,
AS
KING OF AUSTRALIA.
BY A COLONIST.
“ Politics ought to be adjusted, not to human reasonings, but to human nature ; of which
reason is but a part, and by no means the greatest part.”— On, the State of the Nation :
vol, i., p. 113.
:
J. J. MOORE, GEORGE STREET (opposite the Cathedral).
itlrlfaoumc:
GEORGE ROBERTSON, ELIZABETH STREET.
1867.


A PROPOSAL FOR THE
CONFEDERATION
OF THE
AUSTRALIAN COLONIES.
CHAPTER I.
The Future of Australia—Present Depression—The Draining of our Wealth
by retiring Capitalists—Separation certain—A Court—Absenteeism
checked and Wealth retained—Trade and Labor encouraged—Peace
secured—The Evils of Division—Blessings of Peace—Reasons why
Britain would assent to Separation—Liberty permanent under a
Monarchy.
In predicting a great and* a glorious future for
Australia, t we are but expressing the universal
sentiment of the civilised world.
Her vast and varied resources—the invincible
energy of the races which have settled on her shores—
are assurances of the important position she will some
day occupy among nations, when her wealth and her
commerce, her influence and her power, shall have
been established.
On the course of events from her infancy to her
maturity momentous interests depend.
That her unexampled prosperity is at present im-
peded no one will deny. It is, therefore, our duty
and our opportunity calmly to review our social,
commercial, and political position, and to draw those
deductions the circumstances around us suggest and
urge.
A large share of the accumulated wealth of these
Colonies is abstracted and spent in Europe. A large


proportion of our best families retire to Britain, to
enjoy honors and society. Hence, our resources are
undeveloped for want of capital, our trade is depressed
for want of those stimulants which wealthy circles
always afford, and our labor is seeking productive
employment.
Politically, our position is worse. It is veiled
in uncertainty. We know that, sooner or later, our
severance from Imperial rule is inevitable. The five
Australian Colonies are disunited. What will result
if either or all are severed ? What various and joint
policies, or, to speak more portentously, what Consti-
stitutions would be adopted ? Who can say ?
It appears to us, no time can be more meet than
the present, boldly to look these subjects in the face.
England is’at peace with the world. We are on the
best of relations with England. Prince Alfred,
Duke of Edinburgh, is about to visit us.
We propose to discuss whether it would not be
wise and practicable to form a Confederation of the
Australian Colonies, and to offer the Crown to
Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh, as King of
Australia.
We firmly believe, if he could be induced to accept
the throne, absenteeism would be checked; a society
would be formed that would refine our population,
give an impetus to our trade, and encourage labor;
that all future contingencies would be avoided; and
that Britain would always render us an affectionate
assistance in our enterprises, as connected with her
Eoyal House, and governed by her favorite Prince.
The ambition and object of those who set , foot on
our soil is to make as much as they can out of our
country, that they may return, and enjoy ease in
Europe.
Do not our Coopers and our Donaldsons, ’ our
Marshs and our Wentworths, settle in England,


where they may attain the rank and station their
wealth can command ?
It was but a few months ago we read of the death
of a lamented fellow-colonist, who died in London,
whose will was . proved for £400,000. Numerous
similar instances can be cited. It is the rule, and not
the exception, that our rich men retire to Britain.
How is it possible we can derive those benefits our
enormous natural productions should secure us ?
When the slightest check occurs in our pastoral or
mineral resources, our accumulations are being spent
away from us; we are short of capital; trade is
paralysed; and labor lacks work.
Were a Court established, with a Prince of the
House of Brunswick at its head, not only should we
retain our wealthy localised families, but many of the
junior members of the English nobility would come
over; absenteeism would be diminished; an impulse
would be given to trade which only the circulation of
gathered wealth can supply; houses, and furniture,
and luxuries would be required; literature, art, and
science would flourish under the patronage of riches
and refinement.
Would Britain assent to our separation from her?
Under the circumstances proposed we think she would.
It could not but be gratifying to her that these
colonies—the most important of her offspring—should
desire a Prince from,, a family she loves so, dearly.
That she should be proud of the opportunity of estab-
lishing offshoots in her Antipodes, who, adopting her
religion, her laws, and her Constitution, would per-
manently plant her fame ih the Southern hemisphere.
Besides, Britain cannot but be subject to deep
anxiety concerning her far off colonies.
Greater and more powerful than ever, she is yet
aware that should an American or an European contest
break out, such are the appliances of modern warfare,


it may be impossible for her to provide for the
exigencies of distant dependencies. Should the Aus-
tralias occupy an independent position, they would be
freed from such contingencies. Confederated, they
need not be an aggressive power. The desolations of
war are not likely to devastate our lands as they have
done those of the old world.
Moreover, we are all conscious that we are at
present linked to one centre —the Home Govern-
ment. If that link be sundered, we become several
nationalities. Our interests may diverge; similar
difficulties to those that have arisen in Europe and in
America may arise between ourselves. Standing
armies—which are at once an expense, a drain on in-
dustry, and a curse—may be a necessity. Our taxes,
our laboring population, and our ingenuity may be
wasted in devising means of defence.
Mutual jealousies would spring up. The unanimity
essential to our mutual progress would be destroyed.
Our best interests might be sacrificed to the thirst of
ambition and to the love of power. We might thus
drift into a current of evils that would wreck our
prospects and arrest our advancement. As in Europe,
centuries might be required to accomplish what may
be done in a decade.
Should these colonies be totally disintegrated, as
they might be by an American or an European war,
some might be taken by one country, some by another,
some might assert their independence. In any case
we may adopt distinct political constitutions.
From the day we are separated from the Mother
Country without Confederation, our troubles will
begin.
No motive seems strong enough to quench the
passion for war.
We have seen peoples of the same religion, the same
laws, the same language and of kindred blood, casting


aside all considerations of long-formed friendships and
the alliances of brotherhood and affection. All the
dictates of self interest; all the duties which bind
them to amity as co-worshippers of the Prince of
Peace, and fiercely fling themselves into the madden-
ing excitement of deadly strife.
If, on the other hand, these colonies should unite
themselves under one government, and continue in
union, we shall commence an unwritten page in
history. We shall present to the world a spectacle of
peace hitherto unseen. Our territories will be un-
trodden by the heel of the warrior and the hoofs of his
horsemen. Our towns and our villages will be strange
to the din of battle. We shall be freed from the sor-
rows and the stains of devastated fields and pillaged
settlements. The horrors of military march and camp,
burning cities, violated homes, the wails of widows
and orphans, will be familiar to us only in the histories
and in the records of other nations, who rend each
other, hurl their hosts on the roaring cannon, and
sacrifice their sons at the shrine of wild ambition.
We shall have no motive for conquest. The plunder
of a peaceful population is a stigma no civilised state
would now contract. We could not (having no
weapons) give them the plea of insult or attack. We
shall apply ourselves to the developments of
those boundless materials Providence has laid at our
feet.
Our flocks and our herds will range undisturbed
over the mountains and the plains—our fields will
spread out their abundance to the face of heaven —our
settlers, under their own vines and fig trees, will enjoy
a patriarchal repose. Our towns will ring with the
clang of industry, while our thriving artisans will be
utilising our vast mineral products. Overflowing
plenty will feed our commerce and will return to us in
reserved wealth. Literature, art, and science will be


cultivated with the facilities riches and leisure shall
afford.
Britain has of late years shown every disposition
to resign her colonies, if they are not essential to her
security and her power. During the debates on Cana-
dian questions in recent sessions of her Parliament, her
statesmen have frequently declared, if separation were
desired by Canada, it would be conceded at once.
A leading Minister on one occasion asserted, amidst
the cheers of both sides of the House, “if Canada
thought her welfare would be promoted by detaching
herself from Britain, she might arrange for her inde-
pendence without delay.” From the confidence with
which the statement was made, it was evidently the
matured decision of Her Majesty’s Government.
It is no secret, one of the ultimate objects of the
Canadians in desiring confederation is, that they may
offer the crown to Prince Arthur, and declare the
British North American Provinces a Kingdom.
The trade of Britain is now so enormous, her
intellect is so busy , with all that can ennoble a nation,
her greatness and her glory have been so conspicuously
displayed, the prevailing sentiment of her people is
a yearning for rest.
What more can she do than she has done ? Show
us a spot on earth where the climate is suited to her
sons—there will the Anglo-Saxon be found!
It is time for her to halt, to enjoy her wealth, her
discoveries, her noble literature, and the blessings of
peace. She can claim pre-eminence in the field of
arms, of arts, and of mind.
She has stamped her foot-prints on the path of
science—she has given us the abstract and the practi-
cal—she calls Newton and George Stephenson her
children—she has begotten and nurtured poets who
have depicted every phase of human feeling, and who
have touched every chord that vibrates in the human


heart. All that can he reached by the imagination of
man, whether in heaven or on earth, have been sub-
jects for her song. From Chaucer to Shakespeare—
from Milton to Tennyson—we can revel in the Eden
of her inspirations. She has reared a pedestal of
thought that will endure when Egypt’s pyramids shall
have crumbled to their bases.
She has been the Apostle and the Evangelist of
nations. The name of that geographical inch is
everywhere known. Every land has listened to her
statesmen. The valor of her soldiers is a by-word.
The unflinching u red line” is a proverb.
Why should Great Britain jeopardise her prestige
by endeavouring to defend her colonies against modern
odds ? Why should we risk our future on the fortunes
of war ?
We can well imagine the first idea of the peoples of
Australia, in suggesting that a king should rule, will
be that our liberties may be curtailed, and that our
rights may be restrained.
We purpose showing they will not. Further, we
maintain our rights, and our freedom will be promoted.
We now possess manhood suffrage and perfect religious
equality. It would be as impossible for the oak to
return to the acorn, as that we, having realised these
advantages, should concede them to any influence, in-
ternal or external. All power is in the hands of the
people. The Constitution will be founded on a solid
basis. There can be no struggling for reform bills—
no quarrels among ruling or rival sects—no education
squabbles. They are already disposed of. If they
should even disturb us, our broad suffrage is compe-
tent to solve any dispute.
Here, the Crown and the Mitre will be distinct. The
King will rule by our government; our government
will be the exponent of our legislative assembly ; our
legislative assembly will be the elect of the people.


Hence all that concerns us will be controlled by the
best of all safeguards—public will.
Under a Constitutional Monarchy, as in Britain,
the Monarch exercises less personal authority than the
President of a Eepublic. He rules only by his min-
isters. The head of the Government is not the object
of those disturbing influences and those individual
jealousies which selfishness or spite frequently en-
courage.
If an unpopular measure is proposed, or if an error
in administration is committed, the executive is cen-
sured. That personal esteem which should ever sur-
round the Sovereign, is unimpaired and unshaken.
Filling a permanent and hereditary office, he is not
subject to the interferences of disappointed opponents
or expectant successors.
Unconnected with party, he presides over his Coun-
cils with impartiality. He commands the respect
and the veneration of his people by an unbiassed exe-
cution of their policy as presented to him by their
chosen leaders. The minds of the people rest steady
on their Constitution. They are not engaged in seek-
ing objects of favor or of blame.
The Chief Magistracy being a fixed institution, it
cannot be molested by ambition, and the people settle
down to their practical pursuits.
CHAPTER II.
Evils of Republics—Ancient Greece and Rome—Middle Ages—France—
America—The Revolutions of France—The Civil War in America—
The present uncertain state of both Nations—Elective Monarchy—
Poland.
Republics cannot be regarded as models for imitation.
Ancient Greece frittered away her power in the
changes of her rulers and in civil strife.
Ancient Rome became a seething pot of faction,


Her mightiest minds in war and philosophy collapsed
in the conduct of her Commonwealth.
Their names sank to synonyms for weakness and
insecurity.
The Republics of the Middle Ages withered and
merged into Monarchies.
France has in modern times been twice allured by
the seductive theories of Republicanism.
We need not recal her late attempt at “ Liberty,
Equality, and Fraternity.”
For the past sixteen years, notwithstanding the
triumphs that are associated with the reign of Napo-
leon the Third, her mind has been crushed, her
thoughts have been stifled, and her literature has been
destroyed.
Her poets and her philosophers are silent, or
stunted. During this period, except Renan’s “ Life
of Jesus”—which will soon be forgotten—no note-
worthy work of a speculative character has been con-
tributed to the world by the intellect of France. We
beg pardon: there is the “ Life of Csesar”—but that
was the Emperor’s.
Nor is the end of this yet seen.
When the thought of France is set free (and it must
be sooner or later, or France can never be' a great
civilised nation) we may but witness similar confusion
to that which followed after the death of Louis the
Fourteenth, and which brought on the first revolution
with its chaos of thinkers.
History repeats itself. In 1794 —not twenty years
before the execution of Louis the sixteenth—the
publication was forbidden of any work discussing
questions of government. Three years later the writer
of any book likely to excite the public was decreed
punishable with death. A few years after no books
could be printed except by the Government press.
The penalties and persecutions that beset thought in


France now, are but repetitions of those in former
days—though less in degree, they are the same in de-
sign and effect.
Yet this present despotism is the outcome of a
republic. What will be the issue of the struggle
between the mind of France and her Government is
a question only to be solved by time. That it will
free itself no one can doubt; but the track from
despotism to liberty cannot be pre-traced.
Of her former effort for Republicanism we need say
little. Its incidents and its issue are too familiar.
During its existence all people lived in a panic, and
it would not work.
France has still to complete the problem of her first
revolution.
We will now enquire into the nature of republican-
ism as exhibited to us by the noblest republic the
world has yet witnessed—the United States of America.
Though America has achieved an unparalleled great-
ness under her form of Government, we must look
beyond its Government for the mainspring. After her
triumphant struggle for independence scarcely had
the roar of British artillery ceased its concussions, e’er
her domestic difficulties commenced—difficulties that
culminated in her late fratricidal war.
At the close of her success—her Constitution settled
—Washington was by unanimous consent her elected
first President. Yet he—pure and disinterested as he
was—could not peaceably control the people. They
loved him as a father—they revered him as an idol
—but they rebelled against his measures. Lest we
may be considered partial, we will quote from a well
known author, who, during the civil war, wrote in
favor of the Northern interest, “ There is one remark-
able event of internal history to be chronicled during
Washington’s administration—nothing less than an in-
surrection. In order to raise revenue, duties had


been laid on distilled spirits. Already, in his annual
address of 1791, the President had to announce that
there was discontent in some places with the tax. By
1792 he had to report that there was opposition to the
collection of duties ; that he had to issue a proclama-
tion against all unlawful combinations and proceedings
tending to obstruct the operation of the excise laws ;
that he had taken measures to prosecute offenders.
Two years later he had to issue not one, but two, pro-
clamations (August 7th and September 25, 1794)
against actual insurrection. In his annual address of
that year he had to report that in four counties of
Pennsylvania there had been riots, and societies formed
to resist the law; that the United States Marshal, in
endeavouring to enforce the law, had been fired upon,
detained, and forced to renounce the serving of processes
west of the Alleghanies; that the Inspector’s house
had been attacked and burned, and that the militia
had had to be called out. We learn by other sources
that the insurgents had mustered by the thousand,
that delegates had met to the number of two hundred,
not only from the western provinces of Pennsylvania,
where resistance had first begun, but from another
Pennsylvanian, and even from one Virginian, county.
However, by the appointment of Commissioners, by
conferences, and last, not least, by the marching of
15,000 troops into Western Pennsylvania, the mischief
was put down. The insurgents laid down their arms.
Eighteen were tried for treason, but not convicted;
and the tumult subsided, having cost the lives of three
men—one a military officer.” *
Under the second President, John Adams, so active
was the restlessness of party, certain states already
mooted secession. Jefferson, who was Vice-President
and the head of the losing side, writes in 1798, f “If
* Ludlow, pp. 58-59.
f Jefferson’s Correspondence, vol. 111., pp. 400 401.


on a temporary superiority of the one party, the other
is to resort to scission of the Union, no Federal
Government can ever exist. If, to rid ourselves of the
present rale of Massachusetts and Connecticut, we
break the Union, will the evil stop there ? Will our
natures be changed ? Are we not men to the south of
them, and with all the passions of men? * * *
What a game, too, will one party have in their hands
by eternally threatening their neighbours, that, unless
they do so and so, they will join their northern neigh-
bours.”
John Adams was compelled to employ strong means
in order to preserve the Union. In 1798, Pennsyl-
vania resisted taxation. The resistance was only re-
repressed by military force. Though order was restored
without fighting, several malcontents were tried, some
were found guilty, and punished. These agitations
continued. The northern and southern States did not
conceal their antagonism, they reviled and insulted
each other. Warm-hearted John Eandolph, during
the discussion of the Missouri question, uttered this
rash language, which wrought and rankled in the
Northern heart. “We do not govern them (the free
states) by our black slaves, but by their own white
slaves. We know what we are doing. We have
conquered you once, and will conquer you again. Ay,
Sir, we will drive you to the wall, and when we have
you there once more, we mean to keep you there, and
nail you down like bad money.” This was but an ex-
pression of the feelings that existed between the rival
states. Nor (as we shall presently show) did the
Presidents, on this and other questions, command
sufficient authority to check dissentious opinions.
Strife festered and fermented. The chasm
widened. The North and the South regarded each
other with greater animosity than foreign enemies,
there was no central power in the minds of the people


to compel cohesion. Years rolled on. The thunder
clouds gathered and burst in accumulated fury. The
direst cataclysm of blood ever witnessed swept over
the land.
Who can pourtray the madness and the horrors of
the recent struggle in America ? Affections were torn
asunder. Brother faced brother in the battle-field.
The same homestead supplied soldiers for hostile
armies. Fellow-students from the Military College at
West Point practised an education received from the
same lips, and under the same roof, to defeat, to maim,
and to kill one another. It were well if the realities of
the civil war in America were never written. Except
as a lesson, the gladiatorial spectacle can only excite
surprise and anguish. ’Twas enough “to make angels
weep.” Faces, familiar by the friendships of boyhood,
met as frowning foes. Fathers were separated from
sons. Neighbours enlisted to bayonet each other. The
land was full of hatred, and bloodthirstyness, and
revenge. Myriads, from the flower of American man-
hood, were conscripted and sent to the hecatomb.
The more there were killed on either side, the more
rejoicings followed. Families were turned out of
their homes, as ants from their hillocks. Fields and
barns were laid desolate. Sympathy was banished
from every breast. All ears were shut to the remon-
strances of morality and religion. Destruction, destruc-
tion, destruction, was the cry of both combatants.
Thousands rushed to the sanguinary ravings that
were bellowed from pulpits and platforms. In North
and South both sexes were incited to help in the
slaughter. The arch-orator of the North, the Rev.
Ward Beecher, displayed his Christian tenderness by
closing an harrangue with this rhyme—
“ Wo’ll plough their boasted cotton-fields
With cannon, shot, and shell,
And render all secessiondom
As desolate as hell.”


The same illustrious tongue “ preached Jesus unto
the people,” and expounded those Scriptures that
enforce “ Charity suffereth long, and is kind.”
This is Civil War.
The South has been subdued, and the Union has
been re-asserted. But what sensible man believes the
people of America are bound together by a national
sentiment of unity. Without this sentiment, no
Government can prosper. The South has succumbed
to superior force; but the detestation that prompted
resistance still burns in the bosoms of her people—
(we shall prove slavery has not been the only cause of
division). A new era has begun in the history of the
United States. The youngest living may not see the
end of the late conflict.
Again, there has been a growing distrust of the
Executive, that is ever fatal to the well-being of
nations. This distrust was never greater, nor was it
at any time more energetic, than now. The change
of President will not alter it. The power and in-
fluence of the Chief Magistracy has been gradually
departing from the office.
Suspicions are freely expressed. Charges are boldly
made. His person and his rule are surrounded with
contempt.
Immediately after a President’s election, he is beset
with eager applicants, beseeching him for place.
Hence, at the outset of his responsibility, he must
excite jealousies and disappointments.
Since Jefferson—l Boo—sweeping removals from
office have taken place at every transfer of the presi-
dential power. Jefferson accused his predecessor,
John Adams, of filling every post with partisans. He
affirmed that he found no subordinates whom he could
trust.
He therefore made a clean sweep, and filled
every Custom House and Post Office with his own


nominees. This policy has been followed by his suc-
cessors.
As the President is only elected for four years,
every one who enjoys government favours makes the
most of his opportunity, from the President down-
wards.
While such a state of things obtains, you will never
have that high-toned honor which is so signally exem-
plified by British statesmen, and which is necessary
to good government.
It is impossible for the President to escape re-
proach, deserved or undeserved. His personal and
official character is attainted. He becomes a butt for
the shafts of accusation and calumny. *
When once the office loses its dignity, it loses its
influence. The political arena is but a scene of brawls
and indictments.
The interests of the state are set aside, while indi-
vidual contests are raging and rampant.
Such is the organisation of the American Constitu-
tion, we have frequently seen her highest officers at
variance with one another.
In 1830 a banquet was given to celebrate Jefferson’s
birthday. The President, Andrew Jackson, and the
Vice-President, Calhoun, were among the guests. The
President was called upon for a toast. He rose and
gave, “ Our Federal Union, it must be preserved’
Calhoun, the leader of the Southern party, not to be
outdone, ominously followed with another, “The
Union next to our liberty, the most dear.” These
were some of the conflicting elements and divided
councils that have marred every administration in
America. Though the sword has been sheathed, and
peace has been declared, the same evils are still
at work. True, slavery has been abolished;
but slavery was not the only bone of conten-
tion. Tariff bills, if unacceptable to certain


States, were openly resisted. In the second in-
augural address of Jackson, 1883, he fearlessly
expressed the dangers of the state. He said, “ Divided
we shall see our internal trade burdened with number-
less restraints, and exactions; communications between
distant parts and sections obstructed or cut off, our
sons made soldiers to deluge with blood the fields they
now till in peace, the mass of our people borne down
and impoverished by taxes to support armies and
navies, and military leaders at the head of our victorious
legions becoming our lawgivers and judges.* The loss of
liberty “of all good government, of peace, plenty, and
happinness must inevitably follow a dissolution of the
Union.’ ’ Yet immediately after a new tariff was passed,
which South Carolina simply treated with contempt.
Notwithstanding Jackson’s recent address, the Vice-
President, Calhoun, was opposed to him. He brought
forth resolutions in the Senate, and cast them in the
teeth of the President. In these resolutions he de-
clared, “ That the assertions that the people of these
United States, taken collectively, are now, or have
ever been united on the principle of the social com-
pact, and as such are now formed into one nation or
people, or that they ever have been so united in any
one stage of their political existence are not only with-
out foundation in truth, but contrary to the most certain
and plain historical facts and the clearest deductions of
reason.” With these fundamental differences between
the administrators of America, how were we to ex-
pect anything but disorganisation ? It was the upper-
most sentiment in the mind of every American patriot.
Jackson bid farewell to his countrymen in the follow-
ing burning words. These words should bo read and
pondered by the statesmen and people of every new
* This prognostication has boon fulfilled in General Grant, who possesses
more sway over the people than the present President.


country. They are singularly applicable to Australia.
u The first line of separation would not last for a single
generation. * * * New leaders would spring up,
and this great and glorious republic would soon be
broken into a multitude of petty states, jealous of one
another, armed for mutual aggression, loaded with taxes
to pay armies and leaders. , seeking aid against each
other from foreign powers, insulted and trampled upon
by the nations of Europe, until, harassed with conflict,
and troubled and debased in spirit, they would be
ready to submit to the absolute dominion of any
military adventurer, and surrender the liberty for the
sake of repose. * * * If such a struggle is once
begun, and the citizens of one section of the country
arrayed in arms against those of another in doubtful
conflict, let the battle result as it may, there will be
an end of the union, and with it an end to the hopes
of freedom. * * * The Constitution cannot be
maintained, nor the union, preserved, in opposition to
public feeling, by the mere exertion of the coercive
powers confided to the general government. The
FOUNDATIONS MUST BE LAID IN THE AFFECTIONS OF THE
people, in the security it gives to life, liberty, cha-
racter, and property in every part of the country, and
in the fraternal attachment which the citizens of
the several states bear to one another as members of
one political family.” Wise and self-evident counsels
such as these were frequently addressed to the people
of America by her most devoted sons. All warnings
failed to check dissension.
Van Huron succeeded Jackson, 1836. His Pre-
sidency was distinguished by the obstructions of the
Congress.
The Administration of President Tyler was sig-
nalised by its wrangles with Congress. They were at
perpetual variance, and with varying success. The
two most able advisers of the American nation, Clay


and Webster, quitted public life in absolute hopeless-
ness and disgust.
Subsequent events followed in the undeviating
course. The Presidency in the hands of Mr. Pierce
was held in derision.
The Kansas question in 1856 again afforded a
pitiable exhibition of the conflicts that divided parties.
The Senate and the House opposed each other, the
House successively refused to appropriate necessary
funds, though it eventually yielded.
Such was the disorder that destroyed the strength of
the American Executive. - The President possessed no
power, either personal or constitutional, to control it.
Under a Parliamentary Government, as in Britain,
changes of Ministry might have taken place, but the
Sovereign would have been respected and undisturbed.
Differences would soon have been adjusted. The
majority of the nation wuuld have obtained a peaceful
triumph. Ho questions of national disorganisation
would have been raised. Ho ill-feeling would have
arisen between sections of politics. It is an unfortu-
nate but a potent fact that American Presidents
have spent their terms of office in “ popularity-hunt-
ing,” or in disputing with their Congress. Eecently
the fatal word “ Impeachment” has been freely used
in the Legislature of the States. We know not if
Andrew Johnson will weather the storm which is
raging against him. We have seen that other ques-
tions than Slavery have threatened secession. The
presidential office has so fallen into disrepute, that the
ablest senators of America do not offer themselves.
Clay and Webster and Calhoun were the three most
renowned among her modern statesmen. They died
without filling the chair. The first was defeated, the
other two would not contest it.
Perhaps an undue space has been allowed in con-
sidering the example of America. But here is


the only instance of a Modern Republic founded with
the materials and prospect of success. Her people
were banded together to defeat injustice. They were
united by a joint struggle. They were cemented by a
common interest. They shared in the efforts and
sufferings of war for one object. They possessed the
finest territory in the world.
They inherited the blood and the histories of those
who had fought at Agincourt and at Poictiers. Thier
ancestors called the seas their own. Soldiers who had
marched with Marlborough were their fathers’ kins-
men. Chatham and some of England’s greatest men
had declared their cause to be just.
Since they gained their independence, with so much
renown, her people have displayed marvellous energies
of industry and enterprise in commerce and in all the
arts of civilisation.
Rut their Government is unstable. There is still
dangerous restlessness in her political society. If
once America is dis-united, all the evils of old Europe
may afflict her. Rival tariffs, standing armies, and
war may drain her wealth and prostrate her progress.
In considering the desirability of forming the Aus-
tralias into a Constitutional Monarchy, we are bound
to look impartially at the teachings of history.
There is but one other practicable form of Govern-
ment —an Elective Monarchy. This need only be
named to be dismissed. The same objections to those
of a Republic exist, and in an aggravated degree.
Dissension and bloodshed would follow such an insti-
tution. We have no ancient families from whom
a King could be chosen. The chronicles of Poland
will suggest objections to everyone. She was once
among the bravest and most powerful of nations. Her
country was compact. Her people were of one race.
Her annals inspired her with valor. Her famous
deeds of arms lent a terror to her name.


But she failed in governing herself. The claims
of her distinguished families divided her armies and
her people. Her Court and her Councils were a maze
of intrigue. Her bravery was expended in supporting
opposing houses. Her nobles, her generals, and her
soldiers arrayed themselves in hostile camps. Her
fields were drenched with her own blood. Neigh-
bouring nations watched and waited till she lay
lacerated, bleeding, and exhausted. They hastened
to her dis-memberment. She now lies, pitied, and
helpless, a stranded wreck, to warn all nations from
elective monarchy.
CHAPTER III.
Objections answered—Conclusion.
"We have referred to the temporary nature of the
present Australian Governments, and have cursorily
alluded to the necessity of serious reflection and fore-
thought. We have glanced at the dangers that are
imminent if a permanent Constitution is not secured,
and have pointed out some of the disasters that have
prostrated other powers. The material benefits that
would follow a Constitutional Monarchy under the
rule of Prince Alfred, Duke of Edinburgh have been
indicated.
We now propose to anticipate the objections that
may be advanced, and to show the paramount urgency
of immediate action.


Let ns hope our legislators and onr people will
realise the duties they owe to onr children and our
posterity.
It may be said any plan of confederation would be
beset with difficulties; that it is all but an impossibility
to get the several colonies to merge their interests in
one central government.
There is no doubt the question will need all the
wisdom at our command; our legislators must enter
into the negociations with broad and comprehensive
views—all narrow-mindedness must he excluded—
Prejudice must he set aside.
But the difficulties attenidng Confederation
FORM THE STRONGEST ARGUMENT IN FAVOR OF ITS
necessity. If the difficulties attending Confederation
cannot he mastered , what difficulties may not occur between
the several colonies when they are totally detached ? It
cannot he denied our mutual welfare hangs on our
Union.
The differences surrounding the settlement of Con-
federation involve merely a peaceful contest. Should
we not he able to agree in this; when separated, if
differences should spring up they can only be solved
by the sword.
We may endeavour to shut our eyes to the stem
fact; but this probability cannot be gainsayed. His-
tory, ancient and modern, teaches and enforces the
fatal truth.
Subject to the same passions and the same weak-
nesses as other nations how can we expect to escape
similar follies and errors to those that have driven
them into bloodshed and debt ?
The best governed and the most civilised have com-
mitted blunders that have left scars which years will
not efface. Our own races have not been exempt.
Let us he wise in time.
If the intelligence of these colonies applies itself


to this all-important question of Confederation, it can
be adjusted now.
Coming ages and a teeming population will bless
the fidelity and the wisdom with which this genera-
tion will have fulfilled the obligation and the trust
that the present opportunity entails.
We will not encumber our argument with the de-
tails of Confederation. Every point will receive the
maturest consideration. The subject is too weighty
for isolated opinion: every objection to the
main principle may be refuted. Jealousies and
conflicting interests may be compromised when the
general advantage is admitted.
The Court and the Parliaments may be alternately
held in different divisions.
The distance of constituencies cannot be urged with
consistency.
Our intercommunications will be more convenient
than those of Scotland and the Imperial Parliament,
before the days of railways.
They will be more convenient than California and
other American States are to the Congress at Wash-
ington.
They will be as convenient as several of our interior
constituencies are to the legislatures of Victoria, New
South Wales, and Queensland.
The honors, privileges, and commercial advantages
that will attend the presence of the King and his
Court, may be arranged equitably. There are our
own several government houses, and the Court might
alternately be held in each.
Objection may be advanced that a King will involve
us in expense. The objection is illusory. The
colonies now support five Governors with considerable
emoluments, besides attendant costs. There are five
Legislative Assemblies.
It may be questionable taste to refer to the charges


of these establishments, hut it is necessary to name
the fiscal view of the subject, and to suggest the
comparison.
Our King need not be surrounded with “ the pomp
and circumstance” of warlike monarchs.
The glory of his crown will he justice and peace. No
war-warmed battalions will attend him. A simple
body-guard, and the affections of a prosperous people,
will be his defence and his strength.
We can come to no other conclusion than that if we
are to retain our wealth and our wealthy citizens, if
labor, trade, and commerce, are to advanced we
must have a Court. That one Government is the
corner stone of our prosperity, or the colonies
may be perpetually troubled by different tariffs,
smuggling, border disputes, and the various evils that
lead to war. That a Court and a Government are
only possible by offering our States as a kingdom to
Prince Alfred , Duke of Edinburgh.
To consolidate these colonies on a permanent basis
is a worthy object for the noblest minds. Free religion,
free thought, and public opinion are our birthright. A
stable and an enduring Government is all we require.
Everything Providence can afford us is ours. The
corn, the wine, and the oil are ours. He has given us
the sheep and the cattle on a thousand hills. He has
given us the silver and the gold. Corn and cotton,
timber and iron are ours. It seems God has exhausted
his bounty upon us, and set us apart, that we may
share his gifts unmolested. Let us not lose these
transcendant advantages by political mistakes.
Let us shun the possibility of war. Let us unite
while we can. Let us adopt one Sovereign and one
Constitution while we can.
No such favorable opportunity may again present
itself.


The peace and wealth of ourselves and of our
children depend on our decision.
If our legislators are equal to the occasion, this
epoch will he renowned in the world’s annals.
The men who lead us to this consummation will carve
their names on the column of fame. They will be
indelibly inscribed in the archives of the human
family as its greatest benefactors. We shall mani-
fest a confederacy of wisdom as yet unwitnessed.
Our rulers will be charged with but one duty—the
happinness of the people.
Industry and brotherhood will cover the land. We
shall be the first nation on the earth that shall have
fulfilled the faith of Him who came to bring “ Peace
on earth, and good will among men.”
V. CUNNINGHAME, PRINTER, 186 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.


