

HOW TO KILL FENIANISM AND RIBBONISM.
A
PRACTICAL PROPOSITION
FOR THE
SOLUTION
OF THE
IRISH DIFFICULTY.
DEDICATED TO
THE RIGHT HON. W. E. GLADSTONE, M.P.,
First Lord of Her Majesty's Treasury.
LONDON:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY ALFRED BOOT, 64, KING WILLIAM STREET, E.C.
STEAM WORKS—DOCKHEAD, S.E.
1871.
Price One Shilling.




HOW TO KILL EENIANISM AND EIBBONISM.
A
PRACTICAL PROPOSITION
FOR THE
SOLUTION
OF THE
IRISH DIFFICULTY.
DEDICATED TO
THE RIGHT HON. W. E. GLADSTONE, M.P.,
First Lord of Her Majesty's Treasury.
LONDON:
FEINTED AND PUBLISHED BY ALEEED BOOT, 6d,'iaNGt 'WILLIAM STREET, E. 0.,
STEAM WORKS—DOOKHEAD, S.E.
1871.
Price One Shilling.


LONDON :
ALFRED BOOT, PRINTER, G 4, KING WILLIAM STREET, 8.C.,
AND 10 & 18, DOCKHEAD, S,R.


THE IRISH DIFFICULTY.
TO THE
RIGHT HONOURABLE W. E. GLADSTONE, M.P.
Sir,
In a communication which. X had the honor of
addressing to you in the month of August, 1869, I ventured
to suggest the expediency of Her Majesty’s Government
making a temporary advance at interest and upon substantial
security, in order to preserve the Alexandra Park, crowned
by its splendid Palace, from being swamped by the bricks and
mortar of ever-increasing London, or perverted to purposes
fraught with moral and physical injury to the people, and to
develope their combined resources for the benefit of the nation,
and the promotion of the physical health and mental elevation
of the community.
Upon that occasion I confess I was actuated not only by
a well earned confidence in your enlightened desire to support
all objects conducive to the welfare of your countrymen, but
by a vivid recollection of the admirable speech delivered by
you in January, 1864-, and in which you observed : —■


“ With respect to the general government of man, it has pleased God
to make him a free agent, and {hose by whom he is ruled in this world ought
to make it bast von him to do what is bight, and dimtouxt von him
TO DO WRONG."
Now, the object specially contemplated by the plan to
which I ventured to ask for a co-operation in which Govern-
ment would have been perfectly secured against loss, was
precisely in conformity with the wise and truthful words just
quoted, as is explained in a pamphlet which has been published
upon the subject;—
“If many places of public amusement throughout London are of a
vitiating character, injurious to the minds and bodies of their frequenters,
such a state of things presents a cogent reason for giving the people the
means of escape from these vile surroundings, and opening up sources of
salutary, healthful, and elevating recreation. The people want such
means of escape, and they will gladly take advantage of them if presented
upon an adequate scale.”
It is then explained that amusements—play, sports, and
pastimes, are to enter prominently into the arrangements of the
establishment, and the pamphlet proceeds
“ Genuine philosophy declares that it is almost as necessary to teach the
people how to play as how to work. Formerly they were only taught to
work, and that but indifferently. Not being instructed to play innocently
and healthfully, they learned but too easily to do so viciously and hurt-
fully.”
* * « * * «
“The character of the sports and pastimes will be not only innocent
but instructive. The general tenor of the entertainments will be conducive
to the extension of intelligence and pure taste. The Park will be so laid
out, preserved, and stocked with animal and vegetable life, as to present


a complete epitome— a living picture—of the varied features and incidents
of rural scenery, pleasures, and experiences. The whole institution will
be a school, or rather a noble academy, for the acquisition of useful know-
ledge of many kinds, whilst its effect upon those who visit it will constitute
a salutary supplement to direct religious teaching. Through the works
and objects of nature, nature’s Author will be worshipped. When the
institution has been open a couple of years, the complaints respecting
resorts of questionable amusement will be far leas frequent than they have
recently been. People will have amusement of some kind. The Alex-
andra Park and Palace will educate them to enjoy only that which is
good.”
It was partly the conscientiousness of such intentions—“ To
make it easy for men to do what is right,”—'Whilst so many of
our social arrangements and habits have, for ages, made it
easy for them to do wrong but difficult indeed to do right,—
that emboldened me to write to you in 1860. But in the
courteous reply remitted through your secretary it was inti-
mated that, however laudable the undertaking might be,
Government must decline interfering with any enterprise of
a commercial or speculative character.
To that decision of course I deferentially bowed, but, I am
happy to add, and I am sure you will bo pleased to learn, that
the undertaking has now attained so advanced a stage as to
leave no doubt that the Alexandra Park and Palace will soon
bo opened under circumstances most cheering and auspicious.
Tims far with respect to my former communication. The
object of the present one is to request your, careful consider-
ation of the outline, not of a commercial character, but of a
plan, from which, I believe, the Government would receive


invaluable aid in converting into victory the defeat which has
hitherto attended all its efforts to solve the long-standing
“ Irish Difficulty,” and to make Ireland tranquil, prosperous,
loyal and contented. I have a strong hope that upon
perusing it you will concur with me in thinking that the
principle contained in this plan is eminently calculated to
“ make it easy for the Irish to do right and difficult to do
wrong .” Should you come to this conclusion I have not the
slightest doubt that your pure and scrupulous fidelity to duty
will cause you to adopt a proposal from which enduring
benefits would result, not only to Ireland but to the whole
Empire, the true interests of which are inseparably identified
with the prosperity of the sister country.
I have the honour to be, Sir,
Your faithful Servant,
FRANCIS FULLER.
3, Whitehall Gardens,
April, 1871.
The disputes upon the causes for and cure for Irish dis-
traction, Irish disaffection, Irish distress, are little, if at
all less violent and perplexing than they were before the
adoption of the two important measures by which the
present Government hoped to introduce concord, loyalty,
and progress.


That within twelve mouths from the passing of the Land
Bill, which, it was alleged Tby the eminent men who origi-
nated it, would abolish “ all real grievances ” of the occupiers
of land, Government should find it necessary to recommend
the appointment of a Secret Committee, in order to obtain
evidence upon which to deal with an organised system of
murderous outrage, is a painfully significant symptom. It
was avowedly hoped by the authors of the Land Bill that
by removing wrong it would strike at the roots of crime;
and amongst the expected results of the measure was the
dissemination of a general spirit of loyalty amongst the
population Do present appearances justify that expecta-
tion P The truculent language of the journals is not
mitigated. The editors of these prints deride the “ paltry,
hypocritical and fraudulent Acts of the foreign Parlia-
ment.” Their coarse insults to the Queen and Royal
Family are more audacious than over. They scoff even at
such fundamental proposals of change as the repeal of the Leg-
islative Union, and at Mr. - Bearden’s modified scheme of a
Federal Parliament, and protest that nothing short of a
total severance of the “ accursed foreign connection,” even
if it can be effected only by “amalgamation with the
American Union,” will or can satisfy “ the rights of
Ireland.” The tone used by newspapers of the same class
in allusion to the release of the Feninn prisoners is equally
fraught with avowed and ostentatious disloyalty, That


concession, <r as shabby as it was cowardly,” is cited by their
writers as a proof that England is afraid, and “ with charac-
teristic meanness, perfidy, and stupidity,’’ she seeks to throw
Irish patriotism off its guard, Meanwhile “the English
Queen and her children” are made the constant objects of
language of which it will suffice to say that it is infamous
and disgraceful.
It may be asserted that these scandalous effusions are
merely resorted to as a moans of living by pandering to the
ignorance and prejudice of a small section of the population,
and that all the intelligent inhabitants of Ireland repudiate
such excesses. But really non constat that this is the case.
It is, of course, true to a considerable extent that the
treason press appeals to ignorance and prejudice, and that
some of the. writers trade in what they call “ patriotism ”
wholly as a medium for making money. But after all, it is not
the moat ignorant and degraded portion of a population that
usually supports a prosperous and widely circulating press,
and if I am not misinformed, the Fenian papers are the most
prosperous and widely circulated in Ireland. It is but too
evident to common sense, that disaffection—probably having
its foundations amongst the ignorant—must bo considerably
diffused amongst the intelligent. Is it not equally evident
that in our dealings with Ireland there must be some pro-
found error, seeing that every experiment we have tried has
signally failed to effect its object ? In a debate in the House


of Lords in the month, of March last, one of the most
eminent and clear-headed members of that Assembly, con-
fessed to "an emotion of despair for Ireland, in which
disaffection was as rife as ever.” The noble lord passed in
review some of the numerous measures, legislative and
others, which for generations have been tried in order to
make Ireland tranquil and contented. He pronounced the
total failure of all, and notwithstanding his clear-headedness,
could discern no cause for the anomaly except some radical
incompatibility of nature and race.
Commenting upon the same subject of the apparent
impossibility of making the Irish otherwise than disaffected
and discontented, an influential morning paper remarked—
" Justice, clomenoy, conciliation, concession, coercion, punish-
ment, and amnesties, in ever-recurring alternation hate been
tried in min ; for the health of the poor, distracted, self-
tortured patient is as bad as ever. In fact, neither the House
of Lords, nor the House of Commons, nor anybody in Ireland,
can point to a practical way out of the difficulty.”
How I totally dissent from the last assumption. Far from
the solution of the ‘ Irish difficulty ” being so hopeless a
problem as is represented, its solution, Iboliovo, would bo found
by no means difficult if set about in a wise and loving spirit,
into which spirit by the bye, the fooling of prudential
may largely enter. Wo have soon that “ clemency, concilia-
tion, concessions, punishments, and amnesties, ” &0., have


totally failed. Why then should not our efforts for attaining
an object of paramount importance, namely, such a reconcil-
iation as would justify the use of a phrase which, at present,
seems akin to mockery, “ the sister Island.” Why should not
these efforts take the shape of practical encouragement to
rivalry and emulation in personal improvement ?
I shall presently give an explanation of one of the means
hy which we could succeed in this. It will not coat much,
and from what I know of Irishmen in Ireland and out of it, I
will undertake to say that, if carried out carefully hut
liberally, and with judicious regard to the temperament of the
people, it will prove successful.
Preliminarily it may bo well to explain that my proposed
remedy contemplates the fact that agriculture is the basis
of Irish industry to a far greater degree than that of
English.
We know that with the exception of oases arising from
the baneful drinking habits which are amongst the great
curses of England as well as of Ireland, an Irishman in Eng-
land is, in general, a law-abiding man; we know that an
Irishman in America is a thrifty and prosperous man, and
that with his hard-earned money ho is generous and kind,
sending to his relatives and friends in Ireland sums which, in
the aggregate, are enormous, in order to enable them to join
him. We know that in some of the attributes just named


the Irishman in Ireland is sadly deficient, and has been so
literally “ time out of mind.”*
Now, having been directly and indirectly a large employer
of Irish labour for many years, and having acquired an
intimate knowledge of the Irish labourer, his wife and
children, I have satisfied myself that the people only want
proper encouragement to be equal to any population in the
world as industrious, faithful, honest, and, let me add, intelli-
gent working men and women In illustration of one of the
numerous grounds for this opinion I would refer the
metropolitan reader to the large dairies in the neighbourhood
of London, at which the men will be found engaged in labori-
ous work involving, moreover, some responsibility, and requir-
ing both skill and intelligence, which is executed most
efficiently. Their wives and daughters are, at the same time,
employed either in the home dairy duties, or in delivering the
milk nearly all over London, and their healthy and well
developed frames and bright complexions shew the fallacy
of the notion that there is in any natural inferiority to “ the
Saxon.” In point of intelligence there is certainly no inferi-
ority to the English of the same class, whilst with respect to
honesty and fidelity I could from my own experience quote
instances which might surprise many English readers, but
♦ I am here tempted to ask why, if English laws are good
enough for the Irish in England, they are not equally good for the Irish
in Ireland P


which lam sure represent a very general quality. The actual
amount of work performed by many Irish workmen under my
own eye, their willingness, their gratitude, their readiness for
early hours, late hours, long hours, have never been surpassed
during my long experience as an employer of labour in both
islands.
I have been here speaking of the labourer class; perhaps
I ought to say agricultural labourer, as numbers of those
employed by me had been engaged in this description of work
almost all their lives
The class next above these are the small farmers, and with
the latter I have had a great deal to do in purchasing land
for the construction of railways in Ireland,
Here I ought to state, as a fact that would be instructively
remembered in connection with all our plans for making
Ireland content, one of the difficulties of dealing with the
class referred to is want of faith —founded on painful experi-
ence —in the integrity of those with whom they are transacting
business. This feeling exists even in those parts of Ireland
in which the social position and morale of the people are often
represented as most satisfactory. For instance, when secur-
ing land for the Londonderry and Coleraine railway my only
difficulty with the small farmers was that, in the usual course
of business I only signed an agreement for the payment of
money without actually paying it down. I soon discovered
that the cause of this was that in transactions connected with


transfers, improvements, &c., &c., they had been frequently
deceived by promises and agreements, and landlords or
lawyers got money which they expected would have been
paid to themselves. Finding this, I conceived the idea of
paying one-half in cash immediately on signing the agre'e-
and the other half on the completion of the purchase. This
at once produced the desired effects, and in no case did I meet
any further difficulty in procuring a man’s consent to take
cither the whole or a portion of his farm, and either perma-
nently or for temporary occupation.
In subsequently buying land for other Irish railways the
fame of keeping faith preceded me wherever I wont. Not
only was I welcomed by all classes throughout the several
districts, but the hotels at which I put up were crowded by
applicants, from the landlord to the smallest occupier, eager
to have their cases settled upon the basis described.
I mention those facts merely to show-tho extent to which
want of confidence enters into the social evils of Ireland. It
prevails, or until very lately did, amongst all grades, and
probably dates back from the period when many landlords
and their representatives (who in some matters would be
found men of honour) considered it rather something to boast
of to overreach each other. The lamentably backward state
of cultivation in Ireland—so many degrees behind the mis-
chievously backward state of England in this respect— is, I
have no doubt, duo in great measure to the extent to which


this evil principle was formerly carried out. I found from
inquiry amongst the tenants and from many well authenticated
cases —indeed upon this point I offer no new information, as
the fact is notorious—that there prevailed a general fear and
a real danger that improved cultivation, and the expenditure
of a man’s money and industry in effecting it, would be certain
to subject him to increase of rent or ejectment. Hence the
land has been starved; the tenant starved in order to prevent
the landlord from dishonestly grasping, through an increased
rental, the fruits of his tenant’s industry and enterprise; and
the landlord himself equally suffered both in pocket and
character. Ido not propose to discuss the provisions of the
Irish Land Bill, the effect of which has not yet practically
developed itself, and which is as “well abused” by some as it
is praised by others. Admitting, however, that it may go a
considerable way to diminish some of the evils alluded to, by
providing tenants with at least a partial measure of security
against rapacity, I say that it does not present that encourage-
ment to improvement in practical action and in habit of
thought which is absolutely necessary for imparting thorough
permanent impulse to improvement, fostering the spirit of
wholesome emulation, promoting careful and thrifty cultivation,
vastly increasing production, and laying the foundation of
prosperity in manufacturing as well as agricultural enterprise;
for it may be accepted as an axiom that progress in the latter
would mean progress in the former.


I subjoin a skeleton outline of my plan for producing this
result, and premising that all I desire is the recognition of the
principle and the duty, and leaving details to be modified in
any manner considered desirable. It will be perceived that
the plan contemplates the interest of the labourer as well as
that of the tenant.
(1.) Lot the Imperial Government offer a premium
of £SOO, £IOO of which should go to the landlord and £4OO
to the tenant, for the best cultivated farm or holding of from
half an aero to five acres, from which the largest amount of
produce in money value is raised, and having upon it the best-
conditioned cottage or farmhouse with fitting adjuncts,
specially contemplating the requirements of domestic comfort
and decency with respect to accommodation for the members
of the family. The produce should bo held to include market-
able ■ articles of any kind, cereals, roots, vegetables, cattle,
pigs, poultry, butter, eggs, fruit, flowers, &c.
(2.) Let £4OO bo awarded to the second best holding, the
money to bo divided between landlord and occupier in
proportions rateably similar to those in the first clause.
(3.) Let £3OO be awarded for the third best, upon
similar provisions,
(4.) £2OO for the fourth best.
(5.) £IOO for the fifth best.
(6.) £BO for the sixth bast.
(7.) £SO for the seventh best, and so on down to the


lowest prize of £3O, of which £6 should he given to the
landlord and £24 to the occupying tenant.
Let prizes of similar amounts and classes ho awarded for
farms of from five to .fifteen acres, likewise for farms of fifteen
to thirty acres; from forty to one hundred acres ; from one
hundred to two hundred; and from two hundred to three
hundred acres, which should perhaps ho tho maximum.
The whole of the ahovo prizes could he awarded say in tho
province of Leinster, and the same arrangement should he
made for the provinces of Munster, Connaught and Ulster.
Ten competent judges should ho appointed for each province,
and each judge should be allowed £2OO for his work and £IOO
for travelling expenses.
The prizes ought, I would suggest, to be awarded annually
in the month of October, when the agricultural operations
for the year may be considered closed so far as tho result of
produce is concerned, and the money should he paid without
delay to the successful competitors.
The term to which these periodical competitions and
awards of prizes would extend might ho, say, ton years.
The cost to the public Treasury of the ahovo arrangement
would not exceed £150,000 a year, and one effect would ho, on
a moderate calculation, to increase the agricultural wealth
produce of Ireland by at least £20,000,000 a year. Conceive
what an amount of prosperity in its most substantial form
would he created by this enormous addition to the wealth of


the country, circulating amongst every class, and acting
with awakening effect upon manufacturing, mining, and
trading industry in all its branches. I venture to prophesy
that it would terminate for ever the distress of Ireland, and
our difficulties in connection with that distress.
But more important than even this vast access of national
wealth and prosperity, would be the moral effect of such an
operation carried on for ten years, and during all that time
acting with electrical effect in stimulating the long dormant
energies of the people. It would set every one, landlord,
tenant and occupier, down to the cottager with his holding of
half an acre, thinking and working how best to improve homes
and lands. The most efficient system of merit competition
ever instituted would be in force, Ingenuity, enterprise and
industry would be put upon their mottle, The horrible
hovels which formed the subject of a recent Parliamentary
debate, and which, it is announced, are to be dealt with in a
Government Bill, would disappear. The status of the
labourer (who most of all deserves sympathy and aid) would
be elevated, Tt would be humanly impossible that under such
a system the present deplorable condition of degradation,
neglect, apathy and hopelessness could continue. There
would be an universal ambition to secure the honour and
profit of the position of a prizoholder, and that ambition
would lead to equally universal exertion in the direction in
which lies the true key to the regeneration of Ireland.


Landlords, tenants and small occupiers, would in this
machinery find a bond of union, though in the guise of
competition landlords themselves would discover it to be
their interest to promote and encourage in every way the
improvement of the value of their estates through the efforts
of the cultivators of those estates. They would discover
that amongst other results a tenant whose production, acre by
acre, was doubled and trebled would be able and willing to'"
pay with punctuality a rent far higher than that which he
now pays irregularly. The healthy impulse would permeate
all sections of the body politic.
Adopt this arrangement, and the time would soon come
when we should be under no necessity of paying millions
sterling annually to our Continental neighbours ■ for butter,
and importing upwards of 1,000,000 per day of their eggs,
without reckoning large importations of poultry. The soil
and climate of Ireland are peculiarly adapted for dairy and
poultry operations, and she could supply us with all butter
and eggs, cheese and poultry, that are required, retaining an
abundance for herself. If such practical encouragement as
I propose were given to Irishmen in Ireland, the green Isle
would become truly a land of plenty, catering out of her
very superabundance, and to her own great profit, for our
wants in commodities which are every day growing dearer
and scarcer in England.
Imagine, moreover, the happiness and joy which would


bo created amongst wretched people who have so long fared
worse than the horses and cattle, the sheep and pigs of their
landlords, or even their own, when they found themselves
treated in a cordial and friendly spirit, and co-operating
with their landlords for objects of mutual benefit.
Imagine again the enthusiasm that would be caused
amongst one of the most sensitive and affectionate races in
existence at witnessing the reception of the prizes from the
hands of Her Majesty, or of the Prince or Princess of
Wales—'these prizes being given for doing the reverse of
what they and their ancestors have been doing for cen-
turies—for taking pleasure in having docent homes and
accommodation, well-cultivated farms or pieces of land, first-
class poultry and vegetables, fruit, flowers, &0., as the case
may bo.
Imagine the feelings of the small farmer—nay, of the
labourer, with his £BOO or £6OO, and his good character,
certified under the hand of Her Majesty as the best man of
the year in the Province. Imagine, if you can, where this
auspicious influence would stop. It could not be stopped.
It would be perpetual and illimitable. It would pervade
every home in Ireland. Fructifying, deepening, and
broadening for ten years, it would embrace the whole
agricultural population, and through these the population
of the towns. Imagine then how long the spectre of
Feuianism and the demon of Eibboniam would stand before
CORRECTION:
■Page 19, tenth line from foot of page should read—
labourer, with his £4OO or £3OO, and his good character,


such an influence. The radical cause of their existence—
the matured misery, the wretched homes, the dirt and
discomfort, the apathy and despair, the chronic war of classes,
would cease, and they would become extinct.
Is it not too true that vast masses of the Irish people
have hitherto been starved in body and poisoned in mind,
degraded hy the cruel circumstances of their position ? Is
it not certain that these circumstances are the sources of
Fenianism, Ribbonism, disloyalty? Is it not admitted that
every thing hitherto done to improve this state of things,
and to efface the moral and physical effect of ages of mis-
government has disappointed expectations. Try a new
principle of managing them, Adopt a system, the result
of which would be to give -them good feeding of body and
mind. Here is the true method of encouraging good example
and industry, i.e., by rewarding and presenting them with
honour to the world. The family of the first Prize-man in
the province of Leinster would practically say, “ Our father
is one of the finest specimens of a true and good Irishman! ”
The circumstances of Ireland are so exceptional as to
imperatively require methods of action which might not be
so applicable or necessary for England and. Scotland. But
the plan which I here suggest would, I believe, prove
greatly beneficial if carried out in its main features in
Great Britian. Considering that we pay something like
£40,000,000 sterling annually for importations of foreign


food, considering that notwithstanding this immense artificial
supply (and drain) millions of men, women and children in
the United Kingdom do not get nearly a sufficient supply of
nourishing food, considering that it has been demonstrated
that the quantity of food now produced in the country could
be doubled and trebled with commercial profit, and consider-
finally that countless masses are suffering severely from want
of the employment which could be so advantageously given
to them in the cultivation of the soil ; it is clearly the duty of
Government to take some steps for filling up this dreadful and
unnatural duplicate vacuum of food and wobk. Between the
foreign imports and the inadequate nourishment of our people,
it is impossible to estimate the deficiency in the food produce of
the kingdom at less than £100,000,000. By action of the
kind recommended in this Essay, or by that of which the
Industrial Employment Association is the representative, this
deficiency would be easily made good, and in fact a much
larger one if it existed.
Will nothing be done P
We are living in a country renowned for Christianity
philanthropy, practical sagacity, and likewise renowned for
its wealth; but scarcely less remarkable for its hideous
aggregate of poverty —indigence— in the direst form.
I ask again, therefore,
Winn NOTHING BE DONE ?
Returning, however, to the Irish difficulty, I emphatically


concur with the opinions expressed by Sir F. Heygato in the
debate upon Mr. Gregory’s motion respecting labourers’
residences in Ireland, that “much of the disaffection in
that country was due to the miserable hovels in which
the people live.” There can, I think, be as little doubt of
this as that much of the awful drunkenness prevailing in
London, Liverpool, and other large towns, is due to the
wretched alleys and rooms in which the people are crowded
together. Of the agricultural population in Ireland, which,
at the last census comprised about 400,000 families, or
2,000,000 individuals, it appears that a large number are
living in mud cabins with a door but no window. Such a
fact is appalling, and accounts for much of the worst evils
of the country —for some of our own chief difficulties with
her. Mr. Gregory was perfectly justified in a proposition
designed “to encourage the building of better dwellings,
and to discourage the building of those horrible hovels which
are a disgrace to civilization and to humanity,” and he might
justly have gone much farther than he did. It was
satisfactory to hear the Marquis of Hartington say, on the
part of Government, that “the honourable member for
Galway had done good service in calling attention to the
subject,’’ and following this up by remarking, “ I have no
difficulty whatever in promising on the part of the Govern-
ment that legislation on this question should be undertaken
in the course of the present session. The Government


measure will be looked for with, anxiety. In the meantime
there is one passage in his Lordship’s speech, which, as
coming from a public man holding his position, can scarcely,
one would hope, be devoid of an important meaning :
“ I quite agree with what has been said by several honourable
members, that in this as in other respects we must look to the general
improvement in the conditions of the labourers. Let their wages bo
raised, their education improved ; lot the social standard among them be
generally elevated, and improvement in their dwellings will naturally
follow ; but as long as labourers in Ireland receive sometimes only 4s.
or As. a week, as long as they are in such a state of dependance and
wretchedness that they are unable to transfer themselves from a district
where they cannot obtain work to another at a short distance where there
might bo a demand for their labour, no real and permanent improvement
would be effected, even if legislation should secure that they should be
lodged in very much better cottages. It would be nothing but a
mockery to build good and substantial cottages for labourers who had
scarcely the simplest article of furniture to put into them.”
X should decidedly challenge tbo theory that it is a
mockery to release families from “ horrible hovels ” unfit for
tho habitation of members of the brute creation, and place
them in decent dwellings because their furniture is scanty.
Improve the dwelling—encourage an, interest and love for it,
and its contents will by degrees become better suited to it
limn to the “horrible hovel” formerly occupied. In these
matters things adjust themselves and find their level by
processes of management, of which the Irish Secretary, fresh
from tho magnificence of Ohatsworth, Holkar Hall, and
Chiswick, scarcely seems aware. The Marquis is, perhaps,


right in deprecating coercion and recommending encourage-
ment instead, though it is difficult to understand the policy
of tolerating for an hour such dreadful dens as those
described in the course of the debates. The main point of
interest, however, in the passage quoted, centres in Lord
Fartington’s allusion to the importance of generally im-
proving the condition of the labourer. He thinks it a scandal
that wages should be so low. But in order to raise them you
must increase the demand for labour. This can bo best
effected by promoting improved methods of cultivating the
land, and the gist of these improved methods is comprised
in the application of more labour to it. It is by such means
that the social elevation of the labourer, which his Lordship
considers so absolutely indispensable, can be effected. Will
the Government, of which his Lordship is a member, shrink
from the duty of aiding a process of social elevation, which,
through him, that Government declares to be so essential.
In any case it is well that notwithstanding their colleague’s
suggestions must precede the substitution of cottages for
hovels. Ministers and Lord Hartington himself admitted the
necessity of taking up the last named question forthwith.
One of the last points in the course of the debate was
that made by Mr. Downing in his suggestion that facilities
should be provided for securing the labourer a cottage and
half an acre of land. It might better, probably, be an acre.
Such an arrangement acted upon universally, would bo to


the labourer an invaluable source of comfort, enjoyment,
and wealth. Oouple it with the system of encouragement
proposed in this essay, and the death-blow of discontent,
disloyalty, agrarian conspiracy, indolence, ruthlessness, reckless-
ness, would he struck. The great population of agricul-
tural labourers contesting for prizes for the best cared for
gardens and most fruitful produce, would no longer be the
easy dupes of the conspirator. Give the labourer his plot,
and let him be qualified to contend with other small occu-
piers for the annual prizes, and we should no longer witness
what is at present a very unpleasant feature in Irish village
and rural scenery, the almost total absence of the neat fruit
gardens which form so pretty a feature in England. Even
the gardens of the wealthier class are, as a rule, desolate and
" seedy.” That useful and excellent taste —the love of gar-
dening, is not yet appreciated in Ireland.
In concluding this practical proposition for killing
Penianism and solving the Irish difficulty, I ought to allude
to the necessity of removing an impediment which very
perniciously bars the road of effectual improvement.- Mr.
Maguire pointed it out, and enforced his remarks by a prac-
tical illustration which deserves attention, viz:—
“ It would tie necessary to offer to owners of property inducements
to build cottages. At present, under the working of the Poor Law
machinery in Ireland, they are afraid to do so. Ho (Mr. Maguire)
instanced the case of tho proprietors of a factory in Cork, who, to
prevent their workpeople having to walk from and to the City every


day, desired to obtain, near their mill, some land on -which to build
cottages for those whom they employed. The owner of the land refused
to comply with their wishes, because he apprehended that if the mill
hands fell out of work they would become paupers and he would have
to pay for their support. What was the remedy for that ? To follow
the example of England, and adopt a union instead of an electoral
division rating, which had inflicted great evils on the people of Ireland."
Mr. Maguire is probably not aware of the extent to
wbiob the evil he complains of exists on this side of
the Channel. The difference is only in degree, and very
partial degree. Such a circumstance as that related by
Mr. Maguire could not have occurred but for the inherent
vioiousness of the system of local rating for the .poor.
Reason, justice, humanity, economy, good policy, demand
that the Poor Rate should be delocalised, nationalized;
should be an imperial, not a local tax, and be incorporated
with the general financial system of the Empire.
F. F.
Au-nro Boot, Wntor.M, King WllUnm Street, 8.0., and Doolthend, 8.8.
