

PeTH pPrvr*
a X "1-7
i’AHS
A PREMATURE SUNSET:
A SERMON
ON THE DEATH OF
Inrrann Shxonkr Enkrton,
23 kd OCTOBER, 1864;
PREACHED IN ST. ANDREW’S CHURCH, LAUNCESTON,
30TH OCTOBER, 1864,
Bs tfje Ecb. E. It. lE&mg.
Printed from the report taken by Wm, Aikenhead, Esq,
J. WALCH & SONS, LAUNCESTON AND HOBART TOWN.
1864.




SERMON.
‘ e And it shall come to pass in that day, saith the Lord God,
that I will cause the sun to go down at noon, and I will
darken the earth in the clear day.—Amos viii. 9.
I am not an advocate for what are usually understood
by funeral sermons —for various reasons. In too
many cases they are resorted to chiefly for the pur-
pose of producing a sensation —artificially exciting
emotions, transient enough. When indulged in, they
are calculated to beget, and foster morbid feelings in
the public mind, especially in reference to religious
matters. Prompted, sometimes no doubt, by the
love of friendship, they neverthless give a publicity
to the thoughts and habits of the dead, quite repug-
nant to their known tastes and intentions when
living; attach the gravest importance to what is alto-
gether common-place, and leave the speaker—from
many causes —in danger of overcoloring states of
mind as they existed, and overstating facts as they
took place in life. From these considerations, as
well as from a knowledge of the constitution of my
own mind, I have been deterred, as a rule, from
preaching funeral sermons, in a set way. In private,
I cannot always trust my feelings in recalling the


memory of the dead, much less would 1 risk the
effort in presence of an audience. In the case of
which I have to speak to-night, however, there were
such marked features of character, such a reality and
strength of religious principle, and so much that is
startling about his death, that in justice to my con-
gregation, especially the younger portion, I dare not
pass it over; and however trying it may be to ray
feelings, to refer to one who had become to me re-
ligiously so dear, there is little possibility of my
trespassing on stern and absolute truth, in any eulogy
I may utter.
The words of my text point in the most emphatic
manner, to the consequence with which God
threatens to visit certain sins; that in a quick and
unexpected way, the life devoted to self-indulgence
at the sacrifice of purity, love, and truth, shall
cease —pass suddenly away, amidst awful clouds and
darkness. Take the text however, in its broad sense, as
a figurative reference to life and its termination, and it
contains solemn truth of general application. The
sun, and day, in the word of God, mean in many
places life; and the going down of the sun, and the
setting in of night, mean death; the darkening f£ of
the earth in the clear day/* the blighting of all mere
earthly hopes, and the deep obscurity that rests upon
the grave. Let our text then be regarded as figura-
tively expressing these thoughts—pointing clearly to
the way in which God oftentimes deals with human


life, as such, irrespectively of any quality, good or
evil, in personal character, and our attention is then
directed to some truths, which, though they may be
considered commonplace, are nevertheless all im-
portant, but alas ! generally—far too generally—
overlooked or neglected. The idea prominently
exhibited, and which suggests other ideas, is the
phenomenon, and effect of a premature sunset. The
beauties of day are set in contrast to the darkness of
an untimely night; —suggesting how the hopes of a
young life may be suddenly quenched by the cold
hand of death. In city, and in rural life, the noon-
day sun looks down upon a varied and a hopeful
scene. Industry is enjoying its temporary repose,
and the toiler is bracing himself for the remaining
portion of the day’s weariness and labour. Or,
amidst the calm of nature’s beauty, flowers sleep in
the sunlight, flocks and herds stand with brute con-
tent in the warm valley, or slumber on the shady
hill side, and the shepherd, and the husbandman share
in the general repose: a contentment and repose
soon to be turned into helpless fear, and dread
anxiety. Suddenly the sun is impressed with visible
motion; quivering for an instant ere it acquires
momentum, he now begins a hurried course towards
the horizon, and gathering clouds mark the course of
his chariot wheels. The brute instincts of flocks, and
herds, hurry them with untimely haste to their usual
camping grounds, flowers now in wakeful agitation


struggle against the rising wind; and man, every-
where unexpectedly aroused from his repose, in con-
sternation looks on the phenomenon, at once so
terrifying and so grand, and in helplessness waits the
final result.
Such is the idea taught in our text —a premature
sunset; impressing upon all the uncertain tenure on
which life is held. As none can reckon with certainty,
on opportunity, or years, with what emphasis then
does not that truth bear on the young. Oh ! how
solemn the reflection, that in the flush of joy, and
hope, and health, their hold of life is equally uncertain
with that of hoary and feeble old age; that existence
with them, as with all, depends on a shower of rain, or
a breath of wind; that a ringing laugh, a cough, or
step, may be the messenger of death; and that the
very vigour put forth in the discharge of daily
duties, and the food, and air, necessary to nourish
and sustain, may tend in some sudden, and unex-
pected way, to sever the tie which binds the soul
to earth. What thoughts inspire, and what hopes
sustain the heart of one ripening into all the glory
of manhood and womanhood! In the light of
a first love, these prospects glow with a splendour
well symbolized by the brightness of the noonday
sun. Clouds may cast their shadows, and in the
bustle of young life, crosses may irritate, and
obstacles may arrest; but by the strength of an
emotion, as pure and devoted in the cottage as the


palace, even the power of hopes that nerve alike the
peasant and the prince, difficulties are dared, and the
glow of an excited imagination reveals only life in
happiness, and success. Yet the light of hope and
strength may be suddenly extinguished. By the
merest accident, or by an unlooked for and speedy
death, the sun of the young may hurry with resist-
less haste to the horizon, and sink for ever out of
sight. My dear friends, this is not speculation, it is
fact; as truly so, as if you felt the waving of an angel’s
wings, and heard the sounding of an angel’s voice in
making it known to you, or, as if any one now listen-
ing to me, were at this moment to drop dead. Oh !
how significantly such truth is brought home to our
hearts to-night ! Two months ago, and your young
companion—my dear friend, Norman—was at his
duties as a Bank clerk, with as bright, and appa-
rently as certain prospects of life as any here present.
Two months ago, and any Insurance Office would
have issued a policy on his life, as, in all human pro-
bability, one of the safest, and most remunerative
risks. Five weeks ago, and he was with us at the
Prayer Meeting. But four weeks ago, he was one of
the most earnest Teachers, surrounded by his class
in the Sabbath School. Possessed of means—in the
prospect of having ampler—establishing a character,
which gave the surest promise of success in life,
—esteemed by all and loved by many, while his sun
had not even reached to the zenith of life’s heaven,


it hurries to the horizon, and he is lost to our sight
and our companionship on earth. Resistless to all
love—to all hope —to the utmost efforts of profes-
sional skill, prompted by the anxiety of friendship, the
darkest clouds gathered around his young brow, and
his sun “went down at noon.”
What I want you then, my dear friends, to realize
is this:—that what has taken place in his case, may
at any time happen to any within these walls.
Hence arises the question; in what attitude would
death find you—what principles should be cherished,
and what the kind of life to follow, so as to be pre-
pared for appearing before God, when death calls you
there ? But the other day, I had a brief conversa-
tion with a person about the subject of death, and the
future world, arising out of the occurrence now being
referred to. In response to a statement of mine, he
said — “ The duty of every one is to live well, and in
that way get as much happiness as possible out of life,
and do all the good he can; but as to the future, we
need not trouble ourselves about it. I like to think
—and there is poetry in the thought—that after I
have passed away from earth, I may re-appear in the
plumage of a beautiful bird, or as a fair flower.”
Any mere heathen claims that the thought may lay
to the poetic, is lowered by the fact, that it seeks to
blight hopes which are more poetic and glorious—
removes some of the grandest incentives to purity,


progressive intelligence, and love, and seeks to dash
in pieces the soul’s
“Ardent longing after immortality.”
I am not addressing an assembly of persons who be-
lieve in metempsychosis; or a company of pantheists,
of atheists, or of deists. If so, I would be compelled to
adopt a different mode of address —to speak of
the being, attributes, and authority of God—of the
existence and principles of a moral government —of
human responsibility—of the fact of sin—of the
Divine method of regenerating the world —of the
evidences of Christianity—and the fact and its evi-
dences of “ Christ and Him crucified,” as a living
personal Redeemer. lam speaking, I conclude, to
persons who have really or nominally accepted these
great truths—to a mixed assemblage of actual, or
professing Christians —of persons either living for
God, or passing through life as formalists; some
altogether indifferent to his claims, though not
ostensibly despising his authority. How can I then
better place before such, the attitude in which death
should find you, than by exhibiting to you a
miniature of his character and religion, who is the
subject of my present address ? Most of you knew
him well for years —many have known him from
infancy. He was ever esteemed as modest, silent,
and reserved —neither a gossip nor atrifler—staunch
in the performance of what he undertook to do—full
of honor, and integrity. Before he was brought


under the power of religious principle, his unseen
life was better than the seen life of some who now
hear me. Looking at him from a Christian point of
view, before he avowed Christianity, his outward
character was blameless. Though not manifesting
any particular interest in Divine things, nor yet any
especial liberality in money matters to the claims of
religious schemes, his attendance on the ordinances
of grace his attention to Divine service—was
regular and punctual. Permit me to ask, can that
be said of you —you who profess Christ, and to call
in question whose religion would be considered
equivalent to an insult ? Does the mere observance
of ordinances on your part, come up to his punctual
and regular attendance ? Does it come out in the
presence of some in the house of God but once on
his holy day, at any time, and a frequent absence
throughout it; or in an attendance which is regulated
by a cloud in the sky, a shower of rain, or some
petty excuse, which would be considered too trifling
to interfere with any ordinary duty of daily life, or a
piece of pleasure ? These are questions—personal
ones—on the answer to which you can give, great
and eternal interests may depend. I urge you to
consider, what responsibility is brought with the
command —“ forget not the assembling of yourselves
together,” seeing you have the opportunity.
In the use of means— regular and persistent atten-
tion to the means of grace—the Spirit of God met


our friend; met him just as Christ joined the disciples
in their journey to Emmaus; at first unrecognized
in his personality and power, yet conscious of a
changed and glowing feeling towards that which is
pure, and true, and good; even as the hearts of the
disciples “ burned within them by the way” at the
converse of their unknown companion. The Holy
Spirit met him, and taught him to know, and believe
in certain great truths. He was brought to know, that
character alone is not sufficient for salvation, that
religion has two sides,—a spiritual and a moral side, —
that true religion centres in an enlightened, and a ten-
der conscience, and that character is the world’s view
of personal Christianity. He learned to know that the
best heart needs pardon, and purity; to see the
necessity for, and the bearing on the soul of Christ’s
atonement; to feel his condition as a sinner; to
accept Jesus as a living personal Redeemer, and to
look to the Holy Spirit for help, and light. I knoiv
all that from my conversations with him, and from
his own statements; I know it from his prayerful
habits—known also to his family;—prayerful habits,
I say, not the saying oi prayers morning and evening,
but the habitual outpouring of his own thoughts and
feelings to God; I know it from the companion, and
book in daily use the Bible had become to him; I know
it from his love to the Prayer Meeting, and the earnest
way in which he was seeking to qualify himself for
taking part in its exercises; I know it by the growing


interest he manifested in his Sabbath School duties.,
as a teacher; I know it by his marked, and unassum-
ing liberality in money matters to religious demands;
I know it by his unqualified assurance to me of his
happiness in the new life; and I know it from the
whole tendency, and outcome of his mind, when
upon his early death-bed. He came of age in
March last. On attaining to his majority, his
Father, with his usual kindness, gave him the oppor-
tunity of inviting a number of his companions to
supper, in celebration of the event, at which I would
have had the pleasure of presiding, had I not been
occupied with church business at Hobart Town.
After several pleasant hours had been passed, and
his guests had retired, he spent a considerable time
in private prayer, for forgiveness of any sin which
might have mingled with his enjoyments, and for
grace to live consistently. A few days before being
confined to his death-bed, when driving him a short
distance into the country, and speaking to him of the
beauty of natural objects, and their power to cheer
the heart, and lift the thoughts to divine things, after
a short silence, he said, in his own quiet and earnest
way —“Yes, this is very beautiful, but it bears no
comparison to the scenery spoken of in the last
chapter of the Revelations.” That was the unaffected
outcome of a mind solemnly disposed, the inner
harmony of whose thoughts when spoken, showed
how they tended constantly to heavenly things.


The religion of our departed friend, was in its
origin, beautifully free from the merely sensational ,
and in its daily progress quite independent of all
artificial excitement. It seemed to me that in the
use of the means of grace, it was planted in
his heart by the great Spirit, as the bulbs, and seeds
of flowers, and plants, are committed to the soil
by the careful hand of man; and that in its daily
growth, the same Holy Power used thought, reading
and events —some of them startling enough—
prayer, and social religious influences, to water and
to nourish it, just as the flowers, and plants, and
waving harvest fields, are fed and nourished into
beauty, and ripened by wind and rain, storm and
sunshine, heat and cold, and dew. I make these
remarks, for one thing, to warn you against an error;
and for another, to show how favorably you
are situated for becoming like him. I refer thus
to the origin of his religion—its freedom from the
merely sensational; and to its progress —its indepen-
dence of artificial excitement, to guard you against
an error which I know exists, and which may prove
fatal to you. I have no faith in the permanence, and
strength of religious emotions produced by mere excite-
ment. Ido not believe in either the spiritual worth,
or the permanence of religious emotions produced
by the set efforts of what may be well designated
“Muscular Christianity.” In the anxious thought, the
fear, the alarm, ay, and a despair produced—more


or less temporary—from a clear view of sin against
God, as seen by an awakened conscience, I do pro-
foundedly believe ; but, that that state of conscience
is to be “got up,” by getting up an excitement for the
express purpose —in a sense by muscular effort—by
working on the fears, I hold is repugnant to the ex-
ample of Christ and his followers—repugnant to the
spirit of the New Testament, and to what, from the
knowledge we have by experience of the constitution
of the human mind, is the Divinely adopted and re-
vealed method, of implanting in it religious princi-
ples, deathless and mighty. The emotions of a
religious kind, produced by a religious effort ; the
state of alarm, or of rapture, evoked by preaching
which especially aims at being sensational—by a
succession of anecdotes in contrast, now horrible
and now gentle, so as to startle—aided by a heated
atmosphere, and the contagion of excitement among
masses, is not to be confounded with that awakening
of conscience from a sense of sin, which the
Holy Spirit in his own varied way produces.
The outward method of his work is not stereo-
typed, and though amid the tumult, the arrow
shot at a venture may reach here and there a heart,
I believe it is despite, not in consequence of the kind of
means; in the exercise of his Supreme will to manifest
his independence of mere method, whose governing
principle in carrying on the work of salvation is, that
“ the Kingdom of heaven cometh not with observa-


tion.” I may offend some in speaking thus, but I
must speak out my convictions—say what I believe
is right. And if you will calmly watch the progress
of events bearing on this subject in so far as they
come under your observation—carefully note results,
and candidly acknowledge the conclusion to which
they point—l am bold to say that ere long, it may
be ere months or years, you will come to think with
myself, that the profession of religion evoked by
effort to produce sensations, as a rule, is neither safe
nor sound; it yearns for, and needs excitement to
keep it up—it is unhealthy. Even as alcoholic drinks,
which stimulate the physical system to marvellous
activity and power, for a time need constantly to be re-
newed when the spirits flag, so as to sustain the impulse
they gave, until the tear and wear of the practice
creates disease, or causes death; so the religion which
originates in the sensational, needs the repeated appli-
ance of excitement to keep it up, until as an unhealthy
thing from the first, it fades and dies. The religion
of our friend was free from all this. There was
nothing of “ muscular Christianity’* about his religion
—it was independent of all artificial excitement, he
was able in his own simple way to tell why he
believed; could give a reason —mark you, not a
feeling —for the hope that was within him.
My purpose in referring so pointedly to this par-
ticular, is that you may see that now you are equally
favorably placed as he was, to reach the same re-


ligious state of principle, and conscience, and that if
not possessed by you, the entire responsibility of
your eternal loss, will rest on your own shoulders.
Have you not the means of grace in all their full-
ness, and liberty; and opportunity to use them ?
You have the word of God, and a most varied
religious literature to help you in understanding it!
The house of God is open to you —the prayer meet-
ing is open to you—the privilege of private devotion is
open to you —where you may draw near to the Lord,
realize his presence, and have your hearts kindled with
his love; and there are various plans at work in the
various places of worship you attend, affording an
outlet for your best thoughts and feelings, and ample
scope for all your energies.
The thought contained in our text is—a premature
sunset—that such a thing is threatened and is possi-
ble. Will you then risk it ? That is the personal
question I have to put to you. Will you, my dear
young friends, will any one , risk that unexpected
death, which may come to you, as it did to our young
friend Norman? Risk it, and still remain unprepared
by repentance and faith to die ? Oh! to delay till
the rapid descent of the sun, startles you, is in a
sense to wait till it shall be too late—it is procrasti-
nating escape from a burning house, till every passage
is barred by flames. Not only is it unsafe; but is
it wise to follow that course ? is it one you
would suggest or imitate in secular matters ? and


how much less then in what involves eternal in-
terests ? But, if from any cause you will delay pre-
paration for death, till laid upon a sick-bed, what
assurance have you, that then your faculties will retain
their power, that your mind will remain under con-
trol and unclouded ? This question is suggested by
the case of our departed friend. A very few days
after being confined to bed, the action on his brain
of an impaired respiration, and a deranged circulation
of the blood, produced insensibilty. His memory
became clouded, his mental faculties were thrown
out of gear; like a wandering star severed from its
central sun, and kept in eccentric motion by all the
minor gravitating forces in its track, his mind, in all
the flush of youth and hope, roamed without rest, and
beyond control, amid the waste of broken memories
and past events. Will it suffice to spend life in self
indulgence, and hinge the preparation of the heart
for meeting with God, upon a hoped for exemption
from a condition like that , so helpless, yet beyond all
remedy ? Had he followed a course so thoughtless,
and full of hazard, alas ! with what gloomy thoughts
and sorrowful remembrances must we have stood be-
side the family vault? He acted—as you are
enjoined to do—on the Divine injunction “work
while it is called day, for the night cometh when no
man can work.”
It is a psychological truth of terrible import, that
when the faculties are unbalanced, and the mind


wanders incoherently amid the chaos of past circum-
stance, and the wild throng of crowding memories,
there is often the unconscious outcome of its prevail-
ing tastes, and modes of thought, and doings—the
unintended declaration of heart, and life secrets,
whether good or bad. I have visited often the same
sick room where the lips of the dying have been sealed
as if in death, and no question could evoke a reply,
except such as had a reference to the infirmity, or
pain of the patient, or to family matters. I have
stood by the death-bed, where, amid broken utter*
ances, and wild and incoherent exclamations, the
spirit has struck some loosened chord of memory, and
been suddenly startled by what had been recalled,
into the foulest disclosures, poured forth in a
mingled and reckless torrent of curses and lamenta-
tions. In striking contrast to these however, what
joy now to think that the talisman which never failed
to bring back our departed friend to more or less
consciousness was the proposal to pray ? That alone,
seemed to have a secret power in hushing the tumult
of mind, and giving coherence to his thoughts; and
those periods of calm were employed in earnest inter-
course with heaven. Such prayers ! oh! such prayers!
Seldom indeed has it been my privilege to hear such
pleadings with God They were not the outcome of
mechanical memory, but the rapid outpouring of a
full heart, and bore the nearest resemblance to what
ray imagination has formed of a human soul in need,


wrestling with the Lord. He prayed; and prayed
often to be spared, so that he might be made more
perfect, and so fitted when he went hence, to start
from a higher platform in heavenly activity and en-
joyment. He prayed, that he might be qualified to
become such a teacher as he desired to be. He
prayed for blessings on myself, in return for the help
I had been to him. He prayed for his parents, and
pointedly asked whether they believed in Christ,
giving them the earnest assurance of His readiness
to save them. So did he pray; but I can convey to
you no conception of the tones in which they were
uttered, and the language in which they were ex-
pressed ; —in striking contrast to his mode of speech
when in health, they were eloquent, sublime; and the
pathos of the tones, and the grandeur of the lan-
guage, were rendered unspeakably solemn, by the
state into which he would immediately relapse.
My dear friends, from this view of his death-bed
there comes to each of us an appeal, awful, in the
possibility of his experience being repeated in our
case. Who now present, old, middle aged, or young,
is prepared to be so tested ? There are motives,
thoughts, and acts, in the life and character of every
one—even of the best—known only to ourselves and
God, and which, we would shrink in our deliberate
judgment from having revealed to others; yet, the
touch of disease may so derange that delicate organi-
zation, on whose healthy action the intelligent and


coherent operations of the mind depend, that,
obedient to a remorseless power, neither to be es-
caped from nor gainsaid, we may become ourselves
the witnesses to our hitherto unknown shame, fill
the ears of listening friends with tales and thoughts
they would gladly have been ignorant of, and their
hearts with sorrow. Think, oh ! think my friends,
that it is possible any one of us may be subjected to
the test of being placed in such a state ! Who would
not shrink from a public—though at the time un-
conscious—exposure of the heart’s secret feelings,
and the unseen of life ? Through the trying process
of unwittingly doing so, our friend Norman passed;
the feelings of every bye stander at his bed side,
divided between keen sympathy with the patient,
and deep joy at the hearing of every new sentence,
and the reference to any past event —a mingled and
solemn testimony to the simplicity, and honor which
formed the texture of his character. Think of it, ye
who were his companions—let all think of it—use it
as a warning and a beacon, to “do justly, to love
mercy, and to walk humbly before God.”
For some years past, Norman had been a practical,
and conscientious total abstainer. He adopted the
practice of abstinence from alcoholic drinks, not be-
cause he felt he did not need them, but on the principle
of personal safety and example. He did not shut his
eyes to the evils of intemperance, nor did he attempt
to blink the fact, that without a previous moderate use


of alcoholic drinks, there could be no drunkenness,
and therefore his adoption of total abstinence princi-
ples, was no mere temporary expedient. They be-
came an integral part of his social, his moral, and
religious creed, and he was ready at all times to avow
them. On one occasion, I was discussing, in his
presence with some persons on the subject; he
listened for a time to their arguments —if arguments
they could be called—in favor of moderate drinking,
then rising and walking away, he put an end to any
further remarks, saying in his own quiet way —“ It’s
all wrong, it’s all wrong together.” So truly had the
principle of total abstinence, become with him a
matter of conscience, that when on his death bed
wine was administered, as part of the medical treat-
ment, it was resolutely rejected. Not until he re-
ceived the assurance of his Father, that solely as a
medicine was it offered, and that, were “ Mr. Ewing
himself here, he would agree to your taking it,” did
he consent to accept it. Such deep root had princi-
ple, in this respect, struck into his soul, that amid rest-
lessness and incoherence, he was true to it. Brethren,
as an abstainer myself, I take advantage of this occas-
sion to urge the principles of Total Abstinence from
intoxicating drinks on the consideration of all, and
more especially on the attention of the young. In
practically adopting them, you will sacrifice nothing,
and you will gain much : — nothing, for with you the
taste cannot yet have been created, and the habit


cannot yet have been so strongly formed, as to pro-
duce any sense of loss in giving it up;— much , for it
will minister to health, and peace of mind, and guard
you against dangers, to which otherwise you would be
exposed. It will be an avoiding of the appearance
of evil; for though all moderate drinkers do not be-
come drunkards, every drunkard must have been at
one period in his career, a perfectly moderate drinker.
That is an undeniable truth. Will you then risk the
possibility of illustrating by your life, that moderation
is the parent of intemperance; and against which,
while in the practice of moderate drinking, you not
only have no guarantee, but are in daily danger of
being insidiously drawn into the state so much to
be dreaded, and from which, when you see it in
others now, you shrink from horror. The drinking
customs of society are the stronghold of intem-
perance. Will you then continue to countenance
them ? Will you for the mere excitement of the act,
risk the acrobatic performance of standing in a gale
of wind on the edge of a precipice, over which
sixty thousand persons fall annually, into the yawn-
ing depths beneath, who were all at one time moderate
drinkers ? Should not the experience which comes of
observation be sufficient to arouse you to caution, and
self-protection in such a matter ? May God lead you
to see that what is called moderation, is a danger—
becomes a sin—and may end in death. May you be
aroused to the right practical conclusion on that
subject.


From experience we know that sun setting is fol-
lowed by sunrising—that clouds and darkness pass
away, and the glad light returns. So in contrast to
our text, Christ said to his disciples what he now
says to all true believers —“ I go to prepare a place
for you, and if I go and prepare a place for you, I
will come again and receive you unto myself; that
where I am, there ye may be also.” “ And ye now
therefore have sorrow: but I will see you again, and
your heart shall rejoice.” How cheering this pro-
mise ! to think that the brief night of present sorrow,
and suffering, and death, will usher in
“The Resurrection morn,”
the first of that unclouded day over which no shadow
will pass, and which will know no end: even life and
immortality! The upshooting streaks of purpling
light from a departed sun, are the diminishing echoes
of his song—“ I will come again,” and raethinks that
in the case of a dying Christian, his varying hopes—his
changing experiences—and his incoherent utterances
of joy and anticipation, are the broken melody of
his spirit, in its passing away from the worn out
frame, and weeping friends —“ I will come again.”
Yes, the thought of a resurrection, may indeed give
the Christian strength amid present pains and toils,
and may well reconcile him to the prospect of dying;
•* The stars shall fade away, the sun himself
“ Grow dim with age, and nature sink in years :
“ But thou shalt flourish in immortal youth,
“ Unhurt, amid the war of elements,
“The wreck of matter, and the crash of worlds.”


On this subject, man untaught of God can but specu-
late, and draw from nature varied and wondrous
analogies; but the revealed Word dogmatizes.
Writers have written much and beautifully of how
the returning seasons —the opening buds —the ebb
and flow of tides—the production and develope-
ment of organized life from a vital spec the
consciousness of individual identity which we pre-
serve, during all the physical changes of passing life
—the worm-like chrysalis springing into the form so
happily phrased by Dr. Gumming, as the “flying
flower” —symbolise and illustrate the resurrection of
the body, and the immortality of the soul. Much
theorizing has been given to the world about the
mode of that resurrection, and whether all the scat-
tered materials of our bodies will be brought together
again into our person; or such part as will give it
identity. We must not be in any way disturbed about
our ignorance on these questions, enough for us to
know, that our identity will be preserved. It is not
for me to enquire how Omnipotence will secure that,
after death and decay have done their work with the
body; enough for me now to know, on the authority
of God himself, that at the resurrection I shall know
myself to be the same man I was on earth—that my
consciousness will bear unimpeachable testimony to
ray identity—that in my flesh I shall see God ; know
even as I shall be known-—know the living and reigning
personal Redeemer, and be recognized, and acknow-


ledged by him as the same person who had sinned, re-
pented, believed, and who was saved by him on earth.
Oh! it is the immortality of the soul which invests it with
so much value, gives to life so much importance, and
so much dread meaning to the question—“ What
shall it profit a man if he gain the whole world, and
lose his own soul, and what shall a man give in ex-
change for his soul.” To the saving of that soul
therefore, held by God himself in such estimation,
that he gave his Son to die for its redemption;—
“ believe” in the Lord Christ Jesus, and “thou shalt
be saved”; “Remember thy Creator in the days of
thy youth,” and God will be with you in all succeed-
ing days to bless and guide you, enabling you to say
intelligently amid all life’s changes and heart
aches —“ My Lord and my God.”
Norman for the first time was to have been with
us to-day, in celebrating the Lord’s Supper, and this,
I believe, on sound evidence; but, he has gone to be
“ For ever with the Lord
whose death we could only commemorate, and whose
presence our faith struggles dimly to realize. At this
time last Sabbath evening, he had been but a few hours
in the enjoyment of that society, and place, to be
prepared for which, he prayed so earnestly; was fresh
rapt in the first ecstasy of an eternal joy, at the sight
of his Redeemer, and the actual glories of a world,
to us mysterious and far off. When we think of the
promise he gave of future unobtrusive usefulness


in his sphere in society, our natural feelings are over-
come of sorrow at the loss of him; but our human
view of the Divine proceedings are at once corrected,
and our grief restrained, by the principles, and con-
siderations so applicable in his case, expressed
by the Christian poet with so much pathos and
beauty—
Thou art gone to the Grave! but we will not deplore thee.
Though sorrows and darkness encompass the tomb :
Thy Saviour has pass’d through its portal before thee.
And the lamp of His love is thy guide through the gloom
Thou art gone to the grave ! we no longer behold thee,
Nor tread the rough path of the world by thy side;
But the wide arms of Mercy are spread to enfold thee.
And sinners may die, for the sinless has died!
Thou art gone to the grave ! and, its mansion forsaking,
Perchance thy weak spirit in fear linger’d long ;
But the mild rays of Paradise beam’d on thy waking.
And the sound which thou heardst was the Seraphim’s song!
Thou art gone to the grave ! but we will not deplore thee,
Whose God was thy ransom, thy guardian and guide;
He gave thee. He took thee, and He will restore thee.
And death has no sting, for the Saviour has died!
My dear friends, the religion taught in these few
words —“ The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth from
all sin ” —“ whosoever believeth ”in him, “ shall be
saved” —alone can lift the soul to a true sense of its
worth, the grand destiny to which it may attain, and
consecrate its powers while here, to fulfil the true end
of its existence; working out its own salvation, and
doing good unto others. So only can we anticipate


“ the recompense of reward/’ at the termination of
our earthly probation. Sudden accident may come,
or the racking pain, or the painless waste that leads
to death ; —and when the last sound shall have
reached the ear, the last sight of material objects
have been seen, and the mourners at their last visit
gather around the tomb, nothing then of the one
however loved, or dear, will outlive the touch of
death, to cheer or depress, but the character which
had been seen, and the principles that gave it life
and form. Oh ! how important then, that they
should be of the right kind ! The long procession of
mourners, which followed our departed friend to the
family vault, was not alone a mark of respect to the
social position of his parents and himself; it was, as
you know, a tribute to his recognized character —a
spontaneous, and general expression of genuine sor-
row, at the loss of one so young, and yet so full of pro*
mise. If you wish in the true sense, to enjoy this life;
to be able successfully to do battle with the world’s
difficulties, and temptations, and at last to die what
may be really called a happy death, let me point you
—as worthy of imitation—to the character and the
religious principles on which it rested, of our dear
departed friend, Norman Alexander Robertson.
Wilson, Printer, York Street, Launceston.


