

A Proposed Sub-aqueous Viaduct
across Sydney Harbour from
Dawes Battery to Mi Ison’s
Point.
(A paper read by MR. A. M. HOWARTH, Rail-
way Construction Department, Sydney , at the
Engineering Association of New South Wales ,
19th September, 1895.)
"Chronicle” Print, Newtown.
I i I I I I I iTTi




I
Jjt*
A Proposed Sub-aqueous Viaduct
across Sydney Harbour from
Dawes Battery to Mikon’s
Point.
(A paper read by MR, A. M. HOWARTII, Rail-
way Construction Department, Sydney, at the
Engineering, Association of New South Wales,
19th September, 1895.)
t




/r/
Zs’ 9-<?:
A Proposed Sub aqueous Viaduct
across Sydney Harbour from
Dawes Battery to Milson’s Point.
(A paper read by Mr. A. M. HOWARTH, Railway Con-
struction Department , Sydney , at the Engineering Associa-
tion of New South Wales , 19th September , 1895).
THE subject of this paper is one which will remind
every member of the Association that a large number
and variety of schemes have been published for the pur-
pose of making a direct railway and tramway connection
between the city of Sydney and its picturesquely situated
northern suburbs. In submitting this paper, I would like
it to be known that it is not my desire or intention to
criticise any of the work done by my predecessors, and that
1 have strictly endeavoured to confine my remarks to those
matters which appear to be inseparably linked to the
schemes offered for your notice this evening. In a primal
contemplation of the essentialities of a direct connection
system, we cannot ignore the positive requirements of
rapid transit, and are therefore compelled to reject the
time-honoured and slow moving harbour ferry. Though
it is possible that the present excellent service of ferry
boats can be improved beyond recognition, a constantly in-
creasing harbour traffic, and consequent additional naviga-
tion precautions, together with some certain loss of time
spent in transhipment of rolling stock at each end of a
short distance trip, would seriously handicap the best class
of ferry boat engaged in competition with a scheme that
combined maximum rapidity of safe transit, continuity of
transport, punctuality in windy weather or dense fog, and
an entire absence of those collision dangers, which are of
such frequent and increasing occurence in our harbour.
Though it may not require much imagination to suggest


a bridge or a tunnel in lieu of a ferry boat, the difficult of
definite selection was fully recognised by the Royal Com-
mission on City and Suburban Railways 1890 91, which
exhaustively inquired into the relative merits of various
methods of crossing the harbour by bridge or tunnel. The
Committee decided that whenever it may be desirable to
build a bridge, it would be advisable to give it a clear
headway of 160 feet, and one span of 1500 feet, or two
spans of 700 or 800 feet, with a central pier not obstructing
navigation. (Vide Report page 68). Several suggestions
for proposed tunnels to be carried under the harbour at
depths varying from 30 to 150 feet below water level were
separately discussed, and it is probable that the generally
brief description of designs and their modes of execution,,
the conflict of expert evidence, and the admitted uncer-
tainty of cost, were the governing factors in causing the
final rejection of every tunnel proposition. Before dealing
with any of the tunnel schemes, I propose to examine into
the characteristics and final cost of a bridge built to
comply with the Committee’s suggestion. The rail and
road level of this bridge would be 165 feet above water
level, and, though electric traction were used on the rail-
way or tramway, it would not be advisable to use steeper
gradients than 1 in 30 from a point near the centre of
bridge down to each respective abutment. These gradients
have enabled me to select a south abutment site at the
north end of Prince’s-street, Sydney, and a north abutment
on the grounds of Dind’s Hotel, Nortn Shore. The rail
level at Prince’s-street abutment would be above
water level, and at North Shore abutment 107 ft. above
water level. In accordance with the experience supported
teachings of Sir Benjamin Baker, Claxton Fidler, and
other bridge building experts, that a pair of balanced
cantilever beams carrying a central independent girder
would be the best type of bridge to fulfil the
conditions, I have pleasure in submitting to your notice
a skeleton sketch of what I consider to be the shortest
bridge that can be erected across Sydney Harbour. The
total length and approaches would be 1,645 yards. The
roadway would carry a double tram line or railway; double
carriage ways 15ft. wide; and double footpaths 10ft. wide.
Careful observation of recent colonial bridge building ex-
periences, together with data derived from the cost of con-
structing a similar type of bridge across the Firth of
Forth, seem to positively indicate that we could not, at
present market prices, build a bridge as shown upon my


sketch for a less sura than £745,000, exclusive of land and
property resumptions. I will now attempt to briefly de-
scribe the main features of a few of the tunnel schemes.
The first example is a double tunnel completely piercing
the bed rock of harbour, 5(50 yards long, and connected to
ground surfaces by vertical shafts and direct elevating
machinery at each terminal. The rail level at the half
distance of tunnel would not be less than 120 ft. below
water level, and with working gradients of 1 in 20, we
should require vertical lifts of 90ft. to enable us to connect
with shore rail levels, 10ft. above water level. The cost
of this tunnel, with complete working equipments, would
be about £190,000. The second example is a double
tunnel exactly similar to the first mentioned, excepting that
it would be approached by spiral or circular tunnels, instead
of vertical shafts. The curved portions are graded lin 25,
and the total length of tunnels and approaches is 2,016
yards. By forming 128 yards of each approach in open
cuttings we could reduce the length of the tunnel to one
mile between its portals and where the rails would be sft.
below water level. This tunnel could be built and equipped
for about £210,000. The third example is a double tube
projected through the silt and other deposits forming the
bed of the harbour. Assuming that numerous complete
borings justified the conclusion that these tubes could'be
driven by the travelling shield and compressed air system,
as originated by Brunei for the Thames Tunnel, and since
elaborated by Greathead and others, it seems apparent, by
preliminary examination of exhibited cross section of har-
bour, that the central rail level would not be less than 85ft.
below water level. Two tubes, each 560 yards long, with
gradients of 1 in 30, would require vertical terminal lifts
of 67ft., and if curved tunnels were used in lieu of lifts
and graded 1 in 25, the total length of the system would
be 1,676 yards. By cutting off 265 yards for open cut-
tings, we should then have a through tunnel 1420 yards
long and 300 yards shorter than the second example. There
is no presently available information referring to the
natural consistency, watery infiltration, or load bearing
capacities of the silt and other deposits to be tunnelled,
therefore it is practically impossible to estimate the cost of
either propositions of the third example. The best feature
of the last proposal is that the length of the subway
passage would be 20 per cent, shorter than the all rock
tunnel of the second example. As this saving is entirely
due to the raising of the rail level at the centre of harbour,


it is reasonable to believe, that if we were to lift the tuhe&
so that their upper surfaces offered no obstruction to navi-
gation, and thereby placed the rail level at a minimum
depth below water, we should obtain the ideal short passage
subway, and be more certain of that popular patronage
which is essential to commercial success. As a result of
personal inquiries at the Marine Board offices, I am assured
that a clear depth of 36ft. from high water spring tide
mark to the tops of the tubes would be amply sufficient for
all requirements of navigation. The rail level would then
be 50£ft. below water level, and by grading as shown on
exhibited drawings, the subway would be 1,166 yards long.
The bottoms of tubes would be 53ft. below water level,
and, as nearly half of their length would be above and
clear of the soft surfaces of the mud and silt, it is obvious
that their stability and alignment would have to be pre-
served by rigid connections with the bed rock of the har-
bour. The vertical transposition of the tubes and the em-
ployment of pier supports, transforms the original mud and
silt surrounded subway tubes, into a perfectly subaqueous
bridge or viaduct. Subaqueous bridges have been proposed
frequently, and by various engineers for the crossing of
navigable streams, and especially where tunnelling would
be too costly or impossible. The propb's&ls have been
marked by a general similiarity of design. Each engineer
has chosen a tubular beam for his superstructure, and pro-
vided for the depositing of the same upon solidly bedded
supports. Some have proposed plain cast iron tubes from
2in. to 3in, thick and ballasted sufficiently to prevent flota-
tion, others have suggested thinner tubes lined with 1 to
3 feet or brickwork, another has proposed to place one thin
tube within a larger one, and fill the concentric space of
30in. with concrete. The first mentioned suggestions
would require the tubes to be built with very much larger
factors of safety than would be needed for the concentric
tube method, because of the constant corrosion of the
metallic surfaces exposed to the action of the sea water.
The Circular Tube when Treated as a Beam does not
Show the Economy of Material Possessed by the Con-
ventional Type of Flanged Girder, and in Recognition
of this Fact, I Propose a Form of Cross Section for
this Bridge, that will Enable us to Calculate all
Working Stresses as would be Done for an Ordinary
Flanged Girder with a Rigid W eb. Assuming that the
bridge is intended to carry two lines of way, the cross sec-
tion would be as shown thus:— CD. The middle parti-


tion is the web of a girder whose flanges are embedded in
the protective and cement filled chamber between inner
lining and outer casing of Bridge. The roadway passages
are formed by attachment of semi-circle wings to the top
and bottom flanges of central girder. These wings are
designed to transmit all working loads to the central girder.
The outer casing or envelope is 2 feet away from the wings
all round, and would be retained in position by light brac-
ing until the concrete filling was completed and perfectly
set. It will be seen, therefore, that the inner wing
plates could be replaced when required, and though the
outer shell would, at some indefinite time, corrode and fall
away from the bridge, the presence of the age hardened
concrete wall 2 feet thick, would preserve the wings and
girders from damage by salt water. The length of each
span is about 210 feet. The length conforms to good
practice in economic continuous girder building, and would
be convenient to handle when being placed in position.
Each tubular span would be completely finished on shore,
with the ends securely closed by temporary bulk-heads, and
then be floated and towed out to the position indicated for
sinking. The piers are of the ordinary central well type,
and judging by cross section of harbour, plotted from
actual borings, it is reasonable to believe that not more than
314 lineal feet of sunk cylinder would be requisite for-the
founding of the whole of the five piers. Assuming for
argument’s sake, that 400 feet of cylinder be required, and
the finished price was £25 a foot, I think it will be generally
admitted that £20,000 is not an extravagant price to pay
for five rock borne supports for the bridge. The ends of
each span are splayed out on wings and bottom, and are
provided with jointing flanges on the lining and casing.
The flanges would be drilled to standard templates for the
reception of joint bolts. The temporary bulk-heade in
tubes, would be fitted with air-lock door, and
be set back 3 feet from end, so that when
two spans were brought together, a convenient work-
ing chamber would be provided for the divers when
bolting the flanges for a water-tight joint. The gross
buoyancy of bridge per lineal foot is 12 tons, the actual
weight is 11*1 tons per foot. This means that when the
bridge was empty, there would be an upward bending
moment equivalent to 18 cwt. per lineal foot, and if we
impose a total rolling load of 30 cwts.per foot for the
double line, we should change the upward load of 18 cwts.
per foot, into a downward load of 12 cwts. per lineal foot,


and by bo doing produce a bridge which would be safest
when crowded with traffic from end to end. It is evident
that such extremely favorable working conditions permit
us to secure a very large factor of safety with a minimum
expenditure of material. This factor is sufficient to pro-
vide for the remote contingency of accidental flooding of
tubes prior to the final completion of the bridge. The
influx of water could not possibly occur, excepting by
injury to bulk-heads, or negligent use of water-tight doors
when the various tubes were being joined. The flooded
bridge would receive an extra load of 710 tons per span, or
3'38 per lineal foot. As no other loading would be possible
with water in the tubes, we need only provide for this
additional load at each pair of pier cylinders. Each pier
has a bearing area of 102 square feet, with an ordinary
working load of five tons per foot. The additional load of
seven tons due to flooded tubes, plus five tons for working
load, equals 12 tons, and would be perfectly safe. I now
propose to demonstrate the practical impossibility of cap-
sizing or displacing the bridge by side pressure. As the
silts and other deposits might be softened and scoured by
tidal currents or by future dredging operations, no allow-
ance will he made for their side support to piers. In plan,
this bridge presents itself as a horizontal, continuous six
span tubular girder, fixed upon five intermediate piers and
two rigid abutments. The cylinders are securely fixed to
superstructure, and being only three to five diameters long,
they can be treated as vertical cantilevers, and relied upon
to transmit to the bed rock, all horizontal forces of the
continuous girder at each pier. In discussion, the girders
and tubes are supposed to be weightless and valueless,
excepting as vehicles for transmitting simultaneous strain
to all the piers and abutments. The aggregate positive
weight at all the piers is 1750 tons The centre of applied
pressure would not average more than 45 feet above bed
rock. The effective straddle of pier legs is 30 feet, and by
1750 x 30
solution of equation the overturning pressure
45 x 2
required is 583 tons. In addition to this result we must
now ascertain the value of attachment of the girder to rock
abutments. The length of the bridge is 1275 feet, and the
moment of inertia for the steel wings is 4,300,000 inch
units, and taking the elastic limit of steel at 17 tons per
square inch, the moment of safe resistance of the horizontal
beam at the centre of span would be 271 tons. The moment


of inertia of concrete casing is 5,862 foot units, and by re-
inforcing the cement by wire ligaments so as to bring the
safe tensile strength up to 100 lbs. per square inch, or 6.5
tons per foot, the moment of resistance of concrete jacket
is 21 tons. The sum of the moments is 875 tons, and that
represents the united breaking strengths of 12 steel wire
hawsers, each 6 inches circumference. I think it is quite
safe to say that, unless purposely done, it would be im-
possible that such a load could ever exist. The approach
tunnels and cuttings are of the ordinary character, and pre-
sent no great difficulties in their construction. The greatest
engineering problem is how to make the connection between
approaches and bridges. The junction with bridge at the
Sydney end is proposed to be made by a tunnel 200 feet
long, and driven through rock and silt to the first pier of
steel viaduct. The approach tunnel under the battery hill
having been driven to a vertical shaft near the sea wall at
Dawes’ Point, and a temporary shaft having also been sunk
at the Sydney end of bridge tubes, a temporary embank-
ment of clay in bags would then be formed between the
two shafts. The clay bank would range from sto 7 feec
deep by an average width of 36 feet. Ordinary iron tubes,
about 2£ inches diameter, wiili solid pointed ends, would
then be driven at 3 to 4 feet intervals, and in such numbers
as to fill a portion of the area covering the position of pro-
posed tunnel. The points of tubes would be driven within
a few inches of the contour line of arch and flanks of pro-
posed tunnels, and then be provided with inside circulating
pipes, for the purpose of freezing the soft mud and water
bearing deposits into solid matter. The soft core conld
then be excavated without trouble. Access to the drive
for miners and bricklayers would be made by doors pro-
vided in the temporary bulkheads of vertical shafts. On
completion of tunnel, a sealing arch of concrete and steel
would then be built between tunnel and bridge, and there
being no further use for clay banks, freezing pipes, and
temporary ’shaft, the whole of these materials could be
cleared away. At Milson’s Point a caisson shaft, with tem-
porary bulkheads on its north and south faces, would be
sunk to the required depth, and connection made to tunnel
and bridge by jointing up as a described for separate spans
of viaduct. The majority of those people who have ridden
upon the underground rail ways in London, are not unnaturally
opposed to the very name of undergiound or tunnel railways.
It must be remembered that the great objections to the
London system would not exist in my project. Stifling


vapours due to the fuel burning locomotives and the con-
sequent evil smelling, dismal and dirty surroundings,
would not be found in this bridge or its approaches.
Electricity would be used for traction and lighting purposes.
The whole of the approaches and viaduct linings would be
of white enamelled encaustic brick and tiles. Two ventil-
ating shafts each 200 square feet area, and eight others
each not less than 50 square feet, would be distributed at
convenient distances along the crown of tunnels. The pro
vision of a midfeather in bridge section, permits of a com-
pleted division of up and down traffic, and any vitiated air
left by a passing train of passengers would be propelled
from the tunnel by the following train. The curves and
grades are easier than those to be found in the streets of
Sydney. The estimated complete construction and equip-
ment, exclusive of cars and electric power plant, would be
£185,000. The whole of the quantities are based upon
colonial labour and materials, and the estimated time re
quired for construction is two years. Any of the past or
present suggestions for electric tramways or railways for
the city of Sidney, can be readily connected with the pro-
posed subway. A terminal dock or return loop may be
constructed between the cable tram, and Milson’s Point
railway platform ; or a direct connection can be made with
the main line and continuous rapid transit obtained from
Redfern to Hornsby via the city. The junction with the
George-street and Pitt-street lines, would be at a point
opposite the Mariners’ Church, and 26 feet above water
level. The line then proceeds on road surface, and past the
Public Wharves Office, to a point situated in Metcalfe’s
Bond ; from thence in an open cutting with retaining walls
to the southern portal of tunnel at the Government boat
sheds ; from this point the line passes through a tunnel
approach under Dawes’ Point Reserve, to its junction with
the bridge in the harbour. The north shore end of bridge
joins its approach tunnel at a point near the ferry wharf,
and now occupied as a cab stand. The north tunnel is
helical, and is graded to bring its portal within the railway
goods yard, and by running the line from thence on a
parallel to the railway platform, we are enabled to finish in
a terminal dock at the same level, and not more than 20
feet from existing cable cars and railway carriages I
have minutely calculated the quantities of every portion of
the work, and as there are no Land or Property
Resumptions on any Part of my Project, I have great
confidence in quoting the final cost. The direct and easy


methods of communication combined with low cost of
accomplishment, and absolute certainty of rapid transit,
inspire me with every belief that my project would be a
great commercial success, and an incalculably beneficial
factor in the future development of North Sydney and its
suburbs. In concluding this paper 1 beg to offer my sincere
thanks to those engineers, whose labors in attempting to
show the necessity of a direct connection, have enabled me
to gather sufficient information for the projection of J(my
own scheme.
Discussion on the Paper “ On a Proposed Sub-Aqueous
Viaduct Across Sydney Harbour .”
Chairman, Mr. A. D. NELSON, M.L.A.
October, 17th, 1895.
Mr. W. B, Cruickshank opened the discussion. He did
not speak as an expert in this branch of engineering. He
congratulated Mr. Howarth on his scheme, which, as far as
he could judge, was thoroughly practical. The speaker
did not agree with Mr. Howarth’s strictures on the present
boats. The “ time honoured and slow moving ferry ” has
a great deal more to commend it than is usually supposed.
Having been connected with this service for over 20 years,
he believed he was correct in stating that there never has
been any loss of life due to the running of the ferry
steamers. Mr. Howarth says the “ present vessels could be
improved beyond recognition,” but there was no justifi-
cation for such a remark ; for any radical change is rend-
ered in a satisfactory manner, as far as all reasonable
requirements were concerned. The cost given by Mr.
Howarth, i.e., £185,000, appealed to Mr. (Jruickshank to be
very low, but from Mr. Howarth he found that this steel
way would weigh 2 tons to the lineal foot, and taking its
length at 1300 ft., the total would be 2600 tons. Ordinary
bridge work steel has been constructed in the
Colonies for less than £25 per ton, and as Mr. Howarth
has allowed £9O per lineal foot, the whole structure finished
would amount to about £117,000. The tunnelling, 740
yards, at £BO per lineal yard, would be £59,000, bringing
it up to £176,000, and this would leave £9OOO for laying
rails and other expenses. He was not in a position to


check these figures, but trusted some member would do so.
Eeferring to tunnelling generally he gave a slight resume
of this branch of engineering to illustrate its phenomenal
advance. In 1857 the Mont Cenis tunnel was commenced
at both ends, and the work carried on by hand for over
three years, when rock drilling machines were introduced.
Taking the hand rate of progress, it would have taken 30
years to complete the job, whereas with the machines it
was finished in 13 years and one month from date of com-
mencement. Its length was a little over 7£ miles, and it
cost £224 per lineal yard. The Saint Gothard tunnel, com-
menced in 1871, miles long, finished in 1880, cost £142
per lineal yard. The Arlberg tunnel, 6^-miles, occupying
3| years in construction, an average progress of about 10
feet per day, cost £lOB per lineal yard. At the present
time a double line of railway tunnel can be excavated and
finished in the Colonies for about £65 per lineal yard, and
as Mr. Howarth’s tunnel is only f the sectional area, it
should cost less; but as he has allowed £BO per yard, pos
sibly the nature of the material to be passed through may
account for this. The proposed method of construction is
commendable, inasmuch as the central double flanged girder
is plain and simple in all its details, and the wings carry-
ing the roadways are all easy, straightforward work. The
cement covering should, in salt water, be almost indestruc-
tible. As a whole, the scheme bears the impress of careful
thought, presents few engineering difficulties, is eminently
practical, and much superior in every way to any of the
previously proposed methods of tunnel connection.
Mr. Burge said that the method proposed by Mr.
Howarth for tunnelling under the harbour found them
almost equally ignorant, because such work was almost a
new experience to them. He was inclined to agree with
the last speaker as to the necessity of this scheme, but that
was a matter that hardly come within their scope, as they
should confine themselves to the matters before them.
They had to deal with the merits of the scheme, assuming
some sort of communication to be necessary. As a resident
of North Shore, I would be sorry to go dowm in the tunnel
when there was a good ferry available. That was not the
question, however, and as far as he could judge, it was a
well thought out scheme as submitted in the paper. If
there was any improvement to be suggested, it was that
the gradients might be carried down lower, so as not to
interfere with the present depth of the water, and it would
be worth the additional expense incurred.


Mr. Grimshaw agreed that the tunnel might be brought
down a little lower. He thought it would give a greater
security to the tunnel itself, and he saw no difficulty in
.that being done.
Mr. J. T. Haycroft read the following paper : —No one
will doubt, even from a cursory inspection of the drawings
that the author has devoted very considerable time and
study, to the scheme now before you, but in the
■ opinion of the writer, Mr. Howarth has failed in producing
a project which cannot be objected to not from one, but
.many points to view. The writer, in criticising this scheme,
does not wish to be considered as doing so in captious
spirit, and so that the criticism may fulfil its function, and
perhaps lead to improvements. The writer considers the
first point of failure of the scheme to be in the fact that it
■only provides accommodation for people who may happen
,to have money in their pockets, as the travellers by the
ipresent Ferry system must have. No scheme, whether
tunnel or bridge, connecting North Sydney with this city,
will, in the writer’s opinion, be acceptable to the public,
which does not provide, besides a means of rapid transit
iby electric tram or otherwise, a means of free transit to
ipedestrians and vehicular traffic. Another point about the
author’s scheme, which, however he may be able to explain
and which, if it exists as stated in the paper, would render
it inoperative or incapable of competing successfully with
• congested traffic, is the, fact that the out-going cars from
the city would run into a terminal dock at Milson’s Point
Railway Station. The scheme to be effective should be
. circular in action ; the cars from the city should be able
to discharge their freight at Milson’s Point, and be capable
of immediately taking in a return freight to the city with-
out any shunting operations. The particular design of the
tunnel or subaqueous viaduct, has evidence of considerable
■ thought on the part of the author. One point, however,
which would bear elucidating, is how it is contemplated to
. make a water-tight joint at the junctions of the separate
■ spans resting on the piers. Is it intended to take the sag
out of the tubes as they lie on the piers in their initial
stage, before bolting two lengths together. As the author
does not propose to use the outer casing of his bridge for
anything except moulding his concrete, would it not be as
well to do away entirely with same, and when building the
i tubes on land, to use temporary timber casing, which could
be removed as the concrete got sufficiently hard, to permit
.of launching of the tubes. Much more facility for ram-


ming the concrete would be provided by the use of an
outer timber casing, and the cost of same, if made of steel,
avoided. No fear of foul air existing in the tunnels need
be entertained, if the author’s scheme were carried out, in
fact, less ventilation than he provides would be sufficient.
One small point in the paper needs correction, that is a refer-
ence to part of the committee’s report on City and Suburban
Railways. The committee did not suggest, as stated by
the author, that the bridge, if constructed, should consist
of one span of 1500 feet, or two spans of 700 or 800 feet,
with a central pier not obstructing navigation, which the
author remarked he could not understand. The recom-
mendation was, that if possible the bridge be thrown
across in one span ; but if such were not possible, two
spans of 500 to 700 feet, with a central pier, would meet
the requirements of a bridge not obstructing the naviga-
tion of the harbour. The author, when reading the paper, on
mentioning he had taken the elastic limit of steel at 16 tons,,
referred to the proposed bridge across the Hudson, where
he stated the working stress was 25 tons per square inch.
This statement was referred to subsequently in the discus-
sion, which followed, and one speaker stated it must have
been a misprint. Such, however, is not the case, in fact,the
author was below the mark in stating 25 tons. Having
gone so far, a few words on this structure may not be out
place, as it will show what is being done in other countries
in a somewhat similar condition of things between Dawes’
and Milson’s Points. The bridge is to be suspension, 3100
feet clear span with a headway of 150 feet over high
water ; it is to accommodate six lines of railway. _ Mr.
Theodore Cooper, M.A.1.C.E., one of the most eminent
members of the profession in the world, has specified that
the cables, when subjected to the maximum stress, shall
not be subjected to more than 27 tons per square inch.
The wire in the cables shall have a minimum length of
1800 feet, without weld, joint or splice, and shall not be
less in diameter than No. 3 Birmingham wire guage =
0-259 inches, and possess an ultimate strength of 90 tons
per square inch. To show that these requirements are
practicable, the Union Bridge Co. sent in a tender to build
such a bridge for £5,000,000 within three years. The
author is, no doubt, aware that the War Department, who
throughout America, have the right of vetoing any schemes
interfering with free navigation, declined to sanction a
cantilever type of Bridge, where it is proposed to erect a
suspension bridge. The author fixes the prices of bridge,


lie illustrates as suitable for this crossing, at three quarters
of a million, say, with land resumptions, one million, a
sum which compares very unfavorably with his tunnel
scheme ; but the writer is of opinion that a bridge to
accommodate two lines of electric tramway, two carriage
ways, and two footpaths could be constructed for much
less, and still be no obstruction to navigation ; the writer
is engaged on such a design, not to exceed £250,000, and
which will necessitate no land resumptions. In conclusion,
the writer is of opinion the author is deserving of unquali-
fied praise for the energy and acumen displayed in the
design submitted for discussion.
Mr. Norman Selfe said the author deserved the thanks of
the community, as well as of the Association for his valu-
able contribution to the subject of direct communication
between Sydney and the Northern Shore of Port Jackson.
Proposals for a bridge at this site go back at least 40 years,
a design for a single span girder having been made by a
Mr. Henderson in 1857. One could not criticise all the
details without bestowing a good deal of time and trouble
on calculations, or being in possession of information which
is not given in this paper, as to the exact nature of the
bottom of the harbour at that spot. Mr. Howarth, in reply,
would perhaps kindly say if the section shown is approxi-
mate only, or drawn from actual borings, and if a soft un-
reliable bottom above the rock has been proved. Assuming
that the present bottom is not solid enough to carry a tube
without the assistance of a ballast dyke, the necess-
ity for the submerged piers is apparent; and admitting
the correctness of the proportions and estimates given by
the author, no disinterested person will deny the many
merits of the proposal, or contend that it is not well
adapted to afford communication with Milson’s Point for
certain kinds of traffic, at a very moderate cost, if it can be
carried out without accidents. He therefore trusts that he
will nor be misunderstood or be thought to in any way
depreciate the merits of this submeiged bridge or tunnel,
if, while fnlly recognising in it a solution of the problem-
how to connect the tramway and local traffic at Milson’s
Point with the city—he tries to prove that it does not meet
the most important and primary requirements of the
public, which are daily forcing themselves more and more
to the front, and demanding recognition at the hands of
the Government. The connection of Sydney with the
North Shore is a large and important question, and although
the Chief Commissioner of Railways, when giving evidence


at the Royal Commission, more than five years ago, did not
at that time think it was an important one from the rail-
way point of view, the subsequent opening of the line in
Milson’s Point has entirely altered matters. The popula-
tion between the Point and Hornsby Junction has lately
progressed, and is still increasing by leaps and bounds, and'
the traffic is already at least tenfold what it was then.
Bearing in mind that the distance from the Point to
Hornsby Junction is 13 miles, while from Redfern to the
Junction it is 21 miles, and that in various schemes for the
City Railway Extension, both “ Official ” and “ Private.”
Wynyard Square has been selected for one of the City Rail-
way Stations (a central site for a starting point, which a
bridge would make at least 8 miles nearer to Newcastle via
North Shore than via Strathfield), and noting what is in
dubitable, that with “ improved times ” the whole district
from Chatswood to Thornleigh will soon vie with the
Suburban Line in the density of its population, »ve are
brought face to face with the point as the primary one for
consideration in any bridge or tunnel project, namely,
Direct Railway communication from these northern
suburbs in the heart of the city without transhipment. As
a matter of secondary consideration, the local service of the
inhabitants closely surrounding Milson’s Point, now so well
served by tramway and steam ferry, is also extremely im-
portant ; and to meet this local service, Mr. Howarth’s pro-
posal presents great attractions. A correspondent in the
daily press has asked if Mr. Howarth’s bridge would not
cause a silting up of the harbour ; most probably it would
not, but it would certainly reduce the waterway, and
therefore increase the velocity of the tide perhaps a mile
or a mile and a half per hour at “ springs with of course
increased scour that would probably remove silt from, in-
stead of causing it to be arrested at that site ; that, how-
ever, would be a question for the harbour authorities to dis-
cuss. It will be granted, for the purposes of the discus-
sion, that there would be no objection to the scheme on
that score ; we therefore admit that the tunnel is admirably
fitted to carry a tramway traffic and also foot passengers,,
should there be many foot passengers found to prefer pay-
ing the same toll for walking through the tubes as is now
paid to the steamers ; but as there seems to be no idea in
the author’s proposals to carry the railway trains through,
we will pass on lo the consideration of the proposed bridge
for making that more important connection. It has often
been urged against engineers, that they are continually


marring the features of some lovely landscape by their
giant structures. An engineering structure should harmon-
ise with its surroundings, other things being equal, if it is
possible to do so. In a great open estuary like the Forth,
with conditions that absolutely tied the designers to certain
spans and positions for their piers, the great Forth Bridge
has a meaning, and tells it tale well ; but to take a single
span out of that mammoth structure, and straddle it across
Port Jackson, from Dawes’ battery to Milson’s Point, where
a single span is quite unnecessary, to a sensitive person is
simply horrid. You would not only dwarf all the surround-
ings by the immensity of the structure, but you would take
all the poetry out of the situation by its coarse, exaggerated
and pretentious appearance ; and instead of improving on
what nature has so lavishly bestowed, you would set up a
permanent eyesore in the two enormous towers, like per-
manent scaffolds 300 feet high, that would go far to ruin
the reputation of our beautiful harbour; quite as much as the
Cremorne Coal Heap atrocity, so much discussed lately, is
ever likelytodo. The waterway of the harbour at that spot is,
when compared with other parts, sufficiently wide for at
least tenfold the shipping that now passes through; and if
piers were erected, they would enable the authorities to
separate and confine the traffic of vessels going either \yay
to their respective and proper channels. There are, there-
fore, advantages rather than objections, to a bridge with
piers, unless it should turn out that the increased cost of
such piers would exceed the reduced cost of the bridge
with the lesser spans, and that is hardly likely, because no
section of the harbour has yet been made public, that
would suggest any extraordinary difficulty in connection
with piers at the bridge site. Coming to the general design
that a bridge to North Shore should assume, it may be
safely said that no one with taste and cultivation, can look
at arched bridges such as the one over the Mississipi, at St.
Louis, without admiring their grace and elegance, as com-
pared with the cheaper girder structures, or even the best
Cantilever bridges. If it cannot be called handsome or
■elegant, nothing could be more appropriate or dignified
than the appearance of the Forth Bridge; but since the
successful completion of that great work, so admirable on
its own side, numbers of imitations of it, or portions of it,
have been proposed for most ineligible situations, utterly
■differing in requirements, conditions, and surroundings,
and some of these proposals have been made for crossing
branches of Sydney Harbour. lu opening this paper, Mr.


Howarth says, in referring to the Royal Commission on
City Railways and North Shore Bridge, the Committee
decided that whenever it may be desirable to build a bridge,
it should be advisable to give it a clear headway of 160
feet, and one span of 1500 feet, or two of 700 or 800 feet
(vide report page 68), but the first paragraph on that page
68, concludes thus:—“On the whole, it may be concluded
that, for ocean steamships and for the larger sailing vessels
with their top-gallant masts ‘ housed,’ there need be no
greater headway tor the bridge than 150 feet,’” true, a sug-
gestion is made in the following paragraph of 164 feet,
but it has very little weight for the following reasons.
The extra height of headway, if adopted, would only be
an advantage for very exceptional vessels, at very excep-
tional times, and granted that one vessel every month had
to lower her top gallant masts to go under 150 feet, at a
cost of £2O, the annual charge would be say £240, which
would be as nothing compared to even the interest on the
extra cost of the higher bridge, but that first cost would
only be a matter of secondary importance; the matter of
first importance is the grade of the railway, on which de-
pends the traction for the trains. With a bridge only
giving 150 feet height, the ruling grade of the Milson’s
Point line, that is only one in fifty, can be maintained
right on to a city railway station, say in Wynyard Square,
while to get over a steeper bridge would involve the extra
haulage, and the additional wear and tear on say a hundred
trains a day, involving terrible inconvenience and enormous
cost; a cost compared with which the simple lowering of
a ship’s mast now and then bears no comparison at all, for
practical purposes. Sir John Fowler and Sir Benjamin
Baker made the headway for the Forth Bridge 150 feet
when there would have been no difficulty in getting much
more than that if it had been desirable. The great East
River Bridge at New York is only 135 feet, another is pro-
posed not so high, and the quite recent bridges erected
over the great North Sea Canal 138. The Manchester
Canal bridges are very much less than that. An ideal
bridge for this site would be something like Captain Ead’s
celebrated structure at St. Louis, which has two spans of
502 feet and one 630 feet, these dimensions would just
about fill the gap from Dawes Point to McMahon’s Point,
the route selected by the Engineer-in Chief for Railways,
Mr. Deane; and certainly the best one, because it makes a
short and direct connection with the present railway line
at the proper level, near to the Bay Road Station. No


doubt the St. Louis Bridge was a costly one comparatively,,
because it amounted to over a million and quarter sterling,
but our conditions are entirely different, there is no
Mississipi mud here, the season is open for work all the
year round, and prices in Sydney now are probably less
than half of what they were in Mississipi and Illinois 30
years ago; it is therefore possible that a similar structure
could be erected here with a double line of railway and
with a carriage rood and footways above for £600,000; if
so, it would not be too high a price to pay for it. If there
is one place in Sydney more than another, where a monu-
mental structure of this kind would attract the attention
of every visitor to the colony, and in the erection of which
we should be justified in spending money on appearance
as well as for utility, it would be a bridge connecting the
city to North Shore. The accompanying picture shows
Milson’s Point and McMahon’s Point joined by a double
cantilever which has been adopted for several reasons con-
nected with economy in cost. Abutments to a bridge 100
feet high with 500 feet spans, would involve an immense
mass of masonry to resist the thrust; in this design, two
heavy piers are used to anchor the shore ends of the
cantilevers down and are a less serious consideration. The
railway runs on the lower deck to keep down the railway
grade, while the carriage road is above with the footways
on cantilevers. The design of bridge which was submitted
to the Royal Commission, was estimated at that time ta
cost £200,000 for the work above water alone, it was
similar in design to this, but was only for a railway bridge
with single deck. No more need be said now about the
details of this design, because it is only shown to the
meeting as illustrating one way of providing the accommo-
dation, that will soon be absolutely required to meet the
wants of the metropolitan population of the colony, and
although an interesting and popular picture, it is not an
Engineer’s drawing. Coming back again to Mr. Howarth s
Tunnel, all must admit there is a great attraction in the
idea of getting a communication across the harbour for
£185,000; but if such a work was to be successfully carried
out, it would have the effect of indefinitely putting off the
construction of the more important bridge. There is not
in that sum, however, much aliovvance made for meeting
contingencies, and such might not arise; it is well, however
to remember that the Hudson River tunnel was commenced
over 20 years ago and is not finished yet. The cost so far
has been fabulous, and twenty men were drowned at on&


time by an accident in 1880. Look at the Spottiswoode
tunnel at Melbourne, and the recent accident there. The
Detroit River tunnel, commenced in 1872, was abandoned,
owing to the interruption of sand, clay and water. The
enormous cost—£soo,ooo per mile—of the Severn tunnel
was beyond what was expected, and the continual expense
of pumping 66,000,000 of gallons a day most serious. No
doubt we have the advantage of the experience gained
already at the Sarnia tunnel and other places, but the most
trifling accident, remembsr, may wreck a tunnel of this
■sort just on the eve of completion. The writer has the
advantage of having been through the Severn and the
Mersey tunnels before completion, and the Thames and
Tower tunnels since. Considering the success of the South
London tunnel the question of course arises whether it
would not be better to drive two cast iron tubes on the
same principle through the silt with longer approaches, to
allow for a little extra depth, that is if the silt is found to
be solid ? With nothing but soft mud, however, Mr.
Howarth’s proposal, carried on absolute piers, is a more
certain method. The map of Sydney and suburbs ex-
hibited, show's that a railway bridge to North Shore, com-
bined with a city extension would convert the Milson’s
Point and suburban lines into a circular railway, the im-
portance of which can be understood by those who have
watched recent developements on the northern shore of the
Harbour. The great success which attended the Inter-
national invitation to bridge constructors to tender for the
Hawkesbury Bridge, is known throughout the world; and
it should induce the Government to have a highly qualified
officer in the person of the Engineer-in-Chief, to instruct
that gentleman to prepare conditions, and at once issue
similar invitations for a North Shore Bridge. This work
should precede a tramway tunnel to take the local traffic now
served by the cable tram and ferry, and that work might
soon follow. New South Wales has spent so much money
on useless works, that no legitimate complaint of cost can
ever be made by Members or other parts of the
colony against the erection of a bridge like this in the metro-
polis; but if the Government start with the smaller work
of a tramway tunnel first; it will be an excuse to put off
the larger and more important bridge. The preceding re-
marks are made more from a citizen’s standpoint perhaps
than from an engineer’s, but it really seems that when the
inhabitants of both sides of the Harbour have combined
and obtained the bridge for the greater and more important


traffic, and they ought to take it in hand at once—then we-
may all hope to see as a supplement what there is ample
scope for, Mr. Howarth’s carefully thought out proposal
for meeting the more local requirements. When one eoil-
templates the many millions which have been spent on the
numerous London bridges and tunnels, the multiplicity of
ferries at New York, besides the existing and projected
Brooklyn bridges, and considers the transpontine traffic in
other great cities, it is a foregone conclusion that a North
Shore overhead bridge is a necessity; in fact it looms large
in the fog in the immediate future. Whether Mr,
Howarth’s submerged bridge will precede or follow it, de-
pends very largely on the way the public interested, in-
fluence the Members of Parliament representing them, and
how those Members influence the Government. This is a
moat opportune time for such a discussion as the present
one, from which nothing but good can come in the
presentation of the subject from every possible point of
view.
Mr. Howarth in reply to the discussion said, that the
lateness of the hour prevented him from dealing with the
practical criticisms and arguments of past speakers as fully
as they deserved. Ho intended however, to treat each
issue, and as briefly as possible. Mr. Cruickshank’s remark
that the reference to the “ present service of ferry bbats
being improved beyond recognition” was not justifiable, is
best answered by the relative context of the paper, wherein
it is stated “ that the loss of time spent in transhipment of
rolling stock at each end of a ferry trip, wonld severely
handicap the best class of boat, when run in competition
with a direct and continuous tramway.” It is obvious
that if ever the present vessels are enlarged or re-construc-
ted so as to be capable of ferrying a train of tram or rail .vay
cars, “they would have to be improved beyond recognition.”
The objection to go into a tunnel under the harbour
when a ferry is available, is an expression of very common
occurrence, and is not to be wondered at, especially in view
of the fact the alternative has not been presented to them*
daily, and in solid reality. Probably it is not too sanguine
to assert, that the real live business man from or to the
city, and to whom time is precious, would never again use
the cautiously moving ferry boat, after a few congenial
experiences of a rapid, collision proof, and continuous
traffic route via properly constructed tunnel. Mr. Burge
suggested that the viaduct ought to be lowered at the*
centre of the channel, so as to bring the superstructure in-


4o the mud and silt forming the bed of harbour. It is im-
probable that any good object could be gained by placing
the viaduct below the lower levels shewn on drawings.
The first cost of constructing and founding the tubes would
be increased in about the same ratio as the increment of
increased depth or in other words, if the tubes were sunk
18 feet or 33 per cent, so as to bring their upper portions
level with the surface of mud, the increase of cost would
be about 33 per cent. = £39,000, and which added to the
original estimate gives a total cost of £224,000. The 18
feet dip in the centre of length, would change the origin-
ally suggested gradient of 1 in 300 to 1 in 50,
and as it is esential for economic working, that
moderate grades and low first cost should be
strictly adhered to, it is difficult to see how any improve-
ment could be secured by lowering the viaduct. The
suggestion that greater safety would result, is finally met,
by the description of the method of founding upon solid
rock, and the synopsis of calculated resistance to displace-
ment or stability, as per paper.
Mr. Grimshaw’s contentions being in agreement with
those of Mr. Burge, are equally answered.
Mr. Haycroft considers the first point of failure in the
scheme to be in the fact that no accommodation is provided
for those who have no money to pay their fare. This
difficulty can be obviated by the construction of a supple-
mentary subway for the free use of pedestrians. The
extra cost would be about £70,000. He also contends that
no connection to North Shore will be satisfactory, that does
not provide for ordinary vehicular traffic. The primary
object of the scheme now being discussed, was the provi-
sion of accommodation for tram or railway traffic only.
As an adjunct to this published scheme, a sketch design
and estimate have been prepared for a viaduct, to provide
for tram or railway, vehicular, and pedestrian traffic, at a
total cost of £90,000 in excess of original estimate of
£185,000. With reference to the tramway terminal and
junction arrangements at Milson’s Point,provision has been
made for every condition that would conduce to a conges-
tion of preliminary traffic requirements, and directly it was
found to be desirable, a loop line could be easily laid, and
in such a position as would effectually reinforce the pre-
sent proposed triangle and car storage sidings. Mr. Hay-
croft’s query as to how a water tight joint could be made
at the junction of the tubes, is easily explained by addition
fo his own following secondary question. It is intended


to take the upward camber (not sag ) out of the tubes as*
they lie on the piers in their initial stage, before bolting
two lengths together. The camber will be removed by
admitting a small quantity of water to the air chambers of
each span, and of a weight about the same as that exerted
by the live rolling load. Thorough consideration of the
relative merits of timber versus metal for the outer casing
of the tubes, appears to favour metal in almost every item,
either in connection with the concrete, or the handling
during launching and depositing in position.
Mr. Haycroft says the City and Suburban Railway Com-
mittee did not recommend or suggest a largo bridge of one
span for connecting Sydney with North Shore. On refer-
ring to the Committees report, page 68, the following
excerpts will be found : —“ Presuming that there be need
“ in the future for the construction of the bridge, the ”
“ evidence seems to point to 160 feet as the proper head- ”
“ way. This with a rise and fall of tide of four feet, ”
“ gives a possible passage of 164 feet,” or 4 feet more than
mentioned by the author. “ The Secretary of the Commis- ”
“ sion, after considering evidence on the point, and as to ”
“ the height of masts, are of opinion, that when the bridge ”
“ is erected 160 feet will be sufficient headway, and that,”
“if it is possible to throw a bridge across in one span,"
“ such a plan should be adopted, but if not, two spans ”
“ 500 to 700 feet, with a central pier would meet the ”
“ requirements of a bridge not obstructing the navigation ”
“of the harbour .” The 27 ton stress mentioned by Mr.
Haycroft are so-called American tons of 2,000 lbs., and if
Mr, Cooper’s specification for the Hudson River Bridge be
closely read, it will be found in the first clause relating to
permissible unit stresses, that the main tension cables are
allowed a maximum stress of 54,000 lbs. per square inch,
54,000
and equals 27 short tons. Mr. Selfe desires to know
2,000
whether the exhibited cross section of the harbour has
been plotted from actual borings or approximations only.
The cross section is correctly plotted from borings taken in
1887, on a line very nearly parallel to, and slightly over-
lapping the centre line of proposed viaduct. The materials
passed through do not seem to be capable of carrying a
ballasted dyke as proposed by Mr. Selfe. His remarks in
answer to the letter of a correspondent to the daily press
re silting up of harbour by proposed viaduct, are so
thoroughly anticipatory of the author’s intended reply,.


that further comment is needless. The gradient of 1m 13
for sketch bridge, ought to have been printed lin 30. Mr.
Selfe mentions the three conspicious failures that have
occurred in submarine tunnel driving. He also refers to a
few well known successes, amongst which are the Thames,
Sarnia, Severn, Mersey, Tower Subway, and South London
Tunnels. To those mentioned, the author would contribute
the following list of subaqueous engineering triumphs;
Vvrnwy Aqueduct Tunnel under the Mersey, Liverpoo ;
Manchester Sewerage Tunnel under the Bridgewater Canal;
Main Sewerage Syphon under the River Seine, Pans;
Underground Railway’s Tunnel under the River Spree,
Berlin; East River Gas Main’s Tunnel under the Hudson
River New York; Niagara Power Tunnels, Niagara City;
Milwaukee Water Tunnels under Lake Michigan, Illinois;
Chicago „ „ » u _ ’ls, .
Cleveland „ » » »> ne » . r I ’
Toronto „ „ .. • Ontario Canada
Mystic River Tunnel, Charleston, Massachusetts; Jeddo
Mines Drainage Tunnel, 5 miles through water bearing
country (1887 to 1895) Hazleton, Pensylvama; Cable
Tramway Tunnel under the Chicago River, Chicago;
Shirley Gut Syphon, Metropolitan Water Works; three
tunnels for vehicular and pedestrian traffic under the Clyde
at Glasgow, and one of similar construction at Edinburgh,
Two electric tramway tunnels are now being driven under
the Thames, near Blackfriar’s Bridge. At Blackwall a
subway tunnel 28 feet diameter is now being constructed
under the Thames, for vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
At Boston, Mass, a pair of tunnels for railway and pedes-
trian traffic are about to be driven under the harbour. At
Chicago, the Lake Michigan Tunnel is to be extended 2114
yards with a uniform diameter ®f 10 feet; and at Cleveland
it is intended to immediately extend the Lake Erie Tunnel
to a position 4 miles from the shore. If time would permit,
it would not be difficult to considerably lengthen the list of
completed works, and to any student of current engineering
literature, it is almost needless to mention that the propo-
sitions for future subaqueous undertakings are legion.
The author said he wished the meeting to understand that
he was not responsible for the design of the high level
bridge as sketched and exhibited. He was highly gratified
to find that his paper on subaqueous transit had been so
much appreciated, and in conclusion, sincerely thanked
those who had contributed to its success.
Ciirokiclk Print., Newtown.




