

W By MPOthe Kjng
Ei A Proclamation for the: apprezhension of
MZEEJÄLUJYH Efquirexxnd JIHJJFMJI Ftwofcz Gentlcmatd
Hereas by Our fpecsall Tom-Hand, the Lordsktnd others of Our
sozial: Councellz Vaucvyteuerait Ozoexg okthat Asoaro direkten and
Eomtnanoeoxijat swsilccr Long ,Clsfque"lse, state tilgt) Dijeriike of the
Eoukktie okwitkihikc, and Wollen: scrodcxiöentlenianckonne okstrwiltiam
scrodcx of the Counue of Ldcuoxk Jsnigyc - foxkeoitious pxactikoeg am)
crcmeg of a VIII; nat-are, rein-Fiasko by them agaiuci 111-should be. ap-
pzctxeiioco and dxoixgtzt L-gko2et 3)etll, to answere koz the kaio okkectcegz
bis: the VII-THOSE of Hist: Eäjamvgsz mipkopeoiaxhatSokrates. ha-
uing VIILFMIIETPTJIITFLTJCIWZTJITII TTZJDZSUEUUOII , IJMG ketUMkd It?
Dame, am) neither o? ikjem are m app2eyenoeo, no; hatte pecioeo
gixcukxeixxeiziag a: oixiicstixgkoisgizcto hanc ongzstscit baue wicljoxawcte
and hid themkeltteg te: Teich ntatmer , ag that the Vekkcngergeattnot find they« out. Wer there-
foeespvp the adtttte ok Orest-zwickte Vorurteil, hatte thoutzht tät, by this ADur publtque Pzotlatnakiottx
to detlare gDar Kot-at! pleasare and Motten-and; That the katd waikck Longy and winism skkodsx
and either or· them, doefoozjthwtth reitder txteittfelueg to the it« oxdg of gDnr ioxiutecountesti,be-
Idee them to antwerekot then« katd oikenceg : To whtthxftljep that! not pxekenttp yeeld dtvedtencez
trete doefartijer ttratghtlp Charge and cskonnnaridYtattd cuery Our lustttes of Vetter, Ma-
totg, The-Weg, Conqadteg , and other Mut: El) , stets. Mttttktew and touing Indiens,
That they, and eaerp oc them, doe vse at! dtligcnte to appeehendthent «, and ettherok them ,- and
betngappxehectded . to being them ttmttedtately betete Our segnete Eomltell, there to ancwere
vntolttch wartete-as our-Dur behalte that! bee obtetted againltthenhand ettherof them. And
Our further Eontntandts thatmthettteane ttntettotte pxecunte to receive. harbdtttz o; enter-
tatne thekatd wette: Lang, and wiuxam steckte, o: either of them, vpon value okOur htgh dtlpleacure,
and kuth further puntch extent-as) that! vemtt tot ko hjgha Eontetnpa
ciiucn a: OUC Courr at Whiccklsiall , the: fxuen and Ycnticth day ofMarch , in the· Piftb yecxzc of Ouk
ReigncY f« Grcar Bxjtairjesskanccgand IrclancL · ·
God fauc the Ksinz
( Impkjnted at Londorj by B o N H A M N m( T o NHand Io n N B 1 r.HPrinters roth(-
Kings moPc Excellent M««1n; T 1 E. M. Dc. Denk.
