



c ttadn cti&n
A QUEEN IS CROWNED from the
J. Arthur Rank Organisation will remain a
permanent record of the Coronation of our beloved
young Queen, Her Most Gracious Majesty
Elizabeth 11, whose Accession heralds another
unperishahle chapter in British history.
The Second Elizabeth, deeply Christian in belief,
and unsparingly devoted to Service, inspires a new
spirit in her people that is destined to bring new
glories to the great Commonwealth of Nations.
At this memorable time in the year of Coronation,
millions of her people in all parts of the world will
offer heartfelt congratulations to our Sovereign Lady
. . . That her reign be one of peace, happiness and
prosperity is the sincere wish of her loyal subjects
wherever they may be.
★ “A QUEEN IS CROWNED” is a J. Arthur Rank
Organisation presentation. Produced by Castleton
Knight. Narration by Sir Laurence Olivier. Musical
score conducted by Sir Malcom Sargent. Colour by
Technicolor.


Photographer Dorothy Wilding’s fine study of Her Majesty Queen
Elizabeth 11. The Queen is wearing a gown of ivory brocade woven
with gold and turquoise thread and the Sash and Star of the Order
of the Garter.




A Personal Record of the Life
of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth 11
Her Majesty the Queen was born in London
on 21st April, 1926, first child of the Duke and
Duchess of York. Five weeks later she was
christened in the chapel of Buckingham Palace.
The baby was given the names of Elizabeth
Alexandra Mary.
Her early years were spent in London, at
145 Piccadilly, the house taken by her parents
shortly after her birth, at the White Lodge in
Richmond Park, and at the country homes of
her grandparents, King George V and Queen
Mary, and the Earl and Countess of Strath-
more. When she was six, the Duke and Duchess
of York took over, for their own country home,
the Royal Lodge in Windsor Great Park.
Princess Elizabeth and her sister, Princess
Margaret, born four years later, were educated
at home by a Scots lady, Miss Marion Craw-
ford (now Mrs. George Buthlay), a graduate
of Edinburgh University. After the "Duke of
York had succeeded to the throne as King
George VI, Princess Elizabeth, now heir pre-
sumptive, began to study constitutional history
and law, taking special courses under the late
Sir Henry Marten, Provost of Eton then Mr.
The candid camera
records a pleasant
interlude as Her
Majesty the Queen
is shown a glove
puppet by her son
while he sits in his
pedal car. Prince
Charles’ official title
is H.R.H. the Duke
of Cornwall.
Henry Marten and Vice-Provost. The Princess
took her studies seriously and her education
was both broad and austere.
As she became older, the Princess began to
take part in public life. She was fourteen when
she made her first broadcast —in October, 1940,
in a message given during the Children’s Hour
to the children of Britain and the Common-
wealth. "It was perfectly done,” wrote the
South African novelist, Sarah Gertrude Millin,
in her diary. "If there are still queens in the
world a generation hence, this child will be a
good queen.”
Early in 1942, Princess Elizabeth was appoint-
ed Colonel of the Grenadier Guards, and
on her sixteenth birthday she carried out her
first public engagement when she inspected the
Regiment. The evening before she had given
her first official audience, when she received
Colonel Prescott, and was presented with a
diamond Regimental brooch as a birthday gift
from officers and men. (Her Majesty resigned
the Colonelcy on becoming Queen, when she
succeeded the late King as Colonel-in-Chief of
3


Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen Elizabeth 11, His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh and
their two children, Prince Charles and Princess Anne make a charming study in this informal
picture at Buckingham Palace.
all the Guards’ Regiments and the Corps of
Royal Engineers, Captain-General of the Royal
Regiment of Artillery and Honourable Artil-
lery Company. She had already, as Princess,
become Colonel-in-Chief of the 16/5 Lancers
and The Argyll and Sutherland Highlanders.
As Queen, she is head of the Navy, Army and
Air Force of the United Kingdom).
Thereafter, she was increasingly in the public
eye, carrying out official duties. A music-lover
and a piano student, at the age of seventeen
she accepted the Presidency of the Royal College
of Music, and paid her first official visit to the
College in the autumn of 1943, when she
attended a concert and presented prize medals.
She began to accompany the King and Queen
on many of their tours within the Kingdom
and undertook various other offices with their
attendant responsibilities. She became Presi-
dent of the Queen Elizabeth Hospital for Chil-
dren in Hackney, and made her first public
speech on the occasion of her inauguration; as
President of the National Society for the Pre-
vention of Cruelty to Children, she made her
first official visit to the City of London alone
when she attended the Society’s Diamond Jubi-
lee meeting at the Mansion House. Shortly
after her eighteenth birthday, she was appoint-
ed a Counsellor of State during King George
Vi’s absence on a tour of Italian battlefields,
and with her mother, Queen Elizabeth, she
4


signed the commission authorising the Royal
Assent to new statutes.
When not engaged in public duties or study,
Princess Elizabeth enjoyed the normal recrea-
tions of girls of her age. She has a keen apprecia-
tion of art and of music, studied madrigal-sing-
ing with a group of friends under the organist
of St. George’s Chapel, Windsor, and learned
the piano from Miss Mabel Lander, a pupil of
Paderewski’s teacher, Leschetisky. She has
always been fond of outdoor activities and is
a great lover of horses. She has been an excel-
lent horsewoman since she was a little girl, and
with Princess Margaret would often accompany
her father on his rides through Windsor Great
Park. A keen swimmer, she learned life-saving
and at the age of thirteen won the Children’s
Challenge Shield at the Bath Club. Amateur
theatricals were another of the little Princesses’
favourite recreations, and the Christmas show
at Windsor became an annual event, with
Princess Elizabeth frequently in the part of
Principal Boy.
Like other girls, the Princesses took a part
in Y outh activities; Princess Elizabeth was
eleven when she enrolled as a Girl Guide. She
became Patrol Leader of the Ist Buckingham
Palace Guide Company, and later became a
Sea Ranger. She wore her uniform when, at
the age of sixteen, she registered with other
sixteen-year-olds during the war, giving the
Girl Guides as her sphere of pre-service
training.
By the special wish of the King, Princess
Elizabeth was not called up at the age of
eighteen for national service. She herself, how-
ever, was most anxious to join the A.T.S.;
eventually she persuaded her father to give
his permission, and was gazetted a 2nd Sub-
altern in March, 1945. She took a course at
the A.T.S. No. 1 Mechanical Transport Train-
ing Centre, and passed out as a fully qualified
driver. By the end of the war she had reached
the rank of Junior Commander. On the for-
mation of the Women’s Royal Army Corps in
February, 1949, she became an Honorary
Senior Controller, and later Honorary Briga-
dier. (She resigned on becoming Queen).
In July, 1944, the King granted Princess
Elizabeth armorial bearing, consisting of the
Royal Arms "differenced by a label of
cadency”; she flew her personal standard for
the first time when she launched a battleship,
H.M.S. Vanguard, during the winter of that
year. The first naval vessel to wear the Prin-
cess’s own standard was the cruiser Superb, in
which Her Royal Highness crossed to Belfast
fifteen months later to launch the new aircraft
carrier, H.M.S. Eagle, and to make a tour of
Northern Ireland.
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh, with the five Canadian Mounties who
provided their special escort during their tour of Canada. They are (left to right) Constable T. A. Mathews,
Sergeant I. G. Shank, Assistant Commissioner M. F. E. Anthony, Corporal J. T. J. Ouimet, and
Constable E. S. Hunt.
5


H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh, a sailor steeped
in the tradition of the sea. His marriage to
Elizabeth II on the 20 th of November, 1947, was
acclaimed by all peoples of the free world.
From the end of the war onwards, Princess
Elizabeth’s public engagements claimed more
and more of her time. Many societies asked
her patronage or presidentship, and she travel-
led on public occasions throughout the British
Isles. Scotland had known her well from her
childhood, when so many of her holidays were
spent there; in 1944, she made her first public
appearance alone in Scotland, when, during a
tour with her father and mother, she received
purses in Edinburgh for the Y.M.C.A. In the
summer of 1946, she attended the National
Eisteddfod of Wales at Mountain Ash, and was
initiated into the Welsh Gorsedd of Bards
under the title of Elizabeth O’ Windsor. The
next year she accompanied her parents and
sister on the South African tour, sailing in the
Vanguard which she herself had launched
three years earlier. It was during this tour
that the Princess celebrated her twenty-first
birthday, when, from Capetown, she made a
broadcast address to the Commonwealth, and
in a "solemn act of dedication”, said;—
"I declare before you all that my whole
life, whether it be long or short, shall be
devoted to your service and the service of
our great imperial family to which we all
belong. But I shall not have the strength
to carry out this resolution alone unless
you join in it with me as I now invite you
to do. I know that your support will
be unfailingly given.
"God help me to make good my vow,
and God bless all of you who are willing
to share it with me.”
Shortly after the return of the Royal Family
from South Africa, the King announced that
he had given his consent to the engagement of
the Princess Elizabeth and Lieutenant Philip
Mountbatten. Lieutenant Mountbatten was born
Prince Philip of Greece, son of Prince Andrew,
but renounced his Royal title when he became a
British subject. His great-grandfather was
King Christian IX of Denmark; and on his
mother’s side he is a great-great-grandson of
Queen Victoria. He and Princess Elizabeth
had known each other for many years, for his
boyhood was spent in Britain at school and at
the home of his uncle, Lord Mountbatten.
The Royal wedding took place on 20th
November, 1947. On its eve the bridegroom
was created Duke of Edinburgh and granted
the style of "His Royal Highness” (1 >. Prince
(1) The Queen recently announced that the Duke of
Edinburgh takes precedence next to herself.
6


Charles, heir apparent to the throne, was born
the next year and his sister, Princess Anne,
in 1950.
Since her first journey overseas, in 1947, Her
Majesty has paid various official visits abroad.
With the Duke of Edinburgh she has paid
formal visits to France, Greece and Italy, and
she already knows many parts of the Common-
wealth. On her 1947 South African tour she
carried out engagements on her own account,
including the opening of the new graving dock
which bears her name, at East London. She
has visited Malta several times since her mar-
riage, while her husband was stationed there,
and in the autumn of 1951 she and the Duke
won the hearts of the people of Canada on
their tour of that country. When the late
King’s illness made it inadvisable for him to
carry out his projected visit to Australia and
New Zealand, his daughter took his place, and
it was on the first stage of this journey, in Kenya,
that Princess Elizabeth received the sad tidings
of her father’s death, and of her own accession
to the Throne.
In making the customary Accession Declara-
tion, Her Majesty again dedicated herself to
the service of the Commonwealth of which she
had become the head :
"I shall always work, as my Father did
throughout his reign, to uphold constitu-
tional government and to advance the
happiness and prosperity of my peoples,
spread as they are all the world over.
"I know that in my resolve to follow his
shining example of service and devotion I
shall be inspired by the loyalty and affec-
tion of those whose Queen I have been
called to be, and by the counsel of their
elected Parliaments.
"I pray that God will help me to dis-
charge worthily this heavy task that has
been laid upon me so early in my life.”
Her Majesty with her second child, Her Royal Highness Princess Anne. The baby Princess was
born at Clarence House, the London home of her parents.
7


A charming modern portrait of Her Most Gracious
Majesty, Queen Elizabeth 11, taken prior to the
Coronation.


A charming study of the Queen Mother taken on
the occasion of her fiftieth birthday.
• IlMMnii
BiW ;j a WWM a iwhTkil ? gj “gaBT
■AHiliMMinyiilll
The late King George VI is shown taking the
salute as the Yeomen of the Guard march past
at Buckingham Palace in July, 1950.
9


An 'informal “shot”
of Queen Elizabeth
and the Duke of
Edinburgh enjoying
a quiet stroll through
mm the beautiful gardens
at Clarence House.
The devoted Royal
Couple find pleasure
in the simple things
of life and an
evening stroll together
provides a respite
from the affairs of
State, if only for a
brief moment or two.


above : This charming study of Queen Elizabeth with her 'husband, the Duke of Edinburgh, and their children,
Prince Charles (born November 14th, 1948) and Princess Anne (born August 1 5th, 1950) shows the happy family in
the lovely garden of Clarence House.
left : During a
visit to Ottawa, our
Gracious Sovereign
enjoyed the rousing
fun of a Canadian
square dance at a
party in Government
House given by the
Governor - General,
Viscount A lexander.
right : Our
Gracious Queen
signs the Guest Log
Book high in the
sky aboard the
R.C.A.F.'s C- 5
luxury airliner in
which she and the
Duke of Edinburgh
were flown 4200
miles across Canada
and the U nited
States


The United Kingdom is a monarchical State,
formed in the 9th century by the unification
of all England under a Saxon King. It was
later expanded by the conquest of Wales and
Ireland by Kings of England and by the
dynastic union of the English and Scottish
throne, in the person of James VI of Scotland
and I of England. The United Kingdom is
also a member of the Commonwealth, of which
the Queen is the head.
The Royal titles and style are : "Queen Eliza-
beth the Second by the Grace of God, of Great
Britain, Ireland and the British Dominions
beyond the Seas, Queen Defender of the Faith
and Sovereign of the Most Noble Order of
Garter”.
The Queen is the Queen of the United King-
dom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland
and the Dependencies, of Canada, of Australia,
of New Zealand, of South Africa, of Pakistan
and of Ceylon. All owe allegiance to the
Crown and their Governments act in the name ...
of the Crown, which is also a symbol of their
free association in the Commonwealth. In India,
which is an independent republic owing no
allegiance to the Crown, the Queen is accepted
as a symbol of the free association of the mem-
ber nations of the Commonwealth, and, as such,
as the Head of the Commonwealth.
The seat of the monarchy is in the United
Kingdom. In the other member nations of the
Commonwealth which owe allegiance to the
Crown, the Queen is represented by a Governor-General appointed by the
Crown on the advice of the Ministers of the country concerned. In the Depen-
dencies the Colonies, the Protectorates and the Trust Territories the
Queen is represented by Governors, High Commissioners or Residents appointed
by the Crown.
The Monarchy is the oldest institution in the United Kingdom. Its continuity
has been broken only once in over a thousand years; and in spite of interruptions
in the direct line of succession, the hereditary principle upon which it was
founded has never been abandoned. Queen Elizabeth the Second is a
descendant of the Saxon King Egbert who united England in 829.
The permanence of the monarchy has been ascribed to the fact that the consti-
tution of the United Kingdom is governed by conventions, rather than by
formal law. And since these are based upon usage, they are not absolutely
rigid; they may therefore be adapted to changing conditions without serious
disturbances to existing organs and forms. This explains how it has been
possible to curtail the powers of the Crown in executive government without
diminishing the monarchy as an institution.
Succession to the Crown is governed by rules of descent, which provide that
the sons of the Sovereign are in Order of Succession to the throne, or, if there
are no sons in the direct line, the daughters in order of their own seniority.
*> ) iJtv.
12


left The coach used at the Coronation of
English Sovereigns since George 111, for
whom it was built; and finished in 1762.
The coach is 24 ft. in length, 8 ft. 3 in. wide,
and is 12 ft. high. The foie, which represents
a bundle of lances, is 12 ft. 4 in. long ; the
harness is of red morocco leather.
V mSr' luflßn When a daughter succeeds, she becomes Queen
f V Regnant, and all the powers of the Crown are
vested in her as fully and effectively as though
i; € ‘ SMIMmS .. u _ v.
she were a King.
By convention, the consort of a King takes the
■ rank and style of her husband; but the con-
verse does not apply, and the constitution has
I afIH ISKKM never attached any special rank or privileges
f iJV to the husband of the Queen Regnant.
Since the beginning of the 17th century, it has
|Bk been a constitutional principle in England that
i/MyP there is no interregnum between the end of
f, • one re ig n ar *d the beginning of the next-
''flPPPI Immediately on the death of the Sovereign, an
»„*order for the proclamation of the new
Sovereign is made by the Accession Council.
The proclamation is then approved by the
Privy Council in the presence of the new
Sovereign and is subsequently read in the
capital cities of the United Kingdom and in
many of the provincial cities and towns.
Until the 19th century, the death of a Sovereign
involved the dissolution of Parliament, the
termination of all offices under the Crown and
the discontinuance of civil and criminal pro-
ceedings in courts of law. The Representation
of the Peojple Act, 1867, however, made the
duration of Parliament independent of the
demise of the Monarch, and since then both
Houses of Parliament stand adjourned only
until their Members have taken the oath of
allegiance to the new Sovereign, immediately
after the Accession Council has made the order for proclamation. In 1901,
the Demise of the Crown Act provided that the holding of any office should
not be affected by the demise of the Sovereign and that no fresh appointment
should be necessary. The Great Seal and other public seals are continued in
use until the succeeding Sovereign gives orders to the contrary; provision has
been made by statute for the continuance of legal processes; and the functions
of the Royal prerogative are no longer suspended.
(( f V
The Coronation ceremony, which has retained its ancient forms in substance,
if not in detail, for many hundreds of years, takes place on a date selected by
the new Sovereign (usually about fourteen months after the accession and
proclamation).
The ceremony itself is divided into three stages, each of which represents a
different aspect of the relationship between the Monarch and the people: (i) the
acceptance of their Sovereign by the people and the taking of the oath by the
Sovereign; (ii) the purely religious ceremony, which includes the anointing
and the crowning; (iii) the rendering of homage in person by the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal.
The Coronation takes place in Westminster Abbey in the presence of the
Peers, the Commons and representatives of all important public interests.
13


Legend concerning the Abbey has
it that one night a fisherman named
Edric ferried a stranger across the
Thames from Lambeth to Thorney
Island, where next day a fair
church would be hallowed. Pres-
ently Edric beheld the church, all
lit within and angels on a ladder
stretching to heaven. The stranger
thereafter declared himself St.
Peter. At the High Altar shown
below, the Archbishop of Canter-
bury consecrated the Crown of
England during the Coronation
ceremony with this prayer : "O
God, the Crown of the faithful,
bless, we beseech Thee, and sanc-
tify this thy servant Elizabeth, our
Queen, and as Thou dost this day
set a Crown of pure gold upon her
head, so enrich her Royal heart
with Thine abundant grace, and
crown her with all queenly virtues,
through the King Eternal, Jesus
Christ our Lord. Amen.”
Westminster Abbey


An artist's impression of the Coronation of Queen Victoria captures the magnitude of the event. This
Coronation took place in 1838 and sixty-four years elapsed before the next Sovereign was crowned.
The Coronation Chair
The Coronation Chair in the Abbey was made
of solid oak at the beginning of the 14th
century. All the Kings and Queens since
Edward I were crowned in this Chair—begin-
ning with Edward 11, in February, 1308—save
Mary I and Mary 11. Even Cromwell, when
he was installed as Lord Protector in West-
minster Hall, had the Chair brought from the
Abbey for the ceremony, and was placed in it,
in imitation of the enthronement of a King.
The chair is 6 ft. 9? ins. high and, when first
made, was enriched with gilt gesso decorations
and glass mosaics. In the 17th and 18th
centuries, the chair was grievously mutilated,
but some of the original decoration remains.
The Coronation Chair rests on four lions. The
seat is made to slide in and out, and in the
space beneath rests the Stone of Scone. The
Coronation stone is a roughly cut rectangular
hewn block of coarse-grained reddish-grey sand-
stone 26? ins. by 16? by 11 ins. thick. It was
placed near the shrine of Edward the Confes-
sor in Westminster Abbey before being incor-
porated in the Coronation Chair.


Trooping
the
Colour
A cheering multitude gathered outside the Palace,
along the Mall and around Horse Guards Parade
to see the magnificent spectacle of the first reign-
ing Queen of England taking part in the traditional
Trooping the Colour Ceremony.
Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth, wearing the scarlet
tunic of Colonel-in-Chief of the Scots Guards,
and with the badge of the Scots Guards in her
tricorne hat, rode side-saddle from Buckingham
Palace to Horse Guards Parade, escorted by the
Sovereign’s escort of Household Cavalry, to take
the salute. At the ceremony, the Colour trooped
was that of the 2nd Battalion, Scots Guards.
The Queen sat her charge in faultless style as
she took the salute from the Brigade of Guards,
marching past in slow time.


A delightful camera portrait of Her Royal Highness Princess Margaret.
Her appearance at important functions and public engagements is
always greeted with warm enthusiasm.
17


v
t "a


For over a thousand years the Kings and Queens of England have been crowned
with solemn ritual. The Regalia, or Crown Jewels, of England, time-honored symbols
of Monarchy, have always played an essential part in the ceremony. Even apart from
their historic and symbolic associations, the value of the gems, precious metals and work-
manship is impossible to compute.
Most of the ancient State Regalia was destroyed under Cromwell; thus, when the
Monarchy was restored, new Regalia had to be made for the Coronation of Charles II
in 1661. In many cases, replicas of the
Edward’s Crown and St. Edward’s Staff.
The Crown of England, known as St.
Edward’s Crown, is the one with which the
Archbishop of Canterbury actually crowns the
Sovereign. The Sovereign wears this Crown
only once in his or her life for those few
minutes in the Abbey before it is exchanged
for the less cumbersome Imperial State Crown.
The Crown is named for Edward the Confessor
(St. Edward), who reigned during the eleventh
century; it was made for the Coronation of
Charles II as nearly as possible after the pat-
tern of the ancient Crown which had been
destroyed. It is of gold, set with diamonds,
rubies, emeralds, sapphires and pearls, and
weighs nearly seven pounds.
The Imperial State Crown was originally
made for Queen Victoria in 1838, since St.
Edward’s Crown was too heavy for her. It is
worn by the Sovereign when leaving the Abbey
at the end of the Coronation Service and on
other State occasions, such as the Opening of
Parliament. It weighs just over 39 ozs. and
contains several famous gems; the Black
Prince’s ruby, which has belonged to the
Royal house since 1367; the Second Star
of Africa (a portion of the Cullinan Diamond);
the great sapphire from the Crown of Charles
II; another sapphire, said to be from the ring
of Edward the Confessor; and four pear-shaped
pearls, which, tradition says, were ear-rings of
Elizabeth I.
Since the Imperial State Crown cannot
by law leave the shores of England, a special
Crown the Imperial Crown of India
On opposite page are pictured the four crowns.
above left : St. Edward’s Crown, above right :
The Imperial State , Crown, below left : The
Imperial Crown of India, below right : Queen
Mary’s Crown.
old symbols were fashioned, notably St.
was made for the Coronation of George V
as Emperor of India, at Delhi, in 1911.
Apart from a fine Indian ruby in the front
centre and an emerald in each fleur-de-lis,
the stones are mostly diamonds.
The Queen’s Crowns Special Crowns
have been made for the Coronation of
each Queen Consort. In the Crown Jewel
collection is Queen Mary’s Crown, which
was her personal property. (Originally, for
the Coronation of 1911, the famous Koh-
i-noor diamond was set in the centre. This
diamond was later set in the Crown worn
by Queen Elizabeth the Queen Mother, in
1937). The collection also includes the
small Crown of Queen Victoria, made for
her in her later years when the Imperial
State Crown became a burden for her; the
Crown of Queen Mary of Modena, consort
of James 11, and the diadem of Mary of
Modena.
The Royal Sceptre with the Cross is placed
in the Monarch’s right hand at the Coronation.
It is about 36 inches long and is made of gold.
It contains a great drop-shaped diamond, the
largest of the Stars of Africa cut from the
Cullinan diamond.
The Sceptre with the Dove, or the Rod of
Equity and Mercy, is a gold rod 41 inches long,
headed by a gold orb upon which is a gold
and white enamelled dove. The Sceptre,
svmbolic of the Holy Ghost, is held in the
Sovereign’s left hand at one point of the
Coronation Service.
Queen’s Sceptres The Queen Consorts
are given the Queen’s Sceptre with the
Cross and the Queen’s Ivory Rod. A third
Sceptre, the Queen’s Sceptre with the Dove,
is said to have been made for the Corona-
19


tion of William and Mary, when several
pieces of the regalia had to be duplicated
because the King and the Queen ruled
jointly.
St. Edward’s Staff, or the Rod of Justice and
Equity, was originally placed in the Sovereign’s
hand when he entered Westminster Abbey for
the Coronation ceremony. The Staff was to
guide his footsteps in the path of righteousness;
now a Peer preceding the Sovereign carries it
in the Coronation procession. The Staff is 4
feet inches long, and may be described as
a rod of gold divided at intervals with collars
of ornamental leaf patterns. It is topped with
the "mound” (a golden globe) and a cross.
Tradition says that formerly a piece of the
true Cross was enclosed within the mound. For
the purpose of "guiding” the Sovereign, the
Staff is tipped with a steel pike.
The King’s Orb, or the Orb of England, sig-
nifies the Sovereignty of Christianity over the
world. It is a golden globe six inches in
diameter, surmounted by a great amethyst, upon
which is a cross.
There is also a smaller Queen’s Orb, made,
as in the case of the Queen’s Sceptre with the
Dove, for Mary 11, so that she should have
the same symbols of Monarchy as her husband*
William 111.
left : The Royal Sceptre was placed in Her Majesty’s hand during the Abbey Ceremony by the
Archbishop. The Jewelled Sword was carried in the Coronation procession, centre : The four
Sceptres, right : The head of the Royal Sceptre with the Cross. The Royal Sceptre with the Cross
is held in the Monarch’s right hand at the Coronation. The Royal Sceptre contains amongst other
jewels, the Great Star of Africa, cut from the Cullinan Diamond and weighing 516| carats, which was
presented to King Edward VII and embodied in the Royal Sceptre.
20


There are two Orbs, one for the King and the other for the Queen. The Queen s Orb owes its origin
to Mary, wife of William of Orange, who insisted on a 'joint occupation of the Throne. The King s
Orb is the larger, and is of polished- gold studded with large pearls, rubies, sapphires and emeralds.
It is placed in the King’s right hand immediately after the King has put on the Royal Robe.
The Ampulla contains the holy oil from
which the anointing spoon is filled. It is in
the form of a golden eagle, about nine inches
in height, and holds about 6 oz. of oil, which
is poured from the beak.
The Anointing Spoon has undergone less
alteration than the Ampulla. The spoon is
about 10 inches long; its extreme thinness is
attributed to antiquity. It has been estimated
that it has been used in anointing English
Kings since the twelfth century, and the handle
is considered to be Byzantine.
The Swords: There are five swords among
the Crown Jewels. The largest of these is the
Sword of State, a two-handed sword, with a
blade 32 inches long, which can be considered
to be the Sword of England. It is borne
before the Sovereign at the State Opening of
Parliament, and is used at the Coronation.
On the crimson velvet covered scabbard are
representations of a portcullis, a fleur-de-lis,
a harp, the Royal Coat of Arms, the tudor
rose and the thistle of Scotland.
The Jewelled Sword is the most elaborate
of the five. It was made for the Coronation
of George IV, and is encrusted with jewels.
The other three swords are replicas of those
given to Henry VIII as "Defender of the Faith”
by the Pope. The swords, as well as the title,
were retained despite Henry’s rupture with the
Pope. The shortest is the Sword of Mercy, or
"Curtana”, which has a broken blade to denote
mercy; the others are the Sword of Spiritual
Justice and the Sword of Temporal Justice.
Each sword is carried by a Peer at the
Coronation.
The history and use of the swords and other
regalia already mentioned illustrate the two
major themes religious and feudal —of the
Coronation ceremony. These themes, stem-
ming from the days of dedicated chivalry, are
further exemplified in the use of the remaining
pieces of the State Regalia.
The Coronation Ring, with which the
Sovereign is wedded to the State, has often
been retained in the personal possession of the
Monarch, for whom it was fashioned. There
21


The Sword of State {in the centre) is a two-handed
sword, 32 inches long. At the Coronation the
Peer who carried the Sword of State delivered it
up to the Lord Chamberlain who, in exchange,
gave him the Jewelled Sword. The second sword
is known as the Sword of Justice to the Spirituality,
and the third sword as the Sword of Justice to the
Temporality.
are three in the national collection: that used
at the Coronations of William IV, Edward
VII and George V; Queen Victoria’s ring;
and the Queen’s ring, worn by Queen Adelaide
(wife of William IV) and Queen Alexandra
(wife of Edward VII). Queen Victoria’s ring
is a smaller copy of William IV’s; each has a
sapphire set with a cross of five rubies, repre-
senting the red cross of St. George upon the
blue ground of St. Andrew. Brilliants sur-
round the sapphires.
St. George’s Spurs, or the King’s Golden
Spurs, symbols of knightly chivalry, were made
for Charles II after the design of a pair melted
down at the time of the Commonwealth. Once
they were worn during the Coronation Service,
now the Lord Great Chamberlain touches the
King’s heels with them; Queen Victoria, how-
ever, only touched the spurs with her hand and
they were taken back to the altar.
The Bracelets are of solid gold, lined with
crimson velvet and are 1% inches in breadth
and 2\ inches in diameter. The emblems of
the three kingdoms, England, Scotland and
Wales, and the fleurs-de-lis of France .are
enamelled on the surface of the bracelets.
Within this historic building,
the Crown Jewels are housed
for safety and closely guarded.
This view of the Tower accentu-
ates the stately Norman archi-
tecture contrasting with the
adjacent modern office buildings
of the City of London.
22


left. TH E AMP ULLA AND A NOINTING SPOON. The Golden Ampulla and Anointing
Spoon are two of the most ancient objects in the Regalia used in the important rite of Anointing the Sovereign
during a Coronation. The Ampulla takes the form of an eagle with wings outstretched as a receptacle
for the Holy Oil which is poured from the beak into the Anointing Spoon. The handle of the Anointing
Spoon is believed to be of Byzantine origin, right ; The Mace.
The Royal Cypher "E.R.11” was approved by Her Majesty the
Queen from a selection of designs submitted by the College of Arms.
The Royal Cypher will be worn on the uniform of Her Majesty’s
personal staff and on all State documents. It will be used by the
General Post Office on pillar boxes and on mail-carrying vans.
23


above : This historic picture was taken on the balcony at Buckingham Palace after the Coronation
of King George VI. Left to right—The Queen Mother, Princess Elizabeth, now Her Most Gracious
Majesty Queen Elizabeth 11, the late Queen Mary, Princess Margaret and the late King.
below ; Buckingham Palace, the London home of the reigning Monarch. It was originally a mansion
built by the Duke of Buckingham in 1703.


Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth, a keen devotee
of the Cinema, is greeted by Mr. J. Arthur Rank
and Mrs. Rank at a Royal Premiere in Londom
J, IMI iMTI \ f * * ~


. . . “ I shall always work, as my father did throughout
his reign, to uphold Constitutional Government and to
advance the happiness and prosperity of my peoples,
spread as they are all the world over.
. . . “ I pray that God will help me to discharge
worthily the heavy task that has been laid upon me
so early in my life. ”
from Her Gracious Majesty, Elizabeth 11,
Declaration of Accession, St. James’ Palace, Febru-
ary Bth, 1952,
