

A.R.C.
RADIO
FAULT FINDER
A LIGHTNING METHOD OF DETERMINING
RADIO SERVICE TROUBLES.
Copyright . All rights reserved.
Designed and compiled by
AUSTRALIAN RADIO COLLEGE PTY. LTD.
BROADWAY (Opp. GRACE BROS.) SYDNEY.


f. Turn to the page set aside for the sympton apparent in the set.
2. Take each of the probable causes -in turn and check carefully.
3. Apply the remedy suggested.
♦>
♦>
This Radio Fault Finder is designed and printed by The Australian Radio College Pty. Ltd.,
E. S. & A. Bank Buildings, (Opp. Grace Bros.), Broadway, N.S.W., undisputed leaders in the field of Radio
Service Engineering Training.
Some advantages of A.R.C. Training.
1. Modern Training,
2. Night Classes or Correspondence Training.
3. Individual attention.
4. Lessons kept up to date.
5. Free Technical Consultation Service.
6. Free Employment Service.
7. Free Business Advice.
8. Buying Advice etc.
How to Use The Fault Finder.




















Complaint & rela-
tive occurrence.
Method.
Cure.
Set Dead
34%
Apply stage test
(a) Touch grid of 1st A.F. am-
plifier.
(b) Remove tubes from sockets
and listen for clicks.
(c) Trace signals from aerial end
with signal tracer.
(d) Apply signals from test oscil-
lator to each stage starting at
speaker end.
Use multimeter
or oscillator to
determine faulty
part and replace.
Hum 18%
Component Check.
Try new electrolytic filter conden-
sers in parallel with existing ones.
Measure hum voltage in filter with
output meter.
Trace hum with cathode ray oscil-
loscope.
Test valves for heater to cathode
leakage.
Examine rectifier for violet or blue
glow inside plates, revealing gas.
See Fault Finder for other causes.
Replace faulty
parts.
Test valves and
replace if defec-
tive.
RADIO RECEIVER SERVICING
TECHNIQUE
(Attach these sheets to your Fault Finder and use in conjunction with it.)
METHOD OF ATTACK.
Question owner about faults in set. Switch on. In A.C. set, watch for
blue glow or overheating of rectifier.
Observe symptoms. Choose one of three methods of attack listed below.
(a) Stage Tests —To determine faulty group of parts. (Especially suitable
for receivers which seem “alive” but will not reproduce any signals.)
(b) Check All Voltages—Many faults reveal by producing a
change in voltage at one or more points in a receiver. (Especially
suitable when receiver is completely “dead” or where signals are weak).
(c) Check Components most likely to cause symptom—certain faulty com-
ponents cause characteristic symptoms, for example, high impedance
electrolytic condensers cause hum, leaky coupling condenser causes
distortion, etc.
The method of attack selected should be determined by the symptoms
apparent, type of test equipment available, age of receiver and ex-
perience of serviceman.
COMMON TROUBLES.
The table below sets out common troubles in radio receivers, the percentage
with which these faults are experienced in normal service work in districts
where A.C. power mains are used, a suggested method of diagnosing the
cause of trouble and the appropriate cure.
N.B. —The following tables list only the most common causes for- various
troubles and are not by any means complete. They should be used in
conjunction with the appropriate page of the “Fault Finder” which will
reveal all possible causes.


Complaint & rela-
tive occurrence.
Method,
Cure.
Fading and
Intermittent
Operation 10%.
(a) About 50% of these troubles
caused by defects in Electrical
Installation of building.
(b) Faults in set may be due to:
1. Short or open circuits in valves
or bad contact with valve socket.
2. Faults in tubular paper dielec-
tric condensers.
3. Corrosion or Electrolysis in coil
windings.
Record voltages throughout set
and watch for changes.
Check earthing of
electrical conduit
or call in elec-
trician.
Test valves or
try replacements.
Replace all tub.
condensers.
Try short circuit
test.
Determine part
causing change &
replace.
Distortion or
Rattle 8%.
Feel speaker to see that moving
coil is not rubbing.
Test valves especially P.O. valve.
Check voltages, especially bias of
P.O. stage (Use VTVM if avail-
able).
Check A.F. coupling condenser.
Use Signal Tracer or oscilloscope
to determine point at which dis-
tortion is introduced.
Recentre cone.
Oscillation 7%.
Examine shielding and position of
grid, plate and loudspeaker leads.
Check earthing of metal valve en-
velopes.
Try substitute by-pass condenser in
parallel with all tubular condensers.
Check alignment especially inter-
mediate frequency.
Earth shields, re-
arrange wires.
Replace any
faulty parts.
Align.
Crackling
(a) Due to faults
in set 4i%.
(b) Due to inter-
ference 3%.
Attempt to determine whether
crackles are due to fault in set or
interference picked up by aerial
by trying new location or _ testing
with signal tracer or oscillator.
If in set: —
(a) Test valves.
(b) Pass heavy short circuit cur-
rent through coils.
(c) Check for variations in voltage.
(d) Wobble joints and components.
Try an efficient
earth wire.
Replace defective
parts.
Mechanical defects
and noisy controls
4%.
Examine receiver.
Replace broken
dial cords or
faulty controls.
Clean switch
contacts.


Complaint & rela-
tive occurrence.
Method.
Cure.
Stations at Wrong
Position on Dial
4%.
Check dial mechanism.
Check whether oscillator of set is
functioning.
If error greatest at L.F. end, check
padder.
If error greatest at H.F. end, check
trimmer.
Readjust dial.
Realign tuned
circuits.
Insensitivity 2i%.
Check voltages.
Test valves.
Align tuned circuits.
If possible make stage gain mea-
surements with signal tracer or
oscillator.
Replace faulty
parts.
Set inoperative on
L.F. stations only
2%.
Defect in oscillator circuit.
Check oscillator plate voltage—
should be above 100 volts in A.C.
sets.
Test frequency changer tube.
Losses in oscillator coil.
Replace faulty
parts.
Whistles on some
stations only 1%.
If on local station, check inter-
mediate frequency and adjust to
455 K.C. or appropriate value.
Excessive oscillator strength.
10 K.C. whistles experienced at
night only are due to beats between
stations and little can be done at
the receiver to rectify this.
Align.
Reduce oscillator
plate voltage or
remove turns
from oscillator
plate winding.
SUSCEPTIBILITY OF PARTS TO BREAKDOWN,
The following analysis reveals the
component parts most likely to
break down and result in service
calls. The percentage figures show
the percentage of service calls due
to faults in the parts listed.
Faulty valves 25%
Electrolytic condensers
(High impedance) .. . . 15%
(Shorted or leaking) .. 9%
Paper & Mica condensers
(Shorted or leaking) .. 10%
(Open circuited) 6%
Resistors
(Open circuited or high) 9%
(Low or shorted) 1%
Inductors
(Open circuited or
intermittent) 6%
(Short circuited) 2%
Vibrators • 1%
Mechanical faults and noisy
controls • • • • 11%
Other miscellaneous faults .. 5%
GENERAL.
On restoring set to working order,
test thoroughly to determine
whether other less apparent faults
are evident.


INSTRUCTIONS FOR USING FOREGOING TABLES.
The charts printed on the previous pages have been made as compact
and brief as possible and it is felt that the following explanatory note which
enlarges upon certain sections will simplify their use. ~ ~
As most large towns and cities have alternating power available, the
majority of receivers now in use operate from A.C. power mams and the
tables apply particularly to mams operated sets. In the case of y
operated receivers many of the complaints tabulated could be caused by
discharged batteries with voltages considerably below normal. This applies
especially to symptoms such as complete failure to operate intermittent
operation, distortion, crackling, insensitivity, set inoperative at frequency
end of tuning range only and audio frequency howling.. .Therefore a most
important preliminary in servicing battery and vibrator operated sets is
check battery voltages and see that they are adequate.
MET In°aU se F rvfcI T wo C rf‘it is desirable to adopt a methodical rather than a
haphazard approach but there is no one single method which can be efficiently
adopted to cover all types of faults. There are three distinct methods
systematic fault finding which embrace practically all troubles and after a
and questioning of the o™er,
the nature of the complaint, one should adopt whichever of the three systems
listed seems most appropriate and follow it through. ,
Stave tests will frequently reveal m a very short time the smge or
group o? part? in which q a fault exists but a multimeter oscillator or trial
replacement of one or more parts associated
l-,p nnnnqcorv to determine the exact location of the tauit. une stage res.
yn,i-y armHed is to touch the grid of the first A.F. amplifier with one finger.
tV a i ou d squeal or humming sound is heard from the speaker uns immeuiateiy
suvvests that the A.F. amplifier, speaker and power supply section are all
functioning so that a fault probably exists in the tuning section or detector
efficient way of making stage tests is by means of a “signal
tracer” or “modulated oscillator” if these instruments are available
Detailed instructions on the method of applying various tests and
using instruments will be fodnd in many of the lesson papers contained in
the third section of the Service Engineering Course.
Under the heading of “Fading and Intermittent^ Operation onefault
listed is “Corrosion or Electrolysis in Coil Windings . This is a frequent
cause of trouble in tropical districts. It is suggested that you Try short
circuit test”. This consists of deliberately passing a heavy current through
a suspected winding for about 3 seconds. It is easily carried out in practice
bv" short circuiting to chassis, the plate of a valve to which the suspected
Ending for about three seconds. It is easily carried out in practice by
short circuiting to chassis, the plate of a valve to which the suspected part
is LS For example, to test the first I. F. transformer short circuit
for about three seconds, the plate of the frequency converter valve to chassis
bv meals of a screwdriver or wire. If corrosion exists in the winding, the
£a?v surge of current will cause it to become completely open circuited
and the set will stop. If the transformer winding is in good order it w
BOt In connection^with ‘the'same complaint it is suggested that you ‘'Replace
all tubur condensers”. This may seem a dr-tm step when a
condenser which becomes faulty intermittently is suspected. As it may be
a verv long and difficult task to check all tubular condensers for intermittent
fauTts y amfas tubular condensers are not expensive, it is us-% f -per o
discard all those in a set and replace with new ones. Inis step is usually
v(srv successful in curing intermittent troubles.




