





RUBLE IN LAUNCESTON
OHVHf”
AUTHOR OF “ FOSSILS,” &c.
PUBLISHED AT THE “ CORNWALL CHRONICLE” OFFICE,
LAUNCESTON.
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED




j r ijdi-v
n ~i-
PREFACE.
a father sends his first-born son into the world,
fViVI away from the maternal apron-strings, the parent
naturally feels considerable anxiety, and recom-
mends his heir to his friends. This, my first-born, ®ut of a
newspaper, is similarly dealt with, in the devout hope that the
public will deal tenderly with it.
A Eamble in Launceston does not pretend to possess
the merits of a guide book, nor will it shine at the Sydney
Exhibition. If it obtain favor in little Tasmania, all I can
Lope for, and, in fact, all I care for, will be accomplished.
In Victoria and New South Wales, local light literature
is constantly being issued, written by local authors, and pub-
lished by enterprising local firms. , I see no reason why we
in Tasmania should not have a small literary currency of our
own, even if such an humble writer as I make the first at-
tempt.




A RAMBLE IN LAUNCESTON.
CHAPTER I,
PRELIMINARY REMARKS.
it may interest some old servants of John Company
an( l retiring competition-wallahs, from the far
East, to know that after shaking the pagoda tree
successfully and otherwise, they can go and enjoy their
otium cum dignitate on half pay, in a climate a happy me-
dium between sweltering India and frigid England, the author,
a young East Indian to the manner born, will endeavor to
briefly describe the merits and demerits of a charming little
town in Tasmania, called Launceston, for the information of
Indians, and everyone in general.
When the struggle after rupees is over; when the liver
wants curing, after copious feeds of brandy pawnee and curry
bhatli ; when sick leave, leave on private affairs, privilege leave,
and furlough have been played out, ye “ 8.C.5.” and others
are generally getting well into the “ sear and yellow leaf.’*
Ye have wives and children, and occasionally, only a pension,
having lived up to your income. Ye uncovenanted ones
have even less, and your years are more numerous than those
of the luckier “ competition-wallahs, ” who retire early.


According to the inverse ratio which governs these matters,
ye generally have more progeny than income, and yon must
retire some day. Where can you go ? The gods forfend that
ye should live in roasting Calcutta. The Hill stations of
Nynee Tal, Munsonrie, and Simla, are expensive luxuries,
and England’s fogs, and other abominations, would freeze
your marrow. Then you want breathing room. Old Ind,
with all her many disadvantages, has one blessing—her
poorest house is detached, and freely aired. Our old paternal
guardian longed for the home of his fathers, with a great
longing. So he took furlough for a year, and went. He
came back three months before the twelve months had
expired, and said he was disgusted. He only got meat once
a day. The natives of London were astonished at his
extensive morning meal, and he remarked that he could not
swing a cat in the largest houses. We have yet to learn
why he wanted to swing a cat, particularly as he was not
given that way, but the fact remained, he will never return.
If he can afford it he will retire to a hill station—perhaps
come out to Tasmania.
The great problem in India, as elsewhere, is—“ What are
our boys to do ?” They cannot dig, to beg they are ashamed,
or rather we are, to let them, and every vacancy is sought
after by hundreds. What are the fathers to do when they
have only their half-pay ? Some benevolent, but insane
individuals, tried to solve the problem, and the Castra Road
scheme was the result, and more execration, misrepresenta-
tion, and abuse of little Tasmania have resulted than we care
to look into.
In Tasmania we (East Indians, fathers and sons)
fail—we who, reclining, called a servant to put on the dropped


slipper; we who, overcome by the Jane sun, had not once
sufficient energy to brush away the blue tail fly, and feebly
called on the long suffering “ bearer” to do it for us. Our
children, Tasmanian bom, may, perhaps, clear away the
trackless busk, and build up happy homesteads where the
eucalyptus once swayed, and the kangaroo and wallaby
hopped around undisturbed. They may—if they don’t get
annihilated in a water hole or break their necks over a fallen
tree, or lose that lucus a non lucendo , the bush track, in
their endeavors to reach their elysium. Then they might so
easily fell trees and things ! We tried to chop some wood
once for the kitchen. Three hoars’ work resulted in four
logs split, and then we came to the conclusion that it was
not our calling in life —in fact, we were'sure we would not
shine in a chopping match, and succumbed. But our children
may be Goliaths with an axe, so there is still hope/
Then there is something so romantic in drinking tea
without milk, and eating damper, or adamantine bread, baked
the Lord knows when. Boiled tea, especially when cooked
in a “ billy,” is so nice ! There is such a sense of freedom,
too, in sleeping in a bark hut with the winds whistling
through the slits, and the starlit heavens sending rays of
light through the chinks in the ceiling. If you are im-
pervious to “ rheumatiz,” or don’t mind a dripping of rain
down your back, or your bedding getting soaked now and
then, or floods, then all this is so pleasant.
Imagine the intense bliss of you and your wife, and
your olive branches, getting up in the clear, fresh morning,
and felling a tree or two ; in fact, clearing the spot for your
future home 2 You could easily manage four trees a day if
you worked for twelve hours, and there would be only about


ten or twelve thousand trees to clear in two or three hundred
acres of land, roots and all, so it would take you about nine
years to do it—that is if yon don’t wish to employ labor.
Labor is very cheap, however ; you can get a man for eight or
nine shillings a day and tucker—some say for 4s a day—to
work for twelve hours. You can come to town, also, once a
year or so from your “ selected home,” but as a precaution it
is always best to make your will before-hand.
We remember the first “ Tasmanian fever ” in India
and elsewhere, many years ago. Vast acres for a song-
happy homesteads snugly nestling in Eucalypti —satisfied
sheep and pet lambs, coming at your call. This was the
picture. Few cared to think that all this had to be achieved
by hard labor and patient endurance. The Indian officer came,
saw, was conquered, and cursed a little. Some stayed, others
returned, and a good many of the younger ones went to the
gold mines, and worked as day laborers for a while.
The truth of it is, that Tasmania is a charming home for
the old Indian who has a settled and comfortable income, so
far as her cities are concerned, but the sons of these men must
look elsewhere for wealth. The wealthy ones can buy land,
wait in the towns till their paid laborers have cleared it and
built their homestead, select their sheep, and turn into ready-
made sheep farmers, who just know a sheep from a goat.
The chances are, the old fellows will lose money, but their
children would be wiser and reap the benefits of what the
parents had attempted to do.
Another matter which has greatly helped to exaggerate
the desirability of Tasmania as a settlement for Indians is the
lamentable ignorance which prevailed in regard to the
colonies generally in the old country a few years ago, whicji


was transmitted to India in a modified form. The old folks
imagine the “ colonies,” mentioned vaguely, to contain about
100 square miles or so, and to be nearly within ceo-ey distance
of each other. It seems quite natural to ask Brown, of
Melbourne, if he knew Smith, of Sydney, and to think poorly
of his colonial experience if he did not possess that felicity.
The general impression of the stay-at-homes of the middle
class seems to be that the colonies are generically termed
Melbourne, with New South Wales, Tasmania, Now Zealand,
and so forth as adjuncts thereto, or rural suburbs. Another
prevailing idea is that the colonials are either stockriders,
storekeepers, or miners; that they constantly travel about with
portable tents, continuously boil “ billies,” and make money
by digging. Some of the better informed, fancy sheep are
the staple product of the land. This lamentable ignorance is
being fast numbered with the things of the past, but it did
exiot, and not so long ago either.
The foregoing is the cloud. Let us take a peep at the
silver lining.
Tasmania is an opening rosebud waiting for the sun of
energy to expand her petals—for the skilful hand of Capital
to pluck her—rewarded enterprise to enjoy her. She has
thorns for the despondent and unskilful, however—remember
that! She wants no effete Indians or their sons to gaze at
her many forests, and bid the trees fall down and worship..
She does not require the used-up ones of a scorching land,
who ask a thousand acres of arable or pastoral land for a
song, and then cry out because they cannot get what they
expect. She wants the capital of the best of them, however.
She wants the brains of men and gentlemen in her Legislature;
the labor of the stalwart sons of toil in her forests; the


experienced miner in her gold and tinfields; liberal legislation,
and money, enterprise, and new blood, to induce men to
come, and remain; in fact, inducements to lure capital.
These are the things she wants and cannot get, and that is
the reason why she is a century or two behind the other
colonies, and more naturally wealthy than the lot of them put
together.
Reduce Tasmania’s prohibitive and unjust tariff ; give
the miner liberal rights and improved mineral laws; sink
party spirit in the Legislature for the common weal, and get
men to rule her—not puppets, pulled by departmental strings ;
borrow money, and open up the country with railroads ; assist
immigration (no free immigrants) ; when the immigrants
come, give them land to go to; do not leave them to clear
impenetrable bush unaided ; when they have a clearing let
them have a road to send up their products to the towns. At
present one-half of the smaller farmers live in an island of
clearings, surrounded by a sea of forests. Kill some of the
“ inutilities” wholesale, and then Tasmania will go ahead like
a rocket.
We found Tasmania a dear little spot, after eight months’
starvation in Victoria.


CHAPTEE 11.
FIRST IMPRESSIONS.
I|EAVING Melboure, old ocean is smelt very quickly,
? and the Eip is not far distant. The voyage is
pleasant enough, and if you be not sick you can enjoy
yourself on board the T.S.N. Co.’s steamers.
Get your cabin secured a day or two before-hand, and
spell your name yourself in the plan of the steamer at the
Melbourne office. That is, if you don’t want your cognomen
horribly mutilated by that inexorable clerk, who takes a
pleasure in that kind of thing. That Melbourne clerk is a
good son to his mother. He attends church ; he has a
mild eye; he does not keep out, nights; he is civil.
But he has one fault. He has a depraved taste
for mutilating surnames. Browne, (with an e ) forgets
to mention it, or does so casually. That clerk forgets,
and then there i& trouble. Smyth (with ay) has the
same difficulty to encounter. Thomson (without the p ) goes
raving mad when he sees a Launceston paper and the pas-
senger list. That clerk’s life is in danger. Browne, Smyth,
and Thomson have resolved to sacrifice him on the altar of
gentility.
The voyage is not a long one, generally lasting 24
hours. The “ Bip” plays up with some, but does not affect
others. If you lived as a passenger on board the T.S.N.
Co’s, boats for a month, you would be fit to kill for a Christ-
mas dinner. They are always at meals on board those
steamers, and they feed you like princes—or geese being got
ready for pate de foi gras.


I have a book before me which states there is not much
■to be seen on those sweet waters of the Pacific between Mel-
bourne and Tamar Heads, except birds. What a scandal!
Each crested wave tells a tale of incandescent life when the sun
goes down. The very soughing of the water reminds you that
dear ones at home are listening to the same wild sound, and
thinking of the exiles far away. The very cry of the seamen
recals the oft-remembered parting at Gravesend or Calcutta.
Birds are all very well, but give me the dancing waves, re-
dolent with bitter-sweet memories, to make a man think and be
better for his thoughts. These alone—without a sign of
animal life to relieve them. They want no relief. They are
saturated with life, those ever moving, restless waves of
ocean, each drop in whom contains a memory, a buried wish,
a half-forgotten sigh, a remembered kiss, a broken or a fulfilled
trust !
Bass Straits are historical. The surgeon of the Boyal
Navy who discovered that they were Straits, and not the open
sea, was at least a Britisher, and not a Dutchman who loved
a governor’s daughter. He possessed a name which will be
remembered when Tasman has been forgotten; does it not exist
in the far famed XXX ? In fact, Tasman had not much know-
ledge of land beyond his little island. Bass in his whaleboat
solved the question.
The first land sighted after leaving Melbourne is Tamar
or Low Heads, anything but picturesque, with its lighthouse.
Then you enter the Tamar, and are not much struck with the
surrounding scenery or the river itself. Xour pleasures are
to come. Lagoon Bay, a refuge for storm struck vessels, passed,
you come to George Town, a relict of former greatness.
Hear it ip Ilfracombe, the black country of the future, rich in


iron, and York Town, the site of the first settlement. Whirl-
pool Eeach is fraught with sad recollections of the old Petrel,
as I afterwards learnt—from a book.
After all the little places mentioned in the guide books
are passed, you come to Pig Island, where they propose to
erect a battery, to save Launceston from u them Rooshans.”
You get a sight of Launceston hence, and a very pretty one it
is. The white houses seem blended with the circumambient
foliage; and as the town rises gradually in a slope, till it
reaches a moderate height, the peep may almost be called a
view.
After a while you come to a “ splendid swindle,” called the
Ti-Tree Reach. I call it a splendid swindle because it is-
ornamental and utterly useless. The ti-trees are straight,,
with fine foliage on their slender trunks, but—woe be to the
unfortunate ketch or cutter that gets in the lee of that scrub.
The wind is taken out of her sails in less than a minute.
She passes from a breeze to a calm worse than the doldrums.
That ti-tree scrub has caused more blasphemy than the blow*
fly, and that is saying a good deal. Many a precious hour is
a tin-laden vessel detained under the baleful shelter of those
up-standing abominations, while the tantalising breeze blows
fairly, or rather unfairly, 50 yards to the east, west, north,
and south, but comes not within the charmed circle, where the
water is as glass. Some exasperated boatmen went and cut
down about fifty of the trees in a row, and allowed a little
breeze to come through the dense green wall. This spoilt
the look of the Reach, but it gave the boats a chance.
In an hour or so you reach the Bar, or Town Point. These
two terms are as strictly observed by two sections of the com-
munity as religious rites. Some say there is a Bar, and call


a spade a spade. Others say there is no Bar, and call it Town
Point. The casus belli is a huge mud-bank, under water at
low tide, but really a bar to progress so great that it keeps
the town back by ruining its shipping interests. It is only
at very high tide that a large steamer can get over—and this
keeps the brotherhood of boatmen from starvation.
If Sir William Denison had carried out his plan for
getting rid of this obstacle, Launceston would have been at
large and thriving port ere this, and would not have known
where to put all her ships. The junction of the Tamar with
the Esk (north and south) forms a delta of low-lying marshy
land, which is now being reclaimed, of which •* Town Point,”
or the “ Bar,” forms a kind of apex. The Tamar, losing
itself in the Esk, has a wide and rather deep course leading
into the North Esk, and froma point opposite the Queen’s Wharf,
where the T.S.N. Co.s’ steamers berth, a canal was projected
joining the Tamar with the North Esk, in the form
of a line bisecting another. This scheme would have done
away with the Bar, and the canal being of the same
depth as its point of commencement in the Tamar,
would permit of vessels reaching the wharf at any
time. The length of the canal would only be a mile, or a
little over. Sir William Denison had some such scheme as
this, but it was never carried out. Sleepy Hollow, the land
where, as Dr Miller observed at the colonial dinner (a post-
prandial observation, redolent of champagne, by the by), it
was always afternoon, did not see it, and so the watermen and
the Bar exist even to this day.
My first impressions of the Tamar generally were not
favourable, and many months ago I wrote what follows, but
won’t alter it:—


I thought to see grand picturesque scenery. I did not.
It was low tide and the slate-coloured mud against the lofty
tiers and green foliage formed a superb contrast. On either
bank were homesteads and small farms. You could see the
smiling wife dimly in the distance. You knew she smiled by
instinct. She was apparently washing and using a patent
clothes wringer. She had got the house in order, and was
awaiting the arrival of her husband, who had gone into the
bush to get a kangaroo or two for their morning meal. It
was a true picture of the “ Cottager’s Expected Return ” (vide
Illustrated Australian News, passim). I was subsequently
told that this picturesque female had no husband, she never
washed things, and was at that very time only thrashing one
of her children. However, the traditional colonial home-
stead, according to the pictures of the Illustrated London
News and other family pictorial journals, stuck to me like wax.
Very little animal life was to be seen on the banks of the
Tamar. No beautiful birds of bright plumage, only a
Tasmanian jackass or two (feathered and otherwise), and
several sheep, lean and attenuated, feeding on scrub. There
appeared to be poles erected at various intervals, as if to
mark the spot where some weary pioneer lay buried, where
some exile rested, I saw several of them. It was touching.
On further examination my theory was dashed to the ground,
however, for they bore inscriptions to the effect that
“ Trespassers would be prosecuted.”
The view of Launceston from the Bar is superb,
and at its best in early spring. A densely wooded
hill rises to the right, with here and there a rugged
point peering through the green foliage, the gold-
yellow gorse, and the wattle flower. Suddenly the hill breaks
into a gorge, allowing a glimpse of a distant slope, also


densely covered with foliage. D#Wn the gorge flows the
rapid South Esk, sending forth the frothy spume begotten of
the basins farther inland. A distant sound of rushing water
betokens the Cataract. Steep and rugged, gloomy and grand,
with bare peaks and moss grown rocks, rises the Cataract Hill,
sparsely bedecked with the universal gorse which nature,
always impartial, allows to grow even on the barren basaltic
formation. The view in the distance is charming and home-
like. Green fields, hedged With gorse, stand out in striking
contrast to the sullen peaks ; and little homesteads bathed in
the golden hues of the wattle, and the white shimmer of the
apple blossom, pinked with the tender blush of the peach
buds, form part of a landscape worth almost any fatigue
and labour to behold. To the left rises Ben Lomond, crowned
in sempiternal snow, while the slope at his base and all around
exhibit traces of agricultural industry and cultivation. Eight
before you lies the town, gently rising from the flatness of the
town to the heights of Windmill Hill and the delight-
ful suburbs around. And wherever the eye rests, the white
houses and green foliage are relieved by the rich, golden-
hued flowers of the übiquitous wattle and gorse, and the
delicate blossoms of the apple tree. A fairer vision one could
not wish to behold. It amply repays you for the dreary
Tamar, and the weariness of a somewhat monotonous, if short
journey.
Hobart Town scenery is beautiful, no doubt—never
having seen it, I cannot speak of its merits—but, with
a little trouble, Launceston and the surrounding country
will disclose as much beauty as the most fastidious could
wish for. The railway route by the Launceston and
Western Railway, from Launceston to Deloraine, passes
through some of the loveliest scenery in Northern Tas-


mania undulating plains, beautified by man with arts
taught by nature ; golden grain uprearing its bearded
heads ; water courses, winding and nestling amidst over-
hanging trees and verdant grasses ; hills in the distance,
cloud capped or green. All breathe of beauty, and form a
grand picture of still life, rendered more attractive by the
hand of nature-instructed man. A visitor to Tasmania of
some literary ability, speaks of the scenery as follows:
In describing my impression of the landscape scenery of
Tasmania, I write with a vivid recollection of some of the
loveliest parts of Europe, and I do not hesitate to say that
the island combines some of the most attractive features
of Germany, Switzerland, and Italy. lathe neighbourhood
of Launceston I was constantly reminded of Tuscany. The
valley of the Arno seemed to spread before me, girdled by the
put pie Apennines ; and at Corra Linn the rushing river, and
the rocks tapestried with foliage, brought back to mind the
Via Mala, and the ascent to the Splugen Pass in Switzer-
land.”
V hat the writer says is true. The charm of the scenery
lies in its European characteristics, and appeals to the truest
instinct of all—the love of home. I could fill pages with
descriptions of Corra Linn, the Punch Bowl, the Basins,
the caves of Chudleigh, &c., but this is only a ramble, and
not a guide book.
I imagine “ New Chum” being quoted as the Tasmanian
Muiray, and shudder. I cannot conceive the idea of going
into encyclopaedaic ecstacies at so much the line with any
pleasme, so, at the risk of being called discursive and
unsatisfactory, I will confine myself to sketches.
I would like to mention one fact. Within ten minutes’ row


and twenty minutes’ walk from the wharf, a visitor will behold
one of the most magnificent views in the universe between this
and Killarney—the Cataract Gorge and the First and Second
Basins. I won’t describe these lovely spots. It has been
attempted before, and only ended in desecration. Go and see
them. One thing rouses my ire in the Cataract Gorge. It is
a monument of American vandalism and municipal supineness
—The Marionettes’ Rock. An übiquitous advertising
agent went out in a boat and painted one of those storied rocks
with the legend that the “ Marionettes would appear,” etc.
Those queer little dolls are almost forgotten. This record
of them exists in indelible paint, spoiling everything around it.
They (the Corporation) are blasting away at the Cataract Hill
regardless of the picturesque. Could they not redeem their
desecration by one good act—blast that rock to the water’s
edge 1 A word, before closing this chapter, in praise of the
good work done by Mr David Ritchie’s public-spirited
generosity in laying the nucleus of a natural and gigantic
fernery in the vicinity of his mill, near the South Esk Bridge.
The magnificent tree ferns, wild convolvuli, and other
beautiful plants growing under his mill shutes, are coming up
splendidly, and already vastly enhance the grandeur of the
view from the banks of the South Esk where Mr Ritchie’s
artificial Niagara empties herself into the parent stream.


CHAPTER 111.
THE TOWK.
a queer-looking, incongruous, semi-British
vfftvrr
■ j village it is ! Take a good look at it from the
wharf near St. John street, standing on the refuse thrown
out by the smelting works yonder.
To the left of you is a Temperance Boarding House in a
block of buildings that would not disgrace a city, breasting on
a defunct wood yard, containing one decrepid wooden cottage
“to let or for sale ” these many years. To the right are
some smelting works, a few blacksmiths’ shops, and the
Volunteer Buildings, none of which are much to look at. You
next behold an old-fashioned tavern, and an embryo green,
along the frontage of which on St. John street the Corporation
once planted youthful gum trees. Of these only one has
attained a vigorous growth, while the rest are as withered as
the sheltering rails around them. At the extremity of the
green lies the Market, an institution more to be wondered at
than admired, being a relic of barbarism. Passing the
old-fashioned tavern, you come to a flour mill, next to which
are a dilapidated lath and plaster tenement, with all the
window panes broken, a few small shops, and a blacksmith’s
yard. Suddenly, and without warning, you come upon a
frontage of stucco, as durable as the everlasting hills, with a
glass and gold legend announcing they are Tulloch’s stores.
Next to this stand the new and commodious stores and
offices erected by Capt. Samuel Tulloch ®n the site of the late
Mr John Murphy’s depot, which was burnt a few months
ago. Fronting this imposing but slate-colored edifice, on the
opposite side of a cross street, is a lofty but preternaturally


ugly building, which suffers from an outbreak of windows,,
and a legend in huge black letters “ 1—8—4—6.” Then
come some business premises, abruptly terminating in a
lumber yard, overgrown with rank grasses and thistles..
Opposite this is the Town Hall, with stucco frontage,
Corinthian pillars (a size too thick), and a recessed portico,
the chosen home of the swallow. Here all attempt
at architectural beauty ceases. The view from Cimitiere-street,
or the wharf, of the Town Hall, presents a sight which does
not make you think of a civic edifice in all its glory, but
involuntarily calls to mind the monotonous view of undetached
houses easily obtainable from a back yard in Lambeth parish,.
E.C. It is well that scarcely any windows have been put
in this dreary waste of bricks and mortar, for they would look
down on a howling wilderness, which was once a flourishing
garden.
Now you come to something like uniformity, for in a
cluster are the Mechanics’ Institute, the Public Buildings,
including the Post and Telegraph Offices, St Andrew’s
Church, the handsome offices of the Union Bank, the
Criterion Hotel, the establishments of Messrs Farrelly and
Stewart, MessrsE. Hart and Co., and other magnificent struc-
tures. Higher up St. John Street are several mining offices,
hotels, &c., together with some squalid hovels, timber yards,
and general business premises, till Prince’s Square is reached,
for a description of which see Guide Book and Walch’s
Almanac.
Opposite Prince’s Square, in St John street, is a psendo-
Gothic edifice called St John’s Parsonage. This is a brand
new building, with curious windows, variegated bricks, and
funny little gables. It took a deal of money, and caused a


lot of bad blood, to get it erected ; and now it is a white
elephant, hardly useful, and decidedly not ornamental.
We won’t stop at the wharf to gaze around, but walk up
St John-street into the town. At Cameron street corner, to the
left, a-view of the Public Gardens, or People’s Park, the scene of
many a promenade concert, illumination, and fireworks dis-
play, is obtained. On either side of the street can be seen
fine houses, cheek by jowl with tumble-down shanties, and to
the right a ruin, which will eventually rise into the new Bank
of Tasmania. Opposite the Park gates is a house whose
fame is historic in the annals of the police. On the other
side of the street is a ramshackle tenement that occupies the
site of three or four good residences, and being uninhabitable,
ought to be burnt. The houses along Tamar street are
mostly wooden shanties, hardly worth particularising. In
Patterson street the Commercial Bank is the principal
building, and the enterprise of Messrs Herbert, French, and
Sadler has led to the erection of some spacious business
premises.
Charles street is busy, bustling, and business-like. The
shops are imposing, but monotonous ; and at the top of the
street stands the Launceston General Hospital, managed by a
Board. A fine institution it is, too, but wants fresh paint,
and a lot of money spent upon it, which the G-overnmenfc
don't seem anxious to lay out. If money be not laid out on
this institution, a lot of superfluous energy most decidedly
is. In an evil hour an Hospital Board was appointed to
manage, and since then there has been the devil to pay and
no pitch hot. At least, if the pitch be not hot, several mem-
bers of the Board have waxed considerably warm ; others
haye made the moral temperature rather high for their


colleagues, and the unfortunate employes of the higher grades-
Some ladies, too, of that genus which ensures itself of heaven
by making earth exactly the reverse of paradise, went and
discovered imaginary horrors in the matter of dirty linen, &c. r
and everything is topsy-turvy accordingly. Some day I will
give a history of the Hospital rows, which may edify, it not
instruct.
In Patterson street, to the left, are the new and liandr
some printing offices built by the enterprising proprietors of
the Cornwall Chronicle and the Launceston Examiner , the
two local papers. The former is liberal in its views, has for
its motto “ The Eights of the People,” and comes out three
times a week ; the Examiner looks after the landed interests,,
and is a daily. Both papers reflect credit on their manage-
ment and the town. The Tasmanian and the Weekly
Examiner are published every Saturday. These journals revile
not each other now. They used to do so, even as the historic
Eatonswill Gazette and the Independent. Occasionally
there is a civil growl, but though a lot of ink is slung around,
the six-shooters rest in their cases, and the editorial horse-
whip is used to drive the pony chaise, or the steeds of the
country collectors.
Further on we come to the Invalid Depot, the home of
many a poor old exile. What stories those aged and decrepid
men could tell. Tales of the chain gang at Macquarie—the lash
—crimes committed—of unavailing remorse and repentance.
The grounds are beautifully kept, and excel the People’s Park
in loveliness. The courteous superintendent, Mr A. Jones,,
throws them open to the decent public, and their use is much
appreciated—being gratuitous. Last summer Mr Jones, at his
own expense, erected a handsome octagonal music pavilion for


the free promenade concerts at which the City Band performed.
All he asked was a trifling donation to recoup him for the
expenses attendant upon the erection of the little building.
The public, or most of them, shunned the unobstrusive money
box at the gates like a plague—or the Hobart Town Gazette ,
and very little money was raised. This year Mr Jones will
issue season tickets at moderate prices, and this scheme may
perhaps meet the difficulty.
The Court House Square presents the appearance-of
stones—paving stones—if not upon Felion, at least scattered
around recklessly, to the ruin of the grass seed planted by Mr
Jones. They will be removed some day during the present
century.
The Police Court faces the square, and is presided over
by an able magistrate, with occasional help from the justices
of the peace.
'Wellington street used once to be the centre of the busi-
ness locality, and before the days of railroads was the high-
way of the country districts. Now it is a terra horrihilis,
although it still shows traces of past grandeur in some of its
edifices.
Brisbane street proper, the mighty Oxford street of the
town, takes its rise in a very dingy locality, near Wellington
street, and is bounded on one side by the Wilmot Arms, and
on the other by a hovel. Then comes a series of hovels, with
one or two moderately decent tenements. These are chiefly
common lodging-houses, the use of which is of the night,
nocturnal.
Suddenly, without any premonitory symptoms, you
emerge from a vile neighborhood into the very centre of re-
spectable thriving trade. Shops upon shops, plate glass


window after plate glass window, signboard after signboard,
meet the eye, and you stand in a street the width of which is
considerable, and gaze upon two rows of buildings which would
look well and hold its own in London city.
From George street to Charles street, a distance of
hardly 800 yards, there are six hotels, four jewellers’ shops,
eleven drapery establishments, four tobacconists’ shops, three
chemists’ shops, besides a host of publishers, fruiterers, confec-
tioners, grocers, bootmakers, mining agents, lawyers, insurance
offices, architects, builders, and other business establishments
on an extensive scale. Opposite the Brisbane Hotel, the
“ Langham” of the town, is a wilderness of old timber next
to an old weatherboard tenement.
The Elphin Eoad, a continuation of Brisbane street, is
dotted with fine residences. For "Windmill Hill and the
suburbs see guide book.
Launceston is supposed to have 10,660 inhabitants, but
a floating population of visitors makes the actual total
fluctuate. The town sends two representatives to the Legis-
lative Council, and three to the House of Assembly. It is
governed by a Mayor and Aldermen, and has a Marine Board,
and several thousand J’s. P.—or at least, so I believe—and
about a million or two of mining companies, two of which pay
dividends.
I don’t want to be quoted at the Sydney Exhibition as a
guide book, so :the information about the J’s. P. and the
mining companies may not be quite correct within a figure or
so.
There are 48 hotels, publichouses, and restaurants in the
town, so a man need neither go hungry nor thirsty.
I fear I am getting prolix, so I will conclude this chapter,
leaving statistics to our friends, the guide books.


CHAPTER IV.
MEN AND MANNERS.
board the Derwent I made my first Tasmanian
<sr j acquaintance. A gentleman entered into conversa-
tion with me casually as a fellow passenger, found
that I was a stranger in the land, and within half an hour
offered—to sell me any quantity of shares in a good paying
mine at Nine Mile Springs.
My new acquaintance had a versatile taste for talking
mines. If I spoke about the river, he said there was payable
alluvial at Brandy Creek on some claim in which he would
sell me an interest. If I enquired about the grassy banks,
he said that his was the Bank of Australasia, and his company
deposited their dividends and reserve fund there for payment
to shareholders. I began to think that his company paid
dividends some days before the shares were purchased. I
bought some shares—l had not to pay cash, so I could
afford it—and waited for dividends ; but they did not come.
Shortly, I felt like a missionary ; I was “ called,” and replied
not.
I fervently hoped my mineral friend was not a specimen
of all the Tasmanian gentry. He tried often to sell me scrip
after that, but I did not deal. Those shares in the Bottom-
less Gold Mining Company were a burthen on my soul and a
drag on my pocket. I sold them eventually. It was in this
wise :—There were two calls outstanding and no one would
buy, so I gave another mining agent three pounds to take
them off my hands, paid the transfer fees and the arrears of
calls, and departed from his office a free man. I felt as if I
had made a good “spec.” The gold fever had seized me.


My first acquaintance, the man of scrips, when he found
1 was not worth much, cut me. I felt it, bitterly.
The higher class of Tasmanians are better mannered
than moneyed. Those who are very rich live in the wilder-
ness.
Tasmanians, at least those who live in Launceston, are
essentially a trading community, and, as such, form a trading
aristocracy peculiar, but tangible. The tailoi’3 consider they
are doing you a favor if they make you a coat and stand
drinks over the order. It is said they ask you to dinner and
measure you with your feet under their mahogany, but I can’t
say for certain, as I have been often measured, but never
asked to dine. Your grocer talks politics to you, and if you
bring letters of introduction, presents you to his wife. The
way the golden youth behind the counter patronised me ate
into my very soul. I shuddered sometimes, but am used to it
now.
Most of the Launcestonians buy shares. It is away
they have, and some of the general meetings of the companies
are odoriferous of corduroy, as well as patchouli. Laun-
cestonians are very hospitable, but not to strangers—that is,
strangers without credentials. They have been taught some
bitter lessons, so they have become cautious. If you bring
letters of introduction, they will receive you into the bosoms
of their families, but not otherwise. Years of irreproachable
conduct will hardly bring you into their sanctum sanctonm T
and even then they will ask you who your father was—an
awkward question.
There are some queer customers in Launceston. Some
men who are thoroughpaced scoundrels, without the wit to
hide their rascality, who unblushingly take their stand upon


a pedestal of virtue, and preach—yes, actually preach—morality.
The species generally is plausible, well-fed looking, sleek and
unctuous. One of them writes a scurrilous article about you,
and when you reproach him says that the man who wrote it
ought to be kicked. These fellows just keep clear of the
clutches of the law. They perjure themselves willingly,,
but not on paper, or when before the Bench
at least, not sufficiently to be “ grabbed.” In one case
a charge was instituted, which was subsequently
withdrawn. The defendant was summoned to appear at the
capital, and he sent a message to the Court that to attend
would seriously interfere with his business, it being race time,,
and that he would make it a point to attand when that gay
and festive season was over. And nothing happened.
Alas, for human nature ! these men live and thrive, and
Nemesis and the Humenides pass by and chorus around some
one else. I suppose the Eidolons of these bloodsuckers have
a fellow feeling with them, and leave them alone till they
cannot help it.
The name of these gentry is legion. They are to be
found amongst high and low. Among the aristocracy they
dress respectably, and either borrow money and go bankrupt,
or else steal from their hosts till they are fjund out. One ot
the latter class was musical—“ musicalness’’ is next to
godliness here—and he was received everywhere. "W herever
he went he stole things. He was either a kleptomaniac or a
common thief ; and when he was at last caught, coats, ti'ousers,
watches, chains, rings, necklaces, boots, and every variety of
article was found secreted by him. He was sentenced for
five years eventually, but while he lasted he was the rage.
Even while a warrant was out for his apprehension he used to


walk into the hotels and be sheltered by the very people he
had robbed.
The other beings are almost indescribable. You will find
them often in the bars of hotels, and they are mostly
migratory.
Launceston society has erected to itself an invisible
telephone, and he who whispers on the Windmill Hill is
heard even beyond the Cataract. If in the dark hours of the
morning you wake the sleeping publican for a drink—that is
if you be respectable—your female friends tell you of it in a
day or so with holy horror. They never stop to enquire what
right their informant had to be out to obtain the information.
Busybodies are omnipresent. The faintest murmur of
a whisper floats to ears you do not wish should hear. Yet
scandal does not check dissipation.
To a great extent a man is judged by his works, and not
by his calling. The gilder has the best chance of good
society, however ; that is, he who can gild with a golden
currency.
Here and there, forming a clique of their own, may
be found erudite gentlemen, good fellows all, but exclusive.
Once get in their midst as an equal, and in no place in the
world is the intercourse so free and pleasant, the friendship
so disinterested and loyal.
The ladies—the real article—are as well bred as if
fresh from a London drawing-room, and for one ugly face in
the street you might meet ten pretty ones. In the matter of
dress the Launceston lady will bear comparison with anyone
for the display of exquisite taste and chasteness of apparel.
Bad taste does exist, however, and servant-galism to a large


extent. A walk through the fashionable streets would do
good to the heart of any crusty old bachelor, and if he still
remained a mysogamist—after that vision of fair women he
was bound to behold—well—he ought to be cast adrift on
Three Hummock Island without tobacco or buttons.
The lower classes are at once more respectable and more
obnoxious than those in England. Obnoxious, because they
touch you on a tender point; they fancy they are as good as
you are, and a great deal better. Each rising tradesman
thinks he is the chosen amongst mortals for the smiles of
lovely women, and gets himself up accordingly. They (the
profanum vulgus) dress after the manner of English workmen
out for a Sunday, but according to their own
lights cut-away coats, tight unmentionables, a
deal of crumpled shirt front, a deal of perfumed (?)
hair oil, a slouched hat, and a very diminutive
and very loud necktie'tied in a bow. Thus they parade the
streets ; thus they stand at street corners, and smoke, and
spit, and interrupt traffic. To the credit of the best of them,
be it spoken, that they insult not women ; but the worst of the
species cannot let a decent woman pass without an insulting
remark. They can fight to a man, and there are few cowards
amongst them, yet some of the “ larrikins” think nothing
of a dozen attacking one on a pinch. They go about in gangs,
and entertain strong friendship for each other.
A stranger has a trying ideal to undergo in Launces-
ton. He will be stared at unmercifully till his face becomes
familiar. He stands or falls by bis conduct during that pur-
gatorial period, and he is watched through a magnifying glass
for his sins, and a minifying one for his virtues. If he
come through the ideal scathless, be is lucky ; if he slip, his


backsliding will haunt him to his dying day, or till he leaves
the town. The elect, the natives to the manner born, are
safe from this crucial test.
If the Tasmanians once take you by the hand it is long
before their faith in you will be shaken. They will suffer for
you and be silent, and forgive willingly. Eor their kindness
in this respect, their equals do not exist ; they are ever open
to a tale of distress. But struggling gentility stands no
chance ; the people are essentially commercial, and cannot
appreciate it. Brains are at a discount, and anyone who
writes to live is of the outer Bohemians, and not so respect-
able as a grocer’s apprentice.
The people’s representatives in Parliament are able men,
and discuss questions of moment to Tasmania as if they in-
terested the world. That cruel Anthony Trollope called
these questions “ Lilliputian politics.” Some of the speeches
are splendidly composed, and some—well, they are composed
of words.
A few of the men who rule the roast in the town—who
turn the wheel of municipalities, &c. —act with a disinterested
enthusiasm for the good of the town, but some of them, in
very excess of zeal, make themselves ridiculous. These gain
an unenviable notoriety on the Magisterial Bench, at the
meetings of the authorities, and at public meetings generally,
for the utterance of windy bathos, and are sometimes crushed
by the newspapers, only to rise again and out-Herod Herod.
The “pitchforking” art is greatly practised. This ex-
pression may not be generally understood. It is forcible, but
vague. By “ pitchforking” is meant thrusting men on to
greatness who ought to be obscure. Thus a half-educated
man, as a Justice of the Peace, is simply mispJaced, Beside


liis compeer, the Police Magistrate, he is a cipher. If be
assert himself he makes himself ridiculous. Once a “ J.P.,”
he is possibly thrust into the Council ; or once in the Council,
he is made a J.P. Here he talks bathos, and, as compared to
his intellectual congeners, appears to be more absurd than he
really is. Being a Councillor, he is asked to preside at
public meetings. He does not know the duties of a chairman,
but his amour propre will not confess this fact. Lawyers and
others among those assembled, prompt him to his proper course
of action, and instead of taking advice he gets “ scotty.”
This causes further complications. The poor fellow thinks he
is a public character when he is only a good man spoilt, a man
made into a buffoon, by being “ pitchforked” into a position
he has no right to hold.
This specimen may be termed the “active inutility.’’
Here are instances of the “passive inutility,’’ a genus far more
numerous than the former. A man has a long and uneventful
commercial or other career. He makes money, and having
luck and a certain mercantile capacity, never goes bankrupt.
What do the people do ? They elect him a Councillor or to
some public position to which a remuneration is attached.
He attends weekly or fortnightly meetings, votes occasionally,
but is speechless. He has no opinions or never utters any.
He becomes a voting machine, and pockets the fees. Seeing
he is a public man, he is elected to one directorate and another
till his mighty name figures on the directors’ list of half a
score of substantial companies. He attends the meetings,
lets ethers do the work, and pockets the fees—sometimes very
considerable, and decidedly a consideration. He perhaps gets
into Parliament and becomes a ballot ball, a voting machine.
without an idea of his own. He at length dies in the odour of
sanctity without having benefitted his country or his kind.


and if you dare to utter a word against him it is tantamount to
sacrilege.
Let it not be supposed that that he who speaks the most
does the most. Far from it. Many of our most eloquent
politicians are frauds, while several “ perpetual motion ” coun-
cillors are an infliction on the country. But the right men in the
right place are those who talk to the purpose, expose
what is wrong, and work to achieve the right. These men we
have in abundance, and to them Tasmania looks for advance-
ment, and not to the blustrous do-nothings and un-ideaed
noodles.
There are no allusions made to any particular personages
by these remarks. If the cap fit anyone let, him wear it and
welcome. All the tirades in the world will not alter these
constitutional frauds on society, and it is merely “ tilting at
windmills ”to attempt to reform them, but nevertheless the
constant dropping of water wears away the stone, and
perhaps in a centary or so the fiat lux will be given to the
self-afflicted ones, and they will go and revolutionise matters. A
friend suggests that the best and quietest way to get rid of
these frauds is to run them into the Derwent and Tamar, or
to shoot a dozen or so with a six-shooter every morning before
breakfast. I agree with him.


CHAPTEE V.
THE QUEENS OF SOCIETY, AND OTHERWISE.
with a large B, crowds you on every
side here. Beauty of nature, exquisite beauty }
tawdry beauty, beauty getting into the sear and
yellow leaf, heaute du diable, and no beauty at all.
Take a walk down Brisbane street any afternoon and see
the ladies flocking, and shedding a subtle perfume in their
wake. Dressed in exquisite taste, their figures, full some-
times, and slim occasionally, give one a taste of the ineffable.
Cheeks with the peach bloom of health, that make one long
for a kiss. Eyes bright and radiant invite whispers of love’s
bathos, and lips, rose-red and smiling, invite an answering
smile. As they pass they glance and flit by, laughing. You
are a stranger, and thus attract notice. But do not, if you
be wise, be a cad, and speak to them on the invitation of that
passing smile, and those mirth-brightened eyes. If you do,
you will receive a stare that, like the head of Medusa, will
turn you to stone. I met one of these laughing damsels
daily, almost hourly, and smiled back often and often. I
knew her not, but longed at a distance. We were the best
of friends, but spoke not. One day I had the temerity to
raise my hat. It was awfully caddish, but a magnetism
thrilled through me and impelled me to the step. The result
was a stony stare, and to this day the insult is not forgotten.
As they talk when you pass them, the refrain of their
musical voices sends to your listening ears a soft aspirated
word, He. Do not think the “ He” refers to you. Likely
as not they smile at you through habit, and their overweening
sweetness of temper, which would not let them frown at a


dog. All girls talk of “ lies”. They cannot help it. When
they don’t, they talk of “ shes,” and then there is danger
around, for scandal, with her leperous wings, is hovering
about.
The red lips recount that some he went into the
“ Criterion,” with trembling awe at his iniquity, and a
lurking admiration for his terrible fastness. u 1 He’ keeps up
at nights, my dear, and is frightfully dissipated. ‘ He’ plays
billiards and smokes cigars, dear, and speaks to the barmaid,”
and so on. John Goodfellow is going to be married. He
fell in love with the Hebe at the hotel yonder, and like a
gentleman as he is, proposes to marry her rather than do as a
good many do. Then the sweet lips wax spiteful. f£ The idea
of his going after a Bcivinciicl” (the last word italicised by
look and word.) “ A fine life she’ll lead him. Don’t bow,
dear, the wretch is not fit to be known,” and Juno and the
rest of them pass the offending John with the iciest of bows
and a general straightening of the back-bone, and sweeping of
skirts.
The leaders of society smile superior on the “ next lot”
of ladies. “ They are nobodies, my dear, and have no money.”
The “ next lot” say, “ Look at Clara Yere de Vere, what a
sight she is. She thinks herself a swell ; if her father were
not a member of Parliament that talk about her and Harry
Crafty would not have been hushed up so soon.”
dhe “ next lot” to the “ swells” are very re-
ligious; they go to Sunday-school and attend church
rigorously. When they go home they can’t tell you
the text, as a rule, but retain vivid impressions
of fifty dresses, fifty hats, fifty heads of hair, a hundred
flowers, and three hundred colors. Then the patriarchal


piano at home rings out Moody and Sankey’s hymns on
Sunday evening and these items are discussed between the
stanzas of the “ Sweet By-and-bye.”
Next come the shop girls, who are regarded with holy
horror by the previous class. They, poor things, are “ out of
the pale.” They earn their own living, and it matters not
what your father was, or what you are, or what you do, but
how your pocket is lined.
Then the female u Esaus” occupy the substratum , whose
hand is against every woman better dressed than themselves.
Servant girls, factory girls, poverty-stricken girls, kitchen girls,
all pervade Brisbane-street on Saturday night, and jostle and
look daggers at the others. They have their beaux, and are
proud of them according to their lights. These beaux think
it the thing to spit and smoke and stick their arms akimbo
while they talk to their “ girls.” They swear a little, too ; it
is so gentlemanly !
The higher orders—the aristocracy—look down upon all,
and do not infest Brisbane-street on Saturday night; and so
runs the world along.


CHAPTER VI.
COURTS OF JUSTICE.
are several Jurisdictions which hold Court at
different times in Launceston ; the Supreme
Court, in its Civil and Criminal Jurisdictions, held
quarterly ; the Recorder’s Court, when His Honor wishes ;
the Court of Requests, held monthly; the Police Court,
daily ; the Court of Requests, held when occasion requires,
and the Court of Bankruptcy, nominally every Friday—fre-
quently when the bank rate of discount is high, and debts
too pressing. The Court of Bankruptcy can reveal
queer transactions sometimes, and the patient and intelligent
investigations reflect credit on the appointed officers and the
lawyers, though the latter benefit most.
We have a few of Mark Lemon’s “ buyers of job lots,”
who occasionally appear to disadvantage under the searching
scrutiny of Section 8d of the Act, but the transactions are,
as a rule, carefully concealed, and the data in fraudulent
bankrupt are often very vague. The commonest form of
swindle is the bogus “ conveyance,” or settlement of pro-
perty, but Section 89 generally meets the case, and the
bankruptcy succumbs, worried by the legal sleuthhounds,
or flies the country. The Bankruptcy Court has rid Laun.-
eeston of some of the greatest scoundrels unhung, and in this
has worked much good.
The Civil Sittings of the Supreme Court are generally
held for the purpose of settling disputes over £5O, heavy
damages, &c. The Criminal Jurisdiction is for the final
conviction of offences out of the jurisdiction of a Magistrate
and the Recorder, and those which involve questions of life
and death.


The Court House is a heavy-looking building, with a
small space for the public, which is always crowded when the
criminal cases are tried. It is- a matter of speculation
whence all these people come when the trimestrial assizes are
on. They bear the stamp of the working classes who cannot
afford to lose a day’s work, and yet they will attend, patiently
and eagerly, through days of tedious evidence.
A sketch of the Court on the occasion of a
Criminal Sittings would not be amiss. It is
eleven o’clock in the forenoon, and a case of
murder is to be tried. The Judge has not arrived yet, but
the learned brethren of the law are assembled, wigged and
gowned, reading their briefs, generally with feet on chairs,
or talking to each other. In the open space railed off from
the Court are collecting divers “ regulars,” who have once
probably stood in yonder dock themselves. That man with
the terrible mouth and fang-like teeth has “ done” seven
years ; his receding forehead is puckered and brown, and
his elf locks, gray, but abundant, cluster round a head that
might have done credit to an Eugene Aram. There is ter-
rible force apparent in bis broad shoulders and length of
limb, while his open shirt front displays a hairy and veinous
chest, only partially covered by a red neckerchief. That
man is always there. He watches the witnesses with a
remorseless scrutiny, and writhes with rage when the evi-
dence is not given clearly.
Yonder youth is a rising housebreaker, and has brought
his dinner in a red handkerchief, as he means to stop for
the day.
That woman was pretty once, but drink and debauchery
liave brutalised her, so that the only pleasure she has besides


the dram bottle is to watch the prisoners being sentenced.
The man with the fixed eye and uncertain mouth is a
harmless lunatic, a “lifer, ” who once cut a comrade’s throat
for the price of a quart of beer. He labours under an
hallucination that he has been robbed of untold wealth, and'
often makes his appeal to the judge in a critical moment
when the evidence for and against the prisoner is being
summed up. If you look at him he fixes you with his eye—
his wall eye—till you feel uncomfortable.
Our discontented-looking friend within the rails has
been incontinently summoned to attend on the jury. He
had arranged a fishing excursion with some friends, and that
unfortunate citation, which paid him the questionable com-
pliment about being “ a good man and true,” nipped the pro-
jected devotion at the shrine of Izaak Walton in the bud.
He (our juror) would stand being called “ bad and false”
with equanimity if he were let off, but the inelucfabile dies
and an adverse fate keep him a prisoner, and he has to serve
his country willy-nilly.
Another man looks preternaturally joyful. Next to going
to a funeral he loves that jury box. “ Man, proud man,
dressed in a little brief authority.” Such is ho. He dearly
loves to authoritatively question the witnesses, and plays
such fantastic tricks before that high court as make the
judges weep, and the lawyers and reporters to blaspheme.
Then there is the intelligent juror who has no particular wish
to serve on the jury, but takes the inevitable calmly, and
does his duty conscientiously and well.
The hon. the Attorney-General is the grand jury of the
colony. He files bills, makes out the counts, or declares a
nolle prosequi. What an awful power to vest in a political


straw, tossed about in the waters of party strife !
We may well be proud of our Judges. There are no
traditional Pickwickian noodles to strut and bully so as to
hide their own ignorance. Calm, judicial, and gentlemanly ;
hearing patiently, summing up exhaustively, meting out
Justice with mercy. These are our Judges. Better lawyers
than the counsel for the defence, more experienced than Mr
Attorney-General, they are the heads de facto of the
judicial pyramid that has its apex in themselves, and its base
in the Court Crier and the police constables.
That Court Crier, by-the-by, is a character ; he has
grown gray in the judicial service, and is one of the best gar-
deners in the town. Those neatly trimmed rosemary hedges ;
that carefully kept patch of grass, and those numerous
flowers and shrubs that almost beautify the unlovely Court
House, are the result of his untiring attention, and to those
whom he loves he will give a sprig of heliotrope that would
gladden the soul of Piesse and Lubin. If the old gentleman
have an aversion, it is to a juryman. He swears in that ex-
temporised functionary with an injured manner, and seems to
emphasize the words “ good men and true with veiled sai.
casm. For the rest, he is obliging, and his masters for
many years, their Honors the Chief Justice, the Puisne
Judge, and the Recorder, can testify to his integrity, worth,
and faithful service of a quarter of a century. He is the
beau ideal of a Court Crier. His very get up is semi-ju-
dicial, and all the various formulae of the Court are at his
fingers’ ends, except for the word put, which is a stumbling
block in regard to the correct quantity of the vowel.
Presently a juror complains of a draught creeping down
the nape of his neck, and humbly requests that the window


may be closed. Our friend, the Crier, is justly indignant at
*uch presumption, and pretends not to hear. The juror
appeals to the Judge, and upon orders received from that
important functionary, the Crier closes the window with
alacrity, hut under protest, and withers the temerity of the
juror by a frown. If he can manage it, he lets down a few
grains of dust, which invariably makes the empanelled one
rub his eyes for an hour or two.
The old gentleman has many a tale to tell of the times
gone by, and in himself comprises a judicial history of
Tasmania for many years. His life is hemmed in with the
sittings of the Courts and his flowers, and in these surround-
ings he is happy and useful.
Our lawyers and barristers are able men, and some of
them would put a needle completely in the shade for acute-
ness. There is the pathetic counsel for the defence, who
enlarges on the helpless position of his client, who cannot be
sworn, the spotlessness of his character, and the crime»stained,
untrustworthy nature of the witnesses against him. There
is the argumentative counsel, who strives to justify an
offence, prove complicity or extenuation, and occasionally to
make out that the very commission of the act was trust-
worthy rather than criminal. He takes, as a foregone con-
clusion, that there are grounds for the charge, but tries to
educe that criminality is not present. This argument at once
appeals to all traits of the judicial character. The police are
flattered because there was at least some cause for the appre-
hension of the prisoner ; the Crown Prosecutor says—“ Come,
if I filed a bill, I did not act unwisely;” the juryman thinks
his intelligence is appealed to, to find justification for the act.
and the public are appealed to in the matter of sympathy.


The only person untouched is His Honor, but then, “ Nemo
me impune lacessit.’’
In cross-examination, the witnesses have a frightful
ordeal to go through. The gods forfend that I never see a
man shot or a house broken into !— i.e., if the culprit or his
friends can afford counsel. You get your inner life turned inside
out irrelevantly. Did you come out of an hotel at 10.30
p.m. that luckless day ? Did the whisky hot make you just
a trifle mellow ? Or were you courting the unruffled calm
of the night with your loved one on your arm, or with that
member round her ? The foregone conclusion is, of course,
that you had no right to be a witness. If you saw, you
should not have seen. If the lawless act occurred in the
daytime, why were you hanging around loafing instead of
looking after your business ? If at night, why the deuce
were you not in bed, or studying metaphysics, or wasting the
midnight oil ? If you were in the hotel, what did you want
there—a decent, married man ? ( Anglice , what an ass you
were to come out at that unfortunate moment !)
So in this manner you get badgered, and wish yourself in
Jericho, more so, inasmuch as your examination by the
Crown Prosecutor does not give the faintest inkling of the
terrors to come ! I have sat me in that Court and shuddered,
praying that momentary blindness, deafness—in fact, abso-
lute coma —may seize me at the slightest likelihood arising of
having to face that box.
What will ye ? “ Because we are virtuous shall there
be no more cakes and ale ?” We go down to the Cataract
on a still, clear night, and spoon multivious ; we take our
ale or our whisky in the bar parlor of our accommodating
host, who has known us for years, after the madding crowd of


the tap-room has departed and the doors are shut; we owe
money and we have a turned-down page in our book of life,,
so may the fates be propitious and keep us out of that wit-
ness box.
A peculiar odour, one and indivisible, yet combined,,
consisting of burning coals, corduroy, fustian, onions, sand-
wiches, cold cabbage, dinners in handkerchiefs, and nobblers,
begins to pervade the room if the windows be not left open.
Luckily, h®wever, a thorough draught claims the Court
House as its own, and temporises with miasma by capitu-
lating for influenza.
The jury are called, and answer to their names. Twelve
of the unhappy ones are chosen and sworn in, seldom being
challenged. The Associate reads the counts, and the case
proceeds. The counsel for the defence and the Crown
Prosecutor make able speeches, and the jury sleep pro-
foundly. When a witness is being examined, an intelligent
juror sometimes asks a question. In a case tried some time
ago, the plaintiff accused a constable of bumping his head on
some stones, and claimed damages. A juror asked if the
stones were hard enough to hurt! Tableau !
Some of the most exhaustive summings up have been
delivered from the judicial bench in Launceston. Carefully
considered, they take hold of every salient point, and when
the sentence is delivered it is patent to all that justice, tem-
pered by mercy, has been dealt to the criminal.
Not far off from the Court House is the Police Station,
the exterior walls of which in the summer time are festooned,
almost smothered, with delicious purple and white grapes,
the finest in Launceston out of a hothouse. The worthy
Superintendent of Police cultivates these, and occasionally


gives his friends out of his luscious abundance. To taste one
of these grapes is an epoch to be remembered when out of
the colony. Even Mona Yale grapes, as large as a pigeon’s
egg, hardly equal the hardy produce of those carefully trained,
but weather-beaten vines, which grace the Police Station and
the Gaol. Strange that the traditional fruit, the emblem of
man’s fall—nay, the chief cause of criminal effects —should
live and have its being on the very walls within which jus-
tice and punishment are meted out to fallen man !
As you enter a pair of swinging doors you behold a
room similar to the justice hall of the Court House. It is
Petty Sessions day. A gray-headed gentleman, “ weary
and old with service,” sits with benign countenance awaiting
the advent of the second magistrate. , What histories that
old gentleman has heard sitting on that bench for half a
century. Young once, and energetic, he is more irritable
than heretofore; the infirmities of old age creep upon him
apace ; his once acute ears are now dull, but with an instinc-
tive perception of the merits of the cases he tries, he gives
judgments according to law, and these have never yet been
subverted by appeals to higher Courts. A thought imperious,
for he recollects the day when the detritus of England’s scum,
her convict brood, trembled beneath his glance, he cannot
at the same time remember that tempora mutantur et nos
mutamur in illis, and so he still lives in the dead past, when
he was an autocrat and a power in the land.
The Justice of the Peace takes his seat, and the culprit
is brought into the dock. The clerk, a venerable but highly
intelligent old gentleman, with a gray beard reaching nearly
to his waist, reads the charge, “ Tasmania to wit,” &c. The
prisoner is accused of larceny ; he pleads not guilty.


The Magistrate gives a preparatory cough. He looks to«
wards the prisore'.’ and says, “The law empowers me to give you
three years’ imprisonment ; but as this is your first offence
you are sentenced to—.”
“ But, your Worship, the prisoner pleaded not guilty,”
interpolates the Clerk of Petty Sessions.
His Worship —I know he pleaded guilty; don’t inter-
rupt me, please.
Clerk of Petty Sessions—But, sir—
His Worship (a light dawning on him) —He pleaded
guilty, did he not ?
Clerk op P.S. (in a small roar) —No, your Worship,
he said “ Not Guilty.”
His W.—H’m. I misunderstood him. Do not speak
so loud, please. I have a slight cold, and it affects one of
my ears, but, oh, very slightly. Call the witnesses, please.
Witness, sworn, deposes—“ My name is John Snooks ;
I reside in Wellington street; prisoner took a shirt out of my
back yard, and ”
Prisoner—You are a liar.
Magistrate (in blissful ignorance)—You can ask the
witness any questions you like afterwards.
Examination continued—“ Prisoner pawned the shirt
to ”
Prisoner—Why you dash—double-dashed—rogue, you
never had one.
Witness—What 1 had you stole, any way.
Clerk of P. S. rather troubled ; Magistrate unconscious ;
policemen on the alert, and indignant.


Peace being restored, the examination continues, amid
vituperation, and the prisoner is eventually sentenced to nine
months’ imprisonment or so.
The next case is one of abusive language.
The complainant deposes—“ Defendant called me
names.”
Clerk of P. S.—What names ?
Complainant —Bad names.
Clerk of P. S. — But what were the exact terms he
used ?
Complainant— -Oh, they were not fit to be repeated.
Clerk of P. S. (impatiently)—Did he call you a •
or what ?
Witness (in an audible whisper)—Yes, and a
Clerk of P. S.— Why could you not say that before ?
The accused is then bound down in his own recognisances
to keep the peace to all Her Majesty’s subjects for a term of
six months. And thus the wheel of the law turns slowly and
sedately from day to day, while scenes occur daily, worthy
description by a far better pen than mine.
Yonder woman, with the black eye, flaccid countenance,
and swollen lips, was once a bright-eyed girl, tenderly nurtured,
and well educated. A false lover led her astray, and she fell.
It was the old, oft-repeated story of man’s falsehood and
woman’s frailty. She now exists partly in gaol, and partly
on the thresholds of lew taverns, hopelessly drunk, except
when incarcerated. Even now she is sprightly sometimes,
and corrects a lapse of grammar in the constable who arrested
her. That other woman, her companion, is of a different
class. Was she young once, and fair ? Could those fang-


jike teeth have ever been anything but hideous ? that dirty
red web of tangled hair ever have been kempt and smooth,
as a woman’s ought to be? You cannot imagine that this
being was ever other than loathsome, but she was. Bred in
crime, reared in a hot-bed of iniquity, she was vile from her
infancy, drank in vice with her mother’s milk, cursed ere
she could well lisp, and stole when she could just toddle;
but yet she had the beauty of youth once. Kind nature never
makes the young altogether repulsive. She has an ugly cut
over her eye, and painfully puts her hand to her side. Her
broad mouth is discoloured and swollen with an angry bruise,
and she stands there to seek protection against yonder
wretch, who is her paramour, and who has half killed her in
his mad drunken wrath for a fancied wrong. When she is
called to testify against him, the singular brute-like fidelity
to her “ master” prevails, and she utters not an accusation.
When that man is committed to the cells for a day or two for
his frequent breaches[of the law, she hangs about, half through
the chilly night, scant clad and anxious, unwilling t© leave
the spot where he is, and when he is released, welcomes him
with a joy that is almost holy ! Love is the same every-
where ; verily, “it looks on tempests, and is never shaken.’’
Every day, punctual as the clock, the Magistrate takes
his seat and metes out justice. Daily that attenuated frame
is immersed in ice-cold water, winter and* summer alike
And he will do so yet a little while longer, till the enemy
" w h° rea F s the bearded grain at a breadth, and the flowers
that grow between, calls him, and then he will go to his rest
and receive the reward of his long and blameless life. Bear
with him gently, ye Launcestonians ! That old Nestor is
yet worth a thousand of your law-crammed youngsters, whose


hot-headed energy would do more harm than a hundred small
blunders committed now.
Since the above was written, he has gone to enjoy the
otium cum dignitate of a well-spent public life, respected of
all, loved by a few, perhaps detested by a good many, but—
find his equal in experience and ability, and ye will have found
a treasure !


CHAPTER Yll.
ALSATIA,
SET EE the Police Court, our thoughts naturally
turn to its self-imposed victims, the lower stratum
of the humanity of a large town. But for these,
the Magistrate would go to seed, and the Police Clerk lose
his cunning in the reading of charges. But for these, the
lonely policeman would go mad with melancholy, and rust
with inactivity.
Alsatia in Launceston is bounded on the south, north, east,
and west by respectability, and runs mostly in two blocks of
streets, parallel to Charles and Margaret streets, enclosed
by Patterson street on one side, and the unpeopled bush on
the other.
It is known and understood as Wellington street.
Without it we would pine away and die. London hath her
Seven Dials; Dublin her Bull Lane, Bow Lane, Pour
Courts, and the region around Mabbot and Purdon streets,
&c. ; Melbourne her Little Bourke street east ; and even
Hobart Town her Upper Goulburn street. Should we, then,
live without our street, vice bedaubed, and a terra incognita
to the virtuous, to whom omne ignotum est horrihile ?
Not that Vice confines herself to this particular region, only
here she is seen without any “ dressing ” to make her savoury.
She is to be found everywhere, and so is virtue, if only sought.
The two go hand in hand, and yet touch not, though they
know each other. Ignorant virtue is but the absence of vice
through nescience. Virtue that knows and resists for its own
sake is the positive quality to be revered and respected. Real
nnccence, and knowledge of its antithesis, go together. The


other is only a negative virtue, even as the satisfied man will
not eat, and the rich man not rob, save he be a kleptomaniac.
Splendid Vice ! where lovely women kiss us to sin with red
lips, fragrant of the vine of Champagne ; where the glittering
mirror reflects the evening dress that has just left the ante-
chamber of a Duke, and the clean clad waiter, silent as a statue,
who obeys your behests ! Alluring Yice! offering the
glittering wine cup, whose drops are nectar crushed from a
thousand grapes, to make one draught ecstatic and warm as a
pure wife’s kiss! Refined Vice ! where the oath of the
sweltering mob obtrudes not, and where the omnipresent sin
is never mentioned ! Hidden Vice ! amidst which the snow
maiden may have walked in her purity, and not known that
the gold bedizened queen of the feast was a hideous sepulchre
of horrid uncleanness ; where she might have thought that
heaven was even as this. Aristocratic Vice !to whom princes
and peers fall down and worship and lend a brilliancy, that out-
shines homely virtue ! Look not for Vice thus clad and
alluring in Our Alsatia, or you will be disappointed and turn
loathing away. Here she stalks rampant. The skeleton head
obtrudes, denuded of flowers, with disease and filth hovering
around. Let us enter yonder hovel. That is Vice’s palace,
where she reigns supreme.
We enter a small sized weather-board cottage, whose
quiet is ominous. The door is low enough to strike
your head, aud the concussion causes a shower of dust
and cobwebs to gently settle on you as you enter. To the left
is the parlour, where a dirty, half drunken harridan sits
imbibing gin out of a broken tea-cup and smoking villainous
tobacco from a short black pipe, while she emits narcotic
fumes, combined with an odour cf onions. Wild-eyed and


unkempt, she rises at our approach and calls forth her atten-
dant slaves, and they come. All dirty—all with the finery of
the pawnshop ; all smelling strongly of gin and onions—-and
soon you see half a dozen women (?) leering at you. Their
ages vary, but who can tell their age, when they were never
young ? They did not love once and get betrayed ; they were
evil from their infancy. The oldest, ugliest, dirtiest of the
lot is the “ boss of the shanty she is a “ lifer,” and fifty
years ago, came out, London bred, Irish born, sin stained,
for and from all time. About two or three of the abandoned
ones around are young, and save for a bold look and a
generally tawdry aspect, might be called good-looking.
These are better dressed than the rest, and are for show.
The others are past mistresses in crime, and perhaps share
the proceeds of the wages of shame that their prettier compeers
earn. Do not be moved to pity to see these girls so young
and so sin stained. They were not allured to this den of
infamy under false pretences of needlework or domestic
service. They came willingly enough, and know as much
evil as the oldest of the lot. Amongst the crowd, one woman
shows thirty-five years, and a set of fangs, yellow with neglect
and stained with tobacco. Her hair is a horrible dingy red, and
has not been combed within the memory of man—washed
goodness knows when ? Her face, common and freckled, is
bloated by drink, and her eyes, which contain a cast, also
show a cataract and veinous blood-red lines, alcohol begotten.
Bhe stands for a class—-her miserable class. Fair, dark,
muddy complexioned, all show the inevitable stamp of vice—
dirt, coarse mouths, low foreheads, dirty clothes, —all set off and
garnished with tawdry finery. To a woman they
know the police cell. Those of the former generation
all knew the convict lash. The men who frequent


these dens are not of the refine! classes as a rale. Gamblers
in luck ; miners who hare come to town to spend their pile;
strangers seeing the <! lions bullies, who are not profitable
companions either to the women or the frequenters
of the lt crib boys of the artisan class, who
have come here to see “ life, ” or to celebrate
their release from the bonds of apprenticeship. These are
the classes represented. The native gentry to the manner
born know better—private vice is far more tempting than
this kind of thing. You can get “ grog ’’ here, but what
grog ! Alcohol undistilled, reeking with poison and fusel oil.
Drink it not, for it might be hocussed ! Crawling things are
in the cobwebbed corners—on the dirt-smeared floor. If
you have feelings at all, you retire in horror, your curiosity
more than satisfied.
As for the lower class of public-houses, here also is
unpainted vice triumphant. As you drink your nobbier,
your neighbour at the bar exhales nameless odours of an
unwashed skin and an unchanged shirt. On yonder dirty
wooden settee is bunched up in a curiously commingled heap,
half reclining, half sitting, wholly unconscious, a sodden
drunkard. A filthy pipe is feebly clenched in his limp hand.
He dribbles, and his horrible clothes are soiled with hig
thickened saliva. ' His hat lies in an expectorated pool at his
feet, and you yourself stand in slimy refuse, which is nameless.
What attractions do these miseries offer to a mind
even imperfectly educated, and not quite brutalised ? Swine
love their wallow, but the sheep would be unhappy if
penned with the porcine race. Veiled vice is to be dreaded
for our youth, but open vice defeats herself, and is
repulsive. Of veiled vice, Launceston has its full
share. The servant girls are not utterly vir-


tuous; tlie factory and work girl sometimes becomes
Fantine, and even among the goddesses of Capua we bear of
things which cannot be repeated; but organised attractive vice,,
as in Melbourne and Sydney, London and Dublin, is con-
spicuous by its absence. If this were the only pecies of vice-
bedaubed haunts in Launceston, our better class of youth
would grow up perfect angels of purity.
I do not mean to say that vice is everywhere
as openly repulsive and horrible as this. Away on
the borders of the town stands a quiet, respecU
able, good looking dwelling, where “ servant girls ” are
particularly numerous. Some of these “ servant girls” dress
remarkably well for that class of beings, and perform their
work in a most perfunctory manner, such as no mistress, but
a peculiarly lenient one, would permit. These domestics
seem to have very easy times of it somehow. They dress up
at 2 p.m., and do the block in Brisbane street. Then, again,
they are to be seen in gorgeous apparel in the evenings, at the
concerts, on the hill, and in the streets. Strange ! Then they
have as many followers as they like—in fact, the more
the merrier, says their accommodating mistress. That tender
hearted dame has a weakness for servants. She used to keep
a huge negro to open the door to visitors. He always ad-
mitted them, and occasionally ejected them incontinently.
That negro left subsequently and took to giving pugilistic
entertainments and exhibitingposcs plastiques.
George street embraces a curiously commingled mass of
respectable houses —and otherwise. Alongside and opposite a
row of residences that would net disgrace Bloomsbury, stand
some two roomed tenements which the police watch vigilantly
and which we do not care to dilate upon. The subject is not a
savoury one.


About the women of Alsatia. I Lave never yet
seen amongst the more depraved class a fresh faced girl
young in crime, with the thoughts and feelings of her old virtue
-clinging around her. All I have met, knew not the day or the
hour when they fell. Nay, they were always fallen both young
and old. Some there ase who outwardly comfort themselves
as respectable women, decorous and well dressed, neither
drinking nor flaunting. They walk the streets by day
known only by a few, and at night are seen in the secluded
and dark walks by the Cataract and Windmill Hills, but
these come not within the category. Others, again, who are
yet young, are still old in crime ; and though they have their
youth to lend them a spurious animal loveliness are merely
whited sepulchres. Go farther east, and you come to —• — street.
The doors of the hotels there are shut, but a talismanic knock
opens the portals to you and you enter. Here everything
is clean. The house is a respectable one. The golden youth
from the shops are here playing “ Yankee grab ” for shillings’
till daylight dawns. They drink, not much, but gamble and
make bets with a terrible earnestness, which almost insinuates that
the money may have once inhabited the counter till. None look
round at you ; they are too earnestly engaged. Out in the
cold night air again. Eastward still and we enter street.
Here also, the “ open sesame ” secures our entrance to an
hotel. The drinks are sherry and champagne and the
wines of the rich; hot grog and strong, mixed by a neat handed
Phillis, pretty and ladylike. Billiards and pool, subdued laughter,
and refined jokes rule here. The Victorian “swell,” who
spends his money freely, is slightly intoxicated, and “ blows”
greatly, but the interest is centred on the billiard table. A
match is on with something like three or four hundred pounds
at stake. No noise, no bustle, and yet Vice, somewhat


resembling her former shape, reigns here supreme, but feeble..
Nightly the counter-jumpers gamble with their shillings
nightly the proletariat mob fight and drink, and the fallen
women prowl after their prey. “ Swells” sip their wine, and
think they are fast, and having Alsatia, the town is happy.
Yarley may talk and rave about rampant Vice—of weak
sinners dragged down to the bottomless pit. But those now
untainted are safe. The youth who can think the bar of the
in Wellington street alluring, would enjoy himself
in a cesspool ; and the girl who would lose her virtue, lured
to those dirt begrimed hovels, must have her moral
consciousness very dead. There are other ways and means
by which virtue is betrayed, and youths are led out of the path
of rectitude, but they are hidden away and carefully obscured.
Preachers may rave, but where humanity swarms, even with
breathing room, as in our town, there must exist some outlet for
the pent-up passions of untutored men. Each centre of popula-
tion has its detritus, and wherever this congregates, there also
must exist the low pot-houses and other places where fallen
nature takes its pleasures. “ Because we are virtuous, should
there be no more cakes and aie”—or beer and skittles ?
Yarley and others may cry out about rampant im-
morality, but vice, centralised in a town, is at once
the salvation and safety of the burgesses. We can put
down a low public-house, but all our legislation cannot
bold human passions in check. Give these criminal and
drunken men no habitat of their own, and woe be to our
daughters and wives, and even to ourselves, when we walk the
streets. So it would be as well to “ let sleeping dogs lie,”
and for us to be content that things are as they are, and not
a great deal worse.


Our police annals are singularly free, proportionately, of
gross crimes. Misdemeanours are the rale, absolute offences
and crimes the exception. Mr Yarley went into Wellington-
street and told the denizens of their crimes, etc. They pelted
him, and he was paraded as a martyr. What is the use of
facing a tiger with a hymn book ? A piece of raw meat as a
pacifier, and a six-shooter as a persuader, would be far more
effective. If our evangelistic friend had done what several
of our ministers and priests do, and had gone amongst those
men, treating them and reasoning with them as fellow
men, and not as criminals, he would have done more good,
and not have left Launceston with the recollections of a pro-
jectiled brickbat, and an abortive letter to the Council.
Our town is fairly lighted, but it is the falsest of false
economy to restrict the outlay on gas lamps in a large town,
inasmuch as where light exists, crime, which loves darkness,
compelled to hide its hideous head. The policy of most
governing bodies, in regard to the lighting of cities, seems to
converge in the wrong direction. Where fashion and respect-
ability revel in broad Streets, handsome buildings, and spacious
squares, there light is abundant, and the night is robbed of
half its terrors. In the abodes of dirt and crime, the Alsatian
regions where the poor congregate, where the low pot-house
flourishes, helping its neighbor of the golden balls, where the
thief and garroter find fitting seclusion while they lurk for
tbeir prey, there economy in light is practised, and gas lamps
are few and far between.
This is a totally false principle. In a glare of light not
half the disgusting scenes often witnessed in the back ways
and alleys would occur, while in the existing state of things
immorality is rampant and the police are evaded. A lax-ge


outlay on a perfect system of lighting large cities would lessen
the criminal population through want of offered opportunity,
render the police charge sheet* a blank on many occasions,
and make the office of the gaol keepers a sinecure. Crime
and immorality go hand in hand in dark corners, in obscure
and unfrequented spots, and where the public eye cannot see
them. It is a noticeable fact that when the moon is at her
zenith, the charge sheets at the Police Station are almost
denuded of most of the petty larcenies, cases of drunkenness,
disorderly conduct, and other night offences as compared with
other periods of the lunar month.
In London the dark alleys and courts, the arches of London
Bridge, and the Thames Embankment, previous to the intro-
duction of a thorough system of gas or electric lights, used
to be the haunts of criminals, immoral women, garroters, and
prowlers generally. Now the Thames Embankment is a safe
spot for a evening stroll, and crime centres to the eastward
amidst the bye-ways and alleys of St. Giles’, and the purlieus
of Poplar, Stepney, and the outlying regions in those direc-
tions, where the system of lighting has not penetrated in its
entirety. Crime in London has emigrated eastward, as the
march of civilisation spread the glorious beams of the gas
lamp further and further towards Temple Ear. In the old
days of oil burners, Westminster, Charing Cross, and other
dhtricts in the west used to be dangerous spots after dark,
where the midnight thief prowled around unmolested, and the
abandoned woman plied her trade, sometimes luring her
victims to their death. Hyde Park at nightfall presents a
horrible spectacle of depraved humanity scattered broadcast,
although these old blots on London civilisation are gradually
being eradicated by the introduction of a thorough system of
treet lighting.


Coming nearer home, those who have been in Melbourne,
Sandhurst, and other cities, can certify to the immortality
now or lately carried on in the Fitzroy Gardens, the banks of
the Yarra, or the Reserve of old Bendigo, in spite of the
vigilance of plain clothes policemen. These, and a host of
other arguments, can be used against that falsest of false
economy, very noticeable in the minor colonial cities and towns,
of having the streets only partially lighted. Apart from the
danger to pedestrians along uneven roads, the immorality
and crime that are rampant where darkness exists, are suffi-
cient arguments to induce a movement for a better system of
street lighting than is in vogue.


CHAPTER VIII.
MUSICAL SOCIETIES.
coveretli a multitude of sins, but she does
jfp not make her votaries long to clasp each other
a embrace. If “ one touch of nature
makes the whole world kin,” one successful concert makes
some hundred worshippers of the tuneful Muse, who did not
assist at it, lift up their voices and—sneer.
In Launceston music is a sine qua non , a summum honum t
and the one thing needful. Have a fair presence or other-
wise, education—well, a little, just a few friends or intro-
ductions (this is not absolutely necessary), play decently on a
fiddle or flute, or sing a tenor song fairly and correctly, and
your social fortune is made. You become a burning and a
shining light, beloved of women and trusted of men, for
can music err ?
But professionals are regarded with a critical eye, and
woe be to the tenor who indulges in a grace note. That
privilege is for amateurs only. A third-rale amateur concert,
I assert, would be far better and more largely patronised
than even Grisi herself. And why ? Because the people
know the amateur, and have only heard of Grisi. Far be it
from me to assert that there is no talent at these amateur
concerts. One would go a long distance before he would
meet such a rare collection of voices, and such correct ren-
dition of music, occasionally.
I say occasionally, because sometimes the concerts given
for charitable and other objects, and not under the auspice s
of the two societies, are just bearable. They are, as a rule,
well attended; that is to say, men take their wives, get


them comfortably seated, and then clear out till near the
finale.
The two societies of the town have done much to foster
a correct taste for true music. They are ably managed, both
of then), and it is a pity that some individual members of
each have formed cliques, and fight like Kilkenny cats, thus
making people erroneously believe that the societies war
with each other through their leaders.
One society “ goes in” for oratorios, and as it is the
thing to feel charmed, sometimes against your will, the sleepy
mouth dares not gape, but expands into a feeble smile, while
the eyss of the listeners look inexpressively somniferous—-
or ineffably entranced. We will suppose the latter.
The other society indulges in ballads, light operatic
selections, and other variegated morceaux , which it
must be admitted are far more attractive to the
ordinary mind. As it is not fashionable to have
an. ordinary mind, and as the assthetical and wealthy
proletariat loves the cadences of Handel, the rest of the
Launceston universe feels bound to do the same, and conse-
quently the ballad variety is sat upon somewhat. “ Kaarnan,’*
Elijah, and a few other scriptural heroes are personages
regarded with awe, and when they tell you in loud-voiced
tenor, through the medium of bewhiskered singers, that they
did all kinds of things several thousand years ago, the realistic
merges into the imaginary and sublime, perhaps, and the
mind tension lapses as it ought not to do.
But the ballads oft heard, with memories of other days,,
not obscured in the mist of centuries. What of them ? Well,
you can, peradventure, remember that in years gone by some
voice, now silent, sang “ Comm through the Eye,” and your


•eyes grow dim as you listen. “ The Last Hose of Summer,’’
can call back a thought of your first visit to the opera, and
even then you may know that once, listening, your tears
.started unbidden through sheer sympathy with the fair
haired girl who accompanied you, and wept with the hero in
his affliction.
Give me the ballads for their memories, and let the crash-
ings of Handel and Beethoven be enjoyed by those high class
and aesthetical minds which don’t go in for reminiscences, but
chromatic scale passages, and almost impossible combinations.
I am not such a Goth as to substitute “ Yankee Doodle,’’ for
Handel’s sonatas, but—Handel rendered by thirty vocalists, and
eight instrumentalists cannot but be abortive. The arranged
orchestras are wanting, and the volume of harmonised sound,
which depends upon its intensity for its grandeur, being
absent, the effect generally falls flat on ears that require to
he awed before they will listen.
Concerts and lectures, tea meetings, and friendly so-
cieties’ demonstrations, form the sum and substance of Laun-
cestonian amusements save when a wandering minstrel troupe,
a dramatic company, or a circus comes amongst the people.
Then the first and the last make money ; the votaries of
Thespis invariably lose—or say they do to the confiding
hotel-keepers, who deplore their departure generally, retaining
a portmanteau as a memento.
To the lasting reproach of Launceston, be it spoken that
she has no theatre or academy of music where dramatic repre-
sentation, unmutilated, could be presented. Joint stock
companies have been spoken of to start a theatre, the public
prints have urged the necessity for one, and yet Launceston


allows Hobart Town to abrogate to herself all the imported
talent that comes into little Tasmania.
Creswick came and went to the South. Mrs Scott-
feiddons came and departed Southward disgusted, after giving
a few “ recitals.” An English Opera Company came, and
after mutilating the “ Bohemian Girl” departed for Victorian
shores with lightened purses and elongated faces, objurgating
violently, and being remembered by hotel keepers and news-
paper proprietors.
The cause of all this is obvious. There is no place in
Launceston where dramatic representations can be pro-
duced in their entirety—no stage large enough where any three-
act drama can be performed in completeness.
The old Theatre Eoyal was a tumble-down shanty, by
which the proprietors lost money, so a public meeting was
called to consider whether an Academy of Music should be
erected for the town. Six citizens attended. One moved the
raising of subscriptions for the desired object 5 another moved
an amendment that the funds raised be appropriated to the
conversion of the Chalk-taw Indians ; and the others were of
opinion that the very existence of a theatre would corrupt the
morals of the young people.
When the English Opera Company was here several people
went to see the performance at the Mechanics’ Institute, who
had moral objections to a theatre. “It was not like a theatre,
you know, and you did not put on evening dress.” This was
the argument in favor of the morality of the Mechanics’ Insti-
tute as opposed to the immorality of a theatre. The pieces
produced had nothing to do with it. The “Can-can” at the
Mechanics’ Institute would be allowable ; “ Hamlet” at the-
theatre a thing to be prayed against and condemned.


Alas for human nature 1 Morality is contorted into
what men think it is, all the world oyer. Pure morality looks
to the narrowed vision of abortive intellects as like vice, as
cant and conventionality resemble morality.


CHAPTER IX.
KELIGIOUS.
SOW I am coins to a tender subject, for more men
bate each other amove Dei than through nations’
wars.
Till lately little Tasmania served God in love and
union, each denomination worshipping truly ; praying for
each other in churches; hand-shaking heartily on week-
days ; dealing in business amicably ; and letting theological
feuds and dogmas alone. For more than half a century the
Roman Catholic was not to the Protestant a terrible heie noir
to be prayed for, but shunned the Protestant to the
Catholic a horrible heretic lost to Heaven and to be mourned
over with a triduum. Now all is changed lamentably
changed. The first unfurling of the colors of war has com-
menced—Orangemen and the wearers of the green are at
open enmity where, a few months ago, the existence of either
was known to but few. The newspapers teem, or did, with
religious controversies and expectorated gall, but I must say
that latterly the battle has been very one-sided, the more
bitter of the anti-Papists being the aggessors, and occupying
the field unquestioned save occasionally.
These are the effects. The cause—there is, alas, only
one, and the effects of his ministration are so terrible that
even his own supporters shrink back aghast at the results.
He came (why mention his name?), he saw, and scattered
discord which will last for ages, as I said in a former article
in another place, “ for the love and glory of God.”*
* “ Fossils,” Cornwall Chronicle.


He was an old man, childish in his bigotry; this is, if
bis mission were bigotry and not charlatanism. He insulted
a religion through one of its rites, and the people applauded.
He published a book bristling with assertions unproved, and
used the argument de facto which appeals to self-interest and
not to religious feelings, viz., “ Exterminate them or they
will exterminate you.”
Among the ignorant mass this specious indoctrination of
anti-papistical ideas spread like wildfire. The educated
wondered and pitied, not the preacher, but the believers.
Such a wave of religious excitement swept over the 105,000
of little Tasmania, as even Moody and Sankey failed to
raise, proportionately, in the United Kingdom.
Cui lono ? His supporters benefitted not, although
they acted in good faith. The cause of religion benefitted
not, for religion and peace go hand in hand. The preacher
himself benefitted not, for according to him, all the “ takings”
went to a society.
The evil that was wrought up is still apparent, and the
community is divided into sections : wife against husband,
friend against friend, lover against sweetheart, sister against
brother.
Is there any increase in true religious feeling ?Is the
charge-sheet at the police court any the less filled ?Is the
calendar of the criminal sessions purged of the usual
offences? Is commercial morality one whit more pure?
And last of all, though not least of all this string of questions,
has one Eoman Catholic been converted to Protestantism, or
the much-needed (?) work of proselytising been advanced ?
If the answers are in the negative, where is the good to
counteract or nullify the evils of divided interests, bitter


rancour, and internecine moral and religious warfare ?
If the reader will mark carefully, he will find that I
make no assertions ; I only ask questions ; and if I make any
statements they are incontrovertible facts.
As a set-off to the good that may have been done bv an
ill-judged crusade, we have a great quantity of evil. This
must be admitted, assuming that some good was done. The
Hobart Town riots are a blot on our civilisation. The ad-
vertised correspondence in the newspapers—where old and
buried feuds were raked up, are records to be lamented, and
when come across to be burnt. “On earth peace and good-
will towards men,” were the golden words that heralded the
coming of our Saviour ; but, alas, some quote against this
that “ He came, not to bring peace, but a sword.”
Oh, the pity of it ! the pity of it !
Our community is a distinctively religious one, and
active practical Christianity abounds, though tinged greatly
with envy, malice, all uncharitableness, and cant.
I must say, though it may appear invidious, that the
Roman Catholics and the Wesleyans are certainly foremost
in promoting the cause of charity—that is, Christianity.
The Benevolent Society stands first for its practical use-
fulness, and all religions merge their differences outside the
committee-room for the benefit of the suffering poor. This
has always been the case, save in the matter of the alms-
houses, which proved a sore subject, the Holy Bible, strange
to say, proving the casus belli. The Benevolent Society has
lately lost through the Great Reaper one whose place it will
be difficult to fill.
The Industrial School is formed on the truest basis of


social and moral Christianity—the basis of attempting to
reform the juvenile criminal by elimination from criminal
associations and by healthy occupation. But, strange to say, a
large proportion of those depraved girls detest the place, and
clear out on every opportunity, giving the worthy chairman
and others a vast deal of trouble.
Now I take it, that the basis being right, the form of opera-
tions must be wrong, and thus the discontent of the inmates
and the discouragement of the promoters. Take, for example,
a young girl who for twelve years of her life has never heard of
the Bible, and connects curses and oaths with ordinary and
sinless speech. Sinful, free as the air, dirty, and in spite of
what the goody books say, happy according to her lights, she
is dragged from this blissful state of ignorance, her evil spirits
are expelled, and she is taken to a home swept and garnished,
where she hears prayers several times a day, and eats her
meals while she digests a text. From a hotbed of crime she
is thrown into a cold bath of virtue, and the change of tem-
perature does not agree with her.
Why cannot judicious charity be separated from religion
when it is an incontrovertible fact that the latter cannot and
will not be forced down people’s throats ?
I write, being open to correction. I only judge our
Industrial School by others I have seen, and do not know the
system in vogue. I only adduce deductions from given data.
If a girl about to be reclaimed were reclaimed gradually, the
results would be very satisfactory. The forcing system will
always move a failure. Teach a street arab that to swear is
sinful before you instruct him in the church catechism. Other-
wise, the latter and former will have the same meaning, both
being, to the gamin, meaningless.


Sunday Schools are a great and beneficial institution among
ms. They teach the young, while they give the children
healthy mental occupation for Sunday afternoons. I don’t
approve of Sunday School anniversary celebrations, however,
as at present carried out. It is a hard thing to say, but some
of the churches annually become the scene of a capital com-
mercial speculation.
The proper place for the anniversary celebration is the
Mechanics’ Institute, the Town Hall, or other secular build-
ing, not the precincts of a church. For instance, a Sunday
School probably numbers 300 children, all bursting with animal
vivacity. These animated beings have fathers, mothers, and possi-
bly grown up brothers and sisters. A church is improvised for
the necessities of an anniversary, and a stage is fitted up for
the children, while the rest of the edifice is thronged by a dense
crowd of visitors. Ministers, teachers, monitors, are all busy
looking after the arrangements. Visitors are securing seats.
Two thousand people are crammed in a building originally
intended to accommodate a thousand, and the atmo-
sphere is insufferably warm. The children on the
platform are fidgetty, and look upon the whole pro-
ceeding as a fine spectacle where they can show
their new clothes—and nothing more. The visitors think of
each others’ bonnets, and apply fans and hymn-papers pressed
into the service, to stir the reeking atmosphere iuto a breeze.
A hum of voices pervades all, and anything but a solemn
silence is over the assembly met ostensibly to worship Grod.
The sacredness of the church is gone for the time. The visitors,
at an unaccustomed service, gape and stare and talk. The
little ones look out for the prizes and sing their hymns because
they know them. Then comes the collection, the sermon, in
which the grown up folk have no interest, and the throng dis-


perses. It is elevating to bear nice fresh-faced children singing
the praises of the Most High, but it is pitiful to know that
unless the anniversary collection was something considerable,
a decided deficit in the annual church funds would be
shown.
Anniversaries are right and proper, but not in a consecrated'
place of worship, or a church or a building devoted to prayer.
Ic is more fitting that they should be held on a week day in a
public room or hall, and there they would bo impressive, and
appeal to the better feelings of all.
The author remembers in his youth the anniversary pro*
cession and gathering of the Sunday School Union, in
Calcutta, to and at the Town Hall, Hive thousand children
trained to sing the same hymns, were heard by about as many
visitors, who joined in the grand pman of praise, and it
reminded him of the storied Covenanters. The effect was
grand, awe inspiring, and the burst of music would reach the
furthermost ends of the city. If this took place in a church,
the whole would be marred by a sense of unfitness. As it
was, it was in order and right.


CHAPTER X.
INSTITUTIONS
I am not going to “ blow ” about our museums,
institutes, mutual improvement societies, and such
f like things. My “institutions ” will comprise
certain manners and customs of Launcestonians rather than
their buildings. But I must say something about the build-
ings too, and what they contain.
In the first place we have a grand public library. The
antiquity of its books (not its own property) is marvellous, and
the care with which the public is excluded is something to be
wondered at. It is almost perpetually closed, except when
no one who has not his own time absolutely at his own dis-
posal, can visit it. Then the “ librarian ” knows a book from
-a crosscut saw, and occasionally makes blunders, but it is
•only human to err.
The Mechanics’ Institute has a fine collection of literary
productions, a comfortable reading room, an erudite librarian,
who can guide your tastes, or intuitively divine them. The
'absolute knowledge he possesses of the location of each of
those several thousand volumes, without data or reference
sheets, is simply marvellous. It is a source of constant
(pleasure to me to watch his quick perception of a reader’s
wants, and how confidently he turns to the shelf where some
required work abides, till asked for. Have you exhausted
your repertoire of pet volumes and authors ? Tell him your
style, and he will find you congenial food for the mind in a
few moments.
The Mechanics’lnstitute has one or two drawbacks—danc-
ing classes and brass bands. These sometimes perform toge-


ther, and occasionally in two different parts of the building, and
making night hideous, cause the reader, who seeks peace, to
mildly blaspheme, to wildly to rush into print.
Saturdays are sacred to auction marts. Bell’s is crowded
hebdomadally with a heterogeneous mass of human beings,,
from the well-dressed idler to the ragged orange woman, from
the fustian-clad cattle dealer to the greasy loafer.
A lot of crockery is about to be offered for sale, and the
crowd of general dealers surround the incomplete sets,
examining, with a critical eye, for flaws, &c.
At home the genus broker is hook-nosed, and Hebraic.
Here his congener, the general dealer, is voluble, and Hiber-
nian.
This fellow, with capacious jaws, baggy skin, immense
corporation, and dirty habiliments, is wealthy. He is [a
terrible skinflint, and a trouble to the auctioneer, as he
always bids and seldom buys, generally disparaging the lots
to the bystanders.
Yonder oldish man, with the wall-eye, was a prize-
fighter in his youth. He has a constant smile on his face,
and his yellow fangs look horrible and dangerous.
That immensely fat old lady in the marvellous bonnet
keeps a good-for-nothing husband, who lays into her with
a poker. She has also a crippled daughter, who is a great
comfort to her. They all have one characteristic in common.
They have wonderfully keen eyes. Even the fellow with one
optic gleams around enough for two.
These are all in the “ trade,” and there is alway honor
among thieves. They get their goods cheap, and sell dear.
If a stranger were to bid, he would be surprised at the


extreme anxiety some of the species evince for the particular
articles he was attempting to buy.
The auctioneer starts. Says the knight of the hammer
“Now, gen’l’m’n, this, gen’l’m’n, is a lot, geuTm’n, of,
gen’l’m’n, crockery, genTm’n. What shall I say, urn, urn, urn,
3 guineas, 3 guineas, 3 guineas, going at 3 guineas, Ist,
2nd, 3rd, and last time, going, gen’lm’n, at 3 guineas,
3rd and last time, going, gen’lm’n Now, John, don’t
look so hard at that cup, or you’ll crack it ! Shall I say
los ? going at 3 guineas”—and up goes the hammer,
ready for the final stroke.
Suddenly the auctioneer espies a “ good mark,” and
after a little good humoured chaff starts the bidding again at
£3 55., at which figure probably the lot is knocked down.
Nest comes the sale of horses. It is singular that vast
crowds collect and admire the animals, but almost one and
all decline to meet the auctioneer’s eye.
“ This, gen’lm’n,” commences the auctioneer, “is a
gray mare, gen’lm’n, staunch, gen’lm’n, and quiet, gen’lm’n,
in saddle, gen’lm’n, or in harness. Now what shall I say ?
£2O! going at £2O! going at £2O ! £2O! £2l! £2l!
goingat£2l ! Ist, 2nd, 3rd, and last time at £2l !”
dash—and the hammer goes down while the astonished
multitude are informed that the animal is not sold.
Here is scene from another auction mart. A sale of
mining shares is on, and all the scrip fraternity are present.
Some come to buy, some to run up the shares, others to pre-
tend they have vast interests at stake when last week’s rent
and the butcher’s bill remain unpaid.
The auctioneer is a man of the world, and a gentleman. He


talks bis audience into a good temper, and painls mining in
roseate hues. He tells those present that now is the time to
make their fortunes. A few feet more and the reef will be
struck. This crushing will be better than the last. The
share market was going up rapidly, and so on. The scrip
fraternity grin sardonically and nudge each other, but seldom
buy, and possibly the shares are passed in.
Another idiosyncracy of the idle, and a great institution
in Launceston, is to watch the Melbourne steamer come in.
Why ? Half of these idle ones have not the faintest interest
in her, whether she sinks or swims. The remainder are ex-
pecting friends, or are porters and cabmen. The steamer gets
over the bar, and comes alongside the wharf, the boatmen
in the meantime looking injured as they have lost a fair very
unfairly, so they say. Instantly she strikes the fenders, the
gangway is erected, and a swarm of people jostle each other
on the narrow causeway.
Here comes an emaciated, sallow-looking lady of a certain
age, who has been wofully seasick all the passage. Close to
her is a brawny miner, with heavy swag, and the washdirt of
his last goldfield thick on trousers, coat, and hat. Near him
is a natty, dapper, little man, who looks “all there,” chatting
and laughing with acquaintances, and caring nought about
his luggage. He is traveller for Huckaback, Draper & Co.,
of Melbourne and Sydney, and knows a thing or two. You
would think he was a Cook’s tourist, except that he is too
much at his ease.
That fussy father of a family has brought over his good
lady and three children for a fortnight’s holiday. He is
anxious about his luggage, and that box in the hold preys
upon his soul. His wife is pottering about among the sundry


portmanteaux on deck, and gets mixed up with the steerage
passengers, cuddy servants, and others, most mysteriously.
She fears for that luggage, and spoils her first day in Tas-
mania through over-anxiety.
The whole scene is one of bustle and confusion, the
hullabulloo being greatly aided by the lookers-on, who have
no earthly business there, and ought to be made to li move
on.”
When railway trains were a novelty, all the world used
to go and see the express from Hobart Town come in. This
is now a thing of the past.
This dear town takes every available opportunity to
make holiday, and the practice is sometimes inconvenient,
but very pleasant. When the annual regatta is held on the
Tamar, Launceston puts on gala attire, and makes for
Stephenson’s Bend. When the races are run, everyone
rushes off to Mowbray.
On Queen’s Birthday the Windmill Hill is crowded to
witness a review, and it generally rains on that day.
The authorities cannot dodge the clerk of the weather.
If the 24th May fall on a Saturday, and the holiday be fixed
for the 2Gtb, Saturday finds old Sol blazing away, and on
Monday Jupiter Pluvius sends down water by the pailful.
We have our epidemics too. A short time ago it was
cricket, and the newspapers teemed with the willow. One
enthusiastic poet immortalised a game between two country
teams in an epic poem twelve stanzas in length.
Football occasionally seizes the residents. Politics
■occasionally has an innings, but not often. Pigeon shooting
is now “ in, ’ but the most lasting and sensible epidemic of


all is the Volunteer movement. This provides exercise for
those tied to a desk, and recreation to those who labor with
their hands. The man of letters finds in “ soldiering” a
pleasant relaxation, and our youth are made strong and
shapely by judicious drill and discipline. The two branches
of the volunteers are a credit to the town, well officered, and
containing the pick of our young men. The red coats and
the blue are pleasant to behold at any public gathering, and I
hope the ardour of our soldier citizens will not relax when the
novelty wears off.
If an epidemic would only seize Launcestonians and make
them rush after these “ Rambles,” the author would be very
much pleased. He does not wish to rouse the jealousy of
those excellent guide books, or to rush them out of the field..
They are useful in their way, but one likes to form his own
ideas about places, and ordinarily strong-minded men do not
care about imbibing ready-made ideas at Is. the lot. To these
perhaps, these “ Rambles ” may convey a little pleasure when
they have nothing else to do.
The last and greatest institutions of all are The Spoon
Dredge and Hely’s Dock. To see these is to admire them.
In reference to the former splendid ruin an intimate
acquaintance of the author once burst into the following
rhapsody, which he published in the Cornwall ' Chronicle , and
styled,
“IN MEMORIAM.”
“ Gone into the limbo of forgotten things ! She who
was the glory and honour of Tasman’s land ! The spot by
the amorons dolphin which knew her once, knows her no more.
She whom royalty pined to behold and die happy, now hides
her diminished head in the regions devoted to fish and long


forgotten piles. Bearing the scar of battle fresh upon her
the rush of the murmurous Tamar ; the odorous effulgence of
the Russian wharf; the wash of the tidal humidity thick
with the submerged companion of her labors. All these
marks she shows, and weary and old with service she retires,
crushed and left to the mercy of a rude stream that will,,
perhaps, for ever hide her. No more shall she regard with
longing eyes the hebdomadal departure to foreign shores
of her congener of the N.W. Coast. No more on Saturday
shall she regard his return to Tamar’s banks with the odour
of brine from the ocean and moist stanniferous deposits
emitted in gentle fumes ! Now, her limbs, dormant in inac-
tivity, motionless, allow the bittern, the diver, and the shag
to rest on her bosom. Pensively she sees the dock of ancient
fame, also inactive, murmuring at his fate. While the
surging silt, uprearing its effulgence to her protecting arm,
meets nought but the cold billows, or the dash of therotatary
fins of the incoming and outgoing monsters of the deep. Let
her lie, a monument of what was, a relict of a departed era.
Disturb not those hoary limbs covered with the sweat of much
labor and grief. Do we know her ? Ask of the mountain
does it know the mist; the sea shore if it kens of the soughing
ocean. Not to know her proclaims ourselves unknown,
and in the archives of the past, when we are gathered to our
fathers, will appear in letters of fire ;
“ ! The Spook Dredge.”
i


L’ENYOI.
Just a few words at parting. The author claims no
particular merit for the foregoing sketches. They are the
result of jottings made from the first day “ New Chum ”
landed in the colony till the hour of going to press. The
book, such as it is, is his first-born, and he is very proud of it.
No one published a book yet who was otherwise than proud
of it. or he would never risk the chance of a “ slating ” or the
gibes of his friends. If the author have offended anyone, he
is sorry. If anyone choose to apply some of the general
sketches to himself, letEim do so. “New Chum” made the
cap ; if it fit anyone’s head, the fault lies with the head.
Every idea in this little book is original, or believed to be so—
that is its only merit. Some remarks about “street lighting”
appeared in a local paper once. If anyone cavil at the article
being appropriated, let him know that the author having
written it, considered it his own property, and dovetailed it
where it fitted best. This book was not written for the glory
and honor of literature. It was published to sell, and that it
circulates widely and gains notoriety are the devout wishes of
“NEW CHUM”
FINIS.


PERPETUAL MOTION,
Or tbe sun a motive power, driving a machine under water by
its light, not by its heat, nor by any mechanical force or
contrivance, nor by anything terrestrial. It obeys only celestial
influence, pure light, emblem of Diety. It has no sympathy oi'-
affection for any other source of light or heat. Surrounded by
any number of candles, gas lamps, or blazing fire, has no effect
on it. Neither magnetism nor electricity, nor the solar
•spectrum in a dark room, will move it ; but the instant it is
exposed to the mysterious influence of pure sunshine its
behaviour is marvellous. It is animated as with the breath
of Diety. By directing the accumulated light rays from
an 18 inch silvered concave reflector on to it, the
speed is so great it appears to be standing perfectly
still. Directing the heat rays on it destroys it
utterly. Tbe condensed light of a full moon reverses the
motion, driving it backwards, showing its celestial
parentage. Here then is another of Nature’s rm-steries, a com-
plete picture of life in matter. A thing of beauty, extremely
delicate, and so sensitive to celestial influence that the'
diligent student in celestial physics may detect chemical
processes going on in the surface of the sun, that great
planetary time-keeper, which appears to be connected with
this little world of ours by a magnetic cord.
The little engine is a modification of Crooke’s Radio-
meter, and is wholly surrounded by a liquid atmosphere,
through which, whenever the sun shines, it is animated.
Such is the majesty of Light, that quickening pulse of life.
Except to the thoughtless, who have no curiosity, who are
passing through the world without knowing why they came
into it, it is a charming sight, highly interesting and singu-
larly beautiful. It is something deserving our earnest study,.
It is one of the golden chains let down from heaven, to attest
the unity and continuity of creation; that everything in the
universe is connected, and in motion ; that matter is alive
that light is life; and that there is a power in us independent
of us. It is a new philosophy, and religious science of
experimental truths, in which the earnest student feels devout..
It is a phenomenon, or manifestation of force, which clips the


wings of conceit. It is so utterly opposed to all preconceived
notions of the chemistry of the universe, that, strange as it
may sound, coming from one who scarcely knows where to
look for the place of a single star, and the best part of whose
education was picked up outside the walls of schools and cram,
yet does not despair of obtaining similar results from far
greater distances ; learn something going on in the vast
laboratory of the skies, and perhaps distinguish the future
by discovering the law which governs this telegraphic transfer
of energy. And to be the discoverer of one of Nature’s
secrets, to collect, reflect, and refract the light that shines on
other hills, is better than all the gold and the highest social
position in this hemisphere. Although he does not hold a
diploma of philosophy, nor possess acumen of research,
yet he hopes, with the aid of this solar and lunar
telegraph, and the spectroscope, to talk with the stars,
also—the beautiful, twinkling, talking stars—Sirius
•being the nearest and the brightest of those gigantic
self-luminous orbs, which Mr Lockyer tells us are the hottest
bodies in the universe, the sun being only of medium heat
and light. Scuh, then, is light, beautiful light, oue of the
most universal of blessings. Whatever be its nature, its
velocity in these experiments, appears to be as great through
water as it is through planetary space, which is said to be
200,000 miles per second ; and at this speed we can now
talk or telegraph to any visible distance on the earth by
means of a sunbeam and a mirror, and this enormous speed is
now exceeded by the agency of electricity. To exhibit the
perpetual motion the charge will be sixpence by sunlight and
one shilling by moonlight, but as there are many who cannot
-command the sunny hours of the week days it will be
exhibited during the sunny hours of Sundays, without charge,
without money, and without price.
Another view of this interesting picture of life in matter
is perpetual motion by daylight, independent of sunshine. No
matter how dark and cloudy, hot or cold, the day may be, the
motion of this little engine, surrounded by its liquid atmos-
phere, commences at the exact time of sunrise, and stops at
the exact time of sunset, indicating true solar time, without a
glimpse of its solar motor, while none of our terrestrial or
narth-born fires will have any effect on it, which shows that
the sun is not a globe of fire. Indeed,"all the experiments


made with this little instrument tend to show that the sun
may be the most blissful habitation of the system, and that
light, beautiful light, is the most interesting object of
contemplation.
Another lesson taught by this little instrument
and its solar motor, placed at the distance of ninety-
two millions of miles, is, that through a movable
pin hole in the shutter of a dark room, it sensibly
indicates chemical processes going on in this vast laboratory
of light. But it requires further development, or must be
referred to that wonderful man, Professor Crooke, the author
or discoverer of a fourth state of matter , whose sunlit soul
appears to best understand and reverence G-od, best compre-
hends the laws by which Deity works and rules the universe,
and who has the marvellous power of revealing nature in so
many new, delicate, and beautiful aspects. Such is the
nobility of science, and such are nature’s noblemen the true
nobility.
Another motive power, with its machinery under water,
drives two steam engines, 21 carriages, and locomotives ;
pumps its own water, and does all the cooking of the house ;
and by a new application of a jet of water half the size of a
tobacco pipe, drives machinery, blows the fire, plays the
organ, and rocks the cradle.
A ship in a gale of wind ; sinking, finding, and raising
her ; divers seen descending and ascending—one in a diving
dress, the other in a glass diving bell. Also, a self-acting
working model in glass, for utilising the waste water from
the baths, for flushing the gutters, and other sanitary pur-
poses.
The Miniature Regatta is an interesting sight. Looked
at through the proprietor’s spectacles, a fleet of vessels, which
no one can count, is seen sailing in all directions without
coming into collision. Besides the flotilla of boats sailing on
water teeming with gold and silver fish, there are all sorts of
carriages travelling by rail alongside of them.
Crystalisation with polarised light, life in a drop of water
under the microscope—a microscope that reveals, in the space
of 1-lGth of ani nch, the Sermon on the Mount. It has three
eye-pieces, 2,1, i, and £-inch objectives, a polariscope, camera


lucida, perabolic illuminator, large condenser, double reflector,
mechanical stage, and diaphragm, with objects and extras,,
in mahogany case. One of Arnold’s £45 for £25.
The Solar System, showing phenomena never before
exhibited.
The Telescope, Spectroscope, Telephone, and Microphone.
A magnetic electric Locomotive, carrying its own battery.
The Telegraph writes in ink, and delivers the message.
Shooting with silver gun and pistol. A garden and
library. Aviaries and aquariums, with all sorts of fish.
Eevolving fountains, with artificial rainbows. A riding
school, and diorama of the overland route. Hot and cold
baths, Turkish and steam, galvanic and medicated.
The mysterious pendulums and sympathetic clocks. The
double pendulum. The pendulum with two motions. A
pendulum 18 feet long, makes 37,040 oscillations in 24
hours, without any maintaining power, and shows the revo-
lutions of the earth on its axis. A pendulum 41 inches long,
beating seconds. A clock with two pendulums of unequal
lengths and swinging at right angles to each other, but
whose vibrations are equal and keeping correct time. A
clock with three pendulums whose vibrations are unequal,
but keeping correct time. A clock with seven pendulums,
each has a different motion, the nearest approach to perpetual
motion. A clock with pendulum upside down, bob uppermost.
A clock with a dancing pendulum, a clock with revolving
pendulum, horizontal, conical, vertical, and eccentric. A
clock that goes backwards. A clock that goes by sympathy
with other clocks in proximity, or that affection which matter
has for matter. A silent and self-acting clock, whose
machinery never wears out. A clock that requires no wind-
ing up, A clock that regulates other clocks in other rooms.
Aclock that will not go in the night, nor in the dark. A
clock whose rate of going is not affected by temperature or
climate, longitude or latitude. A keyless clock, without a
dial, hand, or wheel, weight or spring, and yet will strike
and chime at any hour required, and for twelve hours at a
stretch.


Here, then, is something really new; something that can-
not easily be found elsewhere ; and except to those who be-
lieve in nothing but money, something highly interesting
and instructive, as well as beautiful; and which dare ask
audience.
CHARGE ONE SHILLING, TIME HALF-AN-HOUR,
BATHING ESTABLISHMENT & HIRING DEPOT,
CHARLES AND CAMERON STREETS,
LAUNCESTON.
DESrTA.Ii.
iixram I. hjliXs
Dented Surgeon,
May be consulted at his residence,
ST. JOHN ST., LAUNCESTON,
DAILY.
It is Mr. HALL’S intention to visit the important
townships of the Western and Midland Districts regu-
larly. These country visits have been arranged more
especially to allow parents the opportunity of having
their children’s teeth regulated and periodically at-
tended to. Due notice of each visit will be given in the
daily papers, and by private circular.


TURNER’S TANNERY,
Frederick and Bathurst Streets-
LEATHER and GRINDERY EMPORIUM,
■ CHARLES-STRBET, LAUNCESTON.
CRAIN, FLOUR, POTATO, GROCERY, & PROVISION
store:.
> OPPOSITE CUSTOM HOUSE, GEORGE STREET.
K. N IB W EY.
GRASS & CLOVER SEEDS IN GREAT VARIETY.
HAY and CHAFF of the best quality always on Sale
at per Cwt. or Ton.
Oats, Peas , Barley , Wheat, and Rye Crushed , and Chaff Cut on the
premises.
THROWER'S
INTERNATIONAL JJOTEL,
BRISBANE STREET,
LAUNCESTO NT,
iisii&if ®Ai&ir
At OWE o’clock.
W. I. THROWER,
PROPRIETOR.


HATTON Sc LAWS,
CHEMI S3T S
in apuaitttomtt U gis tfjnwnunb
Corner of Charles fy Brisbane Streets,
CENTRAL BRISBANE STREET, LAUNCESTON.
IMPORTERS OF
(ffirLLQs, fflrntrucals, latent JlLediauies, SFet~
punernj, fp(imb and Js.nLsfmume, cFutyical
t fL/i/ilicmces, Si (ddiiUQQ.Lsts’ cFnjuitd.es.,
6-
COUNTRY STOREKEEPERS SUPPLIED
ON THE BEST and LOWEST TERMS.
SOLE PROPRIETORS OF
Hatton Laws's Balm of liquorice, Blundell’s Balsam,
Infants’ Preservative, Toothache Specific, Marking Ink,
Sarsaparilla with Potash and Dandelion, Pearl Odonto,
Brillantme, Phosphor Paste, Essence of Ginger, s*c., <^c.
SPECIAL AGENTS FOR
f ATKS’B VASIftT UIIKOTIS
And all the Leading English, American, and French
preparations.
WHOLESALE DRUGGISTS.


1 Mfilf BTABUBB*
Quadrant , opposite the Brisbane Hotel , Launceston.
JOHN HANKIN
Has on hire Horses and Carriages of all kinds, including
Buggies, Cars, Tilburys, Broughams, Dog Carts, Gigs,
etc —the best in the city. Patronised by H.R.H. the
Duke of Edinburgh. Gentlemen using his Stables may
rely upon receiving every attention, and the best that
can be provided. Carriages and Horses at a moment’s
notice. The best four-in-hand team in the colonies.
PLOUGH INN,
CORNER OF
CHARLES & PATTERSON ,
LAUNCESTON,
T. WADHAM, Proprietor.
One minute's walk from the Post Office.
SUPERIOR ACCOMMODATION FOR FAMILIES
AND SINGLE GENTLEMEN.
Good Stabling, Moderate Charges .


TB llliUiii,
stop
IN CENTRAL BRISBANE STREET,
E. HOPKINS^
AND VIEW THE NEW
JUST OPENED.
All the Newest Dress Fabrics !
LATEST MILLINERY,
New Straw Hats, Silk and Cashmere Jackets, Men’s and
Boys’ Clothing.
The premises having recently undergone repairs and
improvements, are now replete with every convenience
for carrying on an extensive trade.
Dressmaking on the Premises.
33. HOPKINS.
ML X KEMELXT,
BOOT & SHOE MAKER,
IUMIETB STREET,
Opposite Workmen’s Club,
REPAIRS NEATLY EXECUTED.
N.8.-AIL WORK GUARANTEED.


warn &
Have now ready for inspection, extensive shipments of
J'feui and saad&.
Every department is now replete with every require-
ment, the value of which cannot be surpassed, having
been selected by our Mr. Frost in the Home Markets;
and it is our intention to give our customers the full
benefit of the advantages we derive from his personal
selection, as regards lowness of price and range of
choice.
We submit no quotations, feeling assured that every
article will give entire satisfaction to the purchaser.
CENTRAL CHARLES STREET.
IRVINE & M'EACttERN,
WINE & SPIRIT MERCHANTS,
WHOLESALE & FAMILY GHOCEBS,
STEAM COFFEE MILLS,
CENTRAL BRISBANE STREET,
liA-UN CESTON.
AGENTS LACEPEDE ISLAND GUANO.
meb mmMm,
WOOL, GRAIN, PRODUCE,
MINING AND COMMISSION AGENT,
Corner of
CHARLES & PATTERSON STREETS.


TO FLOCKMASTERS AND OTHERS.
Calvert’s Carbolic Acid,
FOR SHEEPDRESSING AND DISINFECTING
PURPOSES.
The undersigned specially appointed agents for the above
have received direct from the works of F. C. Calvert &
Co., Manchester, a large supply of their celebrated
CJLRSOXiXC ACIU
In bottles, 1 gallon tins, 5 and 10 gallon drums, and 30
gallon casks. This acid is unrivalled for the Cure and
Prevention of Scab and the Destruction of Ticks, and cannot
be surpassed as a disinfectant, being of guaranteed strength
and quality, and almost free frona color.
Full particulars on application. Appointed by Messrs F.
C. Calvert & Co. duly authorised agents for all their
preparations.
x«. wjattTßaxm bon#
Wholesale & Retail Druggists, Launceston.
TO THE PUBLIC.
nr ew :■? x mt «iil.
The business hitherto conducted by J. T.|GLENWRIGHT
as brewer, etc., will in future be carried on under the style
or firm of GLENWEIGHT & BOAG (J. Boag, late of
John Fawns’ brewery), who are now prepared to supply the
public with a first-class article. Trusting to receive a fair
share of support, we are, yours truly, etc.,
GLENWRIGHT & BOAG,
Cataract Brewery,
PATTERSON STREET.


Ex BEREAN,
fflnd ctkeVL Late, cumlaals. ula jLleHicuene.
Begs to intimate that in addition to his usual extensive Stock
of Ironmongery , etc., by recent arrivals , he has received a
variety of useful and seasonable goods , among which are the
following
WHITE’S PORTLAND CEMENT
CHAMPION’S GENUINE WHITE LEAH
BOILED, RAW, and COLZA OIL
WARD & PAINE’S SHEEP SHEARS
SORBY’S SHEEP SHEARS
TURKEY and WASHITA STONES, and SLIPS for
SHEEP SHEARS
PATENT, CROWN, and AMERICAN SCYTHES
AMERICAN SCYTHE HANDLES
MILK DISHES
KENRICK’S HOLLOWARE
SPEAR & JACKSON’S CROSS-CUT and PIT SAWS
THREE-PLY HERRING TWINE
DECK SPIKES, Black and Galvanised
TACKS of all kinds, and CLOUT NAILS
FISHING LANTERNS and FISHING TACKLE of
all kinds
HALL & SONS’ BLASTING and SPORTING GUN-
POWDER
CURTIS & HARVEY’S SPORTING GUNPOWDER
NOBLE’S DYNAMITE
BICKFORD’S DOUBLE-TAPE FUSE
AMES’S SHOVELS and MINING TOOLS of every
description
BAR, ROD, and SHEET IRON, CAST SHEARS,
and BLISTER STEEL
A liberal discount to cash purchasers , ivlwlesale or retail.
dHAHEES AMU TfOKIi STREETS.


TAILORIM €3r.
M 0 jf ||T B
CLOTHING ESTABLISHMENT,
CORNER OE
BRISBANE AND ST. JOHN STREETS.
We have, now received our stock of Summer
Suitings and Trouserings, comprising all the
new shades and styles ot the present season.
Also some choice patterns in Black and Blue
Coatings, Serges, Meltons, etc., etc.
We wish to draw particular attention to the
fact that all our garments are cut and made
with special care and attention.
fAIMtSUY k STEWAftT,
TAILORS AND CLOTHIERS.


GOLDEN FLEECE
Drapery Establishment,
BRISBANE STREET,
3D J*. W C? 3E SS r W? ,
Is in constant receipt of New and Fashionable Drapery
and Millinery, Boots and Shoes, Carpets, Gentlemen’s
Clothing, Haberdashery, Hosiery. Also a good Stock of
First-class Mourning Materials,
AT MODERATE PRICES.
igir All Orders executed with despatch, and Patterns sent
free to all parts of the colony.
?• & W, SfHWiSI,
WATCH MAKERS, MANUFACTURING JEWELLERS,
ELECTRO-PLATERS & GILDERS,
CENTRAL CHARLES STREET,
LAUNCESTON.
count -house hotel,
CORNER OF WELLINGTON & PATTERSON STS.,
BY M. BUTTERWORTH.
Every accommodation for visitors. Stabling.
Liquors of the best description and brands always on
hand.—Terms moderate.


Fit for about Riy nr T5b*rrV»f
Ansatmii mm&m’t
0 ——
The undersigned is now opening the following New Goods,
direct from America :—
FEET SAWS, with Lathe, &c., complete
The New IRON PLANES
SIGNAL EGG BOILER, with Bell
AMERICAN FOLDING CHAIRS and CAMP STOOLS
EAGLE’S CLAW TRAPS. LEMON SQUEEZERS
CAMPHOR STONE, in One Shilling Boxes
MAGIC PLAITTERS, for Ladies Dress Making
MRS. POTT’S PLATED FLAT IRONS, in Sets
AMERICAN KNIFE SHARPENERS
GLASS CUTTERS, &c., &c.
FJRAJne HA.RT,
Agent for the American Novelty Company,
New york and San Francisco. (over
ADVERTISEMENTS.
IF YOU WANT GOOD FIE ST CLASS
TEA!
able to supply Soda Water, Lemonade, and every de-
scription of Aerated waters at the shortest notice.


ADVERTISEMENTS.
GOLDEN FLEECE
Liquors of the best description and brands always on
hand.—Terms moderate.


IF YOU WANT GOOD FIRST CLASS
TEA!
Fit for about Six or Eight Waters,
GO TO
X T. SJLMPSOIf!
you want fine fresh BUTTER, EGGS, and
Grocery requirement to make the inner man I
X T, SAMPSON,
If you want fine fresh BUTTER, EGGS, and every
other Grocery requirement to make the inner man happy,
go to
GROCER, &c.,
BRISBANE ST., HEAR GEORGE ST.
W. HARRIS and SON,
Manufacturers of Aerated Waters,
Have REMOVED to those extensive premises lately
occupied by Parr’s Livery Stables, Patterson Street, and
having made large alterations and improvements, are
able to supply Soda Water, Lemonade, and every de-
scription of Aerated waters at the shortest notice.


Sl&LIO fz _ n0v) 992
fm& asp a \L Jp
92 r . ADVERTISEMENTS, f
f 5 ' ' '"' ' L ” '
IRONMONGER,
.-,„t f ;W ]:'■ fT -jo /iP Wr, •£()> ii"-!
BRISBANE STREET, LAUNCESTON,
Has on Sale— „
V
The best selection of DOUBLE and SINGLE-FURROW
PLOUGHS in Tasmania
Howard’s, Lennon’s, and Hornsby’s PLOUGH EXTRAS
AVERY’S WEIGHING MACHINES
AMERICAN and ENGLISH HARVESTING GOODS
SHEEPSHEARS, TURKEY & WASHITA STONES
DAIRY UTENSILS, MILK DISHES and CHURNS
FISHING and SHOOTING TACKLE
WHIPS of all kinds. . i
MANUFACTURER OF
CORRUGATED TANKS, PORTABLE BOILERS,
and every description of Iron, Tin, & Copper Goods.
o
A large assortment of
General and Furnishing Ironmongery
Always on hand.
Liberal Discount allowed to Cash Purchasers t
fk JJ
i V.
