





[?]








A RAMBLE
IN
MALTA
AND
SICILY
BY
GEORGE FRENCH ANGAS.




A RAMBLE
IN
MALTA AND SICILY,
IN THE AUTUMN OF 1841.
BY
GEORGE FRENCH ANGAS.
Ellustrateti toitfo
TAKEN ON THE SPOT, AND DRAWN ON STONE BY THE AUTHOR.
“ It is a strange thing that, in sea voyages, where there is nothing to be seen but sky and sea,
men should make diaries ; but in land travel, wherein so much is to he observed, for the most part
they omit it, as if chance were fitter to be registered than observation. Let diaries, therefore, be
brought into use. — Lord Bacon.
LONDON:
SMITH, ELDER, AND CO., CORNHILL.
1842.


TYLER & REED,
PRINTKRS,
BOLT-COURT, FLEET STREET.


//y;V / r 'fe;/‘r '
(2




INTRODUCTION.
To write a Preface, which shall display neither vanity nor egotism, has
ever been acknowledged to be a task of great difficulty, even by experi-
enced writers. I trust, therefore, that I shall be excused for evading it
with this my first and very juvenile work, merely saying that I have endea-
voured to make it as true as my powers of observation would permit,
describing only those scenes which I have personally visited, and sketching
the various characters whose evidences of “ life and manners ” have been
accidentally brought under my notice.
I can but feebly express my gratitude for the encouragement and
honour which I have received, in being permitted to dedicate the following
pages to Her Most Gracious Majesty Queen Adelaide, illustrating scenes
so recently visited by Her Majesty, and which retain such memorials of
Her Majesty’s piety and benevolence.
I also beg to return my sincere thanks to my numerous Subscribers,
who have thus so kindly assisted and encouraged me, especially when 1
remember that the following pages are compiled from my daily journal,
and form but the descriptive detail of my sketches, which I trust may
be found creditable evidences of the undeniable truth of Mr, Waterhouse
Hawkins’s new and infallible system of teaching drawing, as I had been
the professional pupil of that gentleman but for four months when I made
my sketches from nature, and on stone, as they now appear.
London, September 20 th, 1842.




CONTENTS.
CHAPTER I.
Page
Voyage to Malta ...•«•••••!
CHAPTER 11.
Arrival at Malta —Description of Valetta ...... 14
CHAPTER 111.
Sunset —Country House of Mr. Agius—Cattle and Goats . . . . .18
CHAPTER IV.
The Knights of St. John of Jerusalem . ....•• 20
CHAPTER Y.
Palace —Armoury—Tapestry and Paintings . . • • • .23
CHAPTER VI.
Auberges of the Knights—Hospitals . . . . ■ • .26
CHAPTER VII.
Walls and Fortifications—Castles of St. Elmo and St. Angelo—Forts Ricasoli, Tigne, and
Manoel . . . • • • • • * .28
CHAPTER VIII.
Ramble in the Country—Pieta —Baths
CHAPTER IX.
Costume —Dress of the Country People .... • • .35
CHAPTER X.
Walk to Marsa Scirocco —Excursion to Macluba, and the Ruins of Hajar Kim . . 37
CHAPTER XI.
Excursion to St. Paul’s Bay—Mellieha, and the Grotto of Calypso . • .43


CHAPTER XII.
Page
Visit to the Gardens and Palace of St. Antonio, and Civita Vecchia, the ancient Capital of
Malta ........... 48
CHAPTER XIII.
Expedition to the Island of Gozo—The General’s Rock—Rabbato, and the Giant’s Tower 53
CHAPTER XIV.
Convent of the Capuchin Friars . . . . . , . ,5V
CHAPTER XV.
Public Library—Cathedral of St. John —Churches and Nunneries ... 62
CHAPTER XVI.
Floriana Gardens—II Grotto—Naturalists . • .... 65
CHAPTER XVII.
Market—Hotels—Cafes—Prices of Provisions ..... 68
CHAPTER XVIII.
Departure from Malta ...
• • • • • • /I
CHAPTER XIX.
Voyage from Malta to Syracuse ...
• • • • • /o
CHAPTER XX.
Rivers Anapus and Papyrus—Temple of Jupiter Olympus, and the Fonte Ciane . 78
CHAPTER XXI.
Tychse—Neapolis—Fort Labdalus—the Quarries of the Philosophers— Strada del Tombe
—Subterranean Passage—Temple of Ceres .... g2
CHAPTER XXII.
Museum —Temple of Minerva — Fountain of Arethusa —Ear of Dionysius — Garden of
Paradise—Aqueduct —Nymphaeum—Tripod of Apollo — Strada Sepulchrale in Nea-
polis .
••••.. 86
CHAPTER XXIII.
Theatre—Amphitheatre—Catacombs —Chapel of San Giovanni— Tomb of St. Marcian—
Convent and Garden of the Cappuccini—Fortifications—Return to Syracuse—Costume
of the Inhabitants
93


CHAPTER XXIV.
Page
Journey on Mules to Catania jqq
CHAPTER XXV.
City of Catania—Ferdinand and Isabella—llluminations—Abbate’s Hotel . . 106
CHAPTER XXVI.
Catania Prince Biscari’s Museum Cathedral—Greek Theatre —Subterranean Amphi-
theatre—Ancient Baths, etc. 109
CHAPTER XXVII.
Nicolosi—Expedition to Etna . . . . . _ _ .116
CHAPTER XXVIII.
Route from Catania to Messina . . . . . . . .123
CHAPTER XXIX.
Trip to the Faro—Scylla and Charybdis . . , . . .129
CHAPTER XXX.
Return to Etna—Hospitality at Riposto—Ascent of the Mountain . . . 132
CHAPTER XXXI.
Visit to the Castagno di Cento Cavallos . . . . . > .143
CHAPTER XXXII.
Taormina—Journey to Messina ••*.... 147
CHAPTER XXXIII.
Messina —Public Gardens—Cathedral—Shrine of St. Placido—Marina, Streets, Convents,
and Public Buildings ••••.... 151
CHAPTER XXXIV.
Voyage from Messina to England ....... 155


ILLUSTRATIONS.
Page
'i't
I. General's Rock, Gozo •••••’
11. Chiesa San Public, and Protestant Chapel, Floriana, Malta
111. Ruins of the Temple of Jupiter Olympus . . • • • • 80
IV. View from Ruins of Tychse, looking towards Etna .... 83
V. Ear of Dionysius ....••••
VI. Greek Theatre . . . • • • • . . 93
VII. Roman Amphitheatre . . . • • • • .94
VIII. Garden of the Latomie, and Convent of the Capuchins ... 96
IX. Lettiga and mules ( woodcut ) ....... 103
X. Etna from Catania . . . . . • • .109
XI. Crater of Etna ( woodcut) . . . . • • • .139
XII. Castagno di Cento Cavallo . . . . . • .144
XIII. Taormina, looking towards Etna . . . . . . .147
XIV. Gibraltar from the Mediterranean . . . . . .163


A RAMBLE, &c.
CHAPTER I.
VOYAGE TO MALTA.
“ Oh who can tell ?—not thou, luxurious slave,
Whose soul would sicken o’er the heaving wave—
Nor thou, vain lord of wantonness and ease,
Whom .slumbers soothe not, pleasures cannot please
Oh who can tell, —save he whose heart hath tried
And danced in triumph o’er the waters wide, —
Th’ exulting sense, the pulse’s maddening play,
That thrills the wanderer o’er the trackless way ? ”
August 16, 1841.' —It has been justly said, that there are three distinct pleasures
enjoyed by travellers of which those who constantly dwell within the narrow limits of
their own homes can form no competent idea. They are the pleasures arising from
anticipation, realization, and retrospection; all of which are in themselves separate
sources of enjoyment to the observant mind. The first of these I had already cherished
with the most enthusiastic visions of hope ; and the realization of my expected
gatification from the second, commenced, when bidding farewell to my home and
friends for awhile, I embarked for Malta in the beautiful clipper schooner “ Prospero.”
The bustle and excitement of departure being over, I was anxious to leave St. Ka-
tharine’s Docks without delay, that we might sail down the river, and float freely
over the broad bosom of the sea.
But disappointments, like the clouds which mar an April sunshine, mingle
themselves with our most pleasing moments ; and thus it proved to me ; for by
an unavoidable tardiness caused by the brokers of the vessel, we were compelled
to remain in our close quarters for one night, and part of the succeeding day. At
B


nine p.m. the noisy, thundering bell of the Docks sounded the hour of repose, when
all lights are ordered to be put out, under a penalty of ten pounds. But this
curfew of modern times did not prevent our burning a candle “ on the sly,” as the
sailors term it; and covering the skylight with a tarpaulin, and locking the cahin-door,
we sat very comfortably without molestation until ten o’clock. By-and-hy, the
custom-house officer came down, and after the old gentleman had fastened the doors,
he stretched himself on the sofa immediately below my berth, and commenced snoring
most famously, (as only a custom-house officer can,) until the same thundering bell
proclaimed the hour of six on the following morning. My sleep was frequently
broken by the nasal music of this gentleman of the “ customs,” which combined with
many new and strange sounds, such as the dog’s feet patting up and down the deck
overhead ; the distant “ pulley hoy” of vessels going out by the night tide, and the
gentle ripple and plash of the water just level with my head, filled my sleep with
strange and singular nautical dreams. The morning was unusually warm, and the
weather calm and settled. About one, p.m, we left St. Katharine’s Docks, and
were towed by a steam-tug down the river towards Gravesend, where we put the
officer ashore. After passing this place, the river became much wider, and as the
shades of evening gathered in, the low distant shores melted away in the twilight
haze, and the numerous vessels scattered here and there looked like black specks on
the surface of the quiet water. Before us was the Nore light, and to the left, the
lights of Southend sparkled brightly in the distance; while on our right, the lamps of
Sheerness, in the Isle of Sheppey, were equally visible. A few young porpoises,
and a solitary sea-gull, gave token of our approach to the ocean, and about nine
o’clock we cast anchor one mile to the westward of the Nore.
Aug. 18.' —At five o’clock this morning we got under weigh. The atmosphere
was hazy, and after we had passed the Reculvers, in sight on our starboard side, we
were becalmed for several hours. The glassy waters around were smooth and placid
as a lake, and at noon it was oppressively hot. On looking over the stern of the
vessel, I observed numbers of medusae rising through the water. After several
attempts, I succeeded in catching one in a basket let down by a rope ; and when I
had made a coloured sketch of the creature, I again committed him to his watery
home. I was not a little amused when the captain and sailors positively assured me
that it was “ only the strength and filth of the water;” and I could not persuade
them that it was an organized and created being.
By-and-by the breeze again sprang up, and as we tacked about, Margate and the
surrounding shores were frequently in sight. At seven o’clock we cast anchor in the
Downs, and the wind blowing strongly from the south-west, gave us a pretty fair
tossing. Here our pilot left us, by whom I sent letters ashore. The sky looked
wild and stormy, but the stars shone brilliantly between the dark masses of cloud, and


our little vessel rose and fell on the surging water, as we lay moored off Deal for
the night.
Aug. 19. —The morning rose bright and serene, and before I went upon deck
we were passing the Straits of Dover. The white cliffs of the South Foreland
presented a fine effect, with the morning sunshine upon them, and the picturesque
town and castle of Dover were interesting objects from the water. The scene was
still more enlivened by numerous vessels of all sizes lying scattered over the gently
sparkling waves. The morning haze that hung like a veil over the south, prevented
our seeing much of the French coast, hut the heights of Calais were distinctly visible.
About noon we were again nearly becalmed. The towns of Folkestone and Hythe,
with Romney, and the entrance to its extensive marshes, successively presented
themselves to our view. Towards dusk, we rounded that long promontory of shingle,
Dungeness, nearly at the extremity of which is the well-known and conspicuous
lighthouse. The waters were like a sheet of glass ; the last gentle breeze had died
away, and we lay motionless on the sea. The sails hung silently aloft, whilst above
us shone down through the cloudless sky thousands of stars whose brilliancy,
mingling with the bright lustre of one glorious planet upon the waters, gave
additional loveliness and magnificence to the whole scene. The beauty of the night
tempted me to linger on the deck till long after the last wild fowl had sailed past us
on his flight to the marshes ; and it was with reluctance that I exchanged the
landscape of sea and starlight, for my close cabin quarters below.
Aug. 20.—At seven o’clock this evening, we had a brisk breeze; all sails are
spread, we are now off the Isle of Wight, and I am only wishing for a pair of wings
to enable me to revisit that delightful spot. I have watched its rugged cliffs until
distance and the mists of evening shrouded them from my sight, and the flame of
St. Catherine’s lighthouse was the only spot discernible in the horizon.
Aug. 21, four, a. m. —The breeze during the night has increased, and it is now
blowing violently against us with a heavy sea. I remained on deck all day, and
securing myself with a rope to the lockers, weathered wind and waves. Notwith-
standing several good duckings from the spray, I enjoyed the novelty of my situation,
and preferred it greatly to lying in my bed-cabin. At two o’clock we passed Pur-
beck Island, and I had a fine view of that barren and rocky coast. At five o’clock
we tacked out to run towards the French shore ; but as the weather became more
stormy we were driven back, and put in for shelter into the Portland Roads, where
we cast anchor along with a little fleet of forty or fifty vessels, all weather-bound
like ourselves.
Aug. 22. —We rode at anchor all night, and this morning I went on shore at Port-
land Island with some of the sailors, who took casks with them to obtain some fresh
water. This remarkable promontory or bill, as it is called, is connected to the main
b 2


land by a ridge of sand several miles in length, forming an excellent shelter for vessels
from the westerly gales. On reaching a small village on the western side of the rock,
I got some letters conveyed to the post; and after exploring the barren place, and
providing ourselves with some watercresses for tea, we returned on board, though
even in this sheltered bay the waves were so rough that our boat was very nearly
capsized. We dined off a fresh leg of mutton that we brought from London, and this
will probably be the last fresh meat we shall taste until we arrive at Malta. Three,
p. m. ; as the wind appeared rather more favourable we set sail again ; but before we
had well got clear of the harbour, it blew with greater violence than ever. We had
now to pass through the Race of Portland —a dangerous place —with the sea running
very high and the waves standing up almost perpendicularly, resembling those pictures
we occasionally meet with of Moses dividing the waters of the Red Sea. The captain
desired Mrs. B. and myself to go below whilst we were passing through the Race, but
before we could well do so the waves swept completely over us. At six o’clock we
turned in to our berths, but not to sleep, for it soon blew a heavy gale which continued
raging from seven until twelve o’clock, accompanied with torrents of rain. At mid-
night it suddenly fell a dead calm. During the storm the waves ran mountains high,
and the wild confusion of the elements produced a sound like the tumult of a mighty
mob. This dreadful discord was only broken at intervals by the shouts of the captain
giving orders to the crew, and the noise and bustle of the sailors securing the sails and
other moveables on the deck.
Aug. 23.—Early this morning the waves still rolled very high from last night’s
gale, and we have been out of sight of land all day until eight o’clock when we made
Dartmouth. To-day I turned cook, and made some dumplings for our dinner, which
we partook of upon the cabin floor. My dumplings were more fortunate than King
Alfred’s cakes, as they turned out very good, and the captain and mate did them
ample justice.
Aug. 24.—Off Plymouth, in sight of the Eddystone lighthouse. To-day we took
our departure from the Lizard, distant about twenty-five miles north. The main-
sail, as it flapped in the wind, knocked the captain’s hat overboard, and he is now look-
ing very grand in an old “ southwester.” As a winding up, the Channel sent a
mighty farewell wave, which swept all over the decks, and not one of us escaped with-
out a good ducking.
Aug. 25. —We are now clear of the Channel, where we have been tossing about
a whole week. Yesterday we bade adieu to the land, and to-day not a single sail has
appeared in the horizon. The only objects are a few sea-gulls skimming over the
waves. We dined on the cabin floor off a miserable fowl, very lean and boiled to
atoms. I attribute its emaciated condition to melancholy, and sorrow at leaving its
native land, and being shut up during the past week in the long boat. Even as lam


writing I hear dreadful screams on the deck, which assure me that a second unhappy
creature is being sacrificed to our voracious appetites. As they pine so fast we are to
dine upon them every day, till not one remains to tell its tale of woe ! Half-past
eleven, p. m., —I had no sooner retired to my berth than the mate called me up again
to see a shoal of porpoises playing around the vessel; they had a most curious and
beautiful appearance, being quite luminous; their phosphorescent brightness was in-
deed so great that they resembled fishes of fire, as gliding along swiftly they left a
shining track of light behind them. In the wake of the vessel thousands of bright
sparkling animals were constantly in motion, lighting the curl of every wave.
The water in the Bay of Biscay is extremely clear and translucent, and of a deep
blue colour. On looking over the stern of the vessel, I could frequently discern her
keel, and clearly see the smallest objects that were many feet below the surface.
The depth of water in the Bay has never been ascertained, and it is said to be fathom-
less. One of the sailors gravely assured me that it had no bottom at all, and extended
quite through the globe to the other side, where it is known by the name of the
Chinese Sea!
Aug. 27. —This morning was ushered in by a thick fog, through which the sun in
vain endeavoured to penetrate. We are now approaching latitude 45°, where strong
winds and doubtful weather so generally prevail that they have become proverbial
amongst seamen. We are one hundred miles distant from Cape Finisterre, running
on with all sails spread. Towards evening, the wind increased until seven o’clock,
when it blew very strong, but fortunately in our favour, from the east, and we flew
along over the waves instead of meeting them. The captain reefed the sails, and even
then we ran at the rate of ten knots an hour. The waves were very magnificent, and
on a much larger scale than in the Channel; they appeared sometimes as though they
would overwhelm the vessel, when suddenly each mountainous billow sank as quietly
as it rose, and was soon succeeded by another of equally terrific magnitude. As
the wind blew the spray from their foamy crests, the sun shining through them
formed myriads of small rainbows, which were as evanescent as they were beautiful.
Whilst gazing with delight at these beautiful prismatic reflections, a tremendous wave
came sweeping along the side of the vessel, and breaking directly over me wetted me
thoroughly to the skin. Nor was this the only misfortune that befell me, for soon
afterwards Mrs. B. and I went down to tea in the cabin below ; we had no sooner
poured it out than the vessel gave a heavy lurch, and precipitated tea-pot, cups and
saucers, with all their scalding contents, into our laps. We were in this miserable con-
dition when the captain came down, and added to our trouble by scolding ixs well for
not having our tea as usual upon the floor.
Aug. 28. —We passed Cape Finisterre, the north-western extremity of Spain, during
the night, though at a considerable distance. The morning is charming, it breathes of


a southern climate : the air is fresh, but so soft and warm as to render it quite luxurious.
At nine o’clock the thermometer stood at 87° in the shade, and on deck the sun was
quite scorching. We are now sailing in a southerly direction, about twenty-five miles
from the coast of Spain ; and were it not for the haze, or “ loom of the land,” as the
sailors term it, we should be able to see it quite plainly. In the morning a large shoal
of porpoises played around the bows of the vessel. The harpoon was got out, and the
mate at the first thrust plunged it up to the hilt in the body of one of them, which
probably might measure about eight feet. Unfortunately the harpoon snapped in two
with the struggles of the animal, and giving a tremendous leap out of the water, the
poor creature darted down again like lightning through the water, bearing the barbed
weapon deep within him, and for a considerable distance the waves were red with its
gushing blood. All the other porpoises in the shoal followed it immediately, as the
sailors said, to make a meal on their unhappy companion as soon as his dying struggles
were over. During the day we saw several whales, at a short distance from the ship,
spouting up water like a fountain, and blowing with a noise resembling that of an
elephant. Four, p. m. —We are once more becalmed ; the Spanish coast is visible
at a great distance, with a yellow haze resting upon it. Thousands of the most venom-
ous little flies imaginable have entered the cabin, and are stinging us most cruelly.
We have tried to kill them, but they are so uncommonly lively, and come in such
numbers, that it is utterly impossible to get rid of them. The captain affirms that he
can hear them swearing and growling at him because he will not let them have a chance
of biting him. Our feet and hands are stung all over from their furious attacks.
Mrs. B. has accounted for their appearance in a very philosophic manner. She sup-
poses them to be the flies we brought from St. Katharine’s Docks, who having just
recovered from their sea-sickness, are come out with very keen appetites. The sunset
this evening was peculiarly beautiful. From a cloudless sky of the purest blue the sun
sank majestically in the west, bathed in a flood of the most vivid scarlet, gradually
melting off into orange and yellow, till at last it produced that warm glow of atmo-
sphere so much admired in the works of Claude Lorraine. The moon, too, was brighter
and clearer than in more northerly climates, and being nearly at the full, it renders the
evenings on deck very pleasant and delightful.
Aug. 29. During the day the sea has been nearly a perfect calm and the air very
hot. The evening brought no breeze, but the moon and the stars shone brightly, and
only a few fleecy clouds stole almost imperceptibly along the sky. Several huge
black fish rose within a flgw yards of the vessel, and made such a noise with their
blowing, that the dog we had on board commenced barking at them, believing, no
doubt, that they were nightly intruders come with dishonest intentions.
Aug. 30.—The early morning was hazy, but the sun soon burst out with an unusual
degree of warmth, and not a breath of air fanned the sleeping surface of the waters;


the thermometer stood at 82°. Whilst lying thus becalmed, three very large whales
rose near us, blowing at a dreadful rate, and lying with their backs above the water.
Towards evening the Farilhosns rocks appeared in sight, bearing s. s. e. They seem
to rise perpendicularly out of the sea, not unlike the Bass rock, or Ailsa, in Scotland
7 •
The sailors term them the “haystacks,” which they greatly resemble. The Berlingas
or Borlings, are several small barren islands lying south of the Farilhcens, about five
miles from Cape Carboeyro on the main land. These we passed in the night, lat. 39°
26', long. 10° 4'.
Aug. 31.—We have been now a fortnight at sea, and if our progress is no
quicker than it has hitherto been, we shall make a long and very tedious voyage.
There appears no hope of our getting on; it is a dead calm, and the vessel sleeps
upon the sheeted water; indeed the sultry state of the atmosphere makes crew and
captain equally drowsy, and we long for a breeze to invigorate us. The coast of
Portugal is in sight, but so hazy from the heat, that I can make but little of it, even
with the aid of a telescope. I long to be on shore, tasting some of their delicious
grapes, as the water we have on board is too lively to tempt us to drink it, however
extreme our thirst may be ; and would form a better subject for microscopic exhibition
and wonder among the marvels of that marvellous place, the Polytechnic Institution.
I have been trying my fishing lines, but they have proved unsuccessful; the
stormy petrels skim around the hooks, and dexterously carry off the bait, without
being able to secure them. To add to the mortification, shoals of sardinias, pursued
by a whole troop of albicore, have approached within a boat’s length of the vessel.
During the day, as we lay becalmed, the captain put off the jolly-boat, and three of
the men went out to endeavour to catch some from among the numerous shoals of
fish that were rising from the deep water in every direction around us. When the
boat approached within less than one hundred yards of a fine troop of albicore in full
play, they provokingly disappeared, and, to use the sailors’ phrase, “made fools of
them.” A second excursion for the same purpose proved equally unsuccessful, and
the boat was hauled again on hoard in despair. We saw several sharks for the first
time, and the sea-fowl and storm-birds became more numerous. It is a very
interesting sight to watch the last-mentioned little birds, for ever on the wing,
skimming swiftly over the surface of the water. They resemble a swallow, but are
somewhat larger, and have a conspicuous white patch of feathers above the tail;
sometimes they skim within a few inches of us, as they fly across the deck, but are
so dexterous as never to be captured, even by the most expert hands. The sun
shining upon the Portugal coast, rendered it rather more conspicuous ; and in the
afternoon we could discern the town of Ereceira, and on the summit of a high hill,
the famous convent of Mafra, which is very conspicuous from the sea. Five,
P,M> A Portuguese fishing-boat has just passed us with four men and a boy in her.


As we observed them busily pulling up their lines, the captain thought that we might
get a little fish, and called out to them, “ Any pisco ?” hut the only thing they held
up was a dog-fish ; at this our captain shook his head, and muttered some words
that savoured of the Portuguese, when they departed. Capo Rocca, or the rock of
Lisbon, is in sight, hearing s.s.e, and distant about twelve miles ; behind it the land
suddenly rises up into a mountainous ridge, extending a considerable way to the
eastward. The summit is very uneven, having on it a number of detached emi-
nences ; this is the mountain of Cintra, and beyond it is the city of Lisbon.
Sept. 1. —The morning was stormy, accompanied by rain and thunder; but it
soon cleared off, and a steady breeze sprang up in our favour, and carried us along
briskly. In the afternoon land appeared again in sight, and before six o’clock we
rounded Cape St. Vincent, running at the rate of ten knots an hour. The sea is once
more curled up into long sweeping waves, on whose snowy crests the full moon is
shining with a flood of silvery light. The evenings begin to draw in very quickly,
which is owing to the latitude we are in ; the sun sets at half-past six, and in a few
minutes night closes in, the duration of twilight being shorter than in England. Cape
St. Vincent, the south-western extremity of the coast of Algarva, in Portugal, lies in
north latitude 37° 3', and on its summit stands a convent of Augustine friars. About
twenty fathoms from the foot of the Cape stands a large isolated rock, and the
intervening channel is wide enough for ships of heavy tonnage to pass through. In
the distance rise the mountains of Monchique, which are visible at sea for twenty-five
leagues.
Sept. 2. —Very hot weather, with a clear, cloudless sky of the purest azure.
The thermometer in the shade is 81°. We have had a fresh breeze all day, which
will carry us nearly to the coast of Africa, from which we are about sixty miles
distant. The sunset was most gorgeous ; it filled the western horizon with a wide
atmosphere of golden light, shining against the deep indigo blue of the Atlantic ocean.
The effect of the sun’s refraction was remarkably beautiful ; just as it seemed to
touch the water its orb appeared elongated, and seemed drawn downwards in a
cylindrical form into the sea. Ten, p.m.—The breeze has freshened, and the lights
of Cadiz are in sight, bearing n.e.
Sept. 3, Two o’clock, a.m. —The thermometer in the cabin stands at 83°. This
degree of heat effectually prevented my sleeping, so I arose and went upon deck.
We were entering the Straits of Gibraltar, and by the light of the moon I could
discern Cape Trafalgar on the European, and Cape Spartel on the African coast.
The ruddy hues of morning soon began to appear streaking the eastern sky, and I
was amply repaid for my vigils, not only by a beautiful sunrise, but by an excellent
view of the coast on each side of the Strait, which is one of the boldest and most
romantic I ever beheld. At first it broke upon me like a dream, and I could hardly


persuade myself that I was really, for the first time in my life, gazing upon the
shores of Africa. The whole scene was bathed in the rosy light of morning. The
Spanish hills, covered with vines and olive-trees ; the blue and crisped waters over
which we were speeding, and the high and rugged mountains of Barbary with their
lofty peaks glittering in the sunshine, formed altogether a panorama too strikingly
grand and beautiful ever to be forgotten. The rock of Gibraltar stands at the
eastern extremity of the Straits, and directly opposite to it, on the African side, is the
town and fortress of Ceuta, the only remaining Spanish possession in the Moorish
territories. These are the famous pillars of Hercules, the western gates of the world,
according to the ancients. A little to the west of Ceuta, rises the lofty and singular
mountain called Sierra Bullones, or Ape’s Hill, with its summit wrapped in clouds.
Vast numbers of monkeys are said to inhabit this spot, and there is a vulgar belief
current among many that they cross and re-cross to the rock of Gibraltar opposite
by a subterranean passage below the sea. To the right of Ceuta are the remains of
Old Ceuta, probably Carthaginian. On the Spanish side, the town and lighthouse of
Tarifa, the town of and on the opposite extremity of the bay the rock and
fortress of Gibraltar, rising abruptly to the height of 1400 feet above the level of
the sea, are all objects worthy of notice. The wind continued to blow strongly from
the westward; we were soon carried through the Straits, and were sailing over the
bosom of the Mediterranean at the rate of nine knots an hour.
Sept. 4. —This morning it is a calm, and the long swell from yesterday’s breeze
rocks us to and fro like a cradle on the subsiding waves. The thermometer at upon
in the cabin was 100° ; and we have not a breath of air to fan the sultry atmosphere.
Numerous dolphins have been playing around the vessel; the sailors attract them
with a spoon suspended by a line over the bows of the ship, which they move to and
fro in the sun, to resemble the motion of the flying fish.
Sept. 5, —A number of fine bonitoes have accompanied the vessel all day, and a
troop of flying-fishes have just risen from the water, skimming over the waves like
little bladders blown along by the wind. I observed, also, a large fish jump out of
the sea, and up rose another cloud of these timid little creatures, escaping from their
voracious enemy into another element, till their little wings becoming dry they sank
exhausted into their native brine. Quarter past six, p. m. ; the sun has just gone
down over the African coast at Cape Tenez ; a few scattered clouds have caught the
reflection of the glowing sky upon their fleecy forms, and are exhibiting the most fairy-
like appearance imaginable, being tinted with a pure rose colour of exquisite brilli-
ancy, whilst the wide western heavens are radiant in molten gold, and streaked with
broad belts of vermilion cloud.
Sept. 6. —To-day we have seen large numbers of the Portuguese men-of-war, those
small marine animals so frequently noticed by seamen in warm latitudes. They are of
c


a deep blue colour, and as they float upon the surface of the water they raise their
thin transparent gauze-like sail, which catches the wind. I fished up several in a
basket, and made drawings of them. I found it quite useless to attempt preserving
them in alcohol, as it immediately changed their colour to a bright red, exactly in the
same way as litmus paper, or any other vegetable blue is affected by being brought
into contact with an acid. One of the sailors harpooned a bonito, which we cooked
for our supper ; but I did not relish it much, it was too oily and rank.
Sept. 8. —The Balearic Isles are in sight, but the wind continues directly opposed
to us, and we are compelled to tack about in a zig-zag direction, so that we only gain
twenty miles in every 100. The sea is running very high, and the sun shining
brightly. Four, p.m.; the high mountains of Africa are again in sight, somewhere in
the neighbourhood of Algiers ; for a short time we thought we saw the city itself, with
its white buildings, in the distance, but upon a nearer approach it proved to be nothing
but sand-hills. The city of Algiers lies about ten miles to the east, and is hidden from
our view by a projecting cape.
It was near sunset, and the deep indigo sea curled into a thousand snowy waves.
A beach of yellow sand, backed by wild and picturesque rocks, sloped gradually down
to the water’s edge, beyond which the hills arose rapidly till the scene was flanked in
by lofty mountains, so distant that they almost vanished in the warm hazy glow that
overspread the African landscape. The herbage appeared small and scanty, and near
to the water’s edge there projected out a bold rock crowned with a ruined castle,
whilst around it grew magnificent aloes with their lofty flower stalks rising to a great
height , but I could detect no trace or vestige of any human beings in this glorious
wilderness of nature, The French have carried their usurpation and arms into this
devoted land, where Carthage once reared its hundred palaces, and where, in the middle
ages, the Moorish hosts swept down from its mountains like some wild tumultuous
sea, carrying their conquests into the very heart of Gaul. But now,
“ Only the wandering Arab’s tent
Flaps in the desert blast.”
Lions and other wild beasts abound in these unfrequented recesses; and even the
Arab himself is as fierce and untameable as they. After dark we have several times
observed large fires on the hills, which we conjecture were made by some bivouac
to keep out nightly intruders.
Sept. 11.-This morning it is a perfect calm, and very sultry ; the thermometer in
the shade being 85°, and the burning sun pours down its beams upon as blue a sea
as ever garnished the brightest visions of fairyland. The water was so extremely clear
that we resolved to try some experiments. We lowered a basin with a line into the
sea, and at the depth of thirty-two fathoms it was distinctly visible. We next sank
an empty bottle, strongly corked and sealed over ; on being drawn up it was found


filled with water, with the cork inverted. Thinking that I might make known to the
world our condition, I wrote on a slip of paper the name of the vessel, with full par-
ticulars of the latitude and longitude where we lay becalmed, and all other necessary
information; this I enclosed in a bottle, and sealing it well up, threw it overboard.
Two large dragon-flies played all day around our top-masts ; and our rigging was
rendered lively by a bevy of small birds, that had ventured from the shore and taken
up their abode with us.
Sept. 12. —To-day we spoke the schooner “ Petrel,” thirty-eight days from New-
castle, laden with coals for Corfu. The heat is greater than yesterday, hut as there
is scarcely any wind, we have put up the awning over the quarter-deck, which provides
us with a pleasant shelter from the glare of the sun.
Sept. 14. —Wind contrary ; I could not sleep during the night for the violent motion
of the vessel, and the extreme heat of the cabin. I was in constant fear of being pre-
cipitated out of my berth on to the floor; and whilst the vessel was on her southerly
tack, my berth was about as easy a place of repose as the side of a pyramid. Our
salt butter was turned into oil, and our cabin was hot enough for a furnace.
Sept. 15. —In the dead of the night we were all thrown into a state of great con-
sternation by the alarm of pirates. It was a sudden calm, our vessel lay motion-
less, and the sails hung silently from the yards. The dew was falling like rain as
we all assembled upon deck, aroused by the cry of the watch, and by the starlight we
distinctly saw four boats making directly towards us, and soon afterwards we heard
the plash of their oars, and a confused sound of voices on the still night air. The cap-
tain ordered all hands to prepare for combat, and when our fire-arms were mustered,
we found them to consist of two blunderbusses, five or six pistols, two cutlasses, and a
large axe. Armed with these, we considered that we could make a tolerably stout
resistance. For half an hour we stood awaiting their approach, whilst poor Mrs. B.
paced the deck almost frantic with terror. At the end of this time they seemed to
alter their course from some unknown cause, and in twenty minutes we quite lost sight
of them. At the same time a light breeze sprang up, and we stood out to sea with-
out encountering any more Algerines.
Sept. 16. —During the morning the African island of Galita was in sight. In the
offing we saw a troop of large white animals, somewhat resembling whales, but which
the sailors affirmed to be grampuses ; they were of a delicate cream colour, with a
dark line running along the back ; and they reminded me of white asses. During the
night the waters were unusually sparkling and vivid ; the medusse resembled masses
of green fire as they rolled over in the foam of the waves. Whilst amusing myself
by fishing up some of these creatures on the larboard side of the vessel, I was witness
to a strange and brilliant atmospherical phenomenon. The heavens had hitherto
been as clear as azure, and the wind for a fortnight past had been easterly ; on a
c 2


sudden, a globe of fire as large as a cannon-ball arose in the south-west, (the direction
of Africa,) and whirling violently along through the air, broke almost directly over our
heads, whilst at the same moment it exploded into a thousand atoms, exhibiting a
brilliant display of natural fire-works. The flash of light was of a blue colour, and so
intensely vivid that our eyes were for a time quite dazzled by it. Several persons
on board, who only saw the glare of the light, imagined that our vessel was on fire.
The electricity produced by its passage through the air was so great, that the mag-
netic needle of the compass was whirled several times very rapidly round before it
regained its true position. Immediately afterwards, dark clouds spread over the hori-
zon from the quarter whence the fiery ball had arisen, and a strong wind (in our
favour) bore us rapidly along at the rate of eight knots an hour.
Sept. 17.—The fair wind has continued blowing all the day, and Maritimo, the
most westerly of the JEgadean isles, off the coast of Sicily, has been in sight since
five o’clock. This island is used as a place of banishment for the Sicilian nobles.
Since sunset the lightning has been uncommonly vivid, and the sheets of electric
vapour every now and then illuminate the whole eastern side of the horizon, whilst
between the clouds the forked lightning shoots down in golden streams into the dark
sea. The wide track of foam around the vessel as she glides on her way, shines like
a silver fringe gemmed with countless stars, rendering it beautifully luminous, and
contrasting finely with the blackness of the surrounding waters.
Sept. 19. —At sunrise the captain called me on deck to witness a most magnificent
spectacle. The sun rose surrounded with long rays, forming a complete glory of most
dazzling brilliancy, whilst the scattered fleecy clouds shone like burnished gold upon
the exquisite light blue of tbe morning sky. On our left was the coast of Sicily,
with Mount Etna towering proudly above it, at the distance of 120 miles ; and
far before us, cradled in the Halcyon seas, the Maltese islands themselves ap-
peared like dark specks on the horizon. We saw several turtles floating on the sur-
face of the water, and not being able to resist the temptation of so inviting a prey, the
boat was lowered and sculled silently along to the nearest of them, but when it had
reached to within an arm’s length of the prey, the wary creature swiftly and silently
sank beneath the water. Soon afterwards another one appeared, sleeping, with his head
towards the sun. This one they succeeded in catching, and we all made ourselves
happy at the prospect of dining on turtle soup. At sunset the sailors killed the
creature, after which I saw no more of him. The temperature of the atmosphere was
greater to day than yesterday, the thermometer in the shade at noon was 87°.
Eight o’clock.—The new moon is shining with great brilliancy, and a Sicilian speronaro
has just passed us. The lights of Yaletta are visible, distant about fifteen miles.
Eleven o’clock. —One of the native Maltese boats has come alongside to put a pilot
on board ; the moment he neared us, he jumped upon deck without any ceremony,


leaving his companions in the boat to keep up with us in the best manner they could.
He appears to be a pleasant little man, and speaks English very tolerably.
Sept. 20. —Long before daybreak a crowd of small boats surrounded us, whose
crews begged that they might tow our vessel into the Grand Harbour. We are now
fast approaching it, pulled along by about a dozen of them. With this extra assist-
ance we soon neared the Maltese shores, which speedily became visible through the
dim light of early morning. It was a truly pleasant and refreshing sound, after a five
weeks’ tedious voyage across the briny sea, to hear the murmuring of the waves as they
dashed at intervals against the rocky shores, a sound to whose gentle music we had
been strangers ever since we had watched the sweeping breakers hurry confusedly
along the Race of Portland. As the water rapidly deepens at the distance of a few
yards from the shore, we sailed along close under the land, and the first ruddy hues
of morning discovered to our view the towering fortress of St. Elmo, with its impreg-
nable buttresses and turrets, bristling with cannon. The moment we rounded the
promontory of St. Elmo, all was gaiety and animation. Myriads of little boats were
darting in every direction across the harbour, and the graceful polacchi and speronaros
with their curved latine sails, the men of war lying at anchor, and the crowd of yachts,
schooners, and other vessels, rendered the waters of the Grand Harbour a very lively
scene. On the Yaletta side, the dark green foliage of the feathery trees, and the
broad spreading leaves of the bananas, the sombre cypresses contrasting strongly
against the unstained purity of the white buildings as they rose up one above another
from the water’s edge, and the line of domes, turrets, and varied fortifications, added to
the bright sky and strangely foreign air of the whole scene, bursting at once upon the
sight, produced a fairy-like panorama, —a real picture with all the vivid novelty of
some city seen in dreams; and the charm was not a little augmented by its contrast to
the monotonous but silent grandeur of the ocean, where all around, as far as the eye
can reach, nothing breaks the distant horizon but a sail dimly seen, or a solitary sea-
fowl skimming over the restless waves.


CHAPTER II.
ARRIVAL AT MALTA—DESCRIPTION OF VALETTA.
“ For many a night, and many a day,
The ship held on her weary way;
At last she reached those radiant isles
Where pleasant summer always smiles,
And the blue waters at their feet,
Murmur in music soft and sweet.”
As the morning gun was fired from the castle of Ist. Elmo, our schooner cast anchox
in the Grand Harbour, surrounded by the numerous boats that had formed our escort.
The Maltese boats are very different from ours, and always attract the attention
of a stranger. They are flat-bottomed, and both the stem and stern have an appen-
dage of an upright piece of wood which projects about a foot above the level of the
boat. They are painted with all the colours of the rainbow, and as they are exceed-
ingly numerous, they present a very gay appearance, skimming in all directions over
the waters of the Grand Harbour. The pleasure-boats (caico) have a canopy over
them, which can be taken down at pleasure, and is generally a most necessary ap-
pendage to protect and screen the traveller from the great heat of the sun. Ferry-
boats (barca del passo) are constantly crossing over to the town of Yittoriosa, on
the opposite side of the harbour : the proper fare by these boats is one penny, though
the boatmen are always ready to impose upon foreigners. The fishing boats (farilla)
go out every morning before sunrise, and generally return laden with excellent fish,
which is sold directly it is brought on shore. The Maltese boatmen always row
standing, and are remarkably expert in avoiding the waves which often threaten to
swamp their little boats.
The castle and fortress of St. Elmo stand on the right shore of the Grand Harbour
as you enter it. It is surmounted by a lighthouse; and beyond, in a southerly
direction, lies the city of Yaletta. The Marina, lined with stores and crowded with
vessels from all parts of the world, extends along the water’s side for about a mile.
The houses rise one above another, so that almost the whole city can be seen from
the water, interspersed with churches and gardens, which have a remarkably pleasing


appearance. At the extremity of the harbour lie the British men-of-war. The
“ Howe,” the “ Indus,” and the “ Vanguard,” were there on my arrival; but the
“ Revenge” (to one of the officers of which I bore a letter of introduction) was un-
fortunately at Tunis. On the left side of the harbour lie the towns of Borgo (Vit-
toriosa) Birmula, and Senglea, called also Isola, guarded at the entrance by the towers
of Fort Ricasoli, and further in, by the stupendous fortifications of St. Angelo.
When we had arrived in the harbour, the health officer came alongside, and took our
ship’s papers in a pair of tongs. After asking us the usual questions we were ordered
to the Pratique-office, where we stood guarded by a wooden barrier for some time,
till at length we got Pratique, and were permitted to enter the city. The harrier
was then removed, and the officers shook us most cordially by the hand. On return-
ing to the vessel, to get my things ashore, I found it crowded with Maltese, who had
come on board with various articles for sale. It was quite amusing to witness the
various characters : ship-chandlers soliciting custom ; the carpenter, the butcher, the
baker, and even the hair-dresser made their appearance, to say nothing of other
worthies who were very desirous of driving a bargain for fruit, liqueurs, cigars, canary-
birds, and shells. Josef Soler, a young Spaniard, very kindly took me ashore in his
boat; and as I was possessed of a letter of introduction to an English gentleman resid-
ing at Yaletta, we proceeded to his house. The atmosphere in the streets somewhat
resembled that of an oven, hut as the houses are very high, and the streets narrow,
it is easy to walk in the shade, sheltered from the heat of the burning sun. We
first visited the store of M. Pietro Paolo Agius, whence I wrote a letter to England,
as I was anxious to send it by the steamer, which left at twelve o’clock. I went
through this gentleman’s maccaroni works, which are very extensive, and there I saw
the various processes employed in the preparation of this substance, which is one of
the chief articles of food in the south of Europe. The mills for grinding the corn are
turned by mules, and numbers of miserable looking men and women are employed in
forming the paste into an infinite variety of shapes, which is then dried in the sun,
and afterwards packed up for exportation. A great deal of the bread made here is
sent to Alexandria, where it realizes a good price. Above the houses on the Marina
is a delightful terrace, commanding a wide and extensive view of the harbour and the
opposite fortifications, with the various vessels taking in their respective cargoes,
among which the speronaros and polacchi, with their long curved latine sails, had
a very pleasing and attractive appearance, from their uncommonly picturesque style of
rigging. On a platform just above the Marina, stands a bronze statue of Neptune,
holding a trident in one hand ; it is the work of Giovanni Bologna, a pupil of Michael
Angelo, and serves as the centre of a fountain, around which the fish-market is held.
Passing through a long excavated passage called the Lascaris Gate, you enter the
Strada Levante, and cross a drawbridge over a second fortification, beneath which is


a small garden filled with orange, lemon, and cypress trees, whose cool greenness forms
an agreeable contrast to the white dusty glare of the streets on first entering the city.
The houses are all built of stone, of three or four stories in height, and most of them
have an interior court open to the air above, (after the eastern fashion.) This forms
a cool and shady retreat, and is often ornamented with spreading trees and shrubs
growing in pots. Here the Maltese females generally sit and spin, or employ them-
selves in needle-work. The floors, even of the bed-rooms, are all paved with tiles or
flag-stones, and the roofs of all the houses are flat and without chimneys ; and in the
cool of the evening after sunset, the people often resort to the housetop to enjoy the
sea breeze, and pass the time in conversation. In front of the dwellings there are
generally one or two balconies jutting out into the street several feet from the wall.
These are sometimes furnished with glass windows, and sometimes screened with
blinds made of India matting, which form a characteristic feature in the houses of
Malta. The streets, though regular, from the declivity on which part of the city is
built, are so steep as to be composed of stairs, which Byron recollected with no very
pleasant feeling in his lines entitled, “ Farewell to Malta.” At night the city is badly
lighted ; a small lamp fixed in the corner of every alternate street being the only
guide for passengers ; but the inhabitants retire to rest so very early, that compara-
tively few persons are seen in the streets after dark.
I found Mr. S. at his residence in the Strada Zecca, and, after a little conversa-
tion, he recommended me to take lodgings with an English family who resided in
an adjoining street, and I proceeded thither, accompanied by Josef Soler, who being-
able to speak English pretty fluently was of great service to me, and by informing
me of the price of provisions, &c., saved me from frequent imposition. Finding that
the lodgings I was in search of were all engaged, I was recommended to try those
kept by Signor Fabreschi, a Leghornese merchant in reduced circumstances. Here
I engaged a bedroom only, as I found it to be the most convenient method to take
my meals at the cafe, or restaurateur in the adjoining street. I soon found in this
family all that I could wish for, as they did every thing in their power to render me
comfortable, and make my stay in Yaletta as agreeable as possible.
On my arrival, one of the first pieces of information I heard was, that there had
been no rain in Malta for four years, and that water was in consequence extremely
scarce. Indeed, the country in most parts resembled a barren desert, the fields being
so parched up that not a single blade of grass was to be seen ; and the constant glare
of the burning sun upon the white rock, and the clouds of dust that arose on every
breath of wind, rendered it extremely unpleasant to the eyes. There was, however,
still some water in the public fountains in Yaletta, and on passing any of these I
was generally sure to see some twenty or thirty poor creatures gathered around with
small water barrels to take home this valuable necessary to their wives and families.


All were of course eager to be served first, which gave rise to endless quarrels and
contentions, in which the strongest party was of course victorious. In many of the
casals ox villages, the people are obliged to buy their water at the rate of one half-
penny a gallon; this is supplied to them by water-carts from the aqueduct, built by
the Grand Master, Wignacourt, a.d. 1610.
The principal street of Yaletta is Strada Reale, which extends from the gate of the
same name as far as the castle of St. Elmo ; a distance of three quarters of a mile.
The city is closed by three gates ; Porta Reale, which is the chief entrance from the
country, and the suburban town of Floriana; Porta Marsamuscetto, from the qua-
rantine harbour ; and the Marina gate, from the Grand Harbour.
Before the arrival of the order of St. John, the capital of the island was the Citta
Notabile, or Civitta Yecchia, as it is generally called. The first stone of the new'
city was laid by the Grand Master, La Valette, on the 28th March, 1566, and the
whole was completed by his successor, Pietro de Monte, in May, 1571. The popu-
lation of Yaletta, including Floriana, is estimated at about 30,000, and that of the
whole island at 120,000. Gozo contains 18,000 more, consequently it is one of the
most thickly populated places on the face of the earth. The Maltese are generally
of an ordinary stature, strong, robust, and of a sallow complexion ; the country
people are very tawny, and are said to bear extreme heat better than any other
nation. They have large black eyes, and those you see in the towns are occasion-
ally handsome; they are full of fire, and endowed with a warm and lively imagi-
nation, and in their love and hatred, as well as in their general opinions, they are
tenacious and affectionate. Notwithstanding the natural fertility of the island be-
neath a sky of almost continued serenity, the population is so dense that a large
portion of the supplies of grain, fruit, vegetables, &c., on which most of the inhabit-
ants subsist, is constantly brought over in boats from Sicily. Many of the over-
plus population find an asylum in the Barbary states, in Egypt, Syria, and Turkey.
Ihe language is certainly a dialect of the Arabic; and in many of the villages, and
particularly in Gozo, its original is preserved almost pure. In Yaletta most of
the better classes understand Italian, and some few speak English, though not nearly
so many as I should have supposed. In the town, there is a normal school, attended
by about 500 children, as w r ell as several private schools for the children of the
better classes. Education is, however, chiefly in the hands of the priests. The
Government University is a large building, and is attended by about 90 students ;
in the Lyceum, there are nearly 100. It is governed by a rector, and has professors
m the four faculties of arts, theology, law, and medicine. There is a confessor ap-
pointed for the youthful pupils, who pay 2s. 6d. per month each ; those of the
Lyceum pay Is. per month, and both have the use of the extensive library belonging
to Government.
D


CHAPTER III.
SUNSET-COUNTRY HOUSE OF MR. AGIUS —CATTLE AND GOATS.
“ There is a glory in the setting beams
Of heaven’s bright sun at even,
When, through a bank of purple clouds,
He streaks the -western sky
With many coloured radiances,
Of amber and of gold,
Till one ineffable brightness
Pervades the wondrous scene;
And, like an orbed glory
Steeped in vermilion light,
He rolls his chariot-wheels away
Along a path of fire.”
126, Strada Dominico.
I have just returned from a pleasant walk in the country, where I have been to see
Mr. Agius’s villa and farm, accompanied hy his two sons, Antonio and Tancredi. We
left the city hy the Marina gate, and walked along the shore of the Grand Harbour to
Marsa, where there is a pillar erected on the beach. This spot commands a fine view
of the harbour and the surrounding country. As we strolled along, the music from
the men-of-war sounded cheerfully across the water, and broke the calm and pleasing
stillness of the evening. The air was delicious; indeed the only time in this warm
climate, suitable for walking, is either at sunset, or else very early in the morning.
When we had gained the summit of the hill, the sun was just setting behind a hank
of resplendent clouds. The whole western horizon was tinged with a deep orange-
yellow, and small clouds scattering their golden light along the sky, contrasted their
exquisite beauty with the blue of the surrounding heavens. Occasionally we could
see the gleaming lightning shine between the clouds, whose darkened edges became in
an instant vividly bright, and added a glorious and impressive grandeur to the prospect.
On passing the walls of Pieta, we encountered a most remarkable-looking personage,
whose appearance strongly reminded me of the idea I had formed of a ghost in my
younger days. He was dressed wholly in white, with a thick veil covering his head
and face, and two holes left for his eyes; in one hand he held a small box for


money, and my companions explained to me that he was a religious beggar called the
“ Fratello dell’ anima Justiziate,” or brother of the souls in purgatory. By and by
we reached the farm, hut it only resembled an English farm in name. We entered
beneath a portly archway, painted with divers strange representations of camels, goats,
and birds, and other creatures whose names I was unable to divine ; above every door-
way was a cow’s head, carved in stone, and painted to resemble life. The cattle, of
which there were nearly 300, were all tied up in rows outside long stone sheds,
into which they are put at night, and in wet weather. These creatures were all under-
going the process of fattening, and some of them were really handsome: those from
Barbary and Sicily I admired most, as the native Maltese cattle are all of a small size.
It is from this farm that most of the men-of-war calling at Malta are supplied with
beef. These animals are fed chiefly on hay, and other supplies brought from Sicily,
as the present excessive drought has put a stop to almost all cultivation in the island.
By far the greater part of the cattle consumed in Malta are brought over from the
Barbary states, and yield very good beef. The sheep are also from Barbary, and of
a very different breed from our own ; they are frequently black and spotted; with
long legs, and wool almost approaching to the structure and consistence of hair. But
the most numerous and valuable animals which the Maltese possess are their goats,
of which it is computed there are about 12,000 on the island; they are handsome crea-
tures, with very long hair, silky and of every variety of colour; black, white, dappled,
and fawn being the most common. Their milk is plentiful and very good, though
from the scarcity of water its price has of late been raised. The streets of Valetta
are full of them, and it is the custom for the milkman to lead about his goats every
morning and evening to serve his customers at their respective houses.
Horses, which are scarce, are of the Barbary breed : the mules and asses of Malta
and Gozo are remarkable for their large size and their elegant shape, and are the chief
vehicles employed for draught and burden; they are very numerous, especially the
mules, which are generally used for riding.
The race of Maltese dogs, so renowned for their scarcity and singular appearance,
is now nearly extinct, though they may still be obtained at an exceedingly high
price. They are very small, with long glistening hair reaching down to the feet, and
a turned-up nose. Buffbn terms them “ Bichon” in his Natural History. Her
Majesty Queen Adelaide procured one of these little creatures during her residence
in Malta. It was carried to England, where it was greatly admired as being the only
one of its race in the whole country.
We returned home by the light of the moon, and in passing through the suburban
streets of Floriana we were serenaded by the chirping of numberless crickets. The
Maltese seem greatly attached to these insects; they capture them as we would a bird,
and hang them up in little wicker cages, full of leaves, outside their windows.
d 2


CHAPTER IV.
THE KNIGHTS OF ST. JOHN OF JERUSALEM.
“ Lo, I must tell a tale of chivalry !”
In speaking of the island of Malta, I should be guilty of an important omission if I
neglected to mention the knightly order of St. John of Jerusalem, which occupied this
spot for nearly 300 years, and with whose history the name of Malta must he ever as-
sociated. On the 23rd of March, 1530, Charles the Fifth, king of Sicily, gave over to
the order of St. John of Jerusalem the islands of Malta, Gozo, and Comino, with Tri-
poli, in Africa, as a free and noble fief under certain conditions. The remains of the
order, who had fled from the island of Rhodes, and were then in the Papal States,
took possession of this grant in the autumn of the same year. The island, after
having successively been under the dominion of the Phoenicians, Greeks, and Cartha-
ginians, fell from the hands of the Romans during the middle ages under the preca-
rious sway of the Arabs, and Sicilians, but now began to rise into importance
under the military government of the knights. On their arrival they found the
island in a state of great destitution, and exposed to continued attacks from the Turks
and Barbary corsairs. The first act of the Grand Master was to refortify the old
castle of St. Angelo, which was built by the Arabs ; and thus to secure a defence
against the attacks of his enemies. In 1546, the famous corsair Dragut effected a
landing, and sacked the village of Tarshien, but was compelled to retreat with great
loss. After this, repeated attempts were made by the Turks to gain possession of the
island, and they were as often repulsed, till under the reign of John de la Valette,
Malta underwent its severest assault from the hands of the same people. Solyman,
enraged at the seizure of a Turkish galleon belonging to his chief eunuch, vowed the
destruction of Malta, and for that purpose sent a formidable armament under Dra-
gut, the admiral of the Algerine fleet, which appeared off the island, in May 1565.
They first attacked the fort of St. Elmo, but after a most desperate battle, and a
loss of 3000 men, the Turks were obliged to suspend their operations. The assault
was, however, soon afterwards renewed, and 300 knights perished on the occasion. The
cruel Turk, who had now lost 8000 men, wishing to be revenged for the death of his


troops, ordered a search to be made amongst the dead and wounded for the knights,
whose hearts he ripped out, and after cutting their bosoms in the form of a cross,
commanded them to be set afloat upon boards, intending that the tide should carry
them across to St. Angelo, where the forces of La Yalette were. By way of
reprisal, the Grand Master ordered all the Turkish prisoners to be put to death,
and loading his cannon with their still bleeding heads, he fired them into the enemy’s
camp !
In the following year, after the defeat of the Turks, the first stone of the city of
Valetta was laid, and the fort of St. Elmo repaired and fortified. On the death of
La Yalette, the city was completed by Grand Master Pietro de Monte, and from that
time it became the seat of government. The successive Grand Masters continued
the fortifications which were begun under La Yalette, raised numerous forts along the
coast, and established various works and institutions.
During the Grand Mastership of Emmanuel de Pinto, the king of Sicily made
pretensions to the kingdom of Malta, declaring that it had only been yielded up to
the Order on condition that the supreme sovereignty should still be vested in the
hands of the kings of Sicily. For this purpose he sent an embassy styled the
“ Monarchia,” to desire the knights to resign the island at once into his hands.
This proceeding the knights treated with contempt, and the result was, that all the
ports of Sicily were closed against Maltese vessels. This was a terrible blow to
Malta, as all her supplies were then derived from that quarter. The Grand Master,
however, entered into a truce with the Turks, who gladly accepted his proposals,
and the united powers soon made the king of Sicily feel that he had raised up against
himself a formidable enemy ; and after losing many of his vessels, he sought for
peace, and made all possible reparation to the Grand Master for the war which he
had occasioned.
The bailiff Emmanuel de Rohan, of the lineage of France, succeeded Ximenes, the
successor of Pinto, in the year 1775. He formed a regular battalion of infantry,
improved the judicial courts, and facilitated public education. But this prosperity
was not of long duration, for during the latter part of his reign the Order suffered
various losses by the extinction of several of its commanderies, and the exhausted
state of its resources. During the reign of his successor Hompesch, it was found
necessary to melt the plate of the galleys and hospitals.
The French government, which for some time had manifested a spirit of hostility to
the Order, now came forward to display it more openly. On the 6th of June, 1798,
a division of the French fleet arrived before the port of Malta. Through the
treachery of some of the knights, the French army gained possession of most of the
important posts in the country with scarcely any resistance, and after a short time it
was resolved to yield up the city into the hands of the besiegers. No sooner did the


French find themselves masters of the island, than they required all the knights to
leave it within three days. About £lO was advanced to each knight for the expenses
of his journey, but he was not allowed to depart till he had torn the cross from his
breast, and mounted the tri-coloured cockade. Hompesch, the last Grand Master,
embarked, accompanied by twelve knights, on hoard a merchant vessel hound to
Trieste, and in 1804 this unfortunate man died at Montpelier, in the sixty-second
year of his age. The knights who fared best in the general dispersion were those
who took refuge in the Russian dominions. The Emperor Paul was solemnly
inaugurated as the seventieth master of the Order in the year 1798. At the same
time the standard of St. John was hoisted on the walls of St. Petersburgh, where it
continues unfurled to this day.


CHAPTER V.
PALACE—ARMOURY—TAPESTRY AND PAINTINGS.
“ The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,
And all that beauty, all that wealth e’er gave,
Await alike th’ inevitable hour—
The paths of glory lead—but to the grave!”
I have been this morning to see the palace, which is now the residence of the British
Governor, who is absent on a visit to England. It was formerly the abode of the
Grand Masters, and is situated on one side of the Strada Reale, having a spacious
square in front, called Piazza St. Georgio. This square is the usual evening pro-
menade of the fashionables of Malta ; and every evening the military band perform
here for their gratification. On the opposite side is situated the “ Casino,” or Ex-
change, where the merchants generally meet, either for business or conversation. The
external appearance of the palace presents nothing striking, the whole forming a pile
of massive building, about 300 feet square, surrounded on three sides by open bal-
conies. It has two principal entrances in front, which open into a large central court.
At the back of the palace is situated the market; and the stalls, which are fixed up
against the whole length of the building, tend greatly to spoil the appearance of this
part of the structure. The interior of the palace was beautified and adorned by
Grand Master Emmanuel de Pinto. It consists of an upper and lower story, each
containing a range of noble apartments, which run round the building. The interior
court is surrounded with arches, and opposite the entrance is a fountain, ornamented
with a bronze statue of Neptune, fixed in the wall behind it. In a smaller court
adjoining the former is a racket ground, where I observed several military officers
amusing themselves with this healthy exercise. On ascending the staircase to the
upper suite of apartments, I found the person whose duty it is to conduct strangers
through the palace. After proceeding through several spacious halls, embellished
with old paintings of the battles of the “ Order,” executed by Matteo da Lacce, I
passed into the waiting-room, the walls of which were hung with the productions of
two modern Maltese artists of considerable merit—Caruana and Bussatil. The former
of these is certainly the most pleasing master; and his painting of St. Michael is very


good, both as regards composition and colouring. The other pictures which more
particularly attracted my attention were, St. George and the Dragon, St. Peter, Mary
Magdalen, and Eneas. Some of the works of art in the suite of apartments are hy
Caravaggio, Guisippe d’Arpino, and the Cavalier Favray. There is a full-length por-
trait of the Grand Master Wignacourt, clad in a splendid suit of steel armour chased
with gold, hy Caravaggio, and is one of the finest works of art in the palace. Several
ancient scriptural paintings, the gift of the Grand Master Zondadari, adorn the
walls.
In the corridor, leading to the armoury, I was shown a room entirely hung with
very beautiful tapestry, each piece was about twelve feet high, and from six to eight
feet in width, and represented an infinite variety of animals, birds, flowers, and insects,
tastefully grouped together, of the size of life, and all exquisitely worked in their
natural colours. These extraordinary specimens of needlework were brought from
France about the year 1700 : yet even at the present day the colours look quite fresh
and new. But by far the most interesting sight in this palace is the armoury, wdiich
occupies a large saloon at the end of the corridor, and into which I was shown after
examining the tapestry. Here are preserved the armour, and many of the warlike
instruments belonging to the Knights of Malta, together with trophies of their splendid
victories over the Turks. There are ninety complete suits of armour for mounted
knights, and 450 cutlasses, cuirasses, and gauntlets for the infantry. These latter
arms are arranged around the upper part of the room, with their respective shields, on
which are portrayed the white cross of the order on a red field. The suits of armour
for the men at arms are placed upright on pedestals at equal distances from each other,
and are posted along the rows of muskets, looking like so many sentinels placed to
guard the whole. One of these suits of armour was pointed out to me as having been
experimented upon to try its power of resistance against a musket-hall ; several of
which were fired at it from sixty yards distance, and only produced a very slight im-
pression upon the steel. At one end of the room was a gigantic suit of black armour,
seven feet in height, and three feet and a half in width; it must have been im-
possible for any man of the present age to have worn it, and I should think it only
fit for a Cyclops of Mount Etna. I lifted the helmet, which alone weighs thirty-
seven pounds. Adjoining this grim armour figure, stands a case containing a large
assortment of musketry, daggers, guns, and other arms, which were taken hy the
knights from the Turks in their various engagements. Amongst them the sword of
the famous Dragut was shown to me as a valuable relic. The workmanship of
some of these ancient weapons is very curious, when compared with the im-
provements made in modern warfare. My conductor pointed out to me a cannon made
of tarred rope, hound around a thin lining of copper, and covered on the outside
with a coating of plaster painted black ; this curious machine was captured from the


hands of the Turks in one of their attacks upon the city of Rhodes. At the other end
of the hall is the complete armour of the Grand Master Alofio Wignacourt, beautifully
chased in gold. Above it is a painting of the same, copied from the original by Ca-
ravaggio. The regular arms for the use of the British troops are arranged in the
middle of the room, and consist of
19,555 muskets and bayonets,
1,000 pistols,
30,000 boarding pikes,
and besides these there are numerous other curious weapons of warfare, arranged in
various parts of the hall. There is something melancholy in witnessing these instru-
ments of bloodshed and death, which were wielded by men in days of yore, who have
long since finished their warfare, and now sleep silently in the grave ; and one can
but exclaim on viewing them, “ How are the mighty fallen, and the weapons of war
perished!”
E


CHAPTER VI.
AUBERGES OF THE KNIGHTS—HOSPITALS.
“ They meet in mirth and wassail,
Within their lighted halls ;
The red wine sparkles in the cup,
The banners deck the walls.
Each noble knight and courtly page,
The gallant and the free,
They meet in Malta’s palaces
With shouts of revelry !”
Having in my last chapter described the Palace of the Grand Master, I shall now
speak of the various “ Auberges,” or “ Inns,” of the Knights. Each language of the
order possessed one where they all assembled and met together for the various purposes
of business and entertainment. The superior of every language was dignified with
a distinctive title, and held some commanding post in the government.
The Auherge de Provence is situated in the Strada Reale, and is now occupied by
the Malta Union Club.
The Auherge de Castile is the largest of the whole, and occupies a delightful situa-
tion, commanding an extensive view of the surrounding country. Over the principal
entrance is a marble bust of the Grand Master Pinto; and in the interior is a mag-
nificent pyramidal staircase. This Auherge is at present in the occupation of the
officers belonging to the British garrison. The other Auberges are those of Auvergne,
Italy, France, Germany, Arragon, and England. When the English Commanderies
were confiscated by Henry VIII., this language was succeeded by the Anglo-Bavarian.
Most of these languages, besides their respective churches, had small chapels in the
cathedral of St. John where many of the Knights lie buried. The present military
hospital was formerly used by the Knights of Malta for the reception of the sick. It
is a large building, situated at the foot of the Strada Mercanti, not far from the
castle of St. Elmo; in the interior is a spacious court with a fountain in the centre.
During the existence of the order, this establishment was open to strangers, as well
as to the citizens, for whom suitable accommodations were provided. The Knights con


stantly made a practice of attending to the sick in person, and provided them with all
kinds of medicine and surgical assistance free of expense, and served up their food
to them on vessels of solid silver. On the arrival of the French, in 1798, they seized
upon all the plate belonging to this establishment, and used the building as a military
hospital. On the inhabitants demanding another, the nuns of Santa Maddalena
promptly yielded up their own convent for the purpose ; some of them taking refuge
in the monastery of Santa Catarina, and some returning to their own homes. Opposite
to this hospital is the public one for men, and adjoining it is the public female hospital
founded in 1646, by the Lady Catarina Scoppi Senese, who endowed it with all her
wealth.
There is another large building called La Camarata, where many of the more pious
Knights were accustomed to meet together for purposes of devotion ; this is now
occupied by private families.
E 2


CHAPTER VII.
WALLS AND FORTIFICATIONS—CASTLES OF ST. ELMO AND ST. ANGELO—FORTS RICASOLI,
TIGNE, AND MANOEL.
Bourbon.—“ Look there!
Philibat.—“ I look upon
A lofty battlement.”
The walls and fortifications of Valetta, and the towns on the opposite side of the har-
bour, are very stupendous. They have been the scene of various engagements between
the Knights and their enemies, as well as of those of more recent times, connected
with the history of our country’s warfare ; and some short account of them may not
therefore prove uninteresting.
The fortifications which surround the town are of great height, and many of them
are partly formed out of the limestone rock. They were in some places excavated
and raised by the Turkish slaves during the reign of the Grand Masters ; and
they have at various times been greatly increased and strengthened. The walls gene-
rally measure about fifteen feet in width, and are chiefly composed of the common
limestone of the island ; their total circumference is two miles and a half. The ditch
which crosses the peninsula from the Quarantine to the Grand Harbour, thereby
cutting off all communication with the city, is about one thousand feet in length,
one hundred and twenty feet deep, and as many wide. This immense ditch is crossed
by five draw-bridges; one leading into Porta Reale, which forms the principal en-
trance to the city, and the others connected with the covered ways called St. John’s
and St. James’s Cavaliers. The first fort which I visited was the Castle of St. Elmo,
situated at the extremity of the peninsula, on which the city is built. This fort was
first erected on an occasion of an attack of the Turks, in 1488. In the year 1687, it
was almost entirely rebuilt under the directions of the Grand Master Carafa ; and at
the commencement of the last century the bastions were added by Grand Master
Roccaful. The bastions, as well as the fort, are built of a very hard limestone, called
by the natives, “ zoncar,” and they are well supplied with bombs, cannon, and other
artillery. On the angles of the ramparts are two turrets, formerly used as places of
look out: at present, however, they are closed with two slabs, one bearing an inscrip


tion to Sir A. Ball, formerly governor of Malta; and the other, a similar one, in
memory of Sir Ralph Abercrombie, whose embalmed body is enclosed in a barrel
within the turret, just as it was brought from the battle of Aboukir: hence, the bas-
tions to the west are known by the name of Ball’s, and those to the east by the name
of Abercrombie’s bastions.
In the centre of a small square, on the most elevated part of the fort, a beautiful
Grecian monument has lately been erected to the memory of Governor Ball; it is built
of the Malta stone, which in this fine climate retains its dazzling whiteness unsullied
for many years. Around this monument is a row of shady pimento trees, and adjoining
it is an arched way formerly used as a place of amusement by the Knights, from which
the distant views of land and sea are delightful, varied, and extensive. The deep
azure blue of the Mediterranean sea stretched out below, till it mingles with the distant
horizon, contrasts well with the snowy whiteness of the various xebecs, galliots, and
other boats, which appear like specks upon its surface. Far away to the north lay
Capo Passaro, whence I could trace the shores of Sicily towards Palma and Alicata.
On a very clear day at sunrise, Mount Etna, too, may be seen towering above the
Avaters ; but this is not, as many writers have supposed, an every-day occurrence. On
the outermost angle of the fort stands the lighthouse, which has lately been much im-
proved by the British Government. Leaving Fort St. Elmo, I crossed the Grand
Harbour in a boat to Fort St. Angelo, on the opposite shore. This stupendous work
of defence was begun by the Arabs in 870 ; on the arrival of the Knights it was greatly
enlarged, and in 1690, under Adrian de Wignacourt, it finally assumed its present
aspect. Towards the Grand Harbour it presents an imposing front composed of four
batteries, one above another, and each mounting fifty-one guns. The only objects
worthy of notice here are the extensive powder magazines, and a small chapel contain-
ing two sienite pillars brought by the Knights from the island of Rhodes.
Fort Ricasoli is built on the extreme point of the same side of the harbour as St.
Angelo, and corresponds with St. Elmo, on the opposite shore. It was built by the
Cavalier Gianfrancesco Ricasoli, and was called after his name by Grand Master Cot-
toneo, in 1670. On the 3rd of April 1807, this fort was the scene of an event as
disgraceful as it was tragical. The account given of it by a resident here, is as
follows :
“ During the war a French nobleman proposed to raise for the Mediterranean
service a regiment composed wholly of Greeks. The bargain being struck, he
gathered together a horde of various men from the Levant, —Sclavonians, Albanians,
Rnd others, —who were enrolled under the English banner, and denominated ‘ Froberg’s
regiment.’ Soon afterwards they were ti'ansported to Malta, and appointed to occupy
this fort. The officers placed over them acted with great severity and harshness,
which was further aggravated by the promises of advancement which had been offered


to lure them into the service proving only a deception. The occasion of an officer strik-
ing a drummer on the face with a cane, led to an open revolt, in which several of them
were put to death, and finally they closed the gates of the fortress and declared them-
selves independent. Internal quarrels, however, soon lessened their numbers, and
after some of them had surrendered, only about 150 of the most resolute remained
in possession of the fort. An English officer resolved upon and effected its capture >’
and all hut six of the rebels were taken. These six blockaded themselves in the
powder magazine, and then protested they would blow it up if any measures were
taken to seize them. Of those who were captured ten were hung, and fifteen were
musketted on the plain of Floriana. Pinioned and handcuffed, they were made to
kneel upon their coffins without being blindfolded, and after the first volley was fired
at them, several who were not mortally wounded rose up and ran about the plain pur-
sued by the soldiers like so many hares. One of them in particular managed to reach
the bastions, from whence he cast himself headlong down a height of 150 feet.” In-
deed the account which I have heard of these barbarities is almost too shocking to be
remembered, and stands out as a foul blot on the characters of all connected with them.
“ The six rebels who remained, after seeking in vain for pardon, threatened after six
days, in case of refusal, that they would blow up the fort as soon as the first vesper
hell tolled from the cathedral of St. John. All was still till the appointed hour, when
the fatal crash was heard, and the whole building was seen rising a mass of ruins into
the air ! Some time passed away, and the affair was almost forgotten, when one
lonely night a priest returning homewards on a donkey was terrified at the sight of
a man in the ‘ Froberg’ uniform, pointing a musket at him over a wall. The affrighted
Father took to his heels, and on giving his information, an armed force was sent in
pursuit of the bandits. Pale and emaciated they were led into the town, and shortly
afterwards publicly executed. It appears that during the siege they carried out one
of the mines to the extremity of the fortifications, and left only a thin wall through
which to escape. When all was ready they laid the train, and at the moment of
firing, made their exit by this means, hoping that some vessel might appear on the
coast in which they might return to their native country, from whence they had been
so shamefully and cruelly decoyed away.”
On the opposite side of the Quarantine Harbour, stands Fort Manoel, which is now
used as a lazaretto for persons arriving in vessels which are obliged to undergo
quarantine. The quarantine regidations of Malta are very strict, and all vessels
arming from the eastward have to pass from ten to thirty days in the Quarantine
Harbour before they are allowed to hold any communication with the shore. For
passengers, especially, this proves a very great nuisance. They are allowed an apart-
ment in the lazaretto, furnished with one table, two chairs, and a bed-board. If they
wish for any more furniture they can bespeak it of a person who supplies it, however,


at a very high rate. As to food, it is said that if a person has not means wherewith
to pay for a breakfast or dinner, at the enormous rate charged by the “ Trattoria,” he
stands a very good chance of being starved to death.
To the north-east of Fort Manoel stands Fort Tigne, on the point called Cape
Dragut, where that famous corsair was slain in the great siege of Malta. It is intended
to act in conjunction with Fort St. Elmo, for the defence of the Quarantine Harbour,
and is strongly fortified.
The walls of the city measure about fifteen feet in width, and their entire circum-
ference is about two miles and a half. The ditch is a stupendous work, one thousand
feet in length, one hundred and twenty feet deep, and the same in width. The bottom
of this ditch is cultivated, and on looking over the drawbridge of Porta Reale, I saw
fig-trees and prickly pears growing in this gulf below me ; whilst here and there
a sportive summer butterfly could be seen wandering like some light creature of the
element over the green leaves of the stunted trees.
I went through the two underground passages which lead out of the city, called
St. John’s and St. James’s Cavaliers : they are cut out of the solid limestone, and the
air strikes very cold on entering them from the sultry atmosphere without. There are
many outworks and glacis of massive stone beyond these walls, and a second series
of fortifications outside the suburbs of Floriana, which render the city of Yaletta one
of the best fortified in the whole world. I finished my survey by a walk along the
walls overlooking the ditch. That part called the Baracca, commands a very fine
view of the harbour and the surrounding country, which looks like a parched desert
covered with walls and buildings, over which the eye wanders in vain in search of
some spot of green to relieve and cheer the burning glare of this southern landscape.
In the centre of this platform, within a grove of trees, stands the tomb of Sir Thomas
Maitland, one of the late governors of Malta; and several other monuments are raised
in various parts of this fortification.


CHAPTER VIII.
RAMBLE IN THE COUNTRY—PIETA—BATHS.
“ Where the shrill chirp of the green lizard’s love
Broke on the sultry silentness alone.”
I rose in the morning before five o’clock, after a refreshing night’s rest, undisturbed by
the mosquitos, though numbers of them had entered in at the open window, and were
buzzing around the room in search of a victim. My muslin curtains were closed, so I
had nothing to fear. During the night the thermometer stood at 80°, though I did
not feel the heat at all unpleasant. The bedrooms in Malta are paved with tiles, which
greatly helps to keep them cool. After eating a few grapes I set out with Joseph
Soler in search of insects. We passed through the Porta Reale, and soon found our-
selves on the parched plain of Floriana. Almost the first objects that attracted my
attention were the numberless lizards that darted in and out of every crevice among
the stone walls, and turning their slender and graceful forms in every variety of
attitude. Sometimes they would rest for a moment on the side of a projecting rock,
and suddenly raising their heads, as if in the act of listening, would dart off again
with the speed of thought, and disappear in the nearest crevice. I also saw a small
species of locust with red wings ; the natives call these “ Farfetta.” By and by I
caught several of these, which had pale blue wings, and with the exception of a few
ants, and some black beetles, were almost the only insects I met with on the plains
of Floriana. After returning to breakfast at the cafe, I set out again alone, and
took my way along a path which overlooked the harbour. Presently I came to an old
fort where a soldier was keeping guard. A great variety of thistles and sharp prickly
herbs grew around, and a very aromatic plant, on every tuft of which I found speci-
mens of the crimson-speckled footman moth (Deiopeia pulchella.) These moths are
the most numerous of the Maltese lepidoptera; and in St. Paul’s Bay, and some other
places, they are in such great abundance that one can scarcely tread without raising
a whole troop of them. It is worthy of remark, that this species is found about this
latitude, distributed over a tract of country forming a belt around the whole globe.
In Great Britain this species is exceedingly rare, and in the West Indies its place is
supplied by a species closely allied to it, but of a deeper colour. I found the caper


plant growing in great abundance on walls and the sides of rocks ; it bears a beautiful
blossom of a lilac colour. After spending some time around this fort, searching for
land shells and minute insects, I observed a narrow path leading to the right. This
I followed for some distance until I arrived at the village of Pieta, situated on the
western side of the Quarantine Harbour. It is prettily placed, and commands an
extensive view of the water. Feeling very thirsty, and seeing a woman standing at
the door of a cottage, I made signs to her to sell me some milk. Unfortunately the
goats were all dry, and the woman shook her head and said “ Nix,” a common Maltese
term for a negation, said to be derived from the German, though “ Li” is their general
word for “ No.” —“ Eva” signifies “ Yes.” A little farther on I fell in with a respect-
able looking man who spoke English. Observing that I was collecting insects, he
very kindly gave me permission to visit his master’s garden, which was situated a little
higher up the hill. This garden belongs to an English gentleman resident in Malta,
and is one of the prettiest and best cultivated of any I have seen. The walks are
paved with flag-stones, and stone pillars extend along on each side, over which the
vines are trailed so as to form a complete canopy, which is a delightful protection from
the heat of the noon-day sun. There is a well in the garden, and most of the orange
and other fruit trees have a small reservoir around them, which is filled with water at
stated times. A variety of flowers and shrubs adorn the borders ; amongst which
the large blossoms of the white jessamine breathed a delicious perfume on the air, and
from the feathery boughs of the drooping pimento the redstart and the nightingale
poured forth their songs. It seemed a little paradise in the desert, and reminded
one of the oases in the sands of Lybia and Egypt. The presence of several palm
trees gave an oriental appearance to the spot, and the Papilio Machaon, and other
brilliant butterflies, swept swiftly through the sultry atmosphere, whilst the beautiful
violet bee sought for honey in the clustering petals of the Turkish rose. The principal
curiosity in this garden is a deep hole in the rock which was originally filled with rich
clay, but which has since been taken out to form the present soil. This hollow de-
scends almost perpendicularly for fifty or sixty feet and has an underground communi-
cation with the sea. The owner has erected a tasteful balcony of stone work around
the upper opening, and another half way down, which is approached by steps, and forms
a very cool and shady retreat from the sun. The wild parsley, which is common in
underground places in Malta, grows in this ravine. When her Majesty Queen Ade-
laide visited Malta, she came to see this remarkable spot, which certainly presents a
very curious geological phenomenon, and one not easily accounted for. Leaving
this delightful place, I returned towards Valetta by another road. The heat was
excessive, not a breath of wind fanned the atmosphere ; at the bottom of the hill lay
the Quarantine Harbour, and just as I was longing to plunge into its transparent
waters, I observed the sign over the door of the bath house of Pieta. I went in, and
F


after getting perfectly cool, I enjoyed a most refreshing plunge, and amused myself with
catching the hermit crabs and top-shells that crept amongst the sea-weed which lined
the sides and floor of the bath. Bathing is one of the greatest luxuries which can be
enjoyed in Malta, and seems almost indispensable to health. The bath house of Pieta
is pleasant and commodious, but it is much to be regretted that larger buildings de-
voted to the same purpose have not been erected in the immediate vicinity of Valetta.
for the accommodation of the English residents there.


CHAPTER IX.
COSTUME—DRESS OF THE COUNTRY PEOPLE.
“ And such was she, the lady of the cave;
Her dress was very different from the Spanish,
Simpler, and yet of colours not so grave;
For as you know the Spanish women banish
Bright hues when out of doors, and yet while wave
Around them (what I hope will never vanish,)
The basquinah and the mantilla, they
Seem at the same time mystical and gay.”
The costume of the upper classes among the male population in Valetta is generally
French, but the native dress is still worn by many of the lower classes. Its chief
peculiarity is the Phrygian cap, which resembles a long bag made of wool hanging
down behind, or over the left shoulder. This cap is of various colours, but generally
it is either blue, brown, or white. On Sundays and gala days they generally wear a
better sort of cap, of a crimson colour, which is dyed with the kermes of Barbary, and
much esteemed. This article often forms a receptacle for small things which the
wearer may wish to carry about with him; and sometimes it serves also as a purse.
A girdle is frequently worn by the lower orders; it is generally from three to four
yards in length, and with it the pantaloons are confined around the waist; this portion
of the dress is commonly made of blue plaid cotton, and is called a “terha;” it is
sometimes composed of red or yellow silk, when it is denominated a “ bushakka.”
Those who wear this dress do not commonly have a jacket, its place being supplied
by a “sedria,” or vest, which if the wearer can afford it, is often ornamented down
the front with several rows of silver buttons as large as half-crowns. At other times,
instead of these I have seen them wear quarter-dollar pieces, and sometimes shillings
with metal shanks fastened to them. A Maltese thus equipped, or “in gala,” as they
term it, presents a very smart figure, with a long curl of hair hanging down on each side
of his face, and his fingers ornamented with massive rings, to which the Maltese are ex-
tremely partial. After the death of a near relation the men suffer their hair to grow
very long. This custom I observed in the country, but particularly in the island of
f 2


Gozo, where the ancient manners are more strictly preserved than in Malta. Sandals are
now only worn by the country people, and the capuchin friars ; but they used formerly
to constitute a necessary appendage to the native dress : —they consist of two oblong
pieces of untanned bull’s hide drawn round the foot by two strings of the same ma-
terial, and are called “ kork.” Most of the men and boys of the working classes wear
over their shoulder what they call a S£ khurg,” in which they carry their provisions
to town for the day, and on their return home it is filled with supplies for their
families. It is about three yards long and two wide, open in the middle, and reminds
one of a gigantic purse.
As to the costume of the ladies of Valetta, a Jesuit writer very justly observes, te leur
demarche et leur habillement sont si modestes, qu’on les prendroit pour des religieuses.”
It is certainly to be regretted that so many of them have lately adopted the English
costume, which is far from being as simple and as modest as their own. The walking
dress consists of a skirt of black silk worn over a body of some light material; this
is called a half “ onella.” The upper part or head dress is called the ££ onella” or
“faldetta,” and is likewise made of black silk, part of which is bound with whalebone ;
and, on being drawn over the head, forms an elegant arch, displaying the countenance
of the wearer in the most favourable manner possible. The whole is extremely neat,
but it requires a peculiar grace in walking to show it off to advantage, in which re-
spect the Maltese ladies are by no means deficient. The head-dress of the country-
women consists either of a “ faldetta” made of barred cotton, or a simple white hand-
kerchief thrown over the head. On particular occasions they put on a ££ gezwira,”
which is a petticoat of blue cotton drawn up into very thick folds around the waist,
and open on the right side, where it is fastened with bows of coloured ribbon. Very
few of the country people wear shoes, and even in Yaletta all the lower orders go
barefooted ; most of the women, however, like to possess a pair, which are reserved
for very particular occasions. The following anecdote is current in Malta : —Not
long since a Maltese overheard a countrywoman ask her companion while engaged at
their outdoor toilet, beside the walls of the city, how long she had had her /shoes ; the
answer was, “ Since the time of the plague,” (1813.) “ Oh,” replied the other, “ mine
are much older than yours, for I have had them ever since the blockade of the
French !” Ido not vouch for the truth of this tale, but it certainly shows the eco-
nomy of the Maltese countrywomen in the article of shoe leather.


CHAPTER X.
WALK TO MARSA SCIROCCO-EXCURSION TO MACLUBA, AND THE RUINS OF
HAJAR KÏM.
“ A rocky hill which overhung the ocean ;
From that lone ruin, where the steed that panted
Paused, might he heard the murmur of the motion
Of waters, as in spots which are enchanted
To music by the wand of Solitude !”
Early in the morning I set out on a pedestrian excursion, accompanied by my host,
M. Michael Fabreschi, whom I found to be a very kind, obliging, and intelligent young-
man. We proposed visiting the harbour and village of Marsa Scirocco, which is
situated to the south of Yaletta, on the opposite side of the island. As I had already
engaged to meet my friend, Mr. S., in the afternoon, with whom I intended to make
an excursion of some length, I found our time necessarily rather limited ; but, not-
withstanding the heat and dust, -we managed to return at the hour I had appointed,
allowing myself a sufficient period for rest before undertaking another trip. Walk-
ing under the burning sun of Malta is altogether a very different thing from strolling
in the green fields and flowery lanes of our more northern island. Here the eye has
nothing to rest upon but parched and barren rocks, walls and buildings, which from their
glaring whiteness only render the prospect most painful to the dazzled eyes; whilst
every breath of wind raises a cloud of suffocating dust which covers the roads to the
depth of many inches. Many of the English on their arrival in Malta become ill if they
expose themselves to the effects of the snn, and very few of them ever venture on foot
to any distance from the city :—whether pride or incapacity is the cause, I cannot
say. During the whole of my stay in Malta I was constantly exposed to the sun,
and the heat at times was very great, but 1 never felt any further inconvenience
from it than a profuse perspiration, which generally continued night and day with-
out any intermission. But I am wandering from my purpose, which was to give
some account of my morning’s excursion. After following the road by the margin of
the Grand Harbour, we arrived at a salt water inlet, enclosed for the purpose of rear-
ing shellfish, on which many of the poor partly subsist. I obtained some of these


shells ; they consisted chiefly of the murex brandaris, Venus casina, and pullastra, and
the Cardium rusticum, all of which species are very abundant. Around the margin of
this water the samphire grows in great quantities ; it appears to be the same kind
that occurs in Devonshire, where it is used for making an excellent pickle. Even
here, however, amongst this scanty herbage the crimson-speckled moth, I have
before noticed, rose into the air at almost every footstep ; and the sea eagle, perched
upon a jutting rock, sat silent and alone, the undisturbed monarch of the scene. The
fields are surrounded with high stone walls ; the cotton plant is almost the only
article cultivated in them ; it does not, however, attain to any great perfection in
Malta, owing to the long absence of rain. We saw a boy at work among a bed of
cotton plants, and obtained some of the seeds from him ; they were of a brownish
colour, and filled with cotton of a snowy white hue. I soon afterwards had an
opportunity of observing the method in which the natives prepare it for spinning. In
a small room in one of the Casals through which we passed, sat two young men stript
to the waist, and almost smothered with raw cotton. Suspended from the roof were
two curious instruments greatly resembling large bows strung with catgut: —through
these they passed the raw substance, at the same time causing the strings to vibrate
with great violence, which separated the heads of cotton, and reduced them to a light
downy material; this is afterwards spun by the women, and made into native cloth,
which they generally dye blue. We wanted to procure some water, but the people were
so exceedingly shy that they ran away at our approach. An old woman, however,
who had more the appearance of a dried mummy than any thing possessing life and
blood, at last offered us a small pitcher of water, and after we had satisfied our thirst
we paid her three grains, which are equivalent to an English farthing, for its limpid
contents. The prickly pear grows most abundantly all over Malta, and forms one of
the chief articles of food among the lower classes. The mode of preparing this sin-
gular fruit is curious. In its natural state of growth it is covered with small prickles,
as are also the leaves and blossoms, and as fast as we could eat them the poor woman
cut off the tops and bottoms, and then pared off the surrounding skin in a very expert
and dexterous manner, handing the pulpy interior to her stranger guests with as much
politeness and expedition as a French waiter of the first order. The peasants of Malta
and Gozo are said to be an honest and harmless set of people. They live principally
upon fish, fruits, and black bread; and the best provisions that their cottages afford
are always set before the stranger who pauses at their door. We left the old woman’s
hut where we had partaken of the prickly pears, and descended a hill by a winding
and circuitous path, which brought us suddenly in sight of the harbour of Marsa
Scirocco, which is a large inlet of the sea on the southern side of the Island, as its
name imports. Here we entered a fisherman’s cottage, and if it had been possible
to have aroused the spirit of Wilkie, a most amusing picture might have been painted.


At a large table on one side of the house sat the hostess, an immoderately fat woman,
busied in dressing small fish called “ sweethearts.” Opposite to her was a group of
men, women, and children, extending to the third and even fourth generation. At
the door sat the grandfather and grandmother, whose snowy locks and timeworn
countenances carried the beholder’s memory back to distant days when the shrivelled
forms before him sported as gaily as the little grandchild who brought her tiny bag
of shells to earn a few pence from the occasional stranger. The hack ground melted
away into an interminable maze of shelves, bottles, jars, and a thousand articles, the
necessary appendages to a Maltese cottage ; whilst the foreground was enlivened by
a strange medley of dogs and cats, ravenous almost to starvation. A quantity of
fishing baskets hung about the walls. I purchased a small one to bring over to Eng-
land, as their construction is very singular. At one end they have an aperture, through
which the fish enter but cannot get out, and when baited with small crabs are sunk
by a stone to the bottom of the water, where they are allowed to remain all night.
Close to the harbour is a tank where a number of Maltese women and maidens were
busily employed in washing. They first place their garments which are to be ope-
rated upon in the water, and after treading them out with their feet, they afterwards
beat them most violently with wooden spatulas on the edge of the tank. A statue
of St. Rocco stands on the shore, and two or three cottages are scattered along the
margin of the bay. Leaving this place we turned our steps homewards, in order to
be at Valetta in time to join my friend in the afternoon. Passing by a number of
parched carob trees we returned by a different route to Yittorioso, and crossing the
Grand Harbour in a “ barca del passo,” we returned to Strada St. Dominico, where
after having partaken of some refreshment, I waited the arrival of Mr. S. with the
horses for our proposed trip to Macluba, and the ruins of Hajar Kim. We set out
at four o’clock p.m., and after a delightful ride of seven miles, we reached the village
of Macluba ; and leaving the horses in the care of a peasant, we went on to the grotto
accompanied by some women and children who acted as our guides. The oldest wo-
man was the proprietor of the place, and carried the key of the entrance gate. We
descended a rude flight of steps cut out of the solid rock, which conducted us into an
oval hollow in the earth, which sunk abruptly from the surface to the depth of 130
feet. At the bottom we found a pleasant garden abounding with various fruit trees.
The length of this deep hollow is 330 feet, and its width about 200 feet. The ap-
pearance of the inner sides is very wild and craggy, the rocks around are broken and
scattered about in every direction, and the entire surface of the adjacent land bears
evident signs of having at some former period undergone a violent natural con-
vulsion. The land around begins to slope gradually until it reaches this spot, when
it sinks abruptly down into a deep hollow. The word “ Macluba,” signifies “ over-
turned and there is a tradition current among the inhabitants of the neighbourhood,


that this spot was once the site of an ancient village, the inhabitants of which, like
those of Sodom and Gomorrah, so displeased the Almighty that he caused the earth to
open and swallow them up, as was the case with the tents of Korah. My friend Mr. S.,
climbed a tree to pick some small white grapes which were extremely sweet; and
whilst our guides regaled us with the crimson seeds of the pomegranates, one of them
recounted a story of a woman having been blown over the precipice, who alighted in
the fruit trees without sustaining any injury whatever. My companion, having been
long resident in the Island, spoke the native language very fluently, and kindly acted
as my interpreter on these occasions. Having seen all the wonders of this place we
ascended the steep and rugged steps that led up to the surface of the earth, and re-
mounting our horses we started off immediately to the ruins of Hajar Kim. Upon
leaving the village of Crendi, our road lay over a rocky path, which was in some
places very abrupt, and more fitted for mules than for the slight and graceful barbs
which bore us. When we reached the summit of the hill we had been ascending, I
was agreeably surprised by a sudden view of the sea below us, which burst unexpect-
edly upon our sight. It was blue—deep hazy blue —as far as the weary eye could
reach towards the shores of Tripoli. In the distance the rock of Filfila arose darkly
from the sapphire plain, for the shades of evening already began to blend the garish
tints of day into a mellow and sombre hue. I shall never forget the refreshing sight
of that deep blue sea, after a day’s toil among the parched and arid rocks of Malta.
We reached the first ruin of Hajar Kim, (for there are two distinct spots where these
singular remains have been discovered,) after crossing a scorched plain studded with
golden rod and other bulbous roots. A peasant residing in an adjacent hut acted as
our guide, and leaving our horses at the point we had reached, we proceeded on foot
to examine the ruins. They consisted of two separate chambers of an oval form
opening into each other by a doorway composed of two large upright stones, with a
third placed crosswise on the top. Communicating with these chambers are several
smaller ones, in one of which are the remains of a fire-place. There are also several
curious, but rudely carved relics scattered around. One of these in the largest apart-
ment seemed to have been an altar for religious purposes. The whole was in the rudest
style of primitive architecture, and is supposed to have been the work of the Phoeni-
cians, who occupied this island many ages since. The second mass of ruins is situ-
ated at some distance low r er down the hill, and greatly resembles the former in the
style of building employed. These ruins were brought back to the light of day some
years since. They were found buried under mounds of earth ; and among the second
ruins five or six skeletons were discovered, lying arranged upon flat stones in various
recesses raised above the ground in the sides of the several chambers. WTiether
these habitations had been formerly covered in, may be considered doubtful. I should
suppose that in this dry climate the original inhabitants would have scarcely needed


a protection from the weather, especially in the remote ages of antiquity, during which
these places were built. It appeared to me that these temples were originally dedi-
cated to some heathen deity, or were, perhaps, designed for the worhip of the sun.
As the twilight was fast approaching we hastened up the hill to rejoin our horses,
where they were waiting for us, at the first mass of ruins we had visited. Here and
there we roused a solitary quail, the lone possessor of this silent and sterile spot.
The peasant who held our horses had a number of them in a bag, which he wished
to give me ; but being unable to carry them home, I was reluctantly obliged to de-
cline his offer. Before we regained the hut I felt much fatigue, and suffered greatly
from excessive thirst. Indeed my mouth was so parched that I would have given
any thing I possessed for a glass of water, hut not one drop of it was to be obtained.
It reminded me of the descriptions I had read of the horrors of thirst, experienced by
the unfortunate traveller in the arid deserts of Africa, and the lingering death of many
a feeble pilgrim whose bones whiten in the burning sun that darts down from an
unclouded canopy of perpetual boundless blue. On leaving the ruins our path lay
in many places over large and slippery rocks, whose smooth surface was very dan-
gerous for the horses’ feet. I proceeded in safety until I arrived at the last surface
of rock, which was worn and glassy; on reaching the centre of it my horse’s legs
slipped from under him, and before I was able to extricate myself from the stirrups,
the horse fell with his whole weight on my leg and foot. I managed, however, to
keep my seat until the old Maltese, who was our guide, seeing my situation came
running back uttering loud cries, and with the assistance of another man he succeeded
in extricating my leg and foot. The poor animal was much frightened, and lay quite
still ; but I must confess that his heavy body pressing on the hard rock gave my limb
a squeeze that I did not at all relish. At first they feared that my leg was broken,
but I found, fortunately for myself, that it was only severely bruised, and my foot
swollen. By this time a number of the natives had gathered around me; the old
man laid me down upon the sand whilst Mr. S. rode off for some water. I became
giddy and faint from the pain of the bruise, and the fatigue, but more especially from
the dreadful thirst I was suffering. Some water was soon brought, and after drinking
it I was assisted by the old man into his cottage, which stood but a few paces off.
Here I lay down upon a small straw pallet, and as my friend had an engagement at
Valetta at eight in the evening, he returned thither immediately, promising to send
back a cahse and a man to convey me home. I was now surrounded by the whole
village, men, women, and children, who filled the cottage, all chattering to one an-
other in their strange language, whilst the old man was unceasing in his attentions to
me, every now and then examining my foot, and wrapping it up in a cloth with the
greatest care, and all the while uttering the most mournful exclamations. After a
time the chief of the village came in, and brought a small quantity of rum, with which
G


they rubbed my foot, and he sat by my side until the calise arrived, which was at ten
o’clock. I can truly say of these people that they retain until the present day that
which St. Paul said of them when shipwrecked here, which was, that they “ showed
us no little kindness.” On the arrival of the calise two men contested for the privi-
lege of escorting me to Valetta, one of whom was my old and hospitable host. How-
ever, the man appointed by my friend Mr. S. had the prior claim, and the old man
contented himself with running for a mile or two by the side of the conveyance. I
made him a small present, and he came to the window of the calise to kiss my hand,
which is the common custom among the natives on taking leave of a stranger. The
lightning was very vivid as we proceeded homewards, and the air extremely sultry.
We arrived at Valetta shortly before midnight, and on entering the Porta Bombe
I met my friend Mr. S. who had sallied out in search of me. On reaching my lodgings
I found my kind landlord awaiting my return, and on learning that I had met with an
accident, he immediately showed me every possible kindness and attention. Thus
ended the expedition to Hajar Kim, which, fortunately for me, was attended with no
worse effects than a sprained ankle ; but as I found that it would be impossible for
me to walk the next morning, I arranged a plan for visiting Mellieha and St. Paul’s
Bay, with Fahreschi, who agreed to order the boat and get provisions ready by
sunrise.


CHAPTER XI.
EXCURSION TO ST. PAUL’S BAY, MELLIEHA, AND THE GROTTO OF CALYPSO.
“ The white clouds arc driving merrily,
And the stars we miss this morn will light
More willingly our return to-night.
List, my dear fellow, the breeze blows fair;
How it scatters Dominic’s long black hair.”
As usual, a lovely morning broke over Malta, and ere the sun was well up above the
azure bosom of the Mediterranean, the boat was all ready for our voyage. Fabreschi
had paid a visit to the market, where he laid in a stock of provisions for the day
for ourselves and the boatmen. We hastened to the Marina, and soon found ourselves
seated beneath a canopy of blue striped cotton in one of the native flat-bottomed
boats. Two boys brought our provisions, which consisted of bread and goat’s cheese,
melons, and a large keg filled with black and white grapes, as well as some Sicilian
wine, and an immense bundle of celery for the men. After a short delay caused by
filling up our water jars, I desired the boatmen to pull across to the schooner “Pro-
spero,” sending an invitation to the captain and his wife to accompany us; they were,
however, prevented doing so, and we started at once on our excursion, calling for a
pass at the Pratique office, which was easily obtained. As the wind was favourable
we sailed first into San Julian’s Bay, passing by Sliema, where most of the English
inhabitants reside. This village is prettily situated close to the water’s edge, and is
considered to be one of the healthiest spots in Malta. The houses are light and
cheerful, and some of them are painted green and washed with various colours, which
give them a very gay appearance. The wind ceased to favour us on our entering
St. Julian’s Bay and the men took to the oars, which, however, they used in a very
lazy kind of manner. We landed at the innermost part of the bay, where there was
a small sandy beach. Here I found numbers of small beetles (Cicindela); they
were in incessant motion. I managed, however, to secure several of them; and
whilst thus employed I desired the men to seek for shells among the sand. After
digging for some time, they could find nothing; but they gave me to understand
g 2


that we should meet with some in Mellieha Bay. We again entered the boat, and
made the best of our way to the next place of interest. St. Julian’s is a pretty
spot, very secluded, and more picturesque than most parts of Malta. A statue of
the saint adorns the beach, near which rises a small spring of limped water, at which
we quenched our thirst.
Passing by St. George’s Bay, we arrived at the Bay of the salt works. As I
was very desirous to see the method of preparing the salt from the sea water by eva-
poration in the sun, we landed on some sharp rocks, and soon found ourselves in
the midst of the salt pans. Large heaps of crystallized salt of snowy whiteness lay
sparkling in the sun, and several men and boys were collecting it into baskets for
use. They seemed to care but little about clothing, and one lad had nothing on
but a ragged shirt. After recrossing the rocks, and furnishing ourselves with a
supply of these glittering salt crystals, we again got on board and steered for St.
Paul’s Bay. We arrived about noon, and rowing to the Fort, showed our pass to
the soldier on guard, who hailed us on landing. After searching for a shaded spot
where we could enjoy our noontide repast, sheltered from the heat, we found a small
sandy bank protected by the ruined wall of a stone building. After mooring our
boat in a clear deep pool carpeted with green feathery sea-weed, we carried up
our stores and proceeded to our repast. I had scarcely eaten a mouthful of grapes
before the sand on which we were reposing was actually darkened with flies. It was
in vain to drive them off, for the troublesome tormentors only returned in greater
numbers, and with more audacity than before, till at last they resembled the old
plague of Egypt, and fairly drove us back again to the boat; leaving them to feed
on the grape-skin relics of our repast. We desired the men to pull along the shore
to meet us, whilst we walked over the sand to the chapel of St. Paul, which is said
to be erected over the very spot where the natives kindled the fire when the apostle
was shipwrecked on this island. The scanty shrubs that grew on the beach were
spangled with the coloured moth I have before described as being so very abun-
dant ; and at every step we took they rose in rich-coloured clouds upon the air.
On reaching the entrance of the chapel we paused, for instead of beholding St. Paul
in the doorway, we encountered a burly Maltese officer sitting at his dinner in the
outer chamber of the sacred edifice, and doing ample justice to an enormous dish
of boiled maccaroni. I bowed, and the officer looking up for a moment from his inte-
resting occupation, returned my salutation. We requested permission to inspect the
chapel, which was immediately granted to us, and we were invited to walk in. The
only remarkable object in this small edifice is a very old painting, or rather series
of paintings, around the altar-piece, descriptive of the shipwreck of St. Paul, (Acts
xxvin.) The walls were whitewashed, and against one side stood an affair which
I was assured contained every article relating to the sufferings and death of Christ.


We left the chapel, and descending the sandy beach, took our seats once more in
the boat, and steered across the bay to examine the caverns on the opposite side.
We passed a narrow channel inside the little island of Selmone, so shallow that we
could easily see the bottom, when the bay of Mellieha opened to view. The wind
blew fresh as we rounded the cape, but before we had proceeded far into the bay, the
land so sheltered it that it fell nearly a complete calm, and our boatmen had once
more recourse to their oars. At the extreme end of the bay the water was shallow
for a considerable way out, and floored with fine white sand. Here we landed, and
I enjoyed a delightful bathe. We searched for shells but found very few. A num-
ber of small compact balls of sea-weed lay strewn along the sand, and at a little
distance from the shore grew quantities of a bright yellow flower, somewhat resem-
bling the camomile blossom. Our next object of search was the church and vil-
lage of Mellieha, which are situated at the head of a deep and rugged ravine stretching
from the shore. As the wind blew quite contrary for our returning to Valetta, and
I did not wish to be all night tossing about off so dangerous a coast, I dismissed
the boatmen, and ascended the ravine, hoping to find at the village a calise, or, per-
haps, a cart. Half way up is a small tank filled with water, which filters out of the
limestone rock, and falls down the ravine towards the sea. This little stream is
embowered with canes, and other masses of luxuriant vegetation, as far as the
salutary influence of its waters extends. The foliage around was rich and beau-
tiful; the cicada sang long and loud from the dark green carob and fig trees,
as we ascended the winding path that led to the village; the sun was low in the
western horizon, the tired butterfly folded his wings on the stone wall, and the
lizard hastened to its hole. Around the tank were grouped a number of tall dark-
eyed girls, filling their earthen jars with water, and, poising them on their heads
as the Arab and Hindoo maidens are wont to do, they wound up the hill towards
their homes, forming picturesque objects as they wandered farther away from the
spectator. On arriving at the village we found the sacristan who kept charge of the
keys of the church, which we were desirous of visiting. Before the door was an
enclosure containing some olive trees, and several statues were dispersed along
the walls. On entering we were followed by one or two of the peasants, and a
fat old man who took a vast deal of trouble to explain to me the various pic-
tures, offerings, and relics in the church. He could speak a few words of broken
English, and with such assistance of this sort as he could render me, he told me a
long story about a number of bishops whose forms and portraits were painted on the
ceiling; but I could make little of it. At first I took him for the village black-
smith, then I believed that he might be a priest in his dishabille; but at last I
discovered that he was from the neighbourhood of Valetta, and that he had a calise
in the village, in which he was about to return home. He kindly offered me a seat


in it, which I accepted; but we informed him that ere we returned to Yaletta, we
must visit the Grotto of Calypso, a short distance off. He readily agreed to wait for
us, but when we came back he was gone. We found a vast number of absurd pic-
tures hung up in one part of the church. Upon inquiry, we learned that these
were placed there by mariners and boatmen, who, when overtaken by a storm, in-
variably make a vow to the Virgin, that if saved they will hang up a painting at
her shrine, in Mellieha church. The result of all this is, that the majority of these
native offerings are of an exceedingly ludicrous nature; they consist chiefly of re-
presentations of a vessel nearly engulfed by the rising waves, with the Virgin and
Child appearing in the sky in the left hand corner of the picture. The church con-
tains many other relics reckoned precious, but which are, in reality, very absurd;
such as silver and waxen limbs, pieces of old cable, chains and fetters, and various
other incongruous articles. We were sadly disappointed at not being able to see
an original painting of St. Paul, said to have been the work of St. Luke, and which
these simple people assert is under the church! Having viewed all that was worth
notice here we set off for the Grotto of Calypso. Three ragged boys volunteered
their services as our guides, and after leading us over a very steep and rugged path,
they brought us to a series of small caves in the side of a hill, which commanded an
extensive view of the sea, and the places towards Marfa. The most distant of these
holes they describe as being the Calypso ; but what was my astonishment on finding,
instead of the cave of the goddess so enchantingly sung by Homer, only a miserable
hovel, a complete pigsty ! To serve still further to dispel the poetical illusion, our
approach was signalized by the exit of three or four pigs, and a black donkey.
I managed, however, to get clear of the live stock, and with the aid of my pencil
and sketch book, I endeavoured to make the best sketch of it I could ; though I
must confess to having suffered a terrible mortification in finding the sacred cave
employed for so unpoetical a purpose. I made one of our youthful guides sit on a
stone whilst I introduced him into my picture, a circumstance which was the cause
of no little merriment to him. I rewarded this “ sitter” with a penny, upon which
the other two immediately came forward, and very civilly gave me to understand
that they wished to have their portraits also taken in a similar manner. This was
an honour which I respectfully declined; and the “ douceur” of one penny each
satisfied all their lingering scruples, and we returned to Mellieha, hoping to get a
ride home in the calise. We found, however, that the fat man had started without
us, and we therefore hired a cart, the only conveyance that was to be obtained.
Whilst it was getting ready we visited the Grotto della Madonna, a small cavern
just below the church, in which is a spring of water, in the centre of which stands
a stone statue of the Virgin. There is a miraculous report respecting this said
statue, to the effect that it has been frequently taken up and offered a more respect


able asylum in the church; but that during the night she has again chosen to
descend the forty steps to her old station in the cave. We carried a torch with us, by
the light of which we discovered several other headless statues, supposed to he those
of heathen gods and goddesses, arranged in niches around the sides of the cave.
Ascending the forty steps, we left the Virgin the “ sole possessor” of her favourite
cavern ; and after waiting some time for our rustic conveyance, we took our seats,
or rather our positions, on this primitive vehicle. The carts of Malta have no sides,
but consist of two immense wheels, between which is a sloping platform composed
of bars of wood, over which is laid a piece of matting. On this uncomfortable foun-
dation we stretched ourselves in a reclining posture, with a straw bolster placed at
one end for our heads to rest upon, and our feet pressed against the lowest bars.
Though the road was bad, yet I enjoyed this novel mode of travelling very much;
it was perfectly eastern, and strongly reminded me of the manner in which the
orientals recline at a feast. A beautiful moonlight ride over the plains of Naciar
brought us to Yaletta, soon after eight o’clock, much amused and pleased with our
day’s excursion.


CHAPTER XII.
VISIT TO THE GARDENS AND PALACE OF ST. ANTONIO, AND CIVITA VECCHIA, THE
ANCIENT CAPITAL OF MALTA.
“ Like childhood making mirth of age
In its unthinking hour,
So on those ruined walls the sun
Spends his meridian power.”
To-day I have paid a visit to the old city, which is situated nearly in the centre of
the island. After taking a hasty lunch at Yaletta, I joined my friend Mr. S., who
had ordered a calise to be in readiness for us, and we started about noon to Civita
Vecchia, calling, on our way, at the palace of St. Antonio, where the Emir of Bey-
root is at present residing with all his family and suite, under the protection of the
British Government. The sun shone bright in the heavens, and the noontide heat
was great. Our road lay by the side of the aqueduct built by the Grand Master
Alofio Wignacourt, in the year 1610. This great work is in time of drought almost
the only means of supplying water to the inhabitants of Yaletta. It extends
to a distance of nine and a half English miles, commencing at a plain called Diar
Chandal, two miles west of Civita Yecchia. As far as Casal Attard this aqueduct
runs under ground, and its course is afterwards above and below the earth, owino-
to the unevenness of the surface of the ground, until it reaches the city of Yaletta.
Every gentle breath of wind stirred up the dust, which arose in clouds, and compelled
us to close the windows of the calise. As this vehicle differs considerably in its form
and fashion from an English carriage, a brief description of it may not be uninterest-
ing to my readers.
They have no wheels in front, but are furnished instead with a species of prop for
a support, which is let down when the calise is at rest, and is fastened beneath the
body of the carriage when travelling. They are constructed somewhat in the Spanish
fashion, and those used in Yaletta are, many of them, very neat, though it occa-
sionally happens that they are to be met with in the villages of the most outlandish
form and structure conceivable. They are drawn along by one horse or mule, the


driver running along by the side, and with a small piece of wood called a “ niggieza,”
in which two short nails are fixed, he pricks the animal in order to urge him for-
ward. These calise-men will run for many miles in the sun and dust, yet they
never seem tired. Indeed they take a delight in travelling as fast as possible; and
should another calise appear in sight in the distance, the passenger has only to point
it out to the driver, and away he starts to overtake it. When the other calise-man
sees his rival he starts off likewise, and both gallop away, neither choosing to give in
till they arrive at their ultimate destination. We found this plan succeed admirably
when we wished to get back to Yaletta in time for any particular engagement.
Turning out of the main road we arrived at the palace of St. Antonio ; the approach
leading to it was shaded by some of the largest trees I had seen any where in Malta.
At first we doubted whether we should be able to gain admittance; but as it was
the time when the ladies were taking their siesta, we obtained permission to walk
about the gardens by making a present to the gardener. The ladies belonging to
the Emir s suite are numerous, including his own and his son’s wives. Being Ara-
bians, they are kept in a state of great seclusion; and when they do show themselves,
a long white veil covers their faces, disclosing only a pair of large black eyes of
uncommon beauty. We rambled through these gardens which were once the sum-
mer residence of the Grand Masters, and were much pleased with the tasteful and
picturesque manner in which they are laid out. They are certainly the most exten-
sive gardens in Malta, and contain numerous tall cypresses, with a variety of orange,
lemon, cedar, vine, rose, and palm trees. Some of the flowers growing on the margin
of the paved terrace in front of the palace were very beautiful. The walks are all
raised, and formed of slabs of stone, whilst at the various intersections of the prin-
cipal ones there are broad fountains and ponds covered with white and yellow water-
lilies, which form a cool and pleasing variety to the scene. Around these fountains
resort myriads of dragon-flies of every variety of colour; the blue and crimson
bodied ones were the most numerous, and as they darted about in £he sunbeams they
shone like winged jewels in the air. We walked along many of the terraces, which
were bordered with vines; but unfortunately we could not find a single grape
though the stalks hung very thick, and we were therefore led to conclude that the
Arab ladies of the Emir’s harem amused themselves by plucking off the grapes one
by one, during their evening walks, as they must have but little to do in their mono-
tonous and secluded situation. In a shady balcony above a little grove of orange
and mimosa trees, looking into the garden, we saw one of the Emir’s grandchildren,
a beautiful little girl about eight years of age, playing with some toys and attended
by an Egyptian slave. Her dark eyes were shadowed by a long fringe of ebon
lashes, and her slight form attired in the rich and elegant costume of Eastern mag-
nificence. Her hair was braided, and hung down nearly to her feet. She appeared
H


to take no notice of us, but continued playing with her toys, and listening to the
nightingales that sung among the pimento trees. She was occupied with her own
childish and happy thoughts, mingled, perhaps, with recollections of her distant
Syrian home. She reminded me strongly of Moore’s beautiful line,
“’Twas she—that Emir’s blooming child.”
Leaving St. Antonio, a ride of about five miles brought us to Civita Vecchia,
which is situated on an eminence overlooking almost the whole of Malta, It is
surrounded with walls, and fenced with bastions and other modern fortifications,
which render it very strong, considering the elevated situation on which it stands.
Brydone, who visited Malta some sixty or seventy years since, mentions a park
which formerly stood here, but I certainly saw no vestige of it, nor does it seem
likely ever to have consisted of more than two or three trees scattered about, here
and there. In early times this city bore the same name with the rest of the island,
and was called Melita, according to Ptolemy the geographer. Upon the authority
of Cicero and Diodorus Siculus, we learn that the capital of Malta formerly contained
many stately buildings, and -was very rich in the style of its architecture. This I
can easily conceive to have been the case from several remains which are still to be
seen scattered about the city, and by the vestiges of ancient baths and temples which
have been discovered during the progress of the excavations, both within the walls,
as well as without the suburbs. We first visited the Cathedral, which is built, accord-
ing to tradition, on the site of the residence of Publius, who was governor of the
island at the time of St. Paul’s shipwreck. It is built in the Corinthian style of
architecture, and contains an altar composed of rich marbles. The view from the
terrace towards Yaletta is very beautiful, and takes in nearly the whole extent of the
island. We went into the library, where we saw a few antiques, and then visited
the College of Priests, where the young abbots are instructed in the Catholic religion.
Among the boys, Mr. S. recognized one Avith whom he was well acquainted. He
had formerly been at a Protestant school in Yaletta, but was removed here on his
friends determining that he should become a priest. He appeared to be a lad of
fine mind and good understanding, but he will probably lose all that he had acquired
previously, as he is only taught the doctrines of the Popish faith with a little Hebrew.
One of the priests belonging to the establishment showed us the sleeping apartments
of the scholars, consisting of several long airy rooms, with a number of small beds
arranged on each side. Every boy provides his own bedding, so that the furniture of
the apartments is very various. Over most of the bedsteads was affixed either a small
picture of the Virgin, or some favourite saint, to which they attach great im-
portance. Several had Latin inscriptions upon them, and some were got up with a
certain degree of childish taste, and were ornamented with small bows of ribbon. On


leaving the college we proceeded to view what are termed the Catacombs of St. Paul.
They are situated a short distance from the church, the sacristan of which accompanied
us, and carried a supply of tapers for our use. The descent to the entrance is about
nine feet in depth, by a staircase leading to a gallery dug under ground, with a great
number of others branching off in various directions. The sacristan lighted our tapers,
and we entered this dismal abode of the ancient dead. The sides of the various pas-
sages contain many niches cut in the walls to receive the bodies. They are mostly
arranged without any order; some are entirely uncovered, whilst others are in two
stories, and partly closed up with a layer of mortar raised up in a circular form. These
sepulchres are of various dimensions, some are of a proportionately small size for in-
fants ; these generally occupy the sides, whilst in many of the larger ones the presence
of two circular holes of a sufficient size to receive the head, attests that they were in-
tended for two full-grown persons. There are several halls among these galleries.
The roof of one of these is supported by a group of rough fluted columns ; and on
the floor are two circular blocks, about four feet in diameter, flat on the top, with a
low edge running round the circumference. Some persons are of opinion that these
latter were used for the purpose of washing the bodies before burial. Several of
these passages have been walled up, as parties whose inquisitiveness has led them
too far in, have lost their way, and never afterwards been heard of. A schoolmaster
is said to have entered the catacombs with all his pupils, who proceeded along the
winding paths till they missed their way, and all perished in these avenues of death.
A wall has since been built up against the path which these unfortunates took, where
their bones now mingle with those of the men of days long gone by, without a line
to reveal the facts of their mysterious death, and the agonizing manner in which they
must have perished. Some have ascribed the construction of these catacombs to the
early Christians, who, during times of persecution, lived and buried the bodies of
their martyrs and confessors in them. This is the opinion which obtains at Rome ;
but it seems much more probable that they are of Phoenician, or early Roman origin,
whose custom it was to bury in caves. But when the Romans derived from the
Greeks the method of burning their dead, this mode of sepulture came into general use,
and the catacombs were at length perfectly neglected. From the catacombs the
sacristan led us to St. Paul’s cave, a spot which has been very celebrated in Malta
for ages past. It stands underneath the small chapel of San Paolo, and according
to tradition is the identical spot where St. Paul, accompanied by St. Luke the
apostle, and Trophonius, resided for the space of three months, the time of their stay
in the island. The veneration for this cave increased very much about the year
1600, when a citizen of Cordova, named Fra Giovanni, left his native country and
came to Malta in order to tenant this cave as an anchorite. We carried a large torch
with us, and descending several steps we entered the cave by an iron gate. It is
h 2


about twelve yards in diameter and eight feet in height. A fine marble statue of
St. Paul occupies the centre of the cave, and beneath it is a Latin inscription. The
stone of which the sides of this noted cavern are composed, is a soft white magnesian
limestone, which for centuries has been very celebrated as a cure for various kinds
of diseases. Large quantities of it have been exported to Italy, and other Catholic
countries, where it is greatly valued. The general belief is, that the more the lime-
stone is removed the faster it re-accumulates, and a pickaxe is constantly kept in
the cave for the use of strangers, who are allowed to carry away a piece of this
precious remedy. I knocked off 1 several small portions which I preserved, not as
a febrifuge, but as a relic of the place ; for though many may disdain the idea, yet
I confess to being very fond of mementos of this kind : —they have a voice, a me-
mory in themselves, which when one looks upon them, may serve to bear him back
through the region of thought till he stands in the long-forgotten spot from whence they
came ; and every association gathers from the shade of oblivion as vividly as when
he first gazed in rapture upon the mouldering ruin, or the moss-covered trophy of
past ages.
Returning from St. Pauls cave, we partook of some refreshment; and after a
quiet ride home reached Valetta about six o’clock, wLen we immediately set about
making preparations to visit the island of Gozo, intending to start that evening at
eight o’clock, or soon after midnight.


CHAPTER XIII.
EXPEDITION TO THE ISLAND OF GOZO—THE GENERAL’S ROCK—RABBATO, AND THE
GIANT’S TOWER.
“ What think you, as she lies in her green cove,
Our little sleeping boat is dreaming of?
If morning dreams are true, why I should guess
That she was dreaming of our idleness,
And of the miles of watery way
We should have led her by this time of day.”
City of Rabbato, Gozo, Sept, 29, 1841.
We left Yaletta soon after eight o’clock last night in a boat with four men, which we
hired for the occasion, and steered towards the Island of Gozo. The wind was
favourable at starting, but afterwards it died away, and the men were obliged to
take to their oars. As we were both much tired by our trip to Civita Vecchia, in
the morning, and were in expectation of a great deal of fatigue on the next day,
we laid ourselves down in the bottom of the boat, and after the men had covered us
with a sail to keep off the ill effects of the moon and the dew, we managed, despite
the mosquitoes, to get a few hours’ sleep. At half past one in the morning we arrived
at Gozo quay, in the little hay of Migarro. It was, however, quite useless to attempt
to proceed into the interior of the island until four or five o’clock, we therefore
moored the boat to the shore, and whilst one man acted as sentinel we lay down
again to sleep, a rest, however, which was soon broken by loud and long continued
shouting from the shore. We were quickly aroused, and found that we had slipped
from our moorings and were fast drifting out from the shore into the hay. Our
men, however, took to their oars, and we soon reached our original situation, where
we moored ourselves more securely. We did not feel disposed again to tempt the
god of sleep, and we therefore left our boat, and taking two of the men with us, we
walked up the beach to a small fisherman’s cottage. It was still quite dark, but we
went in and obtained some coffee, which was served to us in cups very little bigger
than a thimble. Here we refreshed ourselves and prepared for our walk to Rabbato,


the chief city of the island, which was three miles distant. I now discovered that
the mosquitoes had been annoying me in good earnest, for my face and hands were
covered with the effects of their bites. We left orders with our men that we should
return to the boat before sunset, and we forthwith proceeded on our trip to Rabbato.
Mr. S. had provided himself with a pair of pistols, in case of any dispute with the
natives ; but fortunately we had no occasion to use them. Passing Fort Chambray,
we ascended the steep hill that leads down to the shore, and on gaining the high
ground we looked back and enjoyed a most enchanting prospect. The dark and
rugged shores of Gozo lay beneath us, with the island of Commino to the right.
Farther on, to the eastward, Malta bounded our view, and the strait of Fregi wound
between like a vast river of the deepest azure. The first golden streaks of morning
lightened the top of the Maltese hills, and gleamed over rocks and seas till they
gilded the spot whereon we stood. By-and-by the round red sun rose up, defining
with the brightness of his beams countless objects that were before gloaming in the
twilight. We reached Rabbato about six o’clock, and after examining the old
castle and fortifications, and enjoying the beautiful panorama of the island, we
breakfasted at a small albergo kept by Signor Lippo, where we found tolerable
accommodation.
The island of Gozo was called Gaulos by the Greeks, and Gaulum by the Romans.
From its vicinity to Malta, it has generally shared the fate of the latter island.
During the time of the “ Order,” its government was committed to one knight and
four Giurati, or magistrates, appointed by the Grand Master. At present it is in-
cluded under the jurisdiction of the Govenor of Malta, and the administration of its
affairs is carried on by persons invested by him with civil power. Like Malta, all
the accessible spots on the island are secured by fortifications ; but the whole of the
southern and western coast is guarded by inaccessible cliffs. The face of the country
is more fertile than that of Malta, and produces wheat, barley, and cotton, though
it has suffered in part from the long drought. Occasional showers have fallen in
Gozo, and I saw it raining heavily over the sea whilst at Rabbato. This, I am
informed, is a common occurrence at no great distance from the shore, though the
rain seems very loth to fall upon the land. The interior of the island is broken up
into rugged hills ; some of these are of a conical shape, and are supposed by many
to be extinct volcanoes; but this, I believe, is an error. The mules and asses of Gozo
are of a very large size, and are far superior to those of Malta in strength and beauty.
The dialect of the inhabitants is a much nearer approach to the pure Arabic than
the Maltese, and I was informed that the natives are able to converse with the Arabs
so as to be easily understood. The inhabitants are a very fine race of people, both
hardy and industrious. Several of the ancient customs of the Maltese are still pre-
served in Gozo, particularly their ceremony of burying the dead, which is conducted




GENE RAL'S ROCK, GO ZO.


by mourners termed “ newieha,” who smite their breasts and commence singing in
a low dismal voice, till at length they grow more affected and begin to howl and
tear their hair. This tragic action they generally accompany with some sentence
like the following “ Alas! my brother! he was lovely but he is gone ! Will you
not think of us hereafter ? Remember us to those who have gone before! Why, oh !
why, didst thou abandon all who loved you?”
The population of Gozo amounts to about 17,000 souls. Besides the city of Rab-
bato there are several casals, or villages, scattered over the country. The stone found
on the island is softer than that of Malta, and the houses are not generally such well-
built dwellings as those of the sister island. The situation of the city is imposing
and romantic, but there is nothing within its walls that is worthy of notice. After
breakfast we inquired for a calise to visit the “ Hagra tal Girnal,” or General’s
Rock. For some time we were not able to find such a thing as a calise, but
at last they procured one for us, which certainly surpassed every thing of the kind
I had previously seen. Mr. S. was afraid lest the bottom should come out, whilst
I, more amazed than alarmed, ascribed its manufacture to the Phoenicians, for it looked
as though it had been dug up from the earth. We both came to the conclusion that
it would prove a most valuable affair in the hands of an antiquary; for it was so
very ancient, all over of a rusty brown colour, and patched up here and there with
bits of leather. Still, with all this evident antiquarianism about it, it was the only
calise to be met with, and we had no alternative ; we therefore got in, and after tying
up the door (for, wonderful to say, it had one) with a piece of string, we underwent a
complete and thorough shaking over a terrible path, till we reached the hill that
overhangs the small bay of Duejra, where stands the General’s Rock, at the western
extremity of the island of Gozo. Here we left our antique conveyance, and pro-
ceeded on foot down a steep path, over limestone rocks abounding in fossil echinse,
and other sea shells. We had not gone far before six women came running
down the hill after us, with various curiosities for sale on their heads. These they
faithfully assured us were the identical teeth and tongues of the serpents which St.
Paul cast out when he was shipwrecked in Malta! We purchased a number of these
valuables, and the women all followed us to the rock, pretending to be our guides.
A young man and two or three boys augmented our party, which by this time had
increased to a respectable force. Our picturesque group halted at the extremity of
the point, between which and the General’s Rock ran an arm of the sea, which we
had to cross in a small box, moved along by a rope and pulleys. When the machi-
nery was adjusted, one man crossed the chasm first, which was 150 feet wide. On
the return of the box I got in, and holding firmly by the rope, I soon reached the
opposite side also. The journey over this arm of the sea was any thing but pleasant,
as it consisted of a series of jerks, and the landing on the rock was very steep and


dangerous. The famous “Fungus Melitensis” grows here, and the fruit called
“ cynomorium coccinium,” which is not known in any other part of the country.
The summit of the rock is covered with bushes, wild stocks, and golden rod. After
wandering about and searching for a fungus, which I succeeded in finding, I returned
in the same manner, and rejoined Mr. S. and our numerous convoy oh the mainland.
Some time since the cables of this novel aerial conveyance gave wray, and precipitated
the passenger into the gulf below'.
On ascending the hill, I sat down for a few moments upon a stone to make a
sketch of the rock, w'hilst Mr. S. descended to the beach to enjoy a bathe. At first
the simple natives could not understand what I was doing, but they soon divined
my purpose; and on seeing the representation on the paper, they screamed with
delight. I made signs to one of the women to sit on a rock in the foreground, and
introduced her into the sketch I was taking. I very soon had candidates sufficiently
numerous to fill up the canvass of an historical picture, and by the time Mr. S.
arrived, I had so fully gained their good feelings that they were very unwilling for me
to leave them. Rejoining our calise we again arrived at Rabbato, when w’e dined
off some fine maccaroni and peaches, and immediately afterwards set off in an oppo-
site direction to visit the “ Torre tal Gigant” or Giant’s Tower. This is one of the
most interesting Phoenician remains in the island. It consists of an enclosure sur-
rounded by enormous masses of rock piled one upon another, somewhat similar to
those at Hajar Kim.
It seems probable that these gigantic masses were the remains of a temple to some
deity. The entrance faces the east, and the interior consists of two separate cham-
bers. Many of the slabs of stone exhibit marks of rude chiselling, and in the
doorposts there are several large holes, probably intended for the introduction of bolts.
From all the information that I could collect, it would seem to have been a “ Pura-
theion,” or one of those open edifices in which the rites of fire were celebrated; the
element under which the Phoenicians, who are supposed to have been the first settlers
on this island, worshipped the sun. Here then exists one of these deserted temples
of the earliest ages, almost as perfect as when the first pale flame rose from its altar,
and the hundred worshipers of the element bowed down before the spirit they con-
ceived to be enshrined in its tapering fires. The sun was fast sinking in the west
by the time reached Fort Chambray, where we dismissed our roguish boy, and
his ancient chariot. A little lad, who conducted us to the Giant’s Tower, spoke of
having had the honour of acting as guide to Queen Adelaide, who paid it a visit when
she was at Malta ; though I doubt not but that all the neighbourhood had enrolled
themselves in the list of guides, and that her train was in consequence as numerous
as a Celtic chiefs in the olden time. An Italian sonnet written and put up in
honour of Her Majesty’s visit, still remains on the wall of one of the chambers of the


Giant’s Tower. The wind blew strongly from the eastward, and on reaching the
Bay of Migarro, we refreshed ourselves with a delightful bathe in the surf; and then
getting into our boat, bade farewell to the Island of Gozo. As we approached th
middle of the channel the waves ran very high, and we were in some danger of being
upset. The boatmen, however, carefully watched for every wave, and dexterously
avoided it with their oars. We soon got under the shores of the island of Commino,
where we found a partial shelter. This small island is only five miles in circumference,
and consists chiefly of barren rocks. It abounds in rabbits, which afford the
occasional sport of a day’s chase to the Governor and his officers. The steep perpen-
dicular cliffs along the north side of this island are bold and picturesque, broken into
a variety of grotesque caverns and isolated rocks. In one place I traced an exact
resemblance to a sheep lying down, and in another, a little imagination might have
converted a huge mass of rock into the headless trunk of a Cyclopean giant. Several
of the caves are full of deep water, but so clear that their carpets of green and purple
seaweed were distinctly visible, seeming appropriate residences for Neptune and his
sportive train of Naiads and Tritons. But the days of mythology have passed away
from her once cherished shores, and the lonely heron now reigns in these caves undis-
turbed, nor is he changed into a water god by the creative fancies of southern nations.
After passing the shores of Commino, we again launched out into the open straits, and
underwent a second tossing, which wetted us through and through with the spray.
On rounding the promontory called Dahlet e Scilep, the men commenced crossing
themselves, and praying to a figure of the Virgin which stood on the summit of the
rock, V e succeeded in crossing the mouth of Mellieha Bay ; but as the wind blew
more violently, and the boatmen assured us that if we reached Valetta in safety, it
would not be until two or three o’clock on the ensuing morning, I determined not
to risk it, and ordered them to put in at Mellieha, where I depended on the cart that
I had before made use of to convey us on to Valetta. After getting some distance
into the bay the water was nearly calm, owing to the lee of the high land just above
us. We landed at Mellieha and dismissed the boat, leaving the men to pass the
night there, where they would probably stay until the weather proved more favour-
able. We ascended the hill towards the village, taking with us a little Gozzitan
boy, apparently about nine years old, who was under the care of the boatmen, to be
conveyed to his father, then at Valetta with his speronaro. I proposed the plan of
taking this little fellow with us to my friend, who thought it much better than letting
him be exposed to the risk which he must necessarily run, if left with the boatmen.
After a delay of about three quarters of an hour, we were fortunate enough to obtain
the identical cart on which I had built my only hope of reaching Valetta that night ;
and reclining backwards after the eastern fashion, I took my little protege under my
care, who soon fell fast asleep in my lap. He was a fine little fellow, with a very
i


intelligent countenance, and what is sometimes met with in Gozo —blue eyes. It is
a very curious fact, that although the Maltese are proverbial for large black eyes,
there is a village called Casal Zehbug (olive) where all the inhabitants have them of
a blue colour. This little lad was rendered more interesting by being dressed out
in a smart blue shirt with a braided collar, such as the boys wear on board a man-of-
war. After a lovely moonlight ride, enhanced by the feeling that we were not ex-
posed to the mercy of the waves, whose distant murmur broke on our ears, we arrived
at Valetta about half-past eleven o’clock.
In passing through Casal Nasciar, the circumstance of the church being lighted up
attracted our attention, and we looked in. Several tapers were dimly burning around
the altar, and all the rest of the building was shrouded in gloom. An aged and
venerable man was bending before the altar, apparently engaged in earnest prayer,
and several women and a lad were kneeling at a short distance off. On inquiry I
learnt that they were praying for a dying man, that he might have an easy entrance
into purgatory ! Arriving at Valetta, and reaching the Strada lleale, to my infinite
surprise my little charge darted off all of a sudden in the direction of the quay. On
the next day, as I was walking along the Marina, he came running up to me quite
delighted, and shook my hand most cordially. I made him a present of a few cop-
pers, and he returned to his father in the boat: after this I never saw him again.


CHAPTER XIV.
CONVENT OF THE CAPUCHIN FRIARS.
“ Within the twilight chamber spreads apace
The shadow of white death; and, at the door,
Invisible corruption waits to trace
His extreme way to her dim dwelling-place.”
At sunrise I paid a visit to the convent of the Capuchins. It is situated on an
eminence in the suburbs of Floriana, and commands a superb view of the har-
bours and surrounding country. I had on a previous day applied for admission,
but as it happened to he the time when the brotherhood were taking their siesta, I
was refused, and told that if I particularly wished to see it, the Superior should he
duly informed, and I must come at six o’clock in the morning. The approach to
the building is marked by a cross of black wood, erected on a mound of stones, and
a broad road cleanly swept; the pathway bordered with tapering cypress trees, leads
the traveller to the porch of the convent, underneath which a number of beggars
are continually thronging, who are fed daily by the hospitality of the monks,
who prepare a dinner expressly for the poor. In the centre of the square in front
of the convent stands a large statue of a Capuchin saint, arrayed in the garb
of the order, with a gilt glory surrounding his head. In all their statues of the
saints, the Catholics have a clever method of fixing the glory (which generally con-
sists of a gilt or brazen circle) in such a manner, by means of a thin wire behind
the head, that it has the appearance of resting in the air. The door of the convent
was opened to us by a very old Capuchin servant ; and after proceeding along a
narrow passage, we entered the chapel, where a mass was being performed. The
walls were covered with several pictures, which chiefly represented saints and
their miraculous achievements. In one of the ante-chambers a waxen model of
our Saviour, as large as life, was exhibited, enclosed in a glass case; and in another
were several pictures ; one of them, of the Virgin, was very good. The floor of a little
silver shrine through which we passed, was composed of green and white mosaic.
After going through the lower apartments we ascended a wide stone staircase hung
x 2


with small paintings, and entered the corridors, which extend through the entire
length of the building, and are lined on each side with the cells of the monks, who
are about fifty or sixty in number. The walls of these passages are hung with
pictures representing the astounding miracles performed by friars of the order.
Over each cell is a small Latin inscription taken from the Holy Scriptures. This
convent is very much frequented by the inhabitants of Yaletta on holidays, when
it is thrown open, and great numbers of persons come here to pass an hour in travers-
ing the corridors, examining the pictures, or chatting with some of the fraternity,
and enjoying the fine air and beautiful prospect which surrounds the convent.
From the balcony of the corridor we overlooked the garden, which contains orange
and pomegranate trees, with various culinary vegetables, and a few flowers; the
whole of which are kept in very neat order by the servants of the brotherhood. We
observed one of the servants very busy at work amongst some egg plants, and though
he appeared upwards of eighty years of age, with a long beard of snowy whiteness, yet
he seemed as hale and as hearty as if he had reached but half that amount of years.
The long life to which these ascetics attain, may partly be ascribed to their very
simple mode of living, and the primitive habits which they follow, unalloyed by
anxiety, or any of the numerous troubles resulting from an intercourse and con-
nexion with the outer world, which so often destroy the health and happiness of
those who are engaged in the active pursuits of life. In this convent the four
giraffes, sent by the Pacha of Egypt to Great Britain, were located during their stay
at Malta ; and many are the absurd pictures and descriptions given of them by the
natives, who had never seen or heard of such creatures before; for the spirit of
discovery does not proceed here with such rapid strides as it does in our own favoured
island. Descending the staircase from the corridors, I expressed a wish to see their
“ carneria,” or charnel-house, as it is termed, which occupies an extensive vault below
the convent. By the permission of the Superior we gained admittance; and,
descending a narrow staircase, and passing a grated doorway, the monk who con-
ducted us turned the great key of a heavy portal, when this modern Golgotha burst
at once upon our view, horrid and disgusting in the extreme. The dim light
of morning stole unwillingly through a small aperture above, admitting just enough
light to assure us that we were in the abodes of the dead. Here it is that the monks
who die in the convent, after being disembowelled, well dried, and baked, are dressed
up in their original clothes, and fixed in niches in the walls, where they remain till
time reduces them to decay ; the bones of each are then taken up and nailed upon
the walls, interspersed with small branches of evergreens, so as to form a kind of
sepulchral decoration. The skulls, likewise, are arranged along the ceiling, look-
ing like so many grim spectators of the mockery and indignity offered to their
remains. In one of the sides of this vault are two enclosed coffins, containing the


bodies of two friars who, they say, performed miracles during their lifetime. At one
end of the vault stands a small altar, above which is a figure of our Saviour. There
is a mass annually performed here, which is called the “festival of the dead;” at
which time the whole vault is illuminated, and each of these ghastly remains of
human frailty is decked and adorned with flowers. This is a mockery, indeed, of
the lowest kind, to make use of Nature’s brightest and sweetest ornaments, the
lovely flowers, to decorate with their glowing petals the filthy and decaying body
of an old monk. I love flowers, but I love to see them wreathe the sunny brow,
and meet the starlike smile of childhood; and I would inhale their fragrance not in
a charnel-house, but in the mossy slopes and undisturbed solitude of a forest
glen.
Of the various aspects of these rotten mortals, some tall, some short, and several
sunk from their original position against the walls, I could give a sickening descrip-
tion ; but they have even now destroyed my appetite for breakfast, and I gladly
leave them to decay in their cells, quite unambitious ever to have the pleasure of
seeing them any more.


CHAPTER XV.
PUBLIC LIBRARY—CATHEDRAL OF ST. JOHN—CHURCHES AND NUNNERIES.
Gleam, marble and mosaic,
From gilded shrines around,
So many are the monuments,
They cover all the ground ;
Giall, and verde-antique
From every tomb shine bright,
And the precious lapis lazuli
Sends forth its azure light.
The public library of Valetta, which is a handsome building, adjoining the Governor’s
palace, is worthy of some notice. I visited it before proceeding to the church of
St. John of Jerusalem. The books are arranged around a lofty and spacious apart-
ment, with considerable taste and order, and they amount to nearly 40,000 volumes ;
though I am informed that for so large a collection they contain very little that
is really useful. In the same room is a small collection of antiquities, found at
different times in Malta and Gozo; they consist chiefly of earthen vases and
lachrymatories, and other relics of Phoenician origin. Besides these, there is a
statue of Hercules, in Grecian marble ; a Syracusan altar, dedicated to Proserpine;
a marble slab, on which is a basso relievo of Tullia and Claudia ; the former the
daughter of Cicero, and the latter the wife of Cecilius Metellus, who lived at Rome,
at the same time; a square marble with a basso-relievo bust of Zenobia, Queen of
Palmyra, and a small brass figure found in Gozo, representing a young beggar
seated in a basket. A very trifling collection of stuffed birds, a wolf, and a wild
cat, occupy the window recesses, and an enormous snake, said to have been taken
in Gozo, is stretched out at full length upon a board; the loss of its natural head
being amply supplied by an enormous one of wood, armed with sharp teeth, and
a long red tongue, which give it all the ferocious and awe-inspiring appearance of a
dragon.
Having thus visited the Library, St. John’s Church next claimed my attention
This building is rendered famous by having been the grand cathedral of the knights,


and now holds the first rank in Malta, as the duomo, or mother church. It was built
in the reign of the Grand Master, La Cassiera, about the year 1576, and was after-
wards greatly enriched by the frequent presents of the succeeding Grand Masters.
The entrance is flanked by two square towers, surmounted by small spires, and the
whole extent of building that stretches out on either side, exhibits nothing but a
monotonous and uniform facade of stone-work. The interior of the building is, how-
ever, gorgeously magnificent; being entirely covered with carvings, gilt, tapestry,
and numerous paintings. A row of separate chapels, belonging to each of the
various languages, extend along both sides of the nave. The arched semicircular
roof, which covers this part of the church, is adorned with a series of paintings
illustrative of the life of St. John, painted by the Calabrese artist, Preti, who executed
many of the paintings in the other parts of the edifice. During the short occupation
of Malta by the French, most of the treasures amassed here were seized and taken
away. The pavement is composed of sepulchral slabs of various kinds, of coloured
marble, inlaid with lapis lazuli, verde-antique, jaspars, agates, and other precious
stones. These are beautifully worked in mosaic, and cover the graves of the knights.
The Grand Masters are chiefly buried in the chapels of their respective languages.
The grand altar is very sumptuous, and is beautifully inlaid with gems and marbles.
On a raised pavement around it stand two chairs, covered with crimson velvet: one
being occupied by the Bishop Caramana, and the other intended for the sovereign of
the island, above which is placed the arms of Great Britian. The various chapels
are splendidly decorated, and form the two aisles. They are profusely carved in
alto relievo, and in many parts are a complete mass of gilding. In the oratory,
or chapel of the crucifixion, is a fine painting representing the beheading of St. John,
by Michael Angelo Caravaggio. Several of the mausoleums of the Grand Masters in
these chapels are very superb. The following are among the finest: —In the chapel
of the Portuguese Knights, that of Emanuel de Pinto, with his portrait in mosaic, and
a large statue of Fame ; that of Manuel de Yilhena is still more costly ; it is of
bronze, supported by two lions, and beneath his bust is an alto relievo group, repre-
senting the Grand Master giving directions concerning the erection of Fort Manuel.
In the Spanish Chapel those of Perillos e Roccaful, and Nicholas Cottoner. The
former is surmounted by a large copper bust, having the figures of Justice and Charity
on each side ; the latter is sustained by a Turk and an African, and is adorned with
variously coloured marbles. The splendid copper mausoleum of the Grand Master
Zondadari, flanked with marble columns, is very imposing; and several more of the
monuments that adorn the building are well worthy of notice.
After leaving St. John’s Church, I paid a visit to the other principal religious
edifices in Valetta. The churches are numerous, but a description of one of them
will give an idea of the whole. They are all more or less ornamented with numerous


altars, painting, and carving, and are paved with marble or tiles. It is said that the
priests and friars in the islands of Malta and Gozo, exceed one thousand in
number. There are, also, three thousand ahbati, or hoys, preparing for ordination,
who are likewise supported by the ecclesiastical establishment. In Yaletta, the prin-
cipal churches are St. Giovanni, St. Paolo, St. Francis, St. Dominic, St. Maria di
Gesu, St. Barbara, St. Giacomo, St. Rocco, St. Catarina, and the church of the Jesuits.
There are, also, the nunneries of St. Ursula and St. Catarina, though their inmates are
fast decreasing in number. The chief convents are those of the Capuchins, Zocca-
lanti, Carmelitans, Franciscans, Dominicans, Tariasini, and Augustine Friars. After
this I need not say that Malta is a place where the Romish church is all powerful;
yet amid this pomp and glitter of the ceremonial religion, I must not forget to
notice the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, erected mainly by the benevolent means
placed at the disposal of the British residents in Malta, by her Majesty the Queen
Dowager, and dedicated to the worship of the pure Protestant faith. Whilst writing
these lines, I have received a letter from Malta informing me that this building is
ready to be consecrated. Surrounded by the gaudier edifices dedicated to the Catholic
worship, this single Protestant church may be the beacon-light to many a wan-
dering heart, who now and hereafter, as he may enter that temple of prayer, will ever
remember that he bends in worship before an altar raised to the sacred religion of
his forefathers, by the virtue and piety of a British Queen.




CHIESA SAN PUBLIC AND PROTESTANT CHAPEL, FLORIANA.
(Looking towards Valetta.)


CHAPTER XVI.
FLORIANA GARDENS—IL GROTTO—NATURALISTS.
“ The plumed insects swift and free,
Like golden boats on a sunny sea,
Laden with light and odour which pass
Over the gleam of the living grass;
And the jessamine faint, and the sweet tuberose,
The sweetest flower for scent that blows;
And all rare blossoms from every clime
Grew in that garden in perfect prime.”
In the centre of the plain intervening between the city of Valetta, and the suburbs of
Floriana, is a long nairow garden, enclosed by a high wall, with gates opening at each
end. This is termed the botanical garden ; and it is open to the public, to whom it
affords a pleasant morning’s walk before the heat of the day, or a cool place of retire-
ment in the afternoon, for recreation or conversation, as stone seats are ranged along
on both sides between the pillars that border the paved walks. On entering the
garden from Valetta, the stranger comes upon an open space covered with flag-stones
with a small summer-house at the end, and in the midst is a pond containing gold
and silver fish. Around this pond I noticed that beautiful flower the marvel of Peru,
covered with blossoms of every shade of crimson, pink, and white ; and the dragon
flies, attracted by the water, darted about in all directions, displaying their richly
coloured bodies and gauze-like wings, impaled for one moment, as it were, on the
edo-e of the stone basin, and the next dividing the air like an arrow, with the swiftness
O
and rapidity of their flight. The rest of the garden is divided into three parts, each
of them under the superintendance of a different gardener. Two parallel walks ex-
tend along the whole length of the garden, bordered with carobs, palm, and pimento
trees, and a variety of solanos, and other shrubs. The spaces between the walks
are ornamented by rich flower-beds; whilst around the stone pillars are twined
numerous creepers and climbing plants, which grow so rich and luxuriantly in the
spring, as to throw a deep shade of green over the pathways beside them. Owing
to the long continuance of the drought, this garden is watered by artificial means,
K


and small channels convey the water to every part of it from a tank, situated
near the gates. The flowers are, many of them, very familiar to an English eye,
and a number of annual plants grow along the borders, and attain to a large size;
whilst at the same time the delicate plants which in our northern clime are raised
in hot-houses, may here be seen flourishing and blooming in all their beauty in the
open sunshine, and unfolding their gay and gorgeous petals to the warm and spark-
ling atmosphere of a southern clime. The harmless lizards, (called by the natives
“ Gremsicola,”) dart across the pavement at every step, and are so extremely shy that
it requires no common degree of dexterity to catch them. Wherever flowers abound,
there the insect tribes resort in great numbers; and this green spot is one of the
few haunts of the butterflies of Malta. The violet bee, skimming over the sweet
marigolds ; the rich vanessae, sweeping down the vistas, till, in the aerial distance, they
dwindle to a mere speck, and are not completely lost to sight as they would be in
England, in the density of the atmosphere ; the bird-like hawk-moths, fluttering and
hovering, with trunks uncurled, around the sweetest and most mellifluous blossoms ;
and the full-grown larva of the death’s-head, reposing at ease among the solano
leaves ; these, and many others, are among the sights that meet the eye of the ento-
mologist in most gardens in this rocky island. I have frequently rambled through
this garden at the hottest period of the day, for the purpose of collecting insects, and
have constantly met with the lovely papiliones machaon, and podalirius. The Maltese
boys often catch these little spirit-like beings, and fastening a fine piece of cotton
around their bodies, with a long end attached to it, they follow their fairv coursers
from flower to flower, sometimes tying them up on a particular bush. These children
are seldom cruel, for they generally let the insects go free when they have done play-
ing with them. One little lad, whose bright sharp eye made me set him about catch-
ing lizards, seemed very particular and careful not to hurt them.
Near these gardens there are others belonging to the English chaplain of the
Governor; they are very beautiful, and kept in excellent order. Most of the plants
are arranged in stone vases around the borders, and in a small pond in the centre
grows the papyrus. Adjoining to this garden is a little chapel, or rather room, which
is the only Protestant place of worship in the suburbs. The gardener was very oblig-
mg in giving me free and liberal access to these beautiful grounds ; for I had only to
knock at the door, and I might wander through the garden for hours. A third gar-
den, called ”II Grotto, - ’ the residence of Miss Hamilton, is also well worthy of a
visit; it contains several grottos of beautiful shell-work, and strongly reminded me of
the ruins of some eastern abode. This lady very kindly gave me permission to make
tree use and enjoyment of her garden, but my time would only allow me to pay it
one short visit. On the same day, I had the opportunity of calling on a Maltese
naturalist residing in Floriana. He was by profession a physician, but has a strong


predilection for the natural sciences. I found him sitting in his “ sanctum sanctorum,”
stuffing a Tethys redstart, surrounded by numerous and various curiosities. At the
sight of strangers he arose, and, putting aside his spectacles, proceeded to show me all
his treasures. Amongst them I was greatly amused by a nondescript bird, composed
of the body of a parroquet, with the tail of a bird of paradise, and a flaming crest of
flamingo’s feathers! These were all very artfully joined together by some lover of
nature, who, no doubt, thought to turn this “ rara avis” to good account. Such a
monster might dare to show itself in a country where science seldom smiles; but
could it he tolerated in the presence of a French or German naturalist ? However, I
must not altogether condemn my poor friend, for doubtless his was the “ pursuit of
knowledge under difficulties;” and though not so skilful as many of his contempor-
aries, yet he was very kind and obliging, and I gained some information from him on
various topics connected with the natural productions of the island.
R 2


CHAPTER XVII.
MARKET—HOTELS—CAFÉS—PRICES OF PROVISIONS.
“ Ulysses, —Would you first taste of the unmingled wine?
Silenus, —’Tis just—tasting invites the purchaser.
Cyclops. — And is
The new cheese pressed into the bulrush baskets?”
The market of Yaletta, though small, is well supplied with fruit and fish. Very little
animal food is used hy the natives, and owing to the heat of the climate, it is obliged
to be eaten on the same day that it is killed. On going through the market to
purchase some fruit, I had occasion to pass hy one of the butchers’ stalls. The
Maltese are a very shrewd people and love a joke with the English, “ Any beef,
John,” said the butcher, with an arch smile:—this he intended, no doubt, as a hit
at our national character, though it was said with that naivete and good humour
which it was impossible to he offended at. The greatest portion of the fruit sold
in the market is brought over in boats from Sicily, and some also from Gozo. At
the time of my visit the finest fruits w r ere nearly over ; grapes sold at Id. per rotolo,
(if lb.), and a superior kind, called “ ladies’ fingers,” of a long pod-like shape, for
1 \d. per pound. The prickly pears were sold at four grains per rotolo; pomegra-
nates, one halfpenny each ; apricots, Id. and 2d. per rotolo ; peaches 4 d. per ditto ;
figs, of two or three kinds, Id. per rotolo ; melons, one farthing per pound ; of
these the musk, water and winter melons were in considerable abundance. The
oranges I saw r were those of the last year’s growth ; they were very scarce, owing to
the want of rain. Fish are in great abundance ; they consist chiefly of mullet,
whitings, tunny, sword-fish, turtles, eels, and various species of Crustacea, such
as lobsters, crabs, prawns, &c. Shell-fish are much eaten by the lower classes.
The men who gather them expose them for sale in the markets in small dishes upon
the ground. 1 used frequently to examine them on account of the good shells that
are often found amongst them. I obtained the spondylus, two species of the murex,
the area-nose, the sea-date, the haliotis and three or four kinds of Venus, in this
manner. The little fish called sea-horses are common on the Maltese shores.


The hotels of Valetta are good; Morell’s is the first, where the English may
find excellent accommodation; hut the Minerva, where a table d’hote is daily kept,
I found to be very comfortable, and the charges moderate. A person in this man-
ner may live very cheaply in Malta. The finest Marsala wine is 10c?. per bottle,
and the common Sicilian, 2 d. The best beef is 4 d. per pound, maccaroni soup, 4 d,
per basin, and a person may dine sumptuously for Is. 6d. per diem. Breakfast
is best obtained at the cafes, which are open at a very early hour. Travellers
passing only a short time in Malta will find these places extremely convenient, as they
can drop in at any hour of the day and take coffee or ice, which latter article is con-
sumed in Malta to a very great extent. It is obtained from Mount Etna in the
form of snow, and boats are constantly arriving from Catania laden with this useful
and cooling substance. In the cafes it is no uncommon thing to see them grinding
up whole vats full of frozen snow, which, at first sight, appears very singular to a
stranger in so warm a climate. Most of the cafes are situated in the Strada Reale,
opposite the Library. I found the best attention at “ Saits,” and some of the prices
are as follows : —Cup of coffee, 1-c?. ; breakfast, s d. ; ice cream, 2 \d. lemonata ice,
1 ±d. ; Rogiata ditto, 1 \d. ; other ices, including chocolate, coffee, cherry, strawberry,
and pine-apple, 2 \d. or 3c?. The Mediterranean Hotel is French, and the Albergo
del Sole, Italian. Foreigners of these nations find good accommodation at these
hotels. Liqueurs, particularly Rosolia, and many rich cordials, may be obtained
in Malta at very low prices. Owing to its being a free port, cigars may be had at
the rate of ten for a penny, and sugar from 2c?. to 4c?. per pound. The butter is
bad, and is chiefly imported from England. The native cheeses are made of goats’
and sheep’s milk, pressed into small rush baskets ; these, when fresh, are very plea-
sant, but are obliged to be eaten a very few hours after they are made. Tea is rarely
used as a meal, except by the English. Eggs are very good, at 4c?. or 6d. per
dozen. Poultry is plentiful, consisting of turkeys, fowls and ducks ; quails are also
very abundant in April and September ; and in the market I have seen rails, larks,
and wheatears. The yellow wagtail, (papa-muscae,) are sold by the natives at from id.
to Id. each, in the market, for the purpose of catching the flies in the houses, where
they will live for several weeks, and answer this purpose as effectually as the chame-
leons do in Malaga. Olives are very much eaten by the Maltese, and oil enters
largely into their cookery. The egg plant is considered a good vegetable by them,
and when stuffed and roasted, it makes a palatable dish. It is the custom here,
when you go to market, to be followed by a number of little boys with empty baskets ;
they are called market-boys, and get their living by carrying home purchased articles.
You choose one, and he will follow you wherever your business leads, making his
basket the general receptacle for fish, fruit, bread, and, in fact, of every thing you buy.
1 have always found these boys honest; and after emptying the contents of the


basket at my lodgings, at the end of half an hour’s service, they considered one
halfpenny, or at the utmost three farthings, an ample remuneration: one poor
little lad was trotting off without any thing, after carrying an earthen jar all round
the city, until I called him back, and gladdened his heart with a twopenny piece.
A number of beggars generally throng around the cafes, who are extremely impor-
tunate ; a single grain will however satisfy them, or if you do not feel disposed to
relieve them, “ Allein,” (or “ God help you,”) will answer the same purpose.
One dumb boy, in particular, was always to be seen at the cafe door, and though
unable to tell his wants by articulation, yet his gestures were so significant, no one
could misunderstand him. “ Nix mange, seigneur,” is the constant language of the
Maltese beggars, which signifies, “ Nothing to eat, sir.” Sometimes they will
make little nosegays of mimosa, tied up with a rosebud, at the end of a small stick,
which they sell to the people as they pass from the cafes. Numbers even of the
labouring classes sleep in the streets, and on going along the Strada Levante, after
dark, whole rows of men and boys may be seen reposing on their little mats on
that side of the street which is shaded from the full light of the moon. I have often
been in danger of stumbling over some of these sleepers, and once or twice just looked
down in time to discover a little boy lying curled up at my feet on the bare
stones.
The bread in Valetta is good, and like that of the south of Europe, unleavened.
It is the custom to cover the top with small seeds, which are cultivated on purpose,
called “ Girginella.” The honey is highly esteemed ; that made by the bees of
Mellieha is reckoned the best; its price is B d. per pound. The “ carubse,” or beans
of the locust tree, are, when baked, a very common article of food amongst the poor;
and in passing through the villages, travellers are often annoyed by children holding
out their hands, and begging for “ Habba, harroob,” or a grain to buy locusts with.
Besides the current money of Great Britain, and the additional small coins called
grains, which are one-twelfth of a penny, accounts are also kept in taris and scudis.
20 Grains (Sicilian) ... 1 Tari,
12 Taris ..... 1 Scudi,
1 Scudi, equal to Is. Bi. English.
There is a small police force in Valetta composed of native officers, but they do
not seem to be at all popular with the inhabitants.
The few following words Will give my readers some idea of the Maltese language
Gremsicola . . Lizard Zimal . . . Horse Mosa Goat
Parfetto .. . Locust Baal .... Mule(?wa£e) Kelpe .... Dog
s^ur Bird Bacra .... Cow Himar , , , , Ass
Hut .... Fish Naga .... Sheep Baala ... „ . Mule (fern.)


CHAPTER XVIII.
DEPARTURE FROM MALTA.
“ Adieu! the joys of La Valette!”
Early to-day I received a message from the Marchioness of Testaferrata, a noble
Italian lady, for a copy of my sketch of the General’s Rock, a request with which I
complied. 1 afterwards walked out with my host, Signor Fabreschi, to make several
purchases, and went to see the “ Manderagio,” or lower part of the town, which is
quite a curiosity. The streets are composed of winding stairs only a few feet wide,
forming a complete labyrinth ; and the houses on each side are so high, that the
light of day is almost entirely excluded. Many of the poorer classes in this part
of the town are employed in platting straw hats, and making cigars. On returning
home to my lodgings, I was introduced to the Baroness Philomena de Saian, a
little Messinese girl, whose father was a desperate gamester, and had squandered
away his whole estate. This little girl lived in Malta with her mother, who was
acquainted with Fabreschi’s family. The articles which are chiefly worth purchasing
in Valetta are, black silk mits, fine embroidered linen, various articles of gold and
silver filig ee work, with vases, costumes, and other figures, beautifully chiselled
out of the white stone of the island ; and these latter may be best obtained of James
Soler, 78, Strada Forni, opposite Morell’s Hotel. Lovers of natural history may
occasionally meet with gazelles here, which are brought over in the market boats
from Africa. I purchased a pair of young ones which I intended taking with me
on my return to England. Canaries, and little French dogs, may be also obtained
at very moderate prices. The “ Bichons,” or native dogs, as I have before observed,
are very scarce, and fetch a high price.
My kind host had prepared a light supper of bread and cheese, fruit, and macca-
roni, which he requested me to partake of before retiring to rest. He had on a former
occasion invited me to dine with him ; these, and numerous other little attentions,
which insensibly win a stranger’s heart, and are the result of genuine hospitality,
contributed to raise this amiable family in my estimation. The father is a Leghornese,
and seems a pleasant man; but unfortunately I could only converse with him


through the medium of Michael, who acted as my interpreter to the rest of the
family. The mother and the three daughters, Maria, Carolina, and Rosina, were
unceasing in their attentions. The latter, Rosina, intends becoming a nun; she
has a tame parrot which she calls “ Papa-gar,” and to which she is very fondly
attached. I understood that Grand Cairo is the place where she intends taking the
veil. Giovanni, the youngest, is a fine boy about thirteen years of age, and of a
very affectionate disposition. After I left Malta I happened to find the following
inscription inserted in my pocket book which had lain upon my table:
“ John Fabreschi, he right yo in
That book to not forgete him,”
Besides the kindness I received from this family, I must also notice that of my
friends, Mr. S., and Josef Soler, the Spanish lad. On the next morning I rose
very early to pack up my things, and get all in readiness for my voyage to Sicily,
having taken a passage in a speronaro to Syracuse, which was to sail at six in the
evening, should the wind prove favourable. After getting my money exchanged for
Sicilian dollars, I went to the market with Michael Fabreschi to purchase a supply
of provisions for my voyage, as it was uncertain how long it might last. I laid in
a stock for three days. My bill may amuse ; it was as follows : —bread, Id. ; cheese,
2d.-, eggs, 6d. ; sausages, 4 d.; grapes, 7 d.; melons, pomegranates, &c. 5d. ; sugar,
2d.; figs, 1 d.; lemons, 1 d.; amounting in the whole to 2s. lid. This ample
supply filled a large hamper basket, which, with my other luggage, I sent on board
the speronaro. A passport was the next thing to be obtained, and this I procured
from the Neapolitan consul’s office, after a short delay. As I had every thing in
readiness for my departure full two hours before the time, I crossed over with Fa-
breschi to Sliema, on the opposite side of the Quarantine Harbour ; the fare is only
one farthing each in the ferry boat. After searching for shells among the rocks, and
watching the numerous bathers who resort here, the declining sun warned us to
return again to Valetta, and we recrossed in the boat with a number of priests, who
had been to bathe on the opposite side of the water. I was not long in taking
leave of my kind friends, several of whom accompanied me to the quay, where I
found the speronaro in readiness. As we were on the point of starting, the steamer
from Alexandria arrived, bringing the news of the taking of Canton by the English.
Another farewell look at Malta, and we were lightly skimming over the moonlit
waves for another and a greener isle !


CHAPTER XIX.
VOYAGE FROM MALTA TO SYRACUSE.
“ The day was fair and sunny, sea and sky
Drank its inspiring radiance, and the wind
Swept strongly from the shore, blackening the waves.”
Our speronaro sailed soon after sunset, from the quay of Valetta; and as the wind
blew favourably for crossing the channel, we were soon out of sight of Malta. The
rocky shores of that impregnable island melted away in the soft hazy light of a full
autumnal moon ; and as the graceful bark glided onwards over the waves, the silvery
light shining on her snow-white sails, and the gentle murmur of the breaking waves
that divided as she passed, echoing pleasantly, I had an opportunity of looking around
me, having busied myself when I first went on board in arranging my boxes, and in
getting every thing in order for my little voyage. Though the distance from Malta
to Syracuse is only 120 miles, yet the passage sometimes occupies four or five days ;
for the wind in the Mediterranean is so very variable that it often happens that
these small vessels are obliged to put back again, and wait for a day or two, until
-the wind favours them. When becalmed, the sailors have recourse to their oars,
reminding one of the bygone days of chivalry, when the proud galleys of the knights
ot Rhodes traversed these very seas, and struck terror into the breasts of surrounding
nations. Our speronaro had ten oars ; and, like the generality of the Sicilian boats,
the prow was adorned with an upright post four feet high, on the top of which was
a shaggy fleece, apparently a goat’s skin, dyed blue. This post is an invariable ap-
pendage to all the speronaros, and other Sicilian boats, which I have seen. In
some places the fleece is superseded by a round knob of black wood, and in others
by a bird, or fish, carved and painted. The outsides of these boats are generally
adorned with various strange paintings of nymphs, goddesses, and swans, and other
grotesque representations. The figure of an eye, seems a favourite sign, underneath
which is often placed the name of the vessel. Ours was the “ Concetzione,” or
“conception,” belonging to Syracuse; her crew consisted of the Captain, nine men,
and a lad, all Sicilians ; none of them understood a single word of English, or indeed
L


of any other language than their own “ patois,” in which they chattered with all the
vivacity and liveliness so characteristic of the people of the south.
I was quite alone with these mariners, unable alike to understand or be understood
by them, hut I found them very friendly, and exceedingly anxious to make me as
comfortable as their small vessel would allow. An arched cover at one end of the
deck served as my cabin, underneath which they provided me with a mattress on
which I slept at night; the owner’s son, a handsome young Sicilian, kindly gave
up this cabin for my use. Here I gathered together all my boxes, and setting my
supply of provisions before me, commenced my supper. A picture of St. Lucian,
the guardian saint of Syracuse, and another of the Virgin, were pasted upon my
humble bedboard ; an earthen lamp shed sufficient light to illuminate my little abode,
but the extreme heat soon drove me outside the door, and I sat upon the deck in
a flood of moonlight, where I finished my repast with some delicious pomegranates
which the young Sicilian presented to me. All of a sudden the whole crew com-
menced singing, and continued to do so with great spirit for a considerable time.
The effect was novel and unexpected, but until long after midnight they made such
a noise that I found it impossible to get any sleep ; however, at length they grew
tired, and wrapping themselves up in their huge Sicilian cloaks and drawing the
hoods over their heads, one after another lay down to sleep, and all was again still
save the rippling of the waves on the moonlit sea. Behind my cabin was a recess
like the back seat of a coach, in which the helmsman sat, and steered the vessel; a
small window opened into it, through which I supplied him with some supper of
bread and hard eggs, with a few figs. The only means of getting into this recess
w r as by climbing over the roof of my little domicile ; for the genius of invention is
not so much patronized among the Sicilians, as it is in our own country, of which
I afterwards met with several ludicrous examples.
The morning brought a calm -the clear sunlight shone over the glossy sea, and
the breeze during the night had speeded our progress, so that the shores of Sicily
were now in sight, though almost shrouded by the warm haze of morning. This
soon cleared away, and the island of Passaro, with a long line of coast, shone brightly
beneath the deep blue sky of noon. Our men now took to their oars, not pulling
them as we do, but standing up and pushing them forward, singing all the while, and
modulating their voices to every stoke. Feeling hungry, I went to my basket, and
got out some sausages which I wished to have cooked. I held them up to the
Captain, and said, “ Rosto, Capitano ; ” he took them away, as I supposed, to fry
them on a square fire place resembling a small altar, which stood on the deck at the
other end of the boat. Presently I heard a frizzling sound, and the little boy laid
me a clean cloth on the top of a box, and brought me a plate, and some wine with
a tremendous glass tumbler of water, nearly a foot high. This completed, I began


to look anxiously for my sausages, when, to my surprise, the plate came back filled
with salt fish, swimming in olive oil. I conjectured of course that they had made an
honest exchange, and quietly sat down to eat the fish, which was not over and above
palatable ; —when I had finished, the sausages were brought in, hot and smoking,
to my great astonishment, as I had concluded that they were all devoured. I sent
them back again to the generous folks at the other end of the boat, from whom I
received a profound “ Grazie, Seigneur,” which I answered by an equal sincere
“ Padrone.” The salt and pepper box amused me exceedingly ; at first J thought
it w r as an antique, and fell into a train of meditations which carried me hack to the
days of Hiero and Dionysius ; hut I afterwards discovered that it was the manu-
facture of the present age, though certainly as worthy of a place in the British Mu-
seum as the club of a Fejee savage, or the war-triton of a South Sea islander. The
dress of the Sicilian mariners consists of white native cotton, the trowsers are full,
something like those of the Greeks, and turned up at the knees ; their feet are hare,
and they seldom wear any covering on the head. Capo Passaro, the south-eastern
promontory of Sicily, is a low rocky island, and not in reality a cape. When
viewed from the sea, it has a barren appearance, with a few shrubby plants growing
here and there upon it ; and, like Malta, it seemed quite parched up beneath the
burning sky. The heat at noon was excessive, and I was obliged to retire under
the shade of my cabin roof, where I lay down and attempted to sleep, but the extreme
liveliness of a number of young cockroaches running in all directions over the cabin,
totally defeated my purpose. At sunset it was calm and cool, and I resumed my
box and tablecloth outside the cabin, to make an evening meal of fruit. My little
barefooted page waited on me with the greatest attention, for which I rewarded him
with the remainder of my stock of provisions, reserving only a few branches of grapes
for a “dejeuner” in the morning. The sun set over the Sicilian mountains, bathing
that lovely country in its warm and glowing light ; and, nearly at the same moment,
up rose the full moon, pale and cold, from the deep blue eastern sea. The town
of Noto presented a picturesque appearance on the rising hills, and several scattered
villages were sprinkled about near the shore. Along this coast is a tunny fishery,
famous for the excellency of the fish, and the large size to which they attain. The
flesh of the tunny is much used as an article of food by the inhabitants, and when
salted greatly resembles in flavour the Gorgona anchovies. Very far distant, and but
just distinguishable in the haze of the evening atmosphere, the mighty Etna, now
called Mongibello, rose proudly to the sky, forming an eternal beacon by which the
mariner may steer his way through the halcyon seas that wash its widely-spread
base. Some time afterthe last red streak died away in the west, I continued sitting
on the top of my little cabin, till the dew warned me to retire beneath it; and I
exchanged the pensive light of the moon, and the refreshing air of the evening
l 2


breeze, for the close atmosphere, and the rustic lamp of my night-quarters, where
I again lay down to sleep. The Sicilians were sitting around a lage dish on the
deck, out of which they were eating their supper very quietly with wooden spoons,
when suddenly they all jumped up, and throwing aside their heavy cloaks, took to
the oars, and began to sing with all their might. This chorus, as before, continued
with some intervals during the night; but, as I was more reconciled to their noises,
it did not prevent my sleeping. Their mode of singing is peculiar ; one of the party
makes a kind of sharp hissing noise, modulating his voice to the music, whilst the
rest roar out with the most stentorian lungs imaginable; and it is not unusual for
them to complete the effect with a shrill scream. Several commenced dancing at
the same time, and altogether they seemed as light of heart as their Greek ancestors
at the Olympian games, though probably their music has rather degenerated since
the days of classic story. At early daybreak, Syracuse was in sight before us. The
modem town of Siragusa, on the island of Ortygia, is now all that remains of its an-
cient glory ; but the noble harbour, the spacious plains, the gently swelling hills,
the towering mountains, they are still the same ; and it only requires a slight effort
of the imagination to bring back its hundred marble palaces, its magnificent temples,
fanes, and statues, and to repeople the silent wastes with the teeming population of
ancient Greece. It must, indeed, have been a splendid city ; but its ashes sleep
amidst the wrecks of time, and the sun of its glory is set for ever ; though its climate
is such that, in nature, Cicero’s remark still holds good, “ that there never was a day
at Syracuse, on some portion of which the sun did not shine.”
As we approached the entrance of the harbour we met several boats piled up with
immense tunny nets, made of wicker work, on their way out to the fishery. The
singular appearance of these boats added to the picturesque character of the scene ;
and on passing the southern promontory of the bay, I observed a number of the
natives busily employed upon the rocks in pursuit of shell-fish. Presently our
fairy bark was at anchor, where the fleets of the Romans had anchored before us,
and the mighty inventions of Archimedes had been called into practice to defeat the
common enemy of the world. A beautiful panorama was stretched around us,
canopied beneath the azure heavens ; and the sleeping waters of the Grand Harbour
were so clear and still, that its bed of long green sea-weed was distinctly visible
beneath the spot where we lay. The owner’s son, after securing a number of letters
inside his stockings, exchanged his mariner’s dress for the costume of a Sicilian
gentleman ; and when I had got my things in readiness we stepped into the boat,
and the whole company rowed ashore to the custom-house, where we had to undergo
the scrutiny of the pratique officers. After a delay of about an hour, during which
time my passport was inspected by the various authorities, we returned again to the
speronaro, guarded by two dogans, or Neapolitan soldiers, with an officer of the


custom-house, to examine my baggage. Whilst this operation was going forward
the gleam of a small pin that I wore in my handkerchief attracted the attention of
the officer, and seemed to take his fancy amazingly. He pointed to it with his finger,
exclaiming “ bellissimo! bellissimo ; ” and, at the same moment, drew from his
own cravat an enormous gold brooch, containing dark-coloured crystals. These he
intimated to me were from Mongibello, (Mount Etna,) and after putting it into
my hand endeavoured to explain to me that he wished for an exchange. I did not
understand him at first; but afterwards, by the aid of an Italian phrase-book, I
managed to decline his offer, and retain my bauble, without in any way offending
the officer, who bowed politely, and replaced the crystal brooch in his bosom. The
custom-house is situated close to the water’s edge, leading dow r n to which is a broad
flight of steps covered with carpet, on which we landed. To the right is a cluster
of fig-trees, and on the left, towards the entrance of the town, is a level promenade,
planted with weeping willows and shady pimento-trees, beneath which are several
seats interspersed with flowers. The famous fountain of Arethusa empties itself
into the sea about half a dozen yards from the custom-house, in the form of an
insignificant channel, running underground, and falling from a stone trough which
serves as a tank, where a solitary washerwoman w r as rinsing her linen. The original
site of the fountain, however, is a little higher up, within the walls of the town, from
whence this stream issues to flow into the harbour. Here I paused, and involun-
tarily exclaimed, “ O Syracuse, how art thou fallen !”


CHAPTER XX.
RIVERS ANAPUS AND PAPYRUS—TEMPLE OF JUPITER OLYMPUS, AND THE FONTE CIANE.
“ And nearer to the river’s trembling edge,
There grew broad flag-flowers, purple prankt with white,
And starry river-buds among the sedge,
And floating water-lilies, broad and bright,
Which lit the oak that overhung the hedge
With moonlight beams of their own watery light;
And bulrushes, and reeds of such deep green
As soothed the dazzled eye with sober sheen.”
I had no sooner landed than one of the “ dogans,” or soldiers, led me to the autho-
rities of the Neapolitan Government, and gave me to understand that I must pay
them my “ devoirs” for the services which it was supposed they had rendered me.
This I accordingly did, and after a number of formal bows and bends on both sides,
I was most graciously dismissed, and permitted to enter the town with my luggage.
I now found myself in a strange country, just entering a city, every street of which
was unknown to me; and what was worse, without a single person who could speak
even a few words of English. I was possessed of a letter of introduction to the
British Consul, who is a Maltese by birth, and after a short delay I proceeded to his
residence, accompanied by the young Sicilian who had been my friend on board the
speionaro. I found the Consul at home, but could get very little information from
him; and as my chief desire was to visit as many of the antiquities in the neighbour-
hood as possible, I declined his invitation to call upon him on the following morning.
My next object was to procure an intelligent guide ; and as I had been recommended
to Signor Polite, by my friend, Dr. H., of London, I set off in quest of him. At
first I could not make myself understood, hut afterwards a sailor was brought to me
who had been many years ago in England, having served on board a man-of-war,
and with his assistance as interpreter I explained my purposed errand. Passing
through a number of narrow miserable looking streets, we arrived at last before the
domicile of the Polites. The person recommended to me by Dr. H. was by profes-
sion an artist, and one well acquainted with all the antique treasures around Syracuse;


he had a brother at Girgenti who followed the same profession there, and likewise acted
as a guide to all the numerous antiquities of that place. On inquiring for Signor P,,
I found that he was deceased, or as they beautifully expressed it, “that he was above,”
pointing to the blue sky overhead. His son, however, an obliging young man,
now takes his place, both as an artist, and also as a guide to strangers visiting the
neighbourhood. On making myself known, he immediately prepared to accompany
me to the temple of Jupiter Olympus, and the Papyrus river, and ordered a boat to
be in waiting at the quay for that purpose. As is the custom in Sicily, he laid
before me a box full of the cards and addresses of all the parties who had employed
his father, and himself, as guides, for many years past; and I was agreeably sur-
prised at finding amongst them that of my friend Dr. H., dated 1824, an undeniable
proof that my chosen guide was no impostor. We lost no time in getting down to
the boat, and soon found ourselves again crossing the pellucid waters of that noble
harbour. Our boat was protected from the sun by a canopy of blue striped cotton ;
and I found that they had laid in a stock of bread and tunny-fish, presuming, no
doubt, on my English appetite, for unfortunately we Britons are proverbial for our
roast beef and plum pudding propensities. The day was sultry, and the sky, as
usual, without a cloud; we soon reached the opposite side of the harbour, at the
mouth of the river Anapus. Here the sand had so choaked up the bed of the river,
that our men were obliged to jump out of the boat, and by main force drag it across
the bar ; the water was as clear as crystal, rippling over the white pebbles, and so
extremely shallow that a child might have forded it. After crossing the bar, the
water became considerably deeper, and our men pushed us on by means of the oars ;
for the breadth of the Anapus is so inconsiderable, that there is scarcely room for
two boats to pass one another in some places. The margin is bordered with lux-
uriant vegetation, backed with canes fifteen or twenty feet high. Amongst the reeds,
I observed the false papyrus growing here and there, but it was much smaller, and
in less abundance than the true kind, which is only met with on the banks of the
Papyrus river. Myriads of dragon-flies darted around us in every direction, and the
butterflies were also very plentiful, particularly the papilio, “ machaon,” and P. “ po-
dalirius.” We had not proceeded far, before we were completely embowered in the
canes, among which the nightingale and sedge warbler were singing most melodiously;
our unceremonious intrusion amid these quiet haunts roused a purple gallinule, or
coot, that was feeding amongst the rushes. The bird was evidently taken by sur-
prise, and flew forwards in the direction of the river. Signor Polite, the two men,
and the boy, all simultaneously jumped out of the boat, and ran along the shore, in
pursuit of the bird, leaving me alone on the stream ; they chased it a long way, making
a desperate hunt; and after one or two very narrow escapes, the terrified fowl at last
found a secure retreat under a bed of matted reeds, and its pursuers returned to the


boat. Whilst they were running after the bird, I got on shore also, and looked about
for insects. I found several of the “ mantis” tribe, and an innumerable quantity
of grasshoppers ; but as my time was necessarily so very limited, I had but few
opportunities of making any search for them. I may merely state, with regard to
the insects of Sicily, that I should imagine that country to be a rich field of enterprize
for the industrious entomologist, particularly in the early part of the summer, when
the lepidoptera are the most abundant. The next creature we fell in with was a
large viper, swimming down the stream, and afterwards a multitude of frogs peeping
up from the leaves of the water-sedge, like the picture in AEsop’s Fables, where they
are praying to Jupiter for a king. We now arrived at the junction of the river
Papyrus with the Anapus, where we landed for the purpose of visiting the ruins of
the temple of Jupiter Olympus, leaving the boat to await our return. The first
object I saw on getting clear of the canes, was a beautiful hoopoe feeding upon the
ground ; the moment it saw us, however, it erected its crest, and spreading its wings,
flew away before I had time to admire it. A walk of a few minutes across some
parched fields brought us to the ruins. Only two pillars of this once magnificent
temple now remain standing ; they are at some little distance from each other, and
have a fluted appearance. The accompanying sketch, which I made on the spot,
will convey some idea of it. Near this my guide showed me an oblong pit, about
twenty-three feet deep, and of considerable width; it was probably an ancient recep-
tacle for retaining water. The lizards I found to be of a larger size, and of a much
brighter colour than those of Malta, but not quite so numerous. On crossing one
of the fields on our way back to the boat, I was charmed with the quantity of large
spreading olive-trees that grew on all sides, imparting a classical air to the scene
that harmonized well with the fallen fragments of mighty Greece.
Re-embarking in our boat, we ascended the river Papyrus to its source, at the
Fonte Ciane ; amongst the rank exuberance of vegetation on the sides of this stream,
were placed a number of fishing baskets of wicker-work, which are used to ensnare
the various fish with which the Papyrus abounds the water is very deep, but so
clear and transparent, that every snail shell at the bottom is distinctly visible. It
was now the hottest part of the day, and the evaporation arising from the fierce rays
of the sun pouring down upon the water, rendered the atmosphere like a vapour-bath.
As we proceeded, the vegetation increased ; in many places we were obliged to push
aside the canes to form a passage, and it required considerable power to urge the
boat onwards through the tangled mass of white and yellow water lillies, and other
mer plants that impeded our progress. Almost every leaf was the resting place of
a dragon-fly ; and as we moved along those brilliant creatures thronged the air,
fluttering from one spray to another. I counted no less than nine varieties; some
' vere immensely large, and of a bright blue colour; others crimson, and others again


RUINS OF THE TEMPLE OF JUPITER OLYMPOS, SARACUSE.




were entirely of a dark purple liue. But the most interesting production of this
river is the plant from which it derives its name —the Papyrus, or “paper-rush” of
the ancients. Here it grows in unbounded luxuriance, forming one of the prettiest
sights imaginable; immense groups of this singular plant rise to the height of
eight, ten, and even twelve feet, completely covering the margin of the river, and
forming a rich canopy of its feathery clusters. For some distance both sides of
the stream were entirely composed of papyri, growing up from the bottom of the
water. We pulled up several to examine the lower part of the stem, which is the
portion of which the paper is made; it is about as thick as a person’s wrist, and
of a snowy whiteness for twelve or fifteen inches from the bottom. After a great
deal of time lost in contending with the matted water weeds, we arrived at last at the
Fonte Ciane, a large and capacious basin, from whence the river takes its rise. The
water is extremely limpid, and though twenty-two feet deep, every object at the
bottom is clearly discernible; the whole Fonte is surrounded by tufts of tall papyrus,
backed by rushes, amongst which a number of those beautiful and picturesque crea-
tures, the Sicilian oxen, were quietly browsing. The chief attraction to this place
is the opportunity afforded by the extreme clearness of the water, for observing the
fish swimming about at the bottom of the pool. For this purpose we remained till
the boat was perfectly steady ; and on looking over the side, we saw hundreds of blue
mullet roving amongst the beds of aquatic moss below, as distinctly as though they
had been gold fishes in a globe of crystal. After quenching our thirst by several
very copious draughts of the pellucid water, we returned again to the spot where we
were to disembark. At this place we found mules in waiting for us, and another
cicerone, or attendant. Here I dismissed the boat, and Polite and myself mounting
the mules, we set off at once for the ruins of Tychae and Neapolis.
M


CHAPTER XXI.
TYCHÆ —NEAPOLIS—FORT LABDALUS—THE QUARRIES OF THE PHILOSOPHERS—STRADA
DEL TOMBE—SUBTERRANEAN PASSAGE—TEMPLE OF CERES.
“ I stood alone on Tychse’s ruined height—
The noble harbour as a lake below,
And the broad plains—but all was desolate—
The lizard and the grasshopper alone had life,
And as I stood, strange melancholy thoughts—
The shadows of the past—they haunted me!”
Our ride lay through an extremely rich country, (once the classic soil of Theocritus,)
the path being bordered in many places by hedgerows of prickly pears, enclosing
vineyards and hemp fields. We crossed a small bridge where I observed quantities
of the castor-oil plant, (palma christi,) growing spontaneously on the margin of the
stream bed. My guide picked me a handful of fine blackberries, and had it not
been for the southern air of the aloe and Indian fig beside me, I could for the
moment have fancied myself once more in a Devonshire lane, wandering as I was
wont to do, with my schoolmates, in the merry hours of childhood.
I observed a small tree frog, of a light green colour, upon the leaf of a cactus, which
I pointed out to my guide to procure for me. The old man was quite horror-struck
at the idea of my wishing for such a creature ; and it was with some difficulty I
could prevail upon him to pluck the leaf on which the little animal was reposing ;
despite, however, the old man’s fears, I got him safely to Syracuse, where he found
an asylum in a phial of alcohol, without having spit either fire or poison in my face!
We next ascended a steep rocky path, overhung with several very fine weeping willows,
beneath one of which we halted to pick up some bunches of immense white grapes,
which a man was gathering from a vine that spread itself completely over the top-
most boughs of a tall mulberry tree. These grapes are used for wine, and owing
to their situation they had not attained that degree of sweetness usually met
with in the grapes of Sicily; nevertheless, as we were uncommonly thirsty, they
suited our purpose all the better. A little farther on we reached a small tank where




VIEW FR OM TH E RUI NS OF TY CHA, LOOKI NG TOWARDS ETNA.


we watered our mules, and soon afterwards found ourselves among the walls of
ancient Tychm, and the scattered ruins of that part of the city called Neapolis.
Heaps of stones confusedly piled up, interspersed with creeping briars and bulbous
plants, are the only present remains of the once formidable walls of Tychae. My guides,
(for old Alosco the muleteer proved a very good one, and showed evident signs of
having filled that office long before young Polite’s time,) next pointed out to me
the site of a gateway, through which Marcellus entered when the Romans made
themselves masters of Syracuse. Near this place a small naumachia, and the remains
of a diminutive amphitheatre, were also pointed out. Ancient wheel-tracks are
distinctly visible in several places ; some of which I traced for a considerable distance,
worn in the bare rock. Passing the Quarries of the Philosophers,—so called from
the circumstance of this place having been the prison in which Dionysius confined
the poet Philoxenes, and several philosophers, for refusing to praise his poetical com-
positions, —my guides next showed me the ruins of Fort Labdalus, which form a
conspicuous object at the extremity of the table-land over which these scattered
vestiges of antiquity are spread. The wall facing Epipholse is still discernible ; my
guides informed me that it was erected in twenty days at a sudden notice. The
view from this place is enchanting; it consists of an extensive panorama, including
the modern town of Syracuse, with the harbour, and beyond it the sparkling waters
of the Mediterranean Sea ; to the north the Campo Romano, and the country towards
Catania, with the promontory of Magnesia stretching out into the sea, backed by
crowded mountains half lost in the distance ; beyond which, at the extremity of the
vast plain near the sea coast, the mighty Mongibello towers far above them all,
mingling his sulphurous crest with the clouds. On the south and west the sluggish
waters of the Anapus, winding through a marshy valley luxurious to excess, while
still further to the westward the eye rests on the verdant slopes of the lesser Hybla.
After contemplating for some minutes this delightful panorama, we descended a
rugged hollow, at the foot of the ruins of Fort Esapilo, and prepared to enter the
subterranean passages, which have only lately been excavated. At the time of Mrs.
Starke’s visit to Sicily they were but very partially exposed, and my old guide told
me that “Madame Starkey,” as he called her, crept in as far as she could on her
hands and knees to explore this subterranean abode, where the bat and the scorpion
have dwelt for ages past. Now, however, the passages are so cleared, that by the
light of our torches we penetrated for a considerable way in various directions-. These
passages are so lofty as to admit cavalry, and are generally supposed to have been
formed for the purpose of transmitting troops and provisions from one part of the
city to another, in times of warfare and attack.
Several openings to these underground ways are pointed out from above; and
as we proceeded in our subterranean march, we were here and there cheered by a
m 2


peep of sunlight streaming through the aperture overhead. Evident marks still
remain in these passages of their having been the abode of men and horses, and holes
for rings in the wall at equal distances, are pointed out by the guides, as the places
where the cavalry tied up their horses when awaiting some onset.
Returning by the Strada del Tomhe, in the quarter of Acradina, my old cicerone,
Guiseppi Alosco, pointed out a number of small tombs cut in the rock on both
sides, interspersed with marks of marble slabs, originally having Greek inscriptions.
Amongst these I was particularly called to observe one which the guides assured me
was the tomb of Archimedes; though differing considerably from the description
given of it by Cicero, when he was quaestor of Sicily. He describes it as “ a small
column rising hut slightly above the brambles, on which were graven the figures of
a sphere and a cylinder.” The one which I saw consisted of two fluted Doric
columns, much broken, supporting an architrave and frieze, above which was a
pediment, all hewn out of the solid rock. The interior contains niches for urns, and
the remains of a sarcophagus. This, therefore, cannot be the true sepulchre of the
philosopher, according to the ancient accounts, which tell us that Archimedes had
it inscribed at his own desire with the figures of a sphere and a cylinder, and that
even before the time of Cicero it had been lost and wholly neglected by his ungrate-
ful countrymen. The pleasure and triumph of the illustrious orator, on once more
discovering this relic, is too well known to he repeated.
Just before arriving at the gates of the city of modern Siragusa, we passed the remains
of a temple dedicated to Ceres and Proserpine, only one pillar of which is now stand-
ing. Two others of variegated marble have lately been removed from their original
position, and are now lying in the town close to the cathedral, which is formed partly
by the columns of the Greek temple of Minerva. Here they appear totally useless,
and I fear, if no one has sufficient reverence for the remains of antiquity to replace
them again where they formerly stood, that they will, like most precious relics, he
broken to pieces by order of the King of Sicily, either to mend the roads, or to pave
his Majesty’s kitchen. By this time we arrived at the Albergo del Sole. It was
nearly seven o’clock, and I found my landlord anxiously awaiting my return, afraid
no doubt that as I had ordered dinner at five o’clock, it would all be spoiled before
I came in. I ascended the interminable flight of stone steps that led to the corridor
of the Albergo, followed by Polite and old Alosco, and there I found the boatmen I
had employed in the morning waiting for payment. After concluding our bargains,
in which my landlord acted as interpreter, I dismissed the whole train, and entered
the saloon, where I found a good dinner laid out for me. As I had arranged with
Polite to act as my guide on the following day, and promised Alosco that he should
escort me on the day afterwards to Catania, I sat down to partake of my host’s
liberal repast after the adventures of the day, first presenting him with half-a-dozen


gigantic papyri, which we had brought from the Fonte Ciane, as an ornament for one
corner of the room. My landlord waited upon me in person, bringing in course after
course of macaroni, fish, ragouts, pastry, &c., with excellent Syracusan wine. The
water here, as in Malta, is all iced before it is brought to table, which renders it
exceedingly refreshing in so hot a climate. The desert was copious, consisting of
fresh grapes, figs, walnuts, apples, and almonds. A large mastiff was my only com-
panion for the remainder of the evening, and after I had dined I threw myself on one
of the four couches that adorned the room, and rested myself before proceeding
upstairs to note down in my journal, and pack up the antiquities and other curiosities
which I had collected during the day. The walls of this inimitable saloon were
decorated by six very ancient-looking mirrors, carved all over with images of Venus,
Bacchus, and a host of other divinities, so that their original utility as mirrors was
totally set aside. It was certainly a grotesque example of combining the useful and
the ornamental ; for I had not the least idea, on approaching these glasses, to find a
bevy of gods and goddesses, instead of my own reflected image. After amusing
myself with these mirrors, and various other remarkable articles of furniture belonging
to the apartment, I ascended several more flights of stone steps, and reached my
bedroom, which my landlord had kept locked all day for the safety of my luggage.
After the interchange of “ buona sera,” I secured the door with a couple of chairs,
and putting the window wide open to admit a breath of air, I lay down to sleep, and
to dream of Syracuse and its former glory, after the day’s ramble amongst its ruins—
the first T had spent in pleasant Sicily.


CHAPTER XXII.
MUSEUM-TEMPLE OF MINERVA—FOUNTAIN OF ARETHUSA—EAR OF DIONYSIUS—GARDEN
OF PARADISE —AQUEDUCT —NYMPÆUM —TRIPOD OF APOLLO—STRADA SEPULCHRALE IN
NEAPOLIS.
“ Arethusa arose from her couch of snows
In the Acroceraunian mountains,
From cloud and from crag, with many a jag,
Shepherding her bright fountains,
And under the water, the earth’s white daughter
Fled like a sunny beam ;
Behind her descended, her billows unblended,
With the brackish Dorian stream.”
No sooner had the morning dawned, than my faithful Polite was in waiting at
the doorway of the Albergo, to act as my guide through the city, to the numerous
places of interest and antiquity which still remained for me to visit. I soon des-
patched a cup of colfee, and joining my guide we set off on foot, intending to make a
pedestrian excursion, as most of the spots we had to visit, lay either in the suburbs
of the city, or at a short distance from it. The museum, which is situated near the
cathedral, first claimed our attention. It consists chiefly, indeed I may almost say
exclusively, of antiquities discovered in and about the neighbourhood of the ancient
Syracuse. A marble statue of Yenus, without the head, which was found buried
beneath a fig-tree in the quarter of Acradina, is by far the finest piece of sculpture.
The other objects most worthy of notice, are a Greek head of Esculapius, some very
curious ancient pictures in fresco, lamps, and other articles of household furniture,
two glass cups finely coloured, inscriptions taken from the street of the tombs, of
white marble, some of which are very legible, rings, vases, ladies’ hair-pins, lachry-
matories, and coins. There is also a fine headless drapery exquisitely sculptured in
marble, a basso-relievo of Timoleon, found in the amphitheatre, a leaden sarcophagus
excavated from the Scala Grseca, Campo Romano, containing portions of a skeleton
with an amazingly thick skull; another large sarcophagus, and, lastly, a curious relic
consisting of a quantity of earthen pots and cups, one inside another, which appear
to have belonged to a pottery manufactory, and to have been suddenly crushed by


some violent concussion. These were dug up along with a number of Grssco-
Sicilian antiquities in the vicinity. The usual charge made to visitors at the museum
is four taris, but the guardian finds it more profitable to leave it to the generosity of
the visitors, (a common practice on the Continent,) which often imposes an unpleasant
tax upon strangers. Near the cathedral I observed the two pillars belonging to the
temple of Ceres in Acradina, which have been purloined from the fane of the goddess
to serve some miserable purpose in repairing the modern city.
The cathedral, which I before noticed, is an erection of the 7th century, and dedi-
cated to the Virgin. It is built in the temple of Minerva, or rather, the remains of
that edifice have been cruelly mutilated and disfigured by being transformed into the
walls of this building. Some idea, however, of the simple beauty and grandeur of
this Doric temple may still be formed by a survey of those portions which now remain.
It formerly displayed forty columns, fluted, without a base, erected on a raised
quadrilateral platform. The Celia was enclosed by walls, formed of large stones
neatly joined without cement: these walls were cut through to form communicating
arches with the sides when it became a church. Eleven of the columns on the north
side of the edifice are built into the wall, where they may still be traced. Those on
the south side are in better preservation, and at the western end two more are
visible.
The Monastery of St. Lucian, the guardian saint of Siragusa, is one of the finest
religious establishments in the city. I peeped into the chapel during mass, and was
much struck with the remarkably light and pretty appearance of a vast number of
suspended lamps hanging at various distances above the altar-piece, and reaching
quite up to the ceiling of the church. The cords by which these lamps are hung are
so fine as to be almost imperceptible, and give one the idea of their resting in the air.
Santa Lucian is to the Syracusans what St. Michael is to the inhabitants of Malta —
their favourite guardian saint and patroness—and in almost every cottage, and even in
the speronaro and fishing-boat, a rude picture of this idolized being is constantly to
be found. In more wealthy families, the pictures of the saints are oftentimes
elaborately painted, and finely executed, though the character of the individual
represented is preserved the same in these as in more humble editions. After visiting
the Collegiate Church, where there are several tolerably good paintings, my guide
proceeded to show me the far-famed fountain of Arethusa, which still wells up from the
o-round, broad and bubbling, though its shoals of sacred fishes, and the translucent purity
JD *
of its waters, are fled for ever. It is now converted into a tank for washerwomen, and
is the receptacle for the purification of all the dirty linen in Siragusa. Never again
could a poet sit down and sing of Arethusa, if he had once witnessed the sight which
I was favoured to behold on looking down from the wall which commands a view of
the fountain and its rocky source. My guide wittily said to me on reaching the spot,


“ These are the nymphse modernse,” pointing at the same time to nearly half-a-hundred
women with their clothes tucked up above their knees, standing in rows in the water,
and all busily engaged in washing and beating their dirty garments with wooden
spatulas, forming the most grotesque “ coup d’oeil” imaginable. This was unexpected,
for I did not conceive of nymphs in the year 1841, and so great a number of them too.
Such a scene was hardly “ comme il faut,” and reminded me of the surprise I ex-
perienced on first discovering the grotto of the goddess Calypso in the island of
Malta. It is said that this is the identical river Arethusa which sinks under ground
near Olympia in the Peloponnesus, and that, continuing its course for five or six
hundred miles below the ocean, it rises again in this place. Many of the old
Sicilian authors state that the golden cup won at the Olympic Games was thrown
into the Grecian Arethusa, and was soon afterwards cast up again by the Ortygian one.
They also state that after the great sacrifices at the former place, the waters of the fountain
rose for several days tinged with the blood of the victims. Near to Arethusa, in the
grand harbour, bubbles up another spring, called the “ Occhi di Zillica,” through
the sea, and rises to the surface almost unimpregnated with the salt water. This is
Alphaeus, who, according to the poets, pursued Arethusa all the way to Sicily, and
was by Diana converted into this fountain, just as he was approaching to seize the
terrified nymph, who was at the same moment transformed into the spring, which
still bears her name. Thus much for Arethusa. I certainly was disappointed in
finding it so degraded and debased, but I consoled myself by the feeling that I had
seen Arethusa, and that it was the very same of whose “ sweet waters” Cicero speaks
as containing an incredible number of fishes, &c. Had he said “ washerwomen,”
the description would have better suited its appearance at the present day! Oh 1
the miserable sordid taste of these modern times. There is no regard paid to many
of the precious relics of antiquity, which are the only speaking monuments of ages
that once were—of ages when the eloquence of a Demosthenes—when the courage of a
Leonidas or a Miltiades—the chisel of a Praxiteles, and the pencil of a Zeuxis —when
a brilliant phalanx of warriors and statesmen, and philosophers and poets, all con-
tributed to render Greece the wonder of her time, and the glory of the world. As Ali
Pacha wilfully and maliciously pulled to pieces the venerable temples in Upper Egypt,
so in many other countries, ignorant and avaricious men destroy the crumbling edifice
that bids them do reverence to a long line of forgotten ancestry. Nor are these
instances of a savage and destructive mind few and far between ; look at England,
our own country, and let the guilty blush at home! For many a fair baronial castle,
and many a precious relic of the chivalry and feudal spirit of the middle ages, is sacri-
ficed to the cursed love of gold by the wretched worshippers at the shrine of mammon.
But to return to my subjecthaving by this time completed my survey of all that
was most interesting within the limits of the modern city of Siragusa, we next pro-




EAR OF DIONYSIUS,
In the Latomie Syracuse


ceeded to the quarters formerly called Acradina and Neapolis, where by far the greater
part of the existing remains of ancient Syracuse are to be found. The celebrated Ear of
Dionysius is situated in one of the numerous “latomies,” or quarries, from which it is
generally supposed that a great portion of the stone used in building the ancient cities
was formerly excavated. This latomie is extensive, and is filled with a luxuriant
garden of, fig trees, prickly pears, and other fruits. A winding descent leads the tra-
veller into this garden, to the left of which stands the Ear of Dionysius, hewn out of
the perpendicular limestone rock. This lasting memento of the crafty and cruel
tyrant, is cut in the form of an ass’s ear, being fifty-eight feet in height at the entrance,
seventeen feet wide, and 210 feet long. The sides converge gradually towards the top,
and terminate in a small channel, which conveyed every sound in the cave, however
trifling, to an aperture near the entrance. Hence all the sounds in this prison were
directed to one common tympanum, which communicated with a small private apart-
ment, where Dionysius spent his leisure time in listening to the conversation of his
prisoners. This chamber, as pointed out by the guides, is merely a small square
recess, situated almost at the top of the cavern ; the only present mode of access
being by means of a rope and pulley, the adventurer hazarding his life in a little
crazy chair. The apparatus was duly prepared, and they, no doubt, expected to give
me a ride to enable me to stand where Dionysius stood. Not feeling inclined to ven-
ture my bones on so uncertain a foundation, I contented myself with a view of the
chamber from below, and pacified the pecuniary desires of the owner of the latomie,
by having a small cannon fired off in the Ear, which produced a succession of thun-
dering echoes, resembling a whole volley of artillery discharging at the same time.
A piece of paper torn at the same spot, is also heard distinctly throughout the whole
cave. After purchasing several ancient coins, which had been dug up in the
latomie, and making a sketch of the Ear of Dionysius, we proceeded to the contiguous
quarries, or grottos, out of which an enormous quantity of the stone appears to have
been excavated, but which are now converted into rope-walks. These quarries having
been dug underneath the rock, and portions of the stone left as supporters for the roof,
they present a picturesque and not unpleasing appearance.
The most remarkable circumstance is, that the ancients appear to have hewn out
the blocks of stone, (with some tool of peculiar construction,) from the solid rock,
at once in the shape and size required. This is evident from the marks on the
roof and sides of the quarries, which appear indicated in geometrical quantities, and
show the neatness with which the blocks must have been cut out. In the walls
are still visible the holes to which prisoners were chained, and the general opinion
is, that after the stone had been excavated, it was used as a state prison by Dionysius
the tyrant. The great latomie, or Garden of Paradise, as the Sicilians term it, is
situated at a short distance from the former, and consists of a similar, but larger
N


and more precipitate quarry, which is converted into a most picturesque and
luxuriant garden, and belongs to a nobleman of Syracuse. As we walked on, my
guide, Polite, pointed out to me at almost every step, spots where either he or his
father had dug up coins, vases, or lachrymatories ; so numerous are the scattered
vestiges of this once magnificent and powerful city. We entered the garden by a
number of steps; and as it was the hottest time of the day, and we were fatigued
and thirsty, we gladly availed ourselves of the opportunity of rest afforded by a small
room erected as a retreat for visitors, by the owner of the latomie. Here we found
an old woman and her son, who had the care of the garden. The lad was just
recovering from a violent fever, and presented one of the most sickly and emaciated
countenances I ever beheld. The woman quickly set before us some grapes, walnuts,
figs, and locusts, with a quantity of good Sicilian wine, and bread; the latter com-
monly eaten by the peasants of the country, but so black and sour, that were it to
appear at an English table it would meet with very few customers. But habit ren-
ders all things tolerable, and in time I was able to eat the black bread with consider-
able relish. After writing my name in a small visitor’s book, gaily adorned with
ribbons, and ornamented on the outside with a picture of Queen Victoria, I wandered
through the wa.ks of this subterranean garden amongst cypresses, sorbs, orange,
lemon, and bergamot trees, interspersed with a variety of flowers, nearly similar to
those in our English gardens, particularly China-asters, and pinks. I had the pleasure
of tasting some of the last year’s lemons, which had remained all the winter upon
the trees, and were very sweet, and not unlike an orange in flavour. I would here
remark that the oranges of Sicily are, in general, inferior both to those of Spain and
the Western Islands. Lemons form a much more important article here; and in
the Val di Demone, particularly for many miles around Messina, they grow in such
abundance as to form a considerable article of export from that city, and also from
many of the other towns on that part of the coast. But I am again wandering.
Communicating with this garden by a long subterranean passage, just high enough
for a person to stand upright in, is another and much smaller latomie, now used
partly as a farm-yard, and containing an orchard of orange and lemon-trees. There
is in this latomie another “ Ear,” smaller, but exactly corresponding in form and
intention with that of Dionysius, which I have not heard mentioned in any traveller’s
account of Syracuse.
From the Garden of Paradise, we next visited the aqueduct and nymphaeum,
situated on an eminence overlooking the remains of the theatre. Beneath a cave,
in which rises a spring of water, the tripod of Apollo formerly stood; and even at
the present time it requires but a slight stretch of the imagination to restore the
tripod, and all the mystic things that pertained to the oracle of the divinity ; to call
back the golden cauldron, and the trembling inquirers of the mysterious Pythia —


the white-robed priestess, crowned with a wreath of laurel, frantic in her incantations,
and filled with the divine afflatus, “who knew things past, and present, and to come.”
Such an oracle, placed as this was, and overlooking one of the most charming and
delicious prospects in Sicily, must, when all the cities shone in their marble splen-
dour, and the blue waters of the Mediterranean were covered with the fleets of the
triumphant Greeks, have excited a wonderful influence over a nation whose religion
was of the wildest and most imaginative nature possible; when every stream had its
presiding nymph, and every grove its company of fauns and satyrs. Close to the
site of the Pythian oracle is the Strada Sepulchrale, or street of the tombs. I have
already mentioned a similar street under the denomination of the “Strada del Tombe,”
which is situated in Acradina. This, however, in Neapolis, is much more perfect, and
is of a semicircular form, cut in the rock. The tracks of ancient carriage wheels,
worn in the stones, are very evident; and the whole way, on both sides, is bordered
with a number of sepulchral chambers, containing recesses of various sizes for families,
or single individuals ; some appeared very small, and were cut in the exterior wall;
these were probably for very young children, and were afterwards sealed with a
marble tablet having an inscription.
The following lines, suggested by my excursions amongst all that now remains of
ancient Syracuse, may not be out of place here :
I.
Spirit of Greece! awake thy song once more,
And from the ruin-mantled deserts rise;
Send forth thy numbers on th’ Ortygian shore
And bid them live—as when the bird that dies
Bursts from its ashes with a wild surprise.
Return again ! for thou hast slumbering been—
Thy sun went down beneath the wintry skies
Of long dark ages, and its ray serene
Forsook thy cherished fanes as though it ne’er had been.
11.
Return again ! to that loved spot of thine,
For the dark olive shades thy temples o’er;
Round many a column wreathes the tangled vine
And silence triumphs on thy wave-washed shore!
Spirit! thy mystic grandeur I adore.
Speed thy white wings across the ocean foam—
Nor let the sunset streak thy path once more
As a bright weary bird that’s horn to roam,
But fold thy placid wings and seek thy Grecian home
N 2


111.
Hast thou forgotten every snow white fane ?
Shall pensive maiden fling her lyre aside ?
Shall never minstrel boy breathe song again,
As swells his bosom with romantic pride ?
O Spirit of the Greeks! thou dost abide
Somewhere, though hovering in the star-lit air;
And every lily at the waterside,
And every tall papyrus waving there,
Call on thy magic aid their sweetest song to bear !




THE GREEK THEATRE, SYRACU SE.


CHAPTER XXIII.
THEATRE—AMPHITHEATRE—CATACOMBS—CHAPEL OF SAN GIOVANNI—TOMB OF ST. MAR-
CIAN—CONVENT AND GARDEN OF THE CAPPUCCINI—FORTIFICATIONS—RETURN TO
SYRACUSE—COSTUME OF THE INHABITANTS.
“ I marked the beauties of the land and main,
Alone and friendless on the magic shore
Whose arts and arms but live in poets’ lore;
The past returned, the present seemed to cease,
And glory knew no clime beyond her Greece,
And yet unwearied still my footsteps trod
O’er the vain shrine of many a vanished god.”
The theatre, hewn out of a rock on the shelving side of the hill, beneath the nym-
phaeum, and commanding a view of the fertile valley of the Anapus, with the moun-
tain of Hybla in the distance, is still in tolerable preservation, though in parts en-
tirely overgrown with brushwood and wild flowers, over which innumerable butterflies
were chasing each other in the sultry sunshine of a Sicilian afternoon. Cicero called
this theatre “ Maximum and Diodorus thought it the most beautiful edifice of the
kind in the whole island. But little remains of the Scena; most of the materials
of which it was composed were used by Charles the Fifth, of Spain, in building
his fortifications around the modern city on the island of Ortygia. The shape of
this immense theatre is nearly a semicircle, the seats arranged one above another in
rows. A contrivance is visible in some parts for preventing the feet of one person
from interfering with the comfort of those in front, by the hack of each tier of seats
being slightly raised above the rest of the stone; the diameter is nearly 120 feet,
and persons have computed it to have held 40,000 spectators. It is generally con-
sidered to he the most ancient Greek theatre now in existence, and is built of wdiite
marble. The positions where poles for the support of an awning were fixed, are still
evident; and among the seats of the upper corridor is one having a Greek inscription
graven on the back, portions of which I perceived were easily legible. After climbing
among the seats of the theatre, and searching out every cranny and corner, I picked up


and brought away with me a bit of the marble —the pure and white Parian—that by it
I might still remember the great theatre of the Greeks. I would not have my
readers here condemn me for sacrilege, for there is no one deprecates the barbarian,
yet too frequent, custom of mutilating antique remains, more than myself; still I
considered the loose and scattered fragments of the theatre to be like the ears
after harvest —common property. Not far from this spot is the amphitheatre,
considered to be the work of the Romans, and to have been constructed when
the cities of Sicily were under the yoke of that nation. Until the commence-
ment of the last year, this vast building was almost entirely overgrown with
trees and a great part of it covered with earth. It has, however, been lately
excavated, and many perfect remains of antiquity have been brought to light. In
the centre is a naumachia, where probably the water fights were exhibited. The
corridors are covered, and almost entire. The low covered ways for the beasts are
also remaining; from these are several openings into the arena, from whence the
animals were let loose to the combat. The grand entrance by a flight of steps, which
we descended, is to the north, and we found ourselves in the centre of the amphi-
theatre, which sloped up gradually on all sides. At each end is an arch, formerly
covering the entrance to the arena, which together with portions of the columns and
mouldings of the ornamented parts of the building, are in good preservation ; the
aqueduct runs beneath one side of the walls towards the south. The next object
claiming our attention was the catacombs, or “Le Grotti di S. Giovanni,” situated
near the little chapel of St. John, and not far from the amphitheatre. On regaining
our footpath, my guide accosted a primitive looking monk, who was slowly wandering
along on a donkey. The beast appeared as much a recluse as its master, and now
and then stopped to crop the herbage, unchecked by the monk, who sat with arms
folded, leaving the donkey to pursue its own way homewards to the convent. He
saluted us as we approached, and I presently discovered that he had the charge of
the catacombs, towards which we bent our steps with some degree of alacrity, which
was also imparted to the beast by a good cudgel from the holy father. On reaching
the entrance to the catacombs we halted, and the monk having prepared an earthen
lamp with four wicks, lighted it and went forward, followed by Signor Polite and
myself. The antechamber is an oblong room cut out of the solid rock, from whence
many passages branch off in various directions; these again terminating in other
chambers, and sepulchres for whole families. At several intervals in the main street,
or passage, are holes communicating with the air above, probably cut to admit light,
and also to purify these abodes of the dead. Many of the sepulchres consist of hollow
coffins scooped out of the rock, and lying in rows parallel to one another, of various
sizes ; those intended for very young infants are mostly cut in the sides of the walls at
some height from the ground. In one of these chambers I particularly noticed a


THE ROMAN ANPHITHEATRE, SY RACUSE




rude painting of doves, which I should consider of great antiquity ; it much resembled
many of the Egyptian paintings in hieroglyphics, which are met with in the tombs
of that nation. I afterwards discovered several other remains of paintings on various
portions of the walls, rudely daubed on the smooth rock. One of these represented
a plain black cross, which is said to mark the burial-place of some of the early
Christians of Syracuse. These catacombs are amazingly extensive, and must have
been a prodigious work whenever they were excavated; hut history throws little
light on their origin. In many of the hollow coffins I met with hones of various
parts of the human body, mingled with heaps of mouldering dust that once, no doubt,
thronged the busy streets of the mighty city; hut now both city and people are laid
low. Many of these bones crumbled to dust on my exposing them to the light of
day when I regained the mouth of the catacombs, whilst others remained more per-
fect; and I added these precious fragments of the ancients to my store of relics.
The rib-bone of a Grecian baby, and the skull and finger joint of one who lived in
the days of mythology and renown, can awaken reflections more pleasing to me than
all the tawdry pageantry of a city carnival, or a modern rareeshow. A large sar-
cophagus standing in the centre of one of these underground chambers is worthy of
notice, and, no doubt, many more curious remains might be unfolded by a minute
examination of these singular subterranean dwellings.
On once more gaining the bright sunshine of a Sicilian sky, our eyes were so
dazzled that we could for some little time see nothing; and the cold damp chill of
the cavernous abode was exchanged for the sultry glow of the atmosphere above.
The chapel of St. John is a very old Gothic building, nearly in ruins, situated
close by the catacombs. Beneath it I was shown the underground chapel of the
primitive Christians. This spot was, no doubt, chosen in times of persecution from
the Pagans. The descent into it is by a narrow and retired staircase, and the whole
place has the appearance of great simplicity. The cornices of the pillars supporting
the roof bear the forms of the four Evangelists ; and a very old painting, and a de-
cayed wooden cross, constitute the altar-piece. In one corner are the remains of a
large baptismal font, I should suppose for adults, hut the place was so dark 1 could
scarcely distinguish it sufficiently to judge. But by far the most precious relic in
this chapel, in the opinion of the inhabitants, is the tomb of St. Marcian, the first
Christian bishop of Syracuse, whose remains lie in a small crypt covered by a stone.
These ruins when viewed from a little distance are very picturesque, and the richly
fretted gothic window frame adjoining the western wall of the building, peeping out
amongst the silvery foliage of the olive, and the dark green leaves of the fig-tree,
would alone make a charming vignette.
The convent of the Capuchins, beautifully situated on the brink of one of the


most romantic of the Latomies, next claimed our attention. It is a lovely spot, and
the view from the windows is delightful; overlooking a barrier of dark rocks at whose
base the blue waves of the Mediterranean are ever murmuring their gentle and melan-
choly music. Farther on is the Portus Minor, and the island of Ortygia, crowned
with the domes and churches of modern Siragusa ; to the right stretches out the classic
ground we had just returned from exploring, and if the happy and retired inmates
desire a change of the view, they have only to turn to those windows that overlook
•
the Latomie, which they have converted into a garden, and they will then have a
rich grove of orange, pomegranate, and mulberry-trees, clothing the steep sides of
this romantic subterranean garden ; and up above the margin of the descending cliffs,
like a dim and misty thing, but vast and grand, the mighty Etna bounds the
distant landscape. Such a scene under the blue and sunny skies of the south is, in-
deed, charming ; and after I had enjoyed it as long as my time would admit of, we
proceeded to pay a visit to the inmates of the convent, and a very nice set of monks
we found them. These Capuchins are principally the sons of respectable families,
who, after attaining to a certain mature age, renounce the world, and giving
their money to the convent, spend the remainder of their lives in religious duties, and
the various offices of the brotherhood. We first requested permission to visit the Garden
of the Latomie, which was immediately granted, and two of the monks accompanied
us thither. It is a wild and romantic place, and the hermit-like garb of the Capu-
chins seemed to accord admirably with the character of the scene. On the summit of
a vast isolated mass of rock, which projects nearly into the centre of the garden, are
a number of steps cut in the side, which must have been done before the excavations
were made around it, as there is now no possibility of ascending to the top. I remained
in the garden a short time to make a sketch of this charming spot, and I then ex-
pressed a wish to see the interior of the convent. Before leaving, the good-natured
monks feasted me on delicious pomegranates, which they plucked from the trees.
They were not contented with my eating them only, but insisted on my carrying
some away with me. One of these, which was the largest pomegranate I ever saw,
I preserved among my baggage until I reached England, when it was perfectly good.
I was disappointed in not seeing their cemetery, (where the dead bodies of the
monks in an embalmed state are dressed up and arranged in niches around the walls,)
as the party who had' the charge of the key of this place was gone to Siragusa, and
I was unable to gain access to it; but having seen something of the same kind in the
Floriana Convent at Malta, I was less anxious to view it than I should otherwise
have been. These Capuchin brethren treated me with the greatest kindness and
hospitality. I had no sooner entered the convent than I was met by the guardian,
who conducted me to one of their little cells, a small apartment furnished with a


GRADEN OF THE LATO MIE, AND CONVENT OF THE CAPUC HINS, SYRACUSE.




table, chairs, book-shelves, maps, and various articles for culinary and medicinal uses.
Here I was quickly surrounded by about a dozen of the monks, who insisted on in-
stalling me in a huge arm chair at the head of the table, and set before me a repast
of cakes, walnuts, and figs, with wine from the grapes of the Latomie. I pointed
out to them on the map of the world, my route from England, by the way of Gib-
raltar, which they seemed much pleased with, and they wanted me to come again
to Sicily at some future time. As I could not in courtesy take leave of these
kind people, (who crowded around me in their coarse garments, and hooded cowls,
with their long patriarchal beards, rosary, and miniature skull,) without returning in
some way their hospitality, I made a present to the guardian, who acts as treasurer of
the common property, and bade them all farewell at the outer gate of the convent.
Our way to Siragusa lay along the sea-shore by the Porta Minor. A little
lad, who had been visiting at the convent, accompanied us back to the city, and
made himself useful in assisting us to search for antiquities among the rubbish that
is continually washed down from the bank by the murmuring waves of the sea
beneath. We found many broken pieces of pottery, some of which bore ornamented
patterns upon them, exactly resembling the Graeco-Sicilian vases I had seen in
the museum in the morning.
We spent so much time in groping amongst the crumbling remains of the once
splendid Acradina, that the sun had set almost before we were aware of it, and the
dark purple of the eastern sky began to assume the shades of twilight. A warm and
mellow glow still rested on the Hyblean mount, and the far-distant hills stretching
away toward
“ That fair field of Enna,
Where Proserpine gathering flowers, herself a fairer flower,
By gloomy Dis was gathered,”
That long ridge of ground, once covered with the temples and towers of the five
proud cities, now rose in dark and bold relief against the western sky, all still, and
silent, and desolate. Fort Labdalus rising at the extremity like a cenotaph, to re-
mind the beholder of past realities that are now but as a tale that is told. Sweetly
and harmoniously sang the nightingales from the leafy shade of every spreading fig-
tree, as we passed along the road that leads by the solitary pillar of the temple of
Ceres. We soon reached the fortifications of modern Siragusa, which connect the
island of Ortygia to the main land. These immense walls, with ditches and draw-
bridges, are the work of Charles the Fifth, king of Spain. I passed through six separate
fortifications, each connected by a drawbridge across a wide moat, and under as many
stately arched gateways. We were now within the precincts of the city, and the
o


many peasants returning homewards with their mules and asses, the women wearing
over their heads bright scarlet and yellow shawls, so characteristic of the female
Siragusan peasants, made a gay and picturesque appearance as they moved along ?
merry and lighthearted, enjoying the cool air of the evening. After dining at the
Albergo del Sole, I rejoined my young guide, Salvador Polite, at his own house, to
see his collection of drawings and antiquities, from which I had promised to make
some purchases. Here I found his mother and two sisters, slight gentle creatures,
with brilliant dark eyes, and that ease and suavity of manners which is common to
the women of the south. Finding that I had been much stung by the ants and
mosquitoes during the day, they kindly procured me some oil to allay the irritation,
which I found of great service and comfort. I spent the remainder of the evening in
examining the antiquities and drawings, several of which my good-natured friend
presented to me, and which I treasure as graphic curiosities, as well as on account
of the donor. Some of his late father’s sketches exhibited considerable talent; and
a painting by him of a smiling Sicilian boy with curly hair, I thought remarkably good.
Having engaged Polite to procure passports for myself and old Alosco, previous to
our journey to Catania, on the following morning, I took leave of the family and
returned to my quarters for the night. The streets of modern Siragusa are narrow
and dirty, and the lower orders of the population exhibit a sickly and impoverished
appearance. As in most of the cities of southern Europe, there is in Siragusa an
incongruous mixture of poverty and wealth, which, to the eye of an Englishman,
is strikingly evident. Under a government approaching to despotism, and in a cli-
mate so luxurious as Sicily, the inhabitants have sunk into a careless indifference for
any thing beyond their own immediate wants, having no stimulus to enterprise or
scientific discovery. This is the character of the general mass ; but there are here and
there men who are deeply versed in classic lore, and who possess no common share of
intellect and intelligence. The Sicilians, if they had the advantages and opportunity,
might become famous in the arts and sciences, for there is a natural liveliness and
penetration in their character quite opposed to the sluggish perceptions of John Bulb
and which is often united to considerable talent, and a fervid imagination. The
costume of the gentlemen in Siragusa is French, but that of the ladies is peculiar
and pleasing. It consists of a mantle of black silk thrown over the head, and flowing
completely down to the feet, which envelopes the whole figure, and is confined by
one hand in a graceful manner at the waist. This simple and becoming garb I even
prefer to the modest “faldetta” of the ladies of Malta. In Catania and Messina it
does not appear to be worn at all. The Syracusans, generally, are not so handsome
as the inhabitants of the north of Sicily; but the tall figures and dignified costume
of the ladies give them an imposing and elegant appearance. In some of the people


I fancied I could trace the remains of the Greek countenance, and the profiles of
many of the young persons are quite Grecian.
Before retiring to rest, I threw open the window of my bed-chamber, and went into
the balcony to enjoy the calm loveliness of a still moonlight night; the pale beams
sparkling on the breathless, waveless surface of the broad harbour, and the surround-
ing shores pensive, silent, and forsaken. A magic spell bound me to the spot as I
gazed on those dim and classic shores, and it was with great reluctance I quitted the
scene to obtain a repose sufficient to prepare me for the fatiguing journey of the
next morning.
o 2


CHAPTER XXIV.
JOURNEY ON MULES TO CATANIA.
“ The blue
Bared its eternal bosom, and the dew
Of summer night collected still to make
The morning precious—Beauty was awake !”
On retiring to bed I had, as usual, put the windows wide open to render the room
sufficiently cool and airy; hut here I was unprovided, as in Malta, with mosquito
curtains, and I soon heard those nightly intruders come sallying in through the open
window, with their well known and much dreaded humming sound, and in another
moment they found me out and were commencing their unmerciful attacks. It was
totally useless to bury my head completely underneath the clothes, for they knew
where I was, and follow me they would, until being neither inclined to bear the
suffocation nor the bites, I jumped up and began to drive them out in good earnest;
when I imagined that I had got entirely clear of them, I closed the windows and
returning to bed managed to go to sleep, but all my attempts had been in vain, and
when I awoke in the morning my whole forehead was covered, and my eyes nearly
blinded, with their venomous bites. I would advise every one who may happen to
go to Siragusa, not to think of sleeping without mosquito curtains closely drawn,
particularly in the autumnal season.
Before sunrise old Giuseppe Alosco was at the door of the Albergo del Sole, wait-
ing with the mules, ready to accompany me to Catania. It was not long before we
were again passing the solitary pillar of the temple of Ceres, in the outskirts of the
city, with my baggage slung on Alosco’s mule, and enjoying the fresh and balmy air
of early day. The gold and crimson clouds soon began to gather in the east, and the
bright beams of the morning sun shone along the waters of the Mediterranean Sea,
bathing our path in its glory, as we bade farewell to Siragusa.
Our road for the first ten miles was tolerably good, commanding fine views of the
sea, the Scala Grseca, and the Campo Romano, with the promontory of Tapsos, (Mag


nesia,) stretching out before us, and the town of Augusta, (pronounced Aousta,) in the
distance. Etna, like a beacon, far beyond, pointed out the place of our destination 5
for the city of Catania lies at the foot of the mountain, close to the sea-shore, at the
end of the broad plain over which we were to travel for many miles. About six miles
from Siragusa, on the left hand side of the road, stand two pillars, which I understood
from my guide, mark the spot where some robbers were formerly executed. To the
right, farther on, are the remains of a trophy erected in honour of the Roman
general Marcellus. It consists of a ruin sixteen palmi high, on the top of which is a
fragment of a fluted column. By-and-by, we arrived at a new village, consisting of
a number of detached cottages on both sides of the way, and presenting a neater ap-
pearance than Sicilian villages do in general. At this place we halted for a few moments
to purchase some black grapes ; and as the road terminated soon afterwards, we struck
off into a narrow mule-track that led across a barren country, scattered with olive and
locust trees. Here we met an armed courier mounted on horseback, bearing the
Government letters to Siragusa. He accosted us with the usual salutation of “ Buon
giorno,” and passed on. In the days of Brydone, travellers thought it not safe to
pass along this road without an armed escort of guards, to protect them from the
attacks of the numerous banditti, who infested the woods and mountain-passes of this
picturesque land. But now it is only the couriers, who travel alone, and by night,
having important despatches, that make use of the sword and pistol; and to speak
from my own observation, I should imagine it safer for a traveller to stroll among the
hills and valleys of Sicily, and lie down to sleep at night with his baggage unsecured
by lock or key, as was the case with myself, than it would be for him to do the same
under similar circumstances in this country. I placed the utmost confidence in the
people; and though quite alone, and oftentimes at their entire mercy, a single fear
either for person or property, never once entered my mind for a moment. Their viva-
city and quick perception immediately discovered my feeling towards them, and in-
stead of abusing the confidence I placed in their kindness and protection, they every
where treated me with the greatest attention and hospitality. Perhaps my being so
young, and quite alone, might, in some measure, engage their good feelings ; and I
also attribute my reception, in a great measure, to always taking notice of them, and
treating them in a free and friendly manner, which has oftentimes won for me the
hospitality of these warm-hearted and sensitive people. I also found it necessary to
remember the adage, “He who goes to Rome must do as Rome doeswhich I am
sorry to say is little attended to by many of our countrymen who visit distant
lands, and who, instead of making friends of the people, excite their dislike and con-
tempt by their haughty and overbearing carriage : this, of course, subjects them to
frequent insult, pillage, and opposition ; and hence they return with a very unfavour-
able account of the inhabitants of a country, who, if they had altered their own con


duct towards them, they would have described under very different feelings and im-
pressions.
After watering our mules at a purling stream, over which was thrown a rustic
wooden bridge, shaded by gigantic and spreading walnut trees, we travelled on through
vineyards, and fields of pulse, and cotton, until we reached a wide barren track of
rugged lava, which appears to have issued from the mountain in some dreadful erup-
tion of past ages. We travelled over the rocky beds of this volcanic matter for some
miles, and at length reached the summit of an extensive sandy common which com-
manded a fine view. The soil was covered with various prickly and aromatic shrubs ;
and in the centre of this heath rose a solitary palm tree, that had, apparently, home
the blasts and winds for centuries. At every step of our mules, a little flock of grass-
hoppers rose into the air, and spreading their green and crimson wings, settled down
again as soon as the alarm had passed by. Beneath a flowery hank I saw basking
in the sun a very large and brilliantly-coloured lizard ; it was about seven inches
long, and of the most exquisite shades of golden green imaginable. I tried to catch
it, but the bright-eyed lacerta was too quick for me, and his shining and slender
form shrank silently beneath the brambles with the rapidity of lightning. Shortly after,
we crossed another stream, bounded with rose-coloured oleanders in full blossom,
that grew luxuriantly as far as the vivifying influence of the moisture extended.
The dark green dragon-flies were darting around every leaf, and the little birds had
come down to drink of the cooling stream, where we also halted to slake our thirst.
In one of the tanks where we previously rested, I found a number of leeches, and
some curious aquatic beetles ; but as Alosco appeared shocked at my desire to catch
them, I for once yielded to his feelings, and we went on without either the beetles
or the leeches, although the latter would have proved serviceable to me afterwards
when at Giardini. About noon we passed a lettiga, which is the national travelling
carriage in the more rugged and mountainous parts of Sicily ; it is made to convey
tw r o persons, and is in shape like the body of a vis-a-vis. It is also provided with
strong poles, which are carried between two mules ; a third mule goes before accom-
panied by a muleteer on foot, armed with a stick ten feet long to guide the mules,
and another muleteer mounted and riding at the head of the cavalcade to pioneer the
way. It is gaily lined, and painted outside with a variety of gaudy colours, often
the representation of some favourite saint. It goes up and down over every hill,
however steep, and makes the whole neighbourhood resound with the tinkling of
thirty-two bells, which are fixed to the harness and trappings of the mules. I should
imagine the motion to be very unpleasant and fatiguing, and the jingling of the
numerous bells prevents the muleteers from hearing when called to, and of course
renders conversation very difficult.


We had now proceeded twenty-four miles on our journey, and a steep and winding
descent through an olive wood brought us to the little village of Scaro d’ Agnuni,
consisting of six or seven fishermen’s huts, near the sea-shore, at the southern ex-
tremity of the vast plain over which the remainder of our journey lay, and which
stretches northward beyond the river Giaretta, to the hills that skirt the base of
Etna. The olive trees that formed this straggling wood were large and branching,
and the myrtle bushes were as abundant as the blackberry and hawthorn in more
northern climates. Beneath the trees the bright autumnal crocus lifted its starlike
and leafless form, bordering our path with its lilac petals.
We halted at the village, and my guide, who seemed well acquainted with the place,
entered one of the miserable looking huts, and presently came out again smiling,
and significantly pointing to his mouth, said to me, “ Mange Seigneur, —mange
you, mange me, mange moolos,” in his broken English. Now old Alosco felt very
proud of his English, and it would have offended him highly to have appeared unable
to comprehend the whimsical jargon he used to address to me during the whole ot our
journey ; —nevertheless he was a quiet and good-natured man, so I let him have
his own way, and assented to all he said by a very gracious “ Ce,” repeated two
or three times in a quick conversational manner, which satisfied him admirably.
This, accompanied with an occasional smile, and a nod of assent, was sufficient to
ensure the esteem of old Alosco ; and he would go on chattering about every place
and every thing in a language intelligible only to himself, whilst I was me-
chanically uttering the C note, and giving a nod every three minutes. When he
came out of the cottage, he appeared in high spirits, and I conjectured he had met with
something excellent to provide me with for my dinner.
Imagine my astonishment when I found that they were beans —horse-beans that had
so raised the old man’s pleasant sensations respecting the meal; a large plateful ot
them, swimming in oil, was presently brought outside the cottage door, and two


broken chairs, one of which served as a table, were set down under the shady side
of the wall. Alosco was mightily surprised to find that I could not eat the beans ;
and after they had ransacked the cottage a second time, I made a tolerable repast
on some little anchovies, which, like the beans, were swimming in oil, and out of
which I was compelled to drag them with my fingers. Besides these, there nas
black bread, and lastly eggs, broken and beaten up in a plate, which I ate with
a wooden fork. This reminded me of the Devonshire proverb of “ eating whitepot
with a knitting needle,” and was certainly no easy matter. But this was the
least annoying part of the feast, for the bees and mosquitoes swarmed around me
so numerously, that I was every instant in dread of being stung by some of them.
Good Syracusan wine was next measured out and brought to me in one of the
strangest jugs I ever saw. Old Alosco drank my health, and I poured out a cupful,
and offered it to the host, who was standing by, according to the custom of the
peasantry. Before my worthy guide had finished his beans, a smart lettiga arrived
with two gentlemen of Siragusa, and their muleteers, bound on the same road as
ourselves. Observing that I was a foreigner, they bowed politely to me, invited me
to partake of some refreshments which they had brought with them, and offered
me a seat in the lettiga. This latter favour I declined, but I accepted a piece of
o-oat’s cheese and some sweet fennel, which the Sicilians use as we do celery. I
O
soon became acquainted with the new comers. When the mules had rested for
a sufficient time, the lettiga was suspended, and by mutual consent we agreed to
travel together to Catania.
We were now a rather formidable cavalcade. A muleteer rode before, carrying a
long stick as pioneer ; then came the two mules with their thirty-two bells jingling then-
music till its echo died away among the distant hills ; the lettiga with its gay
colouring, and the two gentlemen vis-a-vis ; and lastly, old Alosco and myself on
our brave mules. We occasionally made slight deviations from the road to pluck
some attractive blossom, and then galloped back to join the equipage and to present
the flower to the occupants of the lettiga. It was a bright and lovely afternoon ;
all the broad plain seemed bathed in sunlight. Etna was before us. The
Saracenic domes of the fair city of Catania, glittered like white specks at its feet,
and the blue waves of the sea, gently met the yellow sandy bank that lay to our
right, along which I occasionally strayed away from the party to gather the purple
shells that strewed its surface. And far away to the left were the hills of Enna,
(now Castro Giovanni,) and the slowly flowing Giaretta winding its way through
flowery meads, and intersecting the broad plain till its waters mingled with the sea.
In many places among the sands, I noticed a prickly species of Solano, bearing
round seeds of a bright golden colour. These, my guide informed me, were the
“ porno del’ amo,” and pointing to the projecting knob in his throat, commenced


giving me an incoherent story about Adam and Eve, which, as I understood it, runs
thus that these fruits were so called from their supposed resemblance to the apples
of Paradise eaten by our first parents, that Eve swallowed hers, but that the portion
which Adam ate stuck in his throat, which caused that small projection in the
windpipe of men to this day, and which is a memorial of the disobedience of Adam,
that is entailed on his descendants to the end of time. Many fine bulbous plants
also grow on the plain, and myrtles, canes, and aloes spring spontaneously from
the soil.
We had now to cross the river Giaretta, (anciently the Simetus,) in a flat-bottomed
terry-boat, almost resembling a raft, into which mules, lettiga, and passengers
all entered, and we were soon towed to the other side by means of a rope sus-
pended from poles across the river. The stream was not very wide, but of con-
siderable depth, and bordered with sedge and rushes. It is remarkable for its
amber, which is collected in considerable quantities at its mouth, where it is
cast up on the sandy beach that runs between it and the sea. This amber is
said to be the finest in the world, and fetches a very high price. Quantities of it
are taken to Catania, where it is manufactured into a variety of beautiful trinkets.
Saints, crosses, necklaces, rings, smelling-bottles, and brooches, all exquisitely
wrought, are from thence exported to Messina, Palermo, and various other parts
of Sicily, and form a considerable article of traffic amongst the ingenious artificers
of Catania. One reason of the superior beauty of the Catanese amber is owing
to the bright iridescent reflections which give it oftentimes a beauty little inferior
to that of the opal. I have seen specimens of a deep blood red, olive green,
black, and also rose colour, but these are very rare, and are sold at enormous prices.
As we drew nearer to Catania, the mule track was exchanged for a tolerable road,
and here we encountered upwards of 200 workmen, men and boys, all engaged in
forming the new road to Lentini, which will hereafter form the line of communication
between Catania and Siragusa. It is to be constructed of lava, and huge heaps of that
substance in good sized blocks, are laid at equal distances to form the basis of the road.
This is afterwards to be filled up and covered with earth and gravel, so that it will
have the appearance of a raised tram-road extending across the plain. We now had
a fine view of the numerous domes of Catania, which presented a novel and imposing-
appearance. After crossing a track of black lava, the production of the melancholy
eruption of the mountain in 1669, we entered the city through a magnificent gateway
built of marble and lava.


CHAPTER XXV.
CITY OF CATANIA—FERDINAND AND ISABELLA—ILLUMINATIONS—ABBATE’S HOTEL.
“ Skirting the midnight ocean’s glimmering flow,
The city’s moonlit spires and myriad lamps,
Like stars in a sub-lunar sky did glow.”
We had no sooner entered the gate of the city, than we encountered a vast concourse
of people. Indeed, the whole population seemed to be abroad upon some occasion
of rejoicing, and as we proceeded along the principal street towards the Piazza
del Duomo, we met numbers of carriages and other equipages driving about rapidly
in all directions. Not being able to account for so bustling and animated a scene,
I made inquiries as soon as we reached the hotel, and found that the king and
queen of the Two Sicilies, Ferdinand and Isabella, had arrived during the day from
Messina, and that there was a general holiday on their account. Moreover, my
new landlord, to whom I bore a letter of introduction from Polite, (who is his
nephew,) also informed me that a grand illumination was to take place on the same
night, and a display of fireworks in honour of their majesties. “ Abbate,” for that
was my landlord’s name, gave me to understand that his hotel was unusually full
of Sicilian noblemen and gentlemen, and that some prince had just arrived, to whom
he must pay extraordinary attention, but that there was a room vacant at the very
top of the building which I might occupy, and ordered an attendant to show me
(the Seigneur Inglese) every possible attention. After a journey of about half a
dozen flights of stone steps, I reached my night’s quarters, followed by old Alosco
bearing my luggage. My first business was to pay the old man, and dismiss the
mules, as he intended travelling back by moonlight as far as Scaro d’ Agnuni. The
old man stooped to kiss my hand, and, after beseeching a blessing from the saints to
rest upon me, bade me a reluctant farewell. The Sicilians are a grateful people
when kindly treated; but, naturally sensitive and proud of what their country once
was, they cannot brook insult and hauteur. After taking a meal in my apartments,
I sallied forth to see the illuminations that starred the long vistas of this beautiful


and extensive city with myriads of sparkling lamps that covered even the domes of
the convents and churches. The effect was so novel, so different from any thing in
this country, that at first I almost felt bewildered as I strolled along street after
street, admiring the tasteful display of lamps hung beneath the serene sky of a
southern climate, which rendered their effect far more charming. Carriages filled
with elegantly dressed ladies rolled along the streets, and the people crowded the
foot-paths, and sat in groups outside the doors of their shops and dwellings, smoking,
and chattering to each other very merrily. As I passed one of these groups, I heard
some one calling, “ Seigneur Inglese,” and on looking round I discovered one of
my two friends, with whom I had travelled in the lettiga ; he seemed much pleased at
seeing me again, and, setting a chair for me, insisted on my forming one of the group
assembled around the door. As I was, however, anxious to make the best of my time,
I soon took leave of my new acquaintance, and seeing a number of persons pouring
out of one of the largest churches, I went in, just in time to see the illuminations of
the interior before they were extinguished. A mass had just been performed, at
which the king and queen had been present, and the effect of the hanging lamps before
the high altar was very fine. Instead of the vehicles of every description that
traverse the streets of London on similar occasions, the only equipages I saw were
open carriages with two or three horses abreast; most of them were too shabby to
appear in this country, but were probably considered very grand by the Sicilians.
The grotesque appearance of the footmen, and the awkward look and clumsy “ tout
ensemble” of the equipages, amused me not a little as they drove rapidly by, following
each other in quick succession. They were mostly filled with ladies elegantly dressed
in the Frank costume, without bonnets, and having their arms only covered by
delicate silk mittens. There were many very handsome women amongst them, much
handsomer than any I had seen at Siragusa. Catania is the chief residence of the
nobility of Sicily, being much preferred by them on account of its fine climate, and
its proximity to Etna. Around the public statues coloured glass lamps, richly
painted, were hung at regular intervals, and flowers were garlanded in festoons
about them. The most general mode of illumination appeared to he by tumblers
filled with red and green water, behind which were placed small oil lamps.
In the Square of the Elephant, I observed several stalls not unlike the ginger-beer
and soda-water carts in London. The people were drinking what appeared to me
to be water, which was obtained from barrels which men swung backwards and
forwards all the time, like the rocking of a cradle. I was curious to know what
this liquor could be, when laying down a small copper coin, I was immediately at-
tended to. The barrels were swung round again, and a glass of the decoction
handed to me, when to my surprise I found it to consist only of iced water, strongly
flavoured with fennel juice. This, as I afterwards understood, is a favourite beverage
r 2


of the Sicilians, particularly on holiday occasions ; and though not very palatable to
us, yet I have no doubt that it is of use in allaying thirst.
One of the most striking objects in the Piazza del Duomo, is the obelisk of red
Egyptian granite, placed on the hack of an elephant, sculptured in black lava, which
ornaments the centre of the square.
The elephant is said to be the work of the middle ages, and the obelisk to have
been sculptured by the ancient inhabitants of Catania, in imitation of those of the
Egyptians. Both are in good preservation, and form a striking object on entering
the square; the base of the pedestal on which they are mounted bears a date of 1736,
with an Italian inscription. On my return from the illuminations, I witnessed a dis-
play of fireworks and sky-rockets from the Strada del Corso, and afterwards returned
to my hotel, the “ Corona d’ Oro,” where I was conducted to my apartment, and
throwing open the window, I went out into the balcony, which was at a giddy height
and only protected by a slight iron railing. I had a fine moonlight view of the bay,
and the fearful promontory formed by the overwhelming eruption of lava, in 1669,
which destroyed a great portion of the city. It rises black and rugged, and descends
abruptly into the sea. Nature in this instance has done for the inhabitants of Catania
what their art was unable to accomplish. Formerly they were destitute of a harbour,
till the lava of 1669, running into the sea, produced the enormous mole which at
present renders the port secure and capacious enough for small vessels. Despite the
mosquitoes, I lay down on my humble bed, and soon fell into a profound sleep.




ETNA FROM CA TA NIA.


CHAPTER XXVI.
CATANIA—PRINCE BISCARPS MUSEUM—CATHEDRAL—GREEK THEATRE—SUBTERRANEAN
AMPHITHEATRE—ANCIENT BATHS, ETC.
“ I stood within the city disinterred,
And heard the autumnal leaves like light footfalls
Of spirits passing through the streets; and heard
The mountain’s slumbering voice at intervals,
Thrill through those roofless halls.”
Catania, it is said, was anciently called Catsetna, or the town of Etna, and is reported
by the early historians to have been founded by the Cyclops, who were the fabled
inhabitants of the mountain. Others inform us that it was founded by a colony from
Chalcis, 753 years before Christ. Had I not been better instructed, I should have
concluded that it derived its name from the numberless cats that nightly peram-
bulate the walls and terraces of this extensive city. It was moonlight, and the
pale beams shone into ray open window as I awoke from my sound and refresh-
ing sleep, serenaded by the most dismal and hideous caterwaulings imaginable.
I lay still, hoping it might cease, but the chorus grew louder; and, as it showed
no signs of abatement, I jumped up, and going out into the balcony, sent the whole
multitude of tabbies, toms, tortoiseshells, and grimalkins, scampering over the roof
tops, by a volley of such small missiles as my bedroom afforded. Away they went,
and the distant crash of falling tiles, and the faint echo of renewed music elsewhere,
gave me the cheering assurance of their departure from the chosen spot beneath my
window. I arose early on the following morning, and sallied out along the Strada
del Corso, the principal street to the north-east of the city, towards Giarra, for the
purpose of making a sketch of Mount Etna, which I took from the open square that
terminates the street. The lava is again visible here descending abruptly to the
sea, and the view of the distant mountain, and the belted zones of vegetation that
clothe its base, form a charming and magnificent feature in the landscape. I re-
turned to the hotel, where I made a hasty breakfast, and after purchasing some speci-
mens of amber and lava from the artisans, who found their way into my bedroom


uninvited, and who most politely entertained me during my meal with a sight of
their ingenious trinkets, I engaged a guide, and started at once for Prince Biscari’s
museum, which I understood contained many objects worthy of notice. The collec-
tion was formed hy the Principi Ignazio Eiscari, an enlightened and patriotic noble-
man, who took great interest in the welfare and antiquities of his country. In the
entrance court is a fine column of the Greek theatre, and an ancient obelisk of granite,
somewhat similar to that upon the elephant in the Piazza del Duomo —sarcophagi of
lava—a vase ornamented with bassi relievi, also of lava, and an immense pair of antique
jars of coarse Sicilian pottery. Under the middle entrance is a statue of Biscari
himself, and several other Sicilian worthies. One of them representing a doctor, whose
face is dreadfully distorted by having received a kick from a mule, is very ludicrous,
but uncommonly well managed. Among the collection of antiques in the long
gallery, are two Bacchi, a beautiful sleeping female in variegated marble, portions of
the tesselated pavements found in the ancient baths, tables inlaid with Sicilian and
African marble, three sarcophagi of terracotta, and a basso relievo of St. Nicholas,
modelled in clay, from Caltagirone, a market town in the interior, long and justly
celebrated for its manufactory of figures in terracotta. A large collection of Roman
penates, a curious harlequin with moving limbs ; also a fine fragment of the head
of Medusa, and upwards of 400 Grseco-Sicilian vases, some of them of vast size, and
all beautifully shaped, and tastefully painted and decorated. One of them in parti-
cular is very highly prized for having a white ground, a circumstance w'hich is seldom
met with amongst these antique vases. In the other apartments there is a good
collection of lavas from Etna and Lipari, a number of shells and corals from the
Mediterranean ; a great variety of lavas and marbles finely inlaid in birds, flowers,
&c.; a large piece of variegated brown and green wood opal from Palermo; impres-
sions of leaves in sulphur, from the crater of Etna, and a collection of calculi from
Trapani, in one case there is a most remarkable variety of lusus naturae, some of
which I noted down. There is a calf with one eye, (probably an iEtnean Cyclops!)
and an enormous tongue ; calves with two heads ; an exact mermaid, and a variety
of children whose monstrous and unnatural appearances are not to be described.
Returning by another gallery of antiques I was principally struck with the following
articles of curiosity. A marble bust of Scipio Africanus, and another of Seneca; a
beautiful cupid; a Venus similar to the one at Syracuse, but having a head; another
fine Venus ; some beautiful busts, with drapery of coloured marble; an infant lying
on a cushion of lava ! (modern;) a collection of very old drawings, and a basso relievo
of the battle of Constantine, a. d. 312. There is also a room filled with curious
bronzes, and a philosophical cabinet which contains two exquisite ancient lachryma-
tories of iridescent coloured glass. I was much disappointed in not being able to see
the coins, of which there is a very valuable collection. The entire museum indicates


considerable taste and neatness in its arrangement, and certainly reflects great credit
and honour on its enlightened founder.
My next visit was to the cathedral. It was originally built, and the see founded,
by Ruggiero, a.d. 1193. The present edifice is one of the most chaste and beautiful
I have ever seen. Twelve apostles of gold stand on the high altar. Along the
facades are several columns taken from the scena of the ancient theatre. The
cupola is very fine; the frescos on the ceiling are from scripture subjects, and to the
left of the altar-piece is a very good painting of St. Agatha by Paladino. The
arabesque work on the doors of the grand entrance is by the celebrated Gagini. In
a chapel to the north of the choir there are some fine specimens of alabaster and
lava. One piece of red lava is equally beautiful with the “ rosso antico,” though
somewhat paler in colour. In a little capella stands the shrine and tomb of St.
Agatha; a small lamp burns night and day before it, and many are the genuflexions
that are made to this their favourite saint by the deluded inhabitants. In the same
chapel is the tomb of the King of Spain, who was buried here in 1495. This
monumental tomb is built of marble, and represents him as a boy of about eleven
years of age, in a kneeling attitude, and attended by a pretty page some years
younger. The monument of Petrus Galetti, Bishop of Catania in 1757, is inlaid with
coloured marble, and deserves attention on account of the beauty of the materials,
and the tasteful design of the whole composition. The tomb of Conrado Deodata,
a priest, who died in 1828, is a very beautiful modern erection ; it is of lava, inlaid
with red figures, and supported by two bronze sphinxes. In the sacristy adjoining
the cathedral is an old painting which represents the dreadful eruption of 1669, when
the lava ran from Monte Rossi, just above Nicolosi, and overwhelmed the city of
Catania.
The monastery of the Benedictines deserves especial notice, on account of having
escaped the lava ot 1669 in an almost miraculous manner, the stream of molten fire
having appeared within five yards of the edifice, and then turned off to the left, and
thus preserved it and its inmates from certain and irreparable destruction. The
chapel of the monastery contains a fine organ, some paintings by Cavalucci, and a
large and valuable museum, all of which I was disappointed in seeing, as the king
had taken up his abode at the convent during the few days of his stay in Catania,
The Greek theatre is approached by a descent of steps of lava, which, with the remains
of the edifice itself, have been excavated from the soil and ashes that so long covered
them. On arriving at the entrance to the theatre, I was accosted by a Maltese
priest, a stout old gentleman, who had been puffing and blowing for some time in
endeavouring to overtake me. Despite his canonicals, I thought he looked like a
very jolly fellow, and finding that he could speak a little English, I accepted his
offer to join him in his perambulation, as his visit to Catania was, like mine, one of


pleasure. I told him that I had recently been at Malta, which pleased him amaz-
ingly. He gave me his name and the address of his residence at Senglea, and
begged that if ever I went to Malta again, I would call upon him. The old gentle-
man took my arm, and asked me if I was a Catholic. I replied in the negative,
when he said, “ Catholics and Protestants are all one.” It would be well if every
one were as charitable in his religious opinions as this priest; it might surely
serve to prevent the innumerable contentions and the bitter enmity that reflects such
disgrace upon mankind in this and other countries. My good friend told me that
he had attempted to climb Vesuvius, which is about one-third of the height of Etna,
and that he was too fat to get to the top ! He, however, proposed to venture the
ascent of Etna, and informed me that if I thought of doing so, three French gentle-
men who were staying at the Corona d’ Oro, where I had taken up my quarters,
would also be very willing to form a party. This was agreed upon, as 1 had intended
ascending alone, with guides, from Nicolosi, and I regarded the prospect of having
companions with me as most fortunate, besides rendering the expenses of the ascent
considerably less ; but I afterwards found that this arrangement did not turn out so
fortunate or agreeable as I had anticipated, —but more of this hereafter. We arranged
matters so that our survey of the remaining antiquities should terminate at three
o’clock, and that after dining at the Corona d’ Oro, we should all start for Nicolosi
at four precisely. After exploring the ruins of the Greek theatre, of which three
corridors and seven rows of seats are distinguishable, we turned our steps towards
the immense subterranean amphitheatre, erected by the Roman colony which was
established by Augustus in this city. It was originally built on the side of a hill,
but the various eruptions of Etna have so altered the appearance of things that
it has long since been buried under ground, and would most probably have remained
so until this day, had not the Prince Ignazio Biscari excavated a large portion of
it, in hopes of finding a quantity of Roman antiquities. The circumference is said
to be about 1000 feet: several of the corridors are cleared; they are very lofty, and
are arched over at the top. The lowest range exhibits vestiges of the dens for the
wild beasts, and the doorways through w’hich they were admitted into the arena are
also visible. We groped our way through these damp subterranean passages, our
guide carrying a large flambeau in his hand, which I made him poke into all the
corners and strange places. In one apartment I met with a spring of water that
trickled along through the rubbish, and in another part I found some fine remains of
the Roman pillars and lofty arched doorways of this magnificent amphitheatre. The
ancient baths are situated under the duomo or cathedral, and are entered by a narrow
winding flight of stone steps, closed at the top by an iron gate. These are termed
“ Bagno Caldi,” or cold baths. Our guide again lighted his flambeau, and we once
more found ourselves in the subterranean chambers of the ancients. These baths


are very perfect, and a stream of water still runs along an aqueduct through them,
which might easily supply the baths, and make them again subservient to their
former purpose. This aqueduct flows under ground for a considerable distance, and
then rises again to the surface of the earth near the quay, where it supplies the
“ nymphae modernse ” with a clear stream of water for their household purposes. A
short walk took us to the remains of the “ Bagno Freddi,” which are situated on the
opposite side of the lava of 1669, and like those under the Duomo, have also been
excavated by the Prince Biscari. In these vapour baths the antechamber and furnaces
still remain. A small apartment (probably a vapour bath for one person) is tolerably
perfect, and the fireplaces are discernible beneath the cisterns for heating the water.
Near these furnaces balls of lava have been found, which circumstance has led some
persons to imagine that they were used to keep up the heat of the stoves.
Piioi to the dreadful eruption of 1669, a castle stood upon the sea-shore near the
ancient walls of the city, having at its side a translucent spring of the purest water, but
when the lava which ran from Monte Rossi accumulated till it rose above the walls,
which were sixty feet in height, it poured over them with great violence, and ran out
into the sea, forming the mole which I have before spoken of. Fortunately, however,
for the inhabitants of the city, the lava flood left a small opening near the half-buried
castle, which enabled the Prince Biscari to excavate it in such a manner that he had
the satisfaction of restoring to his countrymen their long lost and valued spring of
water. We descended a flight of sixty-three steps, cut in the solid lava, which led us
down to the spring. The water w r as pellucid and clear, and the numerous women and
girls filling their stone jars at its source, and the various groups we met balancing
their picturesque water-pots on their heads, filled with the water of the Etnsean spring,
showed what a boon this recovered spot is to the people. My old companion
the priest, now began to feel very tired, and as it was well nigh time that we
should return to the albergo, to make the necessary preparations for the anticipated
ascent of Mongibello, we hastened back, and bidding my friend a temporary adieu, I
ordered dinner to be got ready immediately, and while it was preparing, I packed up
my luggage. My dinner was quickly brought up into my bedroom, for it is the
custom in Sicily to set apart a room for each guest in an albergo, in which they both
eat and sleep, and in short make it their “sanctum sanctorum.” During the time the
guest occupies this room, the door of it is kept locked by the master of the house, and
whenever the occupant goes out, the key is deposited in the hall until his return.
My bed-room, like most others in Sicily, was paved with large red tiles, which rendered
it very cool and comfortable. The houses in Catania are all built of stone, in a very
strong and secure manner, as a supposed safeguard against the earthquake shocks, and
the uncertain and dangerous eruptions of the mountain. My repast was simple, and
consisted, as usual, of a dish of maccaroni, very nicely cooked, with the native
Q


appendage of Tomata sauce, some excellent fish, and, what surprised me a little, a
large lump of frozen snow on a plate. My dessert consisted of grapes, walnuts,
figs, and apples—these latter tasted very much like peaches, and had a more
delicious flavour than any I ever tasted in England. A very large glass tumbler
was set on the table with the wine, and I imagined that it would form an excellent
wine cooler. I therefore placed a small glass inside it, and filled up the outside with
the frozen snow, not knowing at the time what other use to make of this luxury. The
wine thus iced was delightfully refreshing, and seemed to quench the annoying thirst
under which I had suffered whilst walking in the hot and dusty streets of Catania.
The bread I found to be the very best in all Sicily; it is almost as white as the snows
of Etna, and is made in the form of oval cakes, baked very crisp. The commoner
sorts of bread are made up into large open rings about half a foot in diameter, and
numbers of these fantastical loaves may be seen hanging in bunches upon forked
sticks on the outside of almost every cottage door.
The arches of the ancient underground structures of Catania are wholly formed of
tiles placed alternately between pieces of lava. Ancient bassi relievi are also fre-
quently met with, and several fine examples of this mural sculpture have been dis-
covered in the subterranean baths. The chief trade of Catania is in its exports,
which consist of amber, lava, fruit, silk, timber, and snow, which latter article is ob-
tained from the heights of Etna, and supplies not only all Sicily, but likewise Malta
and Calabria with this healthful commodity. In perambulating the streets of this fine
city, the traveller cannot fail to notice the strange admixture of poverty and splendour
which they present. The proudest palace and the lowest hovel may be included in
one glance, and the most magnificent buildings, on which no expense whatever seems
to have been spared, are hidden or disfigured by wretched habitations being placed
beside them. The streets, though wide, and running at right angles with each other,
in many instances are not kept carefully clean, and the tottering condition of many of
the houses, and the numerous cracks and fissures observable in the walls in the Strada
Etnea, which leads towards the mountain, speak in strong and forcible language of the
volcanic fires that slumber beneath them, and that perhaps the fiery streams may
again burst forth from some new crater, high up in the mountain, and pour down an-
other sulphurous flood of lava upon the fated city. The volcanic eruptions of Etna
have taken place at promiscuous intervals for a great number of centuries, and Dr.
Gemmellaro of Nicolosi, who has closely watched and examined the mountain, has
published a very curious and interesting table, giving an account of all the various
eruptions, from the earliest known period of time. For several years past the moun-
tain fires have slumbered, and at the time of my visit not even a wreath of curling-
smoke was visible at Catania from its lofty and snow-clad summit.
The population of the city is averaged at about 30,000. It is the favourite residence


of the Sicilian nobility, and in size ranks as the third city of the island, yielding the
palm in this respect only to Palermo and Messina. The women of Catania, especially
those of the peasant class, are not so handsome as those of Messina, but many of the
boys are prettily featured, and have fine expressive dark eyes. I was much amused
by the water-carts of Catania ; instead of having holes drilled at the back of the
machine, a leathern hose is used with a head attached to it, which a man moves about
as though he were handling a watering-pot, and verifying the proverb that “Lazy
people take the most pains.”
Q 2


CHAPTER XXVII.
NICOLOSI—EXPEDITION TO ETNA.
“ The Port capacious and secure from wind,
Is to the foot of thundering Etna joined,
By turns a pitchy cloud she rears on high,
By turns hot embers from her entrails fly,
■ And flakes of mountain flame that lick the sky.”
About four o’clock, p. m. our party for the mountain was assembled at the door of
Abbate’s hotel in the Strada del Corso, and a supply of wine, cold turkeys and
bread, having been provided for us by our civil landlord, we had only to prepare
suitable clothing to protect us from the intense cold which we expected to encounter
in the upper regions of Etna. My Maltese friend had doffed his ecclesiastical robes,
and three-cornered silk hat, and now looked very jolly in a light shooting coat, and
a fur cap, with a variety of warm comfortable things in the shape of worsted stock-
ings, gloves, wrappers, &c. Our party consisted of the three French gentlemen
before mentioned, the priest, and myself. We travelled as far as Nicolosi, a small
village situated about twelve miles up the mountain, in an open carriage drawn by
three horses abreast. A little bare-footed boy stood behind, and served all the
purposes of a handsome English tiger. We drove along the Strada Etnea, which
leads towards the mountain, from which point its stupendous base begins to rise,
and it seems as though, from this spot, one might pursue the path to its very summit.
But the illusion soon fades as the traveller advances onwards. Our route now
became steep and winding as we journeyed up through gardens of orange and lemon
trees, interspersed with the date-palm, the aloe, and the bergamot. The vine-
yards are fruitful and luxuriant, and the grapes and wine of Etna are by many
considered superior to any in Sicily. The country, as far up as Nicolosi, is called
the first or fruitful region of the mountain; after which comes the “ Bosco,” or
“ Regione Sylvosaand lastly the third region, consisting of scoriae, ashes and
snow, which leads to a platform on the summit of which is the crater. From the


road which ascends from the Strada Etnea, we looked back for a few moments,
and enjoyed a most charming and picturesque view of the city and bay, and the
distant shores towards Siragusa. The day had been uncommonly sultry, the
afternoon was lovely, and as yet everything looked fair and favourable for our
ascent, as the sun set over the plains below us with every indication of fine weather.
But the climate in the valleys and in the lofty and exposed regions of Etna is so
totally different, that no just criterion can be formed from the one of the other. To
the right of the road are the remains of an aqueduct which formerly conveyed some
of the streams that take their rise higher up the mountain to the service of the
inhabitants that dwell at its base. A sharp turn in the road led us between two
fine obelisks of lava; their bases bear inscriptions, but I was unable to learn to what
they had reference. They appeared to be modern erections. Here we met a number
of female peasants coming down a steep path, laughing and singing their wild musical
songs. They carried their oriental-looking jars of water on their heads, balancing
them with that dexterous nicety, so gracefully, and yet so carelessly managed by the
Sicilian women.
The olive trees at this part of the ascent are very beautiful, and the general aspect
of the vegetation in the lower region of the mountain is rich and luxuriant; and
although from the long continued drought I saw it to very great disadvantage,
yet the immense size of piany of the trees, serves to show the fertility and richness
of the volcanic soil. Numerous villages lie scattered about this region of the mountain,
and the vineyards and olive trees yield their produce to an industrious set of inha-
bitants, who show more activity and spirit than the people who reside in the less
healthy plains of the south, where malaria and the extreme heat of the sun in the
summer and autumn months render them very indolent and inactive. In one of
these villages, the church dedicated to St. Antonio formed a picturesque object; the
spire was gaily ornamented, being composed of painted tiles of all colours, which
impart to it a bright and cheerful appearance, contrasting well with the more sombre
tints of the surrounding scenery on the mountain. The next village, Praghi, is built
of lava, and the gloom it occasions is in a great measure relieved by the opposition
of white stone ornaments and porticos. The inhabitants of this region are healthy
and strong, and seemed to enjoy the jokes we played upon them as we passed
through their sequestered little villages. We reached Nicolosi soon after dark, and
could discern the huge shadowy form of Monte Rossi rising abruptly above the
village. Over the immense declivity of Etna, are distributed a number of smaller
mountains, all having regular conoid or hemispherical outlines, which are frequently
covered with trees, giving them the appearance of small parks scattered here and
there over the wide ascending surface of Etna. Every fresh eruption gradually
forms one of these smaller mountains, and the torrents of liquid lava do not, as is


supposed by many persons, burst out from the summit or grand crater of Etna, but
after shaking the mountain for some time, and producing volumes of smoke and
ashes, the lava forces itself out at some near aperture in the side of the declivity,
and the quantities of stones and ashes ejected by the eruption form these conical
mountains, which present so curious and important a feature on the mighty steeps
of Mongibello.
At Nicolosi we left onr carriage and horses, which were to await our return from
the crater, to convey us hack to Catania on the following afternoon. We proposed
to make a night ascent, in order to witness the sunrise, and the magnificent pano-
rama which daybreak would reveal of Sicily and the surrounding shores. Our first
object was to obtain mules and good guides, and we proceeded at once to the resi-
dence of Signor Gemmellaro, the philosopher of Etna, to whom I bore a letter of
introduction from my friend Dr. H—— of London. We walked from a small
albergo, where we had alighted, along a path that seemed to our tread, (for it was
quite dark, and the moon had not yet risen,) extremely soft, and it proved to be
the finest volcanic sand. Our party, as we entered Signor Gemmellaro’s cottage,
presented a motley and somewhat singular appearance. There were individuals
from three different nations, French, Maltese, and English, paying their respective
compliments to the agreeable Sicilian, who found it rather puzzling to carry on a
conversation which he was obliged to vary in so many different languages. He
fortunately understood a little English, and on my presenting my letter, he received
me most kindly, and a few words acquainted him with the object of my visit. “It
is now seven o’clock,” said he : “ you must rest for one hour, and in the mean time
I will provide guides for you, and we must have five mules instantly.” He had just
returned from visiting a patient in the village, and had surveyed the appearances of
the atmosphere, which he feared would be unfavourable for an ascent, as the wind
was howling in the Bosco, and thunder had been heard occasionally to echo in the
region of the crater. Nevertheless, we were all very anxious to make the attempt,
and a peasant was despatched to procure the mules and a guide. He soon returned,
when we found to our dismay, that only two mules were to be had, all the others
in the village being occupied at this season of the year in the vintage. But Gem-
mellaro insisted upon the requisite number of mules being obtained for our party, and
the messenger was again despatched with orders not to return until the five mules
were procured, besides a sixth one for the use of the guide. The three French
gentlemen could not speak one word of English, and but little Italian ; they were
pleasant and courteous, and full of the vivacity so characteristic of the French nation.
The mules arrived at last, and we all walked round to the albergo, where we found
our guide ready equipped, with another man, who was to precede us on foot with
a lantern. The moon had just risen, but there was not sufficient light to show us


the path over the sharp and dangerous rocks of lava that formed the only road we
had to traverse before we gained the woody region of the mountain. The wind
grew louder, and we could distinctly hear it whistling among the ilex trees of the Bosco
far above us. The priest hesitated; he feared the difficulties of the ascent, but
the Frenchmen and myself w r ere not so soon to be dismayed, and we therefore pro-
ceeded onwards. As I had neglected to provide myself with any extra clothing for
the ascent, Dr. Gemmellaro very kindly lent me a warm Sicilian cloak, which I
found of great service, as even at this early stage of our journey I felt the night air
very cool, and the sudden change of temperature from the sultry atmosphere of
the plains, could not very well be borne in a thin white dress. At half-past eight
our cavalcade started from Nicolosi. Our guide, Antonio Massania, a tall, stout
fellow, entirely enveloped in a huge Sicilian cloak, rode in our van, the man
with the lantern walking by his side ; next followed the three Frenchmen and
myself; and the good Maltese brought up the rear. We presented a very
formidable appearance, as our mules wound along one after another, threading their
way amidst the sharp and broken lavas that strew the mountain road between Nico-
losi and the Bosco. The dim light of the peasant’s lantern was the pole-star by
which we directed our steps, and as we found it was in vain to attempt to guide the
mules in the dark, we let them take their own course, as they knew the track of the
mountain paths far better than we did, and indeed it was well for us that the darkness
concealed the dangerous and slippery passes from our sight, which, in our descent,
the daylight revealed more fully to our view. Sometimes we stood on the brink
of a black and rugged channel of lava, and at other times we were overlooking some
fearful and giddy precipice. Nothing presents to the mind a more imposing idea
of the vastness and sublimity of this stupendous mountain, than the immense extent
of its own bulk when viewed from some elevated spot high up on its ascent. As
we scaled height after height, and rock after rock, we could discover, on looking back,
the steep sides of Etna alone, spreading out beneath us, whilst its base was enveloped
in the dewy mists that extended far over the plains below the exalted situation
on which we stood. This gave to it the appearance of a mountain in the clouds,
isolated from all connecting or surrounding objects —a vast and mighty temple raised
to the Deity —the pure sky and bright stars shining above, with a deep and boundless
expanse of space below. I felt that there was something inspiring and elevating
to the soul in such a lofty situation, raised above the insignificant turmoils of the
myriads who people the wide earth—we seem for the moment to forget our own ephe-
meral existence, and the soul spreads its pinions, and soars away into higher, and more
exalted regions. Can we wonder, then, that the ancients chose this mighty volcano
as a fit spot whereon to rear their altars to the Etnean Jove ? that they assigned
its subterranean fires to Vulcan and Pluto, and entertained the belief that the infernal


Hades lay beneath it, where Phlegethon and Styx rolled their pestiferous waves ?
Neither need we be astonished that the same faith in ancient lore taught that the
fabled Cyclops, those mighty giants who ate men’s flesh, and had but one eye in the
centre of their foreheads, were the formidable and fearful race, whose abodes were in
the recesses of the forests of Mongibello.
We at last arrived at the Bosco, or woody region of the mountain, where the air
felt quite keen, and the wind howled and whistled over our heads from the spreading
ilex trees that are scattered about in great profusion over this region of the mountain.
Beneath these trees the fern and the heather grow in great abundance, and the
scenery resembles in its character that of an English park. The soil was sandy, and
mixed up with ashes and lava; but the process of vegetable decomposition had pro-
duced in many places a light rich soil. We had proceeded thus far on our way very
merrily; the excitement and novelty of the undertaking put the Frenchmen into high
spirits, and whenever my mule loitered to crop the fern that grew every where in our
path, one of the company behind was sure to call out with a jeu d’esprit, desiring me,
(the Signor Inglese,) not to block up the pathway, and shouting out all the time,
“ Bambino ! bambino ! ” But the worst was to come, for whilst we were enjoying
the dangers of the ascent, the wind increased in violence, and the distant howling of
the wolf and the wild cat, combined with the low melancholy moan of the elements,
filled the soul of the pious father with dismay ; and to add to his perilous situation,
he was ever and anon slipping off his mule behind, and clinging with all his might
to the saddle: a feat which only served to increase the fun of the Frenchmen and
myself, who followed in the rear almost convulsed with laughter. As the difficulties
of our path increased, the priest showed a great unwillingness to proceed, and a long
conversation, which took place between him and the guides in Sicilian, but which
none of us understood, afterwards proved that he had persuaded them to invent
some excuse for abandoning the attempt to reach the “ crater.”
On our arrival at the “ Casa della Neve,” or winter refuge, (a stone hut at the top
of the Bosco,) the guide endeavoured to persuade us that the weather was so bad
that to venture farther up the mountain, would be to hazard our lives ; and that we
should either be blown by the wind into the crater, or precipitated over the Yal del
Bue, a precipice of 1,000 feet in height! We all agreed to wait for an hour or two in
hopes of a change of weather, and our guides having gathered a quantity of the
dried fern and branches, which are kept in this hut for the accommodation of tra-
vellers, together with some charcoal which they had brought with them, soon made a
blazing fire, around which we all lay stretched on our woollen cloaks. After taking
some refreshment, and passing the time in attempting to sleep, glancing occasionally
at the state of the weather outside the hut, we so far influenced the priest as to
prevail on him once more to attempt the ascent. Remounting our mules, therefore,


\ve again pushed forward, and soon found ourselves completely out of the Bosco, and
entering upon the third region, or, “Laregione deserta,” as it is called, where the
vegetation consists of the scantiest herbs and lichens, scattered here and there among
the volcanic sand, and huge masses of lava that constitute the surface of this inhospit-
able region of the mountain. We had now seven miles to go before we reached the
next resting place, the “ Casa degli Inglesi,” and had already left the late place of our
bivouac a couple of miles behind us. Here our ascent terminated ; for the priest jumped
off his mule, and standing stock still, refused to proceed any further. It w'asin vain that
the Frenchmen and myself expostulated with him ; his only answer to all our argu-
ments and remonstrances was, “ non possible ! non possible ! ” Finding that he was so
resolute, we next endeavoured to prevail on the guide to conduct us to the summit,
whilst the priest returned to the “ Casa della Neve,” under the care of the man who
carried the lantern ; but this did not succeed either. The guide, influenced no doubt
by the fear of the priest, as well as by his own laziness, and knowing that he would
receive the same remuneration whether he took us the whole or only half of the way
up to the crater, was as obstinate as the priest ; and although we offered him double
the sum agreed upon for the other man to act in his place, yet he would not proceed
himself, neither allow the other man to do so, alleging that he was not sufficiently
acquainted with the mountain. There was, therefore, no alternative; go back we
must, and after a long parley in French, English, and Italian, we reluctantly dis-
mounted from our mules, and commenced descending the mountain. The guide was
an obstinate fool, and though near seven feet high, he seemed to have no more cou-
rage or resolution than a child. So satisfied were my French companions of this’
that we meditated undertaking the attempt to visit the crater by ourselves in the
best way we could. But the mists lay heavy and thick along the sides of the moun-
tain, and we soon lost our companions in the deep shadows, as they wound their way
down the mountain’s side on their return. We shouted and hallooed after them, and
at last we were fortunate enough to regain the track we had lost, and soon re-
joined them, greatly mortified at the ill success of our expedition. We found
the descent in the dark, and on foot, for the space of seven or eight miles, to be any
thing but pleasant. We were, however, fortunate enough to arrive at the “ Casa
della Neve,” in the Bosco, without any serious accident, just as the first faint gleam
of daylight was breaking in the eastern sky. Tired, and weary, we entered the hut,
and commenced forthwith devouring our cold turkeys, without the aid of either
plate, knife and fork, or any thing that might have served to distinguish us from the
Cyclops, who, with their claws, devoured their prey in the caves of Etna. A furious
altercation arose hetw r een the Frenchmen and the poor priest, and I began to fear
that a serious affray would be the result. The guide, in broad Sicilian sentences,
was endeavouring to exculpate himself from blame, holding out his clenched fists
R


all the time ; a custom which I found is frequent with the peasantry, when engaged
in earnest or passionate disputes. Sometimes the attitude is altered; the arms
being stretched out, and the hands brought close together, as though the person
were holding them out to receive something, whilst all the while the arms are moved
up and down, beating time with the voice in a very curious manner. I have re-
peatedly witnessed this action, and as it appeared singular to me, I have thought
it not unworthy of notice. Descending through the Bosco, I observed the
cyclamen and the purple crocus in blossom among the fern, and the sweet breath
of the morning filled the air with a pleasant freshness in this exalted region. At
ten o’clock we reached Nicolosi, and to our infinite regret, we saw the clouds chasing
each other away from the upper region of the mountain, whilst the warm rays of the sun
fell brightly over the snug little village at the foot of Monte Rossi. We found our
friend, Dr. Gemmellaro, in his museum, and consoled ourselves by examining the fine
specimens of lava and sulphur which he had at various times collected from the crater.
He took great pains in showing us his museum, and his collection of drawings of the
mountain, and requested us all to insert our names in a book which he keeps for
that purpose. He visits the crater twice or three times during the summer months,
and keeps the “ Casa degli Inglese” in repair, of which he has the key ; this he
lends to strangers on their ascent, who call for it at his house on their way up the
mountain. Finding that the mosquitoes had been attacking us, he very kindly
favoured us with some ointment that he makes from a herb of Etna, and which
I found afterwards to be an infallible cure against their venomous bites. He further
consoled us byremarking, “that when intelligent persons wish to ascend the moun-
tain the weather is generally bad, but when beasts (as he termed them) attempted it,
the weather proved favourable.” This we of course regarded as a polite compliment,
and thanking our friend for his attention, we proceeded to the albergo, where
we rested ourselves after our fatigue, and feasted upon grapes and the delicious
figs of Mount Etna. Monte Rossi forms a fine object in the landscape when
viewed from Nicolosi, and seems like two conical mountains rising up from one base.
In the crater of this latter volcano, there are found small black crystals of lava in some
abundance, which resemble good sized garnets. I was presented with some of these
by Dr. Gemmellaro, in a box, which he gave me, containing several beautiful spe-
cimens of the minerals of Etna. I regretted much that I was not permitted to en-
joy a further acquaintance with this amiable man, as his learning and general informa-
tion would - render him a most delightful companion. Bidding adieu to Nicolosi, we
returned by the same horses and carriage to Catania, where 1 arrived at three o’clock,
resolving that I would not leave Sicily until I had stood on the highest peak of the
crater of the mighty Montegibello.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
ROUTE FROM CATANIA TO MESSINA.
“ Ulysses. —What land is this, and who inhabit it ?
Silenus. —Etna, the loftiest peak in Sicily.
Ulysses. —And who possess the land?—the race of beasts?
Silenus. —Cyclops, who live in caverns, not in houses.
Ulyssse.—And are they just to strangers? hospitable?
Silenus. —They think the sweetest thing a stranger brings
Is his own flesh—
Ulysses.—What! do they eat men’s flesh?
Silenus. —No one comes here who is not eaten up!”
Abbate, our landlord, regretted exceedingly that we were not able to accomplish the
ascent of the mountain; and he even went so far as to say, that had his hotel not
been so full of the visitors who were at Catania, on account of the arrival of the king
and queen in that city, he would himself have acted as our conductor. The guides of
Nicolosi, though generally preferred to those of Catania, are, in my humble opinion,
not always to be trusted; as they are lazy, indolent, and difficult to manage.
Abbate has, at various times, accompanied parties visiting the mountain, and his atten-
tions have invariably been highly spoken of.
I had now no alternative hut to return immediately to Messina, where the schooner
in which I was to sail for England was shipping her cargo of lemons. Only two days
remained before the proposed departure of the vessel. Writing was useless, as the
posts in Sicily are very slow and uncertain. No other course was open than going
myself to Messina, and although I abandoned for the present undertaking the ascent
of Etna, I nevertheless cherished the hope that sufficient time might still be available
before the schooner was ready for sea, for me to return to Catania to accomplish my
desired object. Not one moment was, therefore, to be lost, and my next step was to
hasten on to Messina (a distance of seventy miles) by the first conveyance that pro-
ceeded to that city. Most fortunately for my future plans, Abbate informed me on
our return from Nicolosi, that a “ diligence ” or coach as he termed it, was to stait in
b 2


an hour’s time from the square of the Elephant; it would travel that night as far as
Giarra, and on the following night arrive at Messina. I immediately embraced this
very opportune offer, and hastily sw'allowing my dinner, I settled my account with my
landlord (who, by-the-by, was an extremely civil and obliging fellow) and arranging
matters with the Frenchmen, who had acted as pursers on our mountain expedition,
1 bade them all good day, not forgetting our unfortunate companion the priest, who
despite the affair in the “ Casa della Neve,” gave me a very kind invitation to visit
him at Senglea, in the island of Malta. Having secured my luggage as well as I was
able, I awaited the arrival of the diligence at the door of the albergo. It soon came
up, and I looked for Abbate to act as my interpreter to the coachman, who had the
appearance of a smart sailor, but Abbate was nowhere to be found. My luggage was
immediately seized by half-a-dozen different people, and I fully expected to lose some
portion of it, for they commenced carrying it off in all directions. However, my alarm
was groundless, as I found all my packages safely deposited in the coach, and in
another minute we were driving furiously along the Corso in the direction of the new
road that leads to Messina. The vehicle into which I had thus been so unceremoniously
packed, resembled very nearly one of the third-class-train coaches on the Great
Western Railway. It was divided into two parts, each holding four persons ; the
roof was flat, and supported by iron rods, from which hung curtains, which might be
let down at pleasure, to protect the traveller from the sun and dust, which at this
season are very unpleasant in Sicily. I found this mode of travelling to be pretty
comfortable, and could almost have fancied myself in a Devonshire jaunting car. The
horses, which were harnessed three abreast, were full of spirit, and we galloped off
towards Giarra in fine style. My compagnons de voyage were four in number, all of
them Sicilians, and although I was able to converse but little with them, and that
partly by signs and motions, they yet endeavoured to show me those small attentions and
courtesies so pleasing to a stranger, owing to the kind motives from which they spring.
1 soon discovered that one of my companions could speak French, and through the
medium of this third language we managed to understand each other very well. He
pointed out to me every object worthy of notice by the way, and made himself as
agreeable as possible. My companions offered me some cigars, and were quite sur-
prised to find that I declined them, as in Sicily everybody smokes, from the
miserable sulphur miner up to the noble at Ferdinand’s own table. Cigars may
here as in Malta be obtained for a mere nothing, eight or ten of them being
purchased for five grana, which is about equivalent to an English penny. The
road we were pursuing traversed that part of the country, called the port of Ulysses,
which was overwhelmed by the lava of 1669. It is said that this precise spot
was formerly a deep and capacious harbour, which Virgil describes as—


“ The port capacious, and secure from wind.”
It is now entirely filled up, and the broken fragments of lava that strew the sands
of this beautiful coast show hut too plainly how dreadful must have been the
catastrophe of that eventful and fatal eruption, perhaps the most dreadful of any that
has burst from the bowels of the mountain which records have handed down to us.
By the sea-shore a little farther on, stands the castle of Aci, built on a promontory of
black lava and surrounded on three sides by the sea. The next objects of interest, are
the Scopuli Cyclopum, or rocks of the Cyclops, at the village of Trizza. They consist
of seven islands, a short distance from the shore, though only the three principal
ones hear the name of Cyclops. The largest of these is basaltic, and has a kind
of substratum of yellow chalk ; in form they are abrupt and conical, and are supposed
to be the rocks mentioned by Homer, which he describes as being situated near the
cave of the cannibal Polyphemus, who devoured the unfortunate followers of Ulysses
when they were driven on this inhospitable shore, then the favourite abode of the
Etnean Cyclops. Between Trizza and Aci Reale we travelled through groves of orange
and lemon trees, along a good road. I found this part of the country to be extremely
rich and fertile, and the peculiar beauty of a Sicilian landscape was enhanced by
the warm yellow glow that overspread it, mellowing the western hills where the setting
sun lay cradled in a gorgeous mass of belted purple and golden clouds. It was
at this point that we passed on the sea-shore the far-famed steps of Acis, or the
Scali di Aci, hut the ghost of the beautiful shepherd stole not along the balmy eve,
nor did we see any thing of the nymph Galatea. These steps consist of eight or
nine layers of lava, of different degrees of antiquity. As there is a layer of vegetable
earth between each, a considerable time must have elapsed before a second eruption
took place : which fact goes a great way to disprove the notion that all eruptions of
the volcano have occurred since the time of Homer ; prior to which period, some
authors inform us, it was not known as a burning mountain. We reached Giarra
shortly before eight o’clock, where we were all to take up our quarters for the night.
We were ushered into one general apartment with a stone floor, and which corres-
ponded to what we should, in a country village in England, call the “ traveller’s
room,” with this exception, however, that it was to form our dormitory also, the
beds being supported on tressels around the apartment, which was, to say the least of
it, very large and airy. We sat down to our supper in excellent spirits, and with
a good appetite. Our waiter was a bare-footed woman, whom I took to be the
mistress of the hotel. Our supper was in the true Sicilian fashion, and consisted of
eggs, bread, salad, and wine, with a dessert of apples, grapes, and raw turnips. When
these latter articles came on the table, I paused to observe how they were eaten, imagin-
ing for the moment that they might be some other vegetable used perhaps as a salad.
But there was no mistaking the turnips, for there they stood facing me, tops and all!


Presently one of my companions was seized with a friendly feeling towards them,
and cutting one in half, placed it on his plate. I most gravely followed his example
with the remaining piece, that I might not he deceived by external appearances.
After thus philosophically eating my turnip, I was desirous of having some tea,
but this is a beverage so very rarely used in Sicily, that I found it impossible to procure
it. After a great deal of trouble, however, I managed to get some wretched coffee,
for which a lad had been sent half over the town, and this, such as it was, was served to
us without sugar in cups as big as thimbles. 1 now discovered that one of my
companions was an amber merchant, who was proceeding to Messina with a quantity
of beautiful trinkets, manufactured from this substance in Catania. He amused us
after supper with a display of his treasures, amongst which were some superb brooches
and necklaces. Our barefooted hostess again entered the apartment, and, having
furnished the beds with clean linen, and lit the small shrine to the Virgin which stood
at one end of the room, she left us with a good-natured “ buona sera.” In joining
a native “ table d’hote” in this manner, I was astonished to find so great a dimi-
nution of ray expenditure. I found that for a supper and bed, which, had I been
alone, would have cost me nearly half a dollar, I now paid only B|-d. This mode of
living is the only one which can give the traveller a good opportunity of observing
Sicilian manners in their primitive state, as I found that when Englishmen visit
the larger cities where they “ put up” at the chief hotels, every pains is taken to
wait upon them in the fashion of their own country, and thus it happens, that
instead of their being surprised and pleased with novelty of custom, they only see
repeated in a very imperfect manner what they find at home every day of their lives.
At sunrise we again started on our journey, one only of our party remaining at
Giarra; his place in the vehicle was supplied by an elderly gentleman, accompanied
by a young lady who appeared to be his daughter. They kept the diligence waiting
nearly half-an-hour, when they very leisurely seated themselves, and having given
their friends a farewell embrace, they made the signal of our departure from Giarra.
The morning was a charming one, and our road lay through a most romantic and
fertile country, commanding fine views of Etna, whose unclouded summit arose clear
and distinct in the brilliancy of an early dawn. The town of Catabiano, perched like
an eagle’s eyrie, on the summit of a lofty rock, formed a picturesque object on our
route just after passing Giarra, and afterwards we came in sight of the mountain of
Taormina which is also city-crowned, with the village of Mola overhanging it from a
still loftier peak. Taormina, now an impoverished place, was once the magnificent
city of Taurominium, built by a Homan colony who settled there. It contains many
vestiges and remains of its former splendour particularly the theatre, which is con-
sidered, in its present state, to be the most perfect Roman ruin in Sicily. We were,
at this part of our route, among the mountains of the Val di Demone, which occupy


the north-eastern portion of the island. The whole country to the north of Etna
consists of steep and rugged hills and mountains, forming part of a chain called the
Nebrodes. Of these, the Monte Scuderi is the most remarkable : on its summit is
the ruin of an old building said to have been erected in the middle ages; but the story
of an exceedingly cold wind blowing out of the crater, which Brydone relates, seems
to have no foundation whatever in fact. Brydone was most probably misinformed
by the inhabitants, who, in those days, were much less acquainted with the motives
of travellers in making inquiries than they at present are. These mountains are very
fertile, and abound in olive and mulberry trees, whilst the steeps, which stretch
down abruptly towards the sea, are cultivated by the inhabitants, and groves of
oranges, lemons, and bergamots are interspersed among the cottages that enliven the
shore. The fruit on the trees was yet green, but when fully ripened, it must
present a charming and beautiful appearance. When the lemons have been swelled out
to their full size by the rains, they are plucked in the green state, and shipped at
Messina, and it is during their voyage that they acquire the yellow colour which we
see them have in this country. Most of the lemons for exportation are grown in the
mountain fiumaras around Messina ; numbers are also grown near Giarra, and are
exported from Catania to Malta and other places. These mountains are also famous
for the grapes they produce, and even as far back as the age of the elder Dionysius,
the red wine of Taurominium was highly esteemed. At the time of my visit,
the vintage was nearly over, though occasionally I saw a vine-press teeming with
the purple juice of the grapes, as they were thrown in in baskets full, fresh gathered
from the vineyard. We met troops of peasants with large baskets on their heads,
piled up with tempting clusters, of which they would sell us as many as we could eat
for a baiocchi (about a penny.) We halted a short time at the foot of the mountain
of Taormina, where I noticed that the peasants were generally a handsomer race than
those of southern Sicily, and I found this generally to be the case, as we proceeded
farther northwards. In Messina, for instance, there is much more personal beauty
than at Syracuse, though this circumstance may, in some measure, be accounted for
by the latter place being so very unhealthy, whilst the former is famed for its salu-
brity, delightful climate, and the bracing air of the straits.
Both the men and women of Sicily wear remarkably large rings in their ears ;
some which I have seen worn by the women are above two inches in diameter, and
of solid gold. The possession of a pair of these rings is an important desideratum with
the poorest peasant, and many a more useful and necessary article is dispensed with
to become the owner of what they consider so great an ornament. The ear-rings of
the men are smaller, and seldom exceed an inch across, whilst all are made of a cir-
cular shape, and quite plain. It is also no uncommon thing to see a barefooted female


cottager with her fingers adorned by three or four massive gold rings, whilst the
remainder of her dress may not he worth as many shillings.
After leaving Giardini the country becomes mountainous and romantic the whole
way to Messina ; the road lays along the sea-coast, and in many places it winds round
the sides of the mountains, commanding views which are extremely beautiful and
picturesque. The pass of Fort St. Allessio is very fine, and the opposite shores of
Calabria add increasing beauty to the scene. We reached Zia Paola at noon, where
w r e halted for a couple of hours at a small inn by the sea-side. Here we dined on
a rotolo of maccaroni, and the old gentleman who joined us at Giarra, adding to this
supply a fine stuffed turkey and some Etna wine, which he very kindly invited us all
to partake of, we came off for our dinner much better than we had anticipated. One
of my fellow travellers expressed a desire to drink wine with me, not after the
Sicilian fashion, which consists chiefly in touching glasses, but, as he expressed
it, in the mode of the “ Ingleses.” Instead, however, of saluting me when I bowed, he
seemed dreadfully afraid of not hitting the identical moment, and shouted out “ now,”
with all his might. This was most probably done to display his knowledge of
the English language ; but seeing me smile, and mistaking the cause, he con-
tinued at intervals to vociferate “ now,” during the whole of the time that we were
at dinner. He was very desirous of knowing the English name for every thing, and
as he pointed to various articles before us, I gave him the English words for them ;
but when he came to the word “fly,” he pronounced it as “fry,” and after making
numberless attempts to improve his Anglo-Sicilian pronunciation, he gave it up as a
bad job. After a very merry dinner, we once more started on our journey northwards,
and passed through the village of Scaletta on the sea-shore. Towards evening we
drew near to Messina, having travelled through fields, the hedgerows of which were
composed entirely of aloes and Indian figs ; these latter shrubs, which are called by
the Maltese “ prickly pears,” bear a yellow blossom, which in size and shape very
much resembles that of the cactus speciosissima, and this as well as the fleshy lobes
of the plant is armed with small prickles, whose wounds cause much inflammation,
which I discovered to my cost on attempting to pluck one of the yellow flowers for
my hortus siccus. After dark, the lights of Reggio, on the Italian side of the straits,
shone brightly through the clear evening air, and after passing successively through
several villages, we at last entered the beautiful city of Messina, the Zancle of the
ancients. I alighted at the Britannia Hotel, and after partaking of a cup of excellent
coffee, retired to my room quite overcome with fatigue ; my want of sleep preventing
me from visiting the quay in search of the schooner until the following morning.


CHAPTER XXIX.
TRIP TO THE FARO—SCYLLA AND CHARYBDIS.
“ Incidit in Scyllam, cupiens vitare Charybdirn.”
On ascending Etna, I found that the sharpness of the cold night air in the exalted
regions of the mountain so severely affected my eyes that I was nearly blind ; for
they had not as yet recovered from the effects of the hot glare of the sun in Malta.
During my journey to Messina, I suffered acutely from this species of ophthalmia, and
finding it much worse when I awoke in the morning, I resolved on having a pair of
spectacles. I purchased these in the Strada del Corso, and hurrying down to the
Marina, I commenced searching for the vessel amongst a crowd of others of all
nations, Greek, Austrian, Turkish, Russian, Spanish, and Italian, that thronged the
quay to the extent of a mile. I soon discovered our rakish little schooner, and found
the captain, his wife, and all on board, well. My favourite gazelles, which I had pro-
cured from Tripoli when in Malta, were in good condition, and seemed as healthy and
playful as when I left them at Yaletta. From the captain I received the pleasing intel-
ligence that on account of the want of rain the lemons were not yet ready for exporta-
tion, and that another week would elapse before we should finally sail for England. On
hearing this news, I determined to start very early on the following morning for Etna,
and to make a visit during the remainder of the day to the Faro, from which Messina
is only seven miles distant. Having accomplished this, I purposed to engage mules
back to the neighbourhood of Etna, and lose no time in making the ascent of the
mountain, leaving my survey and description of Messina, till my return.
I set off on a large donkey, which the cicerone of the hotel procured for me; and
taking an old man as a guide, we soon got clear of the streets of the city, and
entered upon the Faro road, which runs along the sea-shore. The ride was beauti-
fully diversified with villas, and fine spreading trees, which are backed by the
fiumaras that descend abruptly from the mountains, down which, in the rainy sea-
son, the streams pour with great force and volume, forming numerous cascades in
their course. Along the whole road, the view of the opposite coast is very beautiful;
s


the mountains of Calabria rising rugged and abrupt, sprinkled over with vine-
yards and olives; and the deep blue waters of the straits, winding, like a vast and
mighty river, between Sicily and the continent of Europe. The distance at this
part is only three miles across, and beneath the clear atmosphere of Italy, objects
appear to be much more distinct than persons residing in less genial climates are aware
of. Tradition states that Calabria and Sicily were once joined. Pliny, Strabo, and
even Virgil, all tell a similar story. The received opinion is, that they were parted
asunder by a violent earthquake ; and that formerly the straits were much narrower
than they are at present. This constant widening of the channel accounts, in some
measure, for the terrors of Scylla and Charybdis having so nearly vanished, the waters
being now less pent up, and their force greatly diminished. The banks here consist,
in some places, of fine yuccas, interspersed among the aloes. The prickly pears are of
two sorts; the larger kind, which bears the fruit that forms so large a proportion of
the food of the lower classes during this season, and a dwarf species, more prickly
than the former, that grows close to the sea, and produces only a hard green seed-
vessel of the size of a walnut. Before arriving at the promontory on which the light-
house stands, the country is low, flat, and sandy, and the road runs between several
salt water lakes that are flooded at high tide. I was much amused in passing one of
these lakes to see several birds stuck upon sticks, in imitation of cranes, wading in the
deep water, but for what purpose this deception was practised I could not discover;
it seemed most probable that it was for decoying others during the winter season,
when these birds are taken.
On reaching the straggling village of Faro, we dismounted at a fisherman’s hut,
and having tied up our donkey, and procured him some hay, we entered the cottage
to seek some refreshment for ourselves. In the vineyards around the Faro the famous
Falernian wine was formerly made, but at present none is to be procured. All we
could obtain was some red wine of the roughest quality, with some black bread,
a few figs, and a dish of olives ; the latter detestable and unpalatable morsels were for
my guide. The wine was served out to us in a monstrous Calabrese vase of so
singular a construction, that my guide very wittily ascribed it to the Saracens, a
nation to whom every thing that is ancient or doubtful is constantly referred by the
Sicilians. When 1 had nearly finished my repast, the woman of the cottage came in
with a fish on a plate, which my guide informed me that she had just caught. This
accounted for her sudden disappearance on my expressing a wish to have some-
thing to eat, and had not the sea been so close to the door, I should have stood but
a poor chance of tasting the fishes of Faro ! But she had been fortunate in her
capture, and seemed determined that I should enjoy it whilst it was fresh. She
took her prize into an outhouse, and threw it upon a charcoal fire, and after a few
minutes’ frizzling, she brought it in to me upon a trencher, black, smoking, and half


smothered in olive oil. Having finished this delicate and dainty dish, we started off
on foot across a sandy beach to visit the lighthouse, the celebrated Pharos of the
Greeks, which is situated on the sandy flats of Cape Pylorus. A small fee secured
my admission, and the door being opened by a Neapolitan soldier, we ascended
several flights of steps, and soon reached the top, from whence I was gratified
with a panorama, the beauty of which fully repaid me for the time I had taken
to visit the Faro. Northwards, and studding the sea like so many fairy islands,
lay Stromboli, Lipari, Panaria, Volcano, and the whole of the Lipari group, with the
promontory of Milazzo jutting out into the water to the westward. Whilst looking
towards the east, the eye rested with delight on the Calabrese mountains, and the
distant shores of Italy stretched along far northward in the direction of Naples.
Beneath wound the blue waters, deep and dark, of the Messinese straits, near the
centre of which the eddying current that flows in and out of the channel every six
hours, points out the direction of the far-famed Charyhdis, and jutting out from the
opposite shore the steep rock of Scylla rises jagged and abrupt, the waters lashing
and foaming around its cavernous base with that moaning sound, that gave rise to
the fabled dogs and syrens of the ancients. The rock of Scylla is united to the
Italian shore, and is not a detached portion by itself, as some have supposed. On
its summit stands the town of Sciglio, containing a castle and about 300 inhabitants.
On returning from the lighthouse, I found my magnificent donkey completely invi-
gorated, and engaging a smaller one for my guide, who was much fatigued, we
trotted off towards Messina, followed by half the children in the village, begging for
a single baiocchi. On returning to my hotel, I called on Mr. R. the banker, an
English gentleman residing in this city, to whom I bore a letter of introduction. He
received me very kindly, and favoured me with a recommendatory letter to a friend
of his at Riposto, a town near Giarra, at the foot of Etna, from whence I was to
start on my ascent to the crater. With this essential aid I was enabled to lay down
the plan for my route during the few remaining days I was to spend in Sicily,
and I therefore abandoned a project whih I had entertained of visiting Stromboli,
which was represented to me as impracticable, the boats being sometimes detained
there for upwards of a week, owing to the surf, which runs so high upon the beach,
that mariners are compelled to wait for a change of wind before they are able to launch
away.
s 2


CHAPTER XXX.
RETURN TO ETNA—HOSPITALITY AT RIPOSTO—ASCENT OF THE MOUNTAIN.
“ I see a chaos of green leaves and fruit
Built round dark caverns, even to the root
Of the living stems who feed them; in whose bowers
There sleep, in their dark dew, the folded flowers.
Like winged stars the fire-flies flash and glance
Pale in the open moonshine, —but each one
Under the dark trees seems a little sun, —
A meteor tamed, —a fixed star gone astray
From the silver regions of the milky way.”
* * * *
* * * “ And a bird,
That cannot be a nightingale, and yet
I know none else that sings so sweet as it
At this late hour.”
After a good night’s rest at the hotel, I arose at daybreak, and shortly afterwards
found the guide and mules, which I had engaged for my journey to Riposto
waiting for me at the door. As the distance was great, I felt very anxious to start
as soon as possible, in order to reach Riposto on the same night. Every thing was
ready, when I found that my passport, which the landlord of the hotel, Signor
Nobile, assured me that he would get signed in time, remained yet unsigned, and that
the authorities were not in attendance at the office of the police at so early an hour.
As I did not wish to run the risk of imprisonment in any of his Sicilian Majesty’s
gaols, I did not consider it advisable to run the chance of proceeding into another
province without government permission, therefore I set off myself in search of the
authorities at their respective dwellings. After a tedious search, which cost me a
delay of nearly two hours, we found the officer at mass in one of the suburban
churches. Here we had to wait until the old gentleman had finished his devotions,
and the moment that the priests had concluded their ceremonies at the altar, he took
the passport, and requesting me to step into an adjoining room, where the priests


were disrobing, he affixed his signature, for which I paid him the usual fee. We had
now to obtain the counter-signature of the head of the police, which concluded the
affair. It was nearly ten o’clock before we started from the Corso at Messina.
The sun was scorchingly hot, and the glare and dust rendered the roads very unplea-
sant. Beneath the bright blue sky of a Sicilian autumn day, the peasants, dressed in
their holiday clothes, thronged the environs of the city, or followed the paths along
the fiumaras, mounted upon mules. It is no uncommon sight to witness a peasant
on his mule, with a barefooted lady seated behind him, and a little child clinging to
her waist. In this part of the country, the women climb the olive trees, and beat
down the fruit with a long stick. In fact, they perform these out-door services in
the fields and vineyards with more spirit than the men, whose employment consists
chiefly in fishing.
About twelve miles from Messina, my guide, who was running behind the mule,
received a severe kick on his breast from the animal, which caused him to faint. We
were several miles distant from any village, upon a lonely road by the sea-shore,
and I was fearful that the man would be unable to proceed any further. As he did
not understand one word of English, I could not discover how much he was hurt;
but fortunately, after a short delay, we were enabled to start again, the poor fellow
pointing to his breast with a most rueful countenance. In another hour we reached
Scaletta, a village on the sea-coast, where we stopped at a cottage to dine. This
cottage appeared to be the general shop or store of the place. A number of pea-
sants were seated around an open doorway, and after dismounting in a spacious
stable adjoining, I entered the cottage, and seating myself at a small table apart
from the rest, I waited whilst the good woman of the house prepared me some dinner.
Here again I saw Sicilian manners in all their native simplicity, and the poor
accommodation I received was amply repaid by the amusement which the scene
afforded me. I was surrounded by three very lean Spanish dogs, which almost de-
voured me for something to eat; four or five remarkably sleek tabby cats followed
their example, and I amused myself by feeding them on grapes until my maccaroni
was cooked. As the cats grew more troublesome, they were driven out of the
house, and flew scampering away in all directions, whilst the dogs slunk underneath
the table. My dinner was by this time quite ready; it consisted of a huge pile ot
maccaroni, (or “ tobacco pipes made easy,” as it has been very aptly denominated,)
with a dessert of figs, walnuts, and delicious grapes. After I had eaten a few mouth-
fuls of the maccaroni, I handed it over to my guide, who, despite his kick in the
morning, managed to clear the trencher. The maccaroni in the Sicilian cities is good,
but the home-made stuff which had been cooked for me was very unpalatable, and,
indeed, was only rendered barely eatable by the addition of a sauce oi red pepper,
or tomatas fried in oil. The son of the landlady, a fine boy of thirteen, soon made


friends with me, and when I remounted my mule to start again on my journey
towards Riposto, he came with his brother and kissed my hand to wish me farewell,
begging me to accept some sweet apples which were the produce of their garden.
I took them, and bidding the boys a friendly good-by, resolved to make this my
resting-place on my return from the mountain, having met with so kind a recep-
tion from these people. The hostess was a merry soul, and little Antonio was the
prettiest page I had seen in Sicily. Leaving Scaletta we travelled on till long after
dark, and, finding that it was impossible to reach Riposto on the same night, we took
up our quarters at the little inn at Giardini, at the foot of the mountain of Taormina.
The latter part of our journey was very lonely ; it lay along the rocky shores, beyond
the pass of St. Alessio, where there is a region of gloomy caves which are the
nightly resort of a desperate band of smugglers. Here we were serenaded by the
shrill cry of the cicada, whose pining note resounded from every olive tree when twi-
light had spread itself over the romantic steeps of the Nebrodes, and the light of an
occasional fire-fly sparkled among the dark green foliage of the lemon and the berga-
mot. The accommodations of the inn at Giardini consisted of a moderately-sized
apartment, with a bed in each corner ; these, consisting simply of mattresses laid
upon wooden tressels, are very easily removed. Presently, my old landlord came in,
and, bringing me a lamp, laid a book upon the table for my amusement until the
supper was ready. This was the visitors’ name book, and it was nearly full of
autographs in various languages, chiefly English, French, and German, accompanied
here and there with droll verses and personal jokes on the old landlord himself,
who, ignorant of the meaning, had treasured them up for many years, thinking, no
doubt, (good and credulous soul !) that they were all eulogiums on his establish-
ment, and the unremitting attention of himself and two old women, who formed a
capital trio for the fun of merry travellers halting in a Sicilian village. Some of the
jokes were so ridiculous, that, although exceedingly tired, I sat and laughed outright
over the precious volume, until the supper was brought upon the table. The old
folks were certainly very attentive, and they did their best to make me comfortable.
I had honey from Hybla of the finest kind, and as no milk was to be procured so
late in the evening, they beat up some eggs instead in my coffee. After this whole-
some repast, for which I was heartily thankful, I slept soundly until four o’clock the
next morning. Before leaving, I made an entry in the old man’s name-book for the
amusement of future guests, and having mounted my mule I started off again with my
guide towards Riposto.
For the first hour it was quite dark, but a gleam of light over the Mediterranean
gave indications of the approach of sunrise, and soon after the summit of Etna caught
the earliest ray, and the dawn gradually spread itself lower and lower, till at last the
round red sun itself peeped up above the sea, end the whole plain revealed its wealth


of vineyards and olive groves to the cheerful light of morning. We struck out of the
main road along a bye path, over rugged lavas and torrent beds, from which I enjoyed
a magnificent view of Etna. The bright green vineyards circling its base, were cheer-
fully interspersed with numerous villages, and white cottages.
About a mile from Giarra, we turned down a sandy lane, and passing through
a plantation of canes, we reached the shore. After proceeding for a short distance
further on, we arrived at Riposto, which is a place of some trade, though the streets
are dirty, and the people present a very miserable appearance,
Mr. Carlhill, the gentleman to whom I bore an introductory letter, received me
most kindly ; and as the family were just sitting down to breakfast, I joined them
immediately, and dismissed my guide, who returned to Messina. The house, which
has only been recently built by Mr. Carlhill, is furnished quite in the English style,
and is the best I have seen in Sicily, if I except some in Catania and Messina. The
dining and drawing-rooms are paved with coloured tiles, and resemble mosaic work,
the climate being too warm for carpets. Mr. Carlhill’s wine-presses are very exten-
sive, and he is engaged in raising new works upon the premises. After breakfast,
Mr. Carlhill, senior, who has resided many years in Sicily, favoured me with an
inspection of the wine-presses and distilleries. As the vintage was nearly over, I
was unfortunate in not seeing the process in active operation. A great variety of
wines, both red and white, are made here, and exported to various parts, more espe-
cially to Malta and America. The wines of Etna are very superior of their kind ;
and there is a richness in the grape growing on the mountain which is said to be
peculiar to itself. The Vino da Dama is delicious, and exceeds most cordials in
flavour, though I was informed by a gentleman of Nicolosi, that it is the pure juice
extracted from the grape. Vessels coming to Riposto for cargoes of wine, usually
lay off about a mile from the shore, and the goods are carried out to them on rafts
constructed especially for that purpose. Smaller vessels are sometimes employed;
they are dragged up on the beach, and I have even seen some of fifty or sixty tons,
high and dry on the shore, taking in their cargoes at Riposto. As there are scarcely
any tides, the vessels are drawn up and re-launched by means of a slip, and their keels
are supported by strong beams. It was a pleasant thing, when so far removed fiom
home, to meet with an English family with whom I could hold intercourse. They
dwell isolated as it were, at the foot of the great Mongibello, on that charming shore
which for ages past has been the scene of classic story; and in imagination, has been
peopled with Cyclops, nymphs, and satyrs. Here they live in perfect retirement,
Messina being the nearest point of communication with any English family. The
pleasure of meeting one’s countrymen was in this instance greatly enhanced by the
very kind reception which I met with from them. Indeed it was impossible for
me to have received more unostentatious kindness from any persons than I did from


the friends whom I met at Riposto. As Mr. R., at Messina, referred me to his ac-
quaintances at this place for instructions as to my best means of ascending Etna from
hence, Mr. Carlhill proposed that I should start at noon for Nicolosi across the
country, taking with me some mules and a faithful servant of his own who had been
in his employment and service from a boy.
All things, therefore, being prepared according to this plan, I took a temporary
leave of my kind friends at Riposto, and proceeded on foot with my guide to Giarra,
where we joined the mules, taking with us a small bottle of rum in case we should
require it when we arrived at the summit of the mountain. After a tedious ride of
five hours, over rugged beds of lava, and through the most romantic scenery, we
arrived at the village of Nicolosi. Our ride lay along steep beds of lava, bordered
with rich vineyards. The mountaineers, in groups of ten or twenty, occasionally met
us, descending with their baskets of grapes to the vine-presses in the valleys ; but
the vintage was nearly over, and these were the last clusters of the season. The pea-
sants of Etna are a hardy, robust, and picturesque race. It is a pretty sight to meet
a group of the villagers winding down the mountain passes, men, women, and children,
all joyous and merry, singing as they go, at the highest pitch of their voices, and each
one laden with a cane basket, piled up with purple grapes, and covered over with a
branch of spreading green leaves. It was past eight o’clock ere we reached Nicolosi.
The little lane of soft volcanic sand, and the pretty cottage of Signor Gemmellaro,
were again familiar to me. I entered and found the philosopher of Etna seated by
his well-trimmed lamp, near the open window, and his wife busied in her household
avocations. He was greatly surprised at seeing me, and after explaining matters to
him, he promised to procure for me a guide who would accompany me to the “Sommo
Cratere,” without fail. In order to render his promises more secure and certain, Signor
Gemmellaro intimated to him from me, that unless he took me to the very top of the
crater, he should not receive his stipulated pay. With this precaution I felt satisfied,
and agreed to start soon after nine o’clock, on my expedition to the upper regions of
the mountain. Whilst resting at Nicolosi, the worthy Doctor regaled me with a sup-
per of conserve of grapes, and the sweet wine of Etna. He accompanied me to the
inn where my two guides and their mules, with a third one for myself, were in readi-
ness awaiting my arrival. Before the village bell sounded the hour of nine, we were
feeling our way over tracks of volcanic sand, towards the Bosco. It was quite dark,
and we groped our way onwards without even a lantern, leaving our mules to follow
their own well-known paths, and hoping by-and-by to be cheered by the light of
the rising moon. But the wind had brought a heavy mass of clouds from the north
and west, and the moon and stars were alike shrouded from our sight. About
midnight we arrived at the “ Casa della Neve,” in the exalted region of the Bosco.
Here the wind howled and moaned most dismally, but we only halted for a quarter of


an hour, and did not even light a fire, as our grand object was to gain the summit of
the crater by sunrise. Added to the melancholy moaning of the wind among the
trees, the occasional yell of a wild cat, sounded like the voice of some unearthly de-
mon from the subterraneous abodes of fire beneath us. By-and-hy, the clouds broke
partially away, displaying here and there patches of the glorious blue canopy of hea-
ven, studded with innumerable stars, shining with a brilliancy peculiar to the clear
atmosphere of so elevated a region as the one we were now traversing. It is com-
puted that Etna is upwards of 11,000 feet, or rather better than two perpendicular
miles above the level of the sea, though the ascent is more than thirty miles.
We had now passed the limits of vegetation, and after a most fatiguing ascent of
seven miles over barren lavas, and sand intermingled with ashes, we reached the
“ Casa degli Inglesi,” or summer refuge, situated on the plain at the foot of the
cone. Here we rested for half an hour, and warmed ourselves by a good fire of
charcoal which the guides had brought with them. The key of this refuge was lent
to us by Signor Gemmellaro, who has lately repaired and improved it at his own
expense. It consists of a spacious hut, built of lava, and divided into two apartments.
In the innermost one are some straw mattresses, on one of which I threw myself down,
and enjoyed the most delightful rest imaginable, though they were frozen completely
stiff. The walls of this refuge are covered with ice, and the intense cold of this region
renders the “ refuge” an indispensable comfort to all travellers visiting the crater.
After warming ourselves again at the charcoal fire, and taking a draught of rum
apiece, we once more prepared to start. It was now about an hour before sunrise,
and leaving the mules in the refuge, under the care of my Riposto servant, I set out
on foot, accompanied by the guide, who pointed significantly towards the dim shadowy
form that rose high before us, the object of my desire and toil. We had now by
far the most difficult part of the ascent to accomplish, and it was still very dark.
We were provided with long sticks to assist us in climbing over the sharp and dan-
gerous lavas, and managed to grope on as well as we could. Every now and then
I slipped into some unseen cavity, or stumbled over a sharp projecting rock of lava.
But with the exception of a gash in my knee, occasioned by falling among some of
these, I escaped all further mischief. As we got higher, the steepness of the ascent
increased, and with it the difficulty of climbing onwards, for the ashes and cinders,
which constitute this portion of the cone, are so loose as to give way at every step,
and we sank down sometimes to our knees. The wind was so high and so violent,
that in some places we had to stoop down and crawl on our hands and knees to
prevent our being completely blown away. The vapours gently curling out through
the loose apertures in the lava soil intimated our approach to the mouth of the crater,
but our goal was still farther off from us than I had imagined, and it took us another
half-hour's industrious climbing before we stood on the sides of the highest or grand
T


crater. Here I sank down on the ashes quite exhausted, but a moment was sufficient
for me to recover my breath, and after making another vigorous effort, we stood on
the brink of the crater. Vapours, strongly impregnated with sulphur, were arising
on all sides. The whole of the immense cone consists externally of lava, ashes,
and volcanic stones mingled with sulphur. The basin, or interior hollow, which is,
properly speaking, the crater, descends very abruptly downwards towards the bowels
of the mountain. We lay fiat dowm and looked over the side into the crater, but the
quantity of sulphurous vapour that slowly but continually arose from all sides of
its mighty depths, prevented our seeing very far down into it. None who have
gazed on the inside of the crater of Etna can ever forget it. The whole descent on
every side is thickly encrusted with sulphur and other volcanic productions. The
gradations of tint and colour are extremely beautiful; they vary from a fine yellow,
which is the prevailing hue, to white, orange, red, brown and dusky grey, and these
all blend into each other with the most exquisite softness of colouring imaginable.
The wildness and solitude of this vast crater are truly magnificent. All around is
sublimity and stillness. The bewildered traveller standing on this vast and isolated
peak seems for the moment to forget all of earth and its associations, and is utterly
lost in the contemplation of the grandeur of the scene before him. But a peep into
the wonders of the crater was not all that I enjoyed on the mighty summit of Etna.
There was yet another and a higher peak above us, forming the north-east edge of the
crater. This was the loftiest “ top” of the mountain, above it there was no object
to obstruct the boundless view of all things around. Naked and exalted, the highest
pinnacle of the volcano reared its summit into the clear blue space of sky far above
the clouds that lay cradled in a thousand fleecy forms over the whole of Sicily. It
was on the summit of this peak that I longed to stand, and my guide, who was a very
resolute fellow, creeping on first along the edge of the crater, beckoned to me to
follow him. The wind w'as very high, and had we slipped on either side, we should
have been precipitated, on one hand into the crater, and on the other over a precipice
of three bundled feet towards the Val de Bue. We gained the rock in safety, and,
holding by the hand of my guide, I stood on the highest peak of Etna. I felt a thrill
of satisfaction at the mere attainment of my desired object, and casting a hasty glance
over the dizzy precipices below, my guide joined me in three cheers to the Cyclops,
and we commenced our return along the narrow edge of the crater. The phenomenon
which delighted me most after the red sun rose above the clouds, that hung like
bags of wool over the Mediterranean sea, was the shadow of the cone itself in the
shape of a pyramid, resting upon the atmosphere ! At first I mistook this appearance
for anothei vast mountain at a distance, until my guide pointed it out, exclaiming,
“ I'omhra, Vomhra .” As the sun arose in the heavens, this vast shadow decreased in
height, and the deceptive appearance grew less. I need hardly inform my readers


that this shadow lay to the north-west of the true crater, and was most clearly defined
towards the top, whilst the broader base melted away into the dusky twilight that
pervaded the lower regions of the mountain. Very soon the whole sky was brightened
by the morning sunbeams, but I was disappointed at not gaining the panoramic
view which I had expected over the whole of Sicily. Cloud upon cloud canopied
the land, and only here and there, where the massy vapours were disparted, could I
gain a glimpse of the earth, that lay extended like a map far, far below, the rivers
winding through it like silver threads. To the south and west the eye ranged over
the pinnacled tops of crowded mountains, that lay like so many hillocks crouching
at the feet of a giant. But to the northward, over Italy, all was shrouded beneath
heavy clouds, blown in that direction by the wind. After collecting some specimens
of lava and sulphur from the edge of the crater, we commenced our descent, which
was accomplished by a series of running leaps, our feet sinking up to our ankles at
every step, wdiich prevented our going downwards too fast. By the time we reached
the foot of the cone, I discovered that my shoes and stockings were cut all to pieces,
and the cinders filled them at every step I took. Happily, however, the most
laborious part of our undertaking was now over, and we reached a track of soft volcanic
sand, which was quite delightful to the feet after the sharp and pointed rocks of lava
which we had just left.
The Torre del Filosofo, or the Philosopher’s Tower, at the foot of the cone, was the
next object which presented itself worthy of the traveller’s notice. It stands to the
eastward of the “ Casa degli Inglese,” a little lower dowm the side of the mountain.
As a visit to these ruins led us out of the direct road, which our mules were to take
in their descent, the guide ordered them forward under the care of my Riposto servant,
and arranged that they should wait for us at a given spot, in the region of volcanic
sand. A succession of flying leaps and slides over a steep descent of loose ashes
brought us at last to the Torre del Filosofo. It presents but little to the eye of the
x 2


inquisitive traveller, consisting only of a few remains of large red tiles, having rude
impressions upon their surfaces. These are scattered loosely about in a quadrilateral
form, and in the middle are a quantity of stones, which probably once formed part
of the edifice. Some persons have ascribed these ruins to Empedocles; and others
again affirm them to he the remains of an altar to the Etnean Jove, of which there are
several in different parts of the mountain. If the former of these suppositions be
correct, the philosopher, indeed, chose a most excellent situation from whence to study
the stars that beam through the rarified atmosphere, surrounding this lofty and
isolated peak. A feeling of sublimity amounting almost to terror, pervades such a
spot as this, where the buzzard and the eagle venture not, and ages roll by without
the sound of any created thing to tell of their solemn and certain flight. Stern, silent,
and alone, Etna rears its snow-clad crater high up into the blue vault of heaven; its
eternal solitude broken only by the voice of the occasional traveller on his pilgrimage
to the summit of the cone, or when the subterranean fires belch forth from below, by
the muttering thunders, and the portentous rumblings that accompany the dense
volumes of smoke, and the broad and fiery streams that boil up from the red hot
furnaces of the volcano. It is a remarkable circumstance, that in the numerous and
overwhelming eruptions of the mountain, these ruins of the Torre del Filosofo have
never been destroyed. The lavas have swept past them, but their course has been
either to the right or to the left. This might, in some degree, help to confirm the
opinion, that the eruptions of Etna but very seldom issue from the mouth of the
grand crater, but generally from some pseudo-volcano, which arises during the erup-
tion from the sides of the mountain much further down, out of which the streams of
lava burst forth, and the quantity of ashes and scoriae thrown out during the con-
tinuance of the eruption form conical hills around the new crater, which after the
lapse of ages become converted into a rich soil and are eventually covered with trees.
Of this I observed several examples in descending the mountain, and the instance of
the terrible eruption of 1669, will suffice to prove the assertion. This eruption,
which destroyed the city of Catania, burst out from the Monte Rossi, just above
Nicolosi, which is at least seventeen miles below the principal crater, and flowing in a
south-easterly direction, ran into the sea, blocking out the coast with huge moles
of black lava in many places between Catania and Aci Reale, From the Torre del
Filosofo, we proceeded to the brink of the Yal del Bue; on looking over which we
could discern among the morning clouds that hung beneath us, a giddy precipice,
and the mouth of a vast crater far beneath us. After crawling on our hands and
knees along the rocks that form the margin of this precipice, to prevent being blown
over by the wind, we struck off to the westward across a bed of soft sand, to regain our
mules, which we found waiting for us beside an ancient pile of rude stones, which
struck me as being more picturesque than the altar of Empedocles. I could gain


no information respecting the history of this pile, hut I should imagine it to be a relic
having a similar origin to the Philosopher’s Tower, at the foot of the cone.
We now mounted our mules; for although the descent was extremely steep and
dangerous, I was so overcome with fatigue that I was glad enough to avail myself of
this sort of partial rest; and trusting entirely to the superior knowledge of the mules
in traversing the broken lavas, I threw the reins on the back of the animal, and en-
joyed the beauties of the descent as much as my extreme state of fatigue would allow
me to do. We soon arrived at the first stages of vegetation ; the air felt sensibly
warmer, and I unburdened myself of the huge Sicilian cloak which Dr. Gemmellaro
had lent me. On reaching the region of the Bosco, the air felt delightfully refreshing,
and the sun was quite warm, butterflies flitted over the fern, and the American cow-
slip, and dog’s tooth violet, enamelled the grass. The trees of the Bosco consist
principally of ilexes, cork trees, and a few pines. These latter, however, are princi-
pally confined to the northern side of the mountain. On the borders of the Bosco,
we passed on our left a huge mass of frozen snow, which is the store that supplies the
inhabitants of the plains with this luxury during the summer. I was much surprised
at seeing this so low down the mountain, as I had not met with one particle on the
crater; and had only observed a few patches on looking down the northern slopes of
the volcano. Just as we arrived at the snow, we met a party of peasants, who had
come up from Catania, to cut a supply of it, for which they were provided with
spades, and large baskets, covered with flannel. My guide procured a lump for me,
which I found very refreshing, as the exhaustion I had undergone caused me an in-
tense thirst, and no water was to he obtained. The snow of Etna is a source of con-
siderable wealth to its several proprietors ; and I was informed that an individual of
Bronte receives a rental of 2,000 Z. per annum for a single patch of it on the northern
side of the crater.
Whilst my mule steadily wound his way down the tortuous paths of the Bosco,
I became so thoroughly drowsy that I went off to sleep several times, and I was only
awakened from my reverie by the shouts of the muleteer. The next most singular
effects which resulted from the severe fatigue under which I was labouring, were the
strange dreams that visited me. Once in particular, I fancied that I was sitting by
a parlour fire in England, and I was not a little startled on awakening, to find that I
was yet descending the mountain ; and it required some moments for me to re-collect
my ideas perfectly. But all my dreams did not end so easily, for I suddenly dis-
covered that during one of my siestas, I had dropped Dr. Gemmellaro’s woollen
cloak, and my guide told me that we must either go hack, or I must pay the ov-nei
of the garment five piastres. This latter remedy was one which I did not at all relish,
so after prevailing on one of the guides to go hack and look for it, I dismounted from
my mule, and lay down under an ilex tree to await his return. After a delightful rest


of nearly an hour, I saw the man coming down, bearing the lost cloak which I had dropt
a long way back ; and as soon as we were all once more adjusted, we hastened down-
wards towards Nicolosi, which place we reached safely soon after two o’clock, p. m.
After partaking of a vile repast of some maccaroni at Massania’s inn, for which I paid
half a dollar, I called on Signor Gemmellaro to make him a farewell visit. He received
me, as usual, most kindly, and presented me with a small box containing a variety of
lavas from the crater. After spending a short time in his museum, I took my leave*
and giving a “ buonamano” to the guide who had accompanied our ascent, I started
for Riposto by the same route as before, with the servant and mules with which
I had been provided by the politeness of Mr. Carlhill. At the end of a tedious
ride of four hours, during the two last of which it was perfectly dark, we reached Giarra,
and turning down a road that leads to the sea-shore, we soon arrived at Mr. Carl-
hill’s residence, where I was most cordially received, and congratulated on my
having accomplished the ascent to the cone under such very unfavourable circum-
stances. Mr. C. remarked that he had been watching the state of the weather during
the day, and, as the summit of the mountain was entirely shrouded by masses of
cloud, he had feared that ray expedition would terminate unfortunately. Had any
of my friends in England seen me on entering the portico of Mr. Carlhill’s dwelling,
they would have been not a little amused at my appearance. My white dress was
torn and dirty, and my shoes and stockings as ragged as they could well be. Dr.
Gemmellaro’s huge green spectacles succeeded admirably in imparting a sober dignity
to the whole; for as I was still half blind with the ophthalmia from which I had suf-
fered in Malta, the philosopher of Nicolosi had kindly lent me these spectacles, which
I found of great service. After supper, one of the young gentlemen showed me
two ancient leaden crosses, which had been discovered during some alterations
in the premises a short time before. They were found enclosed in some earthen jars
of considerable size, which the workmen broke to pieces. They are supposed to
have been the workmanship of the primitive Christians, as they bear evident marks
of great antiquity. Mr. C. begged in the kindest manner that I would accept
of these crosses, and I still retain them among my other curiosities ; the one measures
five, and the other seven inches in length. In the course of our conversation,
one of the ladies observed that very few of the indigenous flowers of Sicily were
remarkable for their perfume, which gives a complete contradiction to Erydone’s
remarks, as well as the fable of Diodorus Siculus, who tells us that hounds lost their
scent in hunting, from the excessive fragrance of the flowers that studded the Sicilian
plains.


CHAPTER XXXI.
VISIT TO THE CASTAGNO DI CENTO CAVALLOS.
“ Prodigious Etna bore a wondrous tree—
A chestnut, whose vast hollow may contain
A well-sized hand of horse.”
“ One mighty tree
Was there. Even on the edge of that vast mountain,
Upheld hy knotty roots and fallen rocks,
It overlooked in its serenity
The dark earth and the bending vault of stars.”
On the following morning I bade farewell to my kind friends at Riposto, from whom
I had experienced such genuine hospitality, and taking with me the same servant
and mules as before, I set olf for the Castagno di Cento Cavallos, or chestnut of a hun-
dred horse, a gigantic tree, or rather the remains of one, situated some way up on the
eastern side of Etna above Giarra. As so much has been said of this wonderful tree
by travellers in Sicily for ages past, I could not pass so near without paying it a
visit. It is particularly marked in an old chart of Sicily, near three hundred years
since, as the “ giant tree,” and has borne off the palm for being the largest chestnut
tree in the world. It is said to derive its present name from the circumstance of the
Queen of Arragon having taken refuge during a storm, attended by one hundred
horsemen, within its enormous trunk ; but this account may probably be fabulous.
We left Riposto about noon, and passing through Giarra, struck into a beautiful
and wildly variegated torrent path that led towards the mountain. This path, though
in many places very steep and dangerous, amply repays the wanderer who pursues
its track by the beauty of the scenery which it presents in every direction ; on one
side of the road lay a deep glen, bordered with caves, and overhung by spreading
chestnut trees : the larkspur, flos adonis, wild thyme, and golden rod, grew upon the
banks, and the blackberry blossom attracted my attention by its deep and rich
colour. After passing by a pretty village, about half way up, the path became still
more rugged, and the only footing for the mules consisted of blocks of slippery lava,


worn smooth by the mountain torrents that flow down these ravines during the winter
season. After pursuing this wild and lonely path for six or seven miles, we at length
arrived almost unexpectedly before the famous tree. At the first sight, I must confess
to my readers that I was rather disappointed; hut when I stood within its aged
limits, and examined the five massy and tortuous stems that now form its only exist-
ing remains, I could not fail to he struck with the magnificent appearance which such
a tree as this must have had when in its pristine growth and vigour. Former writers
have not inaptly styled it “ the glory of the forest.” The Castagno di Cento Cavallos
has now lost its principal attraction; the huge trunk has been destroyed by decay,
and the wood cut away in large quantities for fuel when age rendered it easy to chop
the bark off, so that, at the present day, instead of rearing up one large stem, the
traveller sees five trees, all, indeed, noble in themselves, but surrounding a hollow
space affirmed to have been once occupied by the main trunk. Many young saplings
have shot up around the parent stock, and the boughs of the five trees still bear
a tolerable supply of chestnuts ; some of these, which had been blown down by the
wind, I gathered up. Through the centre of the trees passes the road, or rather
mule-track, and a stone wall connects two of the stems on the northern side. One
reason which leads me to entertain the opinion that these trees were all joined
together at no very distant period of time, is from the fact that the insides only of the
trunks were hacked and cut away, while the outer surface of the bark remains rugged
and untouched. Every traveller who visits this tree takes the liberty of obtaining
for himself a bit of the wood of the “ Castagno,” and in a small hut, a few paces off,
a hatchet is kept for this purpose by an old woman who works in the adjoining vine-
yards.
Whilst engaged in making a sketch of the tree, a few heavy drops of rain fell, and
these were almost immediately afterwards followed by unceasing peals of thunder and
vivid flashes of lightning. After a five months’ drought this sudden change of wea-
ther was most delightful and welcome to the inhabitants, and the old woman smiled
and blessed the saints for so genial a shower, whilst we (mules and all) took refuge
in her humble shed. Fortunately, there was an abundant supply of hay, which
satisfied the hunger of our mules, but for ourselves there was nothing but some
“ carruba,” or locust beans, besides the chestnuts we had gathered from the great tree.
The vintage being over, the winepress that filled the greater part of this hovel was
emptied of its contents, as the juice of the grape, when expressed, is carried in small
kegs to the manufactories, slung across the backs of mules. Whole troops of
these animals thus laden were familiar objects of encounter in the mountain path-
ways, followed by a troop of boys and girls singing their wild and careless songs to
the god of the grape. Instead of abating, the storm increased ; the lofty peak of
Etna was shrouded from our view, the wind howled loudly, and, as it swept by, it


IL CASTAGNO DI CE NTI CAVALLOS, ET NA.




bent the slender stems of the mountain ash and the sorb tree, and laid the tangled
vines level with the ground. The thunder, as it rolled above our heads in the fearful
region of the crater, sounded like a discharge of artillery, and the lightning danced
out of the black and gloomy clouds in many a wild and arrowy fork. For two hours
we were patient occupants of the hut, thankful for having so tolerable a protection
from the pitiless storm that raged with unabated fury around us. By-and-by the
heavens grew clearer, the clouds rolled away, and the sky smiled as blue and as
serenely fair as though no tempest had ever obscured its arch of brightness, and the
wind sank down again in silence as suddenly as it arose. But the wide face of
nature underwent a universal change; the drenched flowers raised up their petals,
refreshed with the genial moisture ; the cicada sang more loudly in the green canes,
and every watercourse, that was before parched up and dry, now became a swollen
stream, murmuring on its way as it leapt from rock to rock on its downward mission
to the sultry plains. As the clouds vanished from the top of the mountain, they
disclosed the peak of Etna, clear and cutting sharply against the azure sky ; but it
had undergone a greater change than any other object. Its lofty summit was crowned
by a zone of dazzling whiteness, and its brown sides had already put on their winter
mantle of snow. This momentary change in the appearance of so conspicuous an
object as that of Etna surprised me not a little, as only the day before I had stood
on its loftiest crag, and searched in vain for an extensive patch of snow.
Near the Castagno di Cento Cavallos there are other trees of an enormous growth *,
but as the delay occasioned by the storm prevented our visiting them, I am unable
to say whether any of these are as remarkable as the one in question.
Our ride back to Giarra was unusually pleasant, and the freshened air was delight-
fully cool. Another shower overtook us, and I was much amused at meeting a number
of peasants who had come out to gather up the chestnuts which were blown down from
the trees that lined the ravine, with enormous umbrellas of coarse sailcloth, painted
red and yellow, in size and shape not unlike those of some of the market-women of
Covent Garden. On reaching Giarra we turned down a path that led us around the
outskirts of the town, instead of passing through it, as we should have done if we
had been returning again to Riposto. Our place of destination being Giardini, this
road formed a short cut, leading from the mountain fiumara into the coach-road to
Messina, on which Giardini lies, nestled at the foot of the mountain of Taormina, with
the blue waves of the Mediterranean kissing the doorsteps of its scattered cottages,
and the distant shores of Italy bounding the view to the eastward. To this secluded
village we now bent our way ; the path behind the walls of Giarra consisted of shining
particles of volcanic sand, strewed here and there with the whitening skeletons of
mules, that gave the spot the semblance of a deserted charnel-house. M hite cot-
u


tages, with their trellised vines overhanging the doorway, beneath which the inmates
sat enjoying the cool pleasant air of sunset; the women spinning their native cotton,
and groups of dark-eyed children merry in their evening gambols, chasing each other
among the dark foliage of the lemon trees. Fields of the cotton-plant, with its red
and yellow blossom, fragrant from the moisture of the genial rain, —hedgerows of
aloes and Indian figs, olives with their purple berries, golden vineyards, mulberries,
date-palms, and locust trees, were among the varied objects that met our view on
this charming coast, as the golden rays of sunset streamed far across the western
heavens, busting from behind a barrier of dense and heavy clouds, and producing an
effect that even the pencil of Turner might have striven in vain to portray, so
wildly beautiful, and yet so evanescent is the evening sky in Sicily. Many of the
cottagers greeted me as I passed with a good-natured “ Buona sera,” that owed much
of its charm to the gracefulness of manner, and playful glance that accompanied
it; though in this fair land there is much of misery, want, and woe, arising from
various political causes, yet traces of beauty and loveliness still exist among its
children, and the clear dark eye, and finely moulded form of the half-clad Sicilian
boy, may even compete with the rosy cheek and flaxen hair of the blue-eyed Scot.
We reached Giardini at eight o’clock ; it was quite dark, and the shrill cry of the
cicada, and the plaintive song of the night-bird, had serenaded us from every olive tree
during the last hour of our journey. We halted, as before, at the little inn which
had afforded me so much amusement; but alas ! it was locked up. The landlord,
and his amiable partner in life, had retired to rest on the opposite side of the street.
My guide, who appeared to understand this state of affairs better than I did, knocked
up the old folks, and presently both Punch and Judy came down in dishabille, and
unlocking the door of the albergo, commenced making preparations for my supper.
In less than half an hour this meal was before me, and I was satisfying my hunger
upon coffee, bread and honey, grapes, and fishes of the eel species, with their tails
stuck into their mouths, reminding me of the fable of the wise serpent in a similar
position, emblematical of eternity. The visitors’ book was again duly laid before me,
and acted like a dose of nitrous oxide, when just at that moment my illustrious
landlord came in with his long red nightcap on, looking more like Punch than
ever. As I anticipated a very long and tedious journey on the morrow, I bade him
good night, and quickly retired to rest, giving orders for every thing to be in readiness
for a visit to Taormina at day-break.






CHAPTER XXXII.
TAORMINA—JOURNEY TO MESSINA.
“ The heights of Mola, city-crowned,
Look on Taormina’s classic steep,
Beneath, the sapphire deep
Rolls on through its accustomed bound ;
And, far above the ocean foam,
Like eaglets perched on eyrie home
The rock-built cities rise!”
No sooner had the first beams of day spread themselves over the blue waters, than
aroused by my civil landlord I hastened to ascend the mountain of Taurominium ;
and bidding adieu to the snug little village of Giardini, my guide and myself
remounted our mules, and slowly wound our way up the steep sides of the hill. The
situation of Taormina is most singular and picturesque. It is beautifully placed
on the summit of wild and lofty rocks, in a salubrious air, and immediately overlook-
ing Giardini, from which it is about two miles’ walk, though the real distance is a mere
gunshot, and the merry shouts of the children from above are clearly heard in the
village beneath. This now inconsiderable place was once the splendid and magni-
ficent city of Taurominium, built by the Zancleans and Hybleans, in the time of
Dionysius the First. It still contains several valuable and interesting remains of
antiquity, amongst which the theatre is by far the most perfect.
We arrived at the summit of the hill without meeting with any accident, though some
tourists have not been so fortunate, as I found from an inscription in my old host’s book
at Giardini, in which a gentleman who with his guide visited Taormina on asses, writes
thus : —“ The donkeys here are shocking. I would also advise people to beware of a
young lad who pretends to act as a guide to Taormina, for he is a very great rogue. I
have been thrown head over heels three times, and if my skull had not proved uncom-
monly thick, I should certainly have been killed!” Such are the miseries of most
persons who ride on asses, from the cockney who falls gracefully on the green turf at
Hampstead or Blackheath, to the more perilous adventurer along the mule paths of
u 2


Sicily. We passed through a gateway in the ruined walls of the ancient city, and
entered the streets of the modern town, to visit the theatre, which stands in a hollow
of the rock above the town. Still higher than this, and crowning a loftier peak, the
village of Mola rises above the theatre, from which it appears to be totally inacces-
sible ; its white buildings contrasting against the azure sky, cluster around its top-
most peaks, and look like some impregnable castle of fairyland, from whence its inha-
bitants may look down upon one of the most enchanting panoramas on the earth. A
narrow and dangerous path along the edge of a precipice, led us to the theatre, where we
dismounted from our mules, and proceeded to examine the interior of these spacious
ruins. A Neapolitan artist, who occupied a small lodge near the entrance to the
theatre, acted as our guide, but unfortunately he chattered so fast and so unintel-
ligibly in Italian, that I could scarcely comprehend any thing he said; I, however,
made it appear that I perfectly understood him, and he was quite satisfied. The
form of the theatre is semi-circular, and from the remains of the columns it would
appear that its architecture was Corinthian : the walls were coated with white marble,
and the whole building composed of very small terra-cotta bricks, of a dark red
colour. The Scena is nearly perfect, and appears to have had three entrances. On
each side of the Scena are large saloons with arched roofs, which are nearly entire;
and below the theatre is a reservoir, with channels for water; a subterranean gallery
runs beneath the Proscenium ; the tiers of seats are almost obliterated, and a quantity
of soil, overgrown with grass and wild flowers, occupies their places. The walls are
in excellent preservation, as are also many of the ornamental decorations on the front
of the edifice. Fragments of rich Corinthian capitals lay scattered about, and por-
tions of columns of granite, Porta Santa, Cipollino, Giall, and beautifully variegated
African marbles, are now being removed from among the ruins by order of King
Ferdinand. Many valuable vestiges of its former magnificence have been dug up
amidst the ruins, and every fresh excavation brings some new treasure to light. But
the view.alone from this spot, is more than sufficient to repay the traveller for the
delay of a visit to so elevated a situation. Let him gaze on the village of Giardini,
nestled at the mountain’s base; on the mined aqueduct, and the modern town just
beneath him ; then let him extend his gaze onward to the site of the ancient Naxos,
and trace the line of coast past Riposto, Giarra, Catania, and Aci Reale, as far as Sira-
gusa. Northward, the distant shores of the Faro of Messina, with that city itself,
its white domes glittering in the sunshine, and the narrow thread of silver running
and winding between Europe and Sicily. The dim and distant mountains of Calabria,
and the thousand picturesque hills of the Yal di Demone, clothed with their wealth of
olives, vines, and mulberries ; before him is stretched out the vast bosom of the
Mediterranean, that looks as though it w'ere formed of one molten sapphire, so pure,
and deep, and lovely is the colour of that faithless, yet fascinating sea. Whilst to com


plete the scene, Etna towers proudly in front, mingling his snow-capped summit with
the clouds. Surely when Taurominium was in the height of its glory, this must have
been a truly imposing sight for its inhabitants to enjoy, when they gathered together
on the marble seats of the va,st theatre, beneath a serene and placid sky, their atten-
tion, no doubt, being often attracted towards the mighty Etna, belching forth flames
and smoke, and adding a terrific reality to the excitement of some Greek tragedy of
thrilling interest. Such was Taurominium ; but its grandeur is gone, and its battle-
ments are forsaken. The flowers expand their lovely petals in rich clusters on the
ruined walls of the theatre ; the lizards bask beneath the prostrate marble columns, and
lonely as the spot itself, the keen-eyed eagle sits on its loftiest pinnacle, and broods
in silence over the forsaken city. Below the Theatre are the vestiges of a chapel
belonging to the primitive Christians, and two quadrilateral sarcophagi are visible in
the valley, which lies to the northward of the hill. Leaving the theatre, we de-
scended on the opposite side to that by which we had come up from Giardini, down a
path exceedingly steep and rugged, bordered with oleanders, and strewn with blocks
of green and red marble, over which the winter torrents gush and murmur on their
downward course, amongst bushes of myrtle, syringo, and laurel. On arriving at the
foot of this path, which, in some places, was so slippery and perpendicular that we
were obliged to dismount, and even our mules seemed fearful to venture, we entered
a deep glen, and shortly afterwards found ourselves close to the sea-shore. Passing
the romantically-situated fort of St. Alessio, and other remains ascribed to Count
Ruggiero the Norman, we arrived at Ali, where there are some famous medicinal
baths, but the accommodations would hardly suit the fastidious and delicate invalids
of Great Britain.
We halted to dine at the village of Scaletta, at the same cottage where I was so much
entertained on my journey to Riposto ; and I had no sooner reached the door, than
I was warmly greeted by little Antonino, who came running to welcome me on the
strength of our late acquaintance. Inside the house, the hens, chickens, and turkeys
appeared more numerous than ever; and the dogs and slim tabbies beset me the mo-
ment I entered. When seated, the good woman turned out a rotolo of maccaroni
into a large dish, which I expected was intended for me; but to my surprise and
astonishment, the whole family surrounded it instantly, and began to demolish it with
wooden forks, cramming as much into their mouths at first as possible, and then dex-
terously pushing in the depending filaments, with their fingers. This is the true
Sicilian mode of eating maccaroni, though certainly not the most polite. After
the family meal was over, there was a second dinner prepared for me, which my hostess
served on a trencher, and, without any ceremony, or even consulting my taste on the
subject, she poured over it some tomata, or red pepper sauce, fried m oil, and then scat-
tered the salt over my plate with her fingers. Presently Antonino brought me in some


delicious figs and grapes, which were worth all the maccaroni in the place, and we
soon entered into a conversation in which his “mamma” took a part. He sadly
wanted me to take him to Messina, and said, in the prettiest voice imaginable, in
broken English, “ Antonino go to England, hut mamma no permitti.” My hostess
now left the room, and in another quarter of an hour re-entered, not in her rustic
petticoat of blue serge, and neat white handkerchief pinned over the head, but decked
out in a rich boddice of scarlet silk, with a gay stuff skirt of a bright green colour,
platted into immense folds ; a profusion of lace about her head, and her fore finger
adorned with three massive gold rings. This was her gala dress, which is similar to
those worn by most of the peasants on holiday occasions, excepting only that the red
and green are often varied by yellow, purple, or scarlet stuffs. As she was going
with her husband to pay a visit to some friends, who lived in the mountains, they
seated themselves on a mule, the lady riding behind quite conscious of her finery, and
trotted off in style towards the nearest fiumara. I also took my departure from Sca-
letta, and left Antonino Chrysofalo all alone as housekeeper, till his good mamma re-
turned from the mountains. The day was now delightfully cool, and as we approached
the suburbs of the city of Messina, we met crowds of people all abroad on some festive
gala; some were dancing in careless groups around the doors of the cottages, to the
discordant notes of the bagpipe, and the jingling of the tambourine ; others, mounted
on mules and donkeys, were thronging the dusty roads, whilst their clear voices broke
the stillness of the evening air. As we neared the city, we met numerous carriages
rolling rapidly along, filled with gaily dressed ladies and gentlemen. As I passed
one of these, an elderly gentleman put his head out of the window, and asked me
if I had been to the mountain, to which I replied in the affirmative, when I recog-
nized him as one of my fellow travellers from Giarra. Before it was quite dark, our
mules’ hoofs were clattering over the pavement of the Strada del Corso, and in another
minute I was comfortably lodged in my quarters, at‘the “ Grande Bretagne hotel,”
overlooking the Marina, and the opposite shores of Italy.


CHAPTER XXXIII.
MESSINA-PUBLIC GARDENS—CATHEDRAL—SHRINE OF ST. PLACIDO—MARINA, STREETS,
CONVENTS, AND PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
“ The Italian shore
And fair Sicilia’s coast were one, before
An earthquake caused the flaw.”
“ How beautiful is sunset, when the glow
Of heaven descends upon a land like thee,
Thou paradise of exiles—ltaly!
Thy mountains, seas, and vineyards, and the towers
Of cities they encircle.”
Nothing is more delightful and picturesque than the situation of Messina. Brydone
happily termed it, “ an enchanted semicircle,” and no description can do justice to
its beauties. According to tradition, this city was founded 1600 b. c., and was
named Zancle (which signifies a sickle) by the Greeks, on account of its crescent-like
shore, which projects into the sea, in a form somewhat similar to that instrument.
The climate is most salubrious ; and owing to the constant current of air blowing up
and down the straits, it is cooler than any other part of Sicily. That singular atmo-
spherical phenomenon, the Fata Morgana, is sometimes witnessed here, aud its illu-
sions are described as most surprising. The houses in Messina are large, elegant, and
spacious; hut, owing to the prevalence of earthquakes, the splendid row of buildings
stretching along the Marina, for more than a mile in extent, has been left unfinished,
and instead of capitals, their broken columns are covered with a rude tiling. A
modern writer on Sicily, gives the following account of the great earthquake that
befel this city in 1783 :
“ The plague in 1743 swept away fifty thousand of its citizens, and the earthquake
of 1783 nearly destroyed its magnificent quay, and most of its superb edifices. The
splendid crescent of houses fronting the Marina was reduced to a pile of ruins, and
the narrow streets were universally blocked up by fallen buildings, though some of
the public structures, owing to their solidity, remained standing, and amongst these


was the cathedral. The shocks succeeded each other from the sth to the 7th of
February. The first was the most violent; providentially, however, an interval of a
few minutes between the first and second enabled the inhabitants to escape from
their tottering houses, and take refuge in the country. At the entrance of the straits
of Messina on the Calabrian side, a violent shock of this earthquake being felt about
noon, the people of the neighbourhood fled to the sea shore, where they remained in
safety until eight o’clock at night, when, owdng to another shock, the sea swelled
immensely, and suddenly precipitated its waves on the beach, engulphing upwards
of one thousand persons, and the same tremendous swell sunk the vessels in the port
of Messina, and destroyed its mole. The dogs in Calabria appeared to anticipate this
awful convulsion of nature by howling piteously ; the sea-fowl flew to the mountains,
and a noise like that of carriage-wheels running round with great velocity over a stone
pavement preceded the first shock of the earthquake, while at the same moment a
dense cloud of vapour arose from Calabria, gradually extending to the Faro and the
town of Messina. The loss of property was incalculable —splendid churches, works
of art, libraries and records being all involved in the common ruin.”
The public gardens situated at the end of the Corso are well worthy of notice, and
though small, they are yet arranged with a great deal of taste. The trees consist
principally of mimosas, pimentos, and various kinds of locusts, oleanders, and other
flowering and ornamental shrubs. Near the entrance there are some palms, (phoenix
dactylifera,) and under the shade of the trees rustic seats are placed about, for the
accommodation of the people, who make this a favourite lounge on a sultry afternoon.
Water is introduced, though scantily, in an artificial grotto, and a stork and a purple
gallinule occupy small aviaries on the left side of the gateway. The Cathedral, or
mother church, is a fine old pile, situated on one side of a square, and well repays
the trouble of a visit. The high altar is embellished with rich marbles and columns
of lapis-lazuli, above which is an enormous picture of the Trinity. The capitals of
the columns supporting the nave are richly gilt, and there is a vastness and grandeur
about the whole edifice which cannot fail to impress the mind of the beholder. Above
the outer door is a chastely coloured fresco, and the entire front is magnificently
ornamented —the altar plate is by Guevara ; and the pulpit, which is of marble, is the
work of the famous Gagini.
Whilst passing along the Strada Corso, groups of people leading little children,
attracted my notice, all moving towards the church of St. John of Malta. As the
crowd entered through two underground doorways beneath the church, the walls of
which were gaily decked with flowers and ribbons, I imagined that there must be
something extraordinary going on below stairs, and went down also. It was the
centary and festival of St. Placido ; and I soon found myself in a low but extensive
subterranean chapel, or grotto, brilliantly illuminated with tapers. The roof was


covered with gilding and festoons of artificial flowers ; and urns, relics, and images of
saints, were aranged around the walls. In the centre of the floor stood a simple
marble shrine containing the bones of St. Placido himself, whilst at the gorgeous
altar three priests were performing various ceremonies, gabbling rapidly in Latin over
a mass which seemed to be addressed to every saint in the calendar in succession,
each ejaculation being devoutly responded to by the deluded worshippers, who knelt
in clusters on the cold floor of mosaic work. Some were bending over the shrine
in reverence, and others silently counting their beads, whilst one old woman actually
fell prostrate on her face before the altar. All this time music sounded sweetly from
unseen choristers, and all seemed so engaged in the rites that I passed out unnoticed.
At the end of a corridor I saw a small altar-piece for the little children; a beautiful
painting of the infant Jesus and the Virgin, stood above it. Here I waited for a
short time and watched the mothers bringing their young children, and even little
babies, teaching them to bow before the picture of Christ, and sprinkling their foreheads
with the holy water, which is contained in a font of verd-antique, near the door. This
constitutes nearly all their religion. On the outside of the church door, a number of
small cannon were being fired off, which caused an echo in the surrounding mountains,
producing an effect not unlike incessant thunder. Messina is a place where the church
is all powerful, and this may easily be supposed from the number of priests, monks,
and friars, that are constantly met with in the streets. The Senate-house is a fine
building, having one entrance in the Strada Corso, and another principal one from
the Marina. The Marina itself is a beautiful promenade, ornamented with fine sta-
tues and fountains, and overshadowed with pimento trees. After sunset this pro-
menade is a most delightful one. Vessels from all parts of the world throng the
whole line of the quay, close to which the water is very deep, and so clear, that every
pebble at the bottom is readily discernible.
The castle, situated on the extremity of the curved promontory of the harbour,
seems to stand midway between Sicily and Calabria; and the panorama of mountains,
clothed with wood to their very summits, rises around the straits in picturesque
beauty. But the view from the convent of St. Gregorio surpasses that from the
Marina, and the scene when gazed upon from the heights of the telegraph above the
city, approaches to the description of the appearance of Constantinople, and the shores
of the Bosphorus, from the burial place of Scutari. The coral fishery is carried on
here, and the straits abound with excellent fish of all kinds. It is a beautiful sight
on a dark evening to observe the process of fishing by torchlight in the Faro. They
carry a large flambeau at the prow of the boat, and its light attracts the fish, which
are speared with a small harpoon when they rise to the surface of the water. The
streets of Messina are much superior to those of Siragusa, and the whole place has
an air of bustle and cheerfulness which is wanting amid the wretchedness and ruin ot
x


that city. Most of the tradespeople, as in Malta, carry on their occupations either
outside the doors, or around the open entrances to the stores and bazaars. The
jewellers’ shops are worth notice, and. the display of Neapolitan trinkets is sure to
attract the eyes of a foreigner. Beautiful shell-work may he purchased in this city ;
and a man who resides on the Marina, assisted by his daughter, manufactures most
exquisite models in cork of the various antiquities on the island, as well as figures of
the native costumes, which may be obtained at very low prices, though the duty im-
posed on them in this country is so enormous as to deter many persons from bringing
them home. The cafes and ice shops are equal to those ofYaletta, though not so
numerous, and the Rosolia, and other cordials made here, are delicious. The Grande
Bretagne hotel, where I staid whilst in Messina, is a magnificent and spacious build-
ing, excellent in every respect, and the charges moderate ; the landlord, Signor Nobile,
is a very polite and civil Italian, and speaks English well. I must not forget to
mention the great kindness which I experienced from my friends, Messrs. Rew and
Rynd, to whom I bore letters of introduction. On the morning before I left, I
walked with Mr. Rynd and his brother to the Capuchin convent, which stands on the
hill where Brydone saw the dancers treading their “ light Sicilian measures,” of which
he speaks so poetically. Lupins grow wild around Messina, and the road towards
Palermo is shaded with fine carob trees. The view from this spot is, like all others
around the Faro, enchanting, and I was truly disappointed at being obliged so soon
to cut short my sojourn in this delightful city. But the long-horned oxen dragging
their ponderous and clumsy wagons along the Marina, piled up with boxes of lemons,
warned me that the time of my departure was nigh ; and before sunset I bade adieu
to the shores of Sicily, and re-embarked in the schooner “ Prospero,” for England.
She was now stored with a full cargo of lemons, every nook and corner being filled
with them ; and the paraphernalia of passports, health-bills, and manifests being
finished, we lay off the quay ready to set sail, waiting only till the current turned in
our favour for passing the dangers of Scylla and Charybdis. The market boats were
our last visitors from the shore ; they were laden with fruits of all kinds, —oranges,
grapes, figs, walnuts and pomegranates, of which we laid in a fair stock for our
voyage.
The excitement of my tour was over; the blue and smiling sky, the golden vine-
yards, the fertile plains and sunny mountains of Sicily, were about to be exchanged
for a dreary and dangerous voyage to a less genial clime, and the dark storms of win-
ter seemed already to whisper their melancholy music in the passing tempest that
succeeded to this sultry day. But memory had wreathed a many-coloured garland of
flowers to cheer me over the dreary ocean; and though years roll by, my brightest
visions and fondest recollections shall be of those sun-lit isles that lie cradled in the
bosom of the Mediterranean.


CHAPTER XXXIV.
VOYAGE FROM MESSINA TO ENGLAND.
“ I go towards the shore to drive my ship
To mine own land, o’er the Sicilian wave,”
“ The sea-world shook beneath a mighty storm,
Each billow on his brow had hound a wreath
Of white foam-flowers; and every moving form
Of spectral Typhoon and sea-monster rose
To battle wildly with the deep wild sea.”
A violent storm of wind, accompanied by torrents of rain, prevented our leaving the
port last night. The water soon collected from the mountains, and pouring down the
fiumaras, or torrent-beds, swept with resistless violence onwards to the sea, carrying
every thing before it. In one of the streets of Messina, leading down to the Marina
Quay, a poor mule was taken off its legs by the force of the torrent, and washed
along by the flood, which carried away the contents of its panniers. The drowning
animal was, however, at last rescued by its owner, having been stopped in its career
by a projecting wall. The Sicilians appear to be quite accustomed to these heavy
rains, and during their prevalence, they lead a kind of aquatic life ; they run skipping
along the streets without shoes or stockings, their trousers turned up to their knees,
and an enormous umbrella carried over their heads. During the night the rain par-
tially abated, and when the morning broke, the sun burst through the clouds, (which
still hung on the mountain-tops,) with its wonted brilliancy, shining along the hilly
slopes, which looked greener and more beautiful after the storm. At six o’clock we
left the quay, and were soon in the midway channel between Sicily and Calabria ; the
high and rugged mountains of the latter country seemed still as so many attractive
points for the storms ; and their black precipices contrasted well with the hills of
Sicily, over which the sunbeams were shining a long farewell, perhaps for ever. I
much regretted leaving Sicily, where I had passed so many pleasant days in exploring
her ruined cities, her shady groves and wild flowery glens; her scattered monuments
x 2


of former greatness, that silently speak to the musing beholder ; and last, though not
least, her lofty and romantic mountains, with the giant Etna, towering majestically
above all, capped with a zone of pearly snow, that gleamed white in the sunshine as
we receded from the lessening shores. To our right, the rock and castle of Scylla,
formed a conspicuous object; and several small villages skirted the foot of the Cala-
brian mountains. As to the whirlpool of Charybdis, nothing now remains but a few
occasional breakers ; and I fancied that the current sometimes took an eddying course,
but neither corresponded with Virgil’s terrible description in the voyage of Eneas ;
“ Dextrum Scylla latus, laevum implacata Charybdis
Obsidet, atque imo barathri ter gurgite vastos
Sorbet in abruptum fluctus rursusque sub auras
Erigit alternos, et sidera, verberat unda!”
Having escaped the dangers of Scylla and Charybdis, whether real or imaginary,
and got clear of the Faro, our pilot left us, and put back in his little boat, telling us
at parting, that we should have a fair wind, or, as he termed it, a “ cracker levanter,
and promised to pray to St. Antonio for a good voyage for us. This kind offer was
made in the hopes of getting an extra dollar added to his pay, a trick which often
succeeds with these men, though whether they really use their pretended influence
with the guardian saint, is a fact of which I am rather doubtful. The Neapolitan
steamer passed us in the afternoon, and a gentle breeze carried us past Monte Strom-
boli, the most eastern of the Eolian or Lipari Isles. Though this volcano is said to
be always in a state of ignition, I could not discover any appearance either of fire or
smoke, although it might, perhaps, have happened that we were at too great a dis-
tance from it, for this to be visible. It has the appearance of a huge cone rising very
abruptly out of the sea; it is upwards of 2,000 feet in height, and nine miles in cir-
cumference, and is about thirty-two miles distant from Sicily.
Monday. —lnstead of the “ cracker levanter,” promised to us by our weather-wise
pilot, the sea this morning was as calm as a lake ; the distant shores of Sicily were
visible at Milazzo, and the top of Etna could he seen towering above the clouds.
About breakfast time a fishing boat from the shore came, and rowed twice around our
vessel; this is a plan adopted by the natives in order to attract the fish, which they
suppose lie under the ship’s keel. In the afternoon some light airs carried us within
sight of Volcano, and several more of the Lipari isles, Salina, Lipari, and Panaria.
The night was calm and beautiful, and the stars beamed out most brilliantly through
the clear, still air.
Tuesday. —Almost a dead calm ; another boat came around us again this morning,
but they did not appear to catch any fish. The islands of Alicudi and Felicudi bore
north of us ; they somewhat resemble Stromboli in form, but they have been extinct,
as volcanos, for ages. Volcano is still active at times 5 the cratei, which is situated


in the centre of the island, presents a superb a:;d magnificent spectacle, and the whole
island abounds with pumices, salts, and sulphur.
Wednesday. —A calm all day.
Thursday. —Towards evening a breeze sprang up, and we passed Ustica, the most
westerly of the Lipari Isles, situated nearly opposite to the city of Palermo, in Sicily,
and far remote from the rest of the Lipari group. A large eagle soared around the
vessel about sunset, and a thrush was caught on the rigging. Several quails, which
I brought from Malta, unfortunately died. I rather think that they committed
suicide, or felo de se, by strangling themselves between the wicker work of their cage.
Friday. —Almost calm again. We were amused in the course of the morning by
watching several pilot-fish swimming under the keel, and accompanying the vessel
for some miles ; they are about the size of a large mackerel, and beautifully striped
with broad hands of black and white ; these fish are said to swim before the sharks,
and act the same part for them which the jackal is supposed by many to perform for
the lion. When attacked, the sailors affirm that they swim dowm the shark’s mouth,
where they find a safe retreat. At sunset a wild duck passed us, apparently winging
his weary flight towards Sicily ; it reminded me of Bryant’s lines to a water fowl.
Saturday, 23rd. —To-day I was gratified with the sight of a number of beautiful
dolphins. I almost feared that we should leave the Mediterranean without seeing
any of them ; hut to-day they seemed determined to show themselves, and sported
around the vessel in high style. Whilst swimming they appear to he of a deep blue,
with a golden-coloured tail, and gleam with a rich metallic lustre on every change of
light; they are said to he much more beautiful when they are out of the water, hut
we were not fortunate enough to catch any, though we made many attempts. M e
even put poor “ Prinny,” the dog, overboard, with a rope made fast around him,
for a bait; however, we afterwards substituted a large piece of pork, which had
the effect of drawing them near, and the captain succeeded in striking one with the
grains (a weapon used for fishing,) but it was so far under water that he found it
impossible to hook it. These fish are said to be the forerunners of a strong breeze,
and are therefore favourites with the sailors.
Sunday , 24th. —We have been fortunate enough to have a fair wind all day, which,
of course, the men attributed to the dolphins, for sailors, though generous and good-
natured, are the most superstitious set of men imaginable.
Monday.— After a fine breeze all day, we passed the island of Sardinia. The high
land of the south-east coast is visible at a great distance.
Tuesday.— This morning we were out of sight of Sardinia, as it had blown hard
all night. Dark clouds from the south-east seemed to portend a storm, and it was
not long before we were suddenly visited by several white squalls, or gusts of wind,
which are every where dangerous, but are particularly dreaded in the Mediterranean.


At eleven o’clock the captain, who was on the look-out, observed one of these squalls
approaching; he lowered all the sails immediately, and made every thing as snug as
he possibly could. He had just time to do this as the squall reached us. It lasted
about five minutes, accompanied with a flood of rain, but happily passed off without
doing us any serious injury. However, a much more alarming accident awaited us,
which would in all probability have proved fatal, had not a merciful Providence pro-
tected us. After the first squall had passed away, the sky appeared much clearer, and
all sails were then immediately hoisted, to make the most of the breeze. Not an hour
had elapsed ere another squall overtook us, quite unawares, just at the instant that
the men were hauling back the sails. For several minutes the wind raged furiously,
accompanied by a loud thundering noise. So sudden was the onset of the tempest,
that the captain was unable to get down a single sheet of canvass. We were blown
quite over on one side, so as to bring the vessel’s keel completely out of the
water, and we were within a hair’s breadth of being upset. It was impossible for us
to do any thing to save ourselves, as all the hatchways were open, and the captain
was on the point of cutting away the boat, when the squall as suddenly abated, and
the vessel regained her previous position in the water. Mrs. B. and I were below, and
whilst drifting along in this dangerous position, I saw the waves, which appeared all of
a froth, high above our heads, and threatening to overwhelm us through the skylight of
the cabin. The remainder of the day was stormy, but as most of our upper canvass
was taken in, we were comparatively out of danger. The thunder, however, increased,
and towards evening it blew a heavy gale, which raged during the whole night. We
were now running under double-reefed mainsail, and the rolling of the ship had over-
turned all the boxes, &c., in my bed cabin, which prevented my getting in, as during
the gale it was impossible to attempt stowing them away.
Wednesday, 27th. —Wet, cold, and miserable, Hay all night upon the steerage floor,
where I remained during this day, and all the next night, the gale raging during the whole
time with unabated fury. With a hard biscuit and a few cold potatoes I satisfied my
hungry wants, and lay thinking of the pleasant scenes in Sicily I had so recently left,
and all the comforts of an English fireside to which I was approaching. As hour
after hour passed drearily by, and no appearances seemed to prognosticate the ces-
sation of the storm, I tried, but in vain, to get a little sleep, for the water constantly
pouring down over my head, and the strange manner in which I was rolled about
over the floor, rendered it quite impossible.
Thursday, 28th.' —Though the wind still continued to blow with great violence, yet
the sky was as blue as a summer’s morning, and the sun shone brightly, seeming to
mock our pitiable condition. The waves ran mountains high, far higher, indeed,
than ever I had seen them before. It was a truly grand sight to see their mighty
crests rolling on each side far above our heads, looking as though they would engulph


us in their fathomless depths. But our little vessel floated like a cork on the water,
now riding on the summit of a vast wave, and then sinking down its sloping sides
into a deep and yawning abyss. When the waves rose against the sky, the light
shining through them produced a lovely transparent blue colour, which, contrasting
with the snowy foam breaking over their summits, formed a strikingly beautiful effect;
and as though we were to lose no portion of so grand a sight, a large man-of-war
(the Hastings) came close upon us. Her spacious decks were covered with men, and
the Royal Arms of England, with the motto, “ England expects every man to do his
duty,” shone conspicuously, whilst every now and then she rose on the top of one of
these mighty waves, as though she were a mere nutshell upon the waters. We sailed
alongside of her for some time, and whilst our little vessel was drenched with spray,
her lofty decks were quite dry. One of the officers gave us the longitude, which
we found to correspond pretty nearly with our own. By-and-by she kept more to
the leeward, as though going to Minorca, and we soon lost sight of her. During the
afternoon a bottle drifted close past us, sealed up with red wax, and having several
barnacles on it. It exactly resembled the one which I threw overboard during our
outward passage to Malta, and I doubt not but it was the same. Could we have
secured it to ascertain the fact, it would have been strange indeed.
Friday, 29th. —During the night the wind had much abated, though it still blew a
pretty strong breeze. In the afternoon we managed to take tea upon the deck, when
we passed the island of Minorca. We saw Port Mahon quite distinctly. 11 appeared
to be a charming place, and the whole extent of coast is sprinkled with houses and
villages. The sky had a remarkably wild appearance, but the sunset was one of the
most resplendent I ever witnessed. Bank upon bank of molten clouds lay piled up
in the golden sky, glowing like the embers of a furnace, whilst huge storm clouds,
black as night, mingled in the scene, and caught the radiant gleam upon their dusky
sides. It was altogether a scene of sublime magnificence, and after watching at till
the last amber streak died away, I could not help regretting the transient nature of so
grand and glorious a spectacle. It reminded me of Byron’s exquisite description in
“The Island.”
“ The broad sun set, but not with lingering sweep,
As in the north he mellows o’er the deep;
But fiery, full, and fierce, as if he left
The world for ever, earth of light bereft,
Plunged with red forehead down along the wave,
As dives a hero headlong to his grave.”
Saturday, 30th.—During the night we passed Majorca, and this morning the islands
of Iviza and Formentara were in sight, though very distant. To-day we have had
several more squalls, but we were prepared to meet them. They were, however,


nothing to be compared with those we had before experienced. After sunset the full
moon shone remarkably clear, and its orb was surrounded by a double halo of uncom-
mon brilliancy. Whilst at the mast-head, the captain caught a redstart in his hand ;
the poor little bird had been flying about the vessel all day, and seemed totally ex-
hausted. We put it into a cage with some birds which one of the men had brought
from Sicily, but on the next morning we found that it was dead.
Sunday, 31st. —The weather still continues very squally and unsettled, though at
times it is almost a perfect calm, whilst at a short distance off we can see as much
wind as we could wish to have for sailing. About noon I observed a waterspout for
the first time. A very black cloud bung over the sea, in the direction of Africa. It
had attracted my attention several times as I sat reading upon deck. At last I ob-
served a long cylindrical column projecting downwards from the under surface of the
cloud, and at the same time the sea beneath became violently agitated, and drew itself
up until it met the column from above, forming a line of communication between
the cloud and the sea. Several other spouts showed themselves in different parts of
the horizon, all presenting similar grand and extraordinary appearances, till one after
another they dispersed from among the clouds, and the waters beneath grew calm as
before. Soon afterwards we saw a beautiful rainbow, and not far off a heavy squall
appeared, which seemed to disturb the waters with a violent agitation, and cover their
suiface with a sheet of feathery foam ; whilst around our vessel, the sea’s surface was
calm and still, and not a breath of wind disturbed a single sail. In the afternoon we
made the coast of Spain, at Denia, the tops of the mountains looking like islands
above the horizon. The evening was calm and pleasant, and we took tea upon the
deck.
Monday, Nov. l.—-This proverbially dreary month was ushered in by a brilliant
morning, and during the day we passed the longitude of Greenwich, which made us
think of getting nearer home, though we had still nearly 1,800 miles to traverse across
the fathomless ocean.
Fuesday, 2nd. Made Cape de Palos. In the evening we again took our tea
on deck, illumined by the glow of a beautiful sunset; quite one of Claude’s in its
way. The Spanish hills lay bathed in its warm light, whilst the calm sea and purple
sky caught rich orange-coloured reflections on the breast of every emerald wave, and
the bosom of every sleeping cloud. The sea had a most singular appearance, rib-
banded, as it was, with alternate colours of green and orange, which I had never
observed so distinctly before. After dark the water became extremely phosphorescent,
a phenomenon which is said to be the forerunner of a southerly wind. The wake of
our vessel glowed like a sheet of flame, and the waters were luminous for some distance
around us, particularly in the ripple of the waves.
Wednesday, 3rd. A fair wind blowing from the south-east has carried us past




GIBRALTAR FROMTH E MEDITER ANEAN.
Bearing W.N.W.


Cape de Gat, and all day the Spanish coast was in sight; the high mountains of
Granada, covered with snow, were visible at a great distance, and presented a
magnificent appearance from the sea. The air was delightful, and the sun shone
clear and bright, reminding one of the warm sunny days of spring. Eight or nine
vessels were in sight, and about four o’clock, p. m., we overtook a small French
schooner from Marseilles. As we ran close past her the French captain cried out in
great terror, “ Que voulez-vous ? ” the poor fellow no doubt taking us for pirates, as
he seemed desperately frightened. We soon glided past them, for the “ Prospero”
is what they term in nautical language a “ clipper,” and before dark they were only
as a speck on the water. The thermometer at noon was 63°.
Thursday, 4th. —At sunrise the rock of Gibraltar was in sight, as we had run dur-
ing the whole night before a fair wind. At nine o’clock, a.m., we passed the rock,
and hoisted our colours out of compliment to the British Government. The wind
became stronger as we entered the straits, through which it generally blows with great
violence. Most fortunately it was in our favour, as it also was on the passage out;
so that instead of having to lie off Gibraltar for two or three days, we ran past with a
most favourable breeze. Numbers of vessels, which doubtless had been waiting for
a fair wind to help them through the straits, were now all running on, crowded with
as much canvass as they could safely carry. Perhaps such a fleet had not sailed past
Gibraltar for a long time, and it certainly was a sight of no common interest to see
from eighty to a hundred vessels all sailing by, and taking advantage of such a
favourable wind. We passed close to the rock, so that I was enabled to obtain a
very good view of it. Some parts appear to be uncommonly picturesque, particularly
where the villas of the officers, and other British residents, are situated, towards the-
western side of Europa Point. Further in stands the town of Gibraltar, and the bay
crowded with men-of-war and other shipping. The garrison amounts to several thou-,
sand troops, and the whole rock is very strongly fortified. At the foot of the preci-,
pices on the eastern side, are a number of caverns, against which the waves dashed,
with great violence; the stone is of a mottled reddish colour, and bears a remarkably
fine polish. About half way along, on the eastern side of the rock, there is a small
fishing town most snugly situated at the foot of a deep ravine. As we rounded the.
lighthouse, we stood close in to the land, and I distinctly saw the aloes with their
long flower-stalks growing around the houses, as well also as several soldiers of the
42nd regiment of Highlanders coming down a narrow defile in the rock, reminding
one of those lines of Sir Walter Scott s :
“ But if beneath yon southern sky
A.plaided stranger roam,
Whose drooping crest and stifled sigh,
And sunken cheek and heavy eye,
Pine for his Highland home,” &c.
X


I saw the hill on the Spanish side of the boundary that commands a view of
Gibraltar, where the queen of Spain sat during the siege of that fort, and vowed that
she would neither eat nor drink until she had seen the Spanish flag hoisted above that
of Great Britain, on the heights of Gibraltar.
Leaving the town and bay of Algeceiras on our right, we passed Cape Carbonaro,
where there is a sunken rock called the Pearl. On looking at the chart, we found
that we had passed it pretty closely, but fortunately we had avoided coming into con-
tact with it. Vessels are sometimes lost upon this rock, as it lies at no greater depth
than ten feet below the surface of the water; and in blowing weather it is very
difficult to be discovered. The high hills between this point and Tarifa, are richly
cultivated with vineyards and orange groves, and the hedges are composed entirely of
aloes, and the cactus opuntia, or prickly pear. Several old watch-towers guard the
coast, and we passed so near that I amused myself by looking through the telescope
at the men, the oxen, and other objects on the shore. I noticed several of the inha-
bitants engaged in ploughing, and watched for some time two Dons who were mounted
upon mules, travelling along a narrow path, until, at last, a projecting rock hid them
from my sight. I was particularly pleased with a little dell at the foot of the moun-
tains skirting the sea shore, filled with luxuriant trees, where there was a small chapel
to the Virgin, It was a spot where one might lie musing for hours on the magnificent
works of nature, far from the busy hum of crowded cities, and the chilling influence
of cold and selfish men. As we neared Tarifa, we flew rather than sailed, and ran past
the lighthouse at the rate of fifteen knots an hour. The sea was covered with foam,
and the current of the waves served also to help us along. Two priests were sitting
on the rocks that jut out beyond the lighthouse, watching, no doubt, the numerous
vessels gliding by, and perchance also staring with amazement at the little Pros-
pero,” for she outran every vessel that was in sight, and before dark we had passed
them all. As fast as we came in sight of one, we overtook her, and then came up with
the next, and so on, until we got entirely clear of the straits, which was about two
o’clock. Tarifa is a fine old town, surrounded with a high wall, and the light-
house forms a conspicuous object in the distant landscape, lire African moun-
tains were shrouded in a thick misty haze, and Cape Spartel was only just visible.
We ran quite close to one of the vessels we passed ; she was the “ Alchemist,” of
Whitby, and had lost part of her bulwarks in the late gales. Presently we over-
took another very fine brig, who hoisted her signals to know who we were ; we con-
sequently returned the compliment, and hoisted ours, when she proved to be the
“ Cassandra.” After this we passed Trafalgar, where Nelson received his fatal
wound, and as we got clear of the straits we gained a glimpse of Cadiz, and then
steered away direct for Cape St. Vincent.
Friday , sth. —Having run all night at the rate of ten or eleven knots an hour,


we expected at daybreak to make Cape St. Vincent, when we found to our astonish-
ment on the captain’s reckoning that we had run about thirty miles to the west-
ward of it, and were still advancing into the Atlantic Ocean. Directly we found out
our mistake, we tacked to the northward, and hy-and-hy we made the mountains of
Monchique, bearing east. The wind had blown pretty strongly all day, and we pro-
gressed at the rate of ten knots an hour during the whole time. It is Guy Faux day,
and we have not forgotten the sports and amusements which it is no doubt affording
to many a merry school-boy in old England, whilst we are breasting the broad
Atlantic. About dinner time a bale drifted past us, apparently full of goods, and
must have escaped from some wreck during the late storm.
Nov. 6. —In the night we passed Lisbon, and I came on deck to get a moon-
light peep at the rock for one minute, and then jumped back again into bed. At day-
break the Berlings Islands were in sight, and a vessel, supposed to be the Isabel, (a very
fast-sailing schooner that left Messina on the same morning that we did,) and a steam-
ship also, appeared on the distant horizon. The atmosphere was fine and mild, and
several swallows flew around our vessel. The mate caught a large locust in the hold,
which probably had come out from amongst the lemons, just to get a breath of fresh air.
In the afternoon the captain put me at the helm, to see if I should be lucky enough to
“bring a breeze,” as the sailors term it. After steering for about an hour the wind
freshened, and I, of course, was considered lucky. It annoyed me sadly, for hereafter
I shall always be called to the tiller in calm weather, when whistling is of no avail.
Nov. 7. —Off Oporto ; the sun shone as warmly as it does on a summer’s day in
England. During the morning I was again called upon to steer for a breeze, and,
indeed, I expect now to be created nothing else than chief helmsman. Latitude 42 c
13'. In the afternoon we passed a large brig bound in an opposite direction to our-
selves ; she hoisted the signals, but we could make nothing of them. The captain
was fortunate enough to spear a young pilot fish, which we fried for our tea ; we
found its flesh to be white and very good, only there was not enough of it. After dark
1 saw what I considered to be a large fire on the Spanish coast, and called the
captain to look at it; he, however, thought less of it, and returned to the cabin
grumbling, and saying, that it was only two or three old Spanish women sitting round
a farthing rushlight! so 1 took care not to call him up any more to interpret my
observations.
Nov, B.—Off Cape Finisterre, distant about thirty miles; thermometer 67°, and
the weather warm and fine. Towards the afternoon it became nearly calm, and the
water appeared to be full of small polypi and jelly fishes, some of which were single,
whilst others were in clusters of twenty or thirty, and some had the appearance of
snakes. We spoke the “Eliza,” of Weymouth ; her master, W., proved to be an
acquaintance of Capt. B.’s, and they held a long conversation together. We invited
y 2


him to come on board and dine with us, hut unfortunately the boat was being painted,
so that we had no means of communication, and the distance between the schooners
was too wide for a leap. I was much vexed at this, for he offered us some nice salt
fish, which would have been a great treat.
Tuesday. —During the night a very copious dew had fallen. The dews of Spain
and Portugal are much heavier than those of Sicily, hence the greater luxuriance of
vegetation in those countries. To-day we spoke the “ Water Lily,” of Bideford,
from Alicant, bound to Falmouth. In the afternoon a very thick fog hovered about
us, which soon spread around on all sides, and rendered the air very sharp and chill.
Wednesday , Nov. 10. —There is a great swell in the bay, though only a light air
is stirring. The morning is very fine but rather chilly ; the “ Eliza,” of Weymouth,
is still in sight to the windward ; the thermometer at nine o’clock stood at 59°. Dur-
ing the afternoon we had the wind from the east, but in the night it changed to the
south-west, which of course was fair for crossing the bay.
Thursday, 11th. —Lat. 45° 57', long. 9° 14'. A large vessel passed us this morn-
ing, outward bound, probably an American liner; the day was throughout very fine
and clear.
Friday , 12th. —Spoke the “Isabel” at last; she sailed from Messina two hours
after us, and when Capt. B. saw her, he lay-to till she came up with us, and then
w r e sailed along together; the sea very rough, and the vessels running along at
from nine to ten knots an hour. The captain of the “ Isabel” was much pleased to
see us, and I was greatly amused at hearing our captain invite him to come on board
and have a slice of his ham ; for before we left Messina, he made us a present of a
couple of very fine ones. Towards evening the sky grew fearfully wild and stormy,
and flocks of sea-gulls skimmed around our vessel, uttering their melancholy and
boding cry. All night it blew a strong gale, and before midnight w r e were abreast of
Ushant.
Saturday , 13th. —At daylight we made the Start Point. I started at hearing the
captain say, as he came down into the cabin, that the English land was in sight,
and hoped that a happy termination would soon be put to our voyage. Ere long
we passed the Bill of Portland, and as the evening shades fell around us, we could
discern St. Catherine’s lighthouse in the Isle of Wight.
Sunday , 14th. —In the morning we were off Dungeness, the air was intensely
cold, and the wind blowing strong. A great number of vessels were leaving the Ness
Roads, and several Boulogne fishing smacks were cruising about. Eleven o’clock,
a.m., off Dover; the pilot cutter came up with us, and put a pilot on board; we
hoisted a yellow flag as a signal that we were in quarantine, and by noon we were
anchored in the Downs. We had no sooner cast anchor than it came on to blow a
dreadful gale from the north east. The storm increased every hour, and w r e dragged


our anchors, arid expected to lose them altogether; our last resource was the remain-
ing anchor, which had in some way got the chains entangled; and after a great deal
of trouble, the captain was obliged to have fifteen fathoms of heavy chain dragged
through the cabin. We were altogether in a state of great suspense, but our remain-
ing anchor was good, and the cables strong. The aspect of the sea was terrific, and
the sky above our heads seemed all on fire. Several vessels drifted from their anchors,
but fortunately almost all the ships had left the Downs early in the morning. At six
o’clock, p. m., it blew a perfect hurricane, but at midnight the storm lulled, though
the sea still ran high, and there was a very heavy swell. Towards morning some
boats came off from Deal, to know if we had lost our anchors, and at daybreak a
smack passed us, towing along a beacon which had been blown down off the Good-
win-sands during the gale. The “ Isabel” anchored alongside of us, but owing to
the stupidity of our pilot, she got under weigh two hours before us, which exceedingly
mortified the captain, as he had only lain down to get an hour or two of sleep, having
had none for several previous nights, and desired the pilot to be sure and not let the
“ Isabel” get the start of us. This man was a source of great trouble to us during
the time that he was on board, and so obstinate was he, that he would move for no-
thing ; indeed the captain had to take the entire management of the vessel himself,
whilst the pilot lay snoring in the cabin ! During the storm, three ignis fatui rested
on the vessel; they arranged themselves very fairly, for one alighted on each topmast,
and the third on the gib-boom end.
Monday , 15th. —It was almost a calm the whole of the day, and the “ Isabel”
was nearly out of sight. We passed Ramsgate and the North Foreland, and anchored
for the night at Pansandhole. The sky looked very wild and stormy, and we lay
expecting another gale before midnight.
Tuesday, 16th. —The threatened gale of last night fortunately passed over to the
eastward, and on going on deck this morning, I saw the shores towards Margate
covered with snow, whilst those which were abreast of us had entirely escaped. We
weighed anchor at breakfast time, and reached Sheerness by noon, where we had to
enter Stanley Creek to get product, and to be released from our state of quarantine.
The Doctor came alongside, and our whole company had to arrange themselves on
deck to show him that they were well, and free from all stain or spot of plague. Our
ship’s papers were taken from us by a pair of tongs, and carried back to the shore in
an iron box to undergo the process of fumigation. After they were examined the
captain went to the product-ship, and obtained our release almost immediately, dhe
same afternoon we got out of the creek, and anchored for the night about a quarter of
a mile below the Nore light.
Wednesday, I7th.—Early this morning we fell in with a steam tug, and by noon
we had reached Gravesend, where the Custom-house officers came on board. By two


o’clock we were safely anchored at Fresh Wharf, and in another moment I was on shore,
moving amongst the busy thousands of the metropolis, on my way homewards. After
a stormy and dangerous voyage of thirty-one days, I was truly glad to set foot again
on terra firma, and to hid farewell for a season to the lonely and murmuring ocean.
When the dark storm and the howling blast sweep with their wintry pinions over its
troubled bosom, I shall think of the rocking ship and the tempest-tossed sailor, whose
home is on the faithless sea. And my thoughts shall wander on till they revisit the
fair forsaken shores of Sicily, and trace every well-known spot on memory’s glowing
chart —spots once seen, but never again to be forgotten 1
THE END.
Tyler & Reed, Printers, 5, Bolt-court, London.












