

H IRaticmal jfaitb
A SCIENTIFIC BASIS FOR BELIEF IN A FUTURE PROGRESSIVE
STATE VERSUS FAITH IN TRADITIONS AND DOGMAS
IRRECONCILABLE WITH REASON
BEING
I
.1
A REPRINT OF “ REASONS FOR THE HOPE THAT IS IN ME ”
AND OTHER PAMPHLETS, &c.
a
u
u
I
M**'
HUGH JUNOR BROWNE
Author of “ Rational Christianity“ The Holy Truth,” “ The
Grand Reality Ac.
PEICE OTsT IE SHILLING
% GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
% MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
JIS92




A RATIONAL FAITH
A SCIENTIFIC BASIS FOR BELIEF IN A FUTURE PROGRESSIVE
STATE VERSUS FAITH IN TRADITIONS AND DOGMAS
IRRECONCILABLE WITH REASON
BEING
A REPRINT OF “REASONS FOR THE HOPE THAT IS IN ME”
AND OTHER PAMPHLETS, &G.
HUGH JUNOR BROWNE
Author of “ Rational Christianity “ The Holy Truth,” “ The
Grand Reality cfcc.
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
MELBOURNE, SYDNEY, AND ADELAIDE
1892




PREFACE.
“ Oh! for the touch of a vanished hand,
And the sound of a voice that is still.”
How frequently does the above familiar quotation
suggest itself to the minds of those grieving over a loved
one who has been called away by the hand of death, yet
how very few, were they to feel the touch of a spirit-
hand, hut would shrink from it with dread, if not with
horror; aiid were they to hear the voice of the loved
departed, would they not tremble with fear at the
sound? I may here, in corroboration of this, mention a
case related to me by a friend, who, with his wife and
only child, a schoolmate of one of my daughters, used to
sit in the same church with my family and self many
years ago. He told me that, having heard of the won-
derful results obtained by us at our family circle, he got
his wife and daughter to sit with him one evening to see
if they could get any spirit manifestations. They had
only sat for a few minutes when his daughter excitedly
exclaimed, “Oh! I see a spirit sitting on the sofa;” ujDon
which they all jumped up from their seats and rushed
out of the room in terror. I said to him, “ What you
have related to me reminds me of the story of a boy
who went fishing one morning, and who, at the first pull
on his line by a fish, threw his rod into the water, and
ran home to tell his mother that a nasty big fish had
taken his rod and line from him.”
What is the cause, let us consider, of this prevailing
superstitious dread of the manifestations of the presence
of spirit friends ? Does it not arise from the false teach-
ings of those who profess to be the people’s spiritual


advisers, but who, from not having investigated
the subject, in reality know no more about it than
savages do of differential calculus? The fact is, these
reverend spiritual deceivers of the masses have, from
interested motives, impugned the character of God by
representing that for many centuries past the Almighty
has closed up the avenue of communication between
the visible and invisible worlds against the return to
earth of His ministering spirits to comfort the sorrowing
and the downcast, and that now only evil spirits are
permitted by Him to return to tempt and deceive man-
kind. Yet these priests and parsons have the effrontery
to declare the truth—namely, that “ God is the same
yesterday, to-day, and for ever.” At what date, let me
ask these blind leaders of the blind, did the Almighty
bring in an amending act to prevent the pure, the true,
and the good from returning to earth to influence and
guide their loved ones still in the flesh ?
In the same way as the printing press, at the time of
its introduction, was denounced by the priesthood as an
invention of the devil, since through its influence in
spreading intelligence broadcast the world would, in time,
become too enlightened to be longer duped by priest-
craft, so in our day have these pious deceivers of the
people had the audacity to denounce communion between
the two worlds, and those who avail themselves of this
grand avenue of knowledge, because they well know
that their irrational dogmas and God-dishonouring
creeds, through which the simple religion inculcated by
the worthy Jesus has been travestied, cannot stand the
light of truth let in through modern Spiritual investiga-
tion and research.
Let me ask those who are afraid to hold communion
with their “ loved and lost,” were the early followers of
Jesus afraid when Moses and Elias appeared to them on
the Mount? or when the materialized spirit-form of
Jesus stood in their midst, the doors of the room in
which they were assembled being at the time closed ? or
when Jesus again materialized and walked with two of
them on the road to Emmaus ? Was John, let me ask.


afraid when the bright spirit appeared to him on the
Island of Patinos and declared that he was the spirit of
one of his brethren the prophets ? Then why should
anyone be afraid to hold communion wdth the spirits of
their friends when they, in our day, endeavour to
manifest their presence when the necessary conditions
are present ?
If it be true that only evil spirits can return, why, let
me ask, are we enjoined to “ try the spirits,” to “ believe
not every spirit,” to “beware of deceiving spirits ? ” “By
their fruits shall ye know them;” “ for I would not have
you ignorant, brethren, of spiritual things.” Without
Spiritual manifestations we possess no rational evidence
of a life to come; all is mere conjecture, based on credulity
and superstition. Through these manifestations we have
a scientific basis for belief in a progressive future state
for man, and through spirit-communion we learn of
God’s infinite wisdom, unerring justice, and everlasting
mercy for all mankind, and of that glorious destiny
which eventually awaits every human soul, be they saint
or sinner, exalted or debased ; for, as God sends the rain
on the just and the unjust, and His sun shines on the
good and bad alike, so His love, being infinite, is, both
here and hereafter, over all His children.
THE AUTHOR.
Melbourne, Ist May, 1892.


CONTENTS.
Reasons for the Hope that is in Me 7
A Touching Funeral Discourse 55
Loss of the “lolanthe” Yacht ------ 63
Is Spiritualism Credible ? - - 84
The Doctrines of the Popular Faith Contrasted with the
Teachings of Modern Spiritualism 103
Christianity: its Origin and Esoteric Meaning - - - 119
Concluding Remarks - - - - - - - -151


REASONS FOR THE HOPE THAT IS IN ME ;
EVIDENCES OF A FUTURE LIFE.
[.Reprinted from “ The Two Worlds f\
PREFATORY NOTE BY EDITOR OF “ THE TWO WORLDS.”
The great interest awakened by Mr. H. J. Browne’s striking
experiences in Spiritualism, as given at tbe recent Bradford Con-
ference, bas induced in many of tbe listeners present tbe wish
that his exciting narrative, together with such other of his
wonderful experiences as constitute marked events in his life,
should be presented to the public in the form of a series of
articles. In view of the Editor’s acquaintance with this estimable
gentleman and his family during her visit to the Australian
colonies, she ventured to urge upon him compliance with the
above-named very general request. As Mr. Browne and his family
were only tourists through England and the Continent prior to
their return to Australia, Mr. Browne felt some difficulty in
complying with his numerous friends and admirers’ request, but
at the solicitation of Dr. and Mrs. Britten, during a brief visit
paid to them, the promise to do his best—as far as travel and
change of scene permitted—was most kindly made. As a series
of irrefutable arguments to which no answer could by any possi-
bility be given in disproof, this pamphlet is amply worthy the
attention of every thoughtful reader.
Manchester, 31si July, 1891.
PART I.
Introduction.
Before relating some of the many wonderful experi-
ences I have had in the investigation of Spiritual science
I shall make a few preliminary remarks.
Without, I hope, being deemed egotistic, I may state
I was reared in the strictest of “ orthodox ” schools, my
father having been a clergyman of the Established


Church of Scotland. Until I was about forty years of
age I adhered to the “ orthodox ” faith, notwithstanding
that frequently during that period I had felt that the
reason with which God had endowed me was at variance
with many of the doctrines which I had been taught to
revere as divine verities. About this time the green
spectacles of superstition seemed suddenly to drop from
my eyes, and the irrationality and God-dishonouring
character of many of the orthodox doctrines became at
once apparent to me. I could then look back at the
many struggles between truth and error my mind had
gone through during the years alluded to, in my earnest
endeavours to dispel doubts, which would involuntarily
spring up through my moral consciousness revolting
against doctrines which, even then, seemed to me
derogatory to the character of God. When, however,
these doubts arose, such passages as “He that doubteth
is damned,” “He that believeth not is condemned
already,” would rise up in my mind, and for the time
silence these doubts. I was at that time unconscious of
the fact that doubt was the great lever by which the
world had been raised from savagery to civilization, and
that it was not only the right but also the duty of every
one to doubt whenever anything clashed with his divine
gift of reason. Blind faith, however, at length, as I
have stated, gave way to reason, and I then, and have
ever since, felt a deep sense of gratitude to God for my
emancipation from mental bondage.
As one would feel who had been a slave all his life
and suddenly set free, so on my emancipation from the
thraldom of superstition I felt much like a ship at sea
without a compass to steer by.
For the purpose of satisfying the craving of my mind
for some sure foundation on which to rest, I commenced
to read all the books I could lay my hands upon relating
to the various religions of the world, but although I
found each of these contained some sublime truths, none
of them appeared to me to be soul-satisfying. About
this time I was induced by a friend to read a work on
the Spiritual philosophy, and though, like all others who


are ignorant of the subject, I was then much opposed to
anything connected with Modern Spiritualism, I was
truly delighted with the theories set forth therein. I
must confess that I wished they were true, but I thought
they were too good to be true. Modern Spiritualism I
looked upon as only suitable for people of a credulous
disposition and of an imaginative turn of mind. The
fact that such men as Professors Crookes, Wallace,
Varley, and other almost equally eminent men, had
publicly acknowledged the reality of Spiritual phe-
nomena seemed to have had no effect on my mind, as it
should have done were it not for the obstinacy which
prejudice engenders. I had no idea then that Spiritual
manifestations were capable of proof by the positive
evidence of demonstrable facts, as I afterwards found
them to be. I was, however, so fascinated with the
Spiritualistic theory, as I then termed it, that I read
with eagerness all books on the subject that I could
procure, and the more I read, the more rational, beauti-
ful, and soul-elevating did the Spiritual philosophy
appear to me to be. During what I now term my
transition period—that is, from darkness to light, or from
blind belief in ancient superstition to knowledge resting
on facts capable of demonstration —I still paid my pew
rents and sent my family to church, not having any-
thing of a definite character to give them in place of
the old priestly superstition. So soon, however, as I
obtained what I never expected to do—namely, scientific
demonstration of the truth of Spiritual manifestations —I
at once discouraged my family in continuing to believe
what I now term and am prepared to prove is popular
blasphemy. It was not long, however, before they all
adopted similar views to mine, having, like myself,
obtained irrefutable proofs of the truth of Spiritual
phenomena.
In looking back at my past life I am truly astounded
to think how I, as a rational being, could have so long-
believed in doctrines which are as God-dishonouring as
they are false and absurd. I maintain that when once
rationally analyzed many of the doctrines of the popular


faith prove themselves to be absurd, and that belief in
them is a disgrace to the intelligence of the age in which
o o o
we live.
I may here observe that everyone who believes in a
future spiritual state for man is a Spiritualist. The
only difference between the manifestations recorded in
the Hebrew and Greek Scriptures and those of our own
day is that the former occurred in ignorant and super-
stitious times, while the latter have occurred, and are
taking place, in all parts of the world, in an age of
inductive reasoning, when astronomy has taken the
place of astrology and chemistry that of alchemy. lam
aware, however, from personal experience, how difficult
it is for those who are ignorant of the subject, and who
are biased against it through life-long misrepresentation
thereof, to realize that Spiritual manifestations are
capable of demonstration in our own day. I can there-
fore sympathize with those who now occupy a similar
position to that which I did twenty years back. Let
me remind them, however, that it is popularly but
erroneously taught that God, who is unchangeable, the
same yesterday, to-day, and for ever, has, within the
last two thousand years, altered His laws regarding the
ministry of angels and communion between the unseen
and the visible worlds. In other words, it is popularly
taught that formerly those who had passed through the
change called death did, at times, manifest themselves in
various ways to men, but that for many centuries past
God has closed up the thoroughfare between the two
worlds to all except an imaginary evil spirit called
Satan, whom He allows to go to and fro like a roaring-
lion, seeking whom he may devour. In corroboration of
this, I need only refer to the appearance of Samuel to
Saul; to that of Moses and Elias on the Mount; and to
that of the bright Spirit on the Island of Patmos, who
declared to John that he was the Spirit of one of
his brethren the prophets ; coupled with the popular
teachings regarding a personal devil, who is represented
as the übiquitous tempter of mankind. The fallacy and
God-dishonouring character of such teachings would be


palpable at once to every rational being were it not that
the judgment of the great majority of the people has
been warped on this subject in their childhood, before
they were capable of using their reason. They have
been taught what to think, not how to think ; that to
use the reason with which God hath endowed them, in
that which is the most important matter of life, is sinful;
that he that doubteth what cunning priests, from inter-
ested motives, have branded as of divine authority shall
be eternally damned; and the masses have thereby been
deceived and misled by priests and parsons, their self-'
constituted spiritual teachers.
These so-called spiritual teachers must be either
cognizant that they are deceiving their followers, or else
they are culpably ignorant on that .subject which they
profess to be capable of teaching. In the former case,
they are wolves in sheep’s clothing ; in the latter, they
are blind leaders of the blind. Which they are is only
known to themselves individually, for, as a rule, they
keep their counsel to themselves on this subject, from
the fear of losing their place and pay if they spoke the
truth.
A pious lie that has got a good start has in all ages
proved very difficult for truth to overtake, and this one
about God having altered His laws regarding spirit
manifestations is no exception to the general rule. The
chief reason why priests and parsons are so anxious to
perpetuate this pious lie is because they well know that
through spirit communion the light of truth is let in
upon all the other pious falsehoods through which they
trade on the credulity of their too-confiding dupes.
They are also aware that their childish and self-
condemnatory doctrines regarding an eternal psalm-
singing heaven for the few, and an everlasting roasting
hell for the great majority of God’s children, will stand
but poor chance of retention in the minds of their
followers when once they become aware, through
Spiritual investigation, of the glorious destiny which
eventually awaits every human soul in the life eternal.
It may be asked why I, the son of a parson and whose


only sister in this life is the wife of a parson, am so
severe upon the cloth. My answer to this is plain and
simple—namely, because it is and has been through priest-
craft that the light of Spiritual truth has been shut out
from the world for so many centuries, and men have
been kept in darkness and ignorance regarding the
infinite goodness, justice, and mercy of God, the im-
partial Spiritual Father of the race; also because so
many of my fellow beings are still kept in mental
bondage by the priests and parsons of our day, who
are the successors of those men who built houses to
God and dungeons for men.
To all who are really animated by the love of truth,
the great question is, “ If a man die, shall he live again ?”
The mere hope that there is another life beyond this may
satisfy some people, but stronger minds require some-
thing more than simple conjecture on so important a
subject ; they desire scientific and rational evidence that
death does not end all, as the materialists assert, and it is
only through the investigation of Modern Spiritualism
that such evidence can be obtained. Priests and parsons
would have men believe that in former times Spiritual
manifestations used to take place, but that since then
the Almighty has brought in an amending act to prevent
their occurrence. Science, on the other hand, has demon-
strated that the laws of nature, which are God’s laws,
are fixed and unchangeable ; therefore if Spirit mani-
festations were possible in former times they must be
possible in our day, and if it were true that they cannot
occur now, then it follows that they could not have
taken place in Biblical times. No one can truly lay
claim to consistency who believes in the one and rejects
the other as false, and those who denounce modern
Spiritual manifestations as all humbug and delusion
should bear in mind that they are only playing into
the hands of the materialists and atheists, for it is alone
by the evidence obtainable through the investigation of
Spiritualism that their blank negations can be logically
and effectually met. Materialists and atheists claim to
be freethinkers, but they are not so in reality, for they


bar Spiritualism, and are as bigoted as churchmen on
this subject. Spiritualists alone can truly claim to be
freethinkers, for they bar no subject under the sun from
their consideration and investigation. Their leading 4
mottoes are “ Light, more light,” “ Prove all things and
hold fast to that which is good,” “ The truth against
the world.”
In ignorant and superstitious times all Spiritual phe-
nomena were looked upon as being miraculous or super-
natural occurrences. Science, however, has proved that
in a domain of law every effect must have its antecedent
and adequate cause, therefore a miracle, or a suspension
of law, is an infinite impossibility. The word “ miracle ”
is only a term used to cover men’s ignorance of the
producing cause of occult phenomena, and as God, the
eternal and infinite cause of all causation, alone is above
nature, nothing else can be supernatural. The laws
which control Spiritual forces are doubtless super-
mundane, but this does not constitute them supernatural,
for the Spiritual world is governed by natural law as
much so as is the physical universe; consequently all
Spiritual phenomena are, though occult, natural occur-
rences. These phenomena furnish the key which alone
can explain the mysteries of all ages. Instead of
Spiritualism being a superstition, as those who have not
investigated it and who consequently are ignorant of the
reality of its phenomena, declare it to be, it is the
destroyer of all superstition. Surely that which rests on
facts capable of demonstration, which courts inquiry,
and which can stand a rational analysis, cannot be a
superstition. If it is, the Berkley an theory must be
right, and we do not really exist, but merely imagine
that we do. No other theory than the Spiritual can be
found to fully explain the mysteries recorded in the
past. Spiritualism, in fact, offers to every earnest in-
quirer a true science of life, here and hereafter.
Through Modern Spiritualism, grander, nobler, and
more reasonable views of God and the destiny of man
are presented than are to be found in any of the
established religions of the world. For instance, in the


popular faith God is represented as the titular deity of
this tiny speck called earth, the countless other planets
with which immensity of space is studded being passed
over as quite secondary in His sight; and as regards
the other world, in which we are to dwell throughout
eternity, it is represented as being divided into a cir-
cumscribed place called heaven, where a few of the most
credulous are to he for ever singing anthems of praise
to a deity seated on a great white throne, and a vast
region called hell, where the great majority of the race,
who have conscientiously renounced the God-dishonour-
ing doctrines of the popular faith, are to writhe in
excruciating agony during the countless ages of eternity.
Through Spiritualism, on the other hand, we learn that
the Almighty is the infinite God of universal nature,
whose love is over all His creatures, and that the world
to come is hut a higher domain of nature, where, by the
inexorable but just law of cause and effect, each indi-
vidual enjoys as much happiness as he is fitted by his
antecedents to receive, and where eventually there is
eternal joy for all the race, not through vicarious
sacrifice, hut alone by personal endeavour to become
nearer in goodness to the Great Author of their being
through doing good to others, which is the only service
God requires of man, both in this life and in that which
is to come.
Before this little speck called earth had e’er revolved in space,
Ten thousand thousand greater orbs had long since run their race,
And when this world, yet in its youth, its destiny hath run,
A thousand other worlds will then their courses have begun.
Eternity, oh! wond’rous word, beyond man’s power of thought,
In thee the purposes of God have all to be outwrought.
Yet some men talk about God’s will as if they knew it all,
And as if they had been present at man’s birth and fabled Fall;
They speak of God as though He had to them his plans laid bare,
And of Christ’s crucifixion as if they had been there.
Oh, foolish men! with reason blest, cast fiction to the winds,
And let the light of truth henceforth illuminate your minds;
Retain the true and good in all, put all things to the test,
And hearken to the voice within, which is, of all guides, best.


PART 11.
Early Spiritual Experiences.
I shall now proceed to relate some of the many won-
derful experiences I have had since the first opportunity
presented itself to investigate Spiritualism ; not with the
idea that my experiences will convince others, for
personal investigation alone can do this in matters
against which such great prejudice exists. My object
in submitting these experiences to the consideration of
truth-seekers is to induce them to personally investigate
this important and grossly misrepresented subject, and
thereby share with me, and thousands of others who
have realized its soul-satisfying truths, the happiness
which a knowledge thereof has conferred, and the con-
solation in the hour of trial which such knowledge
brings with it, and which no religion founded on mere
belief can supply.
Some seventeen years ago I met a friend in
Melbourne, Australia, where I have resided for nearlv
forty years, who, like myself, admired the philosophy of
Modern Spiritualism, although doubtful of the reality of
its reported manifestations. He asked me if I had heard
of the arrival from America of the celebrated medium
Charles Foster. I replied I had not, and added, “I want
very much to see a live medium,” for, like others who
have never witnessed Spiritual manifestations, I then
looked upon mediums as tricksters, who, by some cun-
ning device, could make tables move or produce raps at
will.
On learning Mr. Foster’s address from my friend, who
informed me that he had not up to that time seen him,
I at once proceeded to call on Mr, Foster. He received
me affably, and consented to give me a sitting there and
then. His first question to me was—“ Ho you know
anything about Spiritualism ? ” To which I replied that
I had read books on the subject, but that I wanted de-
monstrable proof of its reality before I could accept it
as true. He said he could give me this, and, handing


me a slip of paper and a pencil, requested me to write
the name of any friend'in spirit life with whom I would
like to communicate while he was out of the room ; not
to show it to him, but to fold the paper up with the
name inside, and to hand it to him on his return. As
soon as Foster closed the door behind him I looked
around the room to see if there were any mirrors to act
as reflectors, or any wires to act as conductors. Finding
none, I wrote the name of my father, who, at that time,
had been “ dead” for thirty years, and folded the paper
up as directed.
On Foster’s re-entering the room I handed him the
paper, which he grasped in his left hand, folded as it was,
and he said to me, “ The spirit whose name you have
written will manifest his presence by causing his initials
to appear on the back of my hand, the one in which I
hold the paper.” I sat on his left side, and his folded
hand with the paper in it was never out of my sight
from the time he grasped it. As I looked at the back of
his hand I observed my father’s initials, A. 8., appear, at
first of a pale pink colour, and then gradually darken to
a deep red. After a few seconds they as gradually got
lighter and ligditer in colour until they faded away.
Being very sceptical, the thoughts that passed through
my mind at the time were : “ This is a very clever trick,
but how comes he, a perfect stranger to me, to know my
father’s initials without opening the paper?” As I was
thus thinking, Foster, still with the folded paper grasped
in his left hand, suddenly went into a trance, a state I
had never before witnessed, and thus addressed me:
“My dear son, I am your father, Archibald BrOwne.
This is an opportunity I have long looked forward to.”
I here interrupted by observing that my father did
not speak with an American accent. The reply to this
was, “ I am merely making use of this man’s vocal organs
to express to you my sentiments.” I then said, “ That
may be; but I shall require more evidence before I
believe that you are the spirit of my father, as you pro-
fess to be.” The answer was : “ When you were a little
boy I took you to so and so” [mentioning several places


in Scotland where I had visited with my father in my
childhood. My father passed to the other life when
I was about fourteen years of age]. “ When you went
to Liverpool” [that was after his death] “ I was with
you. When you went to Africa I was with you, and
ever since you came to this country [Australia] I have
been with you.”
These remarks brought to my mind the woman of
Samaria, who is reported to have said, “ Come, see a man
which told me all things that ever I did.” He continued
by saying, “ You have been changing your theological
views for some time past, and have been giving your own
reasoning powers the credit of this.” I said that was
the case, and that it was alone from reading my Bible
carefully that I had been obliged to reject the divine
authority of it, as popularly claimed. To this he replied,
“ You must, however, give me a little credit for enabling
you to see it in a new light. I was a number of years
in the Spiritual world before I discovered that what I
taught on earth was not true, and as soon as I did so I
began impressing your mind to view theology in a
different light.” I said that may have been the case,
for it explains what I never before could understand—
namely, how from extreme orthodoxy I had almost sud-
denly drifted into extreme heterodoxy about six years
previously. I then inquired if, when on entry into
spirit life he did not realize the hopes and expectations
he held when on earth, he did not at once perceive the
erroneous character of his religious belief ? He replied
that, after his entry into Spiritual life, he met an old
professor of theology, under whom he had studied in this
life, and for whom he had a great respect ; and in answer
to his inquiries he was informed by his old friend that
the Scriptures were misunderstood on earth, and that
Christ would not appear to them until the judgment day.
This explanation, coming from one whom he esteemed so
much, he said, had satisfied his mind for a time, but
gradually the light of truth began to shine on his
darkened understanding, and he perceived the erroneous
character of his belief, and that he then, although I was


unaware of it, impressed me to see things in a different
light. He concluded by saying, “ I spent the greater
portion of my life on earth in disseminating that which
was false and misleading, from my not having made use
of my reason in religion as I did in all other subjects,
and I wish you, on every occasion in your power, to
endeavour to undo the wrongs which I thus did when
on earth.” I promised that I would do so, which
promise I have faithfully kept to this day, and I intend
continuing to do so until I join my father and other
friends in the world of spirits. This, I am told by
those who are in a position to know, is my mission here
on earth.
“ And truth alone, where’er my lot be cast,
In scenes of plenty or the pining waste,
Shall be my end and aim, my glory to the last.”
On Foster coming out of the trance, and while I was
contemplating what had been said to me through him,
he said to me in his normal condition, “Have you any
one in the spirit world of the name of Ada, for there is
a little child standing beside you with blue eyes and
golden curls who gives that name ?” I said I had lost a
little daughter of that name, and answering to that
description, some years previously, but that she had not
crossed my mind for several weeks past. He then said,
“ She desires me to tell you she is very happy, and is
frequently with you and those at home, although you
do not see her.”
I may here mention that, in consequence of this and
its corroboration through subsequent events, I had the
following verse inscribed on her tombstone :
“ Eest assured I shall return, mother, from that angelic place ;
Though you may not see my form, I shall look upon your face ;
Though you may not hear me speak, I shall hearken what you
say,
And be often, often with you when you think I’m far away.”
Foster then said to me: “ There is someone here
speaking to you in a curious language,” I asked him to
repeat it, when he said, “ It is something like saca bona


To which I replied, “ Saca bona waitoo,” and I asked if
he could get the name of the spirit who spoke this
language. Foster replied, “He gives the name of
Henry Shire,” which greatly surprised me, as I knew
an old gentleman of that name many years before who
spoke that language. I then inquired if Foster could
see the spirit giving that name, and he said, “ Yes, he
appears as a very stout man.” I then said, “If it is
my old friend, Henry Shire, will he give me the nick-
name the natives used to call him?” Foster said, “He
states it was nonguamheen,” to which I replied, “ That
is quite right.”
Foster then asked me what nonguamheen meant, and
I answered, “ A big pumpkin, which the natives called
him on account of his being so stout.” He weighed
nearly 19 stone. Foster then said, “He is speaking
some more of that language,” which, on his repeating
it, I understood. Foster then asked me what language
it was, and I informed him it was the Kaffir language,
which I, as a young man, had learnt to speak when in
Natal many years before. I inquired of Foster how it
was that I did not see the spirit or hear him speak as
he (Foster) did. He replied, “ You evidently are not so
mediumistic as I am, and have not cultivated your
clairvoyant and clairaudient faculties.”
On my handing Foster his fee for the sitting, I said
to him, “Well, Foster, I came with the idea that I
would pay you a sovereign very grudgingly, for I
looked upon you and all mediums as little better than
impostors. I now pay it most freely and with gratitude,
for you have solved the problem that has engrossed my
attention for years past, and have given me more
spiritual knowledge in one sitting than all the parsons
have done during my lifetime.” As I was leaving the
room, Foster said to me, “You need not depend on my
mediumship, for your spirit friends say that all your
family are mediums, and if you will only hold circles at
home you will find it is so.” I was so ungenerous at
the time as to think that in Foster’s saying this he was
only flattering me in order to get another sovereign


from me, but in this I did him great injustice, as sub-
sequent events proved to me.
Words cannot express the buoyant feeling I experi-
enced, and with what lightness of step I made my way
to my home after my experiences that day with Foster.
On my relating them to my wife and an intimate
friend, Mrs. G , who was present, to my great
astonishment, as up to that moment they had both been
strongly opposed to anything connected with Modern
Spiritualism, they each expressed a desire to have a
sitting with Foster. I afterwards learnt that it was
from Foster having mentioned the name, and having so
accurately described our little daughter, Ada, that the
mother’s heart was touched, and it was this that caused
such a sudden change to come over her feelings in
regard to this hitherto detested subject.
The next morning the three of us drove over to
Foster’s rooms. Before leaving home my wife took out
of her photographic album some twenty or more photo-
graphs of children, in order to test the truth of his
assertion about seeing our daughter, Ada, the previous
day. On my introducing the ladies to Foster as my
wife and a friend, the former of these inquired if he
could recognize the photograph of a spirit that he had
described the day before. He replied that he could, and
on my wife spreading the children’s photos, before him
on the table he at once said, “ That is your little child,
Ada, who appeared to me yesterday,” pointing to her
likeness. Both my wife and Mrs. G received some
wonderful tests that day.
On one of my many visits to Foster’s rooms I took
with me a friend of Dutch extraction, a widower, and
at my suggestion he put all his questions in Dutch, a
language Foster assured me he did not understand.
Notwithstanding this, my friend received correct answers
to all his questions, so he assured me. His wife, who
had “ died ” a few years previously, gave him a correct
account of the circumstances of her “ death,” and assured
him that such was the nature of her disease that the skill
of all the doctors in the world could not have saved her.


On another visit, while on my way to call on Foster, I
met an old friend who was a sub-editor to the leading
newspaper of Melbourne. I asked him if he had seen
Foster, to which he replied he had not; and when I said
I was going to visit Foster he volunteered to accompany
me. As he walked beside me he said: “If Foster can
tell me my mother’s maiden name, which no one in the
colony but myself knows, I shall entertain a different
view of Spiritualism to what I do.”
On my introducing this gentleman as a representative
of the press to Foster, he asked the latter if he could
tell the maiden name of his mother. Foster replied, “If
you will sit down with Mr. Browne and myself I will
see if I can get it.” No sooner were we seated than
Foster said, “Your mother, Mrs. S——, is present. She
says her maiden name was so-and-so; she died at your
birth, and would have been living on earth to this day
if she had been treated properly by the doctor who
attended her,” &c. My friend was greatly astonished on
hearing this, and assured me it was all correct, stating
that it corroborated what his aunt, who had reared him
from infancy, had told him about his mother and her
“ death,” &c.
On another occasion I got a young friend who was
greatly opposed to Spiritualism to accompany me to
Foster’s rooms. As Foster entered the room in which
we were he said to my friend, “ Young man, your spirit
friends desire me to tell you that you have not long to
live on earth. They say at the utmost three years.
Spirits seldom make such a remark, so your spirit friends
must have a jmrticular object in view in telling you
this.” I interposed by saying that I hoped, even on my
own account, it was not true, as Mr. M was the friend
I had named in my will to act as my executor and
trustee of my estate at my demise.
My friend, who was under thirty years of age and in
good health, ridiculed the prediction, which, he said,
only confirmed his contempt for Spiritualism, Within
three years from that date my young friend “ died ” of
hydatids. I followed his body to the grave, and since


then was trustee for his widow and children, until I left
the colony on my present visit to this country.
The first time Foster called at our house he took up a
photographic album that lay on one of the drawingroom
tables. Turning over its leaves he pointed out the like-
nesses of more than a dozen friends who had passed
over, and who had appeared to him during sittings we
had with him at his rooms. On my saying that there
was the likeness of one he had described to me which he
had not recognized, he turned back a few leaves and
observed, “ That is like J. P„” naming the son of a cousin
of mine who had “ died ” in the colony a short time
previously from consumption, adding, “ but when he
appeared to me he had whiskers.” I said, “ You are
quite right; he had before his £ death/ but this likeness
of him was taken in Glasgow before leaving for this
colony, and at that time his whiskers had not grown.”
During Foster’s stay in Melbourne a friend called one
evening who had been at several seances, and at his sug-
gestion we all sat round the table to see if we could get
any manifestations. After one or two of us had held a
pencil in hand for a few minutes, without any result, the
pencil and paper were passed to my eldest daughter,
then a girl of eleven years, now married and with a
family. Mo sooner had she taken the pencil than her
hand began to move involuntarily, and she cried out,
“ Oh, mamma, I’m so frightened, my hand is writing.”
Her mother and I pacified her by saying there was
nothing to be afraid of, and on taking up the paper I
found a message on it from my eldest sister, and signed
by her, not exactly in my sister’s handwriting, but quite
different to that of my daughter.
This sister, the wife of a colonel in the army, had
“ died ” on her passage home from India, several years
before my eldest daughter was born.
Several other messages from those who had passed to
the higher life were also received through my daughter’s
hand that evening. One of them was from a relative of
the gentleman who had suggested the seance. I may
state that neither my daughter nor any of the family


knew anything o£ the relatives of that gentleman, and
that, through the message he received that evening, he
sailed for Europe by the out-going mail steamer.
Having discovered that we had a medium in our own
family, we commenced to hold regular seances. At these
we used to receive communications through my daughter’s
hand from both friends and strangers who had passed to
the higher life, and on subjects of which my daughter
was totally ignorant. Her hand was frequently con-
trolled to write in foreign languages. As an instance I
o # o o #
may mention that one evening when we were sitting for
communications her hand suddenly grasped the pencil in
a curious way. It was held between the second and
third fingers, with the stem pointing upwards between
her thumb and forefinger, and went off forming, very
hurriedly, what appeared like Chinese characters.
On my showing the nineteen pages her hand wrote in
this way to a Chinaman who used to supply us with
vegetables, and asking him if he knew what was written,
O 7 O '
he asked, “ Who write this ? ” and went on saying, “ Like
little China boy’s writing; not know write well.” I
said to him, “Never mind who wrote it. Can you read
it ? ” He replied that he could read some of it, but that
there were other parts so badly written that he could not
make them out. I then told him it was written by the
spirit of one of his countrymen, through my daughter’s
hand. Instead of being surprised at this, as I expected
he would be, he said, “Ah, I know!” and began des-
cribing how the Chinese communicate with their friends
in spirit life, namely, by means of a trayful of fine
sand, over which they hold a stick, and as the stick
is moved by invisible agency the point of it forms
the Chinese characters in the sand, and after each
message has thus been received they shake the tray, so
as to render the sand smooth for the next communi-
cation.
On my showing him the way in which the pencil was
grasped by my daughter’s hand, when controlled to write
Chinese, he explained that was the manner in which
the Chinese hold their pens when they write.


My daughter said that she felt a numbness come over
her right arm every time it was controlled to write, and
her chief spirit guide informed us, through her hand,
that that arose from his cutting off the' connection
between her brain and the nerves of her arm, so as to
render it susceptible of control by the invisibles. My
daughter was what is termed an automatic writing
medium, and afterwards developed other phases of
mediumship—namely, clairvoyance, clairaudience, &c.
On one occasion I received part of a message through
the hand of my daughter, and was then told that the
spirit friend communicating would finish it through
Foster’s hand. On my calling at Foster’s, the con-
cluding part of this message was written through
Foster’s hand, as promised.
On another occasion, I met a coloured man in the
street, whom I took to be a Kaffir, owing to a large hole
in the lobes of his ears, in which they frequently carry
their long snuff-boxes. On my addressing him in his
own language he seemed rather astonished. I asked
him to call on me next evening, which he did, when I
placed him on a seat a little way from the table, and
then called my daughter into the room to see if we could
get any message from his friends in spirit life. No sooner
had she placed the pencil on the paper than her hand
went off writing- in the Kaffir language.
T ° 1 O O
i may state she was quite unacquainted with that
language, not having been born until after I had re-
turned to Australia from my second visit to Africa. On
my reading out to my coloured acquaintance what
had been written through my daughter’s hand, he was
evidently much alarmed, stating that the author of the
communication, a countryman of his, was dead. But I
said that his enslenzeo, or spirit, still lived, and that it
was his friend’s spirit that controlled my daughter’s
hand to write. This did not seem to have much effect in
appeasing his alarm, the Kaffirs, as a rule, being afraid of
ghosts or spirits.
Some of the words I read out to him were beyond my
knowledge of the language, but he understood them.


At last I came to a word that, pronounce it as I could,
he did not understand. As I was about giving it up in
despair, “ click with mouth ” was written in English at
the bottom of the sheet of paper. Immediately I pro-
nounced the word with a click, which is common in the
Kaffir language, my coloured friend understood it.
When sitting for communication with our spirit
friends one day, in the middle of a message, my
daughter’s hand wrote —“ Put down that balloon.” I said
to my wife, who was sitting on my daughter’s left,
while I sat on her right, “ What on earth have they to
do with balloons in the spirit world ? ” Looking up, I
found my wife smiling, when she said : “ Don’t you see
she [our daughter] is, child dike, playing with a toy
balloon in her left hand, while her right hand is being
•controlled to write for our information ? ” I had been
so intently looking at what my daughter’s right hand
was writing that I had not observed the little toy
balloon in her left hand. I mention this circumstance to
show that our daughter’s mind had nothing to do with
what was written mechanically through her hand by an
•outside and invisible intelligence.
Generally the communications received through my
daughter’s hand were written with extraordinary
rapidity, but at other times very slowly. Sometimes the
messages were written upside down, so that we had to
turn the paper top downwards before we could read
them, and occasionally they were written backwards, so
that we had to reverse the paper and place it between
the light and ourselves before we could make out what
was written. This lam aware some people can do who
have practised it, which my daughter had not. The
nature of the messages thus received was, however,
sufficient to refute the idea that the child had practised
writing in this way in order to deceive her parents, as
•opponents might suggest. One of our spirit friends—
namely, the doctor who had attended at the birth of our
daughter—used always, when communicating through
her hand, to write perpendicularly from the top of the
paper to the bottom, instead of horizontally, and we had


to turn the paper on its side, or longitudinally, before
we could read what was written thereon.
After a time our daughter developed into a clair-
voyant and clairaudient as well as a writing medium.
She used to describe the various spirits present, give
their names, which, on being asked, they would present,
so as to be visible to her, and she would repeat after
them messages conveyed by them to her. She sometimes
described some of my old Kaffir servants who had
“ died,” mentioning on one occasion the mark of a deep
cut one of them had on his face, giving his name, and
repeating after him a message in the Kaffir language, as
Foster did in the case I have related of my old friend,
Henry Shire.
When my eldest son passed to the higher life through
typhoid fever, his eldest sister, then a girl of sixteen,
stood by his bedside and described to me the passage of
his spirit from the physical body almost exactly as
Andrew Jackson Davis has related what he witnessed at
the passing away of a friend of his in his work entitled
“ Death and the After Life,” a hook which my daughter
had never read. She also described and mentioned the
names of our spirit friends who were waiting to receive
and guide our son to his home in the spirit world. Let
me here ask any parents, however opposed they may be
to Modern Spiritualism through misconception thereof,
is it at all probable that at such a time a daughter
would try to deceive a parent ? or is it likely that I, who
can have no object to gain thereby, would in a sacred
subject like this, tell a deliberate falsehood ? No. They
may rest assured that, except for the sole purpose of
inducing others to investigate Spiritualism and thereby
share with me the true comfort and consolation which a
knowledge thereof supplies in the hour of trial, I should
not thus expose to an unsympathetic public family
matters of such a private and, to us, sacred character.
I may here add that while our eldest son’s body was
lying in the coffin in one room, he was writing through
his sister’s hand in the adjoining apartment an account
of the various spirit friends he had met since he passed


to spirit life, and mentioning those to whom he was
most attached. Several of our other children, of whom
we have had eleven, also developed into writing and
clairvoyant mediums, and since then I have occasionally
had glimpses of the spirit world, so that I can describe
it, and I have seen, felt, and heard spirits when no one
in the flesh was present except my wife and self. To
enter into detail of all these spirit manifestations would
fill a large volume, so I shall pass on to other experiences.
PART 111.
Wonderful Test Experiences.
Between seven and eight years ago our fourth son, who
was then about eighteen years of age, in conjunction
with a young man who was in my employ, bought a
yacht called the lolanthe. After having some slight
alterations made in her, they, with our third son, aged
twenty, started on a trial trip with her on a Saturday
afternoon, much against their mother’s wish, with the
promise that they would return early on the Monday.
As they did not do so, and failed to put in an appearance
on the Tuesday morning, my wife became greatly
excited through anxiety, so I called in a friend, Mr.
George Spriggs, late of Cardiff, Wales, a medical clair-
voyant, who had prescribed for my wife with beneficial
results on a former occasion. He knew nothing about
the absence of our sons, and I only requested him to
give us a sitting, saying that my wife did not feel at all
well. Immediately he passed into the trance state and
said : “Oh ! I perceive it is all about the sea.” Then I
asked him what was wrong. He, still in the trance
state, said: “If you will give me something belonging
to them,” not stating to whom the them referred, “ I will
endeavour to trace them.” Without mentioning our
absent sons’ names I went and fetched their pocket
books which they had left in their bedrooms, and placed
these in the hands of the unconscious medium. He
almost immediately began tracing our sons from the


time they left their home till the time the yacht, which
he described, had foundered, which he stated occurred
at nine o’clock on the Monday morning through the
jib-halyard fouling in a squall as they were putting the
yacht about on another tack. He went on to say that
the yacht had gone down in deep water, and that
consequently it would not be washed ashore.
This has proved quite correct, for not a stick of it
has ever yet been found, although I offered a handsome
reward to any of the fishermen who would bring me
anything belonging to the boat.
On Mr. Spriggs coming out of the trance state he
assured me he knew nothing of what he had said
while in trance. I may here observe that Mr. Spriggs is
a young man whom I hold in the highest respect. Ido
not know of one spot on his character, though I have
been on terms of intimate friendship with him ever since
he landed in Australia—a compliment I can pay to but
few others. Before Mr. Spriggs left that morning I
mentioned about our sons’ absence and what had been
said through him when in trance, and he kindly pro-
mised to give us a sitting the next day.
The next morning, on Mr. Spriggs going into trance,
our fourth son, the younger of the two who were drowned,
came and spoke to us through the medium, telling us all
about the occurrence and corroborating what Mr. Spriggs
had described when in trance the previous day. On our
again sitting for communications the following morning
our other son, who had been drowned, spoke through
Mr. Spriggs, saying that he was too excited the previous
day to speak intelligibly through the medium, and giving
us further particulars regarding the catastrophe. They
both assured us that they had not suffered any bodily
pain in drowning, that their mother’s words of entreaty
for them not to go out sailing on the evening they started
came vividly to both of them on finding themselves in
the water, without any vessel in sight to render them
assistance, and that the feelings of remorse this caused
them to experience seemed to deaden all sense of physical
suffering.


The young man who was drowned with them also
spoke through the medium, giving his name and asking
my wife’s forgiveness, as he was the eldest of the three,
and was partly to blame for their going out on the even-
ing alluded to" Knowing that this young man—Murray
by name—held a mate’s certificate, I thought they were
all right, and did not interpose to prevent their starting
when they did.
My wife, who is much more intuitional than I am, had
evidently been impressed, as she, on more than one
occasion after they had left, said to me, “ I hope the boys
are all right in that boat.” In one of their communi-
cations through the medium they said that if they could
not have communicated with us, to let us know they still
lived and loved us, they would have felt miserable; as it
was, even if they possessed the power to again take on
their physical bodies, they would not do so, as the beauty
of, and the delight they experienced in the spirit world,
were beyond their power of description. They told their
mother to thank me for having kept the Spiritual gates
open, so as to enable them to come back and unburden
their minds to her and all of us.
Although I made every endeavour to ascertain tidings
of the missing ones, I was unable to obtain any earthly
information regarding them or the yacht until about a
fortnight after they left home, when the body of the
younger boy was washed ashore, about ten miles from
Melbourne, minus one of his arms, which had evidently
been torn off the body by a shark. At his funeral, after
I had spoken the address over his grave, a friend, occupy-
ing a prominent position under Government, and who
has since solved the grand problem, came to me and said,
“ What a nerve you must have to speak as you have
done over your son’s grave.” I replied, “It is not the
nerve, but the knowledge which I possess, that enables
me so to speak. Unless I had that glorious knowledge,
my eyes would now be bathed in tears.”
A few days after this a friend, who is a grand clair-
voyant and clairaudient medium, and who was at that
time residing at Adelaide, South Australia, which is


about six hundred miles from Melbourne, wrote to me
that my other son, the elder of the two who were
drowned, came to him and said that a large fish had
bitten part of the right arm off his body, and had taken
his waistcoat also. On the medium asking him if it was
a shark, my son replied, “ It may have been, but I never
saw one like it before.”
Two days after this a large shark was caught at
Frankston, which is twenty-seven miles from Melbourne.
A young friend of my son’s, who happened to be present
when the shark was caught, suggested to the policeman
stationed there that the shark should be opened, to see if
there was anything in it belonging to the three young
men who had recently been drowned in Port Phillip
Bay. On opening the shark, which was a white, deep-
sea shark, quite different to the blue sharks with which
the bay is infested, my son’s right arm, almost up to the
elbow joint, was found, also part of his waistcoat, in the
pocket of which were found an old gold watch which
his mother had lent to him, as his own silver one was
out of order, his keys, pipe, and about twelve shillings
in silver. The watch was found to have stopped at nine
o’clock, the exact time we were told by Mr. Spriggs,
three weeks before, that the accident to the boat had
occurred.
On the policeman handing me over in court, by order
of the presiding magistrate, the portion of my son’s
arm, the watch, and other articles which he had found
in the shark, he begged me to allow him to give me a
shilling for one of those thus found, as he desired to
have one of them in remembrance of the occasion. I
told him he was welcome to take one. The rest of
them I distributed among the members of my family,
except one, which I retained, and which I got fastened
on to my watch chain, where it has ever since remained.
The pipe I gave to a young friend of my son’s who was
with him when he bought it, consequently was able to
recognize it. The old gold watch, set at nine o’clock, I
had superficially cleaned, and retain it as a family heir-
loom.


Being invited to a materializing circle about this time —
a circle at which I had been present many times before,
and at which I had witnessed numerous marvellous
phenomena —I willingly attended. The ladies and gentle-
men present on the occasion referred to were nearly all
intimate friends of my family, as was also the medium,
who, I may observe, received no remuneration for his
services.
No sooner had the medium retired behind the curtains,
which were hung across a corner of the room to exclude
the light, which is generally necessary for manifestations
of this kind, than he went into a deep trance.
A few minutes after this I saw the materialized form
of the younger of my two sons who were drowned
open the curtain and walk out.’ On his doing so several
of the ladies and gentlemen observed, “ Oh, there is
Willie Browne.” That was the name of the younger
son. As he stood in front of us he held up his arm in
order to show that although his physical body had been
deprived of it, that did not affect his spirit form. After
remaining before us for a few minutes he retired behind
the curtains. He was not able to speak to us. The
next spirit to materialize was my other son who was
drowned, but he no sooner came from behind the
curtains than he had to retire again, and on my asking
the reason why he who was more physically developed
than his brother could not remain visible to us as long
as his younger brother did, I was informed by one of
the medium’s spirit guides that it was owing to his not
possessing the power of concentration of thought to the
degree his brother did.
As my sons’ characters in this respect were not
known to the medium, and as such was the case, the
elder of the two not having been able to fix his mind
steadfastly on anything for a length of time, while the
younger one had no difficulty in doing so, I considered
this to be very probably the cause of the difference in
the manifestations of my two sons on this occasion.
My sons, I may observe, were both over six feet in
height, and appeared so when they were materialized,


while the medium is rather under the ordinary height.
About a dozen others materialized that evening, rancdno;
from little children to full-grown people. lam aware
that it is only those who have personally witnessed
spirit materializations who can credit my account of my
sons having appeared in materialized forms, the counter-
part of their physical bodies. Even for those who have
investigated Spiritualism, the fact that spirits can
materialize themselves is almost too much for them to
believe until they have actually seen them do so. I
may here state that a much fuller account from my pen
than I have here given of the loss of the lolanthe yacht
appeared at the time in one of the Melbourne news-
papers, and was reproduced in many of the English
papers of the day.
I shall now relate a few of my experiences in
America, through which I returned with my family to
Europe, in order to further investigate the phenomena
of Modern Spiritualism, or Spiritual Science, as I prefer
to call it. On our arrival in San Francisco, where we
were totally unknown except to Mr. and Mrs. Fred.
Evans, whom we met when they visited Australia, we,
in order to remain incognito, determined not to call on
these friends until we had sittings with some of the
principal mediums of the place. Observing by the
papers that a Spiritual meeting was to be held on the
Sunday evening at a place called the Temple, at which
the celebrated medium Mrs. Whitley, of whom we had
never before even heard, was to give tests, my wife and
I determined to be present.
We went, accompanied by our youngest daughter,
and took a back seat in the body of the hall.
The Temple is a large building, capable of holding
about 2,000 people, and was about two-thirds full.
After having given some wonderful tests to a number of
those present —that is, if those to whom Mrs. Whitney
D'ave these tests were not in collusion with her, which
we had no reason to suppose was the case —she said,
“ I see the spirit of one who when on earth was a
clergyman. He says he was known by the name of the


Rev. Archibald Browne, and that there is present in this
hall his son, his son’s wife, and one of their daughters.”
I said aloud, “ That is quite correct.” Mrs. Whitney
then said, “ Your father says your name is Hugh Junor
Browne.” I replied that it was, and I was sure no one
present, but my wife, daughter, and self knew that name.
Mrs. Whitney, continuing, said, “Your father desires me
to say that your mother is present with him, and I see
three line tall spirit sons of yours; one passed on
through typhoid fever, and the other two
drowned.” I said, “ That is quite correct.” Mrs.
Whitney then said, “ Your father tells me that there is
someone on earth connected with you named Colin
Junor; what relation is he to you ?” I replied “Heis a
half-brother.” Mrs. Whitney further said, “Your father
desires you to write to him, and tell him that in a
foreign land, and through the organism of a stranger,
he came to say how grieved he was to see that he was
still so opposed to the grand Spiritual philosophy, but
the time would not he long now before he would know
its grand reality.”
I may here state that my half-brother is a man of
seventy years of age, and is very orthodox in his ideas,
notwithstanding all that I have told him about Modern
Spiritualism, My youngest daughter, who was present
at the meeting, wrote to my half-brother all that was
spoken through this medium, but, as I expected it would,
it had little effect on his prejudiced and bigoted mind.
He is still of the opinion that at death he will “jump
into the arms of Jesus.” One would not be surprised at
an ignorant man saying this, but for a highly educated
man, as he is, to use such an expression is totally beyond
my comprehension. We are told in Scripture, however,
even the worthy Jesus’ half-brothers did not believe in
him, so I need not be surprised that my half-brother
does not believe me when I assure him that Spiritualism
is true, and that it presents a more reasonable faith for
our acceptance than that of popular theology.
To the rational observer it seems truly strange how
people endowed with reason swallow ancient camels.


while they strain at modem gnats. They believe that
Moses and Elias appeared many hundreds of years after
they had lived on earth, and that a spirit materialized
and walked side by side with some men on the road to
Emmaus some eighteen centuries ago; but they refuse
to believe that spirits can manifest their presence in our
day, thereby assuming that God has changed His laws
regarding intercourse between the seen and the unseen
worlds. Without, however, the demonstration of
Spiritual manifestations in modern times, we possess no
rational evidence of a future life for man. But I find
I am digressing.
Having ascertained the private address of Mrs.
Whitney, my wife and I called on her, and asked her to
give us a sitting, which she consented to do. As soon
as she went into the trance state a spirit came and gave
the name of Mayflower. I observed, “I think I have
met a little Indian spirit of that name before.” To this
she replied, “Ho, it was Sunflower whom you met.” I
acknowledged my mistake, saying I had confused the
two names. Mayflower then said, “You know Emmy
and Otto,” the names of two of our dear friends in
Melbourne. I said, “ But how do you know them ? ”
She replied, “Your son Willie took me to them.” I
then said, “ But how do you know that we have a son
called Willie ? ” To this she observed, “He is present,
and stands by your side.” She then said, “ You have a
son, with his wife and two little children, travelling.” I
admitted that was true, and she then remarked, “ They
have a servant with them named Julia.” I said that
was the case, and that she seemed to know more about
them than I did, for I had quite forgotten the name of
the young woman, whom they had engaged to accom-
pany them only a week or two before sailing. I then
asked Mayflower if she could tell me when my son and
his family would arrive at their destination, to which
she answered, “ To-morrow.” This was on the last day
but one of November, 1889, so that, if true, they would
arrive on the last day of that month. I may here state
that my son and his family went round by Natal, South


Africa, to see the country in which he was born, and
which he left when a child, and were to meet us in
London, while we came to this country by way of
America. On my son joining our party in London, as
agreed, I asked him when he had arrived at Natal, and
he replied, “ The last day of November.” My son and
his family had not sailed from Australia when my
family and self left, and had to take passage in a sailing
vessel, as there was no steamer expected to sail for South
Africa for several months, so that if the date named
through the medium was a guess, as opponents to Spirit-
ualism may suggest, it is the most extraordinary guess
ever recorded. We received several communications
through Mrs. Whitney from our children in spirit life,
but, as they were only interesting to ourselves, it would
be of no benefit to others to relate what they said.
Having heard that there was a good materializing
medium from Chicago in San Francisco at that time,
named Mrs. Moore, I called on her and arranged for a
private sitting with my family. On our attending at
her rooms at the time appointed, she invited us, as we
were strangers to her, to examine the cabinet which she
used when giving materializing seances ; also the place
where it stood, so as to satisfy ourselves that there could
be no trickery. Mrs. Moore also offered to undress and
to dress before the ladies of the party, to show that she
had no masks or shawls with which to make up bogus
spirits to deceive us. This she did, and we thoroughly
examined the cabinet and the part of the room where it
stood, thereby satisfying ourselves that there were no
trap-doors, wires, or other devices connected with it.
The cabinet consisted of a four-leaved screen, which
formed a square of about three feet, with a dark cloth
placed over it to exclude the light. In the leaf facing
where the chairs stood on which we were to sit was an
opening towards the top of about two feet by eighteen
inches wide, with a small curtain covering it. On our
taking our seats Mrs. Moore fastened the door of the
room, which was on my left and away from the cabinet,
and then entered the cabinet.


In a short time the small curtain in front of the
aperture was drawn back, and I saw my father, who,
after remaining a few minutes without being able to
speak, retired.
Almost as soon as the curtains closed they were thrown
back and my mother appeared; she also was unable to
speak to us. After she our daughter Ada
came and spoke to us. We recognized her by the strong-
family likeness she bore to her sisters. She passed
away as an infant, but had then grown to womanhood,
as we were previously aware. Frequently, during her
communications with us, through her sisters and other
mediums, she had spoken of the luxuriance of her hair
and its golden colour, so I asked her if she could show
us her hair. She at once put her hand behind her head
and brought her long golden hair forward. It was
certainly a most lovely head of hair, and I remarked,
“ Well, Ada, you might well be proud of such hair; it is
even more beautiful than the head of hair represented
on the placards advertising Madam Allen’s Hair Restorer.”
I may state that the medium had but a scant head of
hair, and it was of a dark red colour.
After conversing with us for a short time Ada with-
drew, and on the curtain opening again we saw our eldest
son, Archie, who had passed on through typhoid fever
nearly ten years previously. After speaking to us a
little he retired; and when the curtain again opened our
third son, Hugh, the elder of the two who wmre drowned,
appeared and said a few words to us. After he had
retired the curtain opened and we saw our son Willie,
the other son who was drowned. He also conversed for
a short time with us ; and on his withdrawing and the
curtain again opening, our friend Mrs. G , whom I
mentioned as having gone with my wife and self on my
second visit to Foster’s rooms, appeared at the aperture
and conversed with us. She said she was delighted that
we recognized her; that, although we were not aware of
her presence during our journeyings, she was with us,
and, in order to prove that she still took an interest
in us and in our belongings, she mentioned the exact


number of packages constituting the family luggage—
namely, twenty-two in all.
I may state that Mrs. G lived with us as lady-help
to my wife for over twelve years, and passed to the
higher life several years ago. She was very much
attached to my wife and our children, and has communi-
cated with us on many occasions since she left the earthly
plane of existence.
I omitted to mention that, besides the family, the
governess, Miss Rea, who accompanied us from Australia,
and who is still with us, was also present at this seance,
making eight in all. A brother, a sister, and an aunt of
hers, also a clergyman under whose ministry she sat
when a child, appeared and were recognized by her.
Each of them spoke to her except the clergyman, who
kept pointing to his throat, as if there was something
there to prevent his doing so. I may state that, at the
time referred to, Miss Rea was not aware that the clergy-
man alluded to was “ dead,” and it was only after our
arrival in New York that she learned he had died of
cancer in the throat. As it may be thought from this,
by those unacquainted with the subject, that infirmities
here are continued in the spirit world, I may mention
that it is not so ; but for the first two or three times of
revisiting the earth plane spirits generally experience
the same sensations as their physical bodies suffered
before passing on.
Let me here ask opponents to Spiritualism on what
other hypothesis than the Spiritual one can they account
for the experiences just related ? We were all total
strangers to Mrs. Moore, who could not possibly have
known, or even learned in California, what relatives and
friends we had in spirit life. The childish assertion that
it is all the work of a mythical being called Satan is too
absurd to require refutation. It would be as reasonable
to assert that all telegrams are the work of the Devil.
Before the seance at Mrs. Moore’s closed a good-looking
young man materialized, whom none of us recognized.
He, however, informed us that he was the chief of a
band of spirits who controlled the medium, giving his


name, which has slipped my memory. He said he and
the medium’s other guides had done their best to assist
our friends who had manifested themselves to us, and he
hoped we were satisfied. This he spoke in a deep mas-
culine voice, quite different to that of the others who had
spoken to us, and in a totally distinct tone of voice from
that of the medium. We replied that we were more than
satisfied, and desired to thank him and the medium’s
other guides for the aid they had rendered to our spirit
friends. He then bade us adieu.
PART IY.
In America.
During our stay in San Francisco we had sittings with
a number of other mediums, but though several of them
gave correct descriptions of our spirit friends, they were
unable to give us their names or characteristic messages
from them, with the exception of Hr. Fred. Evans, the
celebrated slate-writing medium, through whom' we
received a number of messages from various friends
with their names signed at the end. When we called on
Mr. and Mrs. Evans they received us very kindly and
they were most hospitable and attentive to us during
our stay in San Francisco. We had some wonderful
experiences in slate-writing with Dr. Slade, when he
was in Australia, but Evans’s slate-writing was even
more marvellous.
On more than one occasion the slates on which the
writing appeared were not within six feet of the sitters
or the table round which we sat. After he had cleaned
the slates and handed them to us to examine them, that
we might satisfy ourselves that there was no writing on
them, he put a small piece of slate-pencil, not so large as
a grain of rice, between the two slates we had examined,
then placing them on the floor, several feet from where
he and we sat, for a few minutes, on taking them up,


messages from various spirit friends of ours were found
written on the inside of the slates. These sittings took
place in broad daylight, in a room where there were
only an ordinary table and a few chairs.
On one occasion, when the slates were taken up from
the floor where they had been placed in the manner I
have described, with only the one little piece of slate-
pencil between them, several messages, in quite different
handwriting and in three distinct colours—namely,
white, blue, and red, were found on their inside surfaces.
I brought the various slates on which I received messages
through the mediumship of Evans away with me, so as
to be able to show them to any one who might discredit
my description of them. I believe Fred Evans to be the
most wonderful slate-writing medium in the world, and
I have every confidence in his truthfulness and honesty.
His wife is also a very pleasant and straightforward
person, and is a good trance medium.
Soon after our arrival in New York, I observed an
advertisement stating that a meeting would be held at
a certain hall in that city, at which a medium would
give tests, to be presided over by Professor Kiddle,
whom I had never met, but whom I knew of through
his writings on Modern Spiritualism. I may mention
that Professor Kiddle was formerly Chief Inspector over
all the Government schools in the State of New Y ork.
My wife, my youngest daughter, and myself attended
that meeting. There were about five hundred people
present, all total strangers to us, and, as usual, we took
a back seat.
The medium, a young man of about thirty, named
Fletcher, commenced by stating that that was his first
appearance in that hall, and that he was only acquainted
with two or three of all those who were present. After
he had given some wonderful tests to several people,
who each admitted their accuracy, and at the same time
declared that they were total strangers to the medium,
he said—“ The spirit of the late Charles Henry Foster,
the celebrated medium, is here present. He tells me he
is going to assist a friend to take control of me.” The


medium almost immediately went into the trance state,
and then, under control, walked to the end of the hall
where we sat. Placing his hand on my shoulder, I was
thus addressed—“ lam your father, Archibald Browne ;
I come to show you that I am present with you wher-
ever you go.”
After the medium had retired to the platform, I
explained to the audience that we were complete
strangers in New York, where we had not a single
acquaintance, that my father’s name was as stated
through the medium, whom I had never seen before, and
that from many previous proofs of my father’s frequent
presence with me, I had every reason to believe what he
stated; still it was very pleasing to me to have my
belief confirmed in the marked manner it had been done
that evening.
After the meeting was over, I obtained the medium’s
private address, and, the next day or the day following,
my wife and I had a private sitting with him. From
the wonderful tests he had given publicly, we expected
to have received through him characteristic messages
from a number of our friends in spirit life; but, though we
had some few communications, I must say, on the whole,
we were greatly disappointed. We afterwards called on
Professor Kiddle, at his private residence, and had a
long chat with him on the subject in which we were all
so mutually interested—viz., Modern Spiritualism.
Hearing that a Mrs. Gray, who resided only a few
doors from where we were staying in West Thirty-fourth -
street, held circles for materialization my wife and I
called on her, and were informed that circles were held
at her house (I think it was No. 330) twice weekly, at
eight o’clock punctually, her son being the medium. On
attending the first sitting to be held after our inquiry,
at about ten minutes to eight, we were shown into the
front drawingroom, a well-furnished apartment, and
requested to take our seats there for a short time. There
were one or two inquirers in this room when we entered,
and three or four came in after us.
At eight o’clock we were all asked to go into the back


drawingroom, separated from the front one by curtains,
the door of the former being then locked, and the gas
turned out. In the back drawingroom was a cabinet, of
simple construction, which we were invited to examine,
and, on our taking our seats on chairs, forming a semi-
circle in front of the cabinet, Mrs. Gray’s son, a young
man of about five or six-and-twenty, entered the cabinet,
in which was a chair, and then drew the curtains, which
formed its front, together.
The door of the room being locked, the gas was turned
down so as to leave a subdued light, and Mrs. Gray took
her stand by the side of the cabinet.
After a hymn had been sung, we heard a band of
music, seemingly at a distance at first, and gradually
drawing nearer, till they all appeared to be playing their
various instruments inside the cabinet where the medium
was. After a short time they seemed to go away as
gradually as they had come, until the sound of the music
died away in the distance. Then there came from behind
the curtains a thin, eccentric-looking old gentleman,
apparently dressed in black clothes, with a stoop, but
very active. Mrs. Gray addressed him as “ Doctor,” and
told us his name, but it has escaped my memory. He
said he was going to magnetize some paper, to give to
any of the sitters who were suffering from any complaint,
and, on Mrs. Gray saying there was some paper on a
.small table at the side of the cabinet, he walked hurriedly
to it, and commenced to magnetize the paper. As he did
so, I observed a bluish, electrical-looking light proceed
from the tips of his fingers. He then grasped the top
sheet in his hand, and gave this to one of the sitters.
On his return to the small table, he commenced to
magnetize the next sheet in a similar way to the first,
and then handed this to another sitter. After this he
passed between the right-hand seat of the circle and the
wall, and went quickly into the front drawingroom,
which was in darkness. While we were waiting for the
■old doctor’s return, much to our astonishment, in his
stead came a stoutish young woman, draped in white ;
.she did not speak, but passed into the cabinet. In a few


minutes she reappeared, and walked up to one of the
lady sitters, with whom she held a conversation in a
subdued voice. The lady then got up and walked with
her into the front drawingroom, where she dematerial-
ized, and the lady, on returning to her seat, explained to
the other sitters that it was her daughter, and that, while
speaking to her in the other room she had dematerialized
and vanished. Mrs. Gray told us that the doctor had
been one of the medium’s controls for years, and had the
power of dematerializing himself at any distance from
the cabinet, and transferring the matter with which he
had clothed his spiritual form to another spirit. It was
certainly a very remarkable manifestation.
After several spirits had appeared and conversed with
the other sitters, who recognized them and talked with
them as old and dear friends, the figure of a young
woman approached my wife, saying, “ Martha! ” My
wife knew her at once, and embraced her, then turning
to me my wife said, “It is Martha W ,” when the
latter came close to me and shook hands with me with
all the warmth and affection she would have done had
she been still in this life and not seen me for many
years. I said to her, “ Martha, dear, lam delighted to
see you again and to be able to shake hands with you
once more ; I little thought of seeing you materialize,
though you have often communicated with us before.”
After leaving me she took my wife, who sat on the
next chair to me, by the hand and led her to a sofa that
was in the same room, where she told my wife that her
brothers were present, but that they would not be able
to materialize that evening. She desired my wife to
say to her father and mother, her brother and sisters,
that she sent her love to them all, and to tell them that
although they did not realize her presence, she was
often with them. She led my wife up to the cabinet,
and on taking her inside she raised my wife’s hand and
rested it on the shoulder of the medium, who was
breathing heavily at the time, while she held my wife’s
other hand in hers. After embracing my wife she de-
materialized, and we saw no more of her. She seemed


as delighted to make herself visible and to converse
with ns as we were to see and talk with her.
I may here state that Martha, who thus appeared, is
the daughter of very old friends of ours in Australia,
and passed to the higher life many years ago. When
on earth she was very much attached to my wife, and
since then she has frequently, through various mediums,
assured my wife of the continuance of the love and
regard she had for her in earth life. She was a
beautiful girl when in the flesh, and is still more
beautiful now that she has grown to womanhood in
spirit life. Our only wish at the time she appeared to
us in materialized form, was that her mother could have
been present’d© see her angel daughter in her robes of
dazzling brightness. On the medium coming out of
trance, the circle broke up, and the sitters, who were
mostly strangers to each other, dispersed.
On another occasion, when my wife and I were
present at a seance at Mrs. Gray’s, after the spirit
friends of several of the sitters had been materialized,
been recognized, and held converse with their friends, a
spirit, apparently dressed in working men’s clothes,
made his appearance at the front of the cabinet. As he
seemed unable to speak, and was not recognized by any
of the sitters, it was suggested that we should each
in turn ask if we were the party he wanted to be
recognized by. To several who made this inquiry he
shook his head, until it came to my turn, when he
nodded his head, which I took to mean “ Yes,” and,
with my wife. I went close up to where he stood, when
all he seemed to be able to say was “ Charlie,” in little
more than a whisper. While I was endeavouring to
make out who he was, my wife said, “ Is it not the man
that was killed at your works?” No sooner had she
said this than he again nodded his head in acknowledg-
ment that he was that individual, and he whispered,
“ Thank you, thank you,” his countenance at the same
time changing from one of sadness to a happy expres-
sion. Immediately he smiled I recognized him, and
said, “Well, Charlie, I fulfilled my promise to you,” and


he again nodded assent. As we stood by him, my wife
and I observed that he wore, or appeared to do so, the
exact counterpart of the blue guernsey that he used to
wear at my works. He seemed at first cast down when
he was not recognized, but greatly pleased when we did
so. He then retired within the cabinet, and we saw no
more of him.
I must explain that this man was engine driver at
one of my places of business in Australia. ,He was
only a short time in my employ when he was, through
his own carelessness, fatally crushed between the fly
and the driving wheel of the engine. He was at once
O p
conveyed to the Melbourne Hospital, where I went and
saw him as soon as I heard of the accident and that he
had been taken there. I found him quite sensible, but
in a dying condition. He endeavoured to speak to me,
but all he was able to say was my name. I said to him,
“ I know what you want to say, Charlie; I will see after
your wife.” He passed away shortly after this, and we
raised a subscription for his wife which started her in
a small shop, which I believe she still carries on. This
man was the very last person I should have expected to
see materialize. Evidently his desire was to convey his
thanks to me, and through me to all those who sub-
scribed for the benefit of his widow.
My wife and I had sittings with several other
materializing mediums in Hew York, but to recount all
that occurred at each seance we attended would fill a
large volume. I may, however, state that what we
witnessed at 256 West Forty-third-street were the
most marvellous manifestations of all, Mrs. Effie Moss
being the medium.
At the first seance we attended at Mrs. Moss’s, on
her entering the cabinet—-which we had previously
examined—the door of the room being locked, and the
light lowered a little, we (the sitters) sang a few verses
of a hymn, accompanied by a young lady at the har-
monium which was in the room. As soon as we had
finished singing, the curtain, which formed the front of
the cabinet, opened, and a slender female draped in


white walked out and came over to one of the male
sitters sitting beside a lad about ten years of age. After
embracing the lad, she took the hand of the male sitter
and led him over to a sofa, where they both sat down
hand in hand and talked to each other for several
minutes in a subdued tone of voice. She then embraced
him and the lad, whom he had called up to his side, and
retired to the cabinet. On the two sitters resuming
their chairs, the elder one informed those present that
the materialized spirit we had seen and heard talking to
him was his wife, and that he had brought the lad, who
was their son, that evening at her request. He also
informed us that since his wife had passed from earth
life he had not missed attending Mrs. Moss’s circle once
a week in order to hold communion with his wife in the
way we had witnessed, and that she and he talked over
family matters the same as they did when she was in
this life. He informed us he was the captain of one of
the river boats, and he seemed a very respectable and
earnest man.
After several of the other sitters’ spirit friends had
appeared and talked to them, my wife and I observed
what appeared like whitish vapour forming above the
carpet, about a foot in front of us; this gradually
increased in size, until we saw it take the shape of a
human form, and lo and behold ! there stood in front of
us our eldest son, Archie, who, as I have already stated,
passed to the higher life some ten years previously
through typhoid fever. On my saying to him that he
appeared a good deal stouter than he did when we saw
him at Mrs. Moore’s, in San Francisco, he explained that
it was to be accounted for by the difference of the two
mediums through whom he materialized, Mrs. Moore
being a woman of slender figure, while Mrs. Moss was
very stout. After conversing with us for some few
minutes, he said, “ I must go,” shook hands with both of
us, and then gradually dematerialized before us where
he had stood. His feet first dematerialized, then his
limbs, then his body, until all that remained above the
floor was his head, which, as it dematerialized, resumed


the whitish vapoury appearance above the carpet I have
described, and this seemed to be absorbed into the carpet,
until there was nothing visible where our son had stood
as solid and tangible as either of us.
After two or three of the other sitters’ friends had
materialized and dematerialized in the same way as our
son had done, the medium came out of the deep trance,
and soon afterwards she walked out of the cabinet, in
which she had been seated from the commencement of
the seance. The sitters, who seemed mostly strangers
to each other, then held a short conversation upon the
manifestations witnessed during the evening, with which
all seemed highly pleased, and then separated.
PART Y.
Grand Manifestations.
From what we reported that we had witnessed at Mrs.
Moss’s seance, our three daughters, second youngest son,
Arthur, and Miss Rea, the governess, expressed a desire
to attend one of her seances. This they did on the
following Friday afternoon, when, much to their astonish-
ment, no sooner had the sitters commenced singing, and
before the medium had entered the cabinet, than several
spirits appeared by her side. Almost immediately after
Mrs. Moss took her seat in the cabinet a little American
Indian girl came from the cabinet over to where my son,
a boy of eight years of age, sal, and said that someone
wanted the pappoose (the Indian for child).
Taking my son by the hand she led him over to the
cabinet, where he saw his sister, Ada, whom he recognized
from having seen her at Mrs. Moore’s, in San Francisco.
She embraced him, and taking his hand in hers walked
across the room to where his sisters sat; addressing them
as “My sisters,” she embraced them. Turning to Miss
Rea, she embraced her also, and addressing the latter by
her name, “ Lizzie,” she said to her, “Your sister Emily
is here.” After Ada had given some messages which she


wished conveyed to her mother and myself, she asked
her sisters, brother, and Miss Rea to accompany her to
the cabinet. On their doing so they were met by our
son, Archie, who conversed with them for some time,
and while he and Ada held each a hand of their little
brother Arthur, they both began to dematerialize in the
same way as Archie did on the evening on which his
mother and I were present. They continued to hold
their brother’s hands until he had to stoo|), and it was
not until Arthur’s hands were close to the floor that
theirs dematerialized.
Before the seance closed, Miss Rea, who, with our
daughters and our son had resumed their seats in the
circle, was beckoned to the cabinet by a female spirit.
Having heard from our daughter Ada that her sister
Emily was present, she naturally expected to see her
materialize, but, on approaching the spirit who had
beckoned, she recognized a cousin of hers, a Mrs. P— ,
who had passed to the higher life several years previously.
The latter informed Miss Rea that her brother Tom was
ill, which proved only too true, as he passed away before
she reached her home in the north of Ireland.
In a conversation my wife and I had with a gentle-
man from Chicago whom we met at a seance, he spoke
very highly to us of the mediumship of a Mrs. Hesse,
residing at 261 West One Hundred and Thirteenth-
street, and he said if we would call on her and mention
his name he was sure she would give us a sitting. We
accordingly called on Mrs. Hesse, whom we found a very
ladylike and evidently highly intelligent person, and who
at once consented to give us a sitting.
Before, however, relating what occurred, I must explain
that our son Archie, who was of a jocular description,
used generally, when he communicated with us through
a medium in Australia, to introduce himself in a very
peculiar manner, namely—by giving a short whistle, then
flipping with his thumb and second finger, followed by
his holding the medium’s hand out to shake hands with
us, at the same time saying, “Well ma, well pa, how are
you ? ”


On Mrs. Hesse going into the trance state, one of her
guides held a conversation with us for some time, and
concluded by saying that there was a spirit who was
very anxious to speak to us through the medium. On
her giving up the control to this spirit, what was our
surprise to hear the old whistle, the flipping noise, and
see the hand of the medium held out to shake hands
with us, while at the same time—“ Well rna, well pa,
how are you?” was spoken to us in the old familiar accents.
My wife and I both exclaimed at the same time, “ Well,
Archie, we need not ask who you are; that is a grand
test.” After conversing with him for some time he told
us he could not keep control of the medium longer, and
said adieu. On Mrs. Hesse coming out of trance we told
her that our eldest son had manifested through her in
exactly the same way as he used to do through a friend
who is a medium in Australia, and that we were delighted
with the seance, at which she seemed pleased. After
thanking Mrs. Hesse for her courtesy we bade her good-
bye.
While at Mrs. Moss’s, on one occasion—for my wife
and I attended two or three of her seances —she men-
tioned that she was going to give a sitting at Mrs.
Wallace’s, on behalf of a charity, in a day or two, and
that she was sure Mrs. Wallace, who was a very earnest
Spiritualist, would be happy to see us. We accordingly
called on Mrs. Wallace, whom we found a very pleasant
and refined lady, and she kindly invited us to attend
the circle referred to by Mrs. Moss.
On our going to Mrs. Wallace’s house at the appointed
time we found a number of Mrs. Wallace’s friends there
before us. After we had been introduced to them the
circle was formed. Mrs. Moss took her seat in a cabinet
improvised for the occasion and a hymn was sung.
After several spirits had materialized and been recog-
nized, and had held conversation with some of the other
sitters present, our daughter Ada appeared in front of
the curtains forming the cabinet, and my wife at once
went up and embraced her.
Thinking that she might like to speak to her mother


privately, I kept my seat, but Ada beckoned me to come
also. On my going to her she embraced me most affec-
tionately, her beautiful golden hair falling over my
shoulder as she did so. I told her how grateful I felt
to God for the privilege granted to me to be enabled to
embrace, even in this life, one of my children who had
passed from earth so many years previously. The dear
girl seemed, like myself and her mother, overcome with
joy. She told us how exceedingly happy she was in
spirit life, and with what joy she looked forward to the
time when we all would be re-united in that world where
the word “ farewell ”is unknown. When the seance was
over we took our leave of Mrs. Wallace and her friends,
and thanked the former for her kindly inviting us, who
were perfect strangers, to her circle.
Concluding Remarks.
The foregoing experiences are not a hundredth part of
the evidences I have received, during the last seventeen
years’ investigation of Modern Spiritualism, of a future
life, and of the continuity of the individuality after the
change called “death.” They are, however, I consider,
sufficient to convince all unprejudiced truth-seekers that I
possess good reasons for the hope, or rather knowledge,
that is in me. As enjoined in Scripture, I have sought
and I have found, I have knocked and it hath been
opened unto me; I have proved all things and held fast
to that which is good and true, and the truth has made
me free. Go ye and do likewise, “ Try the spirits,”
believe not every spirit; beware of deceiving spirits ; also
“ concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not have
you ignorant.” The manifestation of the spirit is given
to every man (who earnestly investigates the subject) to
profit withal, “ for to one is given the word of wisdom,
to another the word of knowledge, to another faith”
(based on demonstrable facts), “to another the gift of
healing, to another the working of (what appear to be)
miracles, to another prophecy, to another the gift of
discerning spirits, to another the gift of divers kinds of


tongues, to another the gift of interpreting (various)
languages,” &c.
Instead of Spiritualism being a superstition, as popu-
larly supposed, it is the Nemesis of all superstition, for
it is the key by which the door can be unlocked that lets
in the light of truth on all the dark mysteries of the past.
It is a complete induction, for it harmonizes with every
fact capable of proof that is known to the world;
therefore all assumed facts which do not harmonize
with Spiritualism are false and misleading theories,
which will be rejected and discarded as the world
advances in knowledge and wisdom.
The three leading reasons why believers in Spiritual-
ism, as set forth in the Bible, are so opposed to Modern
Spiritualism are as follows: —First, their life-long attach-
ment to time-honoured falsities, which, viewed in the
light of truth and reason, are untenable; secondly,
because the facts brought to light by Modern Spiritual-
ism refute many of the most cherished theories of
popular theology ; and, thirdly, from the erroneous ideas
they have formed of Modern Spiritualism, owing to the
gross misrepresentations which appear from time to
time in the public press, and the falsehoods, trickery,
and deception that have been mixed up with it by
unprincipled and designing people for their selfish ends.
Who, let me ask, are the foolish ones—those who,
without having investigated Modern Spiritualism, owing
to prejudice and bigotry, denounce it as all humbug,
or those who, notwithstanding its unpopularity, have,
after years of patient investigation, had the honesty to
publicly declare that communion with those who have
passed through the change called “ death ” is not only
possible but is an accomplished fact ? While the former,
as a rule, believe in a religion of irrational creeds and
ecclesiastical ceremonies which are a disgrace to the
intelligence of the age in which we live, the latter uphold
a religion resting on a scientific basis, and which can
stand a rational analysis.
Owing to its unpopularity, the public advocacy of
Modern Spiritualism has as yet, with a few noble ex-


ceptions, been confined to the working classes, many of
whom have handicapped its grand philosophy with
special fads of their own, such as vegetarianism, tee-
totalism, phrenology, re-incarnation, re-absorption, &c.,
&c., much in the same way as the simple religion of
love to God and love to man was, soon after its in-
ception, handicapped with the Pauline doctrines of
salvation by faith, atonement of sin through vicarious
sacrifice, election, predestination, and all the forms and
ceremonies of ecclesiasticism. There are, however, a far
larger number of the upper classes who are Spiritualists
than is generally supposed to be the case. Only their
most intimate friends are invited to their circles, their
neighbours being kept quite ignorant of the fact that
they are Spiritualists. They seldom attend Spiritualistic
public meetings, partly from the fear of its becoming
known that they have even sympathy with the move-
ment, and partly on account of the frequent illiteracy of
the public exponents of Spiritualism. When they do
attend any of these meetings they do so stealthily—as
Micodemus is reported to have visited Jesus, by night
—so as not to be observed. How comparatively few
appreciate the truth in its full value, while all profess to
be animated by the love of truth. They thereby deceive
themselves, and the truth is not in them.
Several of my friends, who have become interested in
Modern Spiritualism through what I have related to them
of my experiences, have asked me if I could recommend
them to any good medium in this country, but, although
I have visited a number of those who advertise them-
selves as test mediums, I have not as yet met with one
sufficiently developed as to give the names of, or charac-
teristic messages from, my spirit friends. The best way,
under such circumstances, to ascertain the reality of
spirit manifestations is to form private circles at home,
with some intimate friends who are interested in the
subject. Directions for doing so can be obtained
wherever Spiritualistic literature is sold. Some know-
ledge of the Spiritual philosophy is, however, advisable,
before commencing to hold circles for the investigation
of the Spiritual phenomena.


The facts I have here stated should supply sufficient
data for the Psychical Research Society of London to
form their long-looked-for conclusions in regard to
Modern Spiritualism. Should that society desire to cross-
question me on all or any of the statements I have made,
I shall he happy to afford them the opportunity, pro-
vided they notify that desire to my publishers, by whom
all letters to me will be forwarded.
I did not intend to publish my experiences during my
travels until I returned to the land of my adoption, but
have been induced to do so now at the request of my
much-esteemed friend, Mrs. Hardinge Britten, from whose
learned and eloquent lectures, delivered to large and
appreciative audiences in Melbourne, some years ago, I
derived considerable knowledge on Spiritualism and
kindred subjects. From her grand inspirational gift,
coupled with her good common sense and her noble
desire to uplift humanity, she may well be termed “ The
Queen of Lecturers.”
I shall conclude with a few lines that came to me
without thought on my part, since they express my
experiences and my sentiments in simple language: —
I have seen the hills and valleys in the beauteous summerland ;
I have heard the angels singing across the golden strand;
I have grasped the hands of loved ones who’ve only gone before,
Who’ll greet me with a welcome when I reach the other shore.
For years I’ve held communion with the dear ones of my youth,
And from their loving hearts received sweet messages of truth ;
Our children, too, they often come to tell us of their love,
And how they are progressing in the angel-home above.
Thus my hope has changed to knowledge, all fear of death hath fled,
I know that I shall live again though numbered with “ the dead,”
And that I shall return in love to those I leave behind,
To guide and comfort them through life with counsels wise and kind.
Oh 1 could I but impart to all this knowledge of God’s love,
Which here we only dimly see—it shines more clear above;
Thrice happy will the world become when this great truth is known.
And that, as said of old, we reap just as on earth we’ve sown.


Then trust not in those foolish creeds for priestly ends devised,
But hearken to the voice within, and by it be advised;
To wisdom you will thus attain, and then can truly sing—
Oh ! grave, where is thy victory ? Oh ! death, where is thy sting P
As some of those who may read the experiences herein
related may be interested in Theosophy, and might desire
to know my views thereon, I have deemed it right to add
the following:—After years of careful study of this
subject I came to the conclusion that it is a very in-
genious and plausible theory propounded to fit in with
facts, and thereby it appears to explain these facts to a
certain class of metaphysical minds, but it is a theory,
or set of theories, totally devoid of proof. In this
respect it differs entirely from Modern Spiritualism,
which rests on scientific demonstration and evidence,
which all who will take the trouble to earnestly and
perseveringly investigate the subject can, in a greater or
less degree, obtain for their own satisfaction, while it
fully and naturally accounts for and explains all the
facts referred to.
A Theosophist, like a church-going Christian, must
have the one thing needful, namely, faith. Unless he
takes the trouble to travel to Thibet, in India, to witness
the alleged powers of a certain class, called adepts, he
must take all that is related of these men on mere trust,
in the same way as church-going Christians have to accept
all the Biblical statements, written by men living in
ignorant and superstitious times. To me, one irrefutably
demonstrated fact to the majority of my senses-—namely,
seeing, feeling, and hearing—is worth all the plausible
theories in the world, and I challenge the whole body of
Theosophists to adduce one-tenth, or even a hundredth,
part of the evidence herein related of a rational and
natural future life for man. It may surprise some who
read this to learn that the re-incarnation theory is held
by many in the spirit world, in the same way as
millions there still believe in the popular faith, and are
looking forward to the appearance of their supposed
Saviour on the judgment day. I have at various times
held communion with several in spirit life who professed


to believe in re-incarnation, and have listened to their
arguments in its favour, but when I have asked them
for their proofs of its truth, in no instance have they
been able to adduce any. The fact is, God hath
endowed all sane men with reason, but He never
compels them to utilize this divine gift either in this life
or in that which is to come. None, however, can truly
spiritually progress, either here or there, until they use
their reason in all things, and thereby become God-like.
CONCLUDING NOTE BY THE EDITOR OF “THE TWO
WORLDS.”
We cannot close this series of articles (kindly and generously
prepared by their author for The Two Worlds, at much incon-
venience to himself, seeing that he with his family are only birds
of passage on a tour through Europe) without calling the reader’s
special attention to the following points of the narrative : —They
are prepared by a gentleman whose wealth and social distinction
place him far beyond the slightest possibility of having any in-
terested motive in publishing the statements put forth. They are
prepared by one equally well known in the great modem city of
Melbourne, Australia, for his probity, high sense of honour, and
acumen in analyzing and pronouncing judgment upon any subjects,
however problematical or abstruse, he undertakes to investigate.
It would be generally considered easier to baffle or deceive an
experienced man of the law than Mr. H. Junor Browne; and, in
addition to all this, we have in these experiences a record of mar-
vellous, almost unparalleled, spiritual phenomena, the like of
which might have been exhibited singly and separately to many
far-and-wide searchers, but taken collectively as occurring in one
family, and to persons still in the prime of life, health, and the
maturity of all mental powers, they form a history which, in this
modern age, has never before been equalled. Astonishing and
transcending all former records as this same history is, who—- under
the circumstances of their narration —can dispute, or even dare to
deny them P If they are false, then no testimony upon the face of
the earth can be received as true; if they are true, what answer
can the opponents of Modern Spiritualism have to make concern-
ing the facts herein narrated ? We wait for a reply. — Ed. T. W.


A TOUCHING FUNERAL DISCOURSE.
\_Reprintedfrom “ The Two Worlds' ’ 18 th September, 1891.]
[Note. —The following address was delivered at the time and
place named, and, under the circumstances, shows most con-
clusively the abiding certainty with which THE FATHER who
delivered the address recorded MUST have regarded the assured
fact of his sweet young daughter’s continued existence in the land
of the immortals, and the consoling assurance that she who had
departed would soon be rejoined by those left behind. The noble
and inspired gentleman who sends this copy of his funeral oration
over the beloved and beautiful blossom of his home and heart,
desires that for the present and for special reasons of concern for
others, his own name and that of the fair girl who has arisen shall
be withheld. We, who knew and loved her, can with truth say—
“ Earth has one angel less, heaven one angel more.” — Editor Two
Worlds.
ADDRESS delivered over the grave of a beautiful girl
of sixteen years of age, by her father, at Highgate
Cemetery, London, on Wednesday, 9th September,
1891.
Dear friends, we are met together here to pay the last
tribute of respect to the mortal remains of my youngest
daughter, who, for some wise cause, has, in the bloom of
youth and beauty, been called away from earth, and has
entered into that higher state of existence to which we
all are hastening. Our dear child was evidently too pure
a bud to bloom on earth. Of her it may be truly said—
Pure as the snowflake ere it falls
And takes the stain of earth,
Without a taint of mortal life
Except its mortal birth.
Even to those who, like myself, have had incon-
trovertible evidence of the continuity of life after the


change called “ death,” it is hard to part with the
physical presence of those we love, but in this our hour
of trial we possess that which no religion resting on
mere faith can supply—namely, an actual knowledge
that our dear child still lives and loves us ; that although
she is invisible to our physical vision yet she can see us
and be cognizant of all our loving thoughts towards her.
Of this fact our dear daughter was aware, for she had
O > '
many and conclusive evidences of its truth during her
life on earth. She was well aware that what is termed
“ death ” is not the end of existence, and that, though lost
to our physical eyesight, the loved ones can still, when
they have the opportunity afforded them, communicate
with us, and thereby assure us of their undying love and
deathless affection.
Oh, joy unspeakable to know
This truth divine made manifest
To weary, waiting souls below,
Through those now entered into rest;
To know that for the ills we bear,
The weariness of heart and brain,
A balm there is awaiting there;
Thank God that we shall live again.
Owing to the false teachings of the past, which unfor-
tunately still prevail, the great majority of people know
little of the philosophy of death. It is only when they
are laid low on a bed of sickness, or when some loved
friend is called away by the hand of death, that they
give this all-important subject the slightest consideration,
consequently they are not familiar with it, as are those
who have made it their earnest study, and who therefore
know that
They who are lost to outward sense,
Have but flung off their robes of clay,
And, clothed in heavenly radiance,
Attend us on our earthly way.
For the benefit of those who are unacquainted with this
subject, I may state that death is not, as has been falsely
taught, a penalty of sin—original or otherwise—but a


natural and inevitable transition to a new and higher
stage of existence, a rising into clearer light, fuller
knowledge, more harmonious surroundings, richer
revealings of love, and larger possibilities of progress
and hap in ess.
When the lamp'of life is wearing low, the clouds that
separate the seen from the unseen fade away, and as
the physical matter dies off from that which has been
fettered and imprisoned by its earthly scaffolding we
see with clearer and more extended eyesight. Things
that were previously strange to most of us, and thoughts
that could not be followed in their upward flight to the
heights to which they pointed, become then quite clear.
The mental sight of the past appears as that of one who
could now see, not as before through a glass darkly, but
ns clear as the noonday sun. To this is superadded a
heart-sight—more penetrating than any intellectual
insight—-which makes all plain, and to this enlarged
horizon there appears no limit.
Tims we shall shortly know that length of breath
Is not the sweetest gift God sends Kis friend,
And that sometimes the sable pall of death
Conceals the fairest boon His love can send.
People talk of spectres or ghosts. ’Tis we in the
fleshly body who are shadows passing on to join the
innumerable crowd gone before to the land of the living,
to the land of the great departed, for, as was truly said
of old, “ The things that are seen are temporal, but the
things that are unseen are eternal.”
Victor Hugo, treating of the subject of death, wrote —
‘ ‘ The tomb is not an endless night,
It is a thoroughfare—a way
That closes in soft twilight,
And opens in eternal day.
When unto dust we turn once more.
We can say a day’s work’s done ;
We may not say our work is o’er,
For life will scarcely have begun.”


Writing on the same subject, another poet observes—
“ The eye that is closed in the dying hour
Doth open the next in bliss ;
The welcome is heard in another world
Ere the farewell is hushed in this.
For we pass from the clasp of mourning friends
To the arms of the loved and lost,
And the faces of those will greet us then
Whom on earth we valued most.”
The death of man’s physical body is one of the natural
and necessary changes that the spirit must experience
in its deathless journey through eternity. As the sun
at even sets to rise in radiance on another shore, so, at
the change called death, does the spirit quit its mortal
frame to rise in newness of life in the glorious spirit
world, which is not, as has been falsely taught, a far-off
region, hut lies close around us; for as man’s spirit
interblends with his body, so does the spirit world inter-
blend with the physical universe. Truly, as the poet
writes—
It lies around us like a cloud,
A world we do not see;
Yet the sweet closing of an eye
May bring us there to be.
Its gentle breezes fan our cheek,
Amid our worldly cares ;
Its gentle voices whisper love,
And mingle with our prayers.
Sweet hearts around us throb and beat,
Sweet helping hands are stirred,
And palpitate the veil between
With breathings almost heard.
So thin, so soft, so sweet they glide,
So near to press they seem,
They lull us gently to our rest,
They melt into our dream.
And in the hush of rest they bring
’Tis easy now to see
How lovely and how sweet a pass
The hour of death may be ;
Scarce knowing if we wake or sleep,
Scarce asking where we are,
To feel all trouble sink away—
All sorrow and all care.


‘ Sweet friends around us watch us still,
Press nearer to our side,
Into our thoughts, into our prayers,
With gentle helpings glide.
Let death between us be as naught,
A dried and vanished stream;
Your joy be the reality,
Our suffering like the dream.”
The spirit form of my dear child, whose physical
casket lies in that coffin before us, is, in all probability,
standing by our side at this moment, cognizant of all
that lam saying to you. She is not lost to us, but is
only gone before, and she will without doubt be
frequently present with those whom she loved when in
the body, to influence them for good, and to guard and
comfort them, as far as it is in her power, until they are
reunited in that life where there is no parting from
those we truly love, and where the word “ farewell ” is
unknown. Viewed through our imperfect vision—
Tbe grave seemeth cold
And its silence too hushed
For one who so late
In life’s rosy tints blushed.
Her body we place
In the darkness so deep,
But we know that her soul
Hath not fallen asleep.
Oh ! blessed new gospel,
Which scatters its balm
To hearts which are sobbing
Death’s low minor psalm ;
And bless’d is the chorus
Which breaks on our ears,
So hopeful—so grand—
From the bright angel spheres.
The change called death happily does not sever the
ties of love and affection; on the contrary, it intensifies
them, and, as was said of old, “ where our treasure is,
there shall our hearts be also.”


Oh ! what is death ? ’Tis a fleeting breath—
A simple but blessed change,
’Tis rending a chain that the soul may gain
A higher and broader range.
Oh ! though we weep when our loved ones sleep,
When the rose on the cheek grows pale;
Yet their forms of light, just concealed from sight,
Are only behind a veil.
Humbly acknowledging the infinite wisdom, goodness,
and mercy of God, the loving Father of us all, and
reverently expressing our fervent gratitude to Him
who ordereth all things well, and for the glorious
evidence which spirit communion affords of His bound-
less goodness to man, we now commit the mortal remains
of my dear child to the earth, to mingle with the
elements from which they sprang.
[Here the coffin ivas lowered into the grave.~\
The casket here we leave
To wither and decay;
The precious jewel it once held
Hath left its house of clay.
The casket is but dust—
The merely mortal frame ;
And since it has no further use,
Eeturns from whence it came.
The immortal soul it held
Lives through another birth,
And, needing not the casket now,
It gives it back to earth.
So may we labour here
In goodness, truth, and love,
That we may meet in joy at last,
In that great home above.
I shall conclude, dear friends, with a spiritual com-
munication, received through the mediumship of Miss
Lizzie Hoten, from one who had passed through the
change called death and had realized that life is
continuous beyond the portals of the tomb. It is en-
titled


“I STILL LITE.”
0 Thou, whose love is changeless, both now and evermore ;
Source of all conscious being! Thy goodness I adore.
Lord, I would ever praise Thee, for all Thy love can give,
But most of all, O Father ! I thank Thee that I live.
1 live ! O ye who loved me ! your faith was not in vain !
Back through the shadowy valley I come to you again.
Safe in the love that guides me, with fearless feet I tread—
My home is with the angels—O, say not lam dead !
Not dead ! O, no, but lifted above all earthly strife,
Now first I know the meaning and feel the power of life—
The power to rise uncumbered by woe, or want, or care,
To breathe fresh inspiration from pure celestial air,
To feel that all the tempests of human life have passed,
And that my ark in safety rests on the Mount at last;
To send my soul’s great longings, like Noah’s dove, abroad,
And find them swift returning with signs of peace from God.
To soar in boundless freedom through broad, bright, azure skies
And catch the radiant gleaming of love-lit, angel eyes;
To feel the Father’s presence around me, near or far,
And see His shining glory stretch onward star by star;
To feel those grand upliftings that know not space nor time —•
To hear all discord ending in harmony sublime ;
To know that sin and error are dimly understood,
And that which man calls evil is undeveloped good ;
To stand in spell-bound rapture on some celestial height,
And see God’s glorious sunshine dispel the shades of night ;
To feel that all creation with love and joy is rife—
This, O my earthly loved ones, this is eternal life !
There, eyes that closed in darkness shall open to the morn,
And those whom death had stricken shall find themselves new-born;
The lame shall leap with gladness, the blind rejoice to see;
The slave shall know no master, and the prisoner shall be free.
There, the worn and heavy-laden their burdens shall lay down;
There, crosses borne in meekness at length shall win the crown;
And lonely hearts that famished for sympathy and love
Shall find a free affection in the angel home above.
O children of our Father ! weep not for those who pass
Like rose-leaves gently scattered, like dewdrops from the grass.
Ay, look not down in sadness, but fix your gaze on high;
They only dropped their mantles—their souls can never die.
They live! and still unbroken is that magnetic chain,
Which, in your tearful blindness, you thought was rent in twain ;
That chain of love was fashioned by more than human art,
And every link is welded so firm it cannot part.
They live, but O, not idly to fold their hands to rest,
For those who love God truly are they who serve Him best.


Love lightens all their labour, and makes all duty sweet;
Their hands are never weary, nor way-worn are their feet.
Thus —by that world of beauty, and by that life of love,
And by the holy angels who listen now above—
I pledge my soul’s endeavour to do whate’er I can
To bless my sister woman and aid my brother man.
O Thou, whose love is changeless, both now and evermore,
Source of all conscious being ! Thy goodness I adore.
Lord, I would ever praise Thee for all Thy love can give ;
But most of all, O Father, I thank Thee that I live.
Note.—The above address was delivered by me over the grave
of our youngest daughter, Lilian Violetta Browne, to whom refer-
ence is several times made in “ Eeasons for the Hope that is in Me.”
Shortly after our return to London from the Cumberland Lakes,
where I wrote my experiences for The Two Worlds , she was
seized, at the hotel where we were staying, with typhoid fever,
and passed to the higher life after a fortnight’s illness. The
morning after she left the mortal body, a few minutes after I
awoke, she appeared to me at the foot of my bed, in materialized
form, thereby conveying to me a comfort and consolation which
words cannot express, and for which I shall ever feel grateful.
Well might a writer truly observe : —■“ Good and gracious Father
of Spirits, with what deep ingratitude and pitiful self-denial do
poor mortals reject Thy messages of truth, comfort, and blessing,
when they refuse to accept, or scoff at, the precious boon of
Spiritual communion! . . . . Heaven speed the day of
unveiling, when it shall be recognized by all as the Kingdom of
Heaven come upon earth.” —H. J. B.


LOSS OF THE “ lOLANTHE ” YACHT.
* [The following is a reprint of a couple of letters by me
which appeared in the Harbinger of Light of January and April,
1885, in reference to the death by drowning of our two sons,
Hugh and William. These letters were issued at the time in
pamphlet form, and created a deep interest in the subject, but
they have long since been out of print, and I have frequently been
requested, by parties anxious to obtain copies, to have them re-
published.—H. J. B.]
ONE OF THE MANY ADVANTAGES OF A
KNOWLEDGE OF SPIRIT COMMUNION.
Sir, —As public attention has been drawn to my family,
during the week that is now closing, through the dis-
appearance of the yacht lolanthe, in which two of my
sons —William, aged 18, and Hugh, 20—and a faithful
employe named Murray, started for a cruise on the
night of the 13th, or early morning of the 14th inst.
(December, 1884), perhaps the following particulars
may be of interest to your readers.
In consequence of their not returning as they intended
on the evening of the 14th inst., I came to the con-
clusion that through adverse winds they might not be
back till the following morning, and as they did not put
in an appearance by that time, I went to the home of
the fisherman who looked after the yacht for them
when at its moorings at Fisherman’s Bend. From him
I learned that they had called at his house in his
absence, where they had changed their clothes, leaving
those they took off, as well as the boots of my son
William and Murray.
Not returning on" the 15th, we naturally became very
anxious about them, and on the following morning early
I called on Mr. G. Spriggs, the medical clairvoyant (who


had on a former occasion diagnosed my wife when
suffering from nervous debility, when she derived great
benefit from his treatment), requesting him to pay her
another visit, as she was not so well again.
I made no reference whatever to the cause thereof, as I
wished to leave his mind completely clear, so that I
might get a true clairvoyant tracing, if possible, in
regard to the missing ones, and in the following report I
have italicized my interpolations to render them more
distinct from the clairvoyant’s utterances.
A little before 8 a.m. Mr. Spriggs called over. Taking
my wife’s hand as he went into the trance state, the
first words he said were, “ Have you been down at the
sea ? ” To which she answered, “ I have not.” He then
continued, “ There seems to be a great depression of
spirits in connection with the sea. At night, when all
is quiet, you have great sorrow and trouble, and it
seems as if you give way to tears.” ( Which was quite
true, as my wife on their not returning when expected
was impressed that something serious had befallen
them.) Continuing his diagnosis, the clairvoyant said,
“ The mind causes the nerves to be affected through
a melancholy state, and the whole organs are sym-
pathetically acted upon through the great nervous
depression, Go to the country for change of air, but
not near the sea.” He then prescribed a dietary scale,
saying, “ there was no need of medicine, all that was
required was change of scene,” and he again remarked,
“ All seems connected with the sea.”
For the first time, I now made a slight reference to
what was uppermost on our minds by asking, “Can
you perceive any serious loss at sea ? ” To which the
clairvoyant, still in the trance state, replied, “ I cannot
see that they are in the spirit world, but if you will
give me something by which 1 can trace them, I shall
endeavour to find out.”
Fetching the pocket-books of my two sons, and
placing them in the clairvoyant’s hand, he commenced,
“ They seem to be in a small boat in a bend of a river,
they have a big sail and a small one” (which was quite


correct). “ They go down what looks like a wide river,
and have a little trouble with what seems to be the sea”
(evidently referring to Hobsons Bay) ; “ there appears
like a tower and a pier close by on their right” (this I
take to refer to Williamstown lighthouse and pier);
“ the sea seems to broaden out as they go, then I see the
land on their left hand, and there seems to be clouds
arising as if a storm were coming on; they seem to
bear off to another pier” (they were seen passing
Brighton pier on the morning of the 14 th); “after a
time they endeavour to return, but have the wind
against them, and after sailing about for some time they
land; they seem to have a little difficulty with the boat as
they near"the shore.” ( This I account for by their not
having taken their anchor with them, it having fouled in
a snag in the Yarra some days previously .) “ After
making the boat fast they go up a little embankment,
and seem to be wet through. It looks as if it were dark,
and at a little distance there appears to be a big hill or
cliffs. Ido not see any houses about. They get under
the trees, where they think of their friends at home, and
are troubled about it; one of them seems to be writing
something on paper with a pencil, then they walk about,
and seem to be considering what they should do.” (7
conjecture that they were hesitating whether they would
leave the boat there on the night of the 14 th, and make
their way home by land, but that the fact of Murray and
Willie having left their boots behind determined them
otherwise .) “I think you will have news of them to-
day.” {The only tidings we received of them that day
were that they were seen passing Brighton on the 14 th, as
already stated.)
On my asking where they were now, I was answered—
“ They seem to be somewhere towards Mornington, but
I cannot define the locality exactly, the medium never
having been where they are. I cannot trace further at
this sitting.”
On resuming next morning, the clairvoyant thus con-
tinued —“ They appear to have taken a rest for a time
after landing from the boat; they had been looking about


the bank. After a time they get into the boat again, and
go out to sea” (a boat answering the description of the
“ lolanthe” was seen on the morning of the loth at 8
o' clock from Frankston, off Rickard’s Point , steering in
the direction of Schnapper Point—this I learnt by
telegram). “ After they are out some time I observe on
their left-hand side a number of rocks ; it looks gloomy
and threatening. There is a heavy cloud at their back,
the sea seems to rise, and they make for land again, but
it is difficult for them to see the pier they want to reach;
the wind is changing about, the sails flap, and one of
them tears. One, who is not so tall as the others, is
sitting at the end of the boat, and he calls to the others
to do something with the sail in front.” (This answers
the description of Murray, who was not so tall as either
of my sons, and who would be at the helm and attending
to the main sheet while my sons looked after the jib ; to
my knowledge Mr. Spriggs never saw Murray or knew
anything about him in connection with the boat or other-
wise.) “ They seem to be in a difficulty about the ropes
not working properly.” ( There was a pause here, and
the inference left on my mind was that the catastrophe
occurred at this period, tuhich has subsequently been
corroborated in communications received from my sons.)
“ This appears to have taken place about a mile and a
half from land, in deep water. There are a number of
rocks in the neighbourhood which cause the water to be
more broken, and there appears to be an undercurrent as
if it were a channel where they are. There is a sand-
bank on the other side. This occurred on the morning
of the 15th inst.”
Up to the time of my writing this out I have received
no earthly tidings of the fate of the boat, its occupants,
or anything belonging to them, notwithstanding that the
Hon. the Commissioner of Trade and Customs has kindly
had the coasts of the Bay searched by the Government
steamer Dispatch, and the Chief Secretary ordered that
the shore from Brighton to Sorrento should be patrolled
by the police to see if any traces of them could be
discovered.


On the 17th we sat in circle to try if we could hear
anything of the missing ones from our spirit friends.
The medium was controlled by one of his guides, who
said that one who had recently left earth-life wished to
speak to us, so he would withdraw for a short time. He
was then controlled with difficulty by Willie, the younger
of my two sons, who seemed to be much distressed,
sobbing most bitterly. The first words he uttered were,
“Oh ! forgive me, Mamma; it was all my fault.” It was he
who had bought the yacht in conjunction with Murray,
who was about 30 years of age. His brother Hugh only
went out with them to keep them company. Willie was
still too weak to say much, but stated that he was happy,
and did not suffer much in passing away ; that we were
not to mourn for them, as they were safe in a brighter
world; and if we would sit again on the following
■evening they would endeavour to tell us how it
occurred. We all, accordingly, sat on the evening
of the 18th, when both of my sons spoke through
the medium. The elder one, Hugh, exhibited all the
signs of one being resuscitated after having been
drowned. It was quite painful to witness the con-
tortions of the medium’s face and the heavy breath-
ing before Hugh was able to speak through him.
We have had two sittings since, and I will give an
abridgment of what they said. I may parenthetically
remark that Murray spoke a few words through the
medium one evening. He said, “ Oh, Mr. Browne, tell
my mother I have been. Can you forgive me, Mrs.
Browne ?” To which an affirmative answer was given.
He continued—“ I hope you will excuse me for intruding
to-night. Thank you for letting me come.” My son
Willie then remarked, “ Murray’s mind is greatly relieved
by this short interview and by the forgiveness so freely
granted.” My wife had entreated the three of them not
to go out in the yacht on the night of the 13th ; but they
were so anxious to try her sailing qualities, after having-
painted and put her in trim since they purchased her,
that they did not care whether it was stormy or not,
and started accordingly. Both my sons corroborate the


clairvoyant’s descriptions of their cruise, only they say
it was nearer the Cheltenham than the Mornington side
of the bay, as they were tacking against the wind,
between Rickard’s Point and Schnapper Point, that the
lolanthe upset, filled, and went down. They landed on
the night of the 14th, as the clairvoyant stated; and on
my inquiring about the paper one of them was described
as having written, it was explained that they at one
time contemplated leaving the boat there until the wind
became favourable, but they changed their minds, partly
because Murray, who was considered a good yachtsman,
did not like to return without bringing the boat with
him, and because he and my son Willie had no boots to
walk home in. The paper was evidently written to
inform anyone who saw the boat there that the owners
were going to return for it, and not to disturb it. Willie’s
words are —“ Hughie wished us to walk home, but when
he saw Murray and me get into the boat he followed and
tore up the paper. I felt no danger until the boat upset
and I found myself in the water. I tried to swim, but
the waves broke over me, causing me soon to lose all
consciousness. The last words Mamma said as we left
home came to my mind as soon as I was in the sea, which
prevented me feeling any bodily pain. I seemed to fall
asleep, and I dreamt that I was with Mamma and you
all. I must have slept for more than a day. When I
woke up I found Archie, Ada [his brother and sister, who
passed on about five and twelve years ago] grandpapa
and grandmamma [my father and mother] around me.
They would not let me come to communicate with you
before I did, as they said I was too weak to speak satis-
factorily, so as to make you understand that it was me
who was addressing you. Until I got strength I could
not leave my spirit home. Hugh was anxious to come
the first evening that I spoke through the medium, but
grandpapa persuaded him not until he got stronger, in
order that he might control more positively. After a
time a number of spirit friends came to welcome us to
the spirit world. They asked me to keep my mind at
rest for a time, until I gained strength. I saw, as I


expected, a great change in Archie, although I did not
know him at first. Ada has grown quite a big girl; she
is constantly kissing me.”
In reply to my inquiries Willie said —“ It was about
'9 o’clock on Monday morning (the 15th), nearer the
Cheltenham than the Mornington side of the bay, that
the lolanthe foundered. It was in trying to put her about
that she upset; the jib halyards fouled, and she missed
■stays. I succumbed first, then Hughie, and Murray
last. The change called death is like going to sleep,
just a tingle on the brain, as if from the effects of a slight
blow. You thought, Mamma, that we suffered a great
deal of pain in passing away. We did not.” Addressing
his brother, who was present, he said—“ Colin, how will
you manage about the books ?” (Willie acted as book-
keeper in my office, of which fact the medium was
ignorant.) I replied, “ Don’t trouble yourself about that;
we will arrange it all right.” He then said—“ Mamma, if
you could see how happy we are, and the beautiful home
we are in, you would not w r eep—except it were for joy.
I feel so light in my spiritual body and have no pain.
If it were not to come back to be with you and Papa,
the spirit world is so beautiful that I would not exchange
this life for earth-life even if it were in my power to do
so. There is a very strong magnetic chain between you
and me, Mamma. lam more anxious about you than all
the others. Go out in the mornings with Emily, and
both of you rest in the afternoons. Don’t bring any
stranger to the circle as that would bring back the
memory of what has happened. We want to look to
the future and not to the past. We have to thank Papa
for having kept the spiritual doors open for us so that
we can return and speak to those we love. Grandpapa
says, ‘Tell him ever to keep the lamp of spiritual truth
burning.’ I wish there were more developed mediums
than there are; poor spirits without number are waiting
anxiously to communicate with their friends on earth
when the opportunity is afforded them. I have been to
Ada’s school, where they have classes for all the different
studies. The children are taken into the garden and the


various plants are explained to them; they are also*
taught how to travel. The spiritual body is as light as
air and is no impediment to our movements. By merely
fixing my mind on a certain place I find myself there
almost instantaneously. Archie is going to accompany
me until I get stronger and know how to travel. Dr.
Robinson desires me to say that all friends here send
their kindest sympathy to Mamma, and he says she must
bear up and not fret now that we are able to come back
and talk to her. Mamma, do not let it trouble you any
more; we are happy. I must say good night to you all.
Tell John how happy we are and remember us kindly to-
him and to all friends on earth.”
My son Hugh says : —“ Oh ! I can come back. This is.
a glorious truth. If I could not come back I do not
know what I would do. When they told me that I
could do so I jumped with joy. No one who has not
experienced it can realize the delight it is to return and
speak to those we have left on earth. We are not parted,
Mamma; we are closer than ever. Willie and I will be
constantly with you. I feel quite well and am so happy.
It gives me such pleasure to come and speak to you all.
I shall be still happier when I see you well again, Mamma;
we will then be able to come stronger through the
medium. Don’t mind about our bodies, Mamma, we are
done with them. They are greatly decomposed from
being so long in the water. Our bodies fade but our
o & #
spirits grow brighter. I feel a little cold when I return
through the medium, and grandpapa says I shall feel this
for a little time but it will wear off ere long.” On my
asking him to relate what occurred after he left home on
the 13th with his brother and Murray, he replied—-
“ Willie has told you all about it. When we landed on the
night of the 14th I wanted Murray and Willie to leave
the boat till another time, and to walk home, but as
they would not do so, and got into the boat, I followed
them, as I could not leave Willie—no, I could not —” (He
here gave way to tears , and changed the line of conver-
sation, adding) —“When the boat upset we were all
pitched into the water. Willie made for the yacht again


as she was filling, and went down with her. Murray
swam for the shore, hut I waited for Willie—-I could not
leave him. When he came up again to the surface I called
to him, hut he did not seem to hear me. I looked round
to see if there was a sail in sight, but there was none to
help us. Your parting words came to me then, Mamma. I
felt no pain in drowning. Mental anguish seems to kill
pain. It was an awful sight, but it is over now, and we are
happy—so don’t fret, Mamma, we shall he frequently with
you all. Oh ! Mamma, if you could hut see our spirit
home you would he so pleased. Don’t cry, dear Mamma;
when you do so it makes us feel unhappy. I need not
tell you, Papa, what a beautiful place the spirit world is,
for you know it. lam thankful we can speak together.
What must it he with those who do not know this
glorious truth ? If I could not come back I should
be miserable. lam coming again to-morrow night. I
have had such a load taken off my mind to-night. I
wanted to come the first evening Willie spoke, hut I did
not like to do so in case it would make you cry, Mamma.
I hope I did not hurt the medium the first time I tried
to speak through him. Many thanks to Emily for coming
to comfort Mamma. Grandpapa will not allow many
friends to come and see us until we get stronger. Rest,
he says, is necessary for the spiritual body for some time
after entering the spirit world. What strange things
some of our friends say to us when they come to see us.”
On my inquiring what he wished u*s to do with his grey-
hounds and his various little things, he replied : —“ When
we get stronger and Mamma is better we will be able to
come and tell you what we want you to do with them.
Tell Mary and Sarah that we are both happy. Dear Papa,
thank all our friends for the kind sympathy they feel
towards us. Tell them we are in the better world, having
passed aw T ay suddenly without any pain, our only suffering
being the thoughts of Mamma and all at home. Tell them
we shall never forget their friendship, and ask them
always to remember that there is a life beyond that of
earth. We realize it, and can say positively that we can
come back and hold communion with our friends. Ask


them to encourage mediumship, so that the spirit world
may not be such a blank as it is to most people, but a living
reality, as Mamma and Papa know. Tell them that death
does not annihilate our love, hut rather increases our
affections for those left behind. Tell them to read that
beautiful poem that you often used to quote — I still
live,” by Lizzie Doten). Ask them to think over the
statements which it contains, and to judge for them-
selves.” Turning to his mother, he remarked—“ Am I
not getting on well, Mamma?” (referring to what he had
been dictating). “ Ah, but you are being assisted by your
grandfather, are you not ? ” I asked, which he at once
admitted was the case. He continued—“ We do like Mr.
Spriggs; tell him to be careful of himself, for he does
not know how valuable his mediumship is to those in
spirit life, as well as to those with you. Remember us
most kindly to him. Willie wants to come now, so good-
night.”
The following is an address from my sons Hugh and
Willie, by the latter, assisted by my father, to their
friends on earth :
“Hear Friends, —We thank you all for the kind sym-
pathy shown by you to Mamma and Papa, and the kind
feelings you have expressed for us. We have passed to
the spirit world rather suddenly, but we both can say it
was not a painful death. It was like going to sleep,
only we woke up surrounded by the glorious beauties of
the spirit world.
“We send our greetings to you all, and only ask one
thing, and that is that you will search into this great
truth which we now realize. We cannot express the joy
and pleasure that it affords us to come back and speak to
our parents.
“ Live, dear friends, so that you may not be afraid to
pass away ; then there is nothing to fear in ‘ death,’ for
God and His holy angels are good.
“From your loving friends in spirit life,
“ Hugh Mackenzie Browne and
Wm, Macdonald Browne.”


The principal portion of the foregoing spirit communi-
cations was received on the 18th inst., and no tidings of
the yacht, its occupants, or anything connected with it
have come to hand up to this date, the 20th December,
1884.
I shall conclude with the following lines :
O
“ Oil blessed new gospel! wbicli scatters its balm,
To hearts which are sobbing Death’s low minor psalm;
And bless’d is the chorus which breaks on our ears,
So hopeful, so grand, from the bright angel spheres.”
Yours, &C.,
HUGH JUNOR BROWNE.
East Melbourne,
20 th December, 1884.
Note. —The John, Mary, and Sarah referred to were the coach-
man, cook, and housemaid in our employ at the time.
COMMUNICATION received from my Father, who
is my spiritual guide or guardian angel, who passed
to the higher life some forty years ago.
Good evening, all clear friends. I have much
pleasure in stating that the boys are now what you
would call well, having recovered from the sudden
.severance of their spiritual from their physical
organisms. They will be of great assistance to me in
the dissemination of those grand spiritual truths
through which alone those in the spirit world, as well as
those on earth who are still in darkness, can be en-
Jightened. Do not imagine that their earth-life having
been cut short will have the effect of stunting their
spiritual growth. Not so; they will thereby be better
able to realize the importance of the conditions of earth-
life, and to study the spiritual causes and effects on
your earth. They are magnetically strong, and being
attracted to the earth with great force they will be able
to accomplish with greater ease and more facility their
earth-experience, and to impart a knowledge of it to
others in the spirit world.


The divine laws of Nature, in its extended sense,,
always hold out a compensating hand. The balance is
not unequally divided. It is just and true in every item
of So, dear ones, take courage. Know this, that
the wisdom of God is far above the wisdom of man.
He knows and sees what is best. That which has
occurred is a grand lesson for you all, to teach you
submission to the Divine will. What you view as
misfortunes are, in reality, blessings in disguise.
I shall not take up more of your time this evening,
as the boys desire to say a few words to you. Believe
me, dear one, that my presence is always with you.
Your affectionate father,
Archibald Browne,
THE LOSS OF THE YACHT lOLANTHE.
TO THE EDITOR OF THE “ HARBINGER OF LIGHT.”
Sir, — I have abstained until now from commenting on
the strictures which appeared in several newspapers on
my letter published in your issue of Ist January relative
to the drowning of my sons Hugh and William and their
companion Murray, as, owing to the state of Mrs.
Browne’s health, I have refrained up to the present time
from informing her of William’s body, minus the left
arm, having been found floating in the Bay, near
Brighton, and of a portion of the right arm, parts of the
clothing, watch, chain, &c., belonging to Hugh having-
been discovered in the stomach of the large shark that
was caught at Frankston.
In one of the evening papers it was asserted that
nothing had been disclosed through the medium that was
not at the time publicly known. This is simply contrary
to fact; for the principal portion of the wonderful clair-
voyant description, related in my letter to you of 20th
December, was given on the morning of the 16th through
Mr, George Spriggs, who at the time was not even aware
that my sons were absent from home, far less as to their


having gone out yachting ; and, on the 18th, both Hugh
and William communicated with us, corroborating the
clairvoyant’s account of the cruise, stating that the
lolanthe foundered off Rickard’s Point at nine o’clock
on the morning of the 15th, and relating their experiences
on their entrance into spirit life ; when it was not until
the 21st, the day after my letter to you was written,
that any earthly tidings were received as to the fate of
the yacht or its occupants, when my son William’s body
was identified by his eldest surviving brother, news
having been brought me very early that morning that a
body, which had been found floating in the sea near
Picnic Point, was at the Brighton Police Station awaiting
identification; and, further, it was not until the 27th of
the month that the shark was caught at Frankston.
Another paper had the assurance to assert that no
information was given through the clairvoyant “ which
was not readily available from purely mundane sources;”'
but it studiously refrained from stating where such in-
formation was available. As is only natural under the
circumstances, I had employed all the ordinary means
that lay in my power to obtain information regarding
our missing boys, by telegraphing to the various town-
ships on the Bay and sending messengers to make in-
quiries of the fishermen along the coast if they had seen
anything of them. I also got the Government to dis-
patch a steamer to search the Bay and to have the beach,
from Brighton to Sorrento, patrolled by the police in
order to see if any traces of them could be discovered,
but all without avail. The only information obtained
through these sources was that a boat was seen, answer-
ing the description of the lolanthe, off Brighton pier on
the 14th, and a similar boat was observed from Frankston
at eight o’clock on the morning of the 15th, off Rickard’s
Point (which is about three miles nearer Frankston than
Picnic Point), steering in the direction of Schnapper
Point. Where, then, let me ask, were the purely mun-
dane sources readily available from which information
regarding the fate of my sons could have been obtained ?
Another paper, for the purpose of proving that the


utterances of the clairvoyant were erroneous, had the
effrontery to misquote one of them by altering “ I think
you will have news of them to-day” (which we had) to
“ I think you will have news from them to-day.” Com-
ment on such a mode of criticism would be superfluous.
The foregoing examples are, I consider, sufficient to
illustrate to what subterfuges and quibblings opponents
to Spiritual truths will have recourse in order to confirm
popular prejudice, to hide the light, and disprove this,
the greatest discovery that any age of the world has
witnessed, which, notwithstanding all their opposition, is
destined in time to revolutionize the popular but absurd
conceptions regarding the change called death and the
life to come. I may, however, observe that one critic
asks why my sons, when communicating, did not tell us
about their bodies having been attacked by sharks, in-
stead of merely stating, when asked regarding their
physical bodies, that they were greatly decomposed
through having been several days in the water. This I
consider to be a reasonable question, and in reply, though
I may not be credited by those who do not know me, I
have to state that my son Hugh, when communicating,
called his elder brother aside, out of hearing of his
mother, and informed him, through the medium, re-
garding the mutilation of his brother William’s body by
a shark. This I did not mention in my letter to you for
obvious reasons. Hugh, also, the day previous to the
shark being caught at Frankston, told a friend who was
in Adelaide at the time, and who is a clairaudient, that
a large fish had got part of one of the arms and had torn
his waistcoat off the body. On being asked if it was a
shark, he replied, “It may be, but I have never seen one
like it before.” The shark when caught was said to be
a white or deep sea shark, the head of which species is
quite different in shape to that of the common blue shark
with which Port Phillip Bay is infested. I may add, I
received a letter from another friend in Adelaide, to
whom the clairaudient mentioned the fact at the time,
confirming his statement. On the shark being opened,
on the 27th of December, part of Hugh’s waistcoat was


discovered, in the pocket of which was found his gold
watch with the hands pointing to nine o’clock, the very
hour at which we had been informed through the:
medium on the 18th, or nine days previously, that the
catastrophe had occurred. The watch, chain, keys, and
some silver found with portions of his clothing, are now
in my possession.
Nothing further has since been discovered of the'
yacht or its occupants. It evidently went down in deep
water, as stated through the medium. I may here
mention that at the inquest held on my son William’s
body, on the 23rd December, the doctor who made the
post-mortem examination stated that “ there were no
marks of injuries occurring before death,” so that it must,
have been after he was drowned that the missing arm
was torn off by the shark. The doctor explained that the
pericardium was full of blood, through the right auricle
of the heart having ruptured at the moment of death,
which the coroner said was not an infrequent occurrence
in cases of drowning. On my inquiring of the doctor
about an extraordinary statement he made as to his
having found a plug of tobacco in the stomach, he in-
formed me that it was only a small roll of leaf-tobacco,
about half a pipeful, which had not been chewed, and
which had evidently been swallowed to allay the desire
for food, as they had only taken sufficient provisions to
last them till the afternoon of the 14th. This is an old
sailor’s plan commonly resorted to under the circum-
stances, and it had doubtless been suggested by Murray„
who was part owner of the yacht and accompanied my
sons, and who held a second mate’s certificate.
I consider that the description of the yacht and its
occupants, and of their cruise, given through Mr. Spriggs,,
is one of the best instances of clairvoyant power that I
have either read or heard of, whatever may be said of it
by those opposed thereto, who cannot possibly know as I
do the circumstances under which it was given. Oppo-
nents should bear in mind that I have no object to gain
in being deceived myself or in misleading others in
this matter. I may here also state that on the evening


of the 31st December my son William materialized him-
self at Mr. Spriggs’s circle, at which I was present. I
recognized him distinctly, as did several others who were
there and who knew him when he was in earth-life. He
held up his left arm in order to show me that the injury
to this limb of his physical body did not affect its
spiritual counterpart. On another occasion my son
Hugh partially materialized himself, but not distinctly
enough for me to swear that it was he, as I could do in
regard to his brother. I may add that both Hugh and
William were over six feet in height, while the medium
is not five feet seven inches high. We continue to hear
from them once or twice every week, either through Mr.
Spriggs or through one of the members of my family.
Those ignorant of Spiritual things may ridicule this state-
ment, but let me remind such that all the ridicule in the
world cannot gainsay a single fact. lam aware that it is
only those who have experienced the difference between
a knowledge of these glorious facts and the mere belief in
a future life based on the opinions of others, and who in
the hour of trial have realized the grand truth of spirit
communion, that can appreciate the inestimable value of
a knowledge of Spiritual things. Unless I had possessed
this knowledge I could not have addressed as I did
the assemblage at the grave when the body of my son
William was interred. A friend who was present on
that occasion remarked—“ What a nerve you must
have!” To which I replied, “’Tis the knowledge which I
possess of the grand reality that gives me the nerve you
speak of ; without that knowledge my eyes would now
be bathed in tears.”
The great amount of sympathy received by my family
and self from all quarters, from strangers as well as
friends, during the trying ordeal through which we
passed, has raised my estimate of humanity greatly. It
is evident to me that in cases of bereavement human
sympathy is much more powerful than religious pre-
judice, as I have found that it causes, for the time, all
differences in regard to religious opinions to be cast aside,
and heart seems to throb for heart irrespective of all such


differences. Allow me, through your columns,to thank one
and all for the kind sympathy so generously extended to
my family and self, and let me ask those whose letters of
condolence were unavoidably not acknowledged to kindly
excuse this seeming want of courtesy on my part, as it
was utterly impossible for me to reply to the numerous
letters of inquiry and sympathy daily received for over
a fortnight.
If it is not taking up too much of your valuable space
I should like to add the following extracts from two of
the letters referred to. The first is a quotation from
one kindly sent by a lady of the Jewish belief, and
is as follows :
“Please read the enclosed narrative, taken from the
Talmud. I have written it as well as I can remember,
my father relating it to me when I was a girl;— ‘ Many
years ago, in Jerusalem, lived a very good and learned
Rabbi. One Friday, as was his usual custom, he dressed,
hade his wife good evening, and went to the synagogue
to pay to God his usual devotions. Upon his return
home his wife met him, happy and smiling as usual, and
put the following question to him : —‘ Some time ago,’
.she said, ‘ I had given to me for safe keeping a very
valuable gem. Whilst you have been at the synagogue
he who gave it to me came for it. What would you
advise me to do in such a case?’ The Rabbi, without
hesitation, answered, ‘How can you ask such a question?
The gem is not yours ; return it at once.’ ‘ Come with
me,’ she said, and taking him to her room she turned
down the sheet that was on the bed, when the Rabbi
beheld the dead body of his only son. ■ See,’ she said,
‘ God sent for him while you were from home, and I gave
him,’ The good Rabbi exclaimed, ‘ God gives and He
takes ; blessed be the name of the Lord.’ ” The writer
•concludes her letter with the following lines, which she
has entitled
“BEYOND THE SEA.”
The glittering waves are sobbing to-nigbt
A sorrowful dirge to me ;
For they whom I loved, as but once we love,
Lie buried beneath the sea.


The waves are singing with joyous tone
The sweetest of songs to me:
“ Eejoice ! for they whom ye mourn’d as lost
Wait thy coming beyond life’s sea.”
The following is an inspirational poem very kindly
forwarded to me by a lady who is a spiritual medium.
It is by her guide, “ Katie,” and refers to Mrs. Browne’s
religious ideas and feelings at the times when our little
daughter Ada passed to spirit life many years ago; then
to the passing on of our eldest son, Archie, some five
years back ; and, lastly, to the sudden parting with the
physical presence of our two sons Hugh and William.
It is entitled
“THE PERFECT MOTHERHOOD.”
God had planted a fair garden, giving it a mother’s care,
And she had to tend and cherish all the flowers that she found!
there;
For she had to prune and train them, and to guide them to the
light,
Though she knew not which was dearest of those flow’rets in her
sight—
Yet one morning as she watched it a pure tiny blossom fell ;
And, oh ! the deep grief of losing but a mother’s heart can tell—-
Then she tried to kiss Christ’s mantle, and be humble in her loss,
But her nature cried against her, and she could not find the cross.
So she hushed her heart’s great sorrow, for the flow’rets that were-
left,
Though her garden seemed but barren, with the little bud bereft.
But fresh flow’rets soon sprang earthward, and she watched them
side by side
With those buds that first were given, e’er that tiny snowflake died ;
Till one plant that had out-broadened and spread upward to a tree,
With its young limbs standing boldly and its branches waving free,
In its glorious morning splendour faded, drooping on her breast;
And though hot and fast her tears fell, still she said, ‘ ‘ God knowcth
best,
For my strong tree has not faded, but has folded as a flower,
That will open in the morning, ’neath a higher, better power.”
And she knew that it was living in the unseen world around;
Hot on earth, but still in Nature, might her cherished plant be
found.
Yet again, without a warning and without a leaf’s decay,
God once more, from her fair garden, took two strong young
plants away.


But speak softly, here is mourning, Nature gives to sorrow tears—
Weep on, mother, though the future holds you many happy years ;
But her tears fell fast and faster, what her thoughts were He but
knew
Who had given her the garden and had watched the flowers that
grew.
And He said, “ I gave you many, two I wanted at their best,
Two young spirits bright and daring, not world-weary needing
rest;
They are yours, no seas divide you, they are starting in the fight,
That will yet o’ercome the darkness, and show forth Eternal
Light,
But quite ready and all eager, your sad tears make their tears
start,
Mother, think your sons are soldiers, smile upon them as you
part,
Think that you have watched them for me, kept them only till
I came,
That I asked you for your treasures, and you gave them in my
name.”
Then the mother ceased her weeping, like the women of past years,
Who could send their firstborn boldly on to battle without tears,
And she felt that she gave little as compared with what they gave
Who knew nothing but this earth-life, yet sent darlings to a grave,
Thinking that they plunged forever into Death’s dark, wide abyss,
They, on that side, sad and silent, she, alone and sad, on this.
Could they for one single instant have returned, then flown again,
Joy had lightened half her sorrow, poured its balm upon her pain.
Then, how joyful is this mother, who has soldiers in the fight,
Who can live and love beside her, though they battle for the Light.
And she said, “No tears shall stay them, I will cheer them day
by day,
For my garden is replanted with the flowers that seem away.”
Death had narrowed to her vision till he faded out of sight,
And the change that seemed but terror had brought her Eternal
Light.
This is Life as God intended, full and perfect, not to close
When this little dream is ended, full of bitter tears and woes.
Life is ever, never ceasing, Death a door that leads from earth,
None are lost that enter through it—Death but gives their spirits
birth;
Tell this mother, e’er we leave her, that her garden still is there,
Needing all her lovely touches, needing mother ev’rywhere.
She has earth and spirit flow’rets, perfect Motherhood of Love,
Anxious care to those who need it, smiles to those who work above.
Melbourne, 24th Dec., 1884. From KATIE.


Many others, of the kind and sympathetic letters
received by ns during the trying ordeal through which
we passed, are well worthy of being quoted. Considera-
tion for the space in your columns alone prevents me
multiplying the extracts. In conclusion, allow me to
say that all communications received were equally appre-
ciated, and none more so than the few spontaneous and
evidently heartfelt expressions sent me by your son
William, who knew both of my sons who were drowned,
but who, thank God, still live; and as they live so shall
we live also.
I am, Sir, yours, &c.,
HUGH JUNOR BROWNE.
Park House, Wellington Parade, E. Melbourne,
21 st March, 1885.


The following is a copy of what is engraved on the
tombstone over the graves of our children in the Mel-
bourne General Cemetery;—
Ijtacxnfbr to tlje pi^motrtj
ADA VICTORIA,
FOURTH DAUGHTER OF
Hugh Juxor Browne,
Who died Nov. 27, 1872, aged 8 months.
•“ Rest assured I shall return, mother, from that angelic place ;
Tho’ you may not see my form I shall look upon your face;
Tho’ you cannot hear me speak I shall hearken what you say,
And he often, often with you when you think I’m far away.”
AND TO HIS ELDEST SON,
ARCHIBALD JUNOR BROWNE,
Who passed to the inner life on the 26th of June, 1879,
Aged 20 years.
* ‘ I live ! O ye who loved me ! your faith was not in vain ;
Back through the shadowy valley I come to you again.
Safe in the love that guides me, with fearless feet I tread—
My home is with the angels—O, say not I am dead ! ”
ALSO, OF HIS THIRD SON,
HUGH MACKENZIE BROWNE,
Aged 20 years,
AND OF HIS FOURTH SON,
WILLIAM MACDONALD BROWNE,
Aged 18 years,
Who were drowned in Port Phillip Bay through the foundering of
the yacht lolanthe, on the 15th December, 1884.
■“Farewell, friends! yet not farewell; where you are we too
shall dwell:
We are gone but from your face a moment’s march, a single pace.
When you come where we have stepp’d, you will wonder why
you wept,
You will see, by true life taught, that here is all, with you is
naught.”


IS SPIRITUALISM CREDIBLE?
(A paper read at the Scots’ Church Literary Association , Melbourne f
on Wednesday evening, Ith May, 1884, in reply to an essay
bearing the above title read by another member at a previous
meeting.J
The world hath felt a quick’ning breath
From heaven’s eternal shore,
And souls triumphant over death
Return to earth once more.”
Ladies and Gentlemen, —The title of the essay read
here this evening fortnight was, “Is Spiritualism
credible ? ” To which I reply emphatically, “Itis ; ” and
how those who believe in ancient spiritual manifestations
can, with any pretence to consistency, deny their
occurrence now is to me a perfect anomaly. More
especially so when we have the authority in favour
thereof of those upon whom believers in ancient spiritual
phenomena place implicit trust. Is it not written:
“Now concerning spiritual gifts, brethren, I would not
have you ignorant. . . . The manifestation of the
spirit is given to every man to profit withal. For to
one is given by the spirit the word of wisdom; to
another, the word of knowledge by the same spirit; to
another, faith by the same spirit; to another gifts of
healing ... to another, prophecy; to another, the
interpretation of tongues,” &c. Are we not also told to
“ try the spirits” to “ believe not every spirit,” and to
beware of deceiving spirits ? also that “ hereafter ye
shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending
and descending,” “ And it shall come to pass in the last
days, saith God, I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh:
and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy, and
your young men shall see visions, and your old men


shall dream dreams; and on my servants and on my
handmaidens I will pour out, in those days, of my
spirit; and they shall prophesy; and I will show
wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth
beneath.”
Unless it can be demonstrated that the laws of nature,
which are the laws of God, are changeable, or that
formerly man possessed a faculty which nature has since
withdrawn; if it is true that a spirit removed the chains
from Peter’s limbs and unlocked the prison doors, and if
another spirit or angel rolled away a stone from the
grave of the crucified Jesus, why, let me ask, should not
spirits in our day be able to do equally wonderful acts ?
Again, if a spirit could show himself to John on the
Island of Patinos, and talk to him, why should it be
impossible for spirits to do likewise in our day to those
who, in accordance with the Scriptures, have cultivated
their spiritual gifts, consequently can discern spirits.
The objection to the reception of this modern revela-
tion of the truth arises, in a great measure, from the
undue reverence to the authority of the past, and the
utter repudiation, on the part of many, of the present
active, living, principle of God’s ever-operative guidance
through the guardian-angelship of His ministering
spirits. The same objection has, however, been exhibited
in all ages of the world upon the revelation of any new
truth in science, philosophy, or religion. This an-
tagonism to anything not in accord with popular opinion
has always been characteristic of the living age, and was
exhibited in the time of the Great Teacher when the
unbelieving Pharisees exclaimed, “We know that God
spake unto Moses; as for this fellow, we know not from
whence he is !” And they who to-day ridicule the
manifestations and reject the teachings of modern
Spiritualism would, eighteen hundred years ago, have
stoned the apostles.
One of the principal reasons why Spiritualism is so
little understood by the generality of people is on ac-
count of the opposition shown to it by the priesthood of
the various sects, because it lets in the light of


spiritual truth, demonstrates the impartiality of God’s
love for all His creatures, and proves the rational
character of the life to come ; and because it exposes to
view the erroneous nature of many of the dogmas that
have been added to the simple religion of love and good
works as taught by the worthy Nazarene, who is rep-
resented as having declared that love to God and love to
man comprised all the law and the prophets; and this,
we find illustrated in the parable of the good
Samaritan.
It appears to me that the reason why some people
object to investigate Spiritualism is that they are afraid
to have the truth of immortality demonstrated to them ;
and in case the real conditions of the inner life may not
coincide with the views they entertain regarding the life
to come. For my own part I prefer facts to fiction, and
consider knowledge preferable to mere belief, but I am
aware that all minds are not constituted alike. Those'
whom the reasons mentioned will not debar from investi-
gating and who are not afraid of public opinion, who
will sit down in their own homes with their own families,
or intimate friends of the family circle, need have no-
fear of experiencing that deception and imposture of
which they have heard so much. I have no doubt of the-
results if they will only do so, as mediumship is much
more general than is popularly supposed; it is lying-
latent in many, only requiring development, and is a
natural gift, like that of the poet or painter, which is
highly prized when once its value is appreciated.
The Church, as you are aware, has persistently closed
its doors against the spirit world, so until it opens them
for the reception of Spiritual truth churchmen need not
ask why their spirit friends do not come and communi-
cate with them.
There is, I maintain, no logical standpoint between
Spiritualism and Materialism ; all between these rests on
mere assertion and credulity. If there is another world,
as Spiritualism demonstrates there is, surely nothing is
more natural than that there should be the means of
communication between the two worlds, and nothing


more unreasonable than that people should refuse to
avail themselves of this grand avenue of knowledge.
Those who have not investigated Spiritualism know little
of the joy and pleasure which, owing to their false pre-
judice, they debar themselves from. And who, let me
ask, are the people who denounce Spiritualism, but those
who know little or nothing about it, owing to their never
having examined it carefully, as they ought to do before
passing an opinion upon it ? for, as Solomon remarks,
“ He that answereth a matter before he heareth it, it is
folly and shame unto him,” Surely those who have for
many years carefully and prayerfully investigated the
subject are more competent to form a correct opinion
regarding it than are those who, without examination,
deny the occurrence of modern spiritual manifestations,
while they, at the same time, inconsistently believe in
their occurrence in former times, merely on the testimony
of others, without even a particle of demonstration as to
their truth.
In this sceptical age, what does the world require to
convince mankind that a future life rests not on mere
speculation, as Materialists assert ? Is it not evidence of
the fact of man’s continued existence beyond the portals
of the tomb—proof palpable of a life to come ? To the
credulous who rely on the opinions of others, it may be
all very well to say that we have the testimony of this
or that writer in Biblical times that death does not end
all, and that if they won’t believe the Scriptures neither
will they believe if one rose from the dead ; but to those
who think for themselves testimony is not proof, and
such a reply is only a palpable evasion of the great ques-
tion, “If a man die shall he live again ?” Where can an
answer to this be obtained but through communion with
those who, having passed through the change called
death, can speak from actual personal experience.
To object to modern Spiritualism on the ground that
we have no need of evidence of the life to come is to
insult reason, to mock the deepest yearnings of human
nature, and to ignore the entire religious history of the
world. And, further, it is only a rational faith, supported


by actual knowledge such as Spiritualism supplies, that
can restore a vitalizing religion in the minds of men. As
has been truly remarked, “ Knowledge supports when
faith fails therefore I advise the thoughtful to investi-
gate Spiritualism and put themselves in communication
with those who can really inform them of the best way
to prepare for the great change which must sooner or
later come upon us all.
But some may ask, “ Can this really be done ? ” Yes,
it not only can, but is being done in every civilized
quarter of the globe through those who have cultivated
their Spiritual gifts. “Is it possible that we can hear
from our dear departed ones ?” asks another. Yes, I again
answer, when the necessary conditions are complied with.
“ What are these conditions■?” may probably be asked. To
which I reply, they are very simple, but it may take
some time before satisfactory results are obtained; this,
however, is not always the case.
The following question may here suggest itself—
“ How is it that the demonstration of man’s continued
existence does not come to all without being sought for?”
Because if it did so, without exertion, it would not be
valued. It is the difficulty experienced in obtaining the
precious metals and gems that causes them to be so
prized, and it is the same with that most precious gem of
all—the truth of immortality, the value of which can
only be appreciated by those who, after years of earnest
study and patient investigation, have attained unto a
knowledge of it. To reject this priceless gem because of
the mass of nonsense, falsehood, imposture, and fraud
which have been mixed up with it is as unreasonable as
it would be to refuse to accept gold or diamonds on
account of the mullock or wash-dirt out of which they
have been extracted.
Another question frequently asked is—“lf Spiritualism
is true, how are not the discoveries of physical science
anticipated by it?” Because if it did so it would rob
man of one of the blessings of life—viz., the incentive to
search after knowledge. The true province of Spiritual-
ism is the education of man in things pertaining to


Spiritual life, and thereby to fit him to enter therein at
the change called death.
Spiritualism is not a religion or system of faith and
worship, as is generally supposed; it is the science of
continuous life—a science of observation from which
each investigator has to draw his own conclusions, in the
same way as a student of one of the physical sciences
draws his own deductions from facts presented to his
senses. Spiritualism is therefore the scientific basis of
true religion. Without it there is no rational evidence
of a future life—all is mere conjecture—and it is alone
through Spiritual demonstration that the arguments of
the Materialist can be rationally met. By the rejection
•of the evidences of man’s continued existence afforded
through modern Spiritual manifestations, churchmen are
foolishly playing into the hands of their opponents, the
Atheists and Materialists, who very natually accuse
them of being superstitious for believing in another
world without having had any valid evidence of its
-existence. The latter may reply, “We have the evidence
of the Bible but that is fallacious, for that book only
contains the testimony of its various writers of what
may have been evidence to themselves, but not to others
who were not present to see or hear what they saw and
heard. Testimony is not proof ; it is only secondary
evidence. You can disbelieve my testimony, but you
cannot doubt my presence here this evening, for you have
proof thereof. Let me ask, is your faith, through the
testimony of the Scriptures, at all times so firm that no
doubts enter your minds, so that you require no proof of
immortality? and is your knowledge of the nature of the
future life so great that you need no further light
regarding it ? Then why this aversion to investigate
this subject, so as to receive thereby the demonstration
of immortality and learn the conditions of the inner life?
It is, I maintain, at the time when death steps in and
removes the physical presence of our loved ones from our
sight that the relative values of a religion founded on
mere belief and one based on actual knowledge can be
truly tested, for while the former fails to supply the


consolation which it professes to afford, the latter is
found to he “ a very present help in time of need.”
I’ve proved them both, I know what’s best ;
Give me the truth, take all the rest.
The demonstration obtainable through Spiritualism
converts that which otherwise would be merely hypo-
thetical into a living reality, and brings the fact of there
being a continued existence home to our very senses,,
transforming hope into knowledge and doubt into
certainty.
Many think that Spiritualists are a superstitious lot of
people. Surely it is they who believe without evidence
that are the superstitious, and not those who have had
the fact of there being another world clearly demon-
strated to them ? and surely the relying on the evidence
of one’s senses and on the observation of facts does not
constitute superstition ? Dr. Robert Chambers, of
Chambers Journal, writes:—“Spiritualism is the germ
of the greatest discovery and the greatest revolution of
human thought that any age of the world has witnessed.
. . . Instead of being a superstition itself, as some
are disposed to think it, they will find it the explanation
and the extinguisher of all superstition.”
It is objected that mediums are not all reliable:
was it not the same in Scriptural times ? Do we not
read of false prophets as well as true prophets ? and have
we not the authority of the Bible for saying ; “ O fools,
and slow of heart,” or dull of comprehension, “ to believe
all that the prophets have spoken ? ” “ Why even of
yourselves judge ye not what is right ? ” Is it reason-
able therefore to reject either ancient or modern spiritual
communications because some of them»are found to be
erroneous ? If, on this account, we reject the one, to be
consistent we should also reject the other. Let us rather
as rational beings accept the true and good in each, and
reject the false and bad in both, proving all things, and
holding fast to that which is good.
As to the truth of Spiritualism and the reality of
spirit manifestations, those who doubt them and who*


require something to justify their entering upon an in-
vestigation thereof need only refer to history to obtain
testimony thereto, for both ancient and modern, sacred
and profane history teem with numerous records of
spiritual manifestations ; and there is hardly a family in
which, at some time or another, one or more members of
it have not witnessed some spiritual manifestation. As
has been admitted by Dr. Johnson, and concurred in by
Adam Clarke, the eminent Bible commentator: If
anything has been tested by facts, if anything has been
tested by credible witnesses, the connection and union
which blend the spiritual and material worlds have been
so tested. No fact in history is better authenticated, I
maintain, than that certain individuals, who previously
dwelt on earth and who passed through the change
called death, have appeared, been recognized, and have
communicated with those still in the flesh.
That apparitions of the so-called dead have objectively
appeared to many, both in former times and in our own,
is established by such an accumulation of testimony that
it remains more a matter of unquestionable fact than a
subject of discussion.
The movement of pieces of furniture by spirit agency,
which is so frequently held up to ridicule by the op-
ponents of Spiritualism, is only one of its lower phases—
the A.8.C., it may he termed, of spiritual phenomena.
Insignificant, however, as this may appear, it demon-
strates that there is a power which can overcome the
law of gravitation, and, absurd as it may seem to non-
investigators, it is beyond the capacity of our greatest
scientists to explain away this power. When, however,
as is frequently the case, intelligence is manifested
through the movement of a table, and that intelligence is
beyond the knowledge of all present, then the question
arises, “ Whence comes the intelligence ? ” If this is
asked at the time, the answer generally given (through
the movement of the table in connection with the alpha-
bet) is that it comes from some individual who once
lived on earth. To the unprejudiced investigator the
main point is not the quality of every manifestation, but


its reality. Our greatest discoveries, bear in mind, have
sprung from trifling things, for, as the poet truly re-
marks :
Rivers from bubbling springs
Have rise at first, and great from abject things.’
The hypothesis that magnetism or electricity causes
the various Spiritual manifestations is, to all who have
witnessed them, too absurd to merit a moment’s con-
sideration, and will continue so until it can be demon-
strated that magnetism and electricity can generate
rationality, personate a thinking being, and play the
part of a sentient, moral agent. One might as reason-
ably assert that electricity indites the messages received
through the telegraphic wires. And the innumerable
other hypotheses which, from time to time, have been
suggested to account for the phenomena of Modern
Spiritualism, make a far greater demand on our imagina-
tion than does the simple Spiritual explanation, than
which no other has been found to cover all the pheno-
mena. It must be admitted by all that were magnetism
or electricity proved to be the cause of the modern
manifestations, then the same hypothesis would likewise
explain away the wonderful Spiritual phenomena re-
corded in the Bible.
Some people foolishly object to Spiritualism because,
in God’s impartiality, the road is open for both good and
bad spirits to return; they might as reasonably object to
all friendship because some, whom they once considered
were friends, have turned out their bitterest enemies.
Do they object to the sunlight because of the darkness of
the night ? or to the rose because it has thorns ? Good
and bad are mere relative terms, for none are all good
and none all bad. Without error we could not perceive
the beauty of truth. Perfection implies stagnation, for
without imperfection there could be no progression.
Those whose aspirations are pure and good need,
however, have no fear of being troubled by the presence
of evil spirits, for their society has no attraction for
them, like attracting like,; and if it is wrong for men to


hold communion with spirits now, it must have been
equally wrong on the part of Abraham, Peter, Philip,
John, &c., to have done so in Biblical times, for there-
were both good and bad spirits then as now. And, further,
how can we “ try the spirits” if we do not communicate
with them ? A rational Spiritualist believes not every
spirit out of the flesh any more than he does every spirit
in the flesh; he values the statements of both on their
merits. “By their fruits ye shall know them.” Those
who say Spiritualism is all the work of evil spirits
resemble the Jews who declared that Jesus acted through
the power of Beelzebub, the mythical chief of evil spirits.
“ Woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that
put darkness for light, and light for darkness.”
Because we declare that
Angels are but men in lighter vesture clad,
as Socrates observed,
“Wise men think us clever, while fools think us mad.’
Spiritualism, I may remark, is totally unsuited for
those who are untruthful, tricky, dishonest, or hypocriti-
cal. It is these classes of investigators that have so
frequently brought disgrace on the movement. If, at a
seance, the majority present belong to any of the above
classes, the spirits attracted thereby frequently overcome
the higher influences of those by whom the medium is
usually controlled, and false communications or fraudu-
lent manifestations are the inevitable result; hence the
numerous exposures so frequently published in the
papers, while the other side of the picture seldom, if
ever, appears in the columns of the public press; popular
misrepresentation of and repugnance to Spiritualism is
but the natural outcome of this one-sided conduct on the
part of the press.
All Spiritual phenomena were looked upon in former
times as supernatural or miraculous occurrences. They
are and have always been the result of natural law; for
every Spiritual manifestation that has ever taken place
has occurred in strict accordance with fixed and inexor-
able laws. These laws being beyond man’s knowledge,


the terms supernatural and miraculous have merely been
employed to vindicate his ignorance thereof, just as a
savage, seeing an aeronaut descend in a balloon from the
sky, would probably declare it miraculous, whereas to
those who understand it there is nothing miraculous
about the matter. “ The wonders of one age become the
commonplace facts of the next.”
Spiritualism, I may add, endorses all that is true in
science, philosophy, and religion ; “it recognizes a con-
tinuous inspiration in man; it aims, through a reverent
study of facts, at a knowledge of the laws and principles
which govern the occult forces of the universe, of the
relation of spirit to matter, and of man to God and the
Spiritual world. It is thus comprehensive and progres-
sive, leading to true religion as at one with science and
the highest philosophy. ”
Through the revealments of spirit communion we learn
that God is Spirit, filling all space with His infinite
presence, “in whom we live, move, and have our being,”
and not a localized anthropomorphic Deity ; that the
spiritual realms consist not of two divisions, but of many
mansions or spheres adapted to the various degrees of
spiritualization to which each one attains; that there is
no broad path specially made for the majority of God’s
children and a narrow one reserved for a favoured few,
but that in the inner life, as well as in this outward life,
God is impartial and the road to happiness is open to all;
that there, as well as here, we can only raise ourselves
in the scale of being by our own exertions and holy
aspirations ; that the punishment of the wicked and the
joy of the good come from within, not from without;
that happiness beyond human conception awaits us all
eventually, through purity, wisdom, and love ; that the
best way to evince our love to God is by aiding and
benefiting our fellow men, as He requireth not the glory
of men nor of angels, for all His works glorify Him ;
that He is infinite Love, therefore He rules by love,
causing everything to tend to good, and thereby has
decreed the attainment of happiness by all His children.
Such are a few of the higher laws of truth and right


which spirit communion has revealed to those who have
availed themselves of this grand avenue of knowledge.
It is only prejudice and ignorance that debar most
people from enjoying the glorious privilege of spirit com-
munion, and it is only a matter of time when it will be
gladly accepted by all.
To the question frequently asked: “ What good has
Spiritualism done ? ” I reply, it has been the means of
proving to many, who formerly denied that there was a
life to come, their error, by demonstrating that physical
death does not end all, as they had falsely assumed.
Through the conclusive evidence that Spiritualism affords
.some of the most obdurate Materialists have been con-
vinced of man’s continued existence in another world.
Spiritualism has brought the fact that there is a future
life home to many who previously had doubts thereof,
and has clearly demonstrated to them that what is
termed “ death ” is a mere shedding of the outer husk,
which is only necessary so long as man remains on the
physical plane of life ; for “ the things that are seen are
temporal, but the things that are unseen are eternal.”
To those who once only hoped that there was another
life, Spiritualism has given actual knowledge in place of
mere belief. It has been the means of restoring peace of
mind to many a doubting one, and of changing the
gloom of death into a confident awakening to a higher
and better life. It has satisfied the doubts of thousands,
if not millions, who could not be reached by the various
forms of faith presented by the Churches for their ac-
ceptance. It has incited many to good by its pointing-
out that there is no shirking the responsibility of our
acts by trusting in the sufferings or merits of another;
that there is no royal road to happiness but by a well-
spent life; and that our friends who have passed to the
inner life still interest themselves in our well-being by
aiding us in the weaknesses and difficulties of mundane
existence. To the true Spiritualist it has substituted
the love of God for the fear of God ; it has likewise re-
moved the fear of death and the dread of “ the Devil,”
and it has brought heaven to earth by reuniting us.


even when here, with the loved ones gone before. It
makes men and women less discouraged at the many
trials and disappointments experienced here, causing life
and its passing ills to seem trivial compared to the
boundless, glorious hereafter. It comforts, encourages,
cheers, and soothes the mourner with a blessed knowledge
that no theories or mere beliefs can possibly give. It
transforms grim death into a beautiful angel of light,
soothing all pain, remedying all wrongs, and opening
wide the gateway that leads to the better and higher
life. It reinvigorates every great and moral truth that
has been revealed to mankind. It intensifies all the
sublime thoughts and promptings that urge human
natures on to a grand and glorious destiny. It disarms
death of its terrors, and brings in reality a new heaven
and a new earth to all who have realized its sublime
truth. It unlocks the door of the sacred temple of inner
realities. It demonstrates beyond doubt the boundless
and impartial love of God, the merciful spiritual Father
of all, and it brings a comfort and consolation to the
sorrowing and broken-hearted which nothing else can
p
supply, for it proves that
“ Mind sets not with, the sun ;
Mind fades not with the day.”
And now let me courteously inquire, “ Have you,,
friends, investigated Spiritualism ?” If your reply be in
the negative, let me ask you to suspend your judgment
until you have; for to express an opinion on a matter of
which you know little or nothing is to exhibit consmm
mate assumption, which those who have a knowledge of
these things can only regard with feelings of pity. Be
slow to judge ; be not hasty to condemn ; be like the
noble Bereans commended by Paul, who, having heard
him, searched if these things were so. Emulate their
manly example with reference to this subject. I ask you
to take nothing for granted, nothing upon credit ; search
all things; prove all things; try the spirits, and hold fast
only to that which is good; treasure the golden grains of
truth ; utilize your reason; discard the chaff of error and


falsehood, trample them under foot; and, entering upon
the investigation of that which a great cloud of witnesses
can testify to he a glorious fact, in the spirit of sincere
inquiry to know what is truth, your perseverance and
efforts will, in due time, he amply rewarded and crowned
with success.
Finally, which, think you, is the most conducive to the
moral and spiritual welfare of man, the higher law of
truth and right unfolded by Spiritualism, whereby each
one’s happiness here and hereafter depends upon his own
exertions, or the popular teaching of the Churches that
faith in the merits of another and the acceptance of certain
dogmas are necessary to secure future rewards and avert
endless, consequently irremedial and vindictive, punish-
ment in the life to come ? Think over this, and let the
voice of enlightened conscience decide.
MODERN SPIRITUALISM.
By Mbs. E. L. Watson.
Again a glorious star we see
Above life’s shadow-shrouded hills ;
The heavens outpour love’s melody,
And all the world with promise thrills ;
Our lives, illumined like the morn,
Declare another truth is bom !
From ghastly depths of doubt and woe
Our souls are summoned to ascend,
And now behold our last great foe
Hath proven universal friend !
O, Death we have no fear of thee;
O, Grave where is thy victory !
No more our eager eyes shall turn
To bygone ages for the light,
The altars of the Present burn
With sacred fires as holy, bright.
To all mankind God’s pledge is given,
His truth alone can lead to Heaven !


The dead, already made alive,
Now give us greeting face to face,
And with our doubting spirits strive
To fill their dear, accustomed place ;
No more Love’s treasures lie entombed,
“ Death’s dark” with countless stars hath bloomed,
And as the chains from Peter fell
In presence of the Angel power,
So dread of death and fear of hell
Do lesser grow each day and hour;
Wherever angel feet have trod
There springs a purer trust in God.
The hills of time are touched with flame,
Foretelling splendours yet to be,
And swelling songs anew proclaim
The truth of immortality.
Not “ Christ ” alone hath burst his prison,
For all the dead alike are risen.
The “rustling wing ” once heard afar
Now broods us with a soft caress;
The “ glimmer of a distant star ”
Now thrills us with love’s tenderness ;
And to each angel-guarded home
The promised “ comforter ” hath come.
The seas are bridged with snowy sail
And space annulled by ’lectric Are,
The planets weighed in mental scale
And Heaven o’erleaped by heart’s desire ;
Until at last we hold impearled
This precious truth of all the world !
There is one God supremely good,
To whom the universe belongs,
And when His laws are understood
We shall no longer suffer wrongs ;
And death is but a gateway grand
That leadeth to Love’s Morning Land !


ADVICE TO INQUIRERS.
By M.A. (Oxon.)
THE CONDUCT OF CIRCLES.
If you wish to see whether Spiritualism is really the
mass of jugglery and imposture that it suits some people
to say that it is, try it by personal experiment.
Spiritualist, on whose good faith you may rely, ask him
for advice; and if he is holding private circles, seek per-
mission to attend one, that you may see how seances
should be conducted, and of what nature the ordinary
phenomena are.
There js, however, difficulty in obtaining access to
private circles, and, in any case, you must rely chiefly on
your own experiences gained in your own family circle,
01 \ amongst your own personal friends, all strangers
being excluded. The bulk of Spiritualists have gained
conviction thus.
Form a circle of from four to eight persons, of whom
half, or at least two, should be of negative, passive tem-
perament and preferably of the female sex. The re-
mainder may be of a more positive type.
_ Sit, positive and negative alternately, secure against
disturbance by fresh visitors, in subdued light, and in
comfortable and unconstrained positions, round an un-
covered table of convenient size. Place the palms of the
hands flat upon its upper surface. It is not important
that the hands of each sitter should touch those of his
neighbour, though the practice is frequently adopted.
It is important that attention should not be too fixedly
concentrated on the expected manifestations. To this
end engage in cheerful but not frivolous conversation.
Avoid dispute or argument. Scepticism has no deterrent
effect, but a bitter spirit of opposition in a person of
determined will may totally stop or decidedly impede


manifestations. If conversation flags, music is a great
help, if it be agreeable to all, and not of a kind to irritate
the sensitive ear.
Avoid anxiety and fidgetiness of all kinds. If you
have a medium in your number, results will follow in
due time, and you cannot hasten, though you may impede
them. Patience is essential; and it may be necessary to
meet ten or twelve times, at short intervals, before any-
thing occurs. If after such trial you still fail, break up
the circle and form a fresh one. You will probably be
able to guess at the reason of your failure, and can
eliminate the inharmonious elements and introduce
others. An hour should be the limit of an unsuccessful
seance.
If results are obtained, the first indication usually is a
cool breeze passing over the hands, accompanied by in-
voluntary twitching of the hands and arms of some of
the sitters, and a sensation of throbbing in the table.
These indications, at first so slight as to cause doubt as
to their objective reality, will usually develop with more
or less rapidity.
Table-tilting is more common than rapping. If the
table moves, let your pressure be so gentle on its surface
that you are sure you are not aiding its motions. After
some time you will probably find that the movement
will continue if your hands are held over but not in
contact with its surface. Do not, however, try any such
experiment until the movement has become thoroughly
assured, and be in no hurry to get messages.
When you think that the time has come, let some one
person take command of the circle and act as spokes-
man. Explain to the unseen Intelligence that an agreed
code of signals is desirable, and ask that a tilt may be
given as the alphabet is slowly repeated at the several
letters which form the word that the Intelligence wishes
to spell. It is convenient to use a single tilt for jSTo„
three for Yes, and two to express doubt or uncertainty. ’
If you are satisfied that a satisfactory communication
has been established, ask if you are rightly placed, and if
not, request that directions may be given as to the order


yon should take. After this, ask who the Intelligence
purports to he, which of the company is the medium, and
such relevant questions. If confusion occurs at first,
ascribe it to the difficulty that undoubtedly exists in
directing the table movements at first with exactitude.
Patience will eliminate the source of error, if there be a
real desire on the part of the communicating Intelligence
to speak with you. If you only satisfy yourself at first
that it is possible to speak with an intelligence that is
separate from that of any person present in the circle,
you will have gained a great step.
The signals may take the form of raps. If so, use the
same code of signals, and as they become thoroughly
established, ask that they may be made on the table,
floor, or in a part of the room where they are demon-
strably not produced by any natural means. Avoid,
however, any vexatious imposition of restrictions on free
communication. Let the Intelligence use its own means.
If the attempt to communicate deserves your attention,
it probably has something to say to you, and will resent
being hampered by useless interference. It rests with
the sitters to a very great extent to make the manifesta-
tions elevating or frivolous, and even tricky.
Should an attempt be made to entrance the medium, or
to manifest by any violent methods or by means of form-
manifestations, ask that the attempt may be deferred
till you can secure the presence of some experienced
Spiritualist. If this request is not heeded, discontinue
the sitting at once. The process of developing a trance-
medium is one that might disconcert an inexperienced
inquirer. It will be found that increased light will
check noisy and unpleasant manifestations.
Lastly : Try the results you get by the light of reason.
Maintain a level head and a clear judgment. Do not
believe everything you are told; for, though the great
unseen world contains many a wise and discerning spirit,
it also has in it the accumulation of human folly, vanity,
and error : and this lies nearer to the surface than that
which is wise and good. Distrust the free use of great
names. Never for a moment abandon the use of your


reason. Do not enter into a very serious and solemn
investigation in a spirit of idle curiosity or frivolity.
Endeavour to be animated by a reverent desire for what
is pure, good, and true. You will be repaid if you gain
only a well-grounded conviction that there is a life after
death, for which a pure and good life before death is the.
best and wisest preparation.


THE DOCTRINES OE THE POPULAR FAITH
CONTRASTED WITH
THE TEACHINGS OE MODERN SPIRITUALISM.
A LECTURE delivered on the evening of the sth March, 1891 ,
at the Longbrook-street Chapel, Exeter, by
H. Junor Browne.
[.Reprinted from the “ Devon Evening Express.”]
“ If God loves only those who love Him, what better is he than a
sinner ? and can God, who is infinitely perfect, be less just than man,
His creature ? ”
Friends, — As it is erroneously supposed, by the
generality of people, that all who reject and denounce
the falsities of the popular faith and the conceptions of
God it upholds, are atheists, I shall preface my lecture
this evening with the following lines, addressed
TO THE INFINITE.
“ Oh! sacred Presence, Life divine,
We rear to Thee no gilded shrine.
Unfashioned by the hand of art,
Thy temple is the childlike heart.
No tearful eye, no bended knee,
No servile speech we bring to Thee,
For Thy great love tunes ev’ry voice,
And makes each trusting soul rejoice.
W 6 will not mock Thy holy name
With titles high of empty fame,
For Thou with all Thy works and ways
Art far beyond man’s feeble praise ;


But freely as the birds that sing,
The soul’s spontaneous gift we bring,
And like the fragrance of the flowers
We consecrate to Thee our powers.”
It is a curious fact that although all profess to be
animated by the love of truth, there is nothing most
people dislike more than those truths which disprove
that which they have been taught to believe in as divine
verities. They prefer adhering to time-honoured falsities,
even if they traduce the character of the Almighty,
rather than accept that which is self-evidently true, and
which represents God in the most adorable aspect —
namely, as infinitely good, just, and 'merciful. Thomas
Carlyle declared that there were thirty millions of people
in England, mostly fools, and I quite agree with him if
he referred to their religious beliefs. From having been
taught what to think instead of how to think, the
generality of people profess to believe that which will
not stand a rational analysis, and which is palpably
false and contradictory. For instance, they profess to
believe on the one hand that God is good, and on the
other hand that He cursed with an eternal curse all
mankind yet unborn because Adam and Eve transgressed;
that He is just, yet that He decreed from the foundation
of the world the cruel murder of the innocent Jesus, in
order that the guilty might escape from the just conse-
quences of their moral wrongdoings; that He is merciful,
yet that He has prepared a place of eternal torment for
the great majority of His children. These are only a few
of the many glaring inconsistencies of the popular faith,
but they are sufficient for my purpose. As evidence that
the orthodox entertain grave doubts of God’s merciful-
ness, I need only mention that they are constantly
beseeching Him to have mercy on them: “ Oh, Lord,
have mercy upon me” is their frequent prayer to our all-
merciful Father.
With these few observations, I shall now proceed to
briefly compare the doctrines of the popular faith with
the teachings of modern Spiritualism, and see which
is the more enlightened and rational of the two, and


therefore the more worthy of our acceptance and
support.
Death is claimed by the orthodox faith to have entered
into the world through sin; or, in other words, had Adam
and Eve not transgressed, they would have been living-
on earth to the present day.
Science, on the other hand, proves that death was the
natural sequence of physical birth long before man
■existed on this planet, countless millions of insects and
animals having lived and died for thousands, if not
millions, of years before man appeared upon the scene.
Death is also popularly held to be a consummation to
be dreaded all, as “ the great King of Terrors,”
whereas the fact is, death is a natural and beneficent
■change which should be looked forward to with com-
placency by all who have done their duty to their fellow-
beings when on earth, death being simply the new birth
•of the spirit into a higher domain of life. Death has
been well termed “ the white-winged angel ” that comes
to call the spirit to its heavenly home when the worn-out
physical body is no longer a fit habitation for it.
The reason why death has always been represented by
priestcraft as an occurrence to be looked forward to with
so much fear and dread is to frighten and overawe its
confiding dupes, and thus make them subservient to its
purposes. For their selfish ends priests have in all ages
traduced the character of the Almighty, representing
Him, whose love is infinite and whose mercy endureth
for ever, as a God of wrath and vengeance, who has
created the wicked for the day of evil, and who will laugh
at them when their calamity cometh; and their dupes
seem to like it, for they cling to it tenaciously against the
light of truth and reason.
It has been truly observed that the teachings of
ecclesiasticism have so warped the judgments of its
votaries that they are blind to the truth, causing them to
accept as divine verities the most absurd and God-dis-
honouring statements, merely because they have been
branded by priestcraft as of Divine authority. We may
rest assured, however, that any book, or church, which


represents God as jealous, wrathful, unjust, or vindictive,
cannot be true or worthy of our acceptance. Whatever
is evil in man must be infinitely worse on the part of
Deity.
“ The wrongs that pain my soul below I dare not throne above,
I know not of His wrath or hate : I know but of His love.”
From the facts disclosed through scientific investigation,,
we learn that God’s love is over all, whether they be
young or old, learned or unlearned, both in this life and
in that which is to come, He being the God of Universal
Nature, and not of a sect or church ; that death, which is.
as natural as birth, is a beneficent change for all, and
that what we really have to dread is the memory of an
evil thought, an unkind word, or a bad action.
It is popularly taught that there is no redemption
beyond the grave, for as the tree falleth so it lieth..
Whereas the fact is, moral probation ceaseth not with
this life. If it did it would he most unjust, considering-
the great inequality in the circumstances of men’s births
and the very different environments by which they are;
severally surrounded when on earth. Again, if there bo
no redemption beyond the grave, for what purpose did
Jesus, after he had entered spirit life, go and preach to-
those who had been in the prison-house of darkness since
the days of Noah ? Was it merely to tantalize theso
poor sinners ? If so, his character must have completely"
changed for the worse since he entered into Spiritual life,
and retrogression be the order of the day there, instead
of progression.
In the popular faith the humble Jesus is represented
as now sitting as a great prince on a white throne by the'
side of the titulary deity of the Jews, Javeh or Jehovah,,
or as riding as the King of Kings on a white horse, with
a flaming sword in his hand.
Through Spiritual communion, however, we learn that
a more humble spirit never entered the spirit world than
the worthy Judean Reformer, who there recommenced
those sublime teachings for which he was so shamefully
treated when upon earth. Unselfish love was the dis-


tinguishing feature of his life here, and we may rest
assured that it is the same in the higher life.
The popular faith teaches that in the world to come
the righteous shall see God, whereas through Spiritual
science we leaxm that man is a finite spirit, whether in
the fleshly body or out of it, and that a finite being can
never behold the Infinite. That as on earth God can
only he seen through His works, so in the future life He
can only he seen by His works there, which far transcend
in grandeur and beauty those of earth, grand and
beautiful as some of these are. This is corroborated in
the Ist Epistle of Paul to Timothy vi. 16, where, in
reference to God, it is stated, “ Whom no man hath seen,
or can seeand in John i. 18, it is declared, “No man
hath seen God at any time, neither heard His voice.”
Although in the gospel, said to be according to Mark,
at the 12th chapter, 32nd verse, it is declared, “ There is
one God ; and there is none other but He,” Jesus is
represented in the popular faith as a god, one of three ;
that he is constantly interceding for mankind with the
irate and revengeful senior partner of the Trinity,
thereby exalting in goodness the man Christ Jesus above-
his Father and our Father, his God and our God. Jesus,,
on the other hand, is represented in Scripture as having
been so humble that he reproved a young man for even-
addressing him as “good master,” saying there was none
good but one, that was God. Now, if, as the popular-
faith teaches, Jesus was God, he must either have been
ignorant of the fact or have wilfully deceived the young
man whom he addressed. Our elder brother no more
claimed to be God than he claimed to be King of Judea.
The very idea that we are brothers and sisters to the
is impious. Such, however, would be the
corollary if Jesus were God and our elder brother. The
usual orthodox reply to this is, that Jesus was God in
essence and man in substance. This argument has clearly
been refuted in the following words :
O
“ Talk of essence and substance, and I know not what,
Either God made Christ or else He did not,
If He did, Christ’s a creature, that’s plain to the view,
If not, he’s a God, and then we have tivo.”


When the upholders of the popular faith find them-
selves floored on this point, they cunningdy shift their
ground and declare that if Jesus and Jehovah were not
one, then Jesus was the only begotten son of their God,
but they do not inform us if Jehovah had any begotten
daughters, or how a son can be as old, or co-eternal with,
his Father. Surely the latter must be older than his
son. They also forget that they claim that Jesus was
the fullness of the Godhead bodily, yet it is reported that
he said “ The Father is greater than I.” The deeper this
subject of the Trinity is probed the more inexplicable it
becomes. A doctrine that is not true must be misleading,
however revered it may be by the masses. It was
evidently borrowed from the old religion of India, with
its trinity of Brahma, Vishnu, and Siva, or from the
Egyptian trinity of Osiris, Isis, and Horns.
A popular clergyman being asked by an old friend
what his private opinion was regarding the doctrine of
the Trinity, replied sotto voce, “ I reverence it for its
antiquLy, I adore it for its absurdity, and I preach it
because I am well paid for doing so.” How different
would the teachings in the various churches be if the
clergy were paid for preaching that which they believed,
instead of that which is in accordance with the articles
of their respective churches. Take for instance the
doctrine of eternal damnation for unbaptized infants,
which is distinctly laid down in the Thirty-nine Articles
of the Church of England. How many of your clergy
really believe this blasphemous dogma ? Not one in’ a
thousand, though few have the honesty to openly re-
pudiate this impious charge against the character of God,
whose love is over all. The greatest saint that ever lived
might well have envied an infant for its innocence.
Baptism is simply an old superstitious ceremony borrowed
from the Hindoos, and transferred to the banks of the
Jordan from those of the sacred Ganges, where it was
practised for thousands of years before the time of Jesus.
All the other forms and ceremonies of the popular faith
-can also be traced to heathen origin. Forms and cere-
monies have nothing to do with true religion; they are


but the trappings added, for interested motives, by priest-
craft, to the simple religion of Jesus—viz., love to God
and love to man, which comprise all the law and the
prophets. It has been truly stated—“ The (so-called)
Chiistian religion has been tried for eighteen centuries
without making people even honest; the simple religion
of Jesus remains to be tried.”
“ Creeds are but shackles that enslave the mind,
Goodness consists of actions pure and kind.”
. According to the popular faith the next world is
divided into two compartments—namely, a very sparsely
peopled place called heaven, with a very narrow gateway
at its entrance, “and few there be who go in thereat,” and a
densely populated place called hell or sheol, with a wide
path leading thereto, rendering it easy of access to nine-
tenths of God’s children. Through Spiritual science we
learn that this is false as well as God-dishonouring, and
that Jesus was right when he declared, as is reported,
that in the world to come there were many mansions or
spheres. "Wc also learn that there are many grades in
spheres, into one of which, by a natural law, each
individual is attracted on entrance into spirit life, accord-
ing to his or her character formed when on earth ; for
as we now sow here so shall we reap hereafter, irrespec-
tive of our faith or belief, so that an honest sceptic is
better than a credulous, hypocritical saint.
The popular faith teaches that the life to come is an
indolent one of either eternal anthem singing or of ever-
lasting brimstone roasting; whereas, through Spiritual
communion, we learn it is a life of activity to all who
desire to progress. This activity consists in doing good
to others either on the earth plane or in the spirit world,
which is the best and only way we can serve God either
here or hereafter. As on earth we all can help others
either physically, morally, or intellectually, so in the
spirit world all can assist others morally, intellectually,
or spiritually who are less developed than themselves in
these respects. The doing of good to others is the
noblest work of man, and the surest way to secure our


■own progress in both states of existence, so that the old
adages hold good in both worlds—namely, “ Thrice blest
is he who blesses others,” and “An ounce of help is
worth a ton of pity.” Heaven and hell are states of
mind, not localities. When we do good we are in
heaven, or are in harmony with that state; and when
we do evil we are in hell, or in sheol, as it is now termed
in the revised edition of the New Testament. When we
enter spirit life we carry our heaven or our hell with us,
for the change called death does not alter our state of
mind, but merely our condition. If we have cultivated
evil passions here, they remain with us there until we
have outgrown them, but there the means of satisfying
these passions of our lower nature are wanting, so in
■time they die out.
It is popularly taught that the other world is a bourne
from which no traveller can return; that there is a great
gulf separating the two worlds which prevents this. If
so, how came all the spirits, mentioned in the Old Testa-
ment as having communicated with and manifested
themselves to men in the flesh, to get over this great
gulf ? How came it that Moses and Elias appeared on
the mount to the disciples ? and how about the bright
spirit which John saw on the Island of Patmos, who re-
proved John for attempting to worship him, saying,
“ See thou do it not, for I am one of thy brethren the
prophets ? ” Why is it enjoined in Scripture to believe
not every spirit, and to try the spirits, if they cannot
return and communicate with mankind when the neces-
sary conditions are present ? Spiritualism is not only
taught in the Bible, but we are therein enjoined to
cultivate our spiritual gifts, for to one is given one gift
and to another a different gift, &c. Again, if it be
wrong to communicate with spirits now, it must have
been equally so in Scriptural times, unless it can be
proved that God has in the meantime brought in an
amending act.
It is popularly taught that man’s future state for
eternity is fixed by his faith or belief in this life, which,
in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, is solely dependent


on the circumstances of his birth ; whereas we learn
through the investigation of Spiritual science that man’s
■character is formed, not by his faith, which is a specious
name for pious credulity, but by the daily actions of his
life here, and that according to his character so is his
■condition on entrance into spirit life. If it were other-
wise it would be most unjust to all who never heard of
the popular faith, and to those who, in accordance with
the reason with which God hath endowed them, have
had the honesty to reject such a God-dishonouring
belief, which was invented long after Jesus was put to
death.
The popular faith teaches that God, who is infinitely
good, just, and merciful, will, in the future state, visit
the majority of mankind with an infinite punishment for
a finite transgression, unless they stultify their reason
and receive in blind faith its superstitious, priest-made
creeds. Through Spiritual science we learn that, by the
eternal law of effect following cause, suffering is the
natural result of sin, that that suffering is mental,
temporal, and remedial, therefore it is not, as popularly
taught, physical, everlasting, and vindictive.
It is also popularly taught that man can escape the
just consequences of his moral wrongdoings here through
the merits and sufferings of another, and that thereby
the great law of effect following cause can be contravened.
Through Spiritual science we learn that there is no
escape from the consequences of sin by any magical,
mystical, or priestly process, and that every sin com-
mitted brings its own punishment, either in this life or in
that which is to come ; that the only way we can blot
out our transgressions is by covering them over by good
actions either when here or when we have entered into
Spiritual life. It therefore follows that the popular
doctrine of forgiveness of sins through vicarious sacrifice,
which was not invented till long after the cruel murder
of the worthy Jesus, is but a snare and a delusion. To
uphold the old heathenish doctrine that there can be no
remission of sin without the shedding of blood is tanta-
mount to maintaining that two wrongs make one right.


The putting to death o£ the worthy man Christ Jesus by
his own countrymen is but an example of man’s cruelty
to man. To ascribe this unjust murder to God, for the
purpose of appeasing His divine wrath and satisfying
His otherwise implacable revenge, is, I maintain, rank
blasphemy.
Then trust not faith in foolish creeds,
Blood ne’er can whitewash wicked deeds ;
But let your acts here always be
Those which from sin will make you free.
Now t let me ask, which of the two views set forth,,
think you, is the more enlightened, the more rational’
and consequently the more worthy of acceptance by us
as rational and responsible beings ? Ho not let the
falsely claimed divine authority of a book or church bias
your decision. That the churches place themselves at
the head of nearly every public charity I admit, but
this is diplomacy on their part, and is for the purpose of
giving to their false creeds and dogmas the semblance of
truth, in the same way as the chemist coats with sugar
his nasty pills in order to induce you to swallow them,
and to deceive the palate. The simple religion of Jesus
had no absurd creeds, inexplicable dogmas, or any of the
imposing ceremonies of ecclesiasticism; neither had it, nor
did it require, grand anthems and loud-sounding organs
to attract his followers, as do the churches which falsely
profess to teach the religion Jesus inculcated. When,
you consider the humility of the man Christ Jesus and
see or hear of a pompous bishop being enthroned in
gorgeous apparel, cannot you perceive the mockery of
ecclesiasticism, and that the whole of this priestly
assumption is a palpable public fraud, kept alive for
the purpose of exalting the few over the many ? Does
not the existence of this huge, arrogant, and expensive
priestly institution, still in full swing up to the present
time, prove that Carlyle was right when he wrote that
there were thirty millions in England mostly fools ?
Protestants see the humbug of Eoman Catholicism, but
are blind to the humbug of Protestantism, with its dose


imitation of that of which it is a mere offshoot; as of
old, they see the mote that is in their neighbour’s eye,
but cannot perceive the beam that is in their own. All
that God, who dwelleth not in temples made with hands,
requires is that man should act justly and walk humbly
in the sight of Him who is ever present, and who
knoweth the secrets of men’s hearts. If the money that
has been expended in building the immense cathedrals
and the various churches had been expended in the
erection of homes for the houseless poor, and had all the
amounts paid annually to the clergy for preaching those
foolish old Jewish fables, which turn from the truth,
been devoted to feeding the hungry and clothing the
naked, we should not have required the scheme lately
initiated by General Booth for the amelioration of the
condition of the outcasts of England. Do right, is all the
religion required to be taught the people, for this com-
prises all the law and the prophets, as well as love to
God and love to man. God requireth not the praises of
men or of angels, for all His works glorify Him. The
teachings of Jesus were summed up in a few words—
namely, love ye one another. He had no cathedral, or
even a church, and he preached without money and
without price.
The popular faith, I maintain, is impious, for it repre-
sents God as jealous, revengeful, unjust, unmerciful, and
vindictive; it also is immoral, as it teaches that man can
go on sinning with impunity if he will only, at the
eleventh hour, believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and him
crucified. No wonder, with such misleading teachings,
that the world is still steeped in sin and misery. No
wonder that with all your old cathedrals, churches, and
chapels, large court-houses and prisons are still required
in your midst. As long as people are taught to worship a
wicked God, who is represented as having decreed the
cruel murder of one of His noblest sons, and to have
broken almost every one of His own laws, how can they
be expected to become righteous ? Teach them the
truth, as revealed by Spiritual communion—viz., that if
even they escape from punishment in this life for evil


deeds committed, there is a world of retributive justice
in which every sin brings its own suffering, and from
which there is no escape, and you will soon find an
improvement. Do not teach them that God is so wicked
as to have created a fiery hell to eternally roast them in,
hut rather that there is hope and happiness for all
eventually in that life towards which every one of us is
travelling, each day that passes bringing us nearer and
nearer thereto. Modern Spiritualism corroborates all
the truths and moral teachings of both the Hebrew and
the Greek Scriptures. It is only their absurd legendary
fables and the God-dishonouring and false dogmas, still
popularly taught, that it denounces and repudiates.
The generality of those belonging to the popular faith,
I may here observe, look on Spiritualists in anything but
a favourable light, forgetting that all who believe in a
future life for man are Spiritualists. While viewing-
ancient Spiritualism with feelings of respect, and even
reverence, they inconsistently hold Modern Spiritualism
to be a superstition. Instead of this being the case, it
is the exposer of all superstition. Surely that which
rests on a scientific basis, the phenomena of which can be
obtained in your own homes, cannot be a superstition ?
Without these phenomena, I maintain, we have no
rational evidence of a life to come, and religion is a mere
farce based on credulity or speculation as to there being
a future life for man. Then if, as some assert, the
phenomena of Modern Spiritualism be all the result of
trickery and delusion, this argument will apply equally
to the phenomena recorded in the Scriptures, with the
advantage to the former that their reality can be tested,
which cannot be done with the latter. That there has
been a large amount of imposture connected with the
movement by unscrupulous persons does not affect the
genuine manifestations, any more than a forged bank-
note proves that all others are forgeries. On the con-
trary, in both cases it is palpable evidence that there are
the genuine to copy from. Those who, on the other
hand, assert that the spiritual phenomena of our day are
the work of the Devil, must first prove that such a person-


age exists ; and, even if they were able to do this, they
would only be knocking the ground from under their
own feet, for if the Devil is the author of the modern
manifestations he must have been the author of those in
Scriptural times, both being of a similar character in
many respects. The question may arise, Why are
Spiritual phenomena so uncommon now? The answer
to this is simple—Because the church has, for more than
a thousand years, closed its doors against Spiritual
manifestations, and people have in consequence neglected
to cultivate their Spiritual gifts as enjoined in the
Scriptures, and to prove all things, holding fast to that
which is good.
Through the realization of the facts brought to light
through Modern Spiritualism, a silver lining is given to
every dark cloud in this world of trial, pain, and sorrow,
I can truly say, from personal experience, that the
knowledge obtained through the investigation of
Spiritual science has given me that peace which passeth
all understanding in the darkest hours of my life, which
the popular faith failed to supply under less trying
circumstances. This knowledge supports and comforts in
the hour of death in a manner that no religion based on
mere belief can ever supply, as thousands besides myself
can testify. This knowledge bridges the tomb, with-
draws the veil, and brings heaven to earth, by uniting us,
even while here, with the loved ones gone before.
Spiritualism, therefore, notwithstanding all the mis-
representations and ridicule that have been levelled
against it, is a subject well worthy of the earnest investi-
gation of all who desire “ more light,” who are not afraid
of the truth, and who can stand the sneers of their pre-
judiced and ignorant friends, in the attainment of that
which tfuly robs death of its sting and the grave of its
victory.
I shall conclude by repeating a few lines that came to
me, without thought on my part, many years ago. They
are as follows, and are


AN ODE TO TRUTH.
Oh, Truth ! thou beauteous gem, thou pearl of all the seas,
Visible throughout God’s works to men of all degrees,
Shine forth in all thy splendour, enlighten ev’ry mind,
Extinguish cherished errors, emancipate mankind.
From bigotry and priestcraft the souls of men release,
Let superstitious follies and false religions cease.
Then true worship by our acts shall senseless creeds displace,
And base notions of our God no longer man disgrace.
Then shall thy simple teachings, by Jesus once proclaimed,
Divested of all errors by which they’ve been defamed,
Shine as the second advent, or Love’s sublime new birth,
And countless millenniums reign verily on earth.
ADDENDA.
At the close of the address, the Lecturer replied to a
number of questions put by the audience in reference to
the subjects under consideration. He also stated that if,
during his short stay in Exeter, any of those interested
were willing to take a suitable hall in the city for the
purpose, he was prepared to meet in debate any ac-
credited member of the various churches with which
Exeter is so well supplied, from the Bishop downwards.
He further stated that he alone was responsible for the
statements he had made that evening. On the other
hand, he does not hold himself responsible for the acts
or statements of others professing to be Spiritualists.
Spiritualism differs from the popular faith in this re-
spect : that while the followers of the latter are supposed
to be bound by the same belief, those of the former are
held to be individually responsible for their respective
views, actions, and statements. So far from the popular
faith being harmonious, as is claimed for it, we have only
to look at the innumerable sects into which it is divided
to prove the inharmony of the one book on which they
all profess to base their varying beliefs, and of the
jealousies, if not hatred, which exist among them, while
he whom they claim as their master is reported to have
said, “ Love ye one another.”


The following, which appeared in the Devon Evening
Express of 9th March, expresses, with a few slight
emendations, the views held by the lecturer ;
CHRISTIANITY: ITS FOUNDER AND ITS FOLLOWERS.
A Contrast. By M. B.
In Nazareth a boy did live,
One destined to the world to give
A pure religion for all time.
The brain which harboured thoughts sublime
Had not in college routine grown,
But reason fruitful seed had sown.
The rich were not those whom he sought ;
He loved the poor, the poor he taught,
And for his work his only pay
Was homely hospitality.
No priestly palace his abode,
An ass the proudest beast he rode;
Aspired he not to princely state,
Nor lived he as a potentate.
He loved good cheer and cheery mirth,
And all the good things of the earth ;
His prayers were in few words addressed,
Good deeds he deeiped his worship best.
The sea,, the field, the mountain wild
To him were temples undefiled ;
No mitre, gown, or special dress
Had he to clothe his righteousness ;
His work was not a trade of gain,
His death was but a death of pain.
His followers must to college go,
And then with mediaeval show,
Believe themselves a special race,
Wear solemn airs and lengthened face.
The rich they praise, the poor deceive
With surplice, mitre, and lawn-sleeve;
Their pay by thousands must be told,
Yet preach they curs’d is love of gold !
A palace must be their abode,
Their legs in gaiters must be clothed;
A retinue have they to wait
Upon their spiritual lord’s estate ;
In lengthy prayers and pagan creeds
They waste their time ; man’s goodly deeds
They say are nought ’less he receive
And inexplicable creeds believe ;
They cannot worship save in mass
’Mid sculptured stone and coloured glass ;


His simple life they imitate
In lux’ry, pride and high, estate,
And for his truths of love and light,
A funeral pall as black as night
They draw around the searching mind
That would their Master’s meaning find.
Note. —Spiritualism is not, as popularly supposed, a religion,
although it has a religious as well as a philosophical and scientific
phase. In it we have the only rational basis for belief in a future
state, and through it we learn that by the just and everlasting
law of cause and effect our condition on entrance into the higher
life depends solely on our daily thoughts, words, and actions
when on earth; also, that by the divine law of eternal progress
there is hope eventually for every human soul, however low or
degraded it may have been on the physical plane of existence.
This may well be termed “ the larger hope ” by ail who believe in
religion without superstition, and in a good and wise Father
whose love is over all His children, whether called saints or
sinners, for all have erred to a greater or less extent. Here, let
me ask, who are the foolish ones—those who without a particle
of rational evidence believe in a chimerical future existence, or
those who from scientific evidence received, believe in a reasonable
progressive future state for man ?


CHRISTIANITY; ITS ORIGIN AND ESOTERIC
MEANING.
(d LECTURE delivered at the Masonic Hall, Melbourne, on
Sunday evening, 3 Oth March, 1884. j
And truth alone, where’er my lot be cast,
In scenes of plenty or the pining waste,
Shall be my end and aim—my glory to the last.”
Ladies and Gentlemen, —The title of my lecture this
evening is Christianity: its Origin and Esoteric (that is,
its hidden) Meaning.
In stating the conclusions which have been arrived at
by me in connection with this important subject, I am
not so presumptuous as to suppose that they are faultless,
but merely submit them for your consideration as being
that which appears to me nearer to the truth than the
views popularly entertained in regard thereto.
It remains with you to receive or reject the opinions
expressed by me, according as they commend themselves
or otherwise to your individual consciences. The prac-
tice of listening only to opinions which accord with one’s
views and which confirm one’s prejudices is unfortu-
nately too common an error, for in all matters that are
undemonstrable it is alone by the interchange of oppo-
site opinions that the truth can be arrived at. Theology,
like everything else, has two sides, a false and a true one.
If the views which you at present entertain are really
true, no argument that can be brought forward can
upset them, for truth is invulnerable ; on the other hand,
if they are erroneous, the sooner you are aware of it the
better. Bear in mind that it is much easier to swim
with the tide of popular opinion than it is for one to
endeavour to stem its surging current, and that my sole


object is the exposure of error and the elucidation of
truth. Bear in mind also, as Charles Mackay wisely
remarks, that—
“ The man is thought a knave or fool,
Or atheist plotting crime,
Who for the advancement of his kind
Is wiser than his time.”
And as the poet Whittier writes:
‘ ‘ Every age on him who strays
From its broad and beaten ways
Pours its sevenfold vial.”
That there is a widespread declension in all the
Christian sects from the old standards of faith, and that
a disturbed condition of opinion in regard to religion
exists throughout Christendom, we have evidence from
all quarters. Even from the various pulpits “ a growing
want of faith ” is constantly being deplored ; and, as has
been truly remarked by Emerson, “No man can go with
his thoughts about him into one of our churches without
feeling that what hold the public worship once had on
man is gone or going. It has lost its grasp on the affec-
tions of the good and the fears of the bad.”
We need not travel far to ascertain the reason of this
state of affairs in the religious atmosphere, and for the
causes which produce this prevalent decay and almost
universal death of faith in society. The advance of
science, the expansion of thought, and the freedom of
speech and investigation, now so generally prevalent, are
the chief causes.
Religion throughout the length and breadth of Chris-
tendom may, therefore, be said to be in a transition state,
owing to the intelligence of the day having outgrown
the superstitious ideas which have for ages past been
received by the majority of the people as divine verities,
and to the general enlightenment of the masses tending
to bring men into a greater preparedness for the recep-
tion of spiritual truth, thereby indicating that the need
of a new revelation was never greater than now. A
grand reformation has, in fact, set in, which, though not


jet generally acknowledged, will in due course usher in
a higher and nobler conception o£ God and of man’s
■destiny.
It is a popular hut fallacious assumption that respect
for all religious truth is likely to go with the rejection of
dogmas which are not only totally opposed to science
and common sense but are even dishonouring towards
God and debasing to those who continue to support them,
for, as Carlyle wisely remarks : “ The old never dies till
this happen—till the soul of the good that was in it has
got itself transferred into the practical new.”
In the rational religion now dawning on the world,
those portions of truth incorporated in anterior religions
will he supplanted by new revealments conformable to
the advancing enlightenment of the people.
The transition from the old to the new, I am aware,
will be slow, for so wedded are most people to the errors,
prejudices, and delusions in which they have been
brought up, and so tenaciously do they cling to early
instilled superstition, that even when the falsity and
absurdity thereof are clearly demonstrated to them they
still continue to reverence and cherish them, and to
reject that which both truth and reason commend to
their understanding. If truth, however, is an essential
requisite of religion (as it must be), all lovers thereof
should willingly surrender those doctrines and positions
which are antagonistic to the intelligence of the age they
live in, consequently are no longer tenable by all who
possess a spark of honesty. You may rely upon it that
whatever good has come to the world through a mistaken
faith could have come as well without its errors.
All ideas, however ancient they are, and however much
they may be revered as truth, which are opposed- to
natural facts, consequently are undemonstrable, must be
fictitious, and the principles of all faiths, aside from their
connection with morality, are of little benefit to mankind,
for intelligence and morality, virtue and truth are the
only means through which the world can be redeemed
from ignorance and sin. Before, however, humanity can
rise to a truthful plane of religious thought, the real


basis of religious ideas must be understood. Unfortu-
nately, knowledge in advance of popularly received
ideas is regarded with distrust, and those who have the
candour to submit such knowledge to their neighbours
are, as I have remarked, treated with contumely, while
those who pander to their predilections and confirm their
prejudices, for interested purposes, are reverenced and
respected; for
“ Faith, fanatic faith, once wedded fast
To some dear falsehood, hugs it to the last. ’
It is the height of absurdity to shut our eyes to the
fact that all religions (Christianity not excepted) must
undergo change and modification as man’s higher facul-
ties are developed. The crude thoughts of infancy that
satisfied the masses in ignorant and superstitious times,
being no longer adapted to meet the spiritual wants of
educated and intelligent men and women, must give
place to higher and nobler views, for human ideas on all
subjects expand and alter with growth. Mankind being
subject to the inevitable law of progression, must,
whether willingly or otherwise, advance, not only in
their views of art and science, but also in their views of
their relations to God and to each other ; for every fresh
discovery gives birth to new thoughts and creates new
wants ; and these wants must be met with responses as
intimately connected with them as every effect with its
cause. It is in consequence of this that modern thought
differs from that of the past, in that its views of God
and of man’s present and future existence take a much
broader scope, and grasp with the hands of a stronger
and more rational faith the great fact of immortality.
As the poet has truly remarked—
“ The new must e’er supplant the old
While Time’s unceasing current flows,
Only new beauties to unfold
And brighter glories to disclose.”
It was, in like manner, owing to the great strides made
by philosophy during the first centuries of what is


termed the Christian era, that the pagan temples of
Rome began to be less and less attended and supported
by the intelligent and wealthy classes, and that the
necessity arose for the inauguration of a more enlightened
religious system, which, while it retained all the good
that was embodied in the old religions, would displace
their numerous gods and goddesses, and offer in their
place a conception of Deity possessing attributes which
would commend the new religion to all—to the en-
lightened as well as to the ignorant.
It was not, however, till the fourth century, during
the reign of Constantine the Great, that the old pagan
religions were finally merged into the new. I may here
observe that the conversion of this bloodthirsty emperor
to Christianity was cunningly ascribed by the priests of
his day to a vision which he was said to have seen in the
sky; but the real incentive thereto was evidently the
promise held out to him by the priests of the new re-
ligion of absolution from his sins, of which he had com-
mitted many and grievous ; no such hopes being held out
by the old. The pagan religions inculcated, as you are
aware, the truer, juster, and more rational doctrine of
retributive justice in the world to come.
Constantine (we learn by history) drowned his wife
Fausta in a bath of boiling water. He murdered his
father-in-law, two brothers-in-law, a nephew, and several
others. The crowning act of this Christian emperor
was, however, the beheading of his eldest son, Crispus, in
the very year in which he presided at the Council of
Nice. Such was the character of the man who changed
the Roman empire from paganism to Christianity on the
ground that Jesus was better than Jupiter, and Mary
than Venus. Even after his conversion to Christianity,
Constantine is represented as having retained a certain
respect for the old pagan god Jupiter, to whom he caused
a statue to be erected.
I may here remark that the misrepresentations of
heathen theology, and the distortion of its forms of
religious worship indulged in by many Christian writers
on the subject, do not redound to their credit, too many


of whom have violated truth for the purpose of extolling
their own religion at the expense of the old. As the
Rev. F. B. Gross remarks :—“ Perhaps on no subject
within the ample range of human knowledge have so
many fallacious ideas been propagated as upon that of
the gods and the worship of heathen antiquity. Nothing
but a shameful ignorance, a pitiable prejudice, or the
contemptible pride which denounces all investigation
as a useless or criminal labour when it must be feared
that it will result in the overthrow of established
systems of faith or the modification ofj long-cherished
principles of science, can have thus misrepresented the
theology of heathenism, and distorted —nay, caricatured
—its forms of religious worship. It is time that posterity
should raise its voice in vindication of violated truth,
and that the present age should learn to recognize in the
hoary past a little of that common sense of which it
boasts with so much complacency, as if the prerogative
of reason was the birthright only of modern times.” I
fearlessly maintain that every unbiassed and candid
scholar must admit that, side by side with the most gross
superstition, there was much that was good in paganism,
the same as is the case with all the established religions
of the day, and that
‘ ‘ Truth is truth where’er ’tis found,
On Christian or on pagan ground.”
Tracing religion back as far as we possess materials
for so doing, Phallic worship, in which the sexual organs
formed the leading symbols, appears to be the most
ancient. This in the course of time merged into the
astronomical religion, of which (strange as it may appear
to those who learn it for the first time), Christianity is
but an offshoot, greatly misunderstood by the generality
of those who uphold it. In order to substantiate this
statement it will be necessary for me to make frequent
reference to the astronomical religion, and to explain the
connection between the two.
The Sun, it must be admitted, is the best emblem that
man possesses of divinity, as it is it that supplieth “ that


light that lighteth every man that cometh into the
world.” It is this great orb that shines upon every
nation, savage and civilized, that supplies those fructify-
ing rays that give food to all—to the just and to the un-
just ; it may therefore be truly said to he no respecter
of persons. The Sun also is the best symbol for that
everlasting truth which will in time enable man to walk
uprightly without stumbling, and unite all in one grand
universal brotherhood.
The magi, or wise men of the east, of whom we read
in olden times—viz., the ancient sages of India, Persia,
and Egypt—were the savants or philosophers of the
times and countries in which they lived. They wor-
shipped the Sun, Moon, and stars simply as visible re-
presentatives of ideas. These sages, from their deep
contemplation and insight into the working of the Divine
force in nature, possessed a profound knowledge of the
universe, consequently they were enabled to sway the
minds of the ignorant and credulous masses in any way
they desired. Thus, while to the initiated the worship
of the Sun was merely as the symbol of light, intellec-
tual and spiritual, the ignorant and uninitiated wor-
shipped the Sun, the Moon, and the stars as actual
deities.
The successors of these sages —viz., the priests of the
various sects founded on the worship of the heavenly
bodies—were also the most learned of their day. They,
in like manner, continued to control the minds of the
masses by forming the primitive theologies into systems,
and creating gods and goddesses to suit their own pur-
poses. These priests were perfectly aware of the under-
lying truth beneath all these images; but from interested
motives they sought to hide the truth from the vulgar,
upon whose credulity they relied for the aggrandisement
of themselves and their temples, giving their dupes
merely the outward symbols, so as to keep them in
ignorance and thereby subservient to priestcraft.
At length, through the advancement of Grecian philo-
sophy, the falsities and absurdities of the various pagan
religions, with their gods and goddesses, and their foolish


rites and ceremonies, became apparent to the more en-
lightened and wealthy, who in consequence withdrew,
as I have remarked, their countenance and support from
the different pagan temples. Owing to their withdrawal,
and to the diminution of revenue for the purposes of the
craft, the priests of the various pagan sects combined, in
order to preserve their status, to formulate and proclaim
a new religious system, which, while it retained esoteri-
cally the leading symbols and doctrines of the old
religions, embraced also the highest teachings of the
philosophy of the age, thereby to secure its acceptance
by all classes of society. It was thus that in the time of
Constantine, as I have observed, the numerous pagan
gods and goddesses merged into the new virgin-born God,
the ancient astronomical symbols being perpetuated in
the new religion.
Grecian philosophy, I may here state, was to the
ancient world what scientific investigation is to the
modern; being opposed to superstition, it was vindictively
crushed out (at a terrible cost to humanity) by ecclesias-
ticism, by which it was superseded. While philosophy
taught that all distinctions which existed among men
were chiefly the results of natural conditions, ecclesiasti-
cism impudently denied the inherent right of man to the
possession of individual mental freedom, and found
favour with the world by pandering to its ignorance
and credulity with specious promises of absolution from
sins and future rewards to all who would acknowledge
its claims to jurisdiction over the race.
The conception of the new man-God was evidently
borrowed by his priestly creators from the Egyptian
theology, in which Horus is represented as the son of
Osiris (the Sun) and Isis (the Earth). Thus the sun-God,
or son of God, became the offspring of the Sun and Earth,
the union of the Sun and Earth being the apparent source
of creative power by whom all things are made, and
without whom was not anything made that was made;
so all life centres in them. These subtle priests, there-
fore, gave to their God incarnate (in whom they com-
prised the fulness of the Godhead bodily) power over all


things in heaven and on earth ; at the same time they
knavishly assumed to themselves, as his deputies, the
power of remission of sins. “ Whosesoever sins ye remit,
they are remitted unto them ; and whosesoever sins ye
retain, they are retained.” This was their great master-
stroke, as it held out an inducement which the older
forms of paganism did not claim to possess.
The popular religion of our day is, therefore, merely
reformed paganism, or civilized heathenism, as it has
been termed, and, like all the other established religions,
its origin, as I have said, is astronomical. A writer
truly remarks, “ All religions centre around astronomical
worship,” and in order to preserve the old ideas, all
religions (including Christianity), as I shall presently
illustrate, have been veiled under astronomical signs.
Consequently, the various ancient Scriptures are, to a
very large extent, merely allegorical representations, the
exoteric or literal meaning of which is not the real one.
They were thus designed by their authors in order to
hide, as I have already stated, the truths contained
therein from the ignorant masses, while conveying to
the initiated their esoteric, or hidden, or astrological
meaning.
The Old Testament is simply Hebrew mythology, or the
Jewish version of an astronomical allegory; for, taken
in its exoteric meaning, it is largely composed of the most
absurd fables, that are a standing disgrace to the intel-
ligence of the age we live in. Take, for example, the
stories of a serpent speaking to a woman; of an ass
talking to a man; of a whale swallowing another man,
&c. In its esoteric meaning, however, the Bible explains
certain combinations in the heavens, and in this way
alone are many of its statements made intelligible. In
a few instances in this book however, we find the
esoteric meaning openly given; for instance, in Job (to
prove that heavenly laws never alter), we find it written:
“ Canst thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades, or
loose the bands of Orion ? Canst thou bring forth
Mazzaroth in his season ? or canst thou guide Arcturus
with his sons ?”—(Job xxxviii, 31, 32.)


It is worthy of remark that there are twelve signs in
the zodiac, twelve tribes of Israel, twelve apostles, and
that Elisha, which means “ God that saves,” or the Sun,
is anciently represented as ploughing with twelve yoke
of oxen before him. Moses represents Aquarius, or
Neptune, whose dwelling is where the Sun rises at the
equinox ; he is, therefore, said to he saved from, or
drawn out of, the water. Esau represents Hercules with
the lion’s skin, and therefore is all over like a hairy
garment. John the Baptist also represents Aquarius, or
the water-bearer.
Mr. W. Oxley, a gentleman who has devoted consider-
able study to the subject, writing in regard to the Bible
history as interpreted by the stars, clearly demonstrates
the astro-masonic character of the leading Biblical state-
ments. Mr. Oxley declares them to be “an intellectual
and spiritual adaptation of solar, sidereal, and planetary
motions and positions, which form the base, scienti-
fically true, of an allegory that has supplied the moral
and physical life-force to hundreds of thousands of
human beings.” He further observes: —“ All ancient
Scriptures bear the same impress, which is at once
astronomical and astrological. . . . We are now in
actual possession of the veritable system on which the
whole of the Bible was based.”
The sacred bull of the Brahmins, the Apis of the
Egyptians, the baal or bull of the Chaldeans, the bull
sacrificed by the Persians in the symbolic mysteries of
Mithra, and the bull seen by Ezekiel in the heavens (see
Ezek. i.), represented both the active or masculine prin-
ciple in nature and likewise the constellation Taurus, or
the bull, in the Zodiac, styled in the Jewish Scriptures
Jehovah, or the Great I Am, who was jealous of the
bulls of Bashan, and of all other bulls or gods. The bull
was the emblematical symbol of the Sun at the vernal
equinox in the sign of Taurus, the celestial bull. As has
been truly remarked —■“ The bull certainly did pertain to
astronomical myths among those nations who made him
an object of worship; otherwise, why those extended
wings attached to the bulls of Chaldea and Persia in


every instance, if they were not flying bulls that were
represented; and what bull other than the bull of the
Zodiac ever so much as appeared to fly ? The outward
worship of the celestial bull was twenty-one hundred
years older than the outward worship of the celestial
lamb ; the bull having preceded the ram at the vernal
equinox by that period. In Persia there was a religion
in which the bull was the leading symbol, contemporary
with the baal or bel of the Sun-worship of the Chaldeans ;
which at a later period, when the vernal equinox oc-
curred in the sign of the lamb, or agni of the Zoroastrian
religion, gave place to the worship of the lamb. So in
Egypt the worship of the sacred bull Apis was contem-
porary with the baal or bull-worship of Chaldea and
Persia, but was afterwards substituted by the ascend-
ancy of the ram, when the latter took the place of the
bull at the vernal equinox. The Sun, whether at the
vernal equinox in the bull or the lamb, or ram, was the
same Sun and the same object of worship.” In Revela-
tion iv. 6 to 9, the second beast, the celestial bull-calf,
is manifestly referred to as having relation to the wor-
ship of the celestial lamb, the Anointed One, the Lamb
of God that taketh away the sins of the world by dis-
sipating the cold of winter. This vision evidently
related to the state of the heavens at the vernal equinox
same eighteen centuries ago, when the Sun reached that
point of its apparent annual course, no longer in the sign
of the bull, but in the sign of the lamb, as the celestial
sign in which the Sun, at that time, rose to reign in
glory during the summer months, was regarded by the
Persians and the Jews. The sea of glass represented the
azure dome of heaven, and the throne the position of the
Sun in the sign of Aries or Agni. The four beasts stood
for the four seasons, or the Zodiacal constellations—
Leo, Taurus, Aquarius, and the Eagle or substitute for
Scorpio; there were also four evangelists. The six
wings of each of the four beasts represented the six
hours which each of these constellations occupied in
passing from the horizon to the zenith, making together
twenty-four hours, or length of time of the diurnal


revolution of the Earth, which, like the beasts and the
four and twenty elders, rests not day nor night. for it
revolves unceasingly around the Sun—the king of heaven
—which, either symbolically or otherwise, has been the
object of veneration and worship for ages of millions
upon millions of earth’s inhabitants.
As I have already remarked, the Sun is the funda-
mental symbol of every religion ; from its being every-
where a visible manifestation of God it has been
accepted as “ the brightness of His glory and the express
image of His person.” It is upon this kingly orb that
man depends for light and life, through the influence of
which are produced all things needful to existence. To
this day the course of the Sun not only controls both the
secular and ecclesiastical calendars of the Christian
Church, and the character and times of the festivals held
in honour of Christ, but actually coincides with the main
circumstances narrated of his life, from his conception
and birth to his ascension and reception into heaven ;
and the same remarks apply equally to Christina of the
Hindoos, Mithra of the Persians, Osiris of the Egyptians,
and other ancient man-gods.
Sir Isaac Newton was the layman who first discovered
and announced to the world that the Christian festivals
were determined upon an astronomical basis. The day
assigned to the birth of the Sun-God of all the other
religions was the same as that assigned, without a particle
of historical evidence, by the Church to Christ. The
shortest day ( i.e ., north of the Equator) being the
21st, his birthday is put onto the 25th, the first day that
shows any elongation, and which is, therefore, the actual
commencement of the year; while the 21st, on which
the Sun reaches his lowest point—when his worshippers
are supposed to be filled with alarm lest their lord and
master fail to rise again—is assigned to the doubting
apostle Thomas.
Christmas has come and the Sun is born ; but winter
has still a long career to run, and consequently the Sun,
as yet a feeble infant, has to undergo a series of struggles
with the powers of darkness. And just as we find the


infant Christ exposed to the perils celebrated on Inno-
cents’ Day, we find the various representations of the
Sun with difficulty and danger emerging into childhood.
In the case of the Hindoo deity Chrishna—who was also
said to have been born on the 25th December, cradled
among shepherds, and greeted at his birth by an angelic
chorus—a massacre of children was ordered by a jealous
king named Cansa, in exact correspondence with the
slaughter afterwards ascribed to Herod. In every case,
however, the Sun-God escapes all dangers and grows in
stature and favour with God and man, the days gradually
gaining on the nights as he rises higher above the horizon
until the vernal equinox, when they are equal.
This period of equality constitutes in all the solar
religions a serious crisis in the Sun-God’s history. For a
time things seem to go against him, and mankind are in
despair. The change to the south-west monsoon brings
equinoctial storms which hide the Sun from their sight.
He has succumbed to his foe- They fast long and mourn
him dead (as in Lent). But being a God he cannot be
holden of death. Hay, by his dying he shall prove him-
self conqueror over death, and his very death shall be a
blessing and redemption for the nations; for the rains
by which the Sun has been obscured are essential to the
life of the Eastern world. Thus hope returns and
despair is changed to joy as, from a point still higher in
the heavens than that at which he had disappeared, he
shines out with new and greater effulgence. His rising
is followed by his final triumph and continued ascent
towards the zenith, his kingdom of heaven, whence, in
the heat and fruitfulness of summer, he sends down
sustenance and comfort for men. But during the
equinoctial period of the Sun’s rising and ascension he is
in the constellation of the lamb, as Aries used to be
called. This also is his time to pass over the equinoctial
line from the southern to the northern tropic. How
does the orb of day begin to attain his full powers.
Thus in the Apocalypse we find the Lamb adored in the
presence of the throne by four living creatures, the
cardinal constellations of the heavens, corresponding


with the four archangels—viz., Gabriel, Michael, Uriel,
and Raphael—and representing the four seasons of the
year; and twenty-four elders, who fall down before him
crying “Worthy is the Lamb,” &c., representing the
twenty-four hours which constitute the solar day, the
twelve apostles representing the number of months of
the year. The constellation Virgo (the virgin) represents
the ideal woman—the Divine mother. Osiris, Mithra,
Bacchus, Chrishna, and Christ are all represented as
having been born at midnight, between Christmas Eve
and Christmas Day, in a cave or stable. At this
moment the constellation Virgo is cut exactly in half by
the eastern horizon, the Sun itself being beneath the
Earth, in the sign of Capricorn, or stable of Augeas, the
cleansing of which constituted one of the labours of
Hercules, who also represented the Sun. Justin Martyr
boasts that Christ was born when the Sun takes its
birth in the stable of Augeas, coming as a second Her-
cules to cleanse a foul world. The Church celebrates
the assumption of the Virgin on 15th August, which is
exactly the time of the disappearance of the zodiacal
constellation Virgo. Bth September, the date at which
Virgo emerges from the Sun’s rays so as to be distinctly
seen, is the day appointed for the observance of the
nativity of the Virgin Mary. The Sun in his descent or
passage across the equator is always represented as
crucified between the two evil months of November and
December. It is the constellation of the serpent, or
scorpion, that ushers in the winter, which afflicts the
earth five months, and whose tail draws a third part of
the stars of heaven. —{See Revelation xii.)
Not less susceptible of a solar interpretation are the
miracles ascribed to Christ. Thus the conversion of
water into wine represents the formation of the juice of
the grape out of the rains by the Sun’s action. The
production of food, as in the extraordinary draught of
fishes and the feeding of the five thousand, illustrates
the Sun’s fertilizing influence on land and water. In
the stilling of the tempest we have an example of the
dependence of the weather on the Sun. It is the Sun


that, by affording light, gives sight to the eye. He is
the universal healer of disease, able, by darting his
rays afar, to impart renewed vitality at a distance, as in
the cases of the nobleman’s son and the centurion’s ser-
vant. He it is that raises from the dead to new life the
body buried in the ground. While in the blasting of
the barren fig tree we see the blighting effect of the
Sun’s heat on a feeble and rootless vegetation. The
learned Spaniard, Alphonso the Great, truly stated that
“ the adventures of Jesus are all depicted in the constel-
lations.”
The Persian magicians—from whose philosophy the
Jews in their captivity learned, and after their release
collated, their legends—accounted for the introduction
of evil into the world by a fable of a serpent tempting
the first woman to pluck a forbidden apple. This act, as
the apple ripens late in autumn, was of course followed
by the prevalence of winter, with darkness and cold—
the kingdom of the Evil principle—and necessitated the
adoption of clothing. The mischief thus brought about
could only be remedied by the agency of the Sun, whom
they identified with the principle of Good. Hence they
supposed the incarnation of the Sun in the person of
Mithra. This Mithra was set forth as born of a virgin
in a cave, at the winter solstice, and as accompanied by
a retinue of twelve persons or apostles, who represented
the twelve months of the year. Having vanquished the
prince of darkness, who, under the guise of a serpent,
had seduced the woman, and having lost his life in the
contest, Mithra descended into hell —or under side of the
Earth—and at the spring equinox rose again and as-
cended into heaven, opening to man the gates of light,
and redeeming him from the oppression of the Evil One,
viz., Winter. Mithra was represented as born of a
virgin because the constellation Virgo was on the hori-
zon at the time of the Sun’s birth. And because the
Sun was at that time in the sign of Aries—then known
as the ram —at the vernal equinox, which governs the
year, Mithra was called the lamb of God, and the lamb
that takes away the evils of the world. The serpent


that causes all the mischief by bringing in the winter is
Scorpio, the constellation of the later Autumn. The
religion founded in honour of Mithra was provided with
the sacraments of baptism, penance, the eucharist, conse-
cration, and others. Its novices were subjected to a
severely ascetic regime. Chastity and virginity were
accounted sacred ; and it contained the doctrines of the
Fall, the Incarnation, the Atonement, and the Resur-
rection.
Passing to Egypt we find the Sun-God Osiris, a mem-
ber of a triune Godhead (evidently borrowed from the
older Hindoo conception of the Trimurti), coming upon
earth for the benefit of mankind, and gifted with the
titles of Manifestor of God and Revealer of Truth. Born
on the 25th of December, of a divine virgin, he was per-
secuted and put to death by the malevolence of the Evil
One—-namely. Winter, or darkness. He was buried and
rose again, and returning to heaven became the judge of
all men. Such was the man-God of the Egyptians, whose
worship pervaded the country that gave tone and colour,
if not actual birth, to the Gospels.*
Hercules, Bacchus, Apollo, Adonis, and many others
are also represented as deities who condescended to man’s
estate to redeem mankind from evil. The coincidences
in the histories of these numerous Sun-gods with that
related of Jesus are clear evidence that “ the same com-
pulsion which dominated the expression of the pagan
faiths controlled also the Christian.”
Chrishna, for instance, is said to have as a child
astonished his teachers by his profound wisdom. He was
called “ Heri,” which in Sanscrit means shepherd. He
had a forerunner called “Rama,” and a favourite disciple
named “ Arjuna.” He repaired to the river Ganges for
ablution or baptism, and retired to a desert for medita-
tion and prayer. He washed the feet of the Brahmins
in order to show deep humility. He healed lepers, raised
the dead, and taught inspirational truths. On one occa-
* Note.—l have taken the liberty of adopting, in a great
measure, the phraseology of Mr. Edward Maitland on this subject.
See his “ Keys of the Creeds.”


sion, as he entered the town of Mathura, the people
strewed his path with branches of cocoanut trees, and at
another time he had a box of ointment poured over his
head by a woman whom he had cured of an ailment,
and to whom he is reported to have said—“ Woman, I
accept your sacrifice ; the little which is given by the
heart is of more worth than all the riches offered throuo-li
ostentation.” Chrishna proscribed revenge, inculcated
the returning of good for evil, and taught the people
love of each other, self-respect, the practise of good for
its own sake, and faith in the inexhaustible goodness of
God. He denounced tyranny, sympathized with the
feeble, and consoled the unhappy and oppressed. He
lived poor and loved the poor, declaring that they were
the chosen of God. He lived chaste, and inculcated
chastity as being a reasonable sacrifice on the part of all
men. He came, he said, not to found a new religion, but
to purify the old from all the impurities which the per-
verseness of man had, during many ages, gradually in-
troduced, and to preach to the people a higher and truer
conception of God and of man’s destiny. Christmas
followers believed him to be God, and, according to the
testimony of Hadrian, millions worshipped him as such
in the time of Alexander the Great, or 350 years before
the Christian era; consequently it is little to be
wondered at that Christian writers, both ancient and
modern, admit that the doctrines of Christianity were
known to the pagans before the birth of Jesus.
The history of Jesus, between his birth and his death
(as recorded in the New Testament) is merely an
improved allegorical representation of the Sun in his
relative position to the stars and the planets in their
annual journey. The case is stated very plainly in the
following lines :
‘ ‘ Remember, then, in olden times, as we have said before,
The Sun was recognized as God in all religious lore ;
And often God did mean the Sun of but a season’s reign,
As that of Winter or of Spring—this fact is clear and plain.
At other times a single month was set apart as one
To represent a new-born God —a certain course to run.


Now, let us take the Sun of June, about the twenty-fourth,
When from the brightest point he went descending from the north.
Just one degree then he declines, and thus till Christmas morn
He shortens each succeeding day until the Christ is born.
For then the new-born Christ, the Sun, was risen into view,
And John the Baptist had decreased, his mission being through,
But Christ, the new-born Sun, still reigned, and marching on his
way,
Did verify the words of John, and increased every day.
Dear Christian brother, thus your Christ, together with your creed,
I’ve proved are but a Pagan vine—a growth from Pagan seed;
And though to you Christ is the God, or God-begotten one,
He is the same old Pagan youth, the bright-eyed God-—the Sun.
For Jesus is a triune name, and anciently stood thus :
The letter J supplanted I and then the es and us.
Now all of these in Pagan tongue a single word design,
Which when combined a trio make denoting one Divine.
The letter I but signified the self-existing one,
And every well-trained Pagan knows that one to be the Sun.
The es and us, two mystic words, denoting light and fire,
Descending from the source of life —the Sun —the holy sire,
Who seated high among the stars, clad in his raiment bright,
Is called ‘The Lord,’ ‘The Great I Am,’ or ‘Jacob’s Star,’
‘ The Light,’
Since light and heat proceed from Brahm, the Pagan God —the
Sun,
’Tis plain you see how Christ—the Lord—is three and yet but one;
Behold him rise at early mom —at midday uppermost,
Then down at eve, and thus we have God, Son, and Holy Ghost.
These three positions of the Sun by Nature’s wise decree,
Together form that mystic one, the same mysterious three.
The virgin mother of these Gods, who dwells away from Earth,
Is Virgo, who, it seems, each year conceives—to God gives birth.
And now, since Christ, the Christian’s God, is of the Pagan line,
’Tis easy, hence, to see that he was not a God Divine.”
Thus it will be perceived that the Catholics, in pray-
ing to “ the Holy Virgin ” are in reality praying to the
constellation Virgo, and the Protestants in worshipping
“ the man Christ Jesus ” are unwittingly paying adora-
tion to the midday Sun. In the words of the bright
spirit that is said to have appeared to John on the
Island of Patmos, let me say to both —“ See thou do it
not . . . worship God.”
Did you ever consider that if the Bible was, as claimed
for it, Divinely inspired, it is only reasonable to suppose


that it would have been Divinely preserved ? Instead
of this being the case, “ there does not exist in the world
a single manuscript of any portion of the Old or New
Testament which is an original autograph.” Theologians
admit that none of the copies extant of the New Testa-
ment were written prior to the fourth century, and not
two of them agree.
It is worthy of note that a Greek monk named Simon-
ides confessed that the celebrated MS., the Codex
Sinaiticus (discovered in 1859 by Tischendorf in a con-
vent on Mount Sinai, and supposed by him to have been
written in the fourth century), was written by his hand
at Mount Athos only a few years previously. For all
we know, the Codex Vaticanus and the Codex Alexan-
drinus, which, with this Codex Sinaiticus, are considered
the three most ancient manuscripts of the Bible extant,
may have had a like origin. And as to deceive and lie
for the sake of piety and religion, on the ground that
the end justified the means, was regarded, not as a
crime, but as a virtue by the Romish priests, we are
justified, I maintain, in looking upon all ancient MSS.
referring to Christianity with very grave suspicion.
The copies of the Gospels which we possess are not
written in Syriac (the language spoken in apostolic
times) but in Greek, and do not profess to be the Gospels
of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, but are said to be
merely the Gospels according to these men. We have
nothing to prove that there ever existed originals of
these Gospels, but there is strong presumptive evidence
that such originals never did exist, for had they done so
the early Christians would certainly have referred to
them in their disputes with heretics.
That the writers of the four Gospels were unac-
quainted with the country about which they wrote we
have evidence in the Gospels themselves. For instance,
Nazareth, which was a town in Galilee, is represented as
not being in that division of Palestine. Bethlehem,
which was an inland town, is represented as having
coasts. In like manner Decapods, which was an inland
district, and which, according to Professor Upham, was


not known before the time of Nero, who did not begin
to reign before A.d. 54, is also represented as having
coasts. We have also evidence in the Gospels themselves
that they were not written for many years after the
events they refer to are supposed to have occurred. For
example, after the tale about the bribing of the Roman
soldiers (who are said to have guarded the tomb of the
crucified Jesus) to say that they slept whilst his body
was removed, it is stated, “ This saying is commonly re-
ported among the Jews until this day,” evidently indi-
cating that a considerable period had elapsed between
the occurrence of the events referred to and the date of
writing regarding them. This story is of itself sufficient
to prove the falsity of the whole affair, for it is as
reasonable to believe that a British officer would order a
company of English soldiers to watch the grave of a
murdered Maori, as for a Roman guard to have been
told off for such a purpose at the request of a few
superstitious Jews ; besides which, for a Roman soldier
to have confessed that he slept when on guard would
have been, according to Roman law, instant death,
therefore no bribe would have induced them to make
such an admission.
When the irreconcilable differences that exist in the
various books which constitute the New Testament are
unbiassedly considered, its utter unreliability is evident.
The accounts of the life of Jesus in the three Synoptical
Gospels vary greatly in many points, whilst the Jesus of
the Gospel said to be written according to John is of a
different character altogether. The latter Gospel is
strikingly marked throughout by elegance of language
and with Platonic ideas of which the others are devoid.
The Rev. Canon Westcott, in his “ Introduction to
Study of the Gospels,” p. 249, admits that “ it is impos-
sible to pass from the Synoptic Gospels to that of St.
John without feeling that the transition involves the
passage from one world of thought to another
Nothing can destroy the contrast which exists in form
and spirit between the earlier and later narratives. The
difference between the Fourth Gospel and the Synoptics,


not only as regards the teaching of Jesus, but also the
facts of the narrative, is so great that it is impossible to
harmonize them. . . . Both cannot be accepted as
correct. If we believe that the Synoptics give a truthful
representation of the life and teaching of Jesus, it follows
of necessity that in whatever category we . . , place
the Fourth Gospel it must be rejected as a historical
work.”
Another writer acknowledges that “the Fourth Gospel,
by whomsoever written, was never written by a Jew, not
even a native of Palestine, the numerous geographical
and topographical mistakes and blunders in names and
explanations given precluding entirely such possibility;
that the gospel could have never been written before the
end of the second century, i.e., the date assigned to
Ir emeus; and that it was most probably written at the
command of that personage.”
It is a fact worthy of note that in Matthew and Luke
two different genealogies of Jesus are given; in both
of these his descent from King David is traced through
Joseph, but through different sons of Solomon, and one
has a great many more generations than the other.
Curiously enough, however, after all this trouble to prove
that Jesus was descended from David, we are seriously
informed that he had no earthly father at all, and that
he was the maker of all things, consequently, he must
have been not only the maker of his own mother, but
also of that evil spirit who is said to have taken him
up to the top of an exceedingly high mountain, from
which one could see right round the globe, and all
nations thereon. Certainly if the Bible is divinely
inspired, “ God works in a mysterious way.” Truly
might Tertullian exclaim, “ I believe that which is
impossible.”
Even if the Gospel accounts were true regarding “the
man Christ Jesus,” “a prophet mighty in word and
deed,” he did not, I maintain, claim to be God. On the
contrary, he is therein reported to have reproved a young
man for even addressing him as “ good master,” saying,
“ There is none good but one, that is God.” If it is true


that he said, “ I go to my Father and to your Father, to
my God and to your God;” and that he exclaimed in the
agonies of death, “My God ! my God ! why hast Thou
forsaken me ?” he could not have claimed to be Deity.
I may parenthetically remark that although it is
generally taught that Jesus is God, there is no such
assertion in the Gospels; the clergy of the various
churches are therefore responsible for thus bringing the
Almighty down to an equality with man, and changing
the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made
like to corruptible man. I may add that the former
great stronghold of Trinitarians in 1 John v. 7, viz.,
“ For there are three that bear record in heaven, the
Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three
are one,” is now admitted to be an impudent interpola-
tion—a lie inserted by some pious hand for the purpose
of supporting a holy falsehood—consequently it is
omitted in the revised edition of the New Testament;
so that already this portion of the book is acknowledged
to be a pious forgery, as in time the remainder will also
assuredly be.
I think it was Sir Isaac Newton who declared that
“ the Incarnation of God is not less absurd than the
Impanation of God, or God in a piece of bread.” And
Evanson maintained that “ a virgin daughter producing
her Father, and a creature giving birth to her Creator, is
a blasphemous impiety.” Jerome held that “ those who
confess the Trinity must bid farewell to science.” The
doctrine of the Trinity, I may observe, was an open
question with the Church until the fourth century,
when Athanasius unfortunately carried the day against
the earnest protest of Arius. This may be taken as an
illustration of how Christianity has developed.
If it is true that Jesus said, “ Thy will, not mine, be
done,” he could not reasonably have said “ The Father
and I are one.” If it is true that he said “ The son can
do nothing of himself,” also “ Of that day and that hour
knoweth no man, no, not the angels which are in
heaven, neither the son, but the Father,” he could not,
as represented, have “ considered it not robbery to be


equal with God.” If it is true that he declared himself
to he “ the son of man,” he could not surely have been
the son of a ghost, holy or otherwise. If it is true that
he said “ Our Father which art in heaven,” and further,
if he is “ our elder brother,” then he certainly could not
be God, for if so, we would be brothers and sisters to the
Infinite, instead of being His finite children, as we are.
Again, if it is true that he “ walked not more in Galilee,
for fear of the Jews,” and that he prayed three times
that the cup might pass from him, he did not, as asserted,
offer himself voluntarily as a sacrifice for mankind.
Did it ever occur to you that if the crucifixion of
Jesus was necessary for the redemption of man from sin,
why a beneficent Deity should have delayed it for so
many thousands of years after Adam is said to have
fallen from being a perfect saint to an outcast sinner ?
And if by no other name than that of Jesus Christ can
men be saved, what gross injustice this would be to the
millions who have never heard of such an individual ?
This vicarious-sacrifice doctrine or atonement through
the physical death of “ the man Christ Jesus ” is cer-
tainly of heathen or pagan origin, for in the Hebrew
Scriptures human sacrifice is strictly forbidden, and only
the sacrifice of a few specified kinds of the lower animals
was required to be offered by the priests to their god
Jehovah, who is represented as at one time delighting in
the sweet-smelling savour of roasted flesh, and at other
times as abhorring their bloody sacrifices—a contrite
heart being more acceptable to him,
I may here observe that outside the New Testament
statements we possess no reliable evidence that such a
character as the historical Jesus of the Gospels ever
lived. As this assertion may be called in question, I
may remark that the public archives were in possession
of the Romish priests for centuries before they were
destroyed, and all papers that had reference to any such
person as they made out Jesus to be, would certainly
have been preserved by them for the purpose of sup-
porting their cause; also, that for upwards of a thousand
years all records concerning the Christian religion were


in the hands of the Romish priests, who, history informs
us, caused all manuscripts which were antagonistic to
their views and interests to he consigned to the flames.
Among these, I may mention, were the works of Celsus,
Porphyry, and Julian. We are also informed by history
that the Fathers of the Church (as the earlier priests are
termed), altered, interpolated, and even forged manu-
scripts in order to give to their cause the semblance of
truth. The eminent Christian historian Mosheim
frankly admits that during the two first centuries
forged histories of the life and doctrines of Jesus were
palmed upon the world ; that these histories were full
of pious frauds and fabulous wonders; that they were
composed by men whose intentions, perhaps, were not
bad, but whose writings discovered the greatest super-
stition and ignorance.” And he adds, “ Nor was this all
—productions appeared which were imposed upon the
world by fraudulent men as the writings of the holy
Apostles. ... Thus they who wished to surpass
all others in piety deemed it a pious act to employ decep-
tion and fraud in support of piety.” With such admis-
sions as these by one of their own cloth, and bearing in
mind that all the Christian records were in the hands of
such lying and unscrupulous men for more than a
thousand years, I maintain that we are justified in con-
cluding that all the boasted writings in support of the
churches’ claims are simply priestly forgeries. I also
maintain that the ingenuity manifested by the un-
scrupulous Fathers of the Church to verify the fictions
of their creed was in keeping with the bitterness they
manifested towards philosophy, and with their persistent
efforts to rule or ruin all who dared to oppose them in
their audacious policy to attain supreme power through
appeals to the superstitious nature of man. As has been
truly remarked—“ The historical life of Jesus bears the
same relationship to the individual on whom it was based
as does the story of Robinson Crusoe, in De Foe’s cele-
brated romance, to the adventures of Alexander Selkirk.”
In other words, fantastic decorations have been added to
what was simply a benevolent and self-sacrificing life,


which, instead of being adorned by these tawdry embel-
lishments, has been grossly disfigured and travestied
thereby.
To prove the unreliability of the Church’s evidences,
let us take for example the passage in Josephus about
Jesus who was the Christ, and about the sect of
Christians so named from him, which was evidently
written to support the Gospel accounts of him. Dr. Adam
Clarke, the great Bible commentator, and all other candid
scholars of any note, acknowledge this to be an inter-
polation, or inserted lie. And as it is admitted that this
passage was not referred to before the tenth century by
any writer, we are therefore justified in concluding that
previous to that date it had no existence in the writings
of Josephus.
To my mind this quotation bears the impress of false-
hood on its very face; for, let me ask, is it likely that
Josephus, who lived and died a Jew, would have" made
such a statement, which would have been tantamount to
his acknowledging that he was a barefaced hypocrite-
viz., a Jew by profession and a Christian by belief? It
is also in direct contradiction to his statement that in his
day the Jews were divided, not into four, but into three
sects —viz., the Sadducees, the Pharisees, and the Essenes.
And further, had such a character as the historical Jesus
lived in Josephus’s day, we may rest assured that he
would not have written such a short paragraph about so
important a matter when he devoted whole chapters to
things of much less note.
Time will prevent my going into detail about the
quotations in Tacitus, in Suetonius, and in Pliny the
younger, but we may be assured that they are of a
similar character to that in Josephus. I may here
remark that the passages in Tacitus about the Emperor
Nero having set fire to his own city, about his having
persecuted the Christians for the burning thereof, and
about the founder of the Christian sect having been put
to death as a criminal under Pontius Pilate, are evidently
cunning forgeries, for the following reasons :—-
Were it true that Nero in this instance acted in the


manner stated, he must have been a compound of virtue
and vice, of wisdom and imbecility. Then as to the
asserted public crucifixion of Jesus, the Jews, it must be
borne in mind, were under subjection to the Romans at
the time, and by the Roman law the death penalty was
never inflicted for blasphemy. Had such an accusation
been made by the Jews against Jesus or anyone else, the
Romans would certainly have laughed them to scorn,
and if the charge of treason had been made against him
he would have been entitled by the Roman law to a
fair trial before the governor, who, however, had no
authority to pass sentence of death for •such an offence.
This was reserved to the Emperor, before whom, on
appeal, those found guilty were entitled to appear. In
all cases when Jewish laws conflicted with those of
Rome they were, as a matter of course, annulled. I
may further add that there is no valid proof that the
Roman Empire instituted, or even tolerated, violence
against any nation because of its religious belief, much
less concerned itself about the private opinions of indi-
viduals or sects. On the contrary, it was the policy of
Rome to acknowledge all gods as sacred, and it was only
when the principle was violated, or when the worship of
the gods was interfered with, that the authority of the
Empire was put in force. It is, in fact, the height of
folly to suppose that the vast Empire of Rome, in which
religious toleration was granted to all sects and indi-
viduals of which it was composed, should single out for
persecution the humble Jesus or his followers, or seek to
enforce the doctrines of the Jews, or of any other
religion, upon them. Is it not more probable, from the
admissions of Mosheim and others, that these tales were
concocted by unscrupulous writers of a subsequent period,
who, to perpetuate their priestly power over the people,
fabricated a new religion, and sought to substantiate its
claims by mutilations of the- records, and wholesale defa-
mation of the character of men who lived before their
religion had an existence, and who consequently never
heard of their religious ideas ?
The learned author of “ Primitive Church History ”


states :—“ One thing is certain—namely, that outside the
Church there does not appear to be any trace of the
Christians prior to the persecution of them, a.d, 249,
ordered by Decius.” And Judge Strange writes:—“The
Jewish historians (as I have endeavoured to show) by
their silence exclude the possibility of the Christian move-
ment having taken effect in the first century of the asserted
Christian era; and the testimony of the reputed Christian
authors must be considered, from a historical point of
view, as an absolute blank to the reign of Cornmodus,
or for a hundred and fifty years from the asserted death
of Christ.” Another writer remarks:—“ Christianity had
no existence under that name for over two centuries after
the ascribed date of its inception. It was purposely
made obscure in the records during the first three
centuries; and it emerged from its obscurity in such
varied guises that it was hardly recognizable as an
organization in different parts of the Roman Empire until
the time of Constantine the Great.”
The assertion that Pontius Pilate transmitted to
Tiberius, the Roman emperor, a memorial regarding the
actions and death of Jesus is simply a cunning fabrication,
for had such a memorial existed it would most certainly
have been preserved, and would have been quoted by the
early Church Fathers as proof of his career in their dis-
putations with those heretics who denied that such an
individual as Jesus ever existed except as a phantom.
I am aware that to those who, like Paul, are determined
not to know anything “ save Jesus Christ and Him
crucified,” whether true or false, these arguments will
have little weight, but it is otherwise with all who prefer
truth to fiction.
As to the letter by Pliny to Trajan and Trajan’s reply,
these are evidently spurious writings, for, as far as we
possess any evidence, it was not the custom of Roman
governors to write such letters to their emperors.
Then as to the accounts given of Vespasian, Titus,
Domitian, Clement, Polycarp, Justin Martyr, Papius,
Irenseus, Tertullian, &c., in connection with the Christian
religion, the finding of the holy cross and sepulchre by


Helena, the mother of Constantine, and the localities of
the asserted sacred places at Jerusalem, these were evi-
dently all fabrications by the priests for the purpose of
supporting their falsities and of giving an appearance of
reliability to their fraudulent statements.
These fabrications were similar to one referred to by
Lecky, who writes :• —“ St. Augustine mentions that in
his time (the fifth century), there was no authentic
portrait of Christ, and that the type of features was still
undetermined, so that we have absolutely no knowledge
of his appearance. . . . The type, however, was
soon afterwards found.” I may add “ this was done
that it might be fulfilled what was spoken by the
priests,” &c.
Let us now turn our attention to the Biblical state-
ments regarding Jesus. The prophecies said to apply to
him are found, when unprejudicially examined, to bear
no reference to him, and in this I am corroborated by the
Jews, who should certainly be the best interpreters of
their own Scriptures, The miracles ascribed to Jesus,
and which are supposed to bear evidence of his divinity,
are far surpassed by those recorded as having been per-
formed by some of the old Testament celebrities. Take
for example the exceeding great army of skeletons, or dry
bones, that through the prophet Ezekiel were raised to
life again, which puts the story of Lazarus’s resurrection
completely into the shade. (See Ezekiel xxxvii. 1-10.)
The stopping the course of the sun, or, more correctly, of
the diurnal revolution of the earth by Joshua, far excels
the staying of the tempest by Jesus, for the latter might
have been a mere coincidence, whereas the former could
not be so, as such an occurrence is unprecedented and
would have been a truly marvellous feat, for it would
have disorganized the whole order of Nature.
The fable of the miraculous conception of Mary was
only one of numerous current similar tales that were
believed in by the ignorant in these superstitious times.
No intelligent Jew, however, would then have accepted
as a truth any more than he would now, the idea of a
virgin-born Son of God, and so absurd a fiction as this


(which is on a par with that of Jupiter and Danae), can
only be believed in by people whose judgments have been
warped before they were able to exercise their reasoning
faculties. And this fiction could only have retained its
sway over educated minds from its having been cunningly
interwoven with the purest code of morals, with a few
exceptions, that has ever been presented to the world.
Not that any moral teachings in the New Testament had
not been inculcated previously in the various religious
systems, but that the brightest gems of truth were
selected therefrom and embodied in the so-called Christian
Scriptures. Buckle writes : —“ That the system of morals
professed by the New Testament contained no maxim
which had not been previously enunciated, and that
some of the most beautiful passages therein are quotations
from Pagan authors, is well known to every scholar ; but
to assert that Christianity communicated to man moral
truth previously unknown argues on the part of the
asserter either gross ignorance or else wilful fraud.” I
may mention that in Acts there is a quotation from the
Grecian poet Aratus. In Titus there is one from
Epimenides, and in Corinthians one from the Thais of
Menander. Such facts speak for themselves.
As to the story of the massacre by Herod of all the
children under a certain age, all history outside the
Gospels is silent regarding it, therefore we are justified
in concluding that this is but a plagiarism from the life
of the Hindoo Lord and Saviour, Chrishna Jezeus, who
lived many centuries before the Christian era commenced,
in which a similar tale is recorded, and of which there is
a very ancient representation cut in the rock at the Cave
of Elephanta in Hindostan.
Having already disposed of the trial and crucifixion of
Jesus by Pontius Pilate, I shall pass on to his so-called
resurrection. Here again we have only the Gospel
accounts to rely upon, and as not two of these agree upon
the leading incidents connected therewith, we may with
confidence discard them as totally unreliable.
To sum up what I have said, Christianity is evidently
but a new form of religious expression fabricated by the


priests of the Roman Empire, during the two first
centuries, out of the truths as well as the myths of
antiquity, with which they cunningly interwove
doctrines to suit their own purposes. It is, in fact,
reformed Paganism, and was promulgated as a new
revelation, in which Jesus was represented as the new
Sun-God revealed in the flesh, in whom was combined
the whole catalogue of virtues as the earthly representa-
tive of divine power, all the essential ideas of the old
religions being preserved in allegories in the new. Thus
the Christian religion supplanted ancient Greek and
Roman Paganism in the home of its nativity, which was
not Judea, as is generally but erroneously supposed.
This accounts for the Gospels having been written in
Greek instead of in the language of the men according
to whom they were ingeniously ascribed. I may add
that between the priesthood of the various nations there
existed a secret method of intercourse, the esoteric
meaning of their different scriptures being similar, there-
fore the worship of their various gods was the same in
its nature; consequently it was an easy matter for the
priests of those days to combine the legends of the
numerous Pagan gods in their new Judean Apollo, and
under his name unite the religious worship of all sects.
That the Church Fathers studied Grecian philosophy
we have the authority of Clement, who declared that
philosophic culture was necessary in order to develop
Christianity in a scientific form. (See Neander’s “History
of Dogmas,” page 63.)
All unprejudiced students of Greek and Hebrew
mythology must admit that the birth, life, and death of
Jesus, as represented in the Gospels, are more in accord-
ance with Grecian ideas than with Judaism,
That Christianity was an evolution, and not, as is
claimed for it, a revelation, is evident to all who are not
afraid to use their reason, and he who believes that the
Supreme Power (who is the same yesterday, to-day, and
for ever) hath spoken by the mouth of priest or prophet,
in any age of the world, is simply a victim of superstition
and of false ideas. He, also, who feareth that divine


vengeance will abide on him if he refuses obedience to a
church, priest, or hook, hath not yet found that liberty
which inherently belongs to every soul as a divine
birthright.
That there is a gigantic error at the base of their faith
anyone who will unhiassedly examine the matter will
soon discover. This error is the greatest misfortune
that has befallen Christendom, for it has caused religious
stagnation; consequently it has been the chief hindrance
to spiritual enlightenment. “ The story of the Cross ”
may be very affecting, and “ faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ ” may have a very attractive sound in the ears of
those who from infancy have been accustomed to
associate it with everything that is good and holy, but
if these are not in accord with truth, of what benefit,
let me ask, are they ? Let us rather, as rational and
accountable beings, listen to the voice of God within us,
and repose full confidence in His infinite love, justice,
and mercy. Therefore,
Trust not in faith or foolish creeds,
Blood ne’er will whitewash wicked deeds;
But let your actions always be
Those which from sin will make you free.
Christianity and religion are popularly but erroneously
viewed as synonymous terms; the one is a belief, the
other a life—the one is a delusion, the other a reality.
“ Truth is immortal, and shall live;
Error is mortal, and shall die.”
The influx of light in our day has already begun to
sound the death-knell of mental bondage to superstition,
and the exercise of priestly authority over the intellect
and conscience. Ere long our Christian brethren of
all sects and denominations, instead of worshipping an
ideal embodiment of goodness (however exalted) and
trusting to any creed or in any form of worship to
ensure future blessedness, will join with us in seeking
knowledge and truth, from whatever source derivable,
and will follow them wheresoever they lead, giving of


their store plenteously to their less fortunate brethren,
for in this way alone can we serve God and secure
happiness here and hereafter. Yea, the time is approach-
ing when men will not, in their devotion to their anthro-
pomorphic God, forget their duties to each other, as,
unfortunately, is still too commonly done. Then all
creedal bonds shall be dissolved, and man thereby be
enabled to rise to a higher conception of God, who is
infinite love, and to a better knowledge of life and of the
glorious destiny which eventually awaits ever}' human
soul. May the day soon arrive
‘ ‘ When all shall bend a willing ear
To doctrines new and still untried,
And pause awhile ere they condemn
Those holy truths as yet decried.”
Note. —What will coming generations think of us when they
read that up to the close of the nineteenth century, when we had
made the sun our portrait painter, electricity our postman and
lamplighter, and steam our galley-slave, that the generality of
people, who were sane enough on every other subject, still believed
in the divine authority of a book in which the most absurd and
God-dishonouring fables are set forth ? Assuredly they will say,
“The height,of folly could have gone no further.” As a writer
truly observes—“ That which is nonsense on a principle of reason
cannot be sense on a principle of religion.”


CONCLUDING REMARKS BY THE AUTHOR.
In this age of inductive reasoning, who that is worthy
of being called a rational being can really and honestly
believe that God, who is infinitely just, cursed all
mankind yet unborn with an eternal curse because
Adam and Eve ate a fruit ? That He who is infinitely
good has prepared a place of everlasting torment for the
great majority of His children ? That He who is
infinitely wise devised such an irrational scheme for the
redemption of humanity, in which He required one of
His noblest sons to suffer an ignominious death—the
innocent for the guilty, as if two wrongs could make one
right ? Is it not palpable to the meanest intellect that if
God would but could not forgive transgressors without
the shedding of blood, He cannot be omnipotent; and if
He could and would not, He cannot be good ? I shall
leave upholders of the popular faith to select which
horn of the dilemma they will choose.
It may be asked by some who read this—Are we not
told in the Bible that there can be no remission of sin
without the shedding of blood ? To which I reply, the
statements contained in ten thousand Bibles cannot
cause a lie to be a truth, or a wrong to be a right, and
any book or institution which represents God as less
than infinitely wise, just, and merciful cannot be true or
worthy of our acceptance, however much they may
be revered by the masses for their antiquity. The
numerous contradictory and God-dishonouring passages
contained in the Bible prove that if these were inspired
they must have been inspired by different minds
occupying varying stages of intellectual development,
and not by one and the same mind, Divine or otherwise.
Were the Bible the Word of God, as it has been branded


by priestcraft from interested motives, it would be free
from contradictions, and harmonious in all its parts.
That this is not the case we have irrefutable evidence in
the innumerable sects and denominations in our midst,
at variance with each other, yet all these base their
divergent beliefs on this one book, in which God is
represented as an unjust and~ vindictive Deity seated on
a great white throne situated somewhere above the sky,
and frowning in anger on all who in religious matters
make use of their divine faculty of reason. Surely, if
the Almighty is truly wise and good, He cannot be
wrathful with those who, in the face of popular opinion,
have the nobility of soul to openly reject and denounce
the blasphemous accusations brought against Him both
in the Bible and in the Churches.
“ Can mortal man be more just than God ? ” was asked
many centuries ago, and it is a question as applicable
and as sensible to-day as then. It must be palpable to
all who place truth before time-honoured falsities that
if God is good the Bible cannot be true in all its parts,
and that if the Bible is true God cannot be good. Think
for one moment of a God of Love sending Moses to ask
Pharaoh to allow the Children of Israel to depart, and at
the same time hardening Pharoah’s heart that he should
not let them go ; or of a wise God endowing man with
the sense of right and wrong, and afterwards punishing
him everlastingly and vindictively for applying that
sense in forming a judgment on that which concerns his
eternal welfare; and surely if the returning of evil for
evil is wrong on the part of frail humanity it must be
infinitely more so on the part of a Divine being.
If you can for a few minutes free yourself from
prejudice and pious credulity, let me ask you to consider
what a solemn farce is what is termed “ divine service,”
with its selfish prayers, its God-dishonouring creeds, its
monotonous sermons on old Hebrew and Greek fables,
and its drawling anthems, whether accompanied by pious
organ-grinding or otherwise, full of fulsome praise to a
God of infinite wisdom ? Can you, in your sober senses,
really believe that the all-wise Deity is less rational than


man His creature, and that He can be pleased with such
solemn mummery ? To all who have risen above such
degrading conceptions of the Almighty, divine service in
churches made with hands is merely heathen temple-
worship modernized, with Jehovah substituted for Osiris,
Mary for Isis, and Jesus for Horus. The popular faith
is based on a ghost story, which, if related as occurring
in our day, no one would be justified in believing, and
which is on a par with the fable of Leda and the swan.
What, let me ask, have belief in superstitious legends,
irrational dogmas and inexplicable creeds, and the
observance of priestly ceremonies to do with good
actions ? There are good men and women in the world
who make no profession of faith, and there are good
people to be found in all religious sects. This proves
that religious beliefs have little or nothing to do with
true righteousness. As a rule our religious belief depends
solely on the circumstances of our birth, whereas our
actions are our own, and these form our characters, which
constitute our deathless individuality. True religion
consists of deeds not creeds, actions not professions; being
practical and soul-elevating, it is natural and universal.
From its having been too simple for priestcraft to thrive
upon, it has been adulterated with superstitious fables,
pagan ceremonies, and inexplicable creeds. The ever-
lasting Word of God is truth, and truth is that which
corresponds with eternal fact. As has been truly
observed, “ there can be no higher religion than truth.”
This divine religion existed before Bibles and temples
were thought of, and it will continue when these priestly
inventions, by which the few have been exalted over the
many, have been discarded through the irresistible
advance of human intelligence.*
1 am aware that the views herein expressed will be
more suitable for the twentieth century than they are
for the nineteenth, but, being based on reason, philosophy,
"What a different account would history have had to record
had the religion of good works prevailed in place of that of con-
flicting creeds, with its sectarian hatred and its inhuman cruelties,
all perpetrated in the holy name of God and religion.


and science, it will be only a matter of time before they
are universally adopted. I fortunately live in days
when knocking nails into people’s hands, or burning
them at the stake, have gone out of fashion, or I dare
not thus freely have expressed my religious opinions.
As it is, I challenge the whole world, both lay and clerical,
to refute them, and as in the glorious cause of truth I
give no quarter, I ask for none in return, believing as I
do that “ truth is its own best evidence, for its witness is
within.”
The following question may be asked;—•
“ If we, as you suggest, act as rational beings in regard
to religion as we do in everything else, and view it as
comprised in love to God, exemplified in kind and un-
selfish actions towards our fellow-men, what will our
priests and parsons do for an honest living ? ” I reply :
“ Pension them off as you would a dear old nurse who
had often frightened you in childhood by telling you of
the bogie-man up the chimney, and other blood-curdling
fables, conditionally that they will never again preach
about a wrathful God, a fiendish Devil, or an everlasting'
Hell as being divine verities,” bearing in mind that
‘ The priest continues what the nurse began,
And thus the child imposes on the man.”
Also,
‘ For forms of faith let graceless zealots fight,
He can’t be wrong whose life is in the right.”
Seeing the untenability of such God-dishonouring
conceptions of the Almighty Ruler of Universal Nature,
is it not high time that all should endeavour to
find out a religion more in accordance with the intelli-
gence of the age in which we live and with the divine
faculty of reason which God has implanted in us ?
And are we, as rational and responsible beings, merely
because from the circumstances of our birth we have
been taught to believe these irrational doctrines, justified
in adhering thereto, and neglecting to investigate a
rational and ennobling religion which rests on a
scientific basis; a religion which upholds the wisdom,


justice, and mercy of God, which holds out eternal
hope for all His erring children, proclaiming as it
does a progressive future state and a glorious destiny
for all eventually; a religion which those who, after
years of earnest study and research know its sublime
truth, and have found its knowledge a very present
help in time of need, truly robbing death of its sting
and the grave of its victory. Let all, therefore, who
have too long played the fool in regard to religion be up
and doing. Let them prove all things and hold fast
that which is good, relying with confidence on the
infinite love of God our Father.
True religion, as observed, is too simple for priestcraft
to thrive upon, therefore it has been ignored. It consists
of love to God, and the only way man can express that
love is by acts of kindness to his fellow beings. God
requires neither the praise of men nor of angels, for all
His works glorify Him. True religion rests on facts;
these facts disprove the foolish theories and traditions
of old theology, which are irreconcilable with reason
and science. In consequence of this, modern thought has
progressed beyond the popular faith.
‘ ‘ Theories which thousands cherish
Pass like clouds that sweep the sky ;
Creeds and dogmas all shall perish—
Truth itself can never die.”
THE UNIVERSAL SHRINE.
“ God dwelleth not in temples made with hands.”
Not in the church by thousands trod seek I and find Thee, oh !
my God—
Not where the swelling anthems rise, and lifted eyes salute the
skies;
Not where hired priests alone may dare to speak aloud and lead
the prayer,
And crowded congregations stand to talk with God at second hand,
For there come pious pomp and pride, fashion and vice stand side
by side,
The hypocrite with smiling face and the backsliding saint embrace ;


Dark hearts and sin-stained hands are there, souls dead to truth,
ears deaf to prayer,
Men who their brethren rob and cheat, and who the needy oft
illtreat,
Men who on gold their hopes have built, who talk of sin yet wink
at guilt,
Men who on sensual visions gloat while prayers and praises fill
their throat,
And there the preachers (richly feed) their empty declarations
read,
Set prayers pronounce, set forms go through, and talk the good
they ought to do.
Not there, my God—l come not there Thy presence and Thy love
to share,
Not there my spirit feels Thee near, not there Thy still small voice
I hear,
Not there my soul with love swells high, not there L learn to live
and die,
Not there the inward strength is given to conquer earth and enter
heaven,
But ’neath the broad o’erarching sky, in the free winds that
hurry by,
In the bright orbs that shine above, in all things that have life
and move,
In the deep sea’s resistless might, in the still watches of the night,
In songs of birds and laughing rills, in cultivated vales and wood-
crowned hills,
In all that meets my wondering eye, I feel, I own that Thou art
nigh;
No Saviour there I need; His child will not my Father heed?
Freely my spirit soars and glows, freely God’s love descending
flows,
Voiceless before His boundless throne I bend and pray in thought
alone,
For words are vain and speech is naught to Him who knows each
inmost thought—
Seraphs a fitting song might raise, but silence is man’s noblest
praise.


GOD IS LOVE.
By H. W. Woodhouse.
Who is the man that dares to say
God’s hell-fire burns eternally
And never shall be quenched ?
Oh, cruel monster, thus to preach—
The lessons that you ought to teach
Are peace and goodwill to man.
Oh, blind men led thus by the blind!
Cast such vile teachings to the wind,
And seek truth for yourselves.
Prove all things—then hold fast the good
Believe in God, as wise men should,
The God of Truth and Love.
All bad men’s hell themselves create ;
Our “ God is Love,” not priestly hate,
As these vile preachers tell.
Oh, who can think the God of love,
Who reigns in light and truth above,
Has made a fiendish hell.
There is no death, there is no fire,
E’en sin and wrong shall rise up higher,
Beyond this mortal sphere.
These priests would wrong e’en God Himself
For lust of power, and rule, and pelf,
Give to their tales no ear.
Is this religion given by God —
That He will always hold the rod
Over His children dear ?
We will not, cannot think that He
Would ever wish that you or me
This priestly hell should fear.
Then let them preach of endless hell
And demons like themselves—we tell
Of progress evermore ;
For spirit friends have ope’d the gate
Where every soul may, soon or late,
Beach heaven’s eternal shore.


NATUEE’S TEMPLE.
By Sheldon Chadwick.
There’s many a flower of beauteous bloom
In wilds by man untrod,
And many a truth can find no room
In temples raised to God ;
For true religion never needs
A temple built with hands,
No empty forms, no hollow creeds,
Its sacred shrine commands.
When tongues are tipped with fire divine
They kindle every heart;
It matters not where glows the shrine—
In field, or camp, or mart.
No priestly pomp or outward show
For spirit power we need,
To breathe sweet balm for human woe
And heal the hearts that bleed.
We’ve knelt too long in gorgeous aisles
Where Pharisees abound,
Forgetting that where Nature smiles
That spot is holy ground.
The painted light or organ’s peal
No true religion brings,
But when sincere in heart we kneel
Devotion mounts on wings.
Hurl every priestly fane to dust,
Eeligion cannot die ;
In heaven to hope, in God to trust,
Will raise the soul on high.
On earth there’s one cathedral known,
Whose roof in splendour towers—
’Tis where God rears His sapphire throne,
And speaks in stars and flowers !


WORKS BY H. JUNOR BROWNE.
The Holy Truth; or, The Coming Reformation. Octavo,
cloth, 7s. 6d,
The Grand Reality ; being the Experiences in Spirit Life of a
Celebrated Dramatist. Octavo, cloth, 7s. 6d.
Rational Christianity the Religion of Humanity. Crown Bvo,
cloth, 6s. ; paper, ss.
The Religion of the Future ; or, The Higher Law of Truth
and Right. Crown Bvo, cloth, 3s. ; paper, 2s.
The Conflict between Authority and Reason ; or, Artificial
and Natural Religion. Octavo, paper, 2s.
The Question Settled ; or, Religion versus Superstition. Oc-
tavo, paper, Is.
Atheism Philosophically Refuted. Octavo, paper, Is.
The Higher Branch of Science ; or, Materialism Refuted by
Facts. Crown, Bvo, paper, 6d.; with Addenda, Is.
Comfort for the Bereaved ; or, Where are our Loved Ones 2
Octavo, paper, 2s.
The above can be obtained through Messrs. George Robertson
and Co., Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide ; and Dr. William
Britten, The Lindens, Humphrey-street, Cheetham Hill, Man-
chester, England.


Bilbao
MELBOURNE
GEORGE ROBERTSON AND COMPANY
LITTLE FLINDERS STREET


■' ■
*


" TLhc XAnseen XAmperse,”
A NEW 50-PAGE MONTHLY MAGAZINE,
Devoted to
'ft
Spiritualism, Occultism, &c.,
Mmier tire Sole ©liarge ami ®omiuct of
MRS. EMMA HARDINGE BRITTEN,
Aided by Abie and Talented Contributors.
SUBSOEIPTION—6s. 6d. PEE ANNUM (Exclusive of Postage).
PUBLISHED BY
Dr. WILLIAM BRITTEN, Hiimphrey-st., Cheetham Hill, Manchester;
JOHN HEYWOOD, London and Manchester.
