

A REVIEW
OF
THE ERRORS AND FALLACIES
PUBLISHED BY
MR. GLADSTONE,
IN HIS
TWO Letters
ADDRESSED TO
THE EARL OF ABERDEEN,
ON
THE STATE PROSECUTIONS IN THE KINGDOM
OF THE TWO SICILIES.
tauslaW frnnt tjrc Stalifiu at UaplH,
STAMPERIA DEL FIB RENO, 1851.
Eontion:
PRINTED BY T. BRETTELL, RUPERT STREET, HAYMARKET.
1851.


" ERTURE, NESCIRE, DEOIPI ET MALUM ET TURPE DUCIMUS.”
Cic. PE OFF. 1. 1., C. C.


The warmth with which some of the Foreign
Journals have published, or, with malignant com-
placency, commented upon two letters of the
Honourable Mr. Gladstone, to the Earl of Aber-
deen, on the State prosecutions of the kingdom
of the Two Sicilies, has excited a just feeling of
anxiety to know whether the extraordinary facts
therein alleged have any foundation in truth
and reality, AVe are told of such and so many
woes with which the political convicts in the
Neapolitan countries are overwhelmed, so incre-
dibly exaggerated are their numbers, so arbitrary
have been the judicial proceedings adopted to-
wards, and so cruel the chastisements inflicted
upon them, that even such as are ignorant of the
internal organisation of the kingdom, and of the
mode of administering justice therein, cannot
easily bring themselves to give credit to the
statements which the writer above alluded to has
with so much levity, scattered abroad as so many


truths, or to the dark descriptions drawn by him
in his work.
But of the phenomenon implied in these
doubts, Mr. Gladstone himself, was not without
his presentiments at the time of publishing his
second letter: “ Men ought to he slow to believe
“ that such things can happen, and happen in a
“ Christian country , the seat of almost the oldest
“ European civilisation. They ought to he disposed
“ rather to set down my assertions to fanaticism or
“ folly on my part , than to believe them as an over
“ true tale of the actual proceedings of a settled
“ government
We ascribe them neither to fanaticism nor to
folly—The Honourable Mr. Gladstone bears too
distinguished a name as a Conservative Leader,
and a member of the English Parliament,
and his political principles are too well known,
to admit of the supposition that he could have
suddenly swerved from them, to become the echo
of lies and calumnious statements. Perhaps a
feeling of commisseration and pity towards those
whom justice has taken in hand in behalf of
society in jeopardy, has induced him to receive
with indulgence, everthing that may have been
suggested by some one of the unfortunate indivi-
duals in question, or by some compassionate
friend, and he urged by motives of humanity,
(as he says, and we cheerfully give him credit for


such,) returned to his native soil, with a mind
resolved upon doing all that lay in his power for
their relief.
Compassion is indeed a beautiful thing, but
should go hand in hand with justice and truth.
To be moved by the misfortunes of others,
without inquiring whether they have been
deserved or not, and to endeavour to console, is,
doubtless, a philanthropic idea; but to hurl
accusations against a Government, which has the
same right as others to universal respect, and
denounce it at the tribunal of public opinion, is
a proceeding of which we know not whether
even the fact of such charges, being well founded,
would afford a justification. But the falseness
of the facts becomes evident, if we but look into
the impure and poisoned sources from which
they are made to flow, a task easily accomplished
by any one who is willing to examine, dis-
passionately, Mr. Gladstone’s lengthy story, and
detect its fallacy by the light of fair criticism
and the evidence of undeniable documents.
It has, therefore, appeared to us an advisable
step, and almost a sacred duty, in the interest of
truth, and of humanity itself, thus grievously
outraged, to restore exaggerated facts to their
real proportions, to point out what is altogether
false, and lay bare calumnious statements. This
will be the best answer to the errors and


accusations of which Mr. Gladstone has not
hesitated to become the promulgator, nor do we
intend to imitate him in the bitterness of lan-
guage and contemptuous sneers with which his
writing teems, to the astonishment of every one.
A good cause disdains recrimination and con-
tumely, and is contented with persuading by the
invincible power of facts and reasons. Error
and deceit are reckoned to be, and really are,
fruitful sources of mischief and shame, but they
are unable to pervert public opinion, when, as in
the present case, there are facts and documents,
in sufficient abundance, to unmask any calumny,
however well concocted.


I.
General Observation on the motives by which. Mr. Gladstone
says he was induced to write and publish his Letters through
the medium of the Press.
Mr. Gladstone, at the commencement of his
first Letter, published on the 11th of July of this
year, asserts that he wrote it under a deep im-
pression that it was his duty to endeavour to
mitigate the horrors of the administration of the
realm. We shall hereafter show how false and
calumniatory is the supposition of these imaginary
horrors, by handling them severally in the order
and manner in which they have been deducted
by Mr. Gladstone; but we cannot refrain from
questioning the occasion by which he states
himself to have been urged on, without allowing
that the method selected by him was the only
one that could lead to the attainment of the
object he had in view. And, in truth, is it pre-
sumable, and can it even enter our thoughts that
any government, however little jealous of its
own dignity, could be induced to a change of
system by the mere cries of those who are
7


smarting under its penalties, or by attempts
made to arouse the hatred and abhorrence of
mankind against it ?
Quite different then, and altogether opposite
should have been Mr. Gladstone’s line of conduct,
in order to attain his desired end, and no one
more than he could have commanded the most
complete success, inasmuch as having come to
Naples as one of the most distinguished con-
servatives of Great Britain, and with the high
recommendation of being the representative in
Parliament of the celebrated University of Oxford,
and of having been connected with the Peel
administration, it rested with himself alone to
have been received not only by the Crown
Ministers, but by the King himself, with every
mark of kindness, and to have been listened to
with all the attention and deference usually
bestowed upon a friend.
Far from treading in the path which the most
ordinary sagacity pointed out as the only proper
one, he, Mr. Gladstone, during his stay at N aples,
instead of approaching any Minister or other
personage of note, or evincing any desire to see
the King like other distinguished foreigners,
lived, according to Lord Palmerstone’s statement,
exclusively among gaol prisoners and galley
slaves, and from their lips and the lips of some
others whom the royal clemency has saved


hitherto from merited chastisement, he collected
that heap of calumnies which he has scattered
with such incredible facility, and to which strict
and ample justice will, as we have already stated,
be dealt hereafter.
Had Mr. Gladstone come amongst us, not in
the present year, but in the unhappy year 1848,
or in the early months of the year following, he
could not have remained several months, nay not
even a single day without being compelled to
give to the tumult and terror raised by infuriated
and implacable demagogues, the preference over
order and peace. During that unhappy period
all respect for the laws, and for constituted
authorities was at an end, men of character were
scarcely safe within their own houses ; shops and
houses of business were closed, and nothing met
the eye in any direction or at any hour, in the
streets and squares of the populous Naples, but
the agitators, no other sound assailed the ear but
that of their insults and threats, directed without
disguise, not only to the overthrow of Monarchy,
but to the subversion of social order. And the
statute obtained by them through fraud and
deceit, and given with the greatest good faith
and honesty by the magnanimity of the King,
was received by them only as the means by wdiich
they were to accomplish so barbarous and wicked
a design. Nor can we trace to any other source


the aversion of a great majority of the inhabitants
of the Realm to the above mentioned statute,
and their earnest, spontaneous, and unanimous
wish, in a thousand ways expressed, and a thou-
sand times repeated, for the restoration of a pure
Monarchy.
This short glance at the subject, is sufficient in
our judgment to establish the propriety and
justice of the actual political organization of the
Realm; neither shall we waste more words upon
it, since Mr. Gladstone, at the same time that he
takes the censorship into his own hands, acknow-
ledges that this is no subject for foreign inter-
ference, and admits “ in the most unqualified
“ manner , the respect that is due from Englishmen
“ as from others , to Governments in general ,
“ whether they he absolute , constitutional , or re-
“ publican , as the representatives of a public, nay ,
“ of a divine authority , and as the guardians of
“ order”


II.
Sources from which Mr. Gladstone has derived the false
accounts published by him.
The writer of the letters declares, “ that this
“ grievous subject has forced itself upon him
(how was it forced upon him 1) “ that he is
“ sincere in disclaiming what is called political
“ propagandism, that he has not gathered
“ wholesale, and without examination, the state-
“ ments he is about to make ; that an important
“ part of them are within his own personal
“ knowledge, and that, as to the rest of those
“ which are stated without qualification, after
“ no want of care in examining their sources
“ and their grounds, he firmly and deliberately
“ believes them. ” Hoc opus, hie labor est!
If such be the foundations upon which has been
erected this formidable superstructure of accusa-
tions against the Neapolitan Government, such
as to throw into amazement the deluded
spectator, and calculated to call forth the savage
smile of the subverters of all civil government,
it is our intention to examine whether the


foundations rest upon solid ground, or rather
upon banks of sand, raised by the waves on the
sea shore in times of eager and ungovernable
passions.
And .firstly, whoever is seized with the noble
ambition of discovering the truth, might ask in
what manner and in whose company were made
those personal observations, the first source of
the information with which we are favoured by
the illustrious writer.
Secondly , it might be asked from what
sources other information has been derived, for
the obtaining of which it is necessary that the
sources themselves should have been attentively
explored. Because, it is well known, that
criticism is not easily prevailed upon to admit
facts, until these points are settled. If, per-
adventure, the fountainhead was discovered to be
muddy, or poisoned by the perfidy of others, it
would be vain to expect pure streams to flow
therefrom.
And that Mr. Gladstone has brought himself
in contact with anything but pure sources, can
no longer be doubted, after its having been
publicly announced that he, during his sojourn
in Naples, preferred holding converse with
prisoners and galley slaves rather than with
parties who might have supplied him with
accurate notions of the country; consequently,


all he could do, was, to reproduce the lamenta-
tions of these poor wretches, and borrow their
own impassioned language.
No one is ignorant of the unhappy prevalence,
in our times, of the fatal error by which political
crimes, endangering the safety and the very
existence of civil communities, are visited with a
degree of reprobation far below that which is
awarded to common misdeeds, as if the attempt
upon the property or life of an individual
admitted of any comparison with the crime of
inciting men to fratricide war, and shaking
established Governments, in order to substitute
for them the despotism of the streets and the
scenes of blood which history has shown to have
been its invariable attendants.
As a consequence of this baneful error, politi-
cal convicts look upon themselves rather as the
victims of an untoward destiny than as guilty
parties, and cease not to cry out against cruelty
and abuses, when the only object contemplated
is to carry into execution those laws, which they
have vilely trampled upon to the imminent dan-
ger of the public safety. On the other hand
the interest and sympathy which they inspire,
increases in proportion to their intellectual quali-
fications, and social position, and thus it is that
many lend a willing ear to their complaints. All
governments, with a few solitary exceptions, have


had woful experience of this. England herself,
was visited with the severest censure on account
of the extreme rigour exercised by Sir H. Ward,
and Lord Torrington: and only recently the
alleged harsh and inhuman treatment inflicted
upon several Irishmen, condemned for political
offences, has been made the subject of a motion
in the House of Commons.
But to return to our starting point, the Author
of the letters, does not disguise to himself that
the exposure of the facts alleged by him would
have excited in some indignation and horror ( if the
facts were true), incredulity in others (these are
the friends of the good and just), and indifference
in very few.
And this is not a whimsical incredulity, it does
not originate in a desire to oppose whatever the
the writer may bring to light from a “ pure senti-
“ ment of humanity ,” as he says, “ and for the
“ honour of the great Conservative party , which
“ he prides himself to belong.”
It is the result of careful investigation, and of
information derived from valid and irrefragable
documents. And if he but picture to himself the
sweet consolation that would fill his heart, were
he to yield credit to all that criticism has said
and may yet say on the subject of his statements,
we shall confide in his own words, and readily
believe that he will be the first to disabuse him


self, and to gainsay the relation of imaginary
abuses, such as not the Neapolitan only but every
other government, would, in the present state of
civilisation, hold in abhorrence.
15


III.
Grounds upon which political Offenders are overtaken by justice,
and judgment passed upon them:—their number.
After the introduction which we have just ex-
amined, the honourable Mr. Gladstone enters upon
his subject, and without any difficulty ushers in
the following proposition, about the truth of
which he does not appear to have the slightest
misgiving. “ There is,” he says, “ a general
“ impression that the organization of the govern-
“ ments of Southern Italy is defective, that the
“ administration of justice is tainted with corrup-
“ tion, that instances of abuse or cruelty among
“ subordinate public functionaries are not un-
“ common, and that political offences are
“ punished with severity, and with no great
“ regard to the forms of justice.” He endeavours
to prove these, and other still more truculent
accusations of a similar kind, not by quoting-
facts, bringing forward documents, or corrobo-
rating his statements by the best authority, but
proceeding in this manner, he does not flinch
from asserting, that “ the present persecution is
16


“ awfully aggravated as compared with former
“ ones,” as if any comparison could be allowed
between the present times, and the period of the
close of the last century, a period, as is known to
all, of such calamities as words cannot pourtray,
a period, when the gibbet was every where
erected, not so much by the severity of the laws
as by an implacable hatred, and the total destruc-
tion of public confidence. As it was essential
that his information should not come before us
unsupported by a single fact, he accordingly
ushers in one of a very grave character, and
which, were it not of the same calibre as other
communications emanating from his pen, would
cause us involuntarily to knit our brow. “ The
“ general belief is, that the prisoners for political
“ offences in the kingdom of the two Sicilies are
“ between fifteen, or twenty and thirty thousand.
“ In Naples alone, some hundreds are at this
“ moment under indictment capitally, and when
“ I quitted it, a trial was expected to come on
“ immediately, (called that of the 15th of May,)
“ in which the number charged was between
“ four and five hundred.”
We should be inclined at once to cut the
thread of the author’s ideas, or rather of the silly
tales which have been foisted upon him, and to
exclaim:—lf such be, Mr. Gladstone, the infor-
mation with which you favour us, and of which
B


you say you have attentively examined the
sources, cease to appeal to the judgment of cul-
tivated Europe, for one universal shout of indig-
nation will be raised against those vile calumni-
ators and slanderers of their native country, who
have taken advantage of your amiable simplicity,
to make you the tool of their stupid passions.
Let us, however, reserve for another place, the
refutation of this gross falsehood, and follow the
author in the details of his exposure.
“ There is a law in Naples,” he proceeds to
say, 44 long anterior to the Constitution, which
44 establishes the inviolability of personal liberty,
“ except through an order of a Court of Justice.”
This is a ray of light which has shot from the
learned gentleman’s pen, through the dark clouds
which the malignity of others has gathered so
thick around him. 44 In utter defiance of this
“ law” continues the author, 44 the Government,
44 of which the Prefect of Police is an important
44 member, through the agents of that depart-
-44 ment, watches and dogs the people, pays
44 domiciliary visits, very commonly at night,
4 ‘ ransacks houses, seeking papers and effects,
44 and tearing up floors at pleasure, under pre-
-44 tence of searching for arms, and imprisons men
“ by the score, by the hundred, by the thousand,”
(mercy!) 44 without any warrant whatever,
44 sometimes without even any written authority


“ at all ... . The correspondence of the pri-
“ soner is then examined, as soon as may be
“ found convenient, and he is himself examined
“ upon it, in secret, without any intimation of
“ the charges, which as yet in fact, do not exist ;
“ or of the witnesses, who do not exist either.
“ In this examination he is allowed no assistance
“ whatever, nor has he at this stage, any power
“ of communication with a legal adviser.”
These and other similar calumnies are soon
judged, and cannot fail to elicit a sentence of
universal reprobation, if we but consult the penal
laws of Naples, and are willing to learn from
parties unbiassed by passion, how scrupulously
they are carried into execution. What matter
of astonishment is it not, in the outset, that a
traveller, after a short abode in a friendly state,
should deal so unworthily with its ordinances,
and betray a slovenly carelessness, and an amount
of absurdity that must of necessity open our eyes
to his real ignorance of such matters.
We shall, meanwhile, say nothing of the system
of penal laws of the two Sicilies, contenting our-
selves with hinting at the fact, that when in
France, about the year 1832, attention was turned
to them, with a view to the effecting of certain
reforms in the French Code, they were found to
have been the combined inspiration of philosophy
and humanity, and that able civilians and public


men did not hesitate to express their high admi-
ration of them. With regard to the proceedings,
whoever has looked into the laws by which they
are regulated, or attended the higher Criminal
and Special Courts, has had opportunities of
ascertaining what ample and liberal provisions
are made for the defence of personal liberty, and
for the protection of innocence from every shadow
of oppression. Now these laws empower the
officers of the Judicial Police, and the agents of
the ordinary Police, who in the Capital, and in
the chief places of the provinces, and of the
districts, exercise the functions of the Judicial
Police, to arrest any offender, taken in the act,
or nearly in the act*.
With the exception of flagrante delicto cases,
no one can be arrested unless by a warrant is-
sued by the proper judicial authority, or by the
police charged with the preparation of indict-
ments, and after duly weighing the evidence col-
lected against the supposed offender-]*.
If any necessity exists for visiting the domicile
of any citizen in order to obtain possession of
criminal objects, or to detect traces of guilt, the
* Art. 50 and 101 LL of Penal Procedure.
Art. 10 of Police Instructions of the 22nd January, 1817.
Art. 20 of The Law for the Organization of Judicial Pro-
cedure, of the 29th May, 1817.
Art. 19 of the Royal Decree of the 16th June, 1824.
| Art. 13, 104, 151 & 187, Laws of Penal Procedure.


Law, with a view to the protection of the do-
mestic retreat, does not allow it to be entered
except in special and marked cases, and threatens
with suspension any officer of the judicial police
who should be found to infringe its enactments*.
It is moreover required that the officer should
be attended by two witnesses, that he should
invite the party whose house is about to be
searched to be present at the search, and in
default of him, some one of his relatives, friends
or neighbours, and that if any papers or other
objects deserving of investigation are found, they
should be shown to the party that he may know
them and sign them in his own handwriting, and
that they should be wrapped up, properly fastened
and sealedj*.
Immediately after arrest the prisoner is inter-
rogated, and made acquainted with the causes of
his detention. His answers, as well as excuses,
are registered for the purposes of prosecution as
well as
of the warrant is given within twenty-four hours
to the High Criminal Court, which, after ex-
amining the proofs hitherto collected either upon
the process itself, or upon the report of the In-
quisitor, deliberates whether there are sufficient
* Art. 233, Penal Laws,
t Art. 71 & 72, Laws of Penal Procedure.
I Art. 108, Law 7 of Penal Procedure.


grounds for confirming or recalling the warrant
of apprehension*. In matters, however, subject
to a higher jurisdiction, such as treason, con-
spiracy meetings, and factions, the ordinary police
are invested with the attributes of the judicial
police, and may proceed to arrest persons upon
suspicion of misdeeds not included in the cases of
flagrance, detain them at their discretion beyond
the twenty-four hours, and institute proceedings!.
When the High Criminal Court has sanctioned
the arrest of the accused, and the evidence has
been prepared, the Attorney-General of the
Court, if he deem the line of evidence sufficiently
established, draws the Act of Accusation in due
form, and deposits it in the Record Office of the
High Court!, The Accused is then again in-
terrogated upon the heads of accusation. This
second Interrogatory is called “ constitute,” and
must not be confounded with the first which
follows apprehension§. The Accused moreover
is at liberty to present written statements, that
the Magistrates may avail themselves of them in
deciding upon the case|j. The High Court
examines the Indictment, sees whether there are
* Art. ] 10, 111 & 112, Law of Penal Procedure,
f Art. 10 of Instructions of the 23nd January, 1817.
| Art. 138, Law of Penal Procedure.
§ Art. 131, Law of Penal Procedure.
|j Art, 143, Law of Penal Procedure.


sufficient indications of guilt, and deliberates
whether there are sufficient grounds or not for
admitting the charge*. If the charge be ad-
mitted, it is prescribed and invariably acted
upon that the Accused should be furnished with
a copy of the Act of Accusation.
I his is properly speaking the time when the
entire original procedure, and all documents and
objects of conviction connected with it, are
deposited in the Record Office of the High
Court, and become accessible to the Counsel as
well as to the relatives and friends of the
accusedf.
1 10 m that time the Accused may confer freely
with his Counsel, and, if he be not provided
with any, or have not the means of procuring
any, he is provided with official Counsel^.
The Lawyers of the Neapolitan Bar, to do
them justice, pride themselves upon undertaking,
in the most disinterested manner, these kinds of
defence, and acquit themselves with as much
zeal as if the cases were those of their dearest
friends. A delay of five days is then allowed to
produce all means of incompetence, or of nullity
of Acts, and to ask for the experiments of fact
which the nature of.offence may admit of, and of
* 148, Law of Penal Procedure,
f Art. 166 and 167, Law of Penal Procedure.
I Art. 169 & 170, Law of Penal Procedure.


the traces which it has left*. Another delay of
twenty-four hours is then granted, during which,
the Public Ministry presents the list of witnesses,
and the Accused his elements of defence and the
list of his own witnesses-)*. During two more
days, exceptions are allowed to be taken against
any of the witnesses upon showing the grounds
of and when all circumstances have
been duly weighed and considered, a day is fixed
for a public and open discussion§.
Then in the presence of all the Judges who
are to pronounce upon the accusation, the doors
being thrown open to the public, and in the
presence of the Attorney-General, the Accused
and his Counsel, they proceed to the examination
of all the proofs verbal or written, the witnesses
are heard, who are first exhorted to tell the
truth under the sanctity of an oath, which they
take before the great Court, the documents are
read, and all explanations and demands are
received, upon which they deliberate, and
deliberate openly.
The discussion of the proofs being ended, the
Attorney-General proceeds to sum up the evi-
dence, and according to his own conviction he
* Art. 175, Law of Penal Procedure,
f Art. 195, Law of Penal Procedure.
1 Art. 201, Law of Penal Procedure.
§ Art. 214, Law of Penal Procedure.


may demand either the acquittal of the prisoner,
if he find that the charge is not sufficiently esta-
blished, or that sentence be passed upon him.
Then comes the turn of Counsel to speak, and
lastly the accused himself, in order that the last
words before decision may be for the defence. The
Court immediately withdraws and proceeds to
judgment; nor are they allowed to separate until
after returning into the Audience-room, they
have made the Chancellor read aloud their de-
cision*.
These legislative dispositions which we have
brought forward in the very words of the Nea-
politan Code of Penal Procedure, prove that more
care and precautions have been adopted for pro-
tection of innocence than for the detection of
guilt. The indications collected against an ac-
cused, are subjected to three strict examinations,
one at the time of issuing the order for appre-
hension, another when the arrest is confirmed,
and a third when the charge is made ; and when
these points are settled, then takes place the
solemn and public discussion of all the proofs,
both pro. and con., and the fate of the accused is
decided upon.
These salutary regulations are common both
to the Great Criminal Courts, and to the Great
Special Courts, with the exception that in the
Art. 218 to 271, Law of Penal Procedure.


Special Courts the intervals of proceeding are
shorter, as well with a view to favour appeals
from the decision of lower Courts to the Supreme
Court of Justice, as to forward the demand of
the experiments of fact and the defence, and pro-
vide the lists of witnesses*.
In order, however, to insure the right adminis-
tration of Justice, eight Judges attend the Special
Courts, where, in the Criminal Courts, only six
Judges take part in the trials j*. In cases of
equality of votes, that opinion prevails which is
most favourable to the accused, both in the
Criminal and in the Special CourtsJ ; and if the
appeal from the sentence of condemnation of
these latter Courts is not allowed, it is neverthe-
less granted in what regards the actual applica-
tion of the law, in all cases where a sentence of
condemnation to capital or perpetual punishment
has emanated solely from a majority, and without
the concurrence of six out of the eight voting
Judges§.
Nor must it be supposed as some perhaps be-
lieve, who are but little acquainted with the laws
of the country, that the Special Courts alluded
to are extraordinary Courts, inasmuch as the es-
* Art. 431 & 432, Law of Penal Procedure.
■\ Art. 428, Law of Penal Procedure.
| Art. 81 of the Law of 29th May, 1817.
§ Art. 434, Law of Penal Procedure.


tablishment of them is not new, but forms an
integral part, as well of the Law of the 29th May
1817, on the Ordinance of the Judiciary Power,
as of the Penal Code and Law of Procedure, pub-
lished in 1819. It is these same Criminal Great
Courts that assume the title of Special Great
Courts, and exercise their jurisdiction in cases
established by law, namely, in offences against
the internal and external safety of the State, in
such as regard Sectarian Associations under the
Bond of Secrecy, in cases of forgery of false coin
or of bank papers, of decisions of constituted
authorities, of State seals and stamps, of public
violence and of escape from places of punishment
or of detention*. Therefore they have nothing
in common with the extraordinary tribunals, or
with the temporary State commissions, nor with
the supreme commissions since instituted for the
repression of political offences, and abolished by
the wisdom of the King by the Decree of the Ist
of July, 1846, They are Courts composed of
ordinary Magistrates, upon whom the same Code
confers the inestimable privilege of recommend-
ing the culprit to the royal clemencyj*.
Any one whose mind is enlightened by these
legislative dispositions in full observance, will not
be able to give credit to Mr. Gladstone’s uncalled
* Art. 426, Law of Penal Procedure,
t Art. 436, Law of Penal Procedure.


for lamentations on the organisation of the Nea-
politan Government in matters relating to the
administration of justice. Shall you, for instance,
be able to believe that citizens are arrested with-
out written orders, and at the pleasure of the
Prefect of Police, when he and his agents are
called by the laws to exercise the judicial police
in the capital, to investigate and discover offences,
to take into their custody parties implicated ?
Will you refrain from laughing when you read
that grossly exaggerated statement that “ men
“ are imprisoned by scores, by hundreds, by
“ thousands,” as if they were so many thrushes,
or something worse, whereas the latest returns of
the Neapolitan and provincial prisons do not
exceed the number of 2024 prisoners detained for
political offences, including those who have since
been set at liberty, whether by decisions of the
Great Courts, or by virtue of a decree of grace of
the 30th of April of this year, or of other acts of
Royal clemency* \ Can you persuade yourselves
that a prisoner is interrogated “ without any inti-
“ mation of the charges, and without hearing any
“ witnesses,” when the hearing of the witnesses
precedes apprehension, except in cases offlagrance,
and the accusation follows instead of preceding
the interrogatory ? Will you believe that the
* See the separate numerical statement of political offenders
for each province.


prisoners for political offences are between fifteen
or twenty and thirty thousand, and that in the
prosecution of 15th of May, 1848, the number of
the accused amounts to four or five hundred,
when the writer himself shows the uncertainty of
his statements by utterly disregarding whether
the prisoners for political offences be fifteen or
thirty thousand in number (they do not exceed
2024, as we have recently shown), and when
everybody now knows that the number of the
accused in the prosecution of the 15th of May is
not above thirty-seven* X
But the author asserts, upon this point, that
“ the general belief is, that the prisoners for
“ political offences in the Kingdom of the Two
“ Sicilies are between fifteen or twenty and
“ thirty thousand.” And, what is his evidence X
No other than the assertions of those who
delight in speaking in the name of public
opinion, in the name of their country, as is
practised by Demagogues, one and all, while
they are only giving expression to their own
hatred, and venting, in foul calumny, their
political fanaticism. The writer has, therefore,
the merit of having given publicity to the falsest
statements, and utterly disregarded all that might
have enlightened him as to the real condition
* See the Act of Accusation, published by the Attorney-
General, Mr. Angelillo, 11th June, 1851.


and number of the political prisoners. Had he
applied to the Government he might easily have
referred to the prison registers, and satisfied
himself, with his own eyes, of the real number of
the prisoners. Then, only, he could have said:
I have seen and touched with my hand.
What shall we say of the manner in which he
traduces the Special Great Courts \ He supposes
that a Special Great Court is about to sit in
judgment. The proceedings, he says, are
shortened by the omission of many forms, most
of them available for the defence of the accused;
consequently, in this instance, full forty persons
were deprived of the means of defence, for the
sake of dispatch.
Can it be asserted, seriously, that the Trial of
the Sect, called Italian Unity, to which the
author alludes, was conducted hastily, when
more than eight months were spent upon it, and
five and twenty sittings were exclusively devoted
to the hearing of counsel, and of the perorations
of some of the accused themselves, who claimed
the privilege of being heard. Never can such
false statements as these become available in
swaying public opinion, much less in spreading
a belief that justice is vilely administered in the
Two Sicilies.


IV.
Of the Treatment of Prisoners in the Neapolitan Prisons.
Between the apprehension of a culprit and the
day of his trial, a period of time intervenes,
sometimes not very short, during which care is
taken to establish the evidence, the first indica-
tions collected being deemed insufficient; or other
prosecutions are blended in cases where numbers
of parties appear to be involved in the same trans-
action. During this interval the fate of culprits
is undecided, it not being known whether they
will prove guilty or innocent, and, on this account,
calls forth the solicitude and philanthropy of the
author of the letters. He is sorrowful and dis-
turbed at the thought of the gloom and filthiness
of the prisons in Naples. He knows about the
Gamorristi , a class of men the most renowned for
their boldness in misdoing, and who exercise a
species of authority. He admits that the bread
given to them, though common, is, however,
wholesome ; and calls the soup, the other article
of food allowed, loathsome. We are willing to


concede that the abode wherein so many persons,
chiefly of the plebian class, are compelled to live,
is gloomy, and not altogether clean ; but
supposition beyond this we must unhesitatingly
repudiate. Mr. Cochrane, who was fain to visit
in an unexpected manner the prisons of Naples,
formed a more favourable idea of the manner in
which they are kept. Indeed, the internal man-
agement of these places is in the hands of a
Commission, presided over by the Intendant of
the Province, and by whom every attention is
paid to the health and diet of the prisoners; and
if the Government supplies them with abundant
but not dainty food, even this remark applies to
such of them as are without pecuniary means ;
but the more affluent among them are at liberty
to have such dinner and other refreshments as
may best suit them, and in this respect they are
largely favoured by the prison keepers.
Who will credit the assertion unsupported by
a single positive fact, that the Medical Officers
do not take the trouble to visit the sick, who
with death pictured in their countenances, are to
be found crawling on the staircases of the Charnel
house of the Vicarial
The honourable body of Neapolitan Physicians
has always been distinguished for learning, dis-
interestedness and humanity. Those among
them who are appointed to the care of the health


of the unfortunate delinquents, discharge that
otfice scrupulously, with no other impulse than a
lively sense of duty, compassion for suffering
humanity, and, it may be added, a sublime re-
ligious impression, which in Naples perhaps more
than in any other place in the world, ennobles the
commonest actions, and raises them to an exalted
sphere of virtue. Religion herself, which boasts
of no precept more beautiful than that of fraternal
charity, brings a host of pious priests and
cloistered individuals to visit at various intervals
the pretended Charnel house, bearing with the
consolations of that word which has power to
change the heart, and make men endure the
trials of life with patient resignation. Not many
months since, the Cardinal Archbishop of Naples
visited the prisons in person. Of this venerable
Prelate, Mr. Gladstone, however unsparing of
others, has had the condescension to say, that he
believed him to be entirely incapable of either
participating in, or conniving at any proceedings
unworthy in their character. Upon the hearts
of these poor wretches he shed the balm of the
evangelical precepts, and that of his own acts of
benevolence, and by his presence in the pre-
tended dungeons, gave beforehand the denial to
the false descriptions of the writer.
But he who has said so much that is false and
unjust against the honour of the country itself,
c


could not but pass oyer in silence a most humane
provision of the reigning Sovereign. As soon as
he ascended the throne of his ancestors, he
turned his first thoughts to the improvement of
the abodes of punishment, and gave immediate
orders for the closing and blocking up of those
dismal dungeons, which, among us, as well as
among other nations, (where they are perhaps
still in existence,) bore, unseemly, testimony to
the uncouthness and barbarity of the feudal
times*.
The Vicaria, once the palace of the Viceroy,
and now a place where justice is administered in
civil, criminal, and commercial matters, is the
daily resort of the most eminent members of the
Bar, and of all who attend there for the transac-
tion of business. It no longer conceals dark and
subterraneous places of detention, such as have
awakened so much of our Author’s sympathy,
nor indeed could it, open as it lies to every one’s
gaze, and situate as it is in a populous part of
Naples.
In the prison of the Vicaria, however, Mr.
Gladstone could have but limited opportunities
for seeing the political offenders, in whose regard
he feels so lively an interest. More than twelve
months since they were separated from the com-
* See the Sovereign Rescript of 11th January, 1831.
34


mon offenders, and placed in the House of
Detention called S a Maria Apparente, situate in
the most picturesque spot in Naples, namely, on
the summit of St. Martin’s Hill, commanding a
prospect of the sea on one side, and on the other
of the beautiful city which appears to lie at its
foot. Only during the period when trials are
going on, do the political offenders whose cases
are before the judges, remain at the Vicuna,
where the Special Great Court sits, for the reason
that it would be greatly inconvenient to them to
come there every day from S a Maria Apparente ;
and such as are infirm or of delicate health are
received into the large hospital of St. Francis,
near the Capuan Gate.
Not more exact than his previous disclosures,
is the statement that Michael Pironti, from the
7th December, to the 3rd of February of the
present year, passed whole days, and tedious
nights in a cell at the Vicaria, about eight feet
square, below the level of the ground, with no
light except a grating at the top of the wall, out
of which they could not see. Mr. Gladstone,
who informs us, that he had attended several
meetings of the Criminal and Special Great Court
at Naples, to witness the trials of Pironti, and
others accused of taking part in the proceedings
of the Sect of the Italian Unity, must have re-
membered a circumstance which followed the


last words with which the Attorney-General
called for the condemnation to capital punish-
ment of Pironti, and of five other individuals.
He rose from his seat, to request of the President
and the Great Court that orders might be given,
that the Prisoner, after the capital requisition,
should not be placed under such restraint as
would abridge his means of preparing his defence.
He was answered, that the Government of the
prisons, through wholesome regulations of many
years standing, was in the hands of a Special
Delegation under the control of the Agents of
the Ordinary Police, who well knew how to
maintain the exercise of the sacred right of self
defence, without prejudice to that vigilance which
it is usual to exercise towards parties awaiting
their trial for capital offences. Neither was
Pironti removed from the place he occupied
during the discussion of his case, nor was he
without the means of preparing an elaborate
address in answer to the requisition of the
Attorney-General. He read deliberately, as is
habitual with him, the speech he had prepared,
and the judges followed him with scrupulous
attention through every one of his arguments,
notwithstanding, nearly the whole of them had
already been brought forward and urged by his
distinguished advocate. Mr. Gladstone has the
merit of having transformed a mere apprehension


of Pironti’s, into a substantial fact, which could
not have happened owing to the non-existence
of any subterranean cell whatever : strange logic
by the aid of which he may hope to confer actual
existence upon mere possibilities. But he brings
to the corroboration of his statements, another
instance of dark and subterranean detention in
the case of a certain Baron Porcari, confined in
the Maschio of Ischia, lying 24 feet or palms (he
is at a loss what to say) under the level of the
sea. But this so called Maschio, is not below
the level of the sea, nor can it be, if the real
meaning of this word be considered. The Maschio
of a castle, is the square in which the soldiers
practise their manoeuvres, in the interior of the
fortress. Now we know from the inhabitants of
the country, that the Maschio stands on the most
elevated part of the Castle of Ischia, and there it
is that persons under sentence are privileged to
walk. On one side are spacious rooms in which
are confined parties under discipline for infring-
ing the regulations of the Bagno. The instance
therefore adduced by the author, has not even
the merit of corresponding with the natural fea-
tures of the localities. It is therefore not very
difficult to arrive at the conclusion that the
famous letters teem with blunders and absurdities.
37


V.
Condemnation of Carlo Poerio and others, accused of being
connected with the Sect called Italian Unity.
The author of the Letters passes on designedly
to deal with the case of Carlo Poerio and some
others. He enters into at great length, without
taking any other guide (would you believe it?)
than the defence of the culprit. And in order to
remove all hesitation in believing this fact, we
quote the author’s own words:—“ The history
“ of his arrest,” he says, “ as detailed by him-
“ self, in his address of February 8, 1850, to
“ his Judges, deserves attention.” He concludes
thus:—“ I have taken this detail from Poerio
“ himself, in his defence.” Every man of sense,
to whatever country he may belong, under what-
ever form of government he may live, would have
remembered certain maxims of universal justice,
we should say rather of good sense, in accordance
with which we cannot judge of the merits of one
side of a question, without hearing the reasons
of the other side, nor without the intervention of
a third party to decide on the opposite pretensions


of contending parties. In the present case, who
will not be struck with wonder and surprise at
finding a Government accused of arbitrary judg-
ments, and a college of magistrates charged with
passing an unjust sentence, and this upon no
other foundation than the assertions of the accu-
sed himself? But do you not see that this is
properly the defence, and that you ought to con-
front it with the accusation, and weigh the judg-
ment itself, which did not wholly admit the
accusation, but drew the line of demarcation
required by justice, by declaring Poerio a Secta-
rian, and rejecting, on the grounds of doubtful
evidence, the heavier charge of conspiracy against
the Government, although supported by more
than slight indications of guilt ? Or has a novel
reason been found for giving credit to the words
and subtle arguments of an accused, and disre-
garding the judgment of men practised in the
administration of justice, accustomed to discri-
minate between the guilty and the innocent,
tutored by experience to detect the wily tricks
with which Sectarians cloak their proceedings,
and wear a mask of honesty. But you, honour-
able Mr. Gladstone, get rid of all the objections
which you could not conceal from your view, by
calling the Neapolitan Judges, slaves, and you
do them a favour in not believing them to be
monsters; you place them for learning and mo-
rality below the members of the bar ; you say


that they are ill paid, and liable to removal at
the caprice of Government, and as your only
proof of this, you adduce the instance of an octo-
genarian magistrate, who was discharged, and of
certain judges at Reggio who were punished for
the offence of deciding upon some case, relating,
you tell us, to the ill-omened constitution.
Had any portion of the glories of the Neapo-
litan magistracy been recounted to you, you
would not have given utterance to language of
which the shame and disgrace recoil solely upon
those who have suggested it to you, and to whom
}ou have blindly yielded credence. The magis-
tracy, faithful to its traditions, awards its esteem
to the honourable body of advocates, and often
receives into its bosom, those whose learning and
viitue render them worthy of the ministry of
Ihemis, but does not descend to a comparison
with those whom it views in the light of auxili-
aries. It well knows that the Government,
following the dictates of its own conscience, and
not yielding to the passions of the times, will
e\ei lespect, that primary guarantee of civil
society, namely, Justice. The octogenarian
magistiate to whom you allude, was not removed
fi om office for having decided upon a case of con-
tiavention of the laws of the press, as you sup-
pose, but for other weighty and just reasons,
upon which silence is the better course, and a
consideiable portion of his emoluments were


preserved to him. Three only of the judges of
Reggio, were left, with half their stipend, to
await their final destiny. They had not decided
upon any case relative to the ill-omened constitu-
tion as you say, but upon some very important
occurrences in the Calabrias, during the agitation
of the Demagogues, who, after the overthrow of
the 15th of May, enkindled there the flames of
civil war. But these special measures, which
the Government thought proper to adopt, un-
questionably do not furnish any evidence of that
slavery in which you dare to represent the Ma-
gistracy as involved. Recent and too glaring
facts ought to have taught you better to estimate
how far it yields to its own convictions rather
than to any foreign influence. The solemn de-
cision of the cause of the Italian Unity Sect,
furnishes you with a splendid proof of this. In
this cause, which you were told was the work of
the police, and which you have taken so much
to heart, that you could find no relief but in
writing page after page upon the mournful sub-
ject, that of eight Judges, four had the firmness,
not indeed to acquit several of the prisoners,
which they could not in the face of such speaking
evidence, but to follow the dictates of their own
moral criterion, and of legal knowledge, by
assigning to their guilt its real character, and
thereby saving their lives, and subjecting them
to other punishments. And to come to the par-
41


ticulars of the cause thus again brought before
us, we wish to remind you that the eight Judges
composing the Special Great Court of Naples,
were unanimous in proclaiming the existing of
the Sectarian Association, under the title of
“ Italian Unity,” inasmuch as they could not
have had a stronger proof of it than that afforded
by the printed catechisms, and the unburied
diplomas, bearing the names of the admitted
members. They therefore, unanimously declared
Faucitano, Agresti, Settembrini, Barilla, Nisco,
Pironti, and others, guilty of participation with
that Sect. Poerio was also by them similarly
convicted, with six votes, and not with five, as
you erroneously state in your letters: and had
you have been more exact in your scrutiny, you
would have known that neither of the two dis-
sentient Judges ever dreamt of acquitting Poerio,
inasmuch as they who doubted the force of the
evidence establishing his participation in the Sect,
yet found valid grounds of bringing him in
guilty, as they declared, of intelligence in the
conspiracy formed against the Government, and
of omitting to make a disclosure of what he was
privy to, an offence punished by the Neapolitan
laws with imprisonment*.
* Art. 11., Penal Laws.—Parties sentenced to confinement
are shut up in a strong place, and compelled to work. . . The
duration of this punishment shall not be less than six, nor
more than ten years.


With regard to the capital charges against
Pironti and Nisco, four of the Judges opened in
favour of a lesser degree of guilt and for the
punishment of fetters, rather than that of death,
and this equality of votes, owing to the humanity
of the Laws, was construed in favour of the
culprits, and influenced the decision. Through
a similar equality, Barilla, instead of the punish-
ment of death, met with that of imprisonment,
and Settembrini excluded from the qualification
of a leader of the sect, was by one more vote
declared a conspirator, and sentenced to undergo
the last penalty of the Law. Agresti, with a
majority of five votes, both as leader of the sect
and as a conspirator, was doomed in like manner.
Faucitano alone, more unlucky than the rest,
was destined to be cast by the concurrence of six
votes. Now is not this a most undeniable proof
that the Judges followed the dictates of their own
consciences, rather than the suggestions which
have been so unfairly attributed to the Govern-
ment'? The latter still treading in the path of
justice, the real support of Thrones, far from
making any exception to this disparity of votes,
did homage to the nice discrimination of the
Magistrates who thus opined, by publishing in
the Official Journal the result of their judicial
investigations*. Nor is this the only cause in
* See the Official Journal of the Two Sicilies of loth May,
1851.


which the Magistrates have given proof of their
fidelity to the dictates of their own conscience.
The Author, so conversant with the affairs of
Naples, is silent upon other political trials, in
which, by the sole majority of votes, several
accused have been subjected to milder punish-
ments, and others altogether acquitted, and set at
liberty.
The belief, therefore, “ that Poerio, whose case”
(according to the Author of the letters) “ was a
“ pretty strong one, even for the Neapolitan
“ Judges, would have been acquitted by a
“ division from four to four,” is founded upon
false suppositions. Poerio would still have been
condemned, either to fetters by the vote of the
six deciding Judges, or to imprisonment by the
vote of the other two, unless he had found refuge
in those sympathies to which the writer shows
himself no stranger when he says:—“ Nor is
“ there any one of the names I have mentioned
“ dearer to the English Nation, perhaps none so
“ dear, as is that of Poerio to his Neapolitan
“ fellow countrymen*.”
* Dear, indeed! to whom ? perchance to those whom he
has, by his guilty machinations, involved in ruin with himself,
or to those who view him as the representative of a party ?
We will not say which. An account of his life and guilty
career will be better heard from the lips of another English-
man. “ The writers are unanimous in their conviction of the
“ guilt of Poerio. I have also conversed with English
“ gentlemen who have resided in the Neapolitan kingdom,


But sympathies ought not, any more than
hatred, to intrude into the sanctuary of justice,
and disturb its severity, Solon of old, full in-
tent upon framing his laws, was ridiculed by
Anacharsis, who compared them to cobwebs,
which are fitted to catch small insects, but easily
broken by the larger ones*; shall then the sneer
not a few weeks, like Mr. Gladstone, but very many years ;
and I find in them the same thorough belief in the crimi-
nality of the republican lawyer. Let me give a slight
“ sketch of Carlo Poerio’s life. It appears that this constitu-
tional friend of Mr. Gladstone made his country too hot for
him in the year 1830 ; that he fled to Paris and there
fraternised with Mazzini; that he wrote articles for that
ic\olutionary organ, La Giovane Italia; that, on returning
“ t 0 Naples, he resumed his revolutionary vocation, and that
the whole ministry, of which he formed a part, were proved
lepublicans like Pepe and Saliceti. For additional proof
“ of this > 1 refer jour Lordship to Guglielmo Pepe’s own
“ M emoirs, recently published. That book is at least as
“ stupid as it is wicked; but it ought to be read by those who
make a study of the history of revolution-making. Pepe
“ broadl y affirms that the King of the Two Sicilies ought to
“ have been dethroned by means of the Constituent Assembly,
into which they were all determined to transform the New
Chamber, in May 1848. No one at Naples doubted this.
“ Ever y Neapolitan believed that if the rebels had succeeded
in their barricades, the Republic would have been pro-
claimed, and the King and his family murdered.” Mr.
Me Fa) lanes Letter to the Earl of Aberdeen.
Leges aranearum telis similes sibi videri. Quemadmodum
enim illae infirmiora animalia retinent, valentiora transmittunt:
sic pauperes et bundles legibus constringuntur, divites et
praepotentes eas perrumpunt. Pint, in Solon.


of the caustic philosopher be applied to Poerio’s
case t But can he urge any better claim to our
sympathies than the many unfortunate wretches
whom he has involved in ruin with himself'? In
an age wherein equality is upheld, and so much
noise is made about the rights of man ; can there
be different sets of scales in the sanctuary of
justice.
The writer however, is not by such considera-
tions diverted from his purpose, and he asserts
that Poerio “is strictly a constitutionalist,” and
“ that he has never heard him charged with
“ error in politics, other than such as can gen-
“ erally be alleged against the most high minded
“ and loyal, the most intelligent and constitu-
“ tional, of English statesmen.” It was not on
account of his zeal for constitutional forms that
Poerio was overtaken by justice, much less for
the correspondence with the Marquis Dragonetti,
so often alluded to in the letters. He was im-
prisoned, accused and condemned to irons, for
having been secretly connected with a criminal
association, wffiich, under the plausible name of
“ Italian Unity,” aimed at the overthrow of the
goverment; other criminal practices in which he
was engaged, as well as the leadership of the
Sect, imputed to him, were disregarded, by the
judges, there being no sufficient traces of guilt
to implicate him. The discovery of his guilty con-
nection with the Sectarians, was not made at the
46


period when he was trumpeted forth as a Minister
of the Crown, and be it known to every one, he
was in the Ministry for 28 days from the 6th of
March, to the 2nd of April, in 1848, and in the
single department of Public Instruction; but the
fact is to be met with at a subsequent period to
that in which, after the putting down of the
insurrection in the streets of the capital, the
agitators, having no longer the courage to appear
openly, took refuge in the shade and mystery of
the Sect. It is therefore false, that the accusation
of Poerio, is referrible to the short period of his
Ministry, so often obtruded upon our notice.
Nor did he ever hold the high office of Prime
Minister, as Lord Palmerston would have it, or
attain to the Ministry of Public Instruction
through' any splendid services rendered to the
state, through any high literary fame, inasmuch
as previous to 1848, he lived unobserved in the
midst of the criminal courts among lawyers not
of the first grade, and was suddenly raised to
power through the influence of uncontrollable
and momentaneous circumstances.
Ihe proofs collected in the case of Poerio are
not limited to those indicated by the writer, and
vvith which he has dealt so unfairly. They are
not few in number, and will have their due weight
with all such as bring a proper degree of atten-
tion to the perusal of them in the printed decision,


now in everybody’s hands. We cannot refrain
from pointing to the fact that the Police, so
roughly handled in the letters, showed its
generosity and leniency towards Poerio by not
imprisoning him after the first depositions of
Luigi Jervolino, and by not securing his person
until the discovery of several copies of the Secta-
rian Catechism in the possession of the printer,
Gaetano Romeo, and of several Proclamations
and other papers of a criminal character, no longer
left a doubt that the Sect existed, and were laying
snares for the Government. Added to this, Romeo
himself aggravated Poerio’s position, by declaring
that, in the house of the Archpriest Antonio Miele,
he had heard speak of the connection of Poerio,
Settembrini, and others with the Sect.
And, subsequently, the Sicilian Margherita,
brought from Syracuse to the Neapolitan prison,
and unacquainted with the pending proceedings,
corroborated by his spontaneous disclosures every-
thing that was already registered in the Trial
Papers, and divulged the fact of Poerio’s having
taken part at the meetings held in Agresti’s
house.
Nor does the circumstance affect our purpose,
that Jervolino could not have detected any portion
of Poerid’s guilt on the 29th May, 1849, inasmuch
as Poerio was already, from the 22nd of that
month, in possession of Jervolino’s written denun-
48


dation against him, because, although Poerio,
from that time forward, was on his guard against
Jervolino’s visits, and thus enabled to thwart his
prying investigations, yet could he not do away
with Jervolino’s previous declarations, or with the
occurrences of the preceding year, namely, during
the subsequent months to May 1848, the very
time when Jervolino desired of him to be enrolled
in the Sect, and thus detected both him and his
accomplices.
But the honourable gentleman assures us that
“ he himself heard Jervolino’s evidence discussed,
“ for many hours, in Courta fact evidencing
the pains taken in the Neapolitan Courts of Jus-
tice to discriminate truth from falsehood. He,
however, does not tell us with what exactness the
witness replied to the reiterated questions put to
him by the accused, and especially by Poerio, and
how he not only withstood their sarcasms, but
even baffled all their attempts to mislead him. If
Jervolino be a man “ without position or charac-
“ ter,” as the author insinuates; if he be “ a
“ disappointed applicant for some low office,”
how are we to explain the fact that this man of
narrow intellect is always uniform in his state-
ments, is not betrayed into any contradictions,
acquaints us how he introduced himself into
Poerio s house from the time the latter came to
power, how he became acquainted with the par-
n
49


ticulars of his life, and by what means he suc-
ceeded in discovering the traces of his guilty
connection. No : when a man is found to be so
exact in the detail of circumstances, and not urged
on by any motives of hatred, still less by any
thirst for revenge, it is impossible to suppose that
he is giving utterance to nothing but deliberate
lies and calumnies.
Jervolino’s depositions are not the only ele-
ments and grounds of Poerio’s condemnation.
Besides the arguments already adduced, there are
many to be found in his sentence and in his very
defence, from which Mr. Gladstone, by a novel
way of reasoning, thought to draw arguments in
favour of his innocence. Moreover, Poerio him-
self, incautiously brought forward the proofs of
his guilt, in expatiating upon the preceding inci-
dents of his political life, which he represented
as honourable*, but which will never be so con-
sidered, until the time when secret conspiracies
against constituted governments shall be held to
be glorious deeds, rather than the bases of crimes,
and most dangerous to public security.
Into whatever subversion of ideas the present
* What these incidents were is sufficiently known in Naples
and elsewhere; to Poerio they thrice procured, as he was
wont to say, the honour of political incarceration. A short
account of them will be seen in Mr. Me Farlane’s Letter
before alluded to.


age may have fallen upon this point, we have
not yet succeeded in placing treason on a level
with heroism. The wretches implicated in the
events of June in France, who in their defence
insolently pretended to justify insurrection, were,
both they and their council, severely admonished
by the judges, who reminded them that whatever
latitude they might be allowed in their defence,
yet that they were not to venture rashly upon
the introduction of maxims subversive of all civil
government.
51


VI.
Legality and humanity observed in the execution of the decision
of the trial of the “Italian Unity" case.
Mr. Gladstone seems to consider that anything
but regularity and propriety, such as might be
expected from a Catholic and civilised people,
prevailed in carrying out the decision in the
trial of the Italian Unity Sect, which he prefers
calling Poerio’s trial, so much larger a share of
his sympathy has he allotted to him than to the
other unfortunate men sentenced to severer pun-
ishment, whether perpetual or temporary. Two
out of the 42 implicated, are known to have paid
the tribute to nature, in the course of the pro-
ceedings, three of them, Faucitano, Agresti, and
Settembrini, were sentenced to death; Barilla
and Mazza to imprisonment; Nisco and Marghe-
rita, the individual who made so many disclosures
to the prejudice of his fellow culprits, to 30 years
in irons; Catalano, Vellucci and Braico, to 25
years in irons; Poerio, Pironti, Borneo, to 24
years similar punishment: ten others to 19 years
in irons; two to six years’ banishment; five to


twelve months’ imprisonment; one to a fortnight’s
detention ; another to pay a fine of 50 ducats ;
and eight were set at liberty provisionally. To
a mind unbiassed by passion such a scale of pun-
ishments is a great proof of the justice observed
by the judges ; Mr. Gladstone however heeds it
not but delights in publishing that those acquitted
were nevertheless cast into prison. A falsehood
which, like so many others, has been put into his
mouth by those who are accustomed to repay
kindness with ingratitude. There is no one in
Naples, but knows that after a lapse of two days,
the decision was carried into execution. The
three wretches condemned to die, were reprieved,
and sent instead to the Ergastolo, a place of con-
finement for life in an insulated fortress. Those
who had been sentenced to be chained in irons,
were removed to the place of their destination
at the same time that the acquitted were set at
liberty. The five sentenced to twelve months’
imprisonment, had scarcely entered upon their
course of expiation, when their sentence was
remitted by the King’s decree of grace of the
30th of April of this year, a decree by which the
prison gates were opened to so many others, in
confinement, or under various sentences of con-
demnation. It therefore appears that of the 40
accused, 15 are already restored to the enjoyment
of liberty ; 25 are undergoing their sentence,


with that regard to humanity which is an attri-
bute of the Neapolitan Government. In proof of
this, we need only point to the fact that the gibbet
has nowhere been seen erected in Naples, since
the memorable revolutionary movements of 1848,
and that the government has given, not one only,
but many bright examples of clemency and mag-
nanimity. Neither has Naples, like other states
when tossed in the whirlwind of political storms,
resorted to those “ etats de siege,” those transpor-
tations, en masse, of thousands of citizens, those
standing tribunals, and even councils of war, to
which republican France has recourse at this
very time in her complicated dealings with the
Lyons conspiracy.
Mr. Gladstone, however, finds himself compelled
to acknowledge the humanity of the Neapolitan
Government. It seems, he says, that the Neapo-
litan law humanely provides, that when three
persons are found guilty capitally, the sentence
can be pronounced only on one ; but that this
was forgotten by the judges, and only found out
by the Procurator-General, or some other party,
after they thought they had finished. The judges
could not have forgotten a provision which must
have been identified with their office, neither did
the Attorney-General point out to them any such
law or practise as the writer alludes to. In the
Military Penal Statute, indeed cases are contem


plated of the condemnation to death of numbers,
and the execution of the sentence is humanely
limited as to the number of sufferers, by pre-
established rules specified in that law*.
In the present case, a Sovereign Rescript
issued as long since as the 80th November, 1850,
proclaimed his Majesty’s gracious wish that,
where the Grand Court had sentenced to death
several accused as leaders of the Sect or as con-
spirators, the Court itself should determine
whether the extreme penalty should be carried
out upon one or upon two of the culprits, ac-
cording to the cases indicated in the royal docu-
ment. In this act of leniency, his Majesty was
actuated by the dictates of his own merciful
disposition, averse to the effusion of blood, and
intent upon the means of preventing it. But
when the Judges met to deliberate upon this
interesting point, they felt, as we have heard, a
repugnance in designating, deeply sensible that
the privilege of selecting objects for mercy, was
far above the exercise of their ordinary attributes.
Vanquished nevertheless by the authority of the
Sovereign command, and responding to the con-
fidence his Majesty placed in their religion, they
expressed their unanimous opinion that if, for
the correction of the wicked, and for the sake of
* Art. 370 of Military Penal Statute of 30th January,
1819.


public example, it was required, that one should
make atonement under the hands of the execu-
tioner; the case of Faucitano was the most
aggravated, inasmuch as he, according to the ex-
pression of the Court in the printed decision,
“ from immaterial acts had passed on to material
“ acts and performance.” And in truth, Fauci-
tano was the audacious Sectarian who, after
having attempted by incendiary proceedings, to
renew in the City of Naples the scenes of blood
which disgraced Vienna and Rome, with his
own hand caused the explosion of an apparatus
resembling a shell, on a day sacred to religious
rites, in front of the Royal palace, and amidst a
crowd of inhabitants, who shuddered at the
recollection of the disturbances of 1848 ; and his
purpose in all this was to raise a tumult, enkindle
civil war, and carry bloodshed into the heart of
a populous city.
With these facts before us, how can we deny
to his Majesty of the two Sicilies the praise of
having spared the life of Faucitano, no less than
those of the other two delinquents, Agresti and
Settembrini 1 How can we believe that Mr.
Gladstone has been correctly informed upon this,
any more than upon any other matters by us
disposed of. “ 4 here appears to be too good
reason to believe,” he says, “ that the threat of
the withdrawal of certain useful support from
56


“ the Government of Naples, and not humanity
“ dictated at the last moment, the commutation
“ of his punishment.” But who could interest
himself to such a degree, in the fate of the
obscure Faucitano % or rather, who could have
had the right to meddle with the administration
of Justice of any State 1 Is this the first instance
of a pardon granted by the King to wretches who
had been condemned for treasonable attempts
against the internal security of the State 1
Without referring to many brilliant instances
previous to the year 1848, we will say, that the
few capital condemnations which have taken
place since that unfortunate period, have all been
commuted to different punishments ; and after so
much disturbance and alarm, so many civil con-
flicts, and terrible conspiracies blown over or
repressed, no spot in the kingdom has witnessed
the painful exhibition of those instruments of
death which must have been raised in other
States to the terror and dismay of the enemies of
social order*.
A bright gem indeed is this in the crown of
the Sicilian Monarch, against which the false and
empty words of a hostile press are as clouds
before the wind, or as vapours that dissolve before
the rising sun.
Sec at the end the Table of capital condemnations to
which we have alluded.


But if there are any who would wish to learn
particulars from persons of the middle class, to
which Faucitano belonged, or indeed of an-
other class, they will state, one and all, that
the counsel of both Faucitano and his con-
demned accomplices, hastened to the Palace at
Caserta to implore the Boyal clemency, and re-
turned satisfied, upon being told that his Majesty
would consider of their petitions; that a pre-
sentiment of pardon immediately pervaded the
capital, some even asserted that it was already
granted; and that the numerous family of Fau-
citano, in mournful apparel, repaired to the
palace to endeavour to soften the King’s
heart.
If we had been privileged to enter the pre-
cincts of the royal abode, doubtless we should
be in a condition to say that his Majesty expe-
xienced a severe and painful struggle between
duty and sympathy. The stern obligations of
the Sovereign Buler, bound to provide for the
security of the State and the repression of dis-
turbers, were overruled; that generous com-
passion so often felt, once more prevailed, and
the royal diadem received an accession of the
purest effulgence, A Neapolitan periodical, in
giving publicity to the grant of grace, indicted
the following beautiful words :
Ihe heart and mind are of divine conform


“ ation, they cannot be changed by earthly
“ events.”
“ In 1848, a grave offence against the State
“ doomed Longo and Belli Franci to death ;
“ the crime was certain, the trial most impartial;
“ the punishment was changed for pardon by
“ the sole and principal one offended. Malig-
“ nant men aliened the necessity of the times.
“ Another trial of no less moment took place
“ in the beginning of 1851. Three parties are
“ sentenced to death. The times are more
“ tranquil, the minds of men more calm, and
“ settled; power is consolidated. The same
“ pardon issues forth, more magnanimous, more
“ generous!
“ The heart and mind are of divine conform-
“ ation, they cannot be changed by earthly
u events*.”
But our words, which had received for awhile
the impression of gentler thoughts, must now
again assume a harsher tone, while we reply to
a fresh heap of falsehoods and exaggerations,
indulged in by Mr. Gladstone, in speaking of
the manner in which the prisoners are made to
undergo their sentence. He describes the Bagno
of Nisita, near the Lazzaretto, whither Poerio
* Omnibus —Political and Literary Journal of 5 February,
1851, Anno 19°, No. 11.


and his companions were first taken; the room
damp and without windows, in which they were
confined, the dresses they were made to put on,
and the chains with which they were loaded,
and of which he even counts the number of links,
and describes the length and weight. This it
will be allowed was rather close inspection of the
wretched condition of sufferers under the hands
of Justice, well calculated to point out the pain-
ful difference between the comforts and conve-
niences of their previous mode of life, with the
restraints, and probably sufferings resulting from
confinement in an abode of sorrow. But we
will ask, was anything done to aggravate un-
necessarily, the misery of Poerio and his com-
panions? Certainly not; and Mr. Gladstone
felt the truth of this assertion, but has endea-
voured to evade it by the following eclaircisse*
ment:—“ Well, it may be thought,” he says,
“ the practice is barbarous, and ought not to
prevail; still, as it does prevail, it might be
“ difficult to exempt those persons, although
gentlemen, from it. But this is not the true
“ explanation. On the contrary, it was for the
“ sake of these very gentlemen, that the practice
“ of chaining two and two was introduced into
“ the Bagno of Nisita. . . . Two or three weeks
“ before these double irons were totally un-
“ known.” Therefore a practice, not new, or,more


correctly speaking, a law many years in force in
all the Bagnos of the kingdom, prescribes the mode
in which persons condemned to irons are to un-
dergo this painful punishment. This same law,
had the author referred to it, would have clearly
pointed out to him the real want of foundation
tor the supposition that the practice of chaining
the prisoners two and two was recently intro-
duced, for the sole purpose of subjecting Poerio
to additional hardships*. Such a supposition
indeed, is about as rational as would be the
assumption, that the punishment of transportation
to the colonies, was expressly invented for the
purpose of torturing Smith O’Brien, and the other
conspirators, whom England, in 1848, was com-
pelled to visit with the severest punishment.
Isot a jot more true is another strange state-
ment, namely, that, by order of Mil. the
Count of Aquila, Brigadier Palumbo was dis-
patched to Nisita, to examine Poerio’s and his
companion’s fetters, and render them additionally
heavy. This high-minded Prince, neither did,
nor could give any such directions, inasmuch as
(leaving out of the question his well-known
reputation for humanity) the Bagnos, destined
to receive convicts sentenced to irons, are not
subject to the control either of the Admiralty,
01 of the Ministry of the Navy, but are governed
* Art. 9, Penal Laws.
61


solely by the Ministry of Public Works, in the
hands of General Carascosa, a man whose mill-
tary prowess is equalled by the excellent qualities
of his heart. The real truth of this matter is,
that Brigadier Palumbo, in his capacity of In-
spector of a certain branch of the Royal Navy,
repaired on the 12th of February of this year, to
Nisita, in the discharge of his duty, and for the
purpose of ascertaining how far the prison dis-
cipline was carried out, with respect to the
convicts lately sentenced, for being implicated
in the Sect of the “ Italian Unity.” He found
that they were altogether in one locality, sepa-
rated from other convicts, and that many of them,
and especially the wealthier portion, were allowed
the use of mattresses, and other conveniences, to
the continuance of which he made no objection
whatsoever. See how the fairest dealings may
be traduced, and made the subject of calumnious
accusations!
Settembrini sentenced to death, but whose life
had been spared as we have seen, by an Act of
the Royal Mercy, “ was reserved,” Mr. Gladstone
is apprehensive, “ for a much harder fate, double
“ irons for life, upon a remote and sea-girt rock ;
“ nay, there may be even reason to fear that he
“ is directly subjected to physical torture. The
“ mode of it,” the honourable writer asserts, was
specified to him upon respectable though not


certain authority , “ was the thrusting of sharp
“ instruments under the finger nails.” The
punishment of the double irons, so often brought
before us, cannot be indicted upon convicts sen-
tenced as was Settembrini, to the Ergastolo,
which consists in perpetual confinement in the
Fortress of an Island.
He and his companions doomed to the like
fate, are consigned to the Island of St. Stefano,
which is neither remote, nor distant from terra
firma*. Had wild beasts instead of men been
placed to watch over them, what motive could
they have had for savage treatment of them?
What! Settembrini complained of no cruelty at
the time of his trial, and is now subjected to it
in its most revolting form ! But why, and at
whose instigation ? Was not his life gene-
rously spared? Need we proclaim that the very
thoughts of inhuman treatment excite abhorrence
in Naples ? But Mr. Gladstone, forsooth, has
been assured by respectable parties! Oh ! a seal
upon their false lips! Why, these are the very
wretches who traduce their native country, the
bittei enemies of the public welfare, who never
cease to fan the fire of discord, in order to shut
out every possibility of reconciliation.
Mr. Gladstone supposes that “ since he left
Naples, Poerio has sunk to a lower depth of
* See Art. 7, Penal Laws.
63


“ calamity, having been taken, he understands,
“ from Nisita to Ischia, nor can he honestly
“ suppress his conviction that the object in the
“ case of Poerio, as a man of sufficient mental
“ power to be feared, is to obtain the scaffold’s
“ end, by means more cruel than the scaffold,
“ and without the outcry which the scaffold
“ would create.”
But what is this depth of calamity here alluded
to % We ourselves should be glad to know, if the
writer has indeed published his thoughts in
order to awaken the sympathies of the whole
world. A change of locality has been prompted
by reasons connected with prison discipline, as
well as by considerations of convenience. But
this affords no good ground for supposing that
“ the object in Poerio’s case is to obtain the
“ scaffold’s end, by means more cruel than the
“ scaffold.” Between the punishment of irons,
and that of the law’s severest penalty, there is
no possible room for any comparison, the im-
measurable distance between them is the dif-
ference between life and death. Neither Poerio’s
Judges nor any other of his supposed persecutors
desired that he should die, and the most con-
vincing proof of this is afforded by Mr. Glad-
stone’s own statement, when he says that “it
“ was suggested to him from an authoritative
“ quarter, that his mother, of whom he was the


“ only prop, might be sent to the King to
“ implore his pardon, or that he might himself
“ apply for it,” but that “ he steadily refused.”
We know nothing of this particular fact, but we
can say that it proclaims loudly the confidence
generally entertained by the public of the King’s
merciful disposition. If Poerio is paying to
society, threatened by the practices of a guilty
sect, the penalty of his crime, it behoves him
and his friends to bow to the laws of the land
that gave him birth, and in which he was anxious
to remain, in spite of the perils to which his
criminal actions exposed him, and although fore-
warned of the danger. The tale of his woes is
not to be traced to his love of the constitution,
as Mr. Gladstone supposes, since no man was
ever punished for entertaining such sentiments,
as is evidenced by the case of those who, though
friends of that political system, remain at peace
in their dwellings, several of them even holding
official appointments; but Poerio’s sin was his
being enslaved by an affection for his favourite
old artifices, and his ambition of being reputed
the leader of a party at Naples, as Mazzini was
of all Italy.
It is our wish, however, to administer a little
comfort to Mr. Gladstone before we close the
present article. If he, with incredible ease, has
collected and given publicity to so many lament-
E


able facts, which whether they be true or other-
wise is of little consequence to him, we, on the
other hand, are desirous of placing before him a
few agreeable facts. Since his departure from
Naples, Poerio’s condition, and that of his com-
panions, has become much more endurable; not
that the Government, be it remembered, have
given any orders for a deviation from the rules ol
penal discipline, but because the real good nature
of the Neapolitan folks can, with the aid of time,
mitigate the severest suffering. We have been
informed—but not by the parties of respectability
consulted by Mr. Gladstone, but by parties who
are in a position to prove their words, if need be
by an official correspondence—that all the con-
victs are not clothed in the prison dress, and that
those who are do not wear it at all times; that
Poerio and Pironti have been allowed to go to
the hospital for the purpose of bathing, and that
the former has returned thither, not by reason of
sickness, but because he thought to be more
comfortable there; that at certain hours of the
day they lay aside their chains, and at others go
out to breathe the pure air of the Island; that
Nisco is often visited by his wife and daughters,
and also by a brother, and that on one day they
were fain to stay and dine with him—and let it
be understood that on this occasion he was
released from the companionship of his fellow


sufferer, and had not his usual chains fastened to
his feet.
But in order to give a deeper shade to his pic-
ture of these places of punishment, Mr. Gladstone
refers to a fact no longer recent, but relates it in
a manner so wide of the truth that it is impossible
to believe his statement. “It appears,” he says,
that, not long ago, exasperated by the treatment
“ they received, the inmates of the State Prison
of Ischia revolted, and endeavoured to gain
possession of the prison. The mode of quelling
this revolt was as follows. —The soldiers in
charge of them threw hand-grenades among
“ them, and killed them to the number of 175.
In this number were included 17 invalids in the
Infirmary, who had no part in the revolt.”
Behold, in a few words, several false or exagge-
lated statements. Ihe occurrence did not happen
in the prison of Ischia, but in the Bagno of Pro-
cida. Ihis was not a State prison, but a place
of punishment for culprits sentenced to irons,
among whom there were no political offenders,
as the whole matter refers to the month of June
in 1848, the time when the agitation of the
Demagogues was at its height, but no attempt
had yet been perpetrated affecting the security of
the State. It was not a mere revolt of these con-
victs that compelled the military force in charge
of them to resort to arms, but the acts of violence
67


committed by them in endeavouring to effect their
escape, for which purpose they broke loose from
their fetters and threw down a wall and gratings.
Had they succeeded thus far, there was only one
other wall left to cut off their flight. Far from
being deterred by the attitude of the military,
they rushed furiously upon them, and would have
murdered them had not the soldiers fired in order
to restrain them. It is to be lamented that some
fell victims; but none of the Infirmary patients
were included among these. Mr. Gladstone him-
self admits that “ a revolt or riot in a prison is a
“ formidable thing, and requires strong mea-
“ suresand yet, without any advantage or gain,
it is evident that he has raked up an old occur-
rence, that happened in a manner quite different
from that which he has described, and imposed
by the absolute necessity of repressing the violence
of a troop of rebellious convicts.
68


VII.
Mr. Gladstone's second Letter is a confirmation of his first, save
a few additional errors.
The Honourable Mr. Gladstone, not satisfied
with having written one lengthy letter to the
Earl of Aberdeen, has published a second, in the
course of which he expresses himself as follows :
“ I do not intend to add to the statements of
“ fact contained in my last letter, though they
“ are hut a portion, and not always the most
“ striking portion, of those which I might have
“ produced.” And further on he says: “My
“ chief purpose at present is, to sustain the
“ general probability of my statements, by a re-
“ ference to unquestionable facts, which have
“ occurred both in other parts of Italy and in
Naples itself.” But what are these undoubted
facts ? listen to his narrative of the case of a cer-
tain officer of Police in Milan, called Bolza: he
tells us that at the time of the Revolution of
1848, the private notes of the Government on
his chaiacter, and that of other Police Agents,
were discovered. Bolza is therein described as


a person “ harsh, insincere, and anything but
“ respectable, capable of anything for money’s
“ sake ; in other respects understanding his
“ business, and right good at it.” He adds that,
at the point of death, Bolza, by his will, forbid
his children to seek any employment in the Exe-
cutive Police, so mean an opinion had he of his
own profession. The truth is, in Naples, as in
other countries, leaving out of the question the
subaltern Agents of the Police, other officials
enjoy, with the government and with their fellow
citizens, a degree of consideration and esteem
that increases always in proportion to their
talents and virtues.
The author next touches upon certain ordi-
nances and regulations emanating from the Court
of Pome, and from the Dukedom of Modena, at
a period anterior to 1848, and dismissing the
subject of the Police, returns to his favourite
topic, namely, the political position of the present
Government of Naples. He was not unmindful,
however, of his early protestation that he wished
to avoid a discussion upon such a theme; now,
however, he says, “ some reference to it is neces-
“ sary,” because “ no such extremities of fear,
“ cruelty, and baseness,” as it has been his
irksome duty to describe, “ could be reached by
“ any Government but one already unmanned
“by a bad conscience.” We are opposed to


these words : a faint picture of the horrors which
disgraced the capital and the provinces some
time after the proclamation of the constitution
of 1848, and declared our unwillingness to waste
more words, after the author’s candid acknow-
ledgment that with such matters no foreigner
had any right to interfere. If, however, he re-
turns to the subject, it is under an overwhelming-
sense of the terror and cruelty which he describes
as prevailing in Naples. He is justly anxious to
discover the cause of what he considers an inex-
plicable phenomenon. As he is not disposed to
deny to the Neapolitan people simple manners,
expansive hearts, and much religion, he supposes
that the officers of the Government, from the
highest grade to the lowest, must be altogether
made of a different stuff. He acknowledges indeed
that the Neapolitan Monarch is reputed to be
most regular and strict in the offices of religion,
an assertion in making which he is still much
below the truth.
Now to a person of sound understanding, these
very facts must render very improbable the alleged
accusations of cruel persecutions and barbarous
punishments, inasmuch as piety and cruelty have
never been known to seek shelter under the same
roof, nor has the Catholic religion at any time taken
part in the sacrifice of human victims. But let
the philanthropic writer seek comfort to his


aching heart in the reflection that these ideas of
cruelty and terror are but the offspring of a
fevered imagination, and have been suggested to
him by wretches who, groaning under a weight
of guilt, only strive to vent their bitter hatred
against those whom they believe to be their per-
secutors, but who in reality proved to be their
humane judges. And let us be allowed to repeat
that if the sources from which such ideas have
been gathered were impure, the stream must
inevitably be tainted with the like impurity.
But the author of the letters, in order still to
strenghen his assertions, as he felt himself bound
to do, has recourse to “ another source of evi-
“ dence, which illustrated in a form the most
“ painful and revolting the completeness, the
“ continuity, the perfect organisation of the system
“ described by him.” From this source, however,
nothing more valuable is obtained than the pub-
lication of a small work, by an unknown author,
with the title of “ Philosophical Catechism, for
“ the use of the lower schools,” printed byßaffaelle
Miranda, in 1850, and with the motto, “ Ne quis
“ vos decipiat per philosophiam.”
Mr. Gladstone considers this work highly re-
prehensible in many places, and, as the only
ground for his opinion, he quotes several frag-
ments which appear to him “ false, base, and
“ demoralising, sometimes ludicrous, but oftener


“ horrible.” He does not shrink from asserting,
that this book contains “ a complete systematised
“ philosophy of perjury for monarchs.” We
should be losing sight of the immediate purpose
of Mr. Gladstone’s performance, were we to
attempt to discuss the merit of the doctrines
expounded in the work by him so misinterpreted.
Neither Mr. Gladstone nor ourselves are com-
petent judges of such a book; it unfolds too
large an amount of religious matter to admit of
a minute examination; neither would we wish
to carry into another field a question which he
himself had restricted to a consideration of the
forms more or less regular observed in the trials
of a few ill-fated individuals, and of the manner
in which they are made to undergo the punish-
ment inflicted upon them. On the other hand,
if he lays so much stress on this book for the
sole purpose of strengthening the proposition,
that it is “ exactly adapted to the actual facts of
Neapolitan history during the last three and a
half years, what will be his surprise, nay, his
just indignation, when he hears that this book
is not a performance of the last three years and
a half, as he supposes, but an old tract, which
it pleased the piety of an ecclesiastic to publish
several years prior to the memorable one of
1848, and that his heir in 1850, has thought
proper to have it reprinted for his own private


benefit, and without the sanction, or even the
knowledge of the Government. The old edition,
which we have consulted, came to light in 1837,
and consists with the index, of seventy octavo
pages. It corresponds exactly with the edition
of 1850, which was also published before the
law for restraining the liberty of the press came
into operation, since which, neither the Ministry
of Public Instruction, nor the authority of the
Police, can sanction or allow its impression. Its
title, “ Ad uso delle Scuole inferiori,” is altogether
discretionary, so much so, that it does not appear
at all in the edition of 1850, which bears on
the title page the initials “ C. M. L.”
In these elucidations, the illustrious writer, it
is hoped, will discover fresh arguments to con-
vince him how deeply he has been drawn into
error, by the malignity of others, and by a de-
liberate, and, it may indeed be called, systematic
attempt to throw, if possible, discredit, in every
imaginable way, upon the Neapolitan Govern-
ment.
74


CONCLUSION.
It now only remains to follow Mr. Gladstone
in his conclusion to his first Letter, wherein the
sum total of errors and calumnious charges is
included; and we shall do so the more readily
as many portions of the second Letter have already
been touched upon. He thanks Lord Aberdeen,
for having allowed him to address that letter to
him, “ but for which permission, he might have
“ found himself wholly without the means of
“ putting any such engine into operation as would
“ offer him the least hope of quietly producing
“ a salutary effect upon the proceedings of the
“ Neapolitan Government.” He declares that
“ he has undertaken this wearisome and painful
“ task, in the hope of doing something to dimin-
“ ish a mass of human suffering, as huge, he
“ believes, and as acute, to say the least, as any
“ that the eye of Heaven beholds.” Praiseworthy
and holy thought for which every honest man
must acknowledge himself indebted to him !
Justice notwithstanding, has its reasons, and it is
worse than idle to pretend to stand up to preach


humanity, and at the same moment to trample
upon the rights of others; and more especially
the rights of society threatened in its repose.
Perhaps our disquisition upon Mr. Gladstone’s
letters may convince the unenlightened how far
he has strayed from the truth.
Firstly. —By setting himself up unjustly for a
censor of a government, without having, by his
own avowal, the right to do so, and without bring-
ing any other proof than the false and calumnious
statements of the enemies of all social order.
Secondly. —By deploring the fate of political
offenders, and without measure exaggerating
their number, whereas by the testimony of other
illustrious travellers, and by irrefragable docu-
ments, it is known how humanely they have been
treated, and that in the month of June, of this
year their number did not exceed 2024, including
the many who have since obtained their liberty.
Thirdly. —By supposing unjust the condemna-
tion of some of the most notable conspirators,
upon hearing untrue statements from their own
mouths, and from their published defence, without
consulting the conclusive published evidence
brought against them, and without regarding
public opinion, wkich is unanimous in asserting
that their sentence was dictated by humanity
rather than by severity.
Fourthly. —By imagining cruelty and barbarity


in the execution of their sentences, whereas,
through the Royal clemency, the sentence of
death has not been in any one instance carried into
execution, and the sentences to the Ergastolo or
to irons, are carried out by the officers of the
Bagnos, with a degree of leniency that appears
almost excessive.
Therefore, all the exaggerated woes and
imagining abuses described, exist only in the
fruitful imagination of the writer, and, if you
will so have it, in the sympathy which he feels
for men who, overtaken by the Law, and con-
victed after a solemn trial, of seditious practices,
and of attempts against public order, now groan
under the weight of those punishments, to which
they have voluntarily exposed themselves. A
school, imbued with infernal maxims, is en-
deavouring, it is true, to spread even throughout
Italy, the frightful doctrines that men may, with
impunity, disturb the repose of society, shake
the foundations of Governments, deny them the
right of chastising those who by snares threaten
their stability, and that there ought to be no
inquisitors, no witnesses, no Judges to convict
these artful subverters of civil communities. But
the good sense of an immense majority of those
who reject and condemn such false and unjust
principles, and defend in all the States of Europe
the cause of order and social happiness, hence-


forward the universal cause will make a just
discrimination between the errors and false ac-
cusations too freely scattered in Mr. Gladstone’s
letters, under colour of philanthropic views, and
the facts and documents brought to light by us,
with the simplicity of men conscious of being in
the right.
Naples, August 25, 185 J.
END.


Provinces.
Impri-
soned.
Under
external
custody.
Observations.
Naples. . . •
223
28
The figures opposite, taken from the last
Terra di Lavoro
80
6
Returns forwarded to the Royal Ministry of
Principato Citra
381
12
Grace and Justice, have already undergone a
Do. Ultra.
4
diminution: various causes have been com-
Molise ....
43
pleted since the Returns were sent in, and
Basilicata. .
156
ii
the Royal Indulgence of the 19th of May last,in
Abruzzo Citra •
6
favour of a specific class of political offenders
Do. Ultra 2°
94
relative to 212 causes, has set many at liberty.
Do. Ultra 1°
1
Several cases will come to trial during the
Calabria Citra .
293
7
present month of June, and in the early part
Do. Ultra 2 a
54
of coming July.
Do. Ultra l a
344
Capitauata . .
112
is
Naples, 18th June, 1851.
Terra di Bari
20
Terra d’ Otranto
8
The Official Chief of the 3rd Division
of the Ministry of Grace and Justice.
Total
1819
79
{Signed,) Cay. Giov. Pasqualoni.
(No. 1.)
NUMERICAL RETURN
Of political offenders present at judgment, imprisoned or under
external custody at the Special Great Courts of the continental
dominions of the kingdom of The Two Sicilies.
NOTE.
If to the number of political offenders at the Special Great Courts,
amounting to . . . . . . • • • 1819
Be added that of the prisoners, as per Return, No. 2, of the Police, viz. 205
The total number of political offenders is 2024
From this number must be deducted those who have been admitted to the
benefit of the Sovereign Indulgencies of 30th April and 19th May, 1851, according
to Return No. 3, independently of those who have been tried by the Special
Great Courts from the month of June, the period of the compilation of the
above Return, until the end of August of this same year 1851.


1
Naples
. 77
The arrest of prisoners, as seen
Pozzuoli and Caste
opposite, has always been effected
2
-
under grave and imperative considera-
lemmare . . .
2
tions of public order and security, not
Caserta ....
through caprice and without legal
3
2
forms, but in virtue of orders emanating
Salerno ....
from the constituted ordinary Police
4
19
Authorities, who, by an express pro-
Avellino ....
vision of the law, are empowered to
5
17
arrest for, and even bring actions in
6
Potenza ....
cases of State offences, according to
6
the instructions of the 22nd of January,
Foggia
1817, (*) solemnly confirmed with
7
9
other posterior legislative dispositions.
8
Bari
4
(*) “ Art. 10.—Besides the powers
9
Lecce
“ expressed in the two preceding ar-
10
“ tides, the ordinary Police, in cases
10
Cosenza
“ within the competence of the higher
C
“ Police, indicated in Art. 3, is also
11
Catanzaro . . . .
“ invested with the attributes of the
2
“ judiciary Police. In this capacity
12
Reggio
“ it may proceed to arrest parties
10
“ suspected of any of the aforesaid
13
Campobasso . . . .
“ misdeeds, even out of the case of
7
“ flagrance, may detain those arrested,
14
Chieti
“ at their discretion, beyond the 24
12
“ hours, and may indict them upon
15
Aquila
“ such offences. This, however, does
19
“ not prevent the other agents of the
16
Teramo
“ judiciary Police from taking measures
3
“ for the detection of the same offences,
“ and pursuing the guilty parties.”
N.B. As fast as the required inform-
ation respecting prisoners comprised
in the returns arrives, they are liberated
day by day, as is the constant practice.
The Official Chief of Division
of the Ministry of the Interior,
Branch of Police.
Signed, — Giuseppe Babtolomucci.
Total, No. . .
205
(No. 2.)
NUMERICAL RETURN
Of individuals detained in prison at the discretion of the Police
for Political Offences in the different provinces of the continental
dominions of the kingdom of The Two Sicilies.


PROVINCES.
Sentenced,
but
Reprieved.
Brought to
trial, but
the penal
action is
abolished.
Total.
Observations.
N aples
14
22
36
Terra di Lavoro..
6
11
17
Principato Citra..
6
29
35
Principato Ultra .
9
16
25
Molise
6
22
28
Basilicata
4
13
17
Calabria Citra
1
—
1
Calabria Ultra 2 a .
3
6
9
Calabria Ultra l a .
7
6
13
Abruzzo Citra....
2
8
10
Abruzzo Ultra 2°.
5
27
32
Abruzzo Ultra 1° .
3
1
4
Capitanata
5
47
52
Terra di Bari....
4
10
14
Naples, 24th July, 1851.
The Official Chief of the
Terra d’ Otranto .
4
11
15
3rd Division of the Min-
istry of Grace and Justice.
Signed,
Total
79
229
308
Cav. Giov. Pasqualoni.
(No. 3.)
NUMERICAL RETURN
Of Political Offenders in the Royal Continental Dominions, present
at Judgment, and admitted to the benefit of the Sovereign Indul-
gences of the 30th April, and 19th of May, 1851.
r


Names and Surnames
of the Accused.
Natcke op the Offence.
Special Great Courts where tried.
Period of the Decrees of Gracious
Commutation of Punishment.
1. Gennaro Placco
2. Giovanni Pollari .
3. Tobia Gentile . .
Convicted of attempts against the internal security of
the State, committing acts to destroy the Government and
, excite subjects to take up arms against Royal Authority.
Convicted of going over to foreign and hostile army,
, bearing arms against his own Sovereign and the State.
Sentenced to death by the Special
Great Court of Cosenza.
Sentenced to death by the Special
Great Court of Aquila.
By a Royal Decree of 22nd Feb-
ruary, 1850, sentence changed for
imprisonment.
By Royal Decree, sentence changed
to 18 years of close confinement, in
4. Filippo Agresti
5. Luigi Settembrini .
6. Salvatore Faucitano
-
Convicted of illicit association, organised into a body,
with bond of secresy, constituting a Sect “ Italian Unity,”
of whom the first was also the leader.
Agresti and Settembrini also convicted of conspiring
against the internal security of the State, with a view to
destroy and change the Government : and, Faucitano, of
exciting to civil war, and to carry slaughter among the
inhabitants of the capital.
Sentenced to death by the Special
Great Court of Naples.
fetters.
By Royal Decree of 3rd February,
1851, sentence changed to imprison-
ment.
7. P. Girolamo da
Cardinale, nel
Secolo Domenico
Lombardo . .
-
Convicted of conspiracy and attempt against the in-
ternal security of the State, with a view to destroy and
change the Government, by exciting the subjects to take
up arms against Royal Authority, by speeches in public
places, tending to provoke, in a direct manner, the in-
i habitants of the kingdom to commit the above offences.
Sentenced to death by the Special
Great Court of Reggio.
By Royal Decree of 7th March,
1851, sentence commuted to impri-
sonment.
8. Girolamo Zerbi
9. Giovan Francesco
Griffo ....
10. "Nicola, Palermo
1
Convicted of attempt to destroy and change the Govern-
ment, and to excite subjects and inhabitants of the
kingdom to arm against Royal Authority.
' Convicted of attempt against the internal security of
State, with a view to destroy and change the Government,
by forming one of an armed band, organised for that pur-
pose, exercising command and resisting the Royal Troops.
, Convicted of conspiracy and attempt to destroy and
1 change the Government.
Sentenced to death by the Special
Great Court of Reggio.
Sentenced to death by the Special
Great Court of Catanzaro.
Sentenced to death "by the Special
By Royal Decree of 14th May, 1851,
sentence commuted to 24 years’ con-
finement, in fetters.
By Royal Decree of 2nd June, 1851, I
sentence commuted to 24 years, in I
fetters. |
J3y Royal Decree of 7th June, 1 851, I
commuted to 30 yoax-a. in jfj
Of Capital Condemnations for Political Offences after the unhappy year 1848, comnratea oy His Majesty the King of the Two
Sicilies of his own grace to other punishments, in his Continental Dominions.
(No. 4.)
TABLE
