

a REPLY
MR. S. A. ROSA’S PAMPHLET,
ENTITLED :
“An Exposure of the Federal Conspiracy.”
DONALD CORMACK,
A Member of the New South Wales Federal Association.
Sydney:
HENNESSEY, HARPER & COMPANY, LIMITED,
Hunter and Hamilton Streets




K REPLY
MR. S. A. ROSA’S PAMPHLET,
ENTITLED :
‘An Exposure of the Federal Conspiracy.”
DONALD CORMACK,
A Member of the New South Wales Federal Association.
Sydney:
HENNESSEY, HARPER & COMPANY, LIMITED,
Hunter and Hamilton Streets.




A REPIrT
To Mr. S. A. ROSA’S PAMPHLET, ENTITLED :
I
“An Exposure of the Federal Conspiracy.”
(Reprinted from the Australian Federalist, June 25, 1898. J
Sir, —You did me the favour of sending me
a copy of your pamphlet, and I have read it
carefully through.
Your conclusions I cannot endorse, simply
because our bias is in opposite directions on
this great subject of Australian Federation.
Neither can I commend as your motto for
Australians, the quotation from Sydney
Smith: “ a people do well to watch and
suspect their rulers, and not to be defrauded
of happiness and money by false pretences.”—
A greater than Sydney Smith said, “ Charity
thinketh no evil,” and I commend that purest
philosophy to your careful analysis, in view
especially of a combined public debt of
£150,000,000 for adjustment by the five Fed-
erating States, an obligation which neces-
sarily involves absolute confidence in all
legislators of democratic appointment, if ruin
is to be averted.
Many writers upon Australian Federation,
appear to he possessed of a scared imagination,
and just as the schoolboy on a dark or lonely
road, finds it necessary to whistle in order to
suppress his fears, so the Anti-Billite, often
driven in spite of himself by patriots pur-
suing their destiny along a road, the safety
of which he can neither know nor appreciate
in the very violence of the tumult within and
without him, wildly screams defiance to his
imaginary foes.
In Chapter 111. you take us back nearly
2200 years to the Achaian League, and gravely
tell us that institution was the death of
Greek philosophers, forgetting all the time to
tell us also that there were then no financial
ft 33 55/A 8 7oj
swindlers, blackmailing editors, and debt
raising and devouring provincial politicians to
fire the intelligent indignation, to purify the
patriotic devotion, and to vanquish the dis-
honorable power of the purse by the
triumphant principles of truth and right.
You might encourage the hope that the
nationhood towards which we are slowly
beginning to move, by the high road of
Federation, means not the destruction of the
virtuous, but their apotheosis.
There is a way for man to rise to that
serene height which the ancient Greeks
never knew. Plato, indeed, scorned not to
be instructed in that philosophy upon which
the lowly Nazarene afterwards centred the
whole of his thought and teaching. Says an
old historian : —“ Whilst studious youth
were crowding to Athens from every quarter
in search of Plato for their master, that
philosopher was wandering along the banks
of the Nile or the vast plains of a barbarous
country, himself a disciple of the old men of
Egypt.” And another says :—“ After stor-
ing his mind with the wisdom of Egyptians,
Plato is said to have gone on to
Palestine, and to have had the Unknown God
revealed to him by Jewish Rabbis.” That,
it appears to me, is the secret all philosophers
are pursuing, and it has been made plain to
the willing and obedient, by the despised
and rejected Nazarene, that Moses, who was
‘ ‘ learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, ’ ’
teaches a philosophy which children can be
made to understand, and, therefore, you should
not take a pessimistic view of wisdom and
courage under Australian Federation.


To me, Federation is not so much a matter
of choice as a matter of necessity and urgency,
and I like to think of Australia as creating
her own precedents, rather than flying either
to Greece, America, or to any Continental
Federacy for the pattern of her Constitution.
No other 3,2000,00 people in the world were
ever expected te frame a Constitution with a
combined public debt of £150,000,000,
to say nothing of their private debts
and shrinking assets, both of which will
continue unless we federate at once. How
Australia is to federate, so as to give satis-
faction to all phases of political thought is a
question that can only be worked out by all
parties seeking to understand tne vast issues
involved in the Federal compact. You
appear to fly at once, so to speak, at the
throats of the Delegates for coming to any
conclusion at all, and you cry aloud:
“ There is a conspiracy afoot to still
further defraud us of happiness and
money by false pretence.” All that
I need say to this is: it is a good rule in
public or private life, never to say anything
which you cannot prove. One great
trouble with you is the hackneyed objection
to the constitution of the senate. Without
equal representation no Federation is pos-
sible —that view, at least, was made very
plain at every session of the Convention.
Personally, I cannot work myself into any
fear and trembling over this phase of the
question. I certainly would have preferred
a more reciprocal system than the Bill
provides, but I would not reject Feder-
ation when I know it is possible, if found
necessary, to make three states out of
New South Wales, whose interests would
be identical in the Senate. But you
evidently lose sight of the fact that the
right of a voter at the ballot box is essen-
tially different from the rights of a com-
posite state. While majority rule may be
accepted as the shibboleth of individual
democrats, it becomes a domestic and
political fiction, in the home and in all
deliberate assemblies where the federal
headship is acknowledged.
This political fiction only must be the
false pretence you mean, and you cannot
alter it under provincialism, or under
Federation, neither can you alter it by the
referendum.
You quote against the Bill, Nash and
Coghlan. The mistake they make is they
exalt the science of statistics above the
science of economics, and lose sight of the
fact that Federal Finance is not
so much a question of the ways
and means of the Parliaments
as the ways and means of the people who
create the Parliaments. I desire always to
impress the idea that the strength of the
Federacy must rest upon the«people’s power
to produce, rather than upon the people’s
power to consume borrowed imports, and
therefore products must be stimulated until
their value exceeds the people’s cost of living,
which is notoriously not the case under pro-
vincialism.
The people evidently care not to know how
to become rich by putting into circulation
£4,400,000 per annum in Australian products
alone, nor how to secure to Australia a
Banking system approximating to the Bank
of England, with this important difference
that instead of the proprietary of the coming
Dominion Bank of Australia being private
capitalists as in England, each of the Federa-
ting States would put up the capital based
on say, sixpence in the pound on the annual
value of their products, which would yield,
including Queensland, £2,500,000, out of
which the cost of Federal Government,
£300,000, should be taken, so as to avoid any
customs and excise at all for Federal pur-
poses. I can think of no more equitable
arrangement than a uniform percentage con-
tribution based upon each States products, to
defray the cost of Federal Government. That
sum of £2,200,000 could be made a gold
margin of £4,400,000 currency and credit,
and by a system of tendering to supply wheat,
wine, and iron, to the Dominion Bankers, there
would be brought into active employment
for the occupation of labor, both arable lands
and the present idle hoards of gold in private
banker’s hands.' In this way could Aus-
tralia attract to her both population and
enterprising capitalists, and the standard of
living and comfort would at once change for
the better. A way could then be made for a
system of credit for poor and honest work-
men, on the guarantee of their financial
friends, which would unite labor and capital
for the common good, and Australians could
then live in a dignified way by their own
right arm, instead of constantly plung-
ing both arms into mine uncle’s money bags,


and paying twice over for the privilege,
which is an economic fact that ought to
have been discovered long ago.
Allow me to show you how that much
maligned clause, known as the Braddon Blot,
is one of the brightest gems of the whole
Bill, which has the effect of securing to
Australia a Freetrade tariff lighter in its
incidence than the present narcotic and
stimulant tariff of New South Wales. You
will grant at once that a high protective
tariff will defeat its object, simply because
people will not consume dutiable necessaries
and conveniences sufficiently to provide the
revenue required. It follows, therefore, a
high protective tariff becomes an impossibility
under that clause. Now as, in the opinion
of every anti-Billite, a revenue of £1,600,000
will be required by the Commonwealth,
it must of necessity be raised not
by taxing consumers only as under a
Protectionist tariff, but by taxing as well
the producer of income as under the system
of New South Wales, that is, in other words,
by a direct tax as I have stated on products,
which is an economic system of income tax-
ation that ought to be adopted in the con-
dition of Australian finance.
A tariff to yield £3,140,000 would take
out of the pockets of consumers in New South
Wales, less than they pay at present through
Customs and Excise. A fourth of that
amount £785,000, would be retained by the
Federacy, and the balance returned to the
States to be united with Railway and Land
revenue, so as to pay the loan interest. The
five Federating States produced in 1894-95,
£70,623,000, which would yield, at threepence
in the pound, £882,000, which would be the
direct taxation paid by the producer, (vide
Herald 31st May, page 4.), and as it would
not be raised by Customs and Excise under
the 87th clause of the Bill, but under clause
51, subsection 2., no portion of this £882,000
would be returned to the States. These sums
would give to the Federacy a surplus of
£67,000 over the £1,600,000 said to be re-
quired. But there are other ways of dealing
with this sum of £1,600,000, which can be
better understood by my breaking up Federal
Finance into three sections, viz.,—
Cost of Federal Defence, £825,000.
Cost of Federal Government, £425,000.
Loss on Services transferred, £350,000.
Total £1,600,000
Federal Defence can be dealt with in two
ways:—
First, each of the States might be required
to pay as at present, out of their own revenue
raised by their independent powers in any
way excepting through customs and excise.
Secondly, the direct taxation of threepence in
the pound on all products could be appro-
priated for that special purpose, on the prin-
ciple that products shall pay for their defence.
If the Federacy had an independent source of
revenue, such as I have mentioned, and the
States were allowed to retain their customs
and excise, of course made uniform by the
Commonwealth, the bookkeeping would be
saved, and finance would be simplified, but I
would not refuse the Bill for the bookkeep-
ing clauses.
Dealing now with loss of services trans-
ferred, £350,000 —Under more capable admin-
istration, which wider scope would secure,
the loss on services could be turned into a
profit, by conducting the Departments on
correct business principles. This would
reduce the whole problem of Federal finance
to £425,000 (raised by the Commissioners
from £3oo,ooo—the Convention figures) in-
volving no more under Clause 51, but under
Clause 87, only £1,700,000 through customs
and excise from the five States. So you see
how that 87th Clause leaves Freetraders and
Protectionists free to fight their old battles
in the wider sphere of Australia federated,
and if we had not that clause, the fatal mis-
take might be committed of fixing, by the
terms of the Constitution, either the princi-
ple of Freetrade or Protection. As the clause
stands, we have absolute freedom to move
either way, without a high protective tariff
being a possibility, owing chiefly to our pro-
ducing less in value than we consume each
year.
The wormwood of the opposition of a
section of the press lay in the fact that it
would not see the possibility of a Freetrade
tariff under Sir Edward Braddon’s clause.
Anti-Billites persistently urged and may con-
tinue to urge in the coming struggle, that to
secure the solvency of what they were pleased
to designate the weaker states, a tariff of
£6,400,000 would have to be raised, and they
made it appear that the “Braddon Blot”
was the instrumental cause of a large draft
upon the pockets of the freetraders in New
South Wales. Was there not an exuberance’
of zeal on the part of certain newspapers,


worthy of those I have referred to, as pos-
sessed of a scared imagination ? So many
are exempt from all taxation in New South
Wales, the fallacy quickly became a vulgar
error, and I would encourage your influence
to dissipate that which to me appears a
thoughtless view to take of the situation.
Each state having power to raise its own
revenue it was obviously not the function of
the delegates to provide hard and fast
methods to secure the solvency of the States.
The States may be confidently trusted not to
allow any default to occur, and the general
scope of the financial clauses of the Bill is
ample and sufficient for probable exigencies.
The Federacy may be trusted to make any
weak State the objective as regards popula-
tion, which is the one great solvent of all the
financial ills of Australia. New South Wales
is a clear example of this at the present time,
in contrast with other Colonies, where popu-
lation is not increasing so fast.
You will admit that navigation or irri-
gation of the boundary rivers cannot pro-
ceed without federation, and the conserva-
tion of water must therefore proceed
Yours, etc.,
Printed by Hennessey, Harper & Co., Ltd., Hunter and Hamilton Streets, Sydney.
contemporaneously with new population.
The opening up of so much country in
New South Wales would develop her
resources beyond the most sanguine expec-
tations of even the most enthusiastic
Billite, and Bourke especially would rise
to majestic influence.
At this stage I will ask you to give up
that faculty you appear to possess of
discrediting the leaders of this great
national enterprise.
The question grows in the mind the
more it is dwelt upon, so it has been with
me, so it will be with you, and if instead of
writing a long exposure of what you terra
a “ federal conspiracy,” you could meet the
advocates of the measure face to face with
your solid objections written on a paper
the size of a Jubilee stamp, I promise that
you will be convinced that patriotism
demands your allegiance to the form of the
Commonwealth Bill of 1898,
DONALD CORMACK.




