

Tfmf *
A RECENT VISIT TO SEVERAL OF THE
POLYNESIAN ISLANDS.
BY GEORGE BENNETT, MEMBER OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF SURGEON
IN LONDON, &C. &C.
PUBLISHED IN THE UNITED SERVICE JOURNAL FOR JUNE 1831.
During a recent visit to several of the beautiful islands of Poly-
nesia, I recorded all the information that I could collect respecting
them, and my observations thereupon. The following sketches are an
attempt to describe what I beheld of the scenery of these islands,
together with the manners, customs, manufactures, &c. of the people.
Formerly I had read much respecting the South-Sea Islands, and their
scenery, productions and inhabitants, as described in the various works
that I perused, captivated my imagination. I had previously visited
several parts of India ; I had witnessed many remarkable scenes, and
the impressions that remained on my imagination were very vivid; the
scenery, the inhabitants, oriental pomp and splendour are too captivat-
ing to be easily forgotten; but when my route extended to Polynesia,
when I viewed its scenery, peculiar customs of the people, the ship
crowded with natives, their arts, manufactures, &c. how different were
these impressions!
The importance of these islands as respects their capability of pro-
ducing those articles of commerce which are peculiar to tropical climates,
has not sufficiently excited the attention of the mercantile community
of Great Britain. As by our commerce we have attained that prosperity
which ranks our country so high among European nations, every sub-
ject, which is connected with it, ought to be considered of importance; the
commerce of the Sandwich Islands alone, by the industry and persever-
ance of the enterprising people of the United States of America, is calcu-
lated at a million and upwards of dollars annually, and may be considered
to be gradually on the increase. This commerce, through our neglect, has
for years been enjoyed solely by the American merchants; even now, ex-
cepting two or three mercantile speculators, but of trivial importance,
who are British subjects, the trade is exclusively confined to the mer-
chants of the United States, who have laudably permitted no oppor-
tunity to escape by which their commerce might be extended, and it is
gradually now on the increase over the Polynesian Islands. Not only
in a mercantile point of view are the Sandwich Islands of importance;
their geographical situation renders them an acquisition when politi-
cally considered, more particularly since the South American States have
gained their independence. The Americans view those islands with a
jealous eye, and dread seeing them in the possession of a foreign power;
they are well aware of their importance, and the visits of their ships
of war for the purpose of keeping up a close intercourse with the king
and native chiefs has become of late very frequent. The following ac-
count of the visit of the American ship of war Vincennes, with the ac- ,
companying document sent by the Government of the United States to
the King of the Sandwich Islands, sufficiently demonstrates the interest
taken by them in these islands.
“ The ship of war Vincennes, Capt. Finch, arrived at Hilo Hawaii, on the 2nd,
and at Honolulu, Oahu, on the 14th of October. (1829)
On the 15th Capt. Finch and his officers met the king and chiefs at the palace of
Kauikeoauli, where they were gratified with a friendly reception. _
The commander of the Vincennes then read a communication of his own to the
king, and gave him both the original and a translation in the native language- H


then read also the communication from the President of the United States to the
King of the Sandwich Islands, which he had brought; the same being read also
from a translation into the native language, was delivered into the hands of the
king.
This being finished, Capt. Finch delivered the presents which the President had
sent. A pair of globes, terrestrial and celestial, and a map of the United States, to
the King. A silver vase to Kaahuraanu, with her name and the American arms
upon it. Two silver goblets to Nahienaena, with her name and the American
arms. A map of the world to Governor Boki; and also a map of the world to
Governor Adams.
The following are the above named communications which are now published by
the request of the King and Chiefs, and with the consent of Capt. Finch.
King Tamaamahah : —The President has confided to my care a written com-
munication for yourself, and such counsellors as you rely upon; accompanying it
with various presents for each ; in testimony of the good opinion he entertains for
you individually, and to evince his desire for amity and confidence, in all inter-
course that may subsist between your people and my countrymen.
That the genuineness of the letter may not be questioned, which might have
been the case, if the transmission had been intrusted to casual conveyance ; and to
make it the more honourable to yourself, he has dispatched a ship of war for this
and other purposes; and it is enjoined upon me as the commander, to deliver it in
person into your keeping ; to reiterate the expressions of good will which it con-
tains ; and to exhibit by my own deportment, the sincerity of the motives which
has actuated him.
The friendly and kind reception afforded to one other national ship, the Peacock,
has been most favourably represented by her commander, and doubtless has con-
duced greatly to the visit which I now make.
The improving state of your people has also been so interestingly described by
one of your friends, Rev. Mr. Stewart, now beside me, as to awaken among my
countrymen at large, great benevolence of feeling towards you ; and it will be my
duty, and I trust I shall be warranted on my return among them, to strengthen
their prepossessions in your favour, and to confirm the accounts of the good traits
of character of our new acquaintances the islanders, subject to your authority.
With your leave I will now acquit myself of the pleasing duty devolving upon
me, by reading and handing the document adverted to, which illustrates the light
in which the President wishes to hold your nation, and upon which you will, I
hope, ponder often, deliberately and fully.
The presents I also ask permission to distribute amongst those of your faithful
friends for whom they are intended, trusting that they will tend to enlargement of
knowledge, invite to social and rational enjoyments ; and farther, secure enduring
recollections of the assurances which I give of the disinterested friendship of the
President and Government of the United States, and of their inclination to perpe-
tuate the peaceable condition, happiness, and well-doing, individually and collec-
tively, of those who by your wisdom are supported; and whose support will in-
crease by a sense of their necessities and your justice.
14th October, 1829. W. B. Finch.
TO TAMHAMEHA 111. KING OF THE SANDWICH ISLANDS.
Navy Department of the United States, City of Washington,
20th January, A. D. 1829.
By the approbation and direction of the President of the United States, I address
you this letter, and send it by the hands of Capt. William Bolton Finch, an officer
in our Navy commanding the ship of war Vincennes.
Capt. Finch also bears to you from the President certain small tokens of regard,
for yourself and the chiefs who are near to you, and is commanded to express to
you in his name the anxious desire which he feels for your advancement in pros-
perity and in the arts of civilized life, and for the cultivation of harmony and good
will between your Nation and the people of the United States. He has heard with
admiration and interest of the rapid progress which has been made by your people
in acquiring a knowledge of letters and of the true religion—the religion of the
Christian’s Bible. These are the best and the only means by which the prosperity
and happiness of nations can be advanced and continued, and the President and all
men everywhere, who wish well to yourself and your people, earnestly hope you
will continue to cultivate them, and to protect and encourage those by whom they
are brought to you.


The President also anxiously hopes that peace, and kindness, and justice, will
prevail between your people and those citizens of the United States who visit your
islands, and that the regulations of your Government will be such as to enforce
them upon all.
Our citizens who violate your laws, or interfere with your regulations, violate at
the same time their duty to their own government and country, and merit censure
and punishment. We have heard with pain that this has sometimes been the case,
and we have sought to know and to punish those who are guilty. Capt. Finch is
commanded diligently to inquire into the conduct of our citizens, whom he may
find at the islands, and as far as he has the authority to ensure proper conduct and
deportment from them.
The President hopes, however, that there are very few who so act as to deserve
censure or punishment, and for all others he solicits the kindness and protection of
your Government, that their interest may be promoted and every facility given to
them in the transaction of their business. Among others he bespeaks your favour
to those who have taken up their residence with you to promote the cause of reli-
gion and learning in your islands. He does not doubt that their motives are pure
and their objects most friendly to the happiness of your people, and that they will
so conduct themselves as to merit the protecting kindness of your Government.
One of their number, the Rev. Charles Samuel Stewart, who resided for a lofag time
with you, has received the favour of his Government in an appointment to an office
of religion in our Navy, and will visit you in company with Capt. Finch.
The President salutes you with respect, and wishes you peace, happiness, and
prosperity.
[L. S.] Samuei, L. Southard,
Secretary of the Navy.
The missionaries at the Sandwich Islands are now solely Americans,
and all communication with the government being carried on through
them as interpreters, all their acts must naturally tend to benefit that
country alone of which they are citizens. Civilization and commerce
will gradually advance, if the first undertakings in the latter are not
commenced on too extensive and too expensive a system. The value
now attached to coco-nut oil, since the late valuable discovery of its
capability of being manufactured into candles, will render it an exten-
sive article of commerce, and the tree is abundantly produced over
nearly the whole of Polynesia; varieties of flax, Beche de mer, tortoise-
shell, &c. are now procured, and, by attention, sugar, cotton, and other
tropical produce might be readily cultivated; the sugar manufactured
by Mr. Bicknell and my friend Mr. S. P. Henry, at Tahiti, was of a
superior kind and of a remarkably fine flavour, and affords an instance
of what these islands are capable of producing.
A great benefit would be conferred on the navigators of the South-
ern Pacific, studded as it is with an infinite number of islands,
reefs, &c. and the anxiety and danger would he diminished, if the
British Government would send annually a small vessel of war from
Sydney, for the purpose of surveying and ascertaining accurately the
positions of the various islands, groups of islands and reefs. The
number of new discoveries annually made by the English and Ame-
rican whalers are very numerous, but the situations as laid dowm by
them, are seldom to be depended on. A vessel appointed for the
purpose of survey should touch at Oahu, Sandwich Islands, and Bay
of Islands, New Zealand, those being the principal ports of resort for
the whalers and other vessels frequenting this sea ; every information
respecting recent discoveries could be readily obtained at those places,
and of which, during my visit to the former port in December 1829,
there existed a long list, most of which were not to be found in the
charts. A surveying vessel might also correct the latitude and lon-
gitude, which are generally very inaccurately laid down in the exist-
ing charts, of the various islands they might visit, and estimate the


commercial advantages to be derived from an intercourse with them.
It is for the “ Ruler of the Ocean” to take the lead in enter-
prises of this description; it is for him to render that navigation safe
where his flag predominates, and where commerce can be extended it
ought to be ever found. It is therefore to be hoped, that the British
Government will turn their attention to such a desirable object, and
this dangerous sea be rendered safe to the navigator.
I commence with an account of Independence Island, followed with
that of Rdtuma, one, I believe, but little known, and of which no de-
scription, to my knowledge, has been hitherto published ; these will be
followed by others forming part of the New Hebrides Group, &c.
INDEPENDENCE ISLAND,
On the 19th of February 1830, this island was in sight about 10
a.m. bearing south-south-east, and at noon it bore south by east.
It is small, but densely wooded, and one of those apparently
risen from the labours of the industrious but minute tribe of Zoo-
phytes. About 2 p.m. when but a few miles distant, a boat was low-
ered, and I accompanied the Commander for the purpose of landing and
inspecting its productions. We were soon in with the south-west point,
but found a landing there impracticable on account of the surf, which
broke with tremendous fury over the coral rocks. We pulled round the
island with the expectation of finding some opening by which the boat
could enter and a landing be effected; no place, however, could be found ;
a heavy surf rolled over the rocks, by which the island seemed to
be surrounded, and which had a reddish colour occasioned by the
growth on them of a species of coralline. On the south side of the
island, there seemed to be an opening between the rocks, by which
a boat might enter when the surf was moderate, but at this time it
raged with so much fury, as to render an attempt dangerous. After
pulling round the island, and finding the impossibility of effecting a
landing, we returned on board. The island is, I should suppose,
about two or three miles in circumference, uninhabited excepting by a
multitude of various kinds of oceanic birds, among which the magnifi-
cent man-of-war hawk, Pelicanus Aquila, and the Booby, Pelicanus
Sula, were most numerous, the island affording them an excellent place
of refuge for the purpose of incubation, seldom or never disturbed by
man. The beach is bold and sandy, and the numerous trees impart
a verdant and beautiful appearance to this otherwise insignificant
coral reef; some of the trees being of lofty growth, causes the island
at a distance to have a slightly elevated appearance, which it does
not possess. Among the trees, I could only recognise the Pandanus.
Turtle abounded in great quantity on the reefs, and if a landing were
effected, a quantity could no doubt be obtained, which would be valu-
able as a refreshment for the numerous whalers and other ships fre-
quenting this sea. During the time the ship lay off and on, a* bank
of coral rocks was discovered by Mr. W. Warden, the chief officer, on
which soundings were obtained of from twelve to seventeen fathoms,
the centre of the island then bearing south-west, about four miles distant.
This island wastnade by our observations in latitude 10° 41' south, and
longitude by chronometer 179° 15' east. It is placed in the late charts
in latitude 10° 25' south, longitude 179° 0' east. Our observations
we consider correct, as on the day preceding, (Feb. 18th,) Mitchell’s
group was seen bearing from south by east to south-south-east, about
seven or eight miles distant, and on the second day, (Feb. 21st,) we
■ - s


made the island of Ro'tuma. Independence Island was discovered
a few years ago by an American ship, whose Commander so named it.
When at Rdtuma, I saw an American who had left a whaler and
was residing there ; he informed me that he had visited this island,
and described its appearance accurately; he gave me also the following
information respecting it. The ship to which he belonged having kill-
ed a whale off the island, and during the time that she lay-to for the
purpose of “ cutting in,” as it is technically termed, one of the boats
went to endeavour to land : the first attempt, from the surf raging with
great fury, did not succeed; but on a second attempt, at high water,
the surf being quite moderate, they succeeded in discovering a
passage between the reef by which the boat could enter, and a land-
ing was effected, (on which side of the island he did not recollect);
there was at the time hardly any surf; they procured a quantity of
turtle and sea birds’ eggs.
THE ISLAND OF ROTUMA.
This interesting and fertile island was discovered by the Pandora in
the year 1791? and has been since occasionally visited by English and
American whalers, and a few other ships, for the purpose of procuring
water and a supply of vegetable productions, with which it abounds.
It is situated in latitude 12° 30' south, and longitude 177° O' east, and is
distant about 260 miles from the nearest island of the Fidji group. It
is of a moderate height, densely wooded, and abounding in cocoa-nut
trees, and is about from thirty to thirty-five miles in circumference.
Its general appearance is beautifully picturesque, verdant hills gradu-
ally rising from the sandy beach, giving it a highly fertile appear-
ance. It is surrounded by extensive reefs, on which at low water
the natives may be seen busily engaged in procuring shell and other
fish, which are abundantly produced on them, and constitute one
of their articles of daily food. At night, they fish by torch-light,
lighting fires on the beach, by which the fish are attracted to the
reefs. The torches are formed of the dried spathps or fronds of the
coco-nut tree, and enable them to see the fish, which they take with
hand-nets. It is by these lights that the fish are attracted, but
not so in the opinion of the natives, who say, “ they come to the
reef at night to eat, then sleep, and leave again in the morning.”
The numerous lights flickering about have a beautiful effect dur-
ing a dark night, and might resemble the illuminated halls of Pan-
demonium. On these reefs, an infinite variety of fish is pro-
cured, but generally of small size ; a display of colours of the most
vivid description, as well as extraordinary forms, also occur amongst
them. We made this island on the 21st of February 1830; it bore
west by south-half-south, about twenty-five miles distant; at 11 a.m.
when close in, standing for the anchorage, we were boarded by several
natives, who came off in their canoes, and surprised us by their acquaint-
ance with the English language; this it seems they had acquired from
their occasional intercourse with shipping, but principally from the
European seamen, who had deserted from their ships and were residing
on the island in savage luxury and indolence. One of the natives acting
as pilot, we rounded the islets named Owa by the natives, and anchored
in Onhaf Bay, (which is situated on the north-east side of the island,) in
fifteen fathoms, sand and coral bottom, about two miles distantfrom the
shore. When at anchor, the extremes of the land bore from east by north
to west by compass. An island rather high, quoin shaped, and inhabited.
'S v


situated at a short distance from the main land, (between which there
is a passage for a large ship,) was at some distance from our pre-
sent anchorage, and bore west-half-north by compass; it was named
Ouer by the natives. Close to us were two rather high islands, or
islets, of small extent, planted with coco-nut trees, and almost con-
nected together by rocks, and to the main land by a reef; they shelter
the bay from easterly winds. Their bearings are as follow :—the first
centre bore east-half-north; the second centre bore east-half-south,
extreme of the main land east-south-east by compass. One of the
chiefs, on our anchoring, addressing the Commander made the following
very humane observation, “ If Rdtuma man steal, to make hang up
immediately.” Had this request been complied with, there would
have been a great depopulation during our stay, and it is not impro-
bable that a few chiefs might have felt its effects.
On a second visit to this island in March 1830, we anchored in a
fine picturesque bay, situated on the west side of the island, named
Thor, in fourteen fathoms, sand and coral bottom, about three miles
distant from the centre; but I should strongly recommend ships not to
anchor here during the months of February, March, April, and the
early part of May, the prevailing winds blowing strong from west
and north-west, which we had the misfortune to experience, being
driven on shore during a gale on the 30th of IVlarch, an account of which
will be given in the course of the narrative. Ships should prefer
lying off and on at the lee-side of the island, where they will be able
readily to procure their supplies. A reef extends out some distance
from the beach at this bay, almost dry at low water, and with much
surf at the entrance, from which cause the procuring of wood and water
is attended with more difficulty than at Onhaf Bay. There is another
place on the south side of the island named Fangwot, the residence of
the king, or principal chief. It affords anchorage for shipping, but
from its exposed situation, a ship should prefer lying off and on to an-
choring ; this is the best part of the island for procuring a large supply
of provisions. About five or six miles distant from the main land to the
south-west, are several small uninhabited islands, or islets, which are
occasionally visited by the natives from the main, for the purpose of
procuring from and in their vicinity, shell and other fish. These islets
bear the native appellations of Ofliwa, Athana, Hothahoi ; and a rock
or rocks above water, on which the sea breaks, named Hoth-fakteringa.
The first has a remarkable appearance, resembling a rock divided in
two portions, excepting at one part, where they are joined by a portion
of rock forming a natural bridge. The following diagram gives the
appearance of the island, bearing west-south-west, about five miles
distant; it has a verdant appearance, with several coco-nut trees
growing on the summit.
The others have nothing remarkable in their appearance.


On landing, the beautiful appearance of the island was rather in-
creased than diminished ; vegetation appeared most luxuriant, and the
trees and shrubs blooming with various tints, spread a gaiety around ; the
clean and neat native houses were intermingled with the waving plumes
of the coco-nut, the broad spreading plantain, and other trees peculiar
to tropical climes. That magnificent tree the callophyllum inophyl-
lum, or fifau of the natives, was not less abundant, displaying its shining
dark green foliage, contrasted by beautiful clusters of white flowers
teeming with fragrance. This tree seemed a favourite with the natives,
on account of its shade, fragrance and ornamental appearance of
the flowers. When one was cut down by the carpenter of a ship, a
young tree was brought and planted close to the place where the old
one formerly displayed its wide spreading branches, thus showing a
desire of securing for posterity a similar shade and fragrance to that
afforded by the one which had fallen ; an example well worthy of imita-
tion in every country. When I extended my rambles more inland,
through narrow and sometimes rugged pathways, the luxuriance of
vegetation did not decrease, but the lofty trees, overshadowing the
road, defended the pedestrian from the effects of a fervent sun, ren-
dering the walk under their umbrageous covering cool and pleasant.
The gay flowers of the hibiscus tiliaceus, as well as the splendid huth
or Barringtonia speciosa, covered with its beautiful flowers, the
petals of which are white, and the edges of the stamina delicately tinged
with pink, give to the trees when in full bloom a magnificent appear-
ance ; the hibiscus rosa-chinensis, or kowa of the natives, also grows in
luxuriance and beauty. The elegant flowers of these trees, with others
of more humble and less beautiful tints, everywhere meet the eye near
the paths, occasionally varied by plantations of the ahan or taro, arum
esculentum, which, from a deficiency of irrigation, is generally of the
mountain variety. Of the sugar-cane they possess several varieties,
and it is eaten in the raw state ; a small variety of yam, more commonly
known by the name of the Rdtuma potato, the ule of the natives, is
very abundant; the ulu or bread-fruit, pori or plantain, and the vi,
(spondias dulcis, Parkinson,) or Brazilian plum, with numerous other
kinds, sufficiently testify the fertility of the island. Occasionally the
mournful tpa or casuarina equisetifolia, planted in small clumps near
the villages or surrounding the burial-places, added beauty to the
landscape. A few days after my arrival I by chance visited a spot
which formed a combination of the picturesque and beautiful. I had
passed through a village named Shoulnau, and having ascended a hill
overshadowed as usual by magnificent trees, I descended towards the
beach, when a beautiful view appeared before me; it was a tranquil
piece of water formed by the sea, on one side inclosed by a high island
covered with coco-nut and other trees, and nearly joining the main
land, leaving on each side small passages for canoes, one opening
rather more extended than the other; the opposite banks were covered
with native houses, intermingled with trees and various kinds of
flowering shrubs: the placidity of the water, the tranquillity that
reigned around, interrupted only occasionally by the chirping of birds,
produced an effect approaching enchantment. After remaining for some
time viewing with mingled admiration and delight this interesting spot,
I left it with regret; it is situated on the south-east part of the island,
and named Shaulcope by the natives. I subsequently visited this tran-
quil piece of water in a native canoe ; as we passed through the open-
ings before mentioned, the natives commenced singing a monotonous but
. , v iflp


pleasing song, (consisting of a sentence frequently repeated,) keeping
accurate time with the strokes of their paddles ; the effect as the voices
reverberated around, could be felt, but cannot be described.
The native houses are very neat; they are formed of poles and logs,
the roof being covered with the leaves of a species of sagus palm, named
boat by the natives, and highly valued by them for that purpose on
account of their durability; the sides are covered with the plaited
sections of the coco-nut branches, which form excellent coverings.
They have commonly two entrances,, one before, the other behind,
these entrances are very low, and have a door hung horizontally, which
is raised and kept open by a prop during the day, but at night.
The houses are kept very clean, the floors being covered either with
the plaited branches of the coco-nut tree, or the common kind of
mat, named ehap, most commonly the former. Near their houses they
have generally some favourite trees planted j the tobacco plant also,
recently introduced, flourishes luxuriantly, but as yet they have not
learned the art of preparing it. The landing is easy, on a sandy beach.
Fire-wood can readily be procured at a short distance from the beach j
the water is of excellent quality, but from there being no running
streams, (excepting a few of very trivial importance situated inland,)
the supply is procured from wells.
The natives are a fine-looking and well-formed people, resembling
much those of Tongatabu in their appearance; they are of good dis-
positions, but are much addicted to thieving, which seems indeed to be
a national propensity; they are of a light copper colour, and the
men wear the hair long and stained at the extremities of a reddish
brown colour : sometimes they tie the hair in a knot behind, but the
most prevailing custom is to permit it to hang over the shoulders.
The females may be termed handsome, of fine forms, and although
possessing a modest demeanour, flocked on board in numbers on the
ship’s arrival; their garrulity when there sufficiently prove that even
in this remote part of the globe, there was no deficiency of volubility
of the lingual organ, amongst the foxT portion of the creation, fhe
women before marriage have the hair cut close and covered with the
shoroi, which is burnt coral mixed with the gum of the bread-fruit
tree j this is removed after marriage and their hair is permitted to
grow long, but on the death of a chief or their parents it is cut close
as a badge of mourning. Both sexes paint themselves with a mixture
of the root of the turmeric plant (curcuma longa) and coco-nut oil, which
frequently changed our clothes and persons of an icteroid hue, from our
curiosity to mingle with them in the villages theirs to come on board
the ship. This paint, which is named Rang by the natives, and which is
also the appellation of the turmeric plant, is prepared in the following
manner The root of the turmeric, after having begn well washed,
is rasped into a bowl to which water is afterwards added, it is then
strained, and the remaining liquor is left some time for the fecula to
subside ■ the water is then poured off, and the remaining fecula is dried
and kept in sections of the coco-nut shell or in balls; when required
for use it is mixed with coco-nut oil, and when recently laid on has a
bright red appearance, which I mistook at first for red-ochre.
London : Printed by Samnel Bentley, Dorset Street, Fleet Street.
i,' ‘
tilt ’ •
