

Bathurst (N.S.W.)
TO
Melbourne (Vic.)
493¼ Miles.
The
Pioner
Motor Car
Trip of
Australia
WITH THE COMPLIMENTS OF
THE THOMSON MOTOR CAR LTD.
305 Flinders Lane, Melbourne.


This Booklet
is issued with the compliments
of . ♦
the thomson motor Car limited,
and should you. think that any
erf your friends would be at all
interested, the Company would
be pleased to forward you a few
copies, or mail them direct tb
your friends on receipt of name
and address. .*»


A Record OF
THE PIONEER TRIP OF THE
Thomson
Motor
CAr
Driven by H. THOMSON (the
Inventor ), accompanied by
E. L. HOLMES.
START FROM BATHURST.
"The Thomson motor car, which was awarded first prize at the
Sydney Agricultural Show held during the Easter holidays, is to be put to
a crucial test by the intention of the patentee to drive it overland from the
northern capital. The road, which is not by any means a good one, is bound to
bring out.any weak points (if there are any), and should it come through the
ordeal in a satisfactory manner, a prosperous future can safely be predicted
for it”-
"Melbourne Press."


Introduction.
0N issuing this account of the first Australian motor car long distance journey,,
a brief history of the motor phaeton and the events leading up to such a
severe journey being undertaken by it, would be interesting.
In 1896, Mr. Herbert Thomson, a clever young engineer at Armadale,
Victoria, was fully convinced that motor cars would become the vehicles of the
future, and in order to give the matter thorough investigation, resolved to build a
car in his spare time. Having no recognised data to work upon, progress was
slow, each part having to be well studied. However, the vehicle grew apace, and
in 1898 the first trial run was made successfully. Naturally, in such a new in-
vention, there was always room for improvement, and by this time, having a
practical, as well as a theoretical experience to work upon, the car quickly became
an ‘‘article of commerce Early in 1900 a strong syndicate company was formed
to procure patents throughout the world, and introduce the car generally, with a
view of establishing large manufacturing companies throughout Australasia.
Although the car had been exhibited at the Melbourne, Bendigo, and
Maryborough Agricultural Shows, and had run upwards of 2000 miles on its ex-
perimental trials, no authentic record existed of its adaptability to the Australian
colonies, and its enduring powers. It was with the object of proving these to the
public that the Thomson Motor Car Syndicate despatched Messrs, H. Thomson
and E, L. Holmes to Sydney to exhibit the car at the Easter Agricultural Show, and
return to Melbourne by road. However, so attractive was the car
in Sydney, that the arrangements for return direct were amended by an invitation
to visit the Bathurst Agricultural Show. This invitation was accepted, and it was
then decided to return overland from Bathurst to Melbourne, the distance
being only a few miles shorter than from Sydney to Melbourne.
To attempt a “ record ” with such an experimental car, over roads quite
unknown to the drivers, was out of the question, and the objects aimed at were
to give publicity to the car, and return, safely. The pace therefore was moderate
throughout, buffer purposes of reference, and general interest, Mr. E. L. Holmes
kept a close record of times of running;, stoppages, mileages. Sec., and the fact that
in no case were “ hay motors ” brought into use, proves beyond doubt the entire
suitability of the car for long distances, rough roads, and Australia,
It is true that the car was assisted by the personal exertions of the drivers at
times, but for no other reason than to prevent overstraining the belts and chains
—obviously good reason too when it is considered that 16 CWt., including car,
luggage, tools, drivers, &c., had to be transported 500 miles, and that an
experimental vehicle was being used for the purpose—the car 44 risked all to gain
all,” and a break-down would have meant failure* The whole thing now lies in
degree of strength, the main principles being proved beyond doubt, for fuel —
kerosene and water—were obtainable throughout the whole journey.
The Thomson motor Car Limited
Melbourne, June I4th, 1900,


Bathurst (N.S.W.) 493¼ Miles
TO Melbourne
(VICTORIH).
ON THE THOMSON MOTOR CAR.
©UR trip to Sydney, the awfully rough time on the
"Allinga,” and our arrival at midnight at the
Pyrmont Wharf, interests nobody but Mr. Thomson
and myself. The 10 days’ exhibition at the Royal
Agricultural Show, finishing up with a day's outing
on the car through the busy Sydney thoroughfares, and our
subsequent visit to Bathurst may be interesting to many, but
being compelled to keep within reasonable bounds, I must confine
myself to a record of our overland trip.
Bathurst.
The Bathurst Show finishing up on Friday, enabled us to
make all preparations for starting on our trip on Saturday, but the
rain came on in torrents, forcing us to postpone our departure till
Monday, April 30th, 1900, at 10 a.m., when, notwithstanding the
biting coldness of the south wind that was blowing, Thomson
and I bade farewell to the mayor (R. M, Gilmour, Esq.), Messrs.
W. G. Thompson, A. Rigby, and a host of well-known residents,
and commenced our long and eventful journey, leaving
Hall’s Park Hotel, where we had been staying, at 10 a.m.
sharp.
Effects of 3 Inches of Rain.
We found on leaving the town that considerable havoc had
been wrought by the heavy downpour (which registered 2 in. in 15
hours), all the blinding being washed out of the road, leaving rough
metal, and as we began to ascend the mountains that surround


Bathurst, we made very slow time. Twelve miles out two
creeks, without bridges, had to be negotiated, and the heavy sand
banked up by the recent rains, made them exceedingly dangerous
and difficult to cross, more especially as the beds of both were
covered with large stones. After serious consideration, we gently
lowered the car into the first creek,then with a mighty shove, and
with the motor almost tearin g itself out of its bearings, we climbed
the short sharp rise. The next, however, was even more difficult
to cross, but an extra application of manual strength successfully
overcame it. By this time it was t o’clock, and not anticipating
such a delay we brought no eatables, so felt awfully hungry
and exhausted. Bathampton station was, however, close at
hand, so Thomson and I went to the homestead, where
Mr. Gilmour {the proprietor) treated us splendidly, so well in fact
that it was 3 o’clock before we continued our journey. On
starting we were faced by a curly hill, about 150 yards long,
with a gradient of quite I in 6, and water-worn ruts running
in all directions. Notwithstanding the beautiful manner in
which the motor had hitherto been climbing, this hill, with its
awfully rough surface, pulled the car up several times.
Pitaigerald’s -Mount.
We eventually surmounted it, and after a few miles of downs,
reached the foot of “ Fitegerald’s Mount,” "two miles long and too
steep to ride down,” so said the "Cyclist Guide Book”; but we
quickly changed the sprockets, reducing the gear about one-fifth,
and climbed it splendidly, notwithstanding the rough metal road.
At last reaching the top, we almost immediately entered upon
one of the famous New South "Wales red clay patches. The
tyres began to increase in size with every revolution, slowing
the car down a little, but even the worst of roads have an
ending, and right glad were we when we commenced a steady
descent into Blayney, which, we reached at 6.15 p.m., down-
hearted with the extraordinary rough surface of the road. Only
24 miles were covered during 4 hours 25 minutes actual
running, and had we not received favourable reports of our
future road it is more than likely that the trip would have
been abandoned, but a good tea and comfortable bed made
us eager for more.


Blayney.
The sight that greeted our eyes when we awoke was both,
pleasant and otherwise, everything being white with frost, even
the car in places. Leaving Blayney at 930 a.nn, freezing cold,
we proceeded to climb about miles on good quartz road.
Progress was slow and steady, the demand on the generator being
very heavy indeed. Once this rise was over we entered upon
good undulating country till on the outskirts of Carcoar, when
the road began dipping to about lin 10. Not only was the
grade so steep, but we had to negotiate three right angles,
which the car did successfully. Like many country townships,
Carcoar is built in a hollow, and a very steep hill had to be
ascended out of it; so, having said "Good day n at t 1 we
continued our journey. We were soon in good, undulating
country —firm gravel roads —and good time was made till we
reached Mandurama at 11.35. Usual sleepy country township
(no one to be seen til! we pulled up), with hotel, blacksmith and
store, so having replenished our water tanks, we left at 11.45 a.m.
Bordlrtg Limestone Creek.
After an early lunch at Lyndhurst (as the next stopping
place was too far), the roads seemed better than on our first day's
ride, yet they were heavy for about six miles, when we
met with the first serious obstacle on our journey, viz., "Lime-
stone Creek/' the bridge having been washed away by the
flood water. About one chain from the broken bridge was an
old ford and so after lengthy examination and consultation, we


decided to cross it. Being too dangerous to take at any speed, and
with the assistance of two road repairers, who arrived during our
examination, we lowered the car gently down some 1 in t grade
into the creek, which the car, with a short, sharp sport, cleared,
sticking firmly in the banked op sand and clay on the opposite
bank, from which, after a good deal of trouble, we finally
extricated it.
Stuck: in a Red Clay Bog.
We then entered upon some rough op-hill country
for about two miles, when we came upon another New South
Wales red clay bog. We tried it quietly, but stock firm half-way
op to oor axles, so tucking up oor pants and getting on a billet
of wood, we assisted in the reverse of the motor, and backed on to
dry ground. Seeing that the only way to negotiate the
obstacle was by speed, we got well back and set the motor racing.
I kept up a running shove up to the edge of the mod, and with
the momentum of an express engine the motor tore through
in great style, splashing everything on board. I now found
myself stranded, the road being quite impassable anywhere,
but the fence was " high and dry," so I made a bridge of it.
Cowra.
We now had a good run on on-made road for a few miles,
clearing three red mod patches in great style. The road then
began to improve for four or five miles,-and we made good time,
reaching Cowra at 5.10 p.m., having journeyed the last 25 J
miles in two hours fifty including the obstacles referred
to. We decided to rest here for the night, after a very enjoyable
day's ride, notwithstanding a head wind, "Limestone Creek"
and the red mod bogs.
Roads that were not Roads.
We left Cowra at 9.26 a.m. with the thermometer near
freezing, but the son soon made the day the loveliest we had so far
experienced. Over the Lachlan Bridge out of Cowra we
proceeded on roads not laid down in the Guide Book, which was
hardly to be wondered at after all, as a considerable portion went
through private property, causing os to go through several


gates. The country was comparatively level and good for about
twenty miles, when we struck some very heavy sand patches,
and the road —such as it was —was about four chains wide and
skirted the railway. After twelve miles of this heavy bush road,
which was difficult to follow on account of its unmade condition
and the numerous tracks formed —the only clue to our route being
the mile posts —we had the bad luck to lose our " road." After
proceeding for about half a mile through fairly open bush, wc
stopped and had a consultation, finally agreeing to strike to our
left, eventually bringing us up to one of our "white friends" —a
mile post. An exciting incident happened whilst cruising about
the bush, and which, but for the extreme presence of mind
shown by Thomson, would have caused a rather serious
delay. Coining down a short slope, a heavy sand rut caused the
steering wheels to swerve, heading the car straight for a large
tree, but Thomson, like a flash, struck the lever back, making
the car lift out of the rut, and we cleared the tree by a hair.
Sand now became the order of the day, with small patches of
good road (gravel) and red clay. In one of these soft clay bogs,
the car stuck, the driving wheels revolving in the mud, but, as
the car had nearly cleared it, we assisted it out without any great
difficulty. Keeping on these patchy roads till about six miles
from Young, we commenced a gradual ascent. These rises
were particularly rough and on one of them we met our first
accident, which was of a minor nature. A clip, which connects
the back axle with the chain-adjusting strut, fractured, causing
the right-hand chain to loosen, but a piece of wood wedged
firmly between the end of the strut and the back axle and tied
firmly, proved ample to keep the chain at a fair tension.
However, our time into Young was slow, eventually
arriving there at 4.20 p.m., having accomplished IJ3J miles of
our journey, and the worst portion of it too.
■Young.
Mr. Turlandwas very kind to us here, entertaining Thomson
and I splendidly, and refusing to accept payment for same; the
first and only time such consideration was shown to us throughout
the trip. The new chain strut clip, made by a local blacksmith,
having been fitted, we re-commenced our long, though not weari


some journey the following day, immediately entering upon rapidly
rising ground, which we covered splendidly. Up and down country
for 8 miles, when just before entering Wombat, whilst
running down a good incline at about 30 miles an
hour, we struck a rather deep gutter, bouncing the four wheels off
the ground together. The road still continue; rough, sandy and
hilly, but the car was now well down to its work, and we
made Wallendbcen for lunch at 12.30 a.m. After about 4 miles
of fair road, we entered upon a stretch of splendid quartz gravel
roads, reeling the last 12 miles off in 1.5, a considerable
portion of which we had matched against us a pair of iron grey
“ hay motors," but we gave them our “ heels," or I should say
44 steam," and beat them badly into Cootamundra, arriving at
2.45, having now put 145 j miles behind us.
Cootamundra.
Filling our water tanks, we endeavoured to continue our
journey, but the demand of the residents for an exhibition
proved undeniable, so we accepted the inevitable and spun round
the town, leaving at 3.20 for Bethungra—ls miles out. This road,
after about a mile, became wretched, winding in and out amongst
the ranges, and full of gutters from side to side, preventing any
decent speed, in fact it was necessary to go down some grades
slower than we ascended them, to prevent accident. The
midges were very thick in places, we being often struck in
the face and eyes, and it was necessary once to pull up
and extract one from Thomson's eye, it having got under
the lid, causin g intense pain. However, even the “worst road in the
district,” as it is said to be, has an ending, and we arrived at
Bethungra at about 5.25 p.m., having negotiated the worst
15 miles we had struck since Monday (Bathurst to Blayney)
in 2 hours and 5 minutes.
Bethungra.
Bethungra is the usual country village—hotel (?) store and
station —and determined to make an early start, we ordered break-
fast at 7.30, but it was not till 8.20 that we got away. It was an
awkward town to leave, as about 3 or 4 roads junction out, and it
was by the merest luck that we struck the “right” one.


which happened to be the "left.” We commenced again
on bush tracks, but had proceeded no distance when a slight
accident befel the car, a wheel striking a branch of a fallen
tree which tilted up and knocked the drain tap off our
water tank, losing about three gallons. A cork soon settled
matters, and after a delay of 20 minutes we proceeded, relying on
our reserve supply, which proved ample till we reached Illabo,
where we filled our tanks at the school house, the master
promptly dismissing the school during our brief stay for an.
object lesson in motor cars.
Junes.
Our run into the precincts of Junee Junction was good,
then we got" fogged,” mistaking the road and running right
into the apex of the junction, necessitating a run back of fully
half a mile. Too early for dinner, we got a bag of sand-
wiches, though little did we think then the value we would
get out of them. However, we proceeded, and had not
covered more than 2 miles when an incident occurred
which might have put a full stop to our trip. It happened
in this wise:—The sandy soil had dropped in patches into
ruts up to 2 feet deep, and in trying to dodge one of these,
Thomson unknowingly came too close to the fence on my
side, the left front wheel hub striking a post, which slewed
the car right into the fence —post and five wires. The wires
served as buffers and held the car; but, unfortunately for
the tyre on the " struck ” wheel, the wires also held it, tearing
two large gashes right through the rubber, without penetrating
the canvas. The shock to the hub of the wheel twisted and
bent up the struts and steering rods, but we lost no time in
removing the bent material and hammering it straight,
nothing being fractured, eventually being able to resume our
journey as if nothing had happened.
Wagga Wagga.
We reached Wagga at 2.t0 p.m., causing an immense
sensation in the town, which seemed the busiest we had passed.
Our run had been the best so far, having reeled
off 44| miles in 4 hours 2S minutes, the roads being
unmade and not particularly good. We made a splendid dinner


here, and instinctively retaining our uneaten sandwiches,
set off at 3.15 for Cookardinia (35 miles), as we were informed
that it was a good metal road right through. Our informant
may have told us all in good faith, but had we met him at
7 p.m. I think we would have got into trouble "for assault
and inflicting grievous bodily harm." The roads were tip top
for nearly 20 miles, and then just as twilight began to fall, so
the condition of the roads fell, and from a nice metal road
we had the option of several tracks through the bush, taking
the most worn.
Bushed and Bogged.
Our troubles then began in earnest, for it grows dark quickly
amongst the hills and trees, and by six it was impossible to
see more than ten yards in front. Lighting our four
lamps (two kerosene and two Calcium Kings) we plodded on,
making the best of it, until we came to a chain of swamps.
After sticking once or twice, we struck a dryer track,
but found that a heavily laden bullock waggon had lately
passed over it, sinking in places over a foot —in fact, we came
to several spots where the wheels had been dug out. However,
we kept moving ahead, sometimes leaving the car and inspecting
the ground ahead of us, until at last mistaking a sheet of water for
good level ground, we stuck firmly up to our front axles in mud
and water. This was about 7 p.m., and I "moved" that the car stay
where it was till day-break, we, in the meantime, camping in our
coats and one rug. Thomson seconded my motion, which
was declared unanimously carried, when presently we heard dogs
barking, and a man came upon the scene, having come from a
drovers' camp halt a mile away, after seeing our lights. With
the prospects of company for the night, we rescinded our motion
and set to work, over our boots in water, and eventually
succeeded in dislodging the car from where it had stuck, we
being covered with mud and perspiration.
Sheep Drovers* Camp.
To reach the drovers' camp, we had to pass a flock of
13,000 sheep in a lane (nice work in the dark), the sheep
being real scared with the brilliancy of the lamps, many of


them butting into the car, one getting right under it. We
managed, nevertheless, to force a passage, and [met with a
hearty greeting from eight drovers, who were in charge of the
sheep. They kindly made os some tea, but having run short
of " tucker,” we were compelled to fall back upon our uneaten
" Junee ” sandwiches, with which we satisfied the inner man. We
talked over the fire till 9, when they lent us a few bags and rugs to
sleep under one of the carts, and it took os some time to accustom
ourselves to the hard ground after having been used to nice warm
beds. The thought of it is even enough to keep one awake. How-
ever, we eventually fell asleep, being pretty tired, but in the
morning, oh! cold —why, cold is boiling hot to our temperature;
in fact, when we moved, our joints almost cracked with the
cold —we were frozen. The big fire soon brought life into us
again, and after making a third meal of our "Junee ” sandwiches
(lunch, tea and breakfast), finishing up with some " damper
and mutton ” which the drovers had left after breakfast, wc
made a start at 7.50 for our destination, Cookardinia, which
we reached at 9-22 a.m., after having some difficulty to get
good water, there being no houses or dams on the way. We
managed to obtain a small supply by straining through a
handkerchief, but got through all serene. Nothing of any
importance happened till we reached Germanton at 11.17 a.m.,
when, after sending off a few and re-charging our
tanks, we made a start at 1t.50.


Albury.
Lunching at Woomargama (9 miles from Germanton), we
now entered upon our last stretch of New South Wales road,
and kept up a good rattling pace, eventually arriving at the
border town (Albury) at 5 p.m. exactly, the last 37J miles
occupying 3 hours 52 minutes. We had now covered 296 miles
of our journey, feeling in tip-top health, but the car was hardly
recognisable for mud and slush, nevertheless being in grand
working order. We met with a good reception here, a
number of cyclists going out to meet us, and in order to satisfy
the residents we were compelled to make a ** public ” departure the
next mdming, when a great crowd turned out to give us a send-off.
Victoria again.
II a.m saw our entry into Victoria, crossing the Murray
River and its numerous wooden bridges and embankments;
then, after the usual Customs formalities, we passed through
Wodonga, the Victorian border town, at 11.13. The
roads to Bamawatha were fair and level, but from here to
Chiltern were every bit as bad as any N.S.W. roads, being
unmade and cut up terribly with the rain, &c. Arriving at
Chiltern at 1.50 we had dinner, leaving at 2.45. The roads
thence to Springhurst (10 miles) were fair, after the first 4
miles one very dangerous gutter having to be negotiated.
Striking the metal road just after Springhurst, we reeled of 15|
miles in 1.23, arriving at Wangaratta at 5.40.
W a ngaratta.
After a good night's rest, so good in fact, that we did not
waken till 8 o'clock, we resumed our now interesting journey,
leaving Wangaratta at 9.10 a.m., the residents turning out in
large numbers to witness our departure. The road from here to
Glenrowan was macadamised, but awfully rough in places, the
cobbles having worn to the surface. From Glenrowan to Winton
the going was rough, the famous “ glue pot'' having to be
negotiated. This “ glue pot" is about half-a-mile long, and is
usually about two feet deep in sticky mud, but we made
light of it after the “ roughing" in N.S.W., passing through
Winton at 12.1. Our run into Benalla was good, arriving
just in time for dinner (12.47), and to supply an enterprising
reporter with a history of the trip.


Benalla.
Tanks fall, boiler fall, and drivers fall, we were all in
harmony, and the car, now well down to the hard work, sped
merrily on its way home, passing through Baddaginnie (7 miles)
In fall sail at 2.28, and Violet Town, 15 miles, at 3*22, the pace
being splendid, notwithstanding the sandy nature of the roads,
and the numerous cross gutters. Everything went well until about
6 miles from Euroa, when the car encountered a heavy patch of
sand, breaking the belt at the eye-holes— lo minutes put the matter
right. We quickly made up for lost time, the roads —even if a bit
rough —being level and straight, and we entered Euroa at 4.45,
our mileage reading 3 95 i, the figures by this time being quite
interesting. Our stay was very brief, for we had great hopes of
reaching Seymour during the evening, but the roads continuing
unmade for the greater part, and very patchy, we decided to
stay at Longwood, more especially as we remembered our first
and only experience of night travelling (Wagga to Cookardinia).
Our run from Euroa to Longwood (iOj miles) was done in
57 minutes over sandy unmade roads.
Longwood.
Having only 86 miles in front of us, hope beat high in our
hearts, for with a fair road and good weather we fully made
up our minds to reach the Metropolis in the evening. However,
we had not got
fairly started on our
way when the rain
began to descend in
torrents. We did
well to stay at Long-
wood over night,
for we found the
road to Seymour
(27 miles) was un-
made, and the
ground soil alter-
nate clay and sand,
so it can well he imagined what the running became like.
Notwithstanding the inclemency of the weather and roads, we still
had hopes of reaching Melbourne at nightfall, and passed


through Burnt Creek at 9.25, Awenel at 10,12, and Mangalore
at 11, reaching Seymour, after almost circling the town, at 11,45,
Seymour.
The rain did not seem to impede the progress of the car to
any marked extent, although the belt got wet and greasy, causing
it to slip slightly when working heavily. It was a miserable day,
raining all the time, with the yellow mud splashing everything on
board, but signs of clearing up cheered us greatly after leaving
Seymour. The road to Tallarook was good, being composed
mainly of ironstone gravel, but one heavy pinch, paved with stone
blocks, gave the motor all it could do. ReachingTa-llarook at 1.23,
we now lost all hope of arriving in Melbourne at 4 p.m., as 53
miles lay between us and our destination, so we postponed our
prospective arrival till between 6 and 7, and had dinner, after-
wards filling up tanks and leavings at 2,8. p.m,
Broadford.
We now entered upon a splendid stretch of metalled roads
nicely undulating to Broadford, which we passed through at 3
o'clock. From here to Kilmore th.e rises became more pronounced,
and the belt being soaked by the continuous rain of the morning,
made their ascent very hard work for the motor. Climbing one
of these stiff pinches the belt snapped, for the second time during
the trip, at the hook holes. Six minutes put it right, and we made
fair time to Kilmore, reaching that township at 4.20. While
passing through the township our second breakage to the car took
place, which, strange to say, was the mate to our first —viz., the
chain adjustment strut clip, rather a very long term, but, to explain
matters fully, it is a piece of “L” iron about i x | in. x 2in. long, and
fitted with two small holes in the tong arm, by which it is fastened
to the back axle, and one larger hole in the short arm, through
which passes the screwed end of the adjusting strut, being locked
with nuts at each side. An enormous strain is thrown on this
small piece of iron with the pull on the chains, and the op and
down motion of the back axle. By a piece of lock, when getting
a new one at Young for our first breakage, we got a spare one
made, and the delay in fitting was not more than 20 minutes,
now valuable time. We got under weigh as soon as possible and
covered everything op to " Pretty Sally ” Hill, climbing the slopes


in good style. Over the top we cot off the motor, in the prospect
of a good "coast,” and away we went like the wind. The motion
of travelling at fully 40 miles an hour was terribly exciting.
One cannot imagine the tremendous excitement and pleasure of
going at this terrific pace over the roads, with the car seemingly
alive under os. It was glorious, it was sublime; till, with a series
of rapidly decreasing hisses, and increasing bumpings on the road,
we realized that our back tyre had punctured, after carrying us
over 470 miles of wretched country. The powerful band brakes
soon reduced our pace to a crawl, and we continued our "coast”
at about 8 miles an hour.
Be v e ridge.
After a delay of about half an hour at Wallan, examining
the tyre and lighting our lamps, &c., we journeyed slowly to
Beveridge, arriving at 6 p.m., just in time to avoid the heavy
storm that broke over the place. We had tea, but as the weather
kept up to its best storm standard, we postponed our arrival in
Melbourne, much to our regret and disappointment, till Wednesday,
timing ourselves for 12 noon. On starting at 8.50 a.m. we found
the rain and wind beating bitterly cold into our faces. So our
morning's run was quite devoid of any interest further than we
were nearing Melbourne, and that we were being slowly frozen,
but Thomson swears that he will devise a way of heating the car
in winter by the exhaust steam. This will be a feature of future
vehicles.
Melbourne.
However, pardon my digression from the journey, which was
carried through to time-table, the car passing through Coburg at
1 1.38 a.m. At the Brunswick tram terminus we found Messrs. K.
E. Edge, F. L. Mount, F. G. Wilson, and S. G. Pirani (Direc-
tors of the Thomson Motor Car Syndicate, under whose
auspices and direction the trip was undertaken), and a number
of friends, &c. After a brief welcome we continued our drive
to the city, stopping at the "Australian Cyclist” office to be
photographed, and arriving at the G.P.O. at 12.23, after having
covered the first Australian motor car journey (Bathurst, N.S.W.,
to Melbourne, 493] miles nett), our actual riding time being 56
hours 36 minutes.


1900.
Exact Distance
Nett Running Time.
T ravelled.
hours.
minutes.
April 30
24 miles
4
25
May I
431 „
5
0
ft
2
45 s
5
44
tt
3
47 S „
5
50
9*
4
691 „
7
28
tt
5
651 „
7
J
tt
6
471 „
5
10
tt
7
62:, 1 „
6
35
tt
8
631 „
6
20
»
9
24 „
3
3
4931
56
36
Average speed, 8,72 miles
per hour.
SUMMARY.
The daily running throughout the whole journey has been drawn up from
the notes kept by Mr. E. L. Holmes during the trip, and has been summarised
as follows; —
It will be at once seen that daily time was not aimed at, as the average daily
working time only shows 51 hours per day of 50 miles. There is no doubt
that had the weather been more seasonable, and no stoppages made’ at the
townships passed through, in order to satisfy the public and " press ” demand
for particulars, a much better time-sheet could have been presented; however,
the “ record,” such as it is, stands for Australia, and is open to be beaten.
The consumption of kerosene oil for the journey was 42 gallons,
averaging .084 gallons per mile, 'and costing a fraction over Id. per mile,
buying it as we travelled along, which we found no difficulty in doing. The
total result has been compared with recent English trials, and the comparison
has been indeed gratifying, more especially when the beautiful English roads
are classed against the wretched Australian tracks —not “roads.”
The introduction of the Motor Car must surely go a long way towards
giving the colonies better roads, and it is not a rash statement to make that
ere long we will have the “ coming vehicle ” speeding along merrily through
our country roads, excelling our old friend the horse, and equalling the
utility of the railroad.
SYD. Day, Print, 16 Wright’s Lane, Melbourne,


The New Light Model.
THOMSON STEAM MOTOR CAR.


sm PAY, PRINT. 16 Wright'S Lane, Melbourne
