



P 11)90


NOTE,
AI3.3SS r
\ 4-
The following Review was published several years ago (1858),
just when the letter, to which it refers, appeared. It has recently
been enquired for, and is now reprinted, to meet the wishes of
those who feel interested in the question therein discussed. So
long as the senseless and unwarrantable practice of playing organs
in the worship of God, is persisted in, there is need for its
exposure, as utterly inconsistent with the spirituality of gospel
worship. It is a question that might very soon be settled, were
mankind content to be guided by the Word of God. The simple
question is just this : —Does the Hew Testament authorise the use
of organs, or any other dead instrument, in the worship of God, or
does it not ? That is the question. Surely every one who pro-
fesses to believe in Jesus, is bound to abide by His teaching. The
mind of Christ, as made known in His Word, is the supreme rule
to the believer. The simple question then is, Has Christ, in His
Word, given the slightest indication of its being His will that
musical instruments should be used in His service ? If he has not,
(and He has not), then playing on an organ, or any other inanimate
instrument, in the worship of God, must he an unwarranted inno-
vation, and utterly unjustifiable. There is no need for any
elaborate argument on the subject. It is simply a question of
adherence or of non-adherence to the teaching of the Divine Word,
as contained in the Hew Testament Scriptures.




A REVIEW
DR. GUTHRIE’S LETTER
THE ORGAN QUESTION.
It has been said, that when once an Author succeeds in
getting a name and a reputation for talent and sound judg-
ment, he may write what he pleases, and it will pass current.
Nor can it be denied, that productions of a very ordinary,
and even of an exceptionable character, have sometimes been
hailed with considerable eclat, on account of the repute of
the Author. This sort of indulgence, however, on the part
of the reading public, must have its limits. Discerning
minds are not to be long satisfied with weakness and folly,
even under the sanction of a great name. Seldom have we
known a more palpable attempt to make sophistry pass for
argument, than that which is exhibited in the letter of the
Rev. Dr. Thomas Guthrie, of Edinburgh, upon the subject
of introducing instruments of music in the worship of God.
It might have been expected, that when a man like Dr.
Guthrie thought fit to publish his opinion on any subject,
however erroneous that opinion might be, he would, at least,
have had something like a plausible reason to advance in
support of it. Let us see how far this is the case in the
present instance.
A majority of the Free Church Presbytery of Edinburgh,
had given expression to their views, as hostile to the use of
Organs in the worship of the Sanctuary. Dr. Guthrie


“feels himself called upon publicly to express his dissent from the
views adoped by a majority of the Presbytery .” Such a plain
and palpable avowal of his favourable leaning to the use of
musical instruments in the worship of God, must have taken
by surprise, the sound-hearted Presbyterians of Scotland.
Let us see then how the redoubtable Doctor supports his
views on the subject, in no less than eight formal paragraphs.
i. First of all he tells us that he “ cannot regard the worship
of God as impure because an Organ is employed to lead and guide
the Psalmody He then adds, “ there is nothing in the New
Testament to warrant such a judgment.” Now, if it should be
Dr. Guthrie’s opinion that the worship that is made up of
playing and singing, is as pure a worship, as that which
proceeds from the lips of the living worshippers alone —we
say if that be his opinion, let him hold it, and we will just
take it for what it is worth ; but, when he appeals to
Scripture, the case becomes much more serious : and let it
be carefully noted here, that he does not appeal to what the
Scripture says, but to what it does not say. It seems to be
on the silence of the New Testament, that he founds his
opinion. Does he, then, mean to tell us, that whatever is
not expressly condemned in the New Testament, may be
lawfully introduced into the worship of God ? Unless he
means this, his reference to the silence of Scripture is utterly
worthless, and proves nothing. If the New Testament says
nothing against the use of the sackbut and the psaltery, the
cymbal, the tabret, and the harp ; then, according to the
Doctor’s reasoning, all these may be introduced into Divine
Worship. Nay, fiddles, fifes, and bagpipes, might just as
legitimately be made use of in connection with the worship
of the living God, as either Organ or anything else, if the
learned Doctor’s argument be worth anything at all. In
this way the wondrously liberal Doctor might soon find
warrant for converting every Presbyterian place of worship
into a concert room. Nor will it avail to say that this is
carrying the matter too far, and making extravagant
suppositions ; for neither Dr. Guthrie, nor any other man,
can tell how far matters may be carried when once the door


is opened for such innovations. He ought to have paused
before rushing so heedlessly in the face of that sound-hearted
Presbyterianism, which in other, and less degenerate days,
seemed to know better than some of our modern Solons do,
how to act upon the sound and salutary counsel, obsta
principiis. But if the Doctor will appeal to Scripture, let
him answer this question : —Does the New Testament, or
does it not, contain a sufficiently full and explicit guide, as
to what the services of public worship are to be, under the
Gospel ? This question is surely susceptible of a distinct
answer either in the negative or affirmative. Will Dr.
Guthrie venture to answer it in the negative ? We need
not stay to demonstrate the fearful consequences to which
such an answer would lead. Nor surely has Dr. Guthrie,
with all the liberalism that prevades his extraordinary letter,
yet come the length of repudiating the well-known Protestant
principle as to the Rule of Faith. How, then, does the
latitudinarianism, so furiously breaking forth in this pro-
Organ Epistle, agree with the principle heretofore understood
to be held by Protestants ? How can the Scriptures be a
sure and infallible guide, if there be something needful for the
worship of God, still left for man to devise ? Here is the
germ of Popery at once.
2. The Doctor’s second argument, if argument it can be
called, is, that “ The Directory for Public Worship in our own
Church does not forbid the use of an instrument in conducting the
praises of the Sanctuary.” Now this is really pitiful. Is it
come to this, that because a certain thing is not forbidden in
the Directory, ergo, it may be introduced into the Public
Worship of God ? When a Directory declares and sets in
order the forms and services of Public Worship, it is surely
implied that what it does not specify, and set forth, is
excluded : else what is the use of a Directory at all ? But
no, this is not Dr. Guthrie’s way of reasoning. He holds
himself at liberty not only to do what the Directory bids
him, but also what it does not expressly prohibit. We know
not what kind of a Directory would bind one so expert at
leaping fences, but verily it would require to be a very


voluminous affair, in order to contain a specification of every
thing that is not to be done, as well as of every thing that is to
be done. Really such twaddle from the pen of Dr. Thomas
Guthrie, is very deplorable. Suppose that the musical
propensities of his own congregation were to lead them to the
belief, that half-a-dozen of Highland Pipers, perched in one
of the corners of the gallery of their Church, would constitute
a most heart-stirring and desirable accompaniment to the
Psalmody; the worthy Doctor has effectually shut his own
mouth against all remonstrance. His people would quote
from his own letter, and tell him in his own words, that
“ the Directory for Public Worship in our own Church does not
forbid the use of an instrument in conducting the praises of the
Sanctuary The poor Doctor would be effectually floored
by his own argument. But really it is sad to have to deal
with such miserable trifling. There is no limit to such
vagaries. The Doctor talks in the conclusion of his letter,
of “ our enemies laughing among themselves ,” but assuredly, if
the merest tyro in logic does not laugh at the Doctor’s pithy
arguments, it must be owing to some serious defect in the
risible faculty. The impotency of an argument, upon so
solemn a matter, drawn from the mere fact that the New
Testament does not forbid it, and that the Directory does not
forbid it, must be apparent to the shallowest understanding;
and the very circumstance of having recourse to such an
argument, only proves the untenableness of the position
which it is employed to support.
But, if possible, a still more pitiable aspect of the case is
presented to us, in this singularly foolish Epistle, when he
broadly states, that even although it were forbidden in the
Directory, this would be no barrier to the introduction of the
Organ ! ! And to justify so preposterous a doctrine, he
proclaims to the Church and the world, that he and his
brethren are in the constant practice of violating that
Directory, and makes this a reason for indulging in further
irregularities ! ! Verily if this be not breaking down the
fences of the Church, and opening the door to endless
innovations, we know not what is. If there be meaning in


words, the meaning of the whole of the Doctor’s second head
of argument is just this : —Never mind the Directory. It is
of no manner of consequence whether you observe it or not.
We all do as we like, notwithstanding its rules, so you may
get an Organ if you please ; and the more especially you
may do this, seeing the said Directory says nothing about
Organs. Verily after this, it will be no difficult matter to
find reasons for anything however ridiculous or absurd.
There is not a thief in Edinburgh who might not, upon Dr.
Guthrie’s mode of reasoning, find a way to justify his
pilfering. He has but to take a leaf out of the Doctor’s
system of logic, and boldly exclaim, —I have committed
many depredations already, therefore I may just as well go
on to others.
3. Under his third head, the liberal Doctor fires another
shot at the congregations of his own Church. It is for these
congregations themselves to see to it, whether the charge he
brings against them be well founded or not. Meanwhile, we
take the Doctor’s statement as he gives it. He says, “I
have been present in Presbyterian Churches, where the singing was
very much left to the Precentor and his Band. On the other hand,
I have worshipped in many Congregational and Methodist
Churches, where along with the use of the Organ (some would say,
by means of the use of the Organ) the people joined more fidly in
singing God's praises than they are in the habit of doing in many
of our own Churches .” If this passage proves anything at all,
it just proves what would have been as true although Organs
had never existed, namely, that there are some congregations
where there is better singing than in others, and that there
are some people who can sit in the house of God, without
having heart and soul to praise him, while there are others
who feel it to be their duty and their privilege, to sing aloud,
and make a joyful noise to the God of their Salvation.
These are facts which we all know to be true, and we say,
they would have been facts although neither Dr. Guthrie
nor Organs had ever been heard of. The only way in which
his reference to congregations in which he has worshipped
could serve his purpose, in advocating the use of an Organ,


would be by making out thereby, a proof, that the praise of
God is better, and more acceptably sung by congregations
where Organs are used, than by those where they are not.
If there be meaning in the Doctor’s words, this must be the
conclusion at which he aims. But will he honestly and
broadly affirm this ? Will he hazard the assertion that God
is more spiritually and more acceptably worshipped, in
consequence of an Organ ? He is a bold man ; but we do
not believe he is bold enough for this. He ought, moreover,
to know—and seeing he is so well acquainted with the
practice of other Churches —the Pope’s among the rest—he
perhaps does know, that it can be just as truly said, that in
many congregations where there are no Organs, the praise of
God is more fully joined in by the people, than in many
congregations where Organs are used. This he dare not
deny. He tells us of congregations where the singing is
“ very much left to the Precentor and his Band.” We know this
to be true, and lament it. But we can tell him that there are
also congregations where the singing and the playing are
very much left to the Organist and his band. These are
facts, but what have they to do with the question ? They
neither prove that Organs are Scriptural appendages to
Gospel Worship, nor that they are not. It is a mere
mystifying of the subject to advance such platitudes ; and
we cannot repress our astonishment that the man who bears
the name of Thomas Guthrie should have condescended to
such sophistries. Unless he be prepared to assert, and to
make proof of it, that those who are so dead and indifferent
as to refuse to sing God's praise in his house, will be made
more spiritually minded, and more alive to their obligations
as Christians, by hearing the tones of an Organ —I say,
unless he can prove this, his reference to Methodists and
others, is worth nothing. Even were it the fact, —which it
is not —that a larger proportion of the people sing, where
there is an Organ, than where there is not, that would prove
nothing to the purpose, unless it were also proved that this
additional singing, caused by the Organ, is really spiritual
and devout worship. There is every reason for affirming


that it is not. For ifthere be spiritual and devout worshippers,
they would sing without the Organ, and would not need a
wind instrument to induce them. If Dr. Guthrie be
disposed to maintain that the sounds of the Organ will
awaken devout feelings and spiritual emotions, where they
did not exist before, we should feel somewhat curious to know
upon what Scriptural grounds such an opinion is founded.
We have always understood that Jesus Christ had appointed
in is Church all the necessary means for accomplishing this
end, and we do not find Organs amongst them. Nor are
we aware of a single sentence in the New Testament
warranting the conclusion, that where the appointed means
of grace fail to stir mankind up to their duty, this is to be
accomplished by having recourse to means of man’s own
devising. Advocates for the Organ, therefore, would do well
to consider how far they are depreciating the importance and
sufficiency of the Divinely appointed means of grace, when
they represent that which is no institution of Christ at all,
as necessary to promote the purposes for which these means
were instituted by the Saviour. We would have very little
faith in the genuineness of those emotions which are more
stirred by an instrument of music, than by the word and
ordinances of the Divine Redeemer. Fine music, undoubtedly
may awaken pleasurable emotions, and excite the feelings ;
but that these emotions and feelings are holy and devotional
is another question. We know that men of no religion at
all are susceptible of these impressions, and we have no
doubt at all, that the delusion extensively prevails, of
imagining the feelings that are awakened by the playing of
an instrument, to be devotional and religious feelings, when
they are nothing of the kind. If men will not feel solemnity
of mind under the means of grace instituted by our Lord,
and practised by His Apostles, to call their feelings under the
“ bumming of an Organ,” religious and devotional, seems a
manifest mockery and delusion.
4. In his fourth paragraph, the Doctor, on whose shoulders
Presbyterianism seems to hang very loosely, tells us that it
is a vulgar error to suppose, that the principles of Presbyterian


Church government are, to any degree, mixed up with this
question. On the subject of Presbyterianism the sapient
Doctor seems to be much in need of enlightenment. It were
easy to show that the very thing which he advocates in his
letter, involves a violation of an essential principle of
Presbyterianism. On this point let us hear what Dr.
Candlish says: —“On the congregational system, every
Pastor with his people, may take his own way, —one using
instrumental music, and another condemning the use of it ;
and yet the harmony of any association they form among
themselves may reman unbroken. This may or may not be
a recommendation of that system. That is not now the
question. It is enough to say that it is inconsistent with
Presbyterianism. Those Presbyterians who disapprove, on
conscientious and Scripture grounds, of a particular mode of
worship,—as, for instance, of the Organ, —cannot divest
themselves of responsibility by merely excluding it from their
own congregations. They are bound to resist the introduction
of it in all the other congregations of the Church as well as
in their own.” Now, if Dr. Candlish be right, Dr.
Guthrie is wrong ; for he (Dr. G.) would recommend that
each congregation be allowed to follow its own pleasure in
this matter, thus introducing a loose and disjointed system,
unknown to true and genuine Presbyterianism, which requires
conformity of worship and government, recognising the
sound Scriptural truth that the Church of Christ is one body,
and that there ought to be harmony and agreement among
all its members. But, on the subject of Presbyterianism, as
bearinguponthe Organ Question, we take leave to recommend
the Doctor to set himself to a careful perusal of the masterly
reply of the Presbytery of Glasgow to the Statement of Dr.
Ritchie in 1808.
Whether Dr. Guthrie be right, or whether he be wrong,
when he affirms, what others positively deny—namely, that
the number of Presbyterian Churches in Europe who use the
Organ, is greater than the number who do not, is of no
consequence to the merits of the question. The question is
not, how many adopt the practice, but, is the practice itself
in any way authorised in the New Testament ?


5. We scarcely know what to think of a Presbyterian
Minister who could write the fifth paragraph of this letter.
It is so utterly loose and latitudinarian that we can scarce!}'
realize the fact, of its being the production of a man who
had hitherto been regarded as a leading Minister of the
Presbyterian Church of Scotland. With him the use of
instrumental music in the worship of God, under the gospel
dispensation, is a matter of such perfect indifference, that he
cares not whither it be adopted or no. He has no fixed
principle upon the subject. If the people like it, they may
have it. If they don’t like it, they can let it alone ! Here
is a guide to the people ! The very man who occupies the
place of the Teacher, Counsellor, and Guide of the people in
all religious matters, can contemplate an important matter,
affecting theform of Sanctuary service, with entire indifferency.
He has no teaching nor counsel to give his people on the
subject. They may just do as they please. And mark the
Doctor’s logic. Because the people have the privilege of
choosing their own Ministers, they should also, according to
him, have the privilege of determining whether they shall
have an Organ or no. We should like to know where the
analogy lies.
6. The sixth paragraph is truly a rich specimen of the non
sequitur. It involves the following beautiful specimens of the
inferential mode of reasoning
I. Paul allowed differencies in the Primitive Church. Therefore let the
people who like it have an Organ!
2. It is wrong to multiply unnecessarily, tests and terms of communion.
Therefore, let those who like it have an Organ !
3. Tyrannical attempts to inforce uniformity have been the bane of the
Church. Therefore, let those who like it have an Organ !
4. The good old seceders differed about the lifting up of the bread at the
Communion. Therefore, let those who like it have an Organ!
5. Some Free Church Congregations do not approve of the Gown and
Bands. Therefore, let those who like it have an Organ !
Who after this shall dare to enter the lists with Dr.
Guthrie ? Such logic would have put honest Dougald
Steward to the blush, and made the syllogistic Watts hide
his face. Verily things are come to a sad pass among the


ranks of the Organists, when even such a man as Dr.
Guthrie has recourse to such miserable begging of the
question, in order to vindicate what has no countenance in
all the New Testament.
7. In his seventh paragraph, the Doctor refers to the noble
battle which the Free Church has fought, and shudders at
the thought of the mighty fall that will be involved in fighting
about organs. Let the good Doctor know, that if the
trimming and time-serving spirit which pervades his letter,
had actuated those who fought that battle, it would never
have been fought at all. The stern and stand-up attitude
which Chalmers and Welch and other kindred spirits
exhibited in the ten years’ conflict, had no sympathy, with
the lax and temporising theory recommended in this most
unwise and injudicious letter. To the same spirit of staunch
and consistent Presbyterianism which marked the progress,
and the triumphant issue of the Organ controversy in 1807-8,
Scotland owes the place which she so honorably occupies
among the nations of Christendom. If she fall from that
proud position now, it will not be through the fault of those
who contend against the breaking down of her Presbyterian
policy, and conformity of worship ; but through the defection
of those who would stand idly by and see the door opened
wide for the entrance of innovations, which our forefathers
successfully resisted.
Dr, Guthrie speaks of the great and good men of other
Churches as likely to hang their heads in shame and sorrow,
when they see a controversy about Organs. Pray, have
the faithful among Scotland’s ecclesiastical warriors ever
been in the habit of regulating their contests tor truth by the
consideration of what men in other lands would think of
them ? Pray, Doctor, don’t thus attempt to influence the
question by considerations that have really nothing to do with
it. You have not made even an attempt, throughout all
your letter, manfully to grapple with the real merits of the
controversy. Is this worthy of you? There is throughout
an implied assumption of the question being altogether
trivial and unimportant. It is to be hoped there are men in


Scotland still, who will buckle on their armour, when they
see such dangerous liberalism, threatening the integrity of
her Presbyterian defences, and thus abetting the attempt to
make breaches in the walls of her Zion.
8. In the eighth and concluding paragraph the Doctor
speaks of the abundance of work which the Church has to do
in carrying the gospel to Pagans and Mahommedans. We
trust no man has any controversy with him upon that subject.
But again we ask, what has that to do with the question ?
Surely if a matter occurs which threatens the interests of the
Church at home, there would be little wisdom in making the
heathenism of India, a reason for leaving that matter to take
care of itself. What would be thought of Britain, if when
she has work to do in India, she were to make that a reason
for leaving her own coasts without defence, especially if at
the very time there was an actual attempt to make an inroad
upon her territory ? By all means let the Church do her
uttermost for the dark places of the earth ; but let her also
remember that she will soon lose her strength and living
power for doing good to others, if she do not take care to keep
her own house in order.
But seriously, there is much more involved in this affair
than the worthy Doctor seems to be aware of, or willing to
allow. It involves the important question of abiding or not
abiding by the plain rule of New Testament Scripture ; and
that is not a matter of indifference. Moreover the Doctor’s
own consistency, and fidelity to his vows, are involved. Did
not he, on the solemn occasion of his ordination to the
ministry, engage that he would constantly adhere to the purity
of worship presently authorized and practised in the Church ?
Did he not promise that he would “ neither directly cr indirectly
endeavour the prejudice and subversion thereof .” When he made
that solemn vow, there was not a single Organ in the Church
whose form of worship he promised to maintain. And now
he writes a letter strongly encouraging an innovation, and
deprecating any attempts to preserve entire that very form of
worship which he declared he would constantly adhere to.
This is melancholy enough in one who ought to be a pattern


F ( 13*10
to the younger brethren, of steadfastness and consistency.
Has he not often been a party to the administering of the
same solemn ordination vows to others ? What are they to
think of the man who can so utterly ignore his own vow, and
encourage them to trample on theirs ?
We have done, for the present, with this extremely weak
and witless production. It does not contain a single argument,
worthy of the name, upon the real merits of the question ;
but is a string of most lax and latitudinarian pleas for liberty
to congregations to make a palpable encroachment upon the
integrity and uniformity of worship, as heretofore maintained
and practised in the Church. We might surely have expected
something better than mere pleas of expediency, when a
learned divine set himself to discuss a matter touching the
worship due to the Almighty.
We pronounce the use of instrumental music in the worship
of God, under the gospel dispensation, utterly without
warrant in the Divine Word : and we challenge Dr. Guthrie,
and all the Doctors in Christendom, to disprove this assertion.
Until he does this, all quibbling about the liberty of
congregations to please themselves, or about people singing
or not singing in the praises of the Sanctuary, is totally
beside the question.
