

A REPLY TO THE QUESTION,
What is to be done with our Convicts?
BEING AN
EXPOSITION
OF A NEW SYSTEM
FOR THE EMPLOYMENT AND MANAGEMENT
OF
C onbict Prisoners
UNDER SENTENCE OF TRANSPORTATION, OR OF IMPRISONMENT
FOR PERIODS OF TWO YEARS AND UPWARDS.
BY
A. ALLARDICE,
FARMER, TAYPORT, FIFESHIRE.
DUNDEE:
PRINTED AT THE NORTHERN WARDER OFFICE FOR THE AUTHOR.
AND SOLD BY
JOHN MENZIES, PKINCE’S STREET, EDINBURGH; DAVID ROBERTSON,
GLASGOW; AND W. S. ORR & CO., AMEN CORNER, LONDON.
1854.
PRICE ONE SHILLING.




PRE FACE.
During the autumn of 1852 there appeared an anonymous
pamphlet on the Convict question , to which, as it contained
sentiments different from those I hold, 1 resolved to reply.
Shortly afterwards, the present Lord Chancellor took his seat
on the Woolsack; and at an early period of the Session, announced
his intention of bringing forward a measure to suppress trans-
portation, when I partly abandoned the idea of proceeding farther
in writing my reply. Since then, I have been corresponding
with a few gentlemen whom I deemed qualified to give an opinion
on my views on the subject, as will be seen by the extracts from
my correspondence given in the Appendix.
About the middle of last Session, the Lord Chancellor’s Bill
passed the House of Lords. No farther notice was taken of it
till within a few nights of the prorogation of Parliament, when
Viscount Palmerston brought the measure before the House of
Commons rather unexpectedly and somewhat unseasonably.
Though I fully coincide with the greater part of the noble
Viscount’s speech, still, in some points, I much fear he is over
sanguine. How is it possible that common pickpockets, or noto-
rious swindlers, can be reconciled to remain at large on the ticket
of leave service , and be content with small pay and hard labour %
There is, I think, the utmost probability that very many of those
so privileged would take the first opportunity of escaping, and of
returning to their old tricks and habits; or, at least, that they
would endeavour to regain their freedom, and avoid the necessity
of being sent back to any penal settlement whatever.
It is much to be doubted how far such characters, after being
a few years in gaol, “ might so easily slide into the ordinary avo-
cations of the industry of the country.” His Lordship said no-
thing whatever of the towns, but promised to relieve the counties
of all such additional burden. But have not both counties and
towns to make up taxes to enable the Exchequer to clear oft' all
demands upon the national resources ?
Clearly the change has been forced upon the Government;
and, even with all the public works and harbours of refuge that
could be constructed, it is very questionable how far our convicts
could be advantageously employed in such a way; at all events,
it must be allowed that the generality of prisoners are very unfit
subjects for such employment.
Throughout the noble Viscount’s speech, and during the whole


debate, the term female never once occurs ; nor, in looking into
the Act, am I more fortunate, —the term female only appearing
once in the bill (and that in parenthesis) in clause VII., which
is a long and complicated one, full of repetitions, and out of
which lawyers may make anything or nothing. It is certainly
of importance that it should be shown what is to be done with the
women —it being generally found the female convicts are more
difficult to manage than males.—Surely it is not intended they
should be sent into the sea, for the purpose of aiding in the
formation or the completion of harbours of refuge, or that they
are to be employed in erecting defences on the coast.
By my scheme, for every two male convicts employed, 1 give
employment to one female; and, on this part of my plan, few of
my correspondents venture to cast a doubt.
In the course of the debate, Mr Walpole expressed his agree-
ment with the noble Viscount’s measure, and stated that the
moral reformation of convicts could not be accomplished, unless
they were sent to a country where the moral character of the
population stood high above their own. According to this view,
there is no country better adapted for this purpose of moral
reformation than Great Britain.
The return from Colonel Jebb’s late report, read by Mr Wal-
pole—showing the profits upon convict labour at Portland to have
been, during 1849, £7,000 ; 1850, £14,000 ; 1851, £2o,soo—ap-
pears very gratifying, though it might be well to know upon what
principle the valuation was conducted. Assuredly, if correct, it
is high time for the Crown to start similar establishments, where at
all likely to be attended with equal success.
Doubtless, the country at large will agree with Sir John
Pakington in saying, that the House and the country were taken
by surprise, by a measure of such vast interest and importance
being brought forward at a time when it was impossible to have
any satisfactory discussion of it.
The spirited and valuable remarks of the other speakers 1
cannot enter upon. The gentlemen who took part in the debate
showed no symptom of drowsiness after the reading of the bill
for the first time at such an untimely hour.
I approach the consideration of the subject in the spirit of the
noble Viscount’s closing remarks Inviting the attention of
honourable gentlemen to the bill, which had been drawn up with
great care, considering the whole system as experimental, and in
the working of it, should fresh suggestions occur, and other im-
provements appear likely to be easily accomplished, her Majesty’s
Government would be most happy to receive any such sugges-
tions from others, and to profit by the lessons of experience.”
Tayport, March 1854.


REPLY TO THE QUESTION,
WHAT IS TO BE DONE WITH OUR CONVICTS?
&c.
Thk pamphlet 4 ‘ What is to be done with our Convictshaving
fallen into my hand, I have read it with much interest, and I give the
author great credit for the way in which he has treated a subject that
still remains nothing short of a national puzzle.
Ihe plan proposed by the author is, as to its aim, very praiseworthy,
but in many respects essentially impracticable. Matters have, however,
come to such a pass that something must be done. It has become evi-
dent to the Ministry that our colonies will not much longer submit to
have the outcasts and offscourings of the society of the mother country
thrust upon them, either directly or indirectly, which in time past has
been done to an enormous extent, without an intelligent consideration
of the probable consequences.
If the system is to be persevered in much longer, it is to be feared
the vast gold regions of Australia will turn round and plainly tell
Britain, that the disadvantages of connection with our Government so
greatly outbalance its advantages, that they are prepared to cut the
connecting link, a result that it is the duty of England, by every con-
ciliatory means within her power, to endeavour to prevent.
The leading plan of the pamphlet to which I have referred is, in
many of its general points, good ; but, in place of corporal punishments,
would it not have a more salutary effect to punish hardened criminals
by withholding part of their food, as in many cases the lash would
exasperate rather than sooth the minds of desperate characters ? Again,
the proposed scheme of State servitude would, I much fear, be attended
with many evil consequences. In the first place, every convict em-
ployed in the various crafts would tend to throw poor scavengers, or
other such, out of work, possibly casting them on their respective
parishes for a subsistence, and tending to reduce the whole wages of
A
* Kennedy, Edinburgh; Hamilton, Adams, & Co., London.


the class with whose industry convict labour might interfere, down
to the poor, oppressed needle-woman, reducing many possibly to
starvation, or to a point far below an ordinary subsistence, a considera-
tion that would justly excite the hostility of the parochial boards,
whose opposition would likely be successful in preventing any such
legislative enactment ever being carried through Parliament.
Even under my scheme, I very much fear how T far convicts could be
absolutely prevented from making their escape, or rising up in rebel-
lion on the small armed force I propose to place as a guard over them,
and this, too, though located in an open country, and away from every
facility of refuge.
To place them in populous towns, where fellows at large as depraved
as themselves are continually prowling about ready to render assist-
ance, would invariably provide them with means and inducements to
endeavour to escape.
Besides often breaking out of jails, we frequently read of desperadoes,
even in irons, making off from the criminal officers when running in
railway carriages. What then would we have to look for under more
favourable opportunities of regaining their liberty ?
I would have all criminals sentenced for a shorter period than two
years confined, and treated according to their deserts in the present
jails, —an endeavour being made as far as possible to reclaim, educate,
and reform them.
In my humble opinion, the prospect of no future punishment, how-
ever severe, would deter many from plotting an escape; nothing short
of a chain round their leg, and the point of the bayonet, will ever deter
some desperadoes from endeavouring to make off, and regain their
liberty, life to many of them being deemed of little value; liberty and
an opportunity of gratifying their ruling desires and passions is all
that to them makes life valuable.
I perfectly coincide with the pamphlet referred to as regards per-
sonal disfigurement, unless in the case of juvenile prisoners sentenced
for a shorter period than two years, no disfiguration of whose hair
ought to be allowed.
As juvenile prisoners hardly come under my scheme, I need not
dwell on that subject, though I very much fear the great bulk of them
have neither parents nor guardians ; and if they have such, doubtless
they will be found to be even worse than the young delinquents them-
selves ; and any effort to obtain a fine from such relatives would, lam
persuaded, in nine cases out of ten, prove totally abortive.
As to pauper children, I think the best plan would be to leave them


in the hands of the police judges before whom they may appear —such
magistrates having the best opportunity of investigating into their cir-
cumstances ; and, after a slight punishment, it could be determined
whether they should be saddled on their respective parishes, sent to
an Industrial School, or how to be disposed of.
The question of corporal punishments is assuredly a grave one. In
place of invariably punishing the back I would be more inclined to
punish the belly, for withholding the diet would more likely tend to
subdue the obstinate and refractory, and induce them to reflect on, and
try to amend, their evil courses, than constantly degrading and irri-
tating the feelings by whipping. At all events I would be sorry to
think of any miserable wretch, however worthless and far lost to every-
thing good, being placed entirely at the mercy of some relentless
overseer ; perhaps even more devoid of feeling and common sense than
the poor culprit he may daily vent his spleen upon. At the same time
I do not advocate total abstinence fi'om corporal punishment, for
without it order could not be obtained amid such a worthless crew of
unruly individuals. However, as this subject will form a clause in my
proposed plan, I shall here refrain from saying more on the matter.
In the Dundee Advertiser , of 2d Nov. 1852 a table is given of fifty
of the female frequenters of the Dundee Prison, twenty-five of whom
have been committed in the aggregate eighteen hundred and nineteen
times, or, on the average, thirty-two times each. The next squad of
twenty-five have, on the aggregate, been committed four hundred and
fifty-eight times, or, on the average, eighteen times each. One delin-
quent, only thirty-one years of age, has been no fewer than sixty-four
times in durance vile, the same prisoner confessing she has also been
fully thirty times in the Edinburgh city jail. To deter such characters
from their propensities for a prison life, would it not be well to make
provision for handing them over to the Sheriff, after having appeared
a given number of times before the Police Court, for more severe
punishment ?
Thus far, I think, no power whatever should interfere, by petition or
otherwise, between the Jury, Judge, and the criminal, but through
the Home Secretary of State, as Mr Mackison ably points out.
Had I not lately read the evidence taken before Lord Shaftesbury
on the state of affairs in the public asylum of Old Bedlam, London, I
might have been inclined to have agreed with the pamphlet I have
referred to as to the disposal of lunatic criminals, but this exposure is
quite sufficient to freeze the very blood. Humanity can hardly believe
that such brutal conduct could have taken place in a Christian country.
A 2


Allow me therefore to say that I think all imbeciles should, at the
expense of the Crown, be placed in the nearest convenient asylum
to their own locality ; so that, if they have either friends or relatives,
who entertain any regard for them, such may, from time to time, have
it in their power to visit them.
Without further preface, I proceed to describe my proposed
SCHEME OF PENAL STATE SERVITUDE IN THE CULTIVATION
OF WASTE LANDS, &C., &C.
I propose that the scheme should be managed by Commissioners
whose duties and powers would fall to be defined by Parliament.
The Commissioners to consist of three salaried persons, one for Scot-
land and two for England, to form one general Board, and to sit in
London.
Thus constituted, independent of an Inspector (to be subsequently
alluded to), one of the Commissioners to visit every location or station
annually, look into every matter connected therewith, inquire into the
internal management of the establishment, satisfy himself with the
farming, building, and all out-door operations ; draw up a full and par-
ticular report, to be inserted in any two daily leading London journals,
and also in two of the best circulated local newspapers nearest to the
location which they describe, for the information of other papers, and
the public in general. The salaries should be fair but moderate, as in
this case more may be got effected for L. 600 or L.BOO a year, than in
many instances for as many thousands. The Board of Commissioners
thus formed should begin by looking out or advertising for a piece or
pieces of waste land, measuring not under seven hundred acres in one
clump. They might then be impowered to intimate to the proprietor or
proprietors their intentions, and to refer the question of valuation to
competent arbiters to be appointed to meet and examine the waste land,
and put a fair value thereon —two of the referees to be appointed by the
Crown, and two to be named by the proprietor; and in the event of
their not agreeing as to price, &c., an umpire to be chosen by themselves,
or named by Lords Lieutenant of counties wherein the bulk of the land
may be situated, whose decision shall be binding on all parties and in
all cases.
The next step would be to form what might be termed a local board
of the following officials—namely, an efficient respectable man as Go-
vernor over the whole establishment, to take charge of prisoners sent


in, and of those whose terms of imprisonment expire, and who have to
be sent to their original localities, and on all occasions to correspond
with the Board of Commissioners.
A qualified woman as Matron, to take charge of the whole domestic
affairs of the concern.
A man as a General Manager over the Overseers, and as conductor of
the whole mechanical operations going on throughout the property, and
to assist the engineer when necessary. A Civil Engineer, to have no
fixed residence, but to have an apartment, and board allowed him in
every barrack.
A constant agricultural Resident Manager to conduct and plan out
whatever is to be performed by the convicts, especially the female
prisoners and their overseers.
A properly qualified person to act as Chaplain, Schoolmaster, and
Clerk, to keep a distinct minute book, and other necessary books required
in the establishment.
A Medical Man to reside in the barracks, with liberty to practise on
his own account for six miles around the same.
All the above to be allowed adequate salaries, proper apartments,
and a sufficiently good table.
When matters are further advanced, an eligible Inspector or Sur-
veyor to be appointed to visit the different stations quarterly, and look
into the whole occurrences that may have taken place, carefully examin-
ing the minute book and its contents, especially the punishments that
may have been decerned and carried into effect on the prisoners,
their state of health, and the general aspect of the whole establishment.
When any prisoner shall have been three times punished during the
quarter, he should be brought before the Inspector and interrogated
regarding his bad conduct; when, if the Inspector may deem meet,
he may draught him into another gang, taking him from his present
associates. This may be tried for three changes; and if there be no im-
provement of conduct, let such be sent off to the Hebrides (as hereafter
proposed), unless declared by two medical men to be an imbecile, or fatu-
ous person, when very different treatment must be had recourse to. The
foregoing matters all to be carefully reported to the Board of Commis-
sioners by the Inspector prior to leaving the station at every visit.
The Inspector to have apartments in the barracks, and to sit at the
Governor’s table when on duty.
One male and one female overseer to be placed over each respective
squad of ten prisoners, who should sit at one table.
Ten males and five females, to be selected from among the better be


haved convicts, to act as assistant overseers, and to have a table of their
own, but when at meals the Matron and one of the Managers to remain
in the room beside them until they withdraw to their respective duties.
Unless in the latter case, on no account whatever shall male and
female prisoners be allowed to associate together.
To prevent useless irritation, no overseer should be allowed to inter-
fere with the squad of another, nor should any overseer inflict more
than one blow (and that not on the legs or head) with a rattan or rope’s
end on any prisoner, for one and the same offence.
Prisoners not doing their duty, on such chastisement, to be reported,
and brought before the following tribunal, viz., the Governor, first and
second Manager, Chaplain, Surgeon, officer over the pensioners, and the
ten male overseers —the overseer aggrieved to state his charge, the
culprit to reply, then both to be allowed to offer reasons, and when
punishment is to be inflicted, its amount to be proposed by one of the
overseers. If the proposal should be thought too lenient, or too severe,
it might be met by a counter-amendment by any member of the board,
either motion or amendment to be carried by a majority.
A moveable patent thrashing and corn mill might be kept on the
premises, and worked by the disobedient and very refractory, as a
special and more severe punishment.
In place of corporal punishment, I would propose giving fees and
rewards to the orderly, well behaved, and good workers; which, to
prisoners in general, would prove a great stimulus to amendment of
life and better behaviour.
At the end of one year, a grant of 25s quarterly might be held out
to those of orderly character, —this, or whatever sum awarded, to be
carried to the credit of the prisoner every quarter, and, in place of
carrying the full amount forward, an allowance of snuff or tobacco
might be granted weekly, which would of itself induce hundreds to use
their utmost endeavours to behave in a becoming manner. Besides, at
the end of a convict’s punishment for seven or ten years, he would
have to look forward, perhaps, to the sura of L. 20 and upwards, which,
to reclaimed men or women, would be a great blessing, and probably
prove the means of rendering them useful members of society for the
remainder of their lives, either at home, or as emigrants to a foreign
land, whilst any little sum gained in this way by felons of an opposite
stamp would, in all probability, prove a snare and a curse, very likely
sending them back to their old abode for a much longer period than
before.
To deter vicious characters from attempting escape, suppose not


fewer than twenty-five efficient old pensioners, with an officer, sergeant,
and corporals placed over them, were to be stationed constantly on the
premises, and three of these kept regularly on duty, by night and by
day. If necessary, the soldiers not on guard might also escort the
convicts to and from their various tasks, and remain among them while
at work. The pensioners, over and above their regular pay, to have
comfortable quarters, good fires, and beds, besides a given quantity of
bread and beer, or milk, daily, also a plot of ground whereon they
could raise potatoes or other vegetables.
This, to those who have wives, would be valuable, —the whole of
them to be required to crop, and keep their ground in proper order at
their bye hours.
The constables or overseers, one over every ten criminals, to be wholly
selected from among farm servants or labourers, capable of directing and
carrying on country operations. These men all to have board and lodg-
ings, and moderate salaries, and never more than two or three of them at
a time allowed to be off the premises. Married overseers to be allowed
houses or apartments for their families adjoining the barracks.
The female convicts to be subjected to the same surveillance, under
female overseers, with the assistance of the second Manager overlook-
ing them, and seeing that they perform their work in a proper manner.
Every location to consist as nearly as possible of one hundred male
and fifty female convicts, being as many as it might be safe to have
within twenty miles of one another.
As a terror to hardened criminals, and by way of convincing them
of the hopelessness of escape, the Government might purchase and
become sole proprietor of a few of the Hebrides or Western Islands,
which they might improve and adapt to their own purposes. Here
would be a place of security for all showing a disposition to aim at
desertion, the unruly and very refractory, and such as have undergone
frequent punishment.
No boat or vessel to traffic on, or touch at any creek or harbour,
on any such island, unless on special business, and those to be closely
watched till their departure.
Every boat kept for the use of those on the island to be properly
hauled up, housed, and, with her sails and oars, strictly kept under lock
and key. Swimming would then be the only possible alternative, and
this would be seldom attempted, and never with success, amid such
dangerous tides and currents. The boats might have different sized
plug-holes in their bottoms. The plugs always to be drawn and secured
away when the boats are hauled up.


In such penal islands, a farther preventive might be still adopted by
keeping a squad of old half-pay sailors on each island, who would
go out to sea, and catch fish for the use of all on land, and at the same
time tend to overawe the prisoners; their boats to be hauled up so
soon as they touch land.
Never having been on, or among these islands, I cannot judge from
experience ; but gazetteer description points out North and South
Uist as admirably adapted for such a purpose, possessing many acres
of heath, bog, and swamp, sufficient to employ the profligate and most
unruly of our convicts for generations to come.
Next in order comes on the operation of the Civil Engineer, the erec-
tion of barracks, and the admission of prisoners thereto. The first
thing to be proceeded w r ith is the setting of march-stones, and casting
an ordinary ditch round the whole property, so as to mark off its
boundaries.
Then lining off the best and easiest tracts for good roads, without
which nothing can be done, and at the same time pointing out where
drains and water courses will be required. As an example, I would
propose 1200 acres of waste land, quite contiguous, and ultimately
to be turned into ten farms of 120 acres each, or thereby, which in all
cases, in the first instance, ought to be the general average of farms.
The Engineer then to fix the best spot for a convenient steading,
always keeping in view an easy access and a good supply of water.
Indeed, the Engineer, on fixing on the spot for bis steadings, ought to
bear in mind that, at a future period, when the land comes to full
maturity, 120 acres will be but an insignificant farm; and to get over
this, he should, in all cases where it can be accomplished, put down two
steadings as close together as possible, so that two farms may ultimately
be turned into one.
This done, he should then lay off the first farm into fields of from
seven to twelve acres each, making ten acres, as nearly as may be,
the average. At this stage of the business, it will be necessary to give
a plan for the steading, dwelling-house, &c., and erect a few substantial
out-houses for necessary purposes. On this spot should be erected a
temporary substantial wooden barracks for the accommodation of at
least 100 male and 50 female prisoners, with a sufficiency of apartments
for the staff required over them. Supposing the barracks to be similar
to the following: A square erection, wholly of timber, made of planks
fully four inches thick, with an open court inside; the planks to be all
strongly bound together by iron bars, bolts, and screws, and to be remov-
able at pleasure. The erection should be fully 18 feet high by 27 wide


through the whole range. The lower floor to contain Governor’s
house, large eating room, to serve as school-room and chapel, divided
up the middle to accommodate both male and female pxnsoners. A
large mess-room for the soldiers, and apartments for the officials, and
every other purpose required. On the second or upper floor would be
small sleeping rooms for the overseers, officers, soldiers, and prisoners.
The officers’ and female prisoners’ rooms might be run along the outer
side of the barracks, with small windows, but the windows of the
whole of the male prisoners to look into the court; none of the con-
victs on any account whatever to have access to an outside door or
window. One general gateway might suffice for the whole, except for
the Governor’s house and other better apartments, which might have
entrances of their own, but none of them to have windows looking into
the court, so as to offer the least chance of escape. The whole to be
covered with good wooden sarking and blue slates, or, perhaps, sheet
lead. The windows to be all iron stanchioned, conveniently made and
contrived to remove with the least possible breakage.
The outside planking being but thin, and no lath and plaster used,
every apartment in the whole range ought to be properly heated by the
best constructed w r arm air flues, and as few fire places throughout the
whole barracks to be used as possible.
A furnace for this purpose, along with a suitable kitchen and wash-
ing-house, might be substantially built of stone, apart from the barracks,
to guard against the possibility of fire.
A substantial wooden tank, lined with lead, placed on wdieels, and
the whole soil and water arising from the barracks to be collected
therein and carefully carted off and mixed among mould, or cow and
horse dung, would be very profitable.
The erection of one barrack would at least answer for the improve-
ment of no fewer than two or three farms without removal.
The Engineer must now proceed with laying down drains and water
courses, carrying them on to a running stream. Indemnification only
to be allowed landed proprietors whose properties it may be necessary
to trench on, upon their proving to arbiters any real loss or injury they
may sustain by any such encroachments.
In the same manner shall the laying out of the roads be proceeded
with until reaching a statute labour or turnpike road.
Whilst the roads and water courses are in process of making, ditches,
fences, and dikes may be proceeded with on and around the fields, and
parks laid off; the fences may be built of stone or turf as need be; and
if thorn hedges were at same time planted, they would be springing up,


so as to shelter and break the wind over the various fields, proving a
source of advantage to the crop, and to the cattle whilst grazing.
When these operations are going on, the farm-steading and dwelling-
house not to be lost sight of.
In the court of every farm steading there ought to be built of brick
and mortar a properly constructed tank for the collection of the whole
urine flowing from the cattle, and of all water from amongst their
manure. This from time to time carted out and spread over the grass
fields of such land, would have a most beneficial effect; and when the
season, from drought, will not permit of this, the water to be thrown
over the dung-hills, care being taken that none of it be lost.
After this, proceed with the general trenching over of the w'hole soil,
say, at least, from 18 to 24 inches deep; keeping in view the necessity
of furrow draining, to be accomplished by the stones thrown out in
trenching, and when a sufficiency of stones is not to be had, clay-tiles
may be had recourse to. The drains never can be so cheaply and
effectually made as at this stage of operations.
WORKING OF THE CONVICTS AND RATIONS.
All persons in ordinary health ought to be made to work nine hours
daily—say, from 15th March to 15th October, from seven o’clock till
nine a.m., from ten till two, and from three till six p.m., allowing an
hour for both breakfast and dinner. From 15th October till 15th
March, they ought in ordinary weather to work from nine till twelve
a.m,, and from one till five p.m. ; or in the shortest days till dusk.
Summer and winter to attend in school from seven till eight even-
ing ; and on Sabbath, say three hours each day in chapel. Roman
Catholics to be exempted from such attendance. The female convicts,
besides thus working and amending, ought to be made to mend
apparel, knit and sew one hour daily for the establishment, besides
keeping their own clothes in proper order.
Their food ought to be plain, but substantial, say a given quantity of
beer or milk, with oatmeal porridge for breakfast; an ordinary quantity
of broth and bread, or potatoes, for dinner; and for supper, bread or
potatoes, with milk or beer, as may be deemed best, and most con-
venient.
In England, it ought to be a satisfactory quantity of bread, milk or
beer, for breakfast; but the quantity cannot be precisely fixed, as
some men will eat as much as many two others and be but poorlv
served. At dinner and supper the quantity may be regularly served


out, as men, once well filled, cannot be very badly off for the day ; but
he that worketh must eat. .
As to dress, they ought to have coarse shirts and light jackets for the
summer season; in winter, uniform strong woollen clothing, and caps
to throw the rain off; and, above all, strong stout water-proof shoes.
To procure things at the cheapest rate, every article used ought, if
possible, to be got up among the convicts themselves.
Flax may be raised, dressed, and spun into yarn, and made into
cloth.
Wool to be obtained from sheep reared and kept on the property,
and made into every sort of wearables, and this, too, when prisoners
cannot, from the inclemency of the weather, be sent to out-door work.
As a knowledge of weaving is easily acquired, six or eight looms
might be kept on the station, and, in coarse weather, kept going con-
stantly for fully sixteen hours a day by relays of prisoners.
Men might be selected from among those doomed to long imprison-
ment, or sentenced to death, who, if put to whatever they might be able
to do, might make tolerable tradesmen, from house carpenter, black-
smith, mason, down to the barber ; and from the lowest scullion in the
kitchen up to the tailor, shoemaker, saddler, and baker. Thus, nearly
everything would be got up and produced by the convicts themselves.
After the land is drained and trenched, it would yield a tolerable
crop of oats. The following year it might be well limed, as nothing
but artificial manures would for a short time have to be obtained.
MODE OF CROPPING.
Suppose a rotation of six, —first, oats, then potatoes, and turnips,
and a number of acres sown in flax, to be sold in straw or prepared,
and made into cloth by the prisoners ; oats again sown out with grass
seeds, and then to lie three years in grass; after which plough up
again for oats, and so on till the last year of the Commissioners’ hold-
ing, when an additional quantity of grass land may be broken up, and
a quantity of barley sown ; when, at quitting, the land of a farm to
stand thus :
40 acres of grass.
40 do. oats.
20 do. barley.
20 do. potatoes and turnips.
In most localities, it would be found useless to attempt raising wheat,


or even barley, so long as the Commissioners have a right to hold the
land. When two contiguous farms are thus improved, the barracks
and convicts ought to be removed, and those whose term of imprison-
ment may have expired, might be hired to work such farms on the
same terms as other free farm servants. Under an overseer or gr'eve
and matron, both to be selected from among the overseers, one-third
more wages, at least, to be paid them, than in their former situation.
After the land is thus put in order, I think it likely that a grieve,
matron, with six men and five women, would be able to work a 120
acre farm, to be furnished with the best of implements, four good
horses, and three draught oxen, the horses, in ordinary weather, to
work the same number of hours as the convicts, beginning an hour
earlier, so as to give time to feed during the day. The oxen to go only
eight hours a-day | one of them to rest while the other pair are at work
ploughing.
The matron, with the assistance of the females, to rear a fair quantity
of young stock, pigs, and poultry.
By perseverance and good management, it may be presumed, the
tenth farm might be in such a state, with its buildings all erected, as
to get the convicts and barracks wholly cleared away at the end of
fourteen years, or at least seven years before any sale of the property
can legally take place.
The property to be exposed, at the end of the twentieth year, to give
time for the servants engaged thereon to find other situations ; and also
to allow the Commissioners to cause arrangement to be made for the
disposal of the whole by public sale, agreeably to the custom of the
locality. Every species of property consisting of live stock, imple-
ments, and crops on the different farms to be exposed at once, to give
entrance to the new proprietor and his tenants at the end of the twenty-
one years.
In regard to the sale of the land towax-ds the close of the twentieth
year, it might be enacted that the Commissioners should appoint two
competent arbiters to go over the whole property, satisfy themselves
with the various improvements of the land, and also in regard to the
different buildings erected thereon, affix a fair upset price for the whole
property, then to be advertised in a few of the leading London and local
journals a sufficient time before any sale is brought on.
To give as little umbrage as possible to former proprietors wishing,
from various causes, to have the land back, they might be allowed a
deduction of 10 per cent, from the sale price, provided they buy solely


for their own exclusive use; and, if carried at the sale by another
bidder, the original proprietor still to have it in his power, within
twenty days, to be the purchaser, on paying the price agreeably to
the conditions of sale, and giving the buyer 3 per cent, out of the
10 per cent, allowed him by the Crown.
Thus, the proprietor or his heirs would be very fairly dealt with ; for,
by mortgaging the price paid them by the Crown, and adding the
interest for twenty years, they would at least have a sum sufficient to
secure the property on fair terms, and below what another man is
ready and willing to pay for it. The terms, indeed, are such as few
monied men would refuse in the case of a bond, for the balance re-
quired to be made up for the improved property. Besides, it may be
fully anticipated, that, at the end of fourteen years, the Commissioners
would have the land so brought in and improved, that every vestige of
convictism would be quite cleared away, and removed to another loca-
lity, leaving behind only the few reclaimed servants, selected from the
main body, for working the farms during the Commissioners’ holding,
and even these reclaimed servants may be found as serviceable and
trustworthy as if they had never once appeared before an assize.
To conciliate another class of the landed interest, who neither possess
the means nor have the power to cut roads and water courses, supposing
such to have from 300 to 700 acres of bog or moorish land on their
estates, which they would wish to improve, a clause might be inserted,
entitling them to tender a nominal rented lease for twenty-five years to
the Commissioners, which, if accepted of, the Commissioners shall pro-
ceed with the improvement of the same, as on the purchased land, and
at the conclusion of the lease, the Crown to be repaid for all buildings,
such as houses, dikes; and other fences, by the proprietor, at a valua-
tion by arbiters, at the time of quitting, for their outlay on the surface.
The Commissioners might also cast water tracts on the surface of
any glens, declivities, or craggy clumps, within said boundaries, where
ploughing is never likely to be available, on condition that the owner
at the same time proceeds, at his own expense, with fencing in and
planting a sufficiency of young trees on said patches, such plantations
to be the proprietor’s own property, at the close of the twenty-five years,
without any remuneration whatever, only, the Commissioners should
have the right to hold till their claim is fully compensated.
I have now only to shew how matters would stand with the Com-
missioners at the close of the business, in regard to the original
purchase and ultimate disposal of the property.


It is hardly worth while to hazard an opinion as to what valuation
would be put upon land never yet rented for a shilling per acre, nor
likely to be for generations to come.
But what such property may be sold for at the conclusion, including
the supposed value of the stocking and crops, may be pretty nearly
guessed at, on the opinion of competent judges, according to the rate at
which prices range at the present time.
Independent of the stock and corn that would either be consumed by
the prisoners and those employed on the farms, or otherwise disposed
of during the currency of the Commissioners’ management, the fol-
lowing may be deemed a fair estimate at the end of the twenty-one
years :
ESTIMATED VALUATION* ON 10 FARMS OF 120 ACRES EACH AT THE CLOSE OF 21
YEARS, ALL TO BE IN THE BEST ORDER AND CONDITION.
40 Draught Horses, various ages .. .. .. £2O 0 ~ £BOO
20 Fillies and Colts, 1,2, and 3 years old .. .. 15 0 .. 300
6 Young Foals .. .. .. .. .. 8 0 . t 48
30 Draught Oxen, various ages ~ .. .. 13 0 ~ 390
6 Bulls, 1,2, and 3 years old .. .. ~ 12 0 .. 72
50 Milk Cows, various ages .. .. ~ 9 0.. 450
10 Young Cows in Calf .. .. .. .. 8 0.. 80
60 Cattle, 2 years old ~ .. .. .. 9 0.. 540
60 Ditto, 1 year old .. .. .. ~ 5 0.. 300
60 Calves, 6 and 9 months old .. .. .. 3 0.. 180
500 Sheep, Ewes, and Wedders .. .. .. 14.. 600
200 Young Lambs .. .. .. .. 010 .. 100
60 Breeding and grown-up Pigs .. .. .. 2 0.. 120
120 Young Suckling Pigs .. .. .. .. 0 8.. 48
Poultry, Hens, Ducks, &c., £3 per farm .. 30
£4058
Carts, Ploughs, Rollers, Harrows, and other Ma-
chinery, Harness, Byre, and Stable, Furniture,
Dairy and Kitchen Utensils, Household Furniture,
&c., say £7O per farm .. ~ .... 700
7OO
Manure made on the farms from Turnip-sowing in
June, till Martinmas, say £25 for each farm .. .. .. 250
250
CORN AND GREEN CROP.
400 Acres of Oats in Straw, 36 bushels per acre, or 14,400 bushels
at 3s 6d per bushel .. ~ .. .. .. £2520
200 Acres Barley in Straw, 36 bushels per acre, or 7200 bushels
at 4s .. .. .. ~ .. .. 1440
120 Acres Potatoes .. .. .. £9 0 0.. 1080
80 Do. Turnips .. .. .. .. ..600,. 480
70 Do. Hay, Clover, and Ryegrass, 7000 stones ~ 0 0 6| .. 200
£5720
330 Do. Cutting and Pasture Grass, one-half of the
above produce would be required and purchased by £10,728
the incoming tenants.
* N.B. —This valuation was taken in the beginning of the year 1853.


SUPPOSED VALUE OF THE LAND, HOUSES, AND OTHER BUILDINGS THEREON.
1200 Acres of Land, thoroughly trenched, drained, fenced, and
fully improved, with good roads, substantial dwelling
houses, suitable out-houses, all in excellent order and
repair, would, at the present price of agricultural pro-
duce, rent for fully 20s per acre ....... •••;*• , ,
This sum at 3, hut say 3| per cent., with the prospect of such land
rapidly rising in value, would cover purchase money, and be an
eligible bargain to landholders at £4* 058
To which add the live stock per account .. 700
implements, furniture, •
~ manure on the farms „„„
corn and green crop per account ’ *
£44,728
The calculations have been objected to as not giving what might be
termed the initial cost, or the outlay necessary at the commencement
of the undertaking. But on this head I should suppose the following
would be about the whole items for which an advance in money would
be required at starting on a property at a Martinmas term.
Two or three brood mares, two carts, a plough, harrows, and harness,
to tear up clumps of acres of land —the best to be had—-to be sown
partly in oats and tares for summer keep, and planted with potato for
winter use,—there being provided for this purpose a few quarters of
seed oats, some bushels of tares, and a few cwt. of potato, which will
increase from year to year. Four or five Highland cows, being the
only beasts likely to thrive on such keep, to supply milk for the
ensuing year, afterwards to be fed off and used up by the inmates of
the station. In their place will be required at least a like number of
the very best cows to be had in the locality, for the produce of stock,
twenty ewes in lamb, and a few young pigs and chickens. During the
second year will be required four or six good brood mares for the pro-
duction of the best of stock. Those to be employed in carting of stones,
&c., for roads, drains, dikes, and farm steadings, driving of fuel, and
such like from a distance.
The above, with a variety of small seeds, one or two tons guano, a
general assortment of implements, till prisoners can be taught to make
such for themselves, would be the whole advances required, amounting
to about £230, with say £2O additional for winter keep.
The foregoing is the whole outlay on stock really needed, under
competent management, for the realization of £10,728 worth of stock,
saleable at the expiry of twenty-one years.
The sheep, lambs, draught oxen, and part of the horses, would fall
to be disposed of at May term in place of Martinmas, as not being


required, nor would there be a sufficiency of grass for their keep during
the summer.
This, with the food to be derived from the soil for the various farm
purposes, and likewise the prisoners’ support, during the twenty-one
years’ incumbency of the Commissioners, evidently is no inconsiderable
sura, and appears to me to shew that the system, if not a self-support-
ing one, to say the least, may be deemed equal to any other likely to
be proposed for the employment and reformation of the convicts, and
also for the advantage of the public at large. As a proof of what I
venture to aver regarding this measure, I beg to submit the following
statement and calulation. Supposing the Crown, whilst it might increase
the number of prisoners to be thus employed, and extent of land to
double the amount, were only to carry into effect within the next forty-
two ensuing years, fifty stations, at the end of that period there will be
constantly employed no fewer than 5000 male and 2500 female
prisoners, besides the vast staff of officials required to be placed over
them, forming a force fully adequate to take in and improve not less
than 1500 farms of 120 acres each, or say 180,000 acres, and this too out
of land not likely to be reclaimed for generations to come, and much of it
without chance of ever being brought into a state of cultivation.
Besides the foregoing vast public advantage, what a stimulus would it
give to adjoining spirited landed proprietors to follow up such a bene-
ficial example !
T have thus fully developed my long-thought-of plan of convict
management and employment. I hope those who take the trouble to
peruse my statements, and think favourably of them, will have been at
no loss to comprehend my meaning.
Mere writing and railing will not do. Nor will any result flow from
dealing in Mr Carlyle’s coarse names, such as the “ sweepings of
creation,” the “ devil’s regiments of the line,” the “elect of scoundrel-
ism,” “ degraded under foot,” “perverse creatures,” “sonsof mdocility,”
“ greedy mutinous darkness,” and, in one word, of stupidity, which is
the general mother of such. This is not the way to get over so stupendous
an evil. What is wanted is a distinct practical plan, which may be
considered and discussed in all its bearings, and to meet the fate of
which it may appear deserving.


REMARKS ON PROBABLE DIFFICULTIES.
So far have I endeavoured to guard over the welfare of the convict
by securing him a sufficiency of plain food, clothing, and lodging, being
quite as much as such characters have to look for or expect. The
labour mav no doubt be hard, but at the same time healthy, and after
experience not a mere drudgery. Doubtless, take a professional
swindler, a member of the swell mob, who, perhaps, may not have
handled anything heavier than a walking stick or a pair of tongs, an
put a spade, pickaxe, or wheel-barrow into his hands for nine hours
a-day, and he would sadly feel the vast change, and have plenty of
time to reflect over his worthless profligate past life ; still, in the course
of time, such fellows would come on, and in a few years their labour
might be about equal to their keep ; and at the end of seven or ten
years, they might be found in many respects equal to the other work-
men. One thing I am not very sure about is, the allowing of more than
ten such characters to be out of irons, all congregating together, often
plotting mischief, especially at diet-time, in school and chapel, and even
in their cells.
Such difficulties in the way of practical arrangement I must leave in
the hands of those competent, who have the daily rule over prisoners
and prisons, and are in perfect knowledge of their habits and other
peculiarities. ~ ,
Let me now shew how the public and the working men would stand
affected by my scheme being carried into practice. Sure lam no man
will dare to allege that I in the least degree trench on the labour or
employment of any individual whatever, saving the Police Judge and
Police Officer. Not even from the indigent man that sweeps the street
crossing up to the wealthy peer, do I in the smallest interfere with the
resources of employment ; whilst by my scheme I would reclaim and
turn into tolerable land hundreds of thousands of acres, the greater
part of which must remain mere wilderness for generations yet to come.
Farther, in the course of years, my plan would give bread and labour to
many thousands of individuals, reclaiming many of them from the
lowest and very worst state of degradation, and, at the same time, vast
numbers of those on whom the public would look upon with great suspi-
cion, and not countenance from their tainted, blemished characters.
And, while I improve and reclaim so much waste, I add vastly to t le
value and beauty of the country, and likewise to the healthful ness of
the climate, and raise extensive facilities of sustenance for those who


may see the error of their ways, and be inclined to a new and better
sort of life.
Lastly, comes the most difficult class to deal with, namely, the landed
proprietors, and more especially those possessed of entailed estates.
To pounce upon any part of an estate, against the wish and will of the
owner, must be confessed to be a very disagreeable piece of procedure.
But where the public good so imperatively demands such interference,
the best in the land must submit. Many of the lairds will say, Why
come to us ? we are perfectly satisfied with our properties without any
interference on the part of any set of commissioners whatever. True,
the 1200 acres you want (moi’e or less) neither we nor our forefathers
have ever derived any great benefit from towards enhancing our icnt-
roll or income. Still, on the very wilderness you want, we have
generally kept a few scores of sheep. Lots of hares, that annoy our
neighbour farmers by wasting and especially chopping their turnips,
destroying three times the quantity they eat, besides parti idges, wild
geese, and even muir fowl, have at times been shot thereon. We
therefore candidly tell you we will have nothing whatever to do with
your improvements, though you profess to work wonders, and to add
greatly to our incomes; for, in place of the barren wilderness we have
heretofore had to look on, which at the end of twenty-one years will be
converted into ten well cultivated farms, with excellent steadings,
roads, fences, and buildings placed over the whole, besides our very
climate vastly improved.
To be sure, I do not make every proprietor, at the end of twenty-
one years, sure of his acres back again ; but, if he does not secure them,
he is either unworthy of them, or assuredly he or his heirs would have
themselves to blame by what I in a former clause have pointed at.
Landowners will say, we want no such neighbours. What! plant a
penal colony on our property, or near by us. Why, such a thing is
quite preposterous, and the like never heard of; besides, not contented
with such an encroachment, you go on and lay hold of, and cut and
carve on our properties as you please, and as your engineer may think
fit, if sanctioned by your board; without our leave, compelling us to
prove to the satisfaction of arbiters the loss or injury we may sustain,
from your uncalled-for operations over the whole or any part of our
estate you choose to take from us for your roads and water-courses.
Roads you make in and through our domains that were never heard or
dreamed of before. Water-courses we cannot away with. Why cut
up and encroach on our properties and policies, and, by so doing, in all
probability flood and swamp us by your convict water, sent down on us


by your opened up springs, lakes, locks, and ponds, by surface water
never hitherto given vent to ? Such proceedings we will use our
utmost efforts to prevent ever being carried into effect.
Farmers, in general, will take the same view of matters as the
landed proprietors, —declaring, that to allow such a nest of rogues and
vagabonds to be near to them, or in the vicinity, would be base and
dangerous in the extreme. In the first place, the very thought of
being near to such a crew might prevent them from getting servants,
frighten all the cottars, their wives, and children, out of the neighbour-
hood, and horrify their own wives and families ; in fact, the terror
would be so great throughout the whole community, that there would
be nothing for it but to throw up their leases, however valuable, placing
themselves entirely at the mercy of their landlords for remuneration.
I venture to assure such easily frightened people, this on a very short
trial, would be soon got the better of.
The roads, though made by convicts, would to the whole locality
soon be found to be very convenient, leading to and past farm-stead-
ings where there is hardly a road to be met with, enabling the tenant
to lay as much on one horse as he had been accustomed to lay on two.
And when the banks of the convict-formed stream get neatly sloped
down, laid with green turf, or sown with grass seeds, and a planting of
willows and other shrubs, to firm and keep up the bank, they will be
found not to have disfigured the estate and farms they may happen
to run through, or, at least, by so much as at first dreaded. Besides,
the streams in general, from their regular and constant supply of
water, will continue to flow regularly at all seasons, giving water to
numerous enclosed fields, and drink to many cattle where water was
never known to be before but in the time of heavy rains. Doubtless,
it will have another excellent effect which farmers will prize highly,
being nothing less than driving their corn or thrashing mills, and this
not in one solitary instance ; for, where a stream is obtained to turn one
wheel, it may be so diverted from its own channel as to suit farm-
steadings, in which it might work a dozen of wheels, provided proper
falls can be obtained.
One town and parish I venture to allude to, as an illustration of
the improvements in many cases practicable on apparently useless
tracts—l mean Halifax, one of the largest parishes in England, being
twenty miles in length, by seventeen in breadth, having gradually
risen from a village of thirty houses, in 1443, to one of the most
valuable and flourishing districts in the country.
For generations it remained a clump of waste, sterile, rocky, barren


hills, not fit for sheep-walks, till now it has increased and grown to
what it really is; so that, were its incumbent to attempt to gather
even his small tithes, he would require half a dozen active collectors,
and even then poorly perform the task.
The curious and inquisitive, who wish for farther information as to
this vast parish, I must refer to the various histories and nume-
rous delineations and pictures drawn of that delightful, fertile, wealthy,
and populous manufacturing locality, now no longer a mere town and
country parish, but a district of the very first importance, not only to
its own inhabitants, but to the state and country. Were the Govern-
ment to view such a measure favourably, and carry such a project
through, how many Halifaxes in minature might they not create
throughout the kingdom 1 What a field does not Cumberland and
Westmoreland hold out for such purposes, both possessed of large
pieces of waste land of thousands of acres, where rills and rivulets
could he directed into one channel, and, by hoarding up streams, with
strongly built reservoirs, and well adapted sluices, would command
such a vast source of water-power for manufacturing purposes, improv-
ing the old, and cutting new roads, setting an example and affording
an inducement to liberal landlords to do likewise and improve both
country and climate to an extent hitherto unknown, and in all proba-
bility never likely to be carried into operation, unless by some process
of this kindl When so much could be effected in two counties, what
might not be expected to be accomplished throughout Lancashire,
Cheshire, and Yorkshire, to say nothing of the southern counties,
leaving Wales totally out of the question; whilst that country holds
out an inexhaustible source of encouragement for every such purpose ?
Regarding Scotland, I maybe very brief. All in the least acquainted
with its localities, must at once perceive the advantage that would
accompany a project of this kind to such a country in the carrying of
such a measure.
In our neighbouring shire, there are two moors which might safely
be experimented on, —viz., Rossiemuir and Montroman Muir, both in
the centre of the county of Angus, bounded by the parishes of Lunan
Craig, Marvton, Farnwell, Brechin, Guthrie, Kennel, and Inverkeil-
lor —Rossiemuir being from two to three miles in length, and of
considerable breadth, including a vast number of waste acres, remains
the same wilderness it has ever been. Montroman Muir, though
nearly thrice the size of its neighbour, has of late years been greatly
encroached on from the forming of roads through and by it, besides
two railways now intersect it from end to end, —thus inducing vast


numbers of weavers and labourers to lease acres of it, and proceed
with improving, making a living, and many of them bringing up
families creditably.
Still, the shires of Angus and Mearns hold out endless induce-
ments for such a purpose all along the foot of the Grampian Hills.
To proceed farther north among these mountains and among the
hills of the northern counties, the inducement held forth is most
extensive. If such a system were introduced among our hungry
Highlanders, what a vast blessing would it not prove, and how
greatly would it tend to open up their eyes to their own real in-
terest! At present, hundreds of male and female Highlanders con-
gregate together in their straths and glens, locating themselves
as near to peat mosses as possible for the sake of winter fuel, drag-
ging out a miserable existence in mud huts, void of what may be
termed either door or window, lounging on in a half starved state
amidst smoke, filth, dirt, and idleness, birstling their bare limbs before
a peat fire, like to rabbits in a warren, increasing their own species,
year by year, in a ratio double that of any other part of the country.
Not that they cannot or will not work, could profitable employment
only be obtained, (all having a very great liking for money) ; but work
there is not, and of course none to give, on account of the generally
straitened circumstances of the proprietor, or more generally from the
unproductive return they invariably receive for their outlays, notwith-
standing the low price at which labour is to be obtained in such for-
bidden districts. Could the Government only be induced to countenance
and pass such a measure as here adverted to, and proceed with esta-
blishing penal stations around our rocky bound coast and shores some
miles apart, besides improving the soil and climate, they might lend
a helping hand towards bettering our creeks and small harbours foi
fisheries, shipping and mercantile purposes, making excellent roads to
and from such places, so as to open up the interior of the country,
creating water power for manufacturing operations. Localities of tns
sort would go on springing up into small Halifaxes, stimulating liberal
monied landholders to such like practices, and giving bread and em-
ployment to thousands seemingly doomed to spend their lives in sloth
an CoTd Gr such asvstem only be carried into effect, we should no longer
hear of the heart-rending ejections and clearances, that annually take
place amongst such a forlorn and helpless race of beings as are every
day to be met with in those inclement, cold, bleak regions.
Would that a few of our most influential legislators would only take


up a benevolent plan, akin to what is here proposed, and, with all calm-
ness and earnestness, endeavour to ascertain how far such a system
would alleviate the idleness, misery, and woe, that prevail among
countless thousands of the inhabitants of our rocky mountainous dis-
tricts, not only giving employment, but paving the way for raising
maintenance for generations yet unborn. This, too, all through the in-
strumentality of a class of individuals still more miserable than them-
selves.
In conclusion, having extended my remarks beyond a reasonable
length, I venture to say, however deficient my suggestions may appear,
there are several of them that may be turned to public use in the
event of any measure being concocted on the principle of the plan here
animadverted on.
Most strenuously do I implore every review, magazine, or newspaper
in the kingdom, accustomed to give publicity to matters of this sort,
to take up and dispassionately discuss and declare their opinions on the
project.
I have endeavoured to show the vast amelioration likely to aiise
from such a scheme, should it ever become the law of the land, by
improving the country, climate, and the localities surrounding penal
stations, wherever situated.
Besides creating large quantities of labour, food, and maintenance,
for tens of thousands who, under any other shape, never can participate
in any such blessing, relieving many a lonely, idle, listless prisoner, of
many an irksome hour, by furnishing active employment for mind and
body, in place of leaving him to lounge out his days in gaol, and at the
same time relieving the community of large and excessively heavy
assessments for prison purposes.
That such a scheme may shortly be carried into operation, is my
most sincere desire and prayer.
For one means of employing convict labour in this quarter of the
country, I would point to the remodelling of the line of road between
Kirriemuir and Ballater, w'hich would afford an improved new route to
Balmoral. Since reading in a late number of a Dundee newspaper a
notice of this proposed new route, I have endeavoured to obtain an
account of the survey of the road which the late Earl of Airlie got
executed nearly twenty years ago for his own satisfaction, and with
the view of benefitting the district, but which, for want of funds, has
never been proceeded with. The Engineer, Mr Blackadder, infoims


me that his survey, and the whole of the papers connected with it,
were at the time given to his Lordship, and afterwards probably thrown
among old papers of a similar kind.
The carrying out of any such scheme would offer an exceedingly
favourable opportunity of testing my scheme, as there are not a few
extensive localities along the line of road where convict stations and
barracks might be placed.
I subjoin the editor’s description of the road in question, as it is
superior to any I could give, and may prove interesting to those who
have not read it: —
NEW ROUTE TO BALMORAL.
Our readers will probably remember hearing some time ago of an accident
which happened to a Queen’s messenger, journing from Balmoral to 1 ertn on
the road lying between Braemar and Bridge of Gaily. That accident, althoug
fortunately unattended with fatal consequences, was of such a nature, ana
attended by such circumstances, as leaves us, considering the break-neck state
of the road, without the least guarantee that a similar or even worse catastrop re
may not happen any day. General Wade, no doubt, thought the load a goo
one, and it must have been a manifest improvement upon the bridle-path it super-
seded ; but General Wade and Macadam both are now susceptible ot tartlier
improvement. The road referred to is now possessed of considerable interest, not
only from the fact that it is the route by which the Royal cortege very frequently
travels to Balmoral, but also from the attractive scenery in the district of country
through which it runs—scenery often bleak and wild, but of such a romantic
character that it will always possess an abiding interest to the naturalist and the
traveller of taste. As it is, too, the road is very suitable, barring its comparative
loneliness, forthe pedestrian who is inclined to woo nature in her magnificent moods,
and who has a fancy for enjoying the mountain breeze in its purity, to eques-
trians, carts, carriages, and other wheeled conveyances alone is there any danger.
In passing through the Spittal of Glenshee, the road for some distance is cut out
of the solid rock, which forms on one side a jagged wall, and. on the other side an
equally jagged and frowning precipice; at one spot specially, known by the
ominous name of the “ Devil’s Elbow,” the descent is very steep, _ and the danger,
where horses are concerned, greatly increased. It was at this point that the
accident we have alluded to occurred. Much, no doubt, might be done by skill
and a liberal expenditure to improve the road and render it less dangerous, but,
although this is possible, we question the expediency of spending a great deal ot
public money upon a route which, although highly romantic, can have no tendency
to open up the resources of the country, running, as it does, through a, district
of moorland incapable of cultivation or improvement. Pedestrianism is just the
mode of travelling which suits it, and it would be almost a pity to put it into
such a condition as to supersede this best, but now-a-days least fashionable,
means of locomotion. _
We are the more clear for leaving the thing alone, because another route
might be found for her Majesty to travel by to her Highland home—a route
equally as quiet and as pleasant as the one we have been speaking ot, possessing
at the same time elements of more safety, and, what makes it of general public
importance, calculated, if thoroughly opened up, to develope in a high degree
the industrial capabilities of an important district of country, which is at present
comparatively buried, or at least asleep, amid the hills. Under these circum-
stances, there seems no reason to doubt that her Majesty would readily travel
by such a route, in preference to the rather dangerous one her love of magnificent
scenery at present leads her to adopt if it were only put into a fit state for the
purpose. . j. . ,
We wish, in a sentence or two, to indicate such a route. I here is a district ox


fair strath or valley, or rather series of valleys, second to none in the country,
very little known to travellers, if we except a few naturalists annually drawn to
the locality by its profusion of wild flowers and plants, which her Majesty might
traverse direct to Balmoral, were four or five miles of way lying near its extre-
mity made in a proper manner; we refer to the road through Cortachy, Water-
Esk, Clova, and on to Loch Muick and Ballater, with a branch from the _ most
convenient central point to Balmoral Castle —a road at once safe and exceedingly
attractive. There is not, in fact, a more pleasant locality in Scotland ; the vale
as you ascend becoming romantic in a high degree. The hills that girdle in
the narrow strath are lofty and precipitous, and the windings throughout are
so picturesque and multifarious, that every new turn of the road reveals
something fresh and inviting. Looking at the frowning rocks, often rising
to a direct perpendicular on each side, and the peaceful fields resting so
placidly at their base, one is reminded very forcibly of Lady Mary \V ortley
Montague’s happy simile of “ beauty reposing in the lap or terror.” In Pur-
suing this route to Balmoral, her Majesty might either land, at Dundee, as she
once did already, or she could leave the Scottish Midland Railway at Glammiss,
where one of the finest baronial castles in Scotland would doubtless throw open its
hospitalities to receive her, and where, after viewing from its lofty battlements
the smiling homesteads and richly cultivated farms of Strathmore, she could
proceed on her journey. The road (soon, however, to be superseded by a branch
line of rails from the Scottish Midland) would go on to Kirriemuir a place of no
small importance in its way, a kind of capital to Glenisla and the surrounding
district, and rapidly increasing its population, so that we may hardly call it a
village now—a place, moreover, rather celebrated for the disputatious habits of
its people, especially on ecclesiastical politics, for which the weavers there have
a strong relish, but are not bad folks for all that. Leaving Kirriemuir, an excel-
lent road proceeds by Cortachy and the other hamlets we have indicated on to
Caple Mount, where the only difficulty of the route occurs ; the Grampians just
now forming a virtual barrier to further progress at that spot. But let a cutting
be effected here across the shoulder of the mountain, and there is at once opened
up a comparatively little known district of peculiar charms, and at the same time
a first-rate road formed all the way to Balmoral.
A safe road to Balmoral, however, is not the only recommendation of the above
scheme. Apart from such a consideration altogether, the matter is one of im-
portance to a large section of people and a populous glen. Dundee even has a
considerable stake in the matter. Our town once accessible, there is a great
amount of traffic lying beyond Caple Mount floated down the Dee at present to
Aberdeen, which would find a nearer, cheaper, and greatly more convenient out-
let by the Tay, adding to the business of our merchants and the shore dues of
our Harbour. This cutting effected, the whole district we have mentioned would
also be opened up to another district of country at present all but unknown to the
people in the glens on this side the Grampians ; there would then be excellent
communication by Tomintoul to Inverness and the Ifine agricultural localities
lying along that route. It seems needless, however, to expatiate upon the ad-
vantages of laying open the resources of a district and connecting them with
the large centres of commerce ; the thing is manifest. It could produce little or
no beneficial results of a social or commercial character to improve the first line
of road we mentioned, because it runs through a mere mountain without
inhabitants and incapable of cultivation ; magnificent and to be admired, but
barren In the other case, there is pastoral and agricultural wealth to be de-
veloped and stimulated, and a numerous peasantry to be benefited, besides nume-
rous indirect but substantial benefits to be expected, as they ever follow in the
train of such an improvement. .
Expense alone stands in the way. Of the amount required we are unable to
speak. The engineering difficulties, we know, are considerable, but quite sur-
mountable. If necessary, why might not a small grant of public money be
given to aid the country in an undertaking so really national ? Or, now that
penal servitude comes into operation in the country, what better employment for
convicts could be found than labour of a productive character like this, carried
on in a retired district away from crowds and from contact with masses of the
people ? This latter suggestion, in fact, opens up a wide question in connection
with criminal treatment, which it would be absurd to enter upon at the fag-end


r* nrfiele like this It is, however, worthy of public consideration ; and
bearings.
Noblemen and gentlemen may, and the public generally will,
enquire why they should trouble themselves with a matter the duty
and responsibility connected with which lie on the State. But surely
all who are assessed in prison rates must feel that they have a direct
pecuniary interest in the matter; and as there is not now provision
for removing convicts from the country, these rates must in all likeli-
hood, directly or indirectly, largely increase.
Besides, it is to he hoped that few will be found so callous as to turn
a deaf ear to any proposal that promises to aid in the amelioration of
the numerous and miserable inmates of our gaols many of whom are
cooped up in solitary cells for months or years in idleness and wretch-
edness, and prevented from improving or exercising either bodily or
mental faculties, instead of having the advantage of such means of
reformation as the plan here proposed offers.
Ido not presume to suppose that my plan is a perfect one. My
most anxious wish is that my remarks may have the effect of inducing
a few of the multitude, better qualified than I am, to think and write
on the subject to turn their attention to it in a practical way, and to
let Government and the public have the benefit of their suggestions.
I may here be allowed a few words regarding our pernicious Farm
Bothie system, an abuse calling loudly for reformation, and the baneful
tendency of wdiich has been forcibly illustrated by Mr Cowie, Mains
of Haulkerton, the Rev. Mr Stuart, of and other well-in-
formed writers. Next to excessive whisky-drinking no other evil tends
so sadly to degrade, corrupt, and demoralise our Scottish peasantry.
Mr Cowie, in his able speech before the Fettercairn Farmers’ Club, on
12th March, 1852 well remarked
U On the matter more immediately in hand, both proprietor and tenant, speak-
On the wave mo j equally conspired to destroy the
habitation 1 hasbeen?possibly to check matri-


paupers. Hence the preponderance of single over married men, and the wide
ramification of the bothy system, with all its concomitant evils.”
On this question, however, people are allowed to write and talk as
much as they please without producing any result. Nor does it seem
at all probable that the evil can be remedied except by legislative
enactment. This remedy accomplished, we might at once have added
to every cot-house in the country a well-ventilated, comfortable room,
say thirteen feet square, with two iron bedsteads, furnished with good
bedding, to be washed regularly, and to be, along with the other
nccesssary utensils, the property of the farmer, who would see that the
articles were accounted for at every term. Wooden or paved floors
should in all cases be substituted for earthen ones, and not more than
two individuals should be lodged in the same room.*
In such places men would have the means of comfort, and an oppor-
tunity of exercising and improving their moral and intellectual faculties
which cannot possibly be looked for where they arc huddled together
in a wretched, cold, damp bothie, with a pitiful apology for a window,
the holes in which are frequently stuffed with old hats and filthy rags.
The inhabitants of these hovels, whether they wish it or not, speedily
become acquainted with every species of vice and wickedness ; they are
compelled to listen to all sorts of immoral and blasphemous conversa-
tion, and it is quite impossible for them to free themselves from filth
and vermin. Their beds and furniture are of the meanest description ;
* Mr Stuart’s able address to the Forfar Agricultural Association contains
many valuable suggestions for the improvement of the condition of our peasantry,
though I fear that in numerous instances his views are not likely to be generally
embraced. From the position at which agricultural operations have now arrived
crofts or pendicle holdings, whether granted by landlords or tenants, could only
be made to produce crops at double the market price. Nor can we expect to meet
with bothies of two flats throughout the country. Besides, four men in one room
would no sooner congregate round the fireside than one trickster would keep all
the rest idle or in mischief, an evil that would be greatly lessened by having them
lodged by pairs. Nor would they require fire, except on Sundays, till their day’s
work might be over. Their landlady could supply them with boiling water, and
for this and other little attendance each could pay a small sum monthly. ’
Mr Stuart has very strikingly proved a very essential point—the want of small
houses for jobbers, consisting of a room and closet, with a garden and piece of
potato ground attached. Such cottages, affording accommodation for an old man
and his wife, should be given in lieu of a few days’ work annually. In my opinion
there ought to be one of these cot- houses for such a family on all farms for every
four horses’ labour, or hundred acres of land. Perhaps it would in many cases be
better, instead of adding additional rooms, as proposed, to build new houses
turning a number of the present ones into jobbers’ dwellings, which would prove
a shelter to men who, though perhaps not beyond fifty years of age, are no longer
able to work horses regularly, and who, though they have spent their strength
in the service of farmers, are too often ruthlessly turned adrift to shift for
themselves. To such parties the prospect of such a shelter in their old age
would be an inestimable blessing, instead of as at present having only to look
forward to being thrown on the parish.


only a wooden stool, or more frequently the lid of their chest to sit on,
and no means of easing their bodies except to lounge in their beds. An
ordinary sized kettle to boil water for the whole of the inmates, a horn
spoon, and a tin flask for milk, complete the bothie furniture. To such
treatment are thousands of young fellows, the very sinews of our land,
doomed to submit, till, perhaps, driven to seek relief in premature and
improvident marriages.
Were they enabled and induced to live in lodgings they would
have the benefit of necessary attendance, a clean room, a chair to rest
on, proper cooking utensils, and an opportunity for decent daily ablu-
tions, instead of a slungein a stable pail or a sweel in the horses
watering stone twice or thrice a week, without either soap or towel.
I can only apologise for this digression by pleading the importance
of the subject, and my anxiety to seize this opportunity of pointing out
one of the most demoralising influences to which our peasantry are
subjected—an influence than which none could more effectually oblite-
rate any good principles they may possess, and instil them with had,
and an influence, the pernicious character of which can only he undei-
stood by those who have come in contact with these brutalising
seminaries. From men reared in such haunts nothing good can be
expected in manhood or old age. Bad example frequently leads them
into crimes from which, before their characters had been contaminated
by the bothy system, they would have shrunk ; and many of them are
even brought before the assizes at the public expense and are doomed
to misery for the rest of their lives.
As a corroboration of my sentiments on this I can offer
nothing more appropriate than the following editorial article from the
Edinburgh Guardian of 31st December last:—
THE SLAVES OF THE SOIL.
Social evils are usually of such slow growth, that their increase is not, ob-
served In their incipient and intermediate stages, their existence is unthought
of Ind continues s 0 until a certain point of enormity is reached, which compels
nttcntion either from a regard to personal interest or safety, or from motives of a
m£e pSauSropic and le£ selfisE kind. It is then felt that must
rlone • and though it may he long before that something is decided on, yet, it me
matter is once fairly brought mlr public
meddle with ff perLps it may be so extensive that individual exertion cannot
affect it -—in either case, an association is the proper agent to apply the temedy.
Being in its nature impersonal, an association is not easily injure _ ; -
rallv strong it is difficult to oppose ; it can thus encounter both the prejudice ot
the opposition of interest; and, if rightly managed, is sure in the
end to overcome both.


The latest projected association which has come under our notice, is one for
the purpose of promoting the improvement of the dwellings and social condition
of the agricultural labourers of Scotland. If ever there was an evil that, more
than another, called for the interference of some powerful agency to effect a
reformation, it is the one with a special view to which this body is about to be
called into existence. The condition of the agricultural labourers of Scotland is,
we hesitate not to say, such as would disgrace this or any other country. We
hear of the vice and misery of great cities, and there is indeed in great cities
enough of both ; but we believe it is fully equalled by the vice and misery of the
country. Morality is at as low an ebb in the bothies of Fife and Forfar, as it is
in the closes of the Canongate, or among the dens of Glasgow. Our agricultural
labourers grow up like savages,—they live like brutes,—they are thrown under
the earth like dung. Their education is a farce, and their religion a name;
childhood has no joy, manhood no rest, old age no independence; every stage of
life is destitute of comfort, and rife of suffering. Youth is slavery,—age pau-
perism death relief. This may appear strong language to apply to the condition
of Scotland’s peasantry, but it is unfortunately too true. The statements of
ministers, teachers, and physicians of rural parishes, amply bear out such a view
of the Scottish agricultural labourer’s condition.
The causes which have led to this debased condition of Scottish farm-servants
are not far to seek. We believe they have had their origin in the usage to which
they have been subjected. We are no believers in the comfort of “ the good old
times •” but we are to a considerable degree convinced of their comparative mora-
lity. The comforts of the agricultural labourer were as meagre forty years ago
as they are now. An authority, speaking of the condition of their dwellings at
that period, observes, “that they are smoky and dirty in the extreme; and that
it is hard to say whether the occupants or their cattle be the worse accommo-
dated.” We have no doubt that their other means of life were as inferior as their
dwellings. But it ought to be observed, that this state of things was not con-
fined to servants, but the masters were also sharers in the discomforts of the
time. If the condition of the labourer was not better, he was not separated by
such a wide gulf from his superior; and the influence for good, which is certain
to be exercised by a superior on an inferior, when the two classes come frequently
in contact, he had the full advantage of. The introduction of an improved system
of agriculture destroyed the influence arising out of this intercourse, without in
any degree compensating the labourer by putting within his reach superior
means of life. Agriculture has improved,—the condition of agricultural labourers
has not. The farmer built commodious stables and cattle-sheds, because he had
learned that to keep his horses and his cattle warm and comfortable, was the best
means of preserving the health of the one, and fattening the other. He also
built a fine house for himself and family, in order to be equal with his neigh-
bours and because the means of doing so were put within his reach by the
increased profits of his profession. But, while the master and his family had
thus superior abodes, and while the circumstances of the very cattle were im-
proved the condition of the farm-labourer was even worse than formerly. The
system which gave a separate cottage to the married labourer, with perhaps as
much ground as would keep a cow and pig, was wholly abolished. Unmarried
servants were preferred to others, because they were more easily lodged, and the
bothy system, with its attendant crowd of evils, was extensively introduced.
All intercourse between master and servant, except in the way of giving or
receiving orders, was immediately at an end. The hinds who, under a former
state of things, ate at the same table as their master, and were on terms of
respectful intimacy with him, were now banished from his abode, and, we might
almost add, from his presence. It became highly inconvenient for the family at
“ the hoose” to have such degraded wretches seen within its sacred precincts,
and accordingly, they were never permitted to enter them. They were confined
to their bothy, with all its degrading influences, and in a short time they became
little better than brutes or savages. . _ _ , , , , ~
This result might not have followed so rapidly had it not been for the peculiar
character of bothy accommodation, —indeed, to this more than to any other cause
do we attribute the degradation of the agricultural labourer. Are our readers
acquainted with the appearance of a bothy ? If they are not, we will describe it


to them, such as we saw it at a respectable farm-steading in the kingdom of 1 ife.
The bothy was one of the most ruinous-looking of the outhouses (bothies almost
invariably are.) It appeared to, have been used as a stable, and abandoned
because not sufficiently comfortable. There was but one window of four small
panes most of which were broken, and either stuffed up with straw or mended
with paper. On entering, you descended into a heap of litter, which in summer
was dust but in winter mud; because, the earthen floor being below the level
of the goound outside, every shower that did not penetrate the roof, at least sent
in its contribution of moisture by the door. The furniture of this wretched abode
consisted of the chests of four men-servants, two box-beds, a pot, a ruinous grate,
a bellows without the nozzle, a water-bucket, a few tin pannikins, and a heap of
fuel We scarce think any article of the stool genus was to be seen, but if it was
it must have been in so delapidated a state as not to be recognisable,—certainly
there was no chair. The ceiling had at one time been plastered, but the plaster
had fallen in most parts, and in some the wood also was broken, and tufts hay
from the loft above hung down. To add to the beauty of this inviting interior
some former inmate of the bothy, in a drunken fit probably, had traced rude
figures and obscene words on the parts of the ceiling that remained, by passing a
lighted candle close to it, and marking it with the smoke. A cloddish-looking
you ii" fellow was seated on one of the chests, and to our interrogation he replied
what we knew was the case, that the men in the bothy lived entirely on milk
and oatmeal, and that animal food was a luxury unknown. They washed m the
water-bucket, or at the mill-dam, when they did wash, and dried themselves with
the sheets of their beds, as they had no This bothy, wretched though its
accommodation may appear, is, we believe, a fair type of its class. _\V e have seen
others even worse. We have known them swimming with the moisture from the
adioinin" stable, so that the inmates had to place stepping-stones in the floor in
order to reach their beds or the hearth. In many it is nothing uncommon for the
men to find themselves under a small wreath of snow when they awake in the
winter mornings. Is it any wonder though immorality of every kind is of rapid
growth under such circumstances ? Beading is out of the question, even though
the long severe toil of the men did not wholly unfit them for it, which, except
when the desire for knowledge is very strong, it effectually does. If amusement
or comfort of any kind is desired, it cannot be found in the bothy, and the men
are driven out to seek in drunkenness and debauchery the only enjoyment of
which their position allows them to partake. After such treatment, is it remark-
able that the poor labourer comes to hate his employer with an intense hatred .
They know, and do not hesitate to say, that their masters care more for then-
cattle than for their men, and in many instances, we are sorry to say, they are
perfectly justified in such assertions. We have known horses in a cold rainy day
taken in from the plough, and the servants who attended them sent out again to
mix the compost heap or scour ditches. We do not say such treatment is univer-
sal but we do say it is too general, and servants seeing the comfort of brutes
more attended to than their own, have as a consequence become even lower than
the brutes in morals and manners. , , , ,
This subject is almost inexhaustible. We should weary and shock our readers
were we to tell all the evils that have come under our own observation in rural
districts of Scotland. We believe the country in the vicinity of Edinburgh is
much better as regards the condition of agricultural labourers ; but in T ifeshire,
Forfarshire and Aberdeenshire their state is deplorable, and grows daily worse it
that be possible. We are therefore glad, indeed, to see that the Association to
which we have already alluded is not to confine its operation to the counties in
the neighbourhood of the capital, but is to embrace in it every agricultural district
of Scotland. We hope much from it, because it seems to be under the manage-
ment of prudent men, who propose to begin at the proper point. The aim is, we
believe, in the first place, to introduce an improved order of abodes for farm
labourers; this done a great work will have been achieved, but more is necessary.
Agricultural labourers are not only badly lodged, but they are under-fed and
over-wrought. These evils must also be remedied before we can look for moral
or intellectual elevation. Another thing, “ the great gulf fixed” between masters
and servants at present must also be bridged over, and a larger and more kindly
intercourse take place between them. This will not be difficult when the


labourer sees, in the substantial increase of his comforts, that the fanner is really
desirous for his welfare. Such a change of manners may then also be expected
in him as will render it a pleasure for the master to hold intercourse with him,
instead of exciting disgust, as is too often the case with intelligent farmers at
present. The introduction of such a state of feeling cannot, however, be ex-
pected all at once, it will be the reward of years of labour judiciously directed.
But we do not despair of it ultimately, and we look to the Association about to be
formed, and to the distinguished individual who is to become its patron, as
instrumentalities which may accomplish much good in the way of its attainment.
Most heartily do we wish the movement all success.


APPENDIX.
Evidently the question we have been considering in its present state is such
that few legislators or lawyers can be brought to reconcile their different views of
it • nor are private individuals less at variance thereon, as may be seen on a
slight perusal of the subjoined letters, no two of the writers of which being agreed
(however loudly the subject calls for inquiry and redress), though mainly differ-
ing on points of detail.
The author is led to believe and hope, from the numerous communications with
which he has been favoured, by gentlemen who may be allowed to be qualified to
give an opinion, that there is at least something in his remarks worthy of being
made known to our legislators and the public in general.
To accomplish this end he has decided on publishing this pamphlet, though
assured by every friend to whom he has expressed the intention that besides
trouble it will bo attended with considerable loss. As a farther proof of the pro-
bability of loss, reference may be made to the remarks of Mr Cowan, M.P. for
Edinburgh, who, in a speech delivered by him in the House of Commons on the
Paper and Advertisement Duty, showed that not above one book in three, and
not more than one pamphlet in twenty, paid its expenses. Of course, from the
little public regard paid to the subject matter of this pamphlet, it will in all pro-
bability add another to the large category, notwithstanding any little merits of its
own, and every effort of its author to guard it against such a fate.
To those who may feel any interest in the question to be discussed, a few re-
marks may here be made on the correspondence subjoined.
The letter of Colonel Jebb, from his Secretary Mr Macleod, strongly points out
the anxiety Government have to take up and legislate on the subject treated of in
this pamphlet, but anything yet done goes but a short way to make our gaols
tenantless, or employ advantageously our numerous convict prisoners. Evidently
the Colonel is more than partial to his break-water and public-work system.
However, I have yet to be informed of the number of male convicts he has drafted
and employed out of the Perth or any other Penitentiary or any of our northern
gaols; besides, I hold the employment of females on such public works to be
totally impracticable.
So far as I maybe allowed to judge, I can see no bar to the Colonel’s plan and
mine being, after improvements, amalgamated in one legislative enactment.
Most unfortunately there are but too many convicts for both our purposes,
notwithstanding the prosperous times in which we live (especially for the work-
ing classes), and the vast exertions continually made on all hands to prevent
crime, and to reclaim and reform juvenile backsliders. Look at the state of
matters displayed at our last May Justiciary Circuit Court held at Perth. Out of
thirty-eight prisoners indicted and tried, seven were sentenced to imprisonment not
exceeding twelve months ; nineteen to transportation for seven years: five for
ten years ; one for fourteen years ; one for twenty-one years; and two for life ; two
were outlawed for non-appearance; and two were certified to the High Court at
Edinburgh ; altogether exhibiting a sad picture of the state of our society, the
more especially when we look at the escapes from deserved punishment, arising
out of defects in the Scottish Criminal Law. Assuredly in drawing such a
statute, provision should be made for the profitable or better employment of pri-
soners.
a


Evidently the Colonel and all other inspectors of gaols ought to make it their
duty to know the rules and regulations of every extensive prison throughout tho
kingdom, for assuredly the inspector of the middle district of England has been
very remiss in looking into county and borough gaols, as well as the Birming-
ham local authorities, otherwise such scenes, as detailed in the public papers,
could not have been perpetrated without a check being given to the fiendish
conduct of the Governors and officials of the Birmingham prison, as narrated in
the foot note.*
Still, much valuable information is to be derived from the Colonel’s last very
clear report on prison discipline.
From the daily experience Mr Mackison (of Dundee Gaol) has among prisoners,
he is well qualified to give an opinion on the present subject, and his view of my
plan is very encouraging, inclining, as he does, to the belief that many of the
prisoners may labour under various shades of insanity, in many greatly
aggravated by prison discipline, while kept in a state of solitude and idleness.
Still, Mr M. only points at a limited trial of my agricultural system, which can
* “ It has only been during the past week that disclosures have come to light which
almost makes one in reading them think a second time whether it is an English
prison or tho Spanish Inquisition that they refer to. The borough jaol of Birming-
ham has, it appears, for a series of years, been disgraced by horrible cruelties prac-
tised upon the unfortunate inmates under the name of ‘ discipline.’ The two arch-
fiends, for we can call them by no milder title who have been the authors and direc-
tors of this system, are Captain Machonochie and a Lieutenant Austin. Machonochie
appears to have been the Governor of the gaol, and the originator of the punish-
ments. Austin was next introduced as an assistant, and so heartily does he seem to
have entered into the Governor’s system, that he outdid him in his peculiar field,
and got himself appointed Governor instead. The punishment introduced by these
wretches were strapp'ng to the wall, strapping to iron railings, causing prisoners to
stand immoveable with their faces to the wall for three days at a time, throwing
buckets of water on them, and leaving them to shiver in their wet clothing, depriva-
tion of sleep, excessive deprivation of food, extreme physical exertion, and the strait-
jacket. Women were sometimes strapped to iron railings by these inhuman mon-
sters, so tightly, that they became livid all over and quite numb. Strapping tightly
to the wall was also a general practice productive of the same effects. The labour at
the crank machines, which appear to have been of the most imperfect construction,
was regulated merely by the caprice of the Governor, who humanely informed one
poor fellow that ‘ he would grind the soul out of him.’ This threat Avas Ayell
kept, for excessive labour and deprivation of food did its work. The man died,
but before his death took place, probably by Avay of encouragement to him, his
coffin was made and ready for his reception. One poor little felloAV Avas sent to gaol for
having gone into a shed, AAhere there happened to be some lead, to get his cap, which
had been throAvn there by his companions. Although only about fifteen years of age,
and so puny in appearance as to seem not more than tAvelve, and although he had
never been in jail before, he Avas treated most cruelly. He had a hard leathern
collar put round his neck, his legs strapped close together, and in this condition he
Avas fastened tightly up against the Avail for a whole day. This poor, little, Avretched
creature was next sent to do ten thousand turns of the crank machine per day, Avhich
occupied him from six in the morning until ten at night. Wearied to death by this
most severe exertion, he Avas then conducted to his mattress, and buckled tight by
two men into a straight-jacket, made of thongs of leather, Avhich ‘ hurt his neck, arms,
and chest very much,’ in Avhich condition he Avas left to sleep, with his supper beside
him, consisting of eight ounces of bread, the first alloAved him for the day, Avhich,
being pinioned, he could not eat, but ‘ bit at’ as avcll as he could. After such treat-
ment, and not having a drop of Avater given, although perishing of thirst, was it
Avonderful that the little martyr should be in such ‘ agonies and pains ’ that he
could not sleep ? Such is but a specimen of the horrible treatment to Avhich the
prisoners Avere subjected. Some of them suffered so much that they sought relief in
death, and either hanged themselves, or committed suicide in some other Avay.
When the prisoners Avent to chapel, they Avere put separately into barred cages or
boxes, like Avild beasts, and in this condition had to listen to the ministrations of the
chaplain. It is monstrous that these things should have been going on for years, and
iioav only brought to light.”— Editorial —Edinburgh Guardian , 10 th Sept.


hardly succeed, as the expenses of the necessary staff of officials -would be found
to be a very heavy detraction from the comparatively little good to he done.
The letter of Mr Christie, of Scotscraig, is much to the point, and almost quite
conclusive on the measure ; yet it is to be dreaded whether the Legislature would
go the length of sanctioning his proposition of interfering with gentlemen’s deer
runs and game preserves. Such interference is unlikely, though assuredly many,
many thousand acres out of such tracts could he reclaimed and brought into
excellent improved land, without lessening, or at least seriously encroaching on,
the prerogative of sportsmen.
The view Mr Balfour takes of the scheme is a sound one, only I think his
doubts as to obtaining a sufficiency of land are without foundation. May I ask
him how railway companies have obtained the valuable land they now possess
(much of it through villages, towns, and populous districts) in every part of the
country ? One thing I venture to aver is, that they have paid three times more
for such lands in litigation, (to say nothing of their various Acts of Parliament,)
than under my scheme, would purchase the whole land required even for centuries
to come. Mr B.’s dread of being too near a convict station, is merely imaginative,
and would very soon be got the better of, even by those in the neighbourhood of
such stations, owing to the complete control and management under which the
whole establishment would be kept.
The sound and enlightened sentiments of Mr Makgill of Kemback are too
lengthy to be replied to here in detail, —suffice it to say that he shows himself
thoroughly versant with the subject; though I must respectfully beg to differ
from him in some very essential points, particularly his adherence to solitary
punishment as the greatest preventive against crime. Whilst it must in one
sense be allowed to be so, it must also be stated that it drives many of the inmates
of gaols totally insane, and thus renders them unaccountable beings as well as
incapable.
The next special objection Mr M. starts to my theory is, that I would drive
many ploughmen and ordinary labourers out of employment; but the probable
effect must appear on a little consideration to be quite the reverse. Only think of
the numerous new farms, and the additional young farmers my measure would
require, to say nothing of the many thousands of agricultural peasants it would in
a short time call into the field, and employ and feed along with their numerous
families. Another great advantage to be obtained, is the vast quantities of corn
it would be the means of producing in an importing country like ours, where
nearly 7,000,000 quarters of grain are required from foreign lands annually, to
meet the excess of our vast consumption. And, moreover, only think of the
numerous villages that.would in all such localities spring up, and give employ-
ment to ordinary tradesmen of every description.
Lastly, with all due deference to Mr M.’s reasoning, I must be excused for dif-
fering with him in regard to private individuals or public'companies being able to
compete with the Crown , as he says they would be, in the reclamation of waste
lands. A single legislative enactment would serve the Government for the
whole kingdom, whilst other parties would require a special bill for every county.
To carry such a measure there would be great difficulty, and without it nothing
could be done in forming roads or cutting water-courses, both equally essential.
Besides such heritors or companies would have to pay to all employed the regular
wages given in the district; whilst the Crown would only have to supply con-
victs with the common necessaries of life, which must continue to be done either
by the State, or by prison assessments, whether the prisoners work or stand idle.
€


The City Solicitor of London, Mr Pearson, late M.P. for Lambeth, both in his
speech and letter, assuredly comes nearer to my views than any of my corres-
pondents, only, I cannot agree to his fixed cultivated farms, to be inclosed
within high and expensive walls, in all time coming to be appropriated for
prison purposes. Such places, I very much fear, would, from the constant change
of prisoners, become a great nuisance in the neighbourhood of their immediate
localities; whilst the same could not be said of my proposed farms, as the whole
body of convicts would be removed from the various stations, on the close of their
fiickaxc and spade labour, at about the termination of fourteen years, to another
ocality, probably many miles distant.
The strain adopted by Mr John Mackay, now one of the Magistrates of Dundee,
in the letter with which he has favoured me, is highly complimentary, inasmuch
as he gives praise where some may deem but little due ; but I hold his opinion
and reasoning to be very important, as much of his time and attention is devoted
to prison and other public matters, both in Council and out of Council, and as he
brings an acute and well informed mind to the investigation of every subject in
which he takes an interest. He is, no doubt, extremely cautious in pronouncing
an opinion on my peculiar views, pleading want of practical experience and
knowledge of the subject, but, at the same time, strongly urging the trial of my
scheme on a limited, if not at once on an extended scale.
He candidly tells me that there is much against my plan, both in the able letter
of Mr Makgill of Kemback and in the correspondence of the Government autho -
rities ; still, he thinks the publication of my papers would be productive of great
good, by tending to lead to public discussion.
I cannot do better than refer the reader to a special perusal of the Bailie’s
letter, which I have given at full length.
The straightforward honourable sentiments expressed by Sir John Ogilvy can-
not be too much applauded, although his reasoning is decidedly against my
scheme. Whatever difficulty may attend preventing hardened felons from making
their escape, I still venture to aver that if the overseers and soldiers can be
brought to do their duty, the most hardened and designing villains would scarcely
dare to make off, as the enactment would be so drawn as to give power
to the soldiers to fire upon all such runaways, and, in the event of escaping,
and wherever afterwards found and laid hold off, to be brought back,
branded , and sent either to the Hebrides or to some other distant colony, as a
place of greater security and punishment. Besides transporting hardened irre-
claimable prisoners to the Hebrides or a foreign penal settlement, they might be
disposed of much nearer home. Felons who may prove unmanageable, and
Sersist in attempts to make their escape, might be partly cured of this craving by
eing made clearly to understand that, should they attempt a second escape from
any station whatever, and be afterwards apprehended, their doom would be,
without farther trial, servitude as miners in a coal pit in perpetuity, or at least to
the end of their original sentence of imprisonment.
Such punishment being generally known among convicts, would tend to deter
even the most hardened villains from ever attempting to run off, well knowing
that, if once below ground, their chance of again escaping would be exceedingly
slender. Such convicts might be employed advantageously in coal pits, to supply
with coal the steam navigation belonging to the crown. The convict colliers
would be kept, when above ground, perhaps in irons, well secured, within sub-
stantial high walls and under military surveillance, so as to be deprived of all
chance of escape.
In regard to the risk of fire, my proposed barracks are all to be heated with the
safest and best invented stoves, so that even far less risk is to be anticipated on


this head than on board of ship, where double the number of convicts are often
congregated together. In the event of the officials doing their uy,
would be no more difficulty in preventing male and female prisoners from all
intercourse whatever than there is in any other public gaol, wherever situated.
No one will attempt to gainsay the clear statement regarding the landed inte-
rest, which Sir John is pleased to make; at the sametime the difficulty must be
allowed to rest often in convincing people of benefits to be derived, without ocular
demonstration of ultimate advantage.
Any commendation from the pen of a man possessed of such eruption and
scientific acquirements as those of Mr J. B Lindsay, must
mation. 1 fully coincide with him in regard to the vast extent of land
still lying waste, uncultivated, and in a state next to unproductive,
truth there may be in Mr Lindsay’s assertion, that the distillation of alcobol is
the root and mainspring of our great increase of criminality, it is a question quite
foreign to my purpose, and quite superfluous for me to expatiate on.
Deeply indebted as I feel myself to a farmer of vast practice and experience in
the very opposite comer of this county, but who positively debars me from pub-
lishing on my essay, I cannot refrain from hinting at a lew sugges-
tions, though by no means consonant with many of my views on the question at
18 He particularly objects to my tabular matter of figures, though te sted by
agricultural friends who assure me they are fairly calculated, the more especially
If l do a debtor and creditor statement of the
of a station during the currency of the Commissioners’ holding, which would be
next to impossible; although the value of the implements, stock, orop,_ and land,
at the close of twenty-one years, may be pretty correctly amved at, taking the
average of past years. How can it be otherwise? 1 would defy the ablest
accountant to calculate with precision the vast number of quarters of gram to bo
grown or the great quantity of poultry, pigs, sheep, cattle, and horses, bkely to
be reared (to sfy nothing of their value) on ten cultivated farms much Icssofthe
probable quantity on ten such farms as are proposed, and this, too, for the long
expense at starting a station estimated at *6O.
is a/that can safely be gone into on this head, set off agiunst £4 at wmtog
up a station. My friend also objects to the use of oxen, alleging that forty horses
are sufficient to work the ten farms agreeably to my mode of which I u y
believe to be the case, were it not for the vast cartage required for many years on
such outlandish places, and it must not be lost sight of that my: are a
charged convicts, who. may not be inclined to exert themselves so “ ucl^^ f
men, so that the oxen in most instances would be required during the latter half
of the holding, proving at sametime of but little expense to the Ciown.
My correspondent altogether objects to the use of horses, though it m y
once be seen I never put a plough in the soil (with the exception of the fiist win-
ter) at least for the first seven years. Of course horses are f as
ing purposes; this over, the horses and oxen are gradually brought into use, as
the steadings get in order, and the soil becomes fit for the ploug i.
During the succeeding seven, or at the end ol fourteen years, t e
be removed to a new station, allowing the farms for the last seven years, or
remainder of the Commissioners’ holding, to be entirely worked by horses and oxen,
under the management of discharged prisoners, with the exception of the head-
grieves or overseers and matrons. He also objects to the interferenc p
prietors who must at once be over-ruled by a special statute, otbervusc tbe Com-
missioners would meet with endless difficulties in obtaining land adapted for
their purpose.


lo remedy another evil complained of, I have a special clause enabling land-
lords to treat with the Commissioners for sandy benty hillocks, along the sea
shore, swampy bogs, and clumps of uncultivated land not measuring more than
700 acres. °
In conclusion, this man of experience winds up by assuring me that ever since
he made a tour through Ireland, and there contemplated the immense amount of
money expended in building poor’s-houses all over the country, and their badly
chosen sites, together with the almost non-productive employment pursued by
the unfortunate inmates thereof, he has thought it would have been more ad-
visable to have built the poor’s-houses in the midst of waste lands, of which
there is a great abundance in Ireland, capable more or less of improvement, and
on which the paupers could have been more profitably employed by reproductive
labour, so as to have made them not only self-supporting, but at the same tiirio
adding immensely to the national wealth. Nor can he see how our culprits
could not be managed on a similar plan, but on this head it is needless to dwell,
as Ireland would require a special separate enactment for its own government.
One of my correspondents, a gentleman whose reasoning from personal examin-
ation into the system of prison discipline is entitled to respect, writes me what
may be considered a short essay of itself on the subject, but from which I am
only allowed to take extracts. He says:—
“Having decided on giving your prison system to the public, perhaps the best
advice I could give is that you make a tour among the chief prisons in Britain,
beginning with the Hulks at Woolwich, conversing freely with all the officers, and as
many of the prisoners as you can get access to , ivhich will give you considerable
insight into the incredible difficulties with which the subject is beset. Thus, in doing
so, would give a weight to your plans ivith practical men, which without this they
cannot have, nor can you wonder at their caution, they having so many plans pressed
on their attention, all professing just to be the very thing wanted
All this may be very true, but it is quite possible that amidst so many opinions
I might return home very little wiser than I left, after spending much time and
money, as it is quite evident that the management of convicts is often too arti-
ficial, and that governors of gaols profess a larger share of practical knowledge
than is often turned to good account, besides being apt to imbibe a professional
bias, and to overlook or not appreciate plain common sense views of the
question.
My correspondent says further,—“ I have been now twenty-five years con-
versant ivith prisoners, both military and civil, and have paid considerable
attention to the best modes of dealing with them, and people have sometimes said,
Why don’t you write something on the subject f Why the more I see of it, and
think of it, the worse it grows, requiring an amount of time and searching which I
cannot afford, in order to give weight to anything I could say. Nor in giving an
opinion on your plan, have I experience enough for several of its parts, not being
enough of a farmer, nor enough of a prison keeper. I see the great difficulties
prison officers have to contend with, both in keeping prisoners secure, and in making
them work ; and I also see the great difficulties farmers have to contend with, in
making their farms to pay. Now, how the one set of difficulties working into the
other are to be got over so as to make all safe and secure, and to work so as to pay,
and to give the criminal a fair chance of reformation, is the problem which I humbly
think requires clearly to be demonstrated.
Doubtless it must frankly be acknowledged that the ruling passion among the
great bulk of prisoners would ever be to escape and remain quite free from
punishment and toil; but even under my scheme of management, I cannot see
the great difficulty as to securing their safe custody, every chance of escape
being next to impossible. Whether the various stations could be made to pay,
and ultimately prove self-supporting, is a matter of small importance to the State.
However, to test this, it is necessary that the plan should have a fair trial, either
on an extensive or limited scale, requiring great experience, and years of patient


practice. To say the least of it, it is quite evident, whatever work may be done
under my plan, it must be of far more utility than idly turning cranks, and worth-
lessly squandering time in prison cells for no profitable purpose whatever.
“ I think you do not provide sufficiently against the criminal's chance of escape,
and you allow you have not sufficient confidence in your guard. To my estimate
such a guard as would prevent the possibility of escape during such varied operations
as farm work is, would far outbalance your profits, especially on such land as would
be got in sufficient quantity for the purpose, I may be wrong, but 1200 or 700
acres of land in a clump is not easily to be got, with a good climate where the crops
would ripen."
As to the quantity of land throughout the kingdom to be obtained suitable for
the purpose, a doubt cannot exist. Land in a good climate is not required, as it
is intended operations shall only be carried on where drawing off the surface
water, trenching, and furrow draining would tend greatly to improve both soil
and climate.
“ But suppose you found land, your expense of officers would be a high
rent upon it. For 1200 acres in my way of paying officers, even limiting them
to your own number, and I pay them at the present average pay of prison keepers
and warders, would he upwards of £IOOO per annum.”
This sum I deem much overrated, as I have no warders nor keepers, merely
overseers, and those working men, supposed to earn the amount of wages to be
paid them, and, in all cases, assisted and protected by the armed soldiers. The
expense of the Commissioners, Inspector, and Engineer, would be thrown over
the whole stations. The requirements for single stations, and to be under regular
pay, would be the Governor, Matron, Chaplain, and Medical man, besides twenty-
five soldiers with non-commissioned officers, the pay to whom, when all put
together, would come short of my friend’s estimate, as many of the soldiers
might be draughted from among those on half-pay. The above, with the expense
of purchase money, cost of barracks, miscellaneous outlays, and interest of money,
cannot here be estimated. All I can with safety do, is to estimate the cost of my
outlay at the starting of an establishment —say, £BSO, against my valuation of
£44,700 sterling at the close of twenty-one years. I maintain six armed sentinels
by night and by day, three constantly on duty, and three of them resting in the
guard-room, all of them having access to an alarm bell, which would in an
instant put the whole establishment in motion —this would be a sufficient pro-
tection over the whole barracks. To this force a few mounted horsemen might
be added, and kept during the hours of labour constantly patrolling around the
convicts at work, whilst the other soldiers might be scattered through among
the workers, altogether forming an array sufficient to deter the most daring from
attempting to escape.
My friend calculates that for a station of 100 male and 50 female convicts,
would be required fully fifty soldiers to keep order and prevent desertion, and those
too efficient and active men, being a force quite beyond my idea of what would
be necessary. To be sure, he calculates that the prisoners would be scattered
over the whole 1200 acres ; whilst, generally, they would be confined within thirty
acres, with the exception of a few tried prisoners who might be at a distance
making roads or cutting water-courses, but who would not attempt to make of,
well knowing they would make a poor change, as they would forfeit all the
sum accruing to them from the commencement of their imprisonment.
“ You will never get, on an average, above half work out of a prisoner by any
means you can try, especially as yours would have to be worked in (fains. Besides,
you allow the soldiers to fire, and the overseers to give one blow, a very dangerous
liberty which would soon bring the whole establishment into great trouble
Refractory prisoners would no doubt require to be worked in chains. But how
order is to be maintained and work got performed without, at times, having
recourse to the lash, I cannot conceive; though, by my plan, I prevent excess of
discipline being had recourse to by any single individual official.
“ Worthless characters liable to conviction live on deception before they come
into prison, and they pursue the same system, now their second nature, while there.
As to these fellows not trying to run away, because soldiers may fire on them from
the other side of the field, to most of them this would only whet their desire to be off."
“ Now , how you may be able to get over all these objections , and I shall be glad to


hear that you have , I cannot proceed much farther in my calculations , as lam not
farmer enough for that task. I have passed over many a waste moor , and ashed
why it was not cultivated; the answer was either no soil or no climate.”
My answer to this would be, draw off the surface water, trench, drain, and
proceed with improvements, and you would in a short time meet with both soil
and climate. Even granting that the cost of bringing in such land would never
pay private individuals or public companies, to the Government who can command
any quantity of convict labour at nearly, or very little more than the keep of the
prisoners, the loss or gain need hardly be calculated on. Convicts must be dis-
posed of in some way or other, and surely no better employment can be found
for them than levelling hills,_ filling up hogs, making rough places smooth, and
bringing under proper cultivation large tracts of land, wliich otherwise must remain
unproductive. Besides the general stock of rural produce would thus he greatly
augmented, and the basis of labour widely extended, while no encroachment
would be made on any one source of employment available to the other portions
of the community.
Notwithstanding the desperate and designing character of the general run of con-
victs, I still think bolting could in a great measure be prevented, as all such attempts
would be frustrated by their having miles of wild uncultivated moors to traverse
before reaching a human dwelling, where from their dress, appearance, and manner,
they would find the inmates, in place of sympathising friends, assailing foes, ready
to give the officials in quest of them every information as to their whereabouts, and
if even now and then some of them should get beyond the boundary prescribed,
it would only be to be recaptured, brought back, branded, and sent to one of
the Western islands, into a coal mine, or to a foreign penal settlement, the pro-
prietorship of which might be obtained by government for the purpose.
Nothing but a full and fair trial of my scheme can shew its efficiency or can
settle the jarring opinions on the subject. It is so beset with difficulties that
time and experience can alone set the matter at rest.
CORRESPONDENCE.
LETTER FROM COLONEL JEBB, SURVEYOR-GENERAL OF PRISONS, &C.
45 Parliament Street, 3d March 1853.
Sir, —I am directed by Colonel Jebb to acknowledge the receipt of your letter,
dated the 25th ultimo, transmitting for his perusal, in manuscript, “ an exposi-
tion of a new system for the employment and management of convict prisoners.”
He desires me, in reply, to thank you for sending him this paper, but he is of
opinion that your suggestion for employing convict labour in the reclamation of
waste lands would not be productive of all the advantages you appear to antici-
pate. The experience which has been already gained on this point proves that
the labour of convicts may be more advantageously employed in great public
works of national importance, such as the breakwater at Portland, rather than in
agricultural occupations; and if you will be so good as to read the account in
Colonel Jebb’s Reports of the manner in which prisoners are employed at Port-
land, Dartmoor, and Portsmouth, you will observe the very satisfactory results
that have been obtained.
You will also probably form a more favourable opinion pf the existing system
of prison discipline than you have perhaps been hitherto led to entertain.* Pos-
* The following are extracts from Colonel Jebb’s Report for 1852 :■ —
“ The ascertained value of the work performed at Portland for the last three years
is subjoined. As regards the past year, it has exceeded the entire cost of the esta-
blishment, and there is no reason to doubt that wherever there exist the same faci-
lities of employment, a similar result will he obtained.
1849 . . . £7,214 611
1850 . . . 14.067 16 7
1851 . . . 20,541 15 5
“ I have carefully considered the subject, and am of opinion, that whenever the


sibly you may not have had the opportunity of seeing any of these establish-
ments, or of knowing what improvements have been introduced into them within
the last few years. lam desired to return all your papers, —and am, Sir, your
most obedt. servt.,
Norman Macleod.
Mr Allardice.
Letter from Mr Mackison, Governor of Dundee Jail.
Dundee Prison, ith February 1853.
1 have read with pleasure the manuscript of a reply by the “ Northmost
Farmer in Fifeshire,” to the question “ What is to be done with our Convicts ?”
and his valuable suggestions on this important subject. I should like well to
see his plan of cultivating the waste lands of this country by convict labour put
into operation; a fair trial would test its soundness in principle, and point out
its defects in practice, and be the foundation of a system of dealing with our con-
victs at home. My experience does not enable me to pass an opinion on the
subject of agricultural employment to convicts, but this I will venture to state,
that should criminals have undergone several severe punishments in a prison before
being placed under restraint on a convict farm, it would be for their advantage
and the public weal to be kept on it for ever, provided they were qualified to
endure its labours; and to be dealt kindly with and encouraged to do the work
assigned them, for by this time, through a constitutional weakness and indul-
gence in vice, they may be looked upon as morally insane and unfit to be at large.
Criminals placed there for their first offences ought to be differently dealt with,
to teach them, if possible, to be honest and industrious members of society, and
to prevent them from sinking into a life of indolence and crime.
Wm. Mackison, Governor.
Letter from Mu Christie, Mains oe Scotscraio.
February 1853.
Dear Sir,— After a careful perusal of your manuscript “On the management
of convicts,” 1 beg to state that, without going into details as to the mode of
operations, I quite agree with you in the idea of the practicability of employing
male convicts in the reclaiming and cultivating of waste lands, deer forests, &c.,
in such a manner as would greatly reduce the present national cost of supporting
them, even taking into consideration the difficulty of guarding ; but the idea of
the Hebrides as a penal settlement (by which my objections from the difficulty
of guarding would be materially obviated) I most cordially agree with. At the
same time, allow me to express my serious doubts as to the practicabilty of having
males and females on the same Settlement-
Wishing you every success in your patriotic effort, I am, dear Sir, yours truly,
Peter Christie.
Letter prom Mr Jambs Balfour, Farmer.
Milton, by Leuchars, Ylth February, 1853
Sir, —I have carefully read over your reply to the question “ What is to be
done with our convicts,” and agree with you that in an agricultural point of
nature and extent of any work required the employment of from 500 to 800 men for
a period of five or six years, it would justify the erection of a removable prison, and
the formation of a convict establishment for the purpose of executing it.
“ Agriculture. —ln the event of there being no public works to which the labour
of the prisoners could be devoted, with a view to realizing the cost of their detention,
the less profitable application of it to agriculture might be resorted to. In such a
case my general view would be to obtain two or more tracts of good land in a dry and
healthy locality, contiguous to a railway, and in such a situation as to be conveniently
accessible from the more densely populated parts of the country, so as to reduce to a
minimum the cost of the removal of prisoners.”


view, that a large number could be employed in improving the waste-lands in our
own country and be self-sustaining, or nearly so, but the details I will not at
present enter into. One thing should be kept in view, that it isby the spade or
fork that the land should continue to be cultivated so as to give work to the
convicts. No ploughs and very few horses would be required, no more than would
be necessary for carting.
The great difficulty would he to get a proprietor willing to give ground for
such establishments. I do not see that any Government could make it compul-
sory ; this would be an interference with the rights of property that the country
would not stand, and I confess I would not like to live within a few miles of such
a crew ; it is only on some island or Government land that your plan could ho
developed to have a chance of success.
Get the ground, and I have no doubt your plan would do well. It would be of
the utmost consequence if the convicts were compelled to work, and that their
labour was able to keep them in food. I am, yours truly,
Jas. Balfour.
To Mr Arch. Allardice.
Letter from George Makgill, Esq. of Kemback.
g IR) When in Fife last week I had the pleasure of receiving your packet and
letters#
Being at present very much occupied with removing from my present house, 1
have not been able to devote so much attention to your essay as I wished to do.
I have read it, however, with great pleasure, and feel convinced, that, at all
events, the principle on which the plan you recommend is founded is a sound one.
The great point to be kept in view in determining as to the fitness of a penal
system is that in regard to hardened or twice convicted offenders; they have for-
feited all right to have the mode of their punishment adapted solely to their benefit.
In the case of such criminals, the costly system of separate and reformatory
discipline is not only almost wholly useless, but it is irrational, and unjust to the
public at large. In treating twice convicted offenders (who form between one-
third and one-half of the whole number), the chief consideration ought to be, how,
without lessening the penal and inflictive character of the punishment, the neces-
sary burden of their custody and maintenance can be rendered least oppressive
to the community; or, in other words, we have to find only how their labour can
be turned to best account. Profitable labour then being the chief consideration,
there can be very little doubt that this can be insured better in association than
in separation, and better in large central establishments than in small local
prisons. Under our present system, if it can be called a system, the average
earnings of each prisoner are in England 225., and in Scotland about 525. per
annum. What we want then is some plan, by which, while still treating the
criminal as a criminal, we may compel him as much as possible to repay to the
State the cost of his maintenance. There arc three ways of employing him for
this purpose. Ist, On public works, such as that of Portland, to which Colonel
Jebb lias called your attention; 2d, In-door labour at manufactures or other
handicrafts ; 3d, Out-door agricultural labour, especially the improvement of
waste lands, which you prefer.
For my own part, 1 cannot say that anything I have yet heard or read has
convinced me that this third plan possesses any such advantages over the other
two as to entitle it to exclusive preference. I can conceive circumstances in
which it would be attended with benefit, but, on the whole, I am still inclined to
think that in-door labour in association combines most advantages.
I cannot enter at length into my reasons for this preference; but I wish to
notice one of the common arguments against it, which I see you make the ground
of recommending labour on waste lands. You seem to think that employing
prisoners in manufactures is unjust to operatives, as displacing their labour. But
I think, if I had the opportunity, I could show you that, in this respect, employ-
ment in-doors and employment in the reclamation of land are precisely on the
same footing. Such reclamation must either be a profitable undertaking or an
unprofitable. If profitable for a prison it would be profitable for a private
capitalist (landlord or farmer), and in that case, by occupying the field of employ-


ment, you are virtually dicing the taboo. otthe
spadesmen, &c., who rmgkt have been pro a y 1 y ~i e taxpayers
had let it alone. On the other hand, if the wor f f ’ e p ave the less
must pay the more for supporting the convicts, i i ’ o f those who
to lay out upon other things, which is just displacing the labour ot those w
me that this and other reasons that
indoor employment of prisoners, I would by no means op d
land-labour scheme. I don’t know whether you re f
trial upon an extensive scale at the What we 'cannot yet judge of its
however, has been opened so recently (1850) that we , J f Dublin
success.’ When in Ireland last year 1 found theP™“ ‘“Sfment on one
working at a scheme tor establishing a penal »SJ 10 „ ®“‘l Prison Hoard ot
island ot
“ittZt'rhE'yonare aw.rtot.he
which was brought before the notice of 1 arhamei y . information in
M.P. for Lambeth. If you have not seen it, you will tadmuch
his evidence, given with great detail before the Committee of t
‘YSrnot noticed the details otyour plan which would hike longer toe ton
I have to spare. I can only now say that the beat eei C( f nsidel F at i 01 ,
system placed on a sound and rational footing is i . Empire,
which it is now attracting from many intelligent men thr^£ u ™ v^ mpl 6 ’
and I am glad to see the subject is not lost (sight) of
I cannot conclude without thanking you sincerely for the obhging exp
of approval you use regarding the views 1 ately advocated at Cupai on
Management. I remain, Sir, yours very truly, Ma.ro ill.
12 Claremont Crescent, Edinburgh,
May 7, 1853.
Letter from Mr Pearson, late M.P.
Sm, —My proposal did not address itself to the reclamation but to
the cultivation by prisoners of land of the first class so HS f ° *
demand for productive labour upon the smallest quantity of land, enctosed withi
lofty and substantial walls. Of course I should not object to the
waste land, if of a good staple soil, and in a suitable chmati 3 to a
of grain or garden crops. The Government promised that my p f •
tried; but instead of making the experiment of spade husbandry and high far: g
under the conditions I recommended, they have selected for the attempt the mid
lands of Dartmoor—peat upon a granite bottom—upon mountam tops
more thanfifteen hundred feet above the level of the sea, where wheat wfi! not grow
and oats will only ripen in occasional years. I enclose you . herewith a ot
my speech in Parliament when I moved for the appointment of the Committee
which was granted by Government. lam too much occupied now hy my
official duties, and by my efforts to obtain for the citizens railwayJ
give any time to the convict question at present, but as I told Lend 1 almerston
yesterday, I feel confident, when I have leisure, I shall carry out my dMgn-
it was only suspended by a severe illness which compelled me to leave! arlmment
to save my life. Believing that discussion upon this important subjec ,in
form, will tend to elicit truth, I assure you of my utmost good wishes in the
inquiry you have in hand, I am, Sir, your obedient servant,
Charles Pearson, City Solicitor,jGuild hall, London, May 28th, 1853.
1)


Letter from Sir John Ogilvy, Bart.
Baldovan House, 28 th
Sir, —1 had the pleasure to receive your letter of 21st instant, and the docu-
ments that accompanied it. 1 have read the whole with attention, and have to
thank you for the compliment you have paid me in affording me an opportunity
of perusing them.
You ask me to give you my candid opinion as to the practicability of your
scheme for the employment of convicts.
I regret to say that the result of my experience leads me to pronounce against
it, and I think, on reflection, you will see that you have yourself hit the blot which
is fatal to it. On the lower part of page 4of your Essay you justly remark that
you doubt if it would be possible to “ prevent convicts from bolting.” lam satis-
fied it would be impossible, and that, at the end of half an hour after they had
been set to their several employments, the most reckless and desperate would be
travelling as fast as their legs could carry them, either to their former haunts and
companions, or to some place of concealment. But, even if this difficulty could be
overcome, it would be impossible to provide, in such wooden erections as you
describe, against the danger of fire, whether accidental or wilful; and it would
never do to have male and female convicts in the same establishment.
The only other point which I think it necessary to notice is, that which relates
■ to the difficulty which you anticipate from the opposition which your scheme
would receive from the landed interest.
I think you have formed an erroneous estimate of the feelings and motives which
actuate them. My own firm belief is, there is no class in the kingdom which, as
a whole, is more anxious to promote improvements. If they oppose, it is not from
interested motives, but from want of conviction that the plan proposed is a
good one. Satisfy them on this head, and you will carry them along with you
heartily.
I am sorry to Write in this discouraging manner, but I could not with a clear
conscience do otherwise. lam your obedient servant,
(Signed) John Ogilvy.
Letter from John Mackay, Esq., one of the Magistrates of Dundee.
Dundee, 9 th July 1853.
Archibald Allardice, Esq.
My Dear Sir, —Many thanks to you for the perusal of your interesting paper
upon the employment of convicts in the reclaiming of waste lands. Nothing but
that “ charity which is the end of the commandment” could have induced you to
bestow the amount of labour and of deep thought that you have devoted to the
subject. No attention given to this momentous topic, no scheme suggested for
the employment of our convicts, however imperfect and defective it may be, is
labour in vain. The seed sown will in due time germinate. The more attention
given to it, the greater the amount and variety of intellect employed in elucida-
tion of it, the greater the chance of some scheme being devised by the assistance
of the suggestions thrown out that may ultimately be found to solve the problem,
how our convicts may be employed with most benefit to themselves, in a way
most conducive to their emancipation from vicious habits, and at the same time
most beneficial to society, and at the least possible pecuniary expense to the
nation. How to treat our convict population, is every day becoming more im-
portant to the community at large. It has not yet been satisfactorily solved.
It is as yet only in the course of solution. Transportation has been tried and
found wanting. Still more glaring has been the failure of the indiscriminate
employment of capital punishments to lessen the amount of crime. And the
substitutes now employed, in place of these exploded modes of punishment, have
in my opinion only partially succeeded. I confess I have not sufficient informa-
tion on the subject to enable me to pronounce in favour of your peculiar views


on this highly interesting subject. Perhaps it might not be amiss to try the
experiment on a small scale, carried on at a proportionably small expense. How-
ever, I must be candid enough to confess that there is a very great deal of weight
in the objections to your plan thrown out so ably in the letter of Mr Mackill of
Kemback, and in the correspondence of the Government authorities with you.
Still I think that the publication of your views would be productive of great
good. Anything that would produce public discussion on the subject must be so.
I know you do not approve of my suggestion of dividing your paper into a series
of communications to the editor of, and getting them inserted in a newspaper of
respectability and large circulation. But in whatever way you address the
public on the subject, the publication of your able paper must and will be attended
with good to our criminal population and to the whole community.—l am, my
dear Sir, your obedient servant,
Jno. Mackay.
Letter from Mr J. B. Lindsay, Teacher, Dundee.
Dundee, 11 South Union Street, July 18 th 1853.
Sir, — I have read and considered your plan for the employment of prisoners
convicted of crime. I find that your ideas in general agree with my own. I
have long thought that such persons might be advantageously employed in
bringing waste lands into cultivation, and that this would be more profitable
labour than the teazing of ropes, or the working of machines that execute
nothing. Perhaps the half of Scotland is not yet under cultivation, and one-half
of the part uncultivated might, I should think, be easily brought in. These
operations, too, are less likely than others to interfere with those of free work-
men, as otherwise they might not be effected at all. I have not minutely examined
your plan in the details, but were the general plan agreed to, the minor details
could be settled afterwards.
At the same time I may state that I should like to see the prevention of crime
rather than its punishment. For this purpose I would put an entire interdict on
the'distillation of alcohol except for those purposes which are allowed to be
necessary. I had advocated the principles of the Maine law long before that
State had introduced it, and Ido not think that the masses will be reformed in
any other way. Our constitution seems to me very much in fault in allowing so
many facilities to intoxicate the people, and thus give encouragement to crime.
One person is protected by law to hold out the bait, and the simple who is tempted
to seize it is legally knocked down. This has long seemed to me the consumma-
tion of absurdity, and ought to be rectified ; but if the root cannot be got at,
something may be done with the branches. I remain, &c.,
J. B. Lindsay, Teacher in Dundee Prison, &c.
Charles Pearson, Esq., late M.P.,in moving in favour of a committee of the
House of Commons to enquire into the practicability of establishing a uniform
system of Prison Discipline (May 15.1849) urged many arguments that go directly
to prove the desirability and feasibility of my proposals. He maintained that by
the erection of prison farms and workshops instead of prison palaces, prisoners
might be made to support themselves, and shewed that the present system was not
only exceedingly costly but exceedingly inefficient as to any reformatory influences.
He insisted on hard labour being the best punishment for crime, and calculated
that prisoners kept close at work upon one of his convict farms might support
themselves and the whole establishment of which they formed a part and leave a
large money surplus of profit. The main feature of the learned gentleman’s
argument may be gathered from the following extract: —
“ There were few prisoners so fallen in the scale of human degradation as to be
incapable of restoration, if subjected to a proper system of punitive, reformatory,
and probative discipline. Such a system would blend kindness with firmness, and


would couple with moral instruction and religious exercises continuous labour
and industry, called into action by the free will of the prisoner himself, stimu-
lated and sustained in healthy exercise by rendering the duration of his con-
finement, and the quantity and quality of his diet dependent upon his labour
and conduct in gaol ; always taking care that it shall be one fundamental and
essential condition of the system, that a prisoner shall have less time for sleep or
relaxation—less bodily comforts of every kind'—to be purchased by more bodily labour
than would suffice to procure a greater amount of bodily comfort for a labourer un-
convicted of crime. Such a system as he proposed was in direct conformity with the
word of God, and with the dispensations of His will, as they might be read in all his
works. He proposed to subject the actions of the prisoner to the government of his
own will, moved only by the same motive power that governed all mankind in a free
condition. To supply men’s daily bodily wants, and to make some provision for
future independence, were the mainsprings of human action. ‘lf any man will not
work, neither shall he eat,’ was the Divine law by which the universal world was to
be governed ; and yet, without producing any patent of exemption from its obliga-
tion, the criminal class were permitted to evade its injunctions, and to cast the burden
of their maintenance upon the honest industrious portion of the community. This
absurd and wicked mode of dealing with the criminal class prevailed to a considerable
extent in all our gaols ; so much so, that while the expense of maintaining our prisoners
in England and Wales amounted to upwards of £450,000 per annum, exclusive of the
enormous cost of the mansions in which they reside, their entire productive labour
did not exceed L. 20,000, and the greater part of that sum was realised in the Go-
vernment and metropolitan prisons. It appeared by the Prison Inspectors’ Returns
that at the model gaol of Reading, while the annual cost of each prisoner, besides
the expense of his palace residence, was upwards of L. 30, his productive labour only
amounted to 2s 8d for the entire year’s work, which the magistrates say is not en-
forced, but only allowed for the prisoner’s recreation and relaxation front his mental
and moral studies. In support of the position which he had assumed, he (Mr
Pearson) could adduce high authorities; the philanthrophic Howard, Archdeacon
Paley, and Archbishop Whately, were in favour of stimulating'the 'mind and body
of prisoners to healthful and vigorous action, by rendering their position in prison,
and their future release, dependent upon their conduct and industry while suffering-
the sentence of the law.”
“ The lazy cellular system was directly contrary to the laws of God; it was con-
trary to the laws of nature, and even to the laws of the land in which it was now
being carried into operation. Upon what principle was it that there was no hard
labour provided in the model prison, when the statute of the 4 George IV., c. 64,
required that in every gaol there should be hard labour provided ? The Act, more-
over, required that in every prison in this country, where hard labour was not a
part of the sentence, the prisoner should be made to labour towards his own support.
The enforcement of hard labour was not permissive, but (obligatory. Now, the
prison inspectors had reported to Her Majesty that there was no treadmill, nor any-
thing approaching to the hard-labour system, in the Reading gaol. The number of
prisoners, whose names were on the printed calendar as having been sentenced to
imprisonment in Reading gaol, with hard labour, from 1844 to 1849, was 1625; and
yet in that gaol the provisions of the statute were utterly disregarded. Notwithstand-
ing the inspector’s report, the Home Office had taken no steps to enforce obedience
to the law. Many of those prisoners had been committed again and again to the
Soft and effeminate indulgence of that gaol. Who could say, if the law had done its
office to those individuals, that the county would have had (again to pay for their
support while suffering imprisonment ? If they had not been reformed, they might
have been deterred, by the severity of the punishment, from subjecting themselves
to it a second time.”
“ Let them deal with a man in gaol according to the same precepts of religion, and
the same laws of political economy, by which he was governed in a free condition.
Let him have nothing but water and coarse bread until hc'had earned better fare by
hard and continuous labour, except in cases where, from age, infirmity, or sickness, a
just exception might be made to the other wise edict of the divine law, that if ‘ a man
will not work, neither shall he eat.’ The number of criminals wouldjthen be soon
reduced by the operation of a system which would prove itself at once punitive, refor-
matory, and economical. Stimulate convicted prisoners by adequate motives to
habitual labour and industry—by making the quantity and’quality of their food and
the duration of their imprisonment dependent upon the gravity of their crimes out-
side the prison, and by their conduct and the amount of their work and labour within
it—they would be found as a class able and willing to provide themselves and their
keepers with food and clothing, without unjustly interfering with the rights of free
labour, and without subjecting the revenues of the nation or the rates of the county to
one single shilling of expense.”
