

A
REFUTATION
OF THE
SINGLE TAX
THEORY,
AND
PUNGENT CRITICISM
OF
“PROGRESS & POVERTY,”
BY
ALFRED G. YEWEN.
PRICE; SIXPENCE.
Sgbnoj :
PUBLISHED by the INTERNATIONAL PUBLISHING COMPANY
533 George Street.
1800.




“PROGRESS AND POVERTY.”
A CRITICISM.
“ Plausibility has ended; empty routine has ended; much has ended.
This, as with a Trump of Doom, has been proclaimed to all men. They
are the wisest who will learn it soonest. Long confused generations
before it be learned ; peace impossible till it be.”— r
THOMAS CARLYLE.
CLAIMS TO GREATNESS.
fROGRESS AND POVERTY has been written; It has
gone forth as the conception of a master mind, and
its author has become famous in consequence of it. It
is fondly imagined by some people to be the guiding star that
points to the complete and final solution of the social problems
of nineteenth century civilization.
Whether this is so or not we shall be better able to judge
by critically examining the book, and the public utterances of
the author, than by taking the laudatory puffs of the partisans
of the Single Tax doctrine as the unbiassed judgment of an
enlightened body of men.
The book is claimed by its author to be a work that
explodes the fallacies of the whole of the political economists
who had previously written upon the subject of the production
and distribution of wealth in modern civilised society. But
it must be borne in mind that Mr George makes no reference
to the writings of Karl Marx, whose book has been called
“ the bible of the working classes.” This fact is significant,
inasmuch as Marx is the Darwin of social and political
economy, and whose writings can no more be ignored by any
writer upon the subject of Wealth arid Want than can Darwin’s,
be passed by in any disquisition that treats of the origin of.
species. Mr. George also claims that his definitions are precise'
and clear, and that the book, Progress and Poverty, is the acme
of exactness; and that the dry bones of political economy
have been revivified by him, and clothed in garments woven,
by the imagery of the poet, and girdled by the acumen of the-
scientist. This is undoubtedly the contention of George and
the Georgeites; but it is just possible that Progress and Poverty /


•will be shown to be lacking in the essentials that go to make
up the work of a clear, logical and profound thinker ; and that
plausibility may be found to he the main constituent of the
work that had previously passed as the quintessence of
science and philosophy—that, indeed, only needed to he acted
upon to cure all the social and economic ills that civilization
is heir to.
If plausibility—a mere surface seeming solution of the
problem—is shown to he Mr. Ge age's forte, we must under-
stand that when Thomas Carlyle said, “ Plausibility has
ended,” he was a little ahead of the times, and that what he
probably meant was that the palmy days of plausibility were
over ; and that in this age of criticism and enlightenment it
would receive a short shrift, and an unceremonious burial,
whenever it obtruded itself, and sought to speciously thrive
upon the ignorance and credulity of men.
And this is indeed true, notwithstanding the fact that
plausibility has seemingly gained ground by the coming of
Mr. Henry George to Australia, and the effervescent success
that has attended the Single Tax movement, through his
lectures on the efficacy of the single tax, and the charming
beneficence of “ free trade, free land and free men.” What-
ever that may mean !
The fact is this single tax extirpation of poverty scheme
is but a bubble that is floating along on the surface of the
stream : hero worship and ignorance give it importance, and
swell it out to bursting proportions. Nevertheless it is but a
bubble, and will die down as quickly as it has been blown
out; and, furthermore, poverty will stalk in our midst when
it is entirely forgotten. Indeed, if this were the only move-
ment that had for its aim the extirpation of poverty, humanity
would be in. a sorry plight. A one-man movement never did
more than create a sect —even when made by a great, and able,
-and self-sacrificing man ; but the hero worship of a man who
has only half an idea and strives to be so “ respectable,” is
the sorriest form of hero worship that has ever deluded the
mind of man.
That this Single Tax movement partakes of this character
there can be no doubt, else how can be accounted for the very
unreasonable remarks that fall from the devoted followers of
the greatest living exponent of the Single Tax.” But
fortunately the age is democratic, and unlike the ordinary
form of hero worship, the craze in this particular case partakes
of a truly democratic character. The devotees enthuse more
admiration for their leader than can be absorbed by him;
consequently they very considerately allow the overflowing
banker to suffuse over themselves, although it endangers the
bursting of the bubble through abnormal expansion. When
Mr. Plumb, M.L.A., likened Mr. George unto Jesus Christ (who,


by the way, had not where to lay his head), and Mr. Garland,
M.L.A., took up the refrain hy placing his hand on the
shoulder of the laudated one exclaiming Pace homo. 1 it was
•uly the storm-tide of the stream that flows throughout the
whole of the Single Tax party reaching high-water mark.
That mutual admiration and plausibility cut a truly sorry
figure in so far as it is likely to extirpate poverty, and make
of this life a joyous life that will he worth the living, there
can be no doubt; but for bluffing a movement it does inestim-
able service—for a time. But only for a short length of
time : of that fact we may rest assured.
Progress and Poverty probably has to answer in a great
measure for this unhealthy state of things. The ideas con-
tained in it are decidedly not original, nor are they
scientifically compiled. Its strength lies in the apparent
progressive nature of the book, which when analysed is found
to be entirely illusive, The terms that are used are inexact,
have a double meaning and are contradictorily used, notwith-
standing the fact that the author claims to “ eschew inex-
actness,” and the very remedy that is proposed to cure all the
social ills that modern society is suffering from is shown by
the writer himself to be no remedy at all. Consequently we
cannot wonder at the writer denying on the platform the
principles which ho had propounded in his book. At the
Exhibition Building, May in answer to a question, he
said :—“ I don’t think I ever used the term ‘ confiscation of
rent.’ ” Whereas that is exactly the term that he does specifi-
cally use as the solution of the problem, and it occurs in
Progress and Poverty on pages respectively 280, 288, 310 and
331. On page 280 it runs as follows : —“ Wo have weighed
every objection and seen that neither on the ground of equity
or expediency is there anything to deter us from making land
common property by confiscating rent.” And on page 288 it
is stated in these terms :—“ It is not necessary to confiscate land;
it is only necessary to confiscate rent." The italics are Mr.
George’s own ; so to suppose that ho could so emphatically lay
down this principle in his book and then forget, when he was
in front of a'fashionable audience, that he did so, is rather
moie than the wildest credulity can be convinced of.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES.
Now in order to understand Mr. George aright we must
proceed inductively, from the known to the unknown, from
the general to the special. We must first ascertain and state
the general principles that he lays down. We must see what
he seeks to accomplish, and the means that he proposes should
be used for the accomplishment of the aim that he has in
view. We must also, at the same time, understand what ho
opposes, as well as that which he proposes, so that we may, on
the very threshold of our enquiry, understand whether he has


fully mastered the subject that ho is supposed to bo such a
great authority upon.
First of all, the truism is laid down that side by side
with increasing power of producing wealth comes increasing
difficulty in obtaining it. That is, progress and poverty.
The few tend to become richer and the many poorer. “ And
unpleasant as it may be to admit it, it is at last becoming
evident that the enormous increase in productive power which
has marked the present century, and is still going on in an
increasing ratio, has no tendency to extirpate poverty or to-
lighten the burdens of those compelled to toil. It simply
widens the gulf between Dives and Lazarus, and makes the
struggle for existence more intense.” So says Mr. George,,
and this he declares is the case “ where protective tariffs
stupidly and wastefully hamper trade,” and “also where trade
is nearly free.”
Now, he professes to trace this condition of things to one
evil,namely,private ownership of land. He says: “To extirpate
poverty, to make wages what justice demands they should be,,
the full earnings of the labourer, we must therefore substitute
for the individual ownership of land a common ownership.
Nothing else will go to the cause of the evil —in nothing else
is there the slightest hope. This, then, is the remedy for the
unjust and unequal distribution of wealth apparent in modern
civilization, and tor all the evils that How from it: We must
make land common property.” Here, then, wo have succinctly
stated by himself the cause that he considers poverty and all
its concomitant evils are due to, namely, “the individual
ownership of land.” And the remedy that he considers
necessary to its removal is by making “land common
property.” Th,o means that he would take towards accom-
2>lishing such an end, though, would not be by State appro-
priation or confiscation of land, hut by the taking over of the
economic rent by the State. “It is 'not necessary to confiscate
land , it is only necessary to confiscate rent. We may safely leave
them the shell if we take the kernel,” says Mr, George. Tims
we see that individual ownership would not give way to
common ownership, as ho declares it should be ; but the aim,,
the proposal to render nugatory the private ownership of land
would bo attained all the same, says Mr. George, “ by con-
fiscating rout.” Before proceeding to show how ho arrives at
such a conclusion, and the peculiar means that ho proposes to
’adopt to bring it about, and before we comment on his dictum
“ that nothing else will go to the cause of the evil—in nothing
else is there the slightest hope : ” and before wo show the
utter fallaciousness of the confiscation of rent theory, and
that it cannot be “ the remedy for the unjust and unequal
distribution of wealth apparent in modern civilization, and
for all the evils that flow from it,” wo will just glance at the
attitude he assumes towards those who strive to mitigate


somewhat the evils of existing conditions, and the charitable
manner he has of stigmatising them “ charlatans and dema-
gogues.”
CHARLATANS AND DEMAGOGUES.
He applies this epithet to those who assert the axiomatic fact
“ that there is a necessary conflict between labour and capital ”
—(or, as we would say, capitalists and labourers ; for as
capital is inanimate and labour animate, there cannot, strictly
speaking, be any conflict between such totally dissimilar forces
as living and non-living matter) —“ that machinery is an evil,
that competition should bo restrained and interest abolished,
that it is the duty of the government to furnish capital or
furnish work.” “ Such ideas,” says Mr. George, “ which bring
great masses of men, the repositories of ultimate political
power, under the leadership of charlatans and demagogues,
are fraught with danger.” Doubtless these ideas are fraught
with danger to those who flounder about in a stagnant pool
and imagine that they are riding on a mighty ocean wave,
and that their little leaky tub is a veritable ark that will save
the whole people. As to machinery being an evil, he does
not point out that these people whom he stigmatises are con-
tinually pointing out that machinery is not an evil in itself.
If they held this view the “ charlatans and demagogues”
would not talk about nationalising the machinery as they do,
hut they would talk about destroying it, which they certainly
do 'not do ; and even the effrontery of Mr. George is not
sufficiently great to specifically assert that they do propose to
do anything with machinery other than devote it to its legiti-
mate use, which should be to lighten the toil of man. Even
John Stuart Mill said: —“ It is questionable if all the
mechanical inventions yet made have lightened the toil of
any human being.” And what we demagogues reiterate is,
that machinery per se is not an evil; but that it is to-day, in
the hands of private individuals, under competitive com-
mercialism, invariably introduced and used for displacing (in
some trades 90 per cent.) and cheapening labour, tor beating
down wages and increasing profits ; and that this competition
between manufacturers to cheapen commodities tends to the
introduction of machinery and the cheapening of labour, and
that necessarily increases the intensity of the necessary
conflict between the capitalists and the labourers. The very
existence alone of trades unions shows that there is an inter-
minable conflict between these two forces. The labourers on
the one hand strive to increase wages, secure a normal working
day, or prevent wages from being beaten down, or the hours
of the working day increased. The capitalists on the other
hand strive to cheapen commodities and increase profits by
using labour-saving machinery (it should be called labour-
displacing machinery), increasing the number of hours worked


by the labourers, and decreasing the' wages paid to them.
That this takes place is as evident to anyone who can see as
the sun is on the clearest day at noon, and only a very ignorant
or purblind person would deny it; and even he would have to
resort to sophistry in order to bolster it up and give it currency.
Even in the home of the “ free,” in the United States of
America, in 1880 the machinery was equal to 3,500,000 horse-
power, which enabled 4,000,000 workers to turn out as much
wealth as it would have taken 21,000,000 workers without
machinery. And then we wonder at there being more than a
million tramps in America, and increasing want with increasing
wealth.
As to the “ charlatanism ” in “ restraining competition and
abolishing interest,” and the government furnishing capital
and furnishing work, we shall allude to further on, giving the
greatest attention to interest, as Mr. George’s defence of this
form of robbery is unique. Enough for us now to see is that
Progress and Poverty is a laboured attempt to trace all the
defects of modern industrialism to private ownership of land j
and this the author contends he has more than done, for we
find him making this assertion :—“ I have now traced to their
source social weakness and disease. I have shown the remedy.
I have covered every point and met every objection.”
As this is the case, let us see the manner in which h e
does it. In order to do this thoroughly, we must be critical 5
and this his readers and admirers never have been, or the
author would never have emerged from the obscurity that the
qua si-scientific nature of the book would have left him in.
There is no historical groundwork to the book at all; it is-
written as if the modern capitalist form of production of
commodities for sale had always been the form of producing
wealth in all countries and in all times. This is evidenced
by the use of the term wages and interest to conditions to-
which they have no intelligible application whatsoever.
ANCIENT SOCIETY.
There is no mention of ancient society and its fundamentally
different basis to modern society : wherein no class was sub-
servient to another class ; in which dwelt “ the free-necked
man, whose long hair floated over a neck that never bent to a
lord.” A glimpse of a survival of one of the many forms of
this pre-historic human society can be seen at our very doors,
in New Guinea to wit, where the people are not divided into
landlords, capitalists and wage slaves. Sir William Mac-
gregor, the Governor of New Guinea, in his latest reports,
December, 1889, says : —“ The people of Odagositia live, like
their neighbours, by agriculture. The staple portion of their
food consists of bananas ; they have apparently considerable
quantities of sago ; they have say two or three hundred


cocoanut trees in bearing. Their cultivation, from the ex-
tensive drainage the land requires, is somewhat laborious.
Our party have seen some of these tribes at work digging
these ditches with sticks. Men, women and children partici-
pate in the task.” Summing up his report of the exploration.
Sir W. Macgregor says :—“ In short, it may be stated generally
that wherever the country is sufficiently high and dry for
human occupation, it is already in the possession of a numerous
warlike race of agriculturalists, whom it would take an
adventurous, extensive and wealthy lot of European settlers
to displace.” In criticising Mr. George’s book—his theories
and his remedy—it is very necessary to look at society his-
torically, as therein will be shown the utter baselessness of
his remedy. Making land “ common property ” would settle
the problems of modern society, if we had never got beyond
the agricultural stage of the Papuans of New Guinea, with
their ooooanuts, banana and sago food ; their ditch digging
with sticks, and their scanty—very scanty—primitive attire.
But us, with our soups, entrees, joints, dessert, sweets, etc.—
our mammoth steam-hammers, diamond drills, steam dredgers j
factories, foundries, docks, railways, steamships, postal and
telegraph systems—and our bustles and high-heeled boots,
and our swallow-tailed coats—it is another matter, and quite
a different problem altogether to solve, I can assure you, Mr.
George.
SLAVE SOCIETY—THE STATE.
Take another stage in human progress, which had merged
from the tribal and communal stage and differentiated into
oppressors and oppressed—the Slave Society—of which Bom©
affords us a good example, with its patricians and proletarians ;
in which the prisoners taken in war, who were not ransomed,
were enslaved; those that were not used for sport in the
arena, produced wealth for their captors to enj'.y. “He hath
brought many captives home to Rome, whose ransoms did the
general coffers fill,” said Marc Anthony of Csesar, and he ad-
vanced it as a great point in his defunct countryman’s favour.
It was the ethic of the period—enslave or be enslaved. Still
it was not none as we do it to-day. They strove to make the
slaves work: quite as much as in chattel slavery, when the
slaves were purchased as a commodity and retained as part of
the wealth of the estate. We are not so particular nowadays.
Men’s labour may now run to waste ; it’s of no importance to
capitalists in a commercial era. Do not their philosophers and
economists toll them so ? Does not Mr. George reprehend
“ the government furnishing capital or furnishing work.”
Always, of course, upon the assumption that there is more
“ freedom ” in walking about; the waste of energy, the
agonising torture wrought through hunger and destitution
being quite a minor matter. Too trivial, in fact, to take any
notice of.


FEUDAL SOCIETY.
But really Feudal Society, the Middle Ages is the period that
has the greatest interest for us, as landlordism definitely took
shape upon its appearance, and “ free ” labourers appeared on
the scene. The lord of the manor began to receive money as
rent, and to hire the free labourers to till the soil. And side
by side with the landlord, the tenant, and the tiller of the soil,
grew the craft guilds and the towns. The guilds craftmen
fashioning their tools and working up the raw materials into
useful and beautiful things. A class of workpeople that
dealt entirely with products that had already been taken from
the land ; with iron, if they wore smiths ; wool, if they were
weavers ; stone, if they were masons ; and so on throughout
the various industries or handicrafts. Their occupations were
not upon the land—except in accidental cases, through the
necessity of quick harvesting—but upon the products gained
from the land, or from the animals upon the land. -This fact
needs insisting upon, as the Georgian theory of wages is built
upon the argument that a man receives as wages just as much,
or more, than he would obtain for himself, if ho worked upon
the land that is “ at the margin of cultivation,” which means,
of course, upon land that is not of sufficient fertility to
yield economic rent. This wages theory buttresses up the
“interest” or “just return to capital” theory—a doctrine
peculiar to Mr. George. It assumes that the wage workers
obtain in wages all that they have produced, or are entitled
to ; that is, all they could produce without tools upon the
poorest soil in cultivation, from which no rent is taken. Else
if they did not, says this economist, the wage earner would
at once leave his employer and go out and tickle the margin
of cultivation patch with a stick—the government, of course,
■“ not to furnish capital.” A sempstress that works for sixteen
hours a day for one shilling, or a chain-maker that works
seventy hours for nine shillings per week, may get far more
wealth as wages than they could if they worked upon “ the
margin of cultivation ” patch of granite that wouldn’t yield a
lichen. But it does not prove that this munificently remuner-
ative wage, which capital has “ aided ” the workers to get, is
all thej r should get ; or that the imposition of a single tax
upon land values would enable them to get all they should
get, namely, the full fruits of their toil. Moreover, there is
the underlying assumption that there is “ the margin of culti-
vation land ” for them to go to ; and that all the myriads of
workers that are not engaged in raising products from the
land, but who are engaged in factories, foundries, workshops,
warehouses, and the thousand and one other multifarious
callings, could go upon the margin of cultivation block of
granite when the Single Tax obtains, if they did not get from
the capitalists the full earnings of labour. The workers are
not, according to this theory, to secure any advantage through
the improved means by which civilised people produce wealth.


The gain of tools and machines over fingers and toes is not
to be enjoyed by all the members alike in society, but is to
■accrue exclusively to the capitalists as interest.
But we are rather anticipating matters, so we will return
to our notice of Feudal Society, so 'that we may clearly see
that at this period the foundation of Modern Industrialism
was laid. The handicrafts in the Middle Ages, it is true,
were fundamentally different to, and distinct from, the modern
machine industry. The craftsman governed and owned the
tool ; now the factory “ hand ” is controlled by the machine,
and owned by the machine owner ; still it is from this
mediaeval period that it definitely sprang. The mediaeval
master-workman was the embryo modern employer or
■capitalist, and the “free man” and the “journeyman” the
precursor of the modern American tramp —abroad or other-
wise.
Although the craft guilds allowed only a limited number
of « orkmen and apprentices to be employed by any one master
■craftsman ; if piece work, only a given quantity allowed to
to be done : and a given number of hours to be worked, and
ensured good workmanship—they were powerless to secure
this condition of things upon the manifestation in the
sixteenth century of the principles upon which the whole of
the civilised world to-day is based, and that is : The production
of commodities for sale, as opposed to the previous principle
of making things, which were necessarily beautiful, for use.
Yet people fondly imagine that there has been and can be no
■change.
THE OLD ORDER CHANGED.
This new principle governing the production of wealth in
human society, made the art of buying and selling one of the
finest of the fine arts. It showed for the first time in history
how men could be “ freed,” and yet enslaved, under the guise
of freedom, far more effectually than by possessing their
persons. The possession of the land by the landlord class,
and the possession of the raw material and the instruments of
production by the capitalist class, put the proletarian, or wage-
working class, completely outside the pale of the natural
resources and means, whereby they alone could obtain the
necessaries of life. The landlord class was quite willing for
the working people to live upon, and work upon, such parts of
the land as they did not require for their own special enjoy-
ment, upon the payment of rent. It is true that the landlords
did not make the land, or make its surface blossom into
waving corn and purple fruit ; but they obtained possession
—which was sufficient justification for them. It became their
private property, and they made out their parchment deeds
-accordingly. As with the landlord class, so with the capitalist
class. Upon the coming into being of the invention of tool


machines, and the yoking of steam power to machines proper,
came the power of human beings to increase a thousand-fold
the productive power of man. The secret of this inventive
faculty- of man, and his patient industry, not benefltting the
whole race, through his greater power over nature by the
increased power of wresting crops from the laud, and
fashioning the raw material, by the machinery being set in
motion by the mere turning on of a screw, is due ,to the fact
that the landlord and capitalist classes possess the machinery,
the raw material, the means of transit, and all the other
factors used in the production of wealth. It is true that the
capitalist class did not make the machinery, produce the crops
and raw material, and build the factories, anymore than the
landlord class did not make the land. But they, like the
landlords, have obtained possession : and that, too, is enough
for them. The two classes are masters of the situation, and
can control affairs and even the destinies of the “ free ” men,
who are quite at liberty, of course, to leave the land if they
do not wish to pay rent, or refuse to use the whole of the
resources of civilization if they don’t yield profit.
This, then, is the situation, and its brief sketch will
enable us to more intelligibly understand Progress and Poverty ,
and the arguments and theories that its author enunciates,
than if we had baldly opened, as Mr. George does in his book,
with a discursive ramble on wages and capital. To his book,
then, we will now go.
PROPOSITIONS AND DEFINITIONS.
In the opening of the work Mr. George writes : —“ I propose
to seek the law which associates poverty with progress, and
increases want with advancing wealth ; and I believe in the
explanation of this paradox we shall find the explanation of
those recurring seasons of industrial and commercial paralysis
which, viewed independently of their relations to more general
phenomena, seems so inexplicable. Properly commenced and
carefully pursued, such an investigation must yield a con-
clusion that will stand every test, and as truth will correlate
with all other truth. For in the sequence of phenomena there-
is no accident.” Thus he lays down in the introductory
chapter what he sets out to do ; and let the reader mark well
that the conclusion will “ stand every test.” Also, let me
ask the reader not to think that the portion of this criticism
that is devoted to dealing with his definitions of the terms
that he uses is unimportant. It is really of considerable
importance, for if we really do not know that the terms that
he uses are no clearer and precise than those of the economists
whom he has assailed, we shall not have made any material
advance. If we wish to arrive at a correct estimate of the-
value of Progress and Poverty, we must give more than a
passing thought to it ; which reminds me of what a friend of


mine once declared. lie said :—“ I took honours at Oxford,
not because I had mastered the subject, hut because my com-
petitors knew less about it than I did.” So it is with Mr.
George. lie takes honours because his gloritiers know less
about the subject than he does. Only Mr. George doesn’t
frankly declare it.
WAGES AND WAGE LABOUR.
He defines wages as—“ Whatever is received as the result or
reward of exertion. For, as political economists explain, the
three agents or factors in production are land, labour and
capital; and that part which goes to the second of these
factors is styled by them wages. Thus the term labour in-
cludes all human exertion in the production of wealth ; and
wages being that part of the produce which goes to labour,,
includes all reward for such exertion. There is, therefore, in
the politico-economic sense of the term wages no distinction
as to the kind of labour, or as to whether its reward is received
through an employer or not; but wages means the return
received for the exertion of labour, as distinguished from the
return received for the use of capital and the return received,
for the use of land. The man who cultivates the soil for
himself receives his wages in its produce, just as if ho uses
his own capital and owns his own land ; he may also receive
interest and rent. The hunter’s wages are the game he kills.
The fisherman’s wages are the fish he takes. The gold washed
out by the self-employing gold-digger is as much his wages
as the money paid to the hired coal-miner by the purchaser of
his labour; and, as Adam Smith shows, the high profits of
retail storekeepers are in large part wages, being the recom-
pense of their labour and not of their capital. In short,,
whatever is received as the result or reward of exertion is
wages.” “ This is all that is now necessary,” says Mr. George,.
“ to note as to wages, but it is important to keep this in mind,
for in the standard economic works this sense of the term
wages is recognised with greater or less clearness, only to be
subsequently ignored.” While we are here quoting Mr.
George’s definition of wages, and before giving his definition
of capital, it will be as well to make some allusion to it
although in dealing with his definition of capital and interest
we shall have to return to it, as it will necessarily involve it.
The term wages, as we can already see, is used by him in a
general sense, so general, in fact, that it cannot be determined
or located.* It may be applied in such a way that it becomes
* Of course Mr. George may make what definitions he pleases of
anything and everything. Our objection to such procedure manifesting
itself through his definitions being no clearer than the writers he pre-
sumes to set right. And, above all, the implied way in which he seems
to have dealt with all the greatest economists. Whereas, he was not
educated by the writings of Karl Marx, and consequently comically acted.
Hamlet without the Prince of Denmark.


meaningless; indeed, it is so used in tlie sentence above
quoted, where a man may cultivate his own soil, “ and if he
uses his own capital and land he may also receive rent and
interest.” Now, all the while a man confines himself to per-
forming his own work and supplying himself with its produce,
there is but the simple produce, and no differentiation of it
into wages, rent and interest. Kent and interest is what is
taken from the product, and wages are what is left. Obviously,
if the product, the whole product is retained by its producer,
the same term does not accurately express the fact as when
two-thirds of the product is dissipated into rent and interest.
Therefore “ wages,” the term wages, does not accurately
express or determine what is retained by the producer if it is
the whole product, as well as what the labourer receives as
wages which are part of the product. Nor can it be used if
we are to know what we are writing or speaking about when
it concerns the production and distribution of wealth.
Furthermore, until the product is so differentiated does it
appear or come into existence and partake of the tripartite
character of wages, interest and rent.
Mr. George deals in his book with the conditions under
which wealth is produced in capitalist countries, in which he
knows that commodities, or articles to sell, are produced by a
wage-earning class, that is the bulk of the people, and that
they receive of the wealth but a dead lion’s share ; which of
course narrows their share down to a part of the product from
the whole, which of course they have produced. It is true
that a part is the retutn to or reward of labour, and that it is
all they receive, and that when it appears in this form it is
correctly denominated wages, and can have no double meaning
whatever.
Such conditions as the foregoing constitute a wage-
working class. The wage workers, that is the working class,
sell their power to labour to the capitalists, who purchase it
in the labour market at its market price, which is always at
the “ standard of comfort,” or subsistance point, driven to it
by the struggle for existence. Herein is to bo found the
secret of the Corn Law movement in England, which was
engineered by those “ Free Trade liagmen,” Richard Cobdon
and John Bright. The cheaper the bread, the cheaper the
labour. Therefore, these pious shining examples of middle-
classdom, fought might and main for cheap bread, and, there-
fore,'cheap labour. The mantles that have fallen from the
shoulders of these proflt-mongoring prophets have fallen like
a wet blanket upon the shoulders of such men as Charles
Bradlaugh and Henry George, and they are girdling them
about their loins, working under them with all the ardour
that Bright opposed the Factory Acts, and the other progressive
legislation that interfered with the humanity-crushing manu-
facture of his cheap and nasty wares.


In seeing wages and wage labour in this light, we can see-
clearly enough that there is no analogy between the primitive
hunter who killed a Dinornis, and a modern wage slave tiiat
sews a frock-coat in a sweating-den. “ The hunter’s wages
are the game he kills,” forsooth! Why, there is no inter-
vention between the pre-historic man and his big bird. There
are no capitalist sweaters preying around taking the legs,,
wings and breast of the bird as profits, and leaving the hunter
the giblets as wages. There was no such complexity as
profits, interest or rents, and consequently, wages in the
business at all. Society had not yet evolved and differentiated
into wage labourers, capitalists and landlords. What the
primitive hunter obtained was the full fruits of his labour
and if his wife fashioned the implement with which he killed
the bird, and there was a division of the spoil, he didn’t hand
over any part of the result of his labour as “ interest ” on
“ capital which aids labour,” but for the love she bore him,
and because it is social to act decently and equitably.
“ The wages of sin is death ” is perhaps a permissible use
of the word in Biblical lore which is full of allegory ; but in
a work that is written by an author that claims to “ eschew
inexactness ” it is far from being exact enough. Another
example will perhaps make this clear. “ Wages are* that part
of the produce of his labour obtained by the labourer,” says
Mr. George, in discussing upon “ Wages not drawn from
capital.” “ For,” says the writer, “ there was no more advance
of capital than if he hired his hands to dig clams, and paid
them with a part of the clams they dug. Their wages were
as truly the produce of their labour as were the wages of the
primitive man when, long “ before the appropriation of land
and the accumulation of stock, he obtained an oyster by
knocking it with a stone from the rocks.” Here again, side
by side, line upon line, is shown unconsciously and crudely
, enough that when wages are reallj’ paid that it is a part of the
product, clams in this case ; and that wages imply an em-
ployer and employees : and that when wages do not enter into
the obtainment of wealth at all, it is the whole of the product,
and not a part of it. The conditions' are totally dissimilar,
and have no relationship with each other whatever in the way
claimed. The part is not equal to the whole now any more
than when Euclid demonstrated it. A simple organism is not
a complex organism ; an amceba is not a rotifer. A simple
state of society is not a complex one ; and the more grimaces
and gibberings that do duty for language in the grey darwn
of human history, will not suffice for the approaching noonday
of human enlightenment. Aor will the terms necessary for
our distinctly different set of social activities be interchange-
able for their rude barbarities. Wages, “ the reward of
exertion,” forsooth ! Why, the burglar exerts himself, often
* The italics are mine.


to' l , with greater ingenuity than the chairman of a mining
company ; the embezzler also, and our social pariahs too.
Even the landlords, according to Mr. George, as well. So to
have their “ rewards ” come within the category of wages, us
well as the knocking of oysters off the rocks by ape men, is
•about as clear and precise and scientific as asserting that the
world was made in six days, and that all the animals went
for a cruise in the ark.
The ambiguitj 1 and want of explicitness in his definition
■of wages, his objection to confining the term to wage workers,
■and the loose treatment of the term by him, would not be so
noticeable were it not for the fact that he calls the other
bourgeois economists, who are not a whit more dense than
himself, “ flabby writers,” etc. lie pompously says of their
vulgar errors :—They crop out in the disquisitions of many
of those flabby writers who have burdened the press and
darkened counsel by numerous volumes which are dubbed
political economy, and which pass as text books with the
ignorant and as authority with those who do not think for
themselves.”
The least any man should have done who describes other
writers in the above way, was to take care that he at least did
not fall into the same error himself, and “ burden the press
and darken counsel by numerous volumes which are dubbed
political economy, and which pass as text books with the
ignorant and as authority with those who do not think for
themselves.” And this he might easily have done without
drawing on originality of thought in the least degree, by con-
sulting Das Kapital of Karl Marx, which had been out thirteen
years before Progress and Poverty appeared. If Mr. George
had studied this subtle work, he would have seen that in
capitalist countries, and that is what Mr. George’s book deals
with, the form the wealth in those countries take is that of
commodities ; and that this wealth is produced by a working
class, who receive a portion of the wealth so produced in the
form of w-agcs. Of course there are other members of the
working class unemployed, and consequently not in receipt of
wages ; others in asylums, hospitals and workhouses, where,
by the way, they are more degraded and tortured than worked,
who receive wealth, or “ the reward of exertion,” but not
wages in a politico-economic sense of the term. So, too, with
trades unionists, who receive while out of employment assist-
ance from the common fund. The “ reward of exertion ”
mainly attending this state of things is fearful anxiety as to
spinning out the necessarily small union allowance, and ex-
isting decently till wages are really forthcoming. The
swagsmen receive rations, which are the reward of their
tramping exertion, but certainly not wages—that is what they
are in search of. Or rather, they are practically exemplifying
the “ mobility of labour ” theory of the “ vulgar economists,”


toy tramping in search of a capitalist who can purchase their
labour power. When they are successful they render them-
selves up to him, body and soul, and he extracts from them as
much labour power as they possess, whether they work for
him eight, ten, twelve or sixteen hours out of the twenty-
four. The result of their lab .nr is commodities, having value
according to the amount of labour embodied in them. These
the capitalist ‘possesses, for which he pays the labourers,
wages. This form of producing wealth, with the people
divided into classes, one class possessing all the means by
which the commodities are produced, and another class being
dependent on the possessors of the instruments of production
for employment, who only receive the market price for their
labour, which is determined by competition, is peculiar to
civilization and constitutes the system of capitalist production.
•“ Labour has become a commodity and the labourer a
machine,’’ is just a mire passing allusion that Mr. George
gives to this very basis of society. And it “ wages are that
part of the produce obtained by the labourer,” as he says it
is, it is clear to the meanest intelligence that those conditions
reveal a state of things that the terms used for expressing
them are not applicable to primaeval doings, and not inter-
changeable where the forms of society are totally dissimilar.
Consequently the term wages cannot go sailing round the
world picking up any meaning from any source, from the
rude flint implement period down to the age of modern
industrialism. That is, if the author is to be more clear and
less “ flabby ” than were the precursors of flabbiness. It Mr.
George had been able to do this, he would have laboured and
brought forth a decently progressive rat, and not like the
mountain have laboured and prematurely delivered a de-
plorably poverty-stricken skeleton of a mouse.
CAPITAL.
The want of explicitness running through his use of the
term wages, also courses through his definition of capital, and
the function it performs. Indeed, the one error necessitates the
other, This is doubtless attributable to striving to be
original, and to reach finality by a short cut. Wages had to-
be shown that they were not drawn from capital, and a system
had to be built upon Herbert Spencer’s proposal of state
ownership of land by state appropriation or taxation of rent,
The only difference between Spencer’s proposal, enunciated
twenty years before Progress and Poverty appeared, and Mr.
George’s repetition of it • is, that the single tax is to be
collected by the landlords instead of by state officials. The
simplicity and absurdity of the latter scheme we shall point
out when we come to deal with the charming “ sovereign
remedy ” for the extirpation of poverty by means of the
■Single Tax.


In defining capital Mr. George’s error lies in not under-
standing that distinct periods in human society have been
marked by the mode of producing wealth during those periods,,
and that society is an organism acquiring greater powers as it
evolves to higher and more complex forms. It is true that he-
says —“ That society is an organism, not a machine,” wherein
ho infers that socialists are ignorant of the fact, and that
they are ignorant of the economic development of human
society. The truth of this assertion can he found to be
baseless by referring to Capital, the work of Marx. Further-
more, in the preface to the edition of 1867, Marx said that
“ within the ruling classes themselves a foreboding is dawning
that the present society is no solid crystal, but an organism
capable of change, and is constantly changing.” If Mr.
George understood, this great principle he would not prate
such arrant nonsense as he did at the Sydney Town Hall,
March 6th, when he said that “ Socialism has so strong a hold
on the continent of Europe that they are likely to try that
first ; but if the Single. Tax is adopted in any one of the-
English speaking countries, not merely all the rest of them
will soon follow, but the rest of the civilised world.” When
human society evolves into socialism it can no more go back to-
capitalism and try the single tax nostrum, than can the human
organism, after walking on its hind legs, go back to the
quadruraauous or quadrupedal form of locomotion. Once we
became bipeds, became human beings, we could not possibly
go back ; and once we rationally produce and equitably dis-
tribute wealth, we can no more go back to the devil’s scramble
of commercialism and the single tax bunkum than we
can fly.
The whole assertion is so nonsensical and puerile that it
carries its own refutation upon the surface of it. And not alone
does Mr. George not understand that society is an organism, in
different stages of development, according to the basis of each
society, but he does not understand that the basis of our society
is capitalism—and that, too, in different stages of development
in different countries. The form of society in which we are at
present living is capitalism ; and this truth cannot be too strongly
insisted upon. “ Consequently the wealth of those societies in
which the capitalist mode of production prevails presents itself
as ‘an immense accumulation of commodities,’ its unit being a
single earaumuity. The circulation of commodities is the starting
point of capital. The production of commodities, their circu-
lation, and that more developed form of their circulation called
commerce, these form the historic groundwork from which it
rises. The modern history of capital dates from the creation, in
the sixteenth century, of a wo>rld-embracing commerce and a
world-embracing market As a matter of history, capital,
as opposed to landed property, invariably takes the form at first
of money; it appears as moneyed wealth, as the capital of tho


merchant and of the usurer. But we have no need to refer to
the origin of capital in order to discover that the first form of
appearance of capital is money. We can see it daily under our
very eyes. All new capital, to commence with comes on the
stage, that is on the market, whether of commodities, labour, or
money ; even in our days in the shape of money that has by a
definite process to be transformed into capital. The first dis-
tinction we notice between money that is money only, and money
that is capital, is nothing more than a difference between their
form of circulation.” So writes Marx, and his “ Capital: a
critical analysis of capitalist production,” is a scientific demon-
stration of it. Our whole life is built upon commercial founda-
tions ; and any inquiry into the condition of people, whose
life-blood is the circulation of commodities, that does not lay
bare to the roots the production and distribution of such com-
modities, is utterly worthless and void of all scientific exactness.
Private ownership of land was the starting point of landlordism,
and the private ownership of the means of production is the
pivot of capitalism.
Mr, George’s definition of capital is:—•“ Capital is only a
part of wealth—that part, namely, which is devoted to the aid
of production, as distinguished from wealth used for the satis-
faction of desire; or as I think it may be defined, of wealth in
the course of exchange. Capital, therefore, increases the power
of labour to produce wealth, by enabling labour to apply itself
in more effective ways, as by digging up clams with a spade
instead of the hand, or moving a vessel by shovelling coal into a
furnace, instead of tugging at an oar,” etc. We see here, there
is lacking in the definition of capital the interpretation of its
cardinal principle, namely, the principle of buying in order to
sell, the production of things which are to be sold, out of which
profit or interest is to accrue to the capitalist. The principle of
capitalism is that a rolling stone gathers moss. Mr. George
also says;—“ Capital is not a necessary factor in production.
Labour exerted upon land can produce wealth without the aid of
capital, and in the necessary genesis of things must so produce
wealth before capital can exist.” Exactly so. But capital is not
merely a spade taking the place of hands in the digging of clams.
Spades existed ; buildings—beautiful buildings—were erected
before capital ; or the principle of buying and selling became a
thimble-rigging piece of business. The assertion that “capital
aids production ” is entirely baseless in so far as it expresses a
general principle, and in the assumption that it aids labour to
dig clams with spades wliere hands would otherwise be used.
Has Mr. George yet to learn that a machine is never introduced
in capitalist production, if human labour is cheaper? Unless a
machine can cheapen the cost of production of a commodity, no
capitalist ever dreams, least of all introduces, a machine into
production. Mr. George’s definition shows a complete non-
understanding of the whole position, and entire disregard for the
teachings of other men who have mastered the subject, and given


their labour freely to the world. It is a complete ignoring of
history, and the different modes of producing and distributing
wealth in different ages, examples of which are represented in
different countries to-day. Wealth was used in the production
of more wealth, and “ wealth in course of exchange ” obtained in
human society for ages before capital appeared on the scene.
And is so to this day. Human societies had been hunting and
fishing, settling and pasturing, digging and draining, producing
and exchanging ; weaving raiment, sowing wheat, building mud
huts and even cathedrals, and otherwise providing themselves
with the necessaries of life, for thousands upon thousands of years
before the word capital was born or had any meaning, and to
which the modem scientific meaning cannot be consistently
applied. The word capital was not used till human society had
reached the initial capitalist stage, when the product of labour,
cattle, were habitually, not exceptionally, changed for other
commodities. Capital now purchases labour in just the same
way that it purchases any other commodity. Therefore wealth,
“ moneyed wealth,” acting in this way acts specifically different
to the modes of producing, distributing and exchanging wealth
in other forms of society. Seeing civilised society in this light,
■with the capitalists and landlords in possession of the whole of
the resources of civilization (with their land and capital “ avling ”
production (!), enabling the wage labourers to use spades where
they had previously used their hands in digging clams !), it is idle
for any man to beat about the bush, spinning mystifying yarns
about “capital aids production,” “ wages not drawn from capital,”
“the just return to capital,” etc.
Without all that, we can see perfectly well that in modern
society wealth is produced in the greatest abundance by machinery
and the division of labour, and that the productive resources of
man more than equal his requirements. We can also see that
through the capitalists possessing the instruments of production,
and hiring wage labourers to produce commodities for sale, and
paying wages, which are but one third of the value* of the wealth
that has been produced, that the capitalists get richer and the
poor wage labourers get poorer. The system being founded on
the law of supply and demand, we can see that as the workers’
purchasing power is limited by the wages, which is but one-third
the value of the wealth produced, that the markets increase only
in an arithmetic, while the producing power increases in a
geometric ratio; thus, of course, increasing the producing power
and decreasing the purchasing power. Every new invention,
every labour-displacing machine, increases the intensity of this
evil, flooding the market with wares that cannot be sold, and
overcrowding the labour market with the willing anxious sons
* Value in this sense is meant to apply to exchange value, which a
study of Marx and Engels is necessary to appreciate. “The difference
between real value and exchange value is based upon this fact, namely,
that the value of a thing is different from the so-called equivalent given
for it in trade, i.e., that this equivalent is no equivalent.”— E. Engels.


men eager to toil, but who cannot be employed because the com-
modities already overstocking the markets cannot be sold. These
things, we must reiterate, cannot be sold because the people
cannot purchase them, although they have made them and require
them. This, then, is the deified law of supply and demand, with
its free trade maxim, “ Buy in the cheapest and sell in the dearest
market.” Never mind that it is human beings that are bought
in the cheapest labour market, and that it is the fruits of their
toil that are sold in the dearest market, and that the capitalists
get the advantage in the form of profits. That is no matter, or
is very good ;so says Mr. George. And as this l is the cause of
the havoc felt all round—even by the feverish gamblers them-
selves, who thus play fast and loose with the lives and happiness
of millions of men—-how can we look upon him as a man
yearning for equity among men.
INTEREST.
That “ interest ” plays this part in the affairs of civilised men
fhere can be no doubt, especially when we can call to mind the
Egyptian war, which was solely undertaken for the purpose of
exacting the interest, for the bondholders, on money lent to the
Khedive, which the principal and interest the poor Egyptian
people have to pay. But it is not alone interest that appears in
this form that Mr. George is so anxious to see rise ; it is the
profits or “interest” of the factory owner and importer as well.
So it will be necessary before coming to his “ remedy ” for poverty,
to examine his “interest” or “just return to capital” theory, as
it will have considerable bearing upon the “extirpation of
poverty ” scheme, and the “no conflict between capital and
labour ” absurdity.
“Of words in common use, that which comes nearest to
exclusively the idea of return for the use of capital, is interest,
which, as commonly used, implies the return for the use of capital,
exclusive of any labour in its use or management, and exclusive
of any risk, except such as may be involved in the security.”
“ When we speak of interest, or the return to capital, we mean
what goes to capital after its replacement or maintenance.”
These quotations from Progress and Poverty give us some clue
to what Mr. George means interest to apply to; but it is no
more than the clue to it, bec;iuse after capital has been replaced
and maintained it is perfectly clear that no more “ return to
capital ” can possibly stick to capital. So it cannot possibly mean
other than the “just return” to the capitalist, which is quite
another matter. The justice of the claim of the capitalist to
take wealth in this way, which is not for labour performed either
in its making or maintenance, is—according to Mr. George —■
because time has given a natural increase. Calves have grown
into cows, and seed has grown into corn, and new wine has grown
into old crusted port through the element of time generating an
increase. Yes, this is seriously one of the arguments adduced


by Mr. Henry George as the basis or one of the bases of interest.
Bastiat’s nursery tale about the lending of a plane, in which the
facetious Frenchman, in order to show how the capitalists who
have not made their capital should justly receive interest,
instances the case of a man who makes a plane, and lends it to
another man to plane up boards with. As the man is thereby
“ aided ” in his board planing work, he therefore, with the aid of
the plane, would be able to turn out a larger number of boards
than he otherwise could have done, had he continued to use a
shell or flint. Consequently he should return to the lender of
the plane not alone a new plane, because it has “ aided pro-
duction,” but a few boards as well, nicely planed up, about two-
thirds of them, just for usurious interest sake. This pretty tale
is like the explanations mothers give their children who ask in-
convenient questions. No doubt it is all very well, and good
enough for people who bow to wisdom; but it does not account
for the capitalists being in possession of planes that they have
not made. Mr. George, I suppose, seeing this very evident truth,
does not subscribe to it entirely. He comes to Bastiat’s relief
and improves upon the yarn by dragging in “ the element of time.' 1
He says : —“ It is evident that if there is any reason why William
at the end of the year should return to James more than an
equally good plane, it does not spring, as Bastiat has it, from the
increased power which the tool gives to labour, for that, as I have
shown, is not an element; but it springs from the element of
time—the difference of a year between the lending and return of'
the plane. Now, if the view is confined to the illustration, there
is nothing to suggest how this element should operate, for a plane
at the end of the year has no greater value than at the beginning.
But if we substitute for the plane a calf, it'is clearly to be-
seen that, to put James in as good a position as if he had not
lent, William at the end of the year must return, not a calf
but a cow And so if the plane had been devoted to
exchange, it might during the year have been turned over several
times, each exchange yielding an increase to James.” This,
interpretation of interest is exceedingly profound; but any
ordinary person would think that if a man tended a calf till it
became a cow, that he would want its equivalent from the owner
of the calf for the necessary labour involved in it. And an
equally ordinary person would wonder where, in the name of all
that is natural, any increase could come from during the ex-
changing peregrinations of a plane for a year. But, there lit is
Georgian economy ? It is food for babes, fit for those who are
not out of the cradle of Progress and Poverty. According to
this version of “ interest ” one part comes from increase in
growth, and the other through exchange. Let Mr. George speak
for himself :—“ As when we plant grain in the ground, or place
animals on a stock farm, or put away wine to improve with age,
the benefit arises not from the use, but from the increase. And
so, when we employ capital in another of these modes, and instead


of using a thing we exchange it, the benefit is in the increase or
greater value of the things received in exchange.” Thus saith
the prophet.
THE MORALITY OF INTEREST.
Now for the morality of it. “Thus interest springs,” says Mr.
George, “from the power of increase which the reproductive
forces of nature, and in effect analogous capacity for exchange,
give to capital. It is not an arbitrary, but a natural thing; it
is not the result of a particular social organization, but of laws
of the universe which underlie society. It is, therefore, just.”
Thus says the interest monger; and this is probably how the
cheat feels when he has exchanged something valueless for some-
thing of great value ; when he has exchanged a brass ring for a
sovereign. Doubtless he lays Mr. George’s dictum to heart that
“ the laws of the universe underlie it.” “It is, therefore, just.”
One hardly knows what to make of such absurdities at all,
emanating as they do from “ the greatest economist and social
reformer of the world.” I suppose H. M. Stanley was actuated
by this ethical law when he exchanged his valueless trifles for
exceedingly valuable ivory. It was a law of the universe, and
“ therefore just.”
And as for the “ reproductive forces of nature ” phase of
the argument, in which Mr. George improves upon Bastiat’s plane
yarn, by his calves into cows, seed into corn time process, which
he avers is the only “pure merino.” It is the principle upon
which the bankers, army captains, clergymen and others, who took
up shares in Guinness’s Dublin Stout Brewery, when it was floated
into a company, take their dividends. They think that their
dividends, the interest on their capital, comes from and is due to
the “ power of increase which the reproductive forces of nature ”
exert upon the Extra Double Stout, and not from the difference
between its cost of production and its selling price. Their divi-
dends do not come from this source, oh dear no ! The interest
comes from the “laws of the universe which underlie society. It
is, therefore, just.”
Now, as a matter of fact, corn, cows, old crusted port and
double-brown stout, are commodities; and depend, like iron,
bricks, diamonds, or planes, for their value, upon the amount of
labour that has been expended in producing them. And the
difference between the wage that is paid to the workers engaged
in the production of them, and the price that is received for them,
is the “ interest,” the surplus value, the unpaid labour that the
wage workers have produced, and which the capitalists receive.
"THE SOVEREIGN REMEDY.”
Our criticism has so far been mainly directed to the economic
fallacies of Progress and Poverty. It has not included in any
detail “ the simple yet sovereign remedy ” that is to abolish
poverty, and raise morals, by the State appropriation or confis


tion of rent. Although this is the case, we have still been able
to see that the mere taxation of land values is no more a remedy
for the extirpation of poverty, than is the throwing from a ship
in a storm of a few barrels of oil on the tempestuous waters of the
ocean, the means for absolutely abating the fury of the gale. We
have also seen that Mr. George’s definitions are as vague as. the
most whimsical vagary could make them. And we have found that
his denunciations are directed against people who are decidedly
less charlatanic and demagogic than himself. Still, in spite of
all this, we must bring out his “ sovereign remedy,” and examine
it in the light of day, and see wherein lies its virtue, its prac-
ticability, and its inconsistency.
The basis of Mr. George’s theory is that landlords alone
reap the advantages of other people’s labour, and that if all
taxation is abolished, save that upon land values, which is to be
appropriated by the State and collected by the landowners, no
one could possibly live without performing work, and complete
and final justice would prevail. He says : —“ What I, therefore,
propose as the simple yet sovereign remedy, which will raise
wages, increase the earnings of capital, extirpate pauperism,
abolish poverty, give remunerative employment to whoever wishes
it, afford free scope to human powers, lessen crime, elevate morals,
and taste, and intelligence, purify government, and carry
civilization to yet nobler heights, is —to appropriate rent hy
taxation .” This rhetorical flourish contains so much that is con-
tradictory, which the preceding pages devoted to wages and
capital have dealt with, which the reader can recall. But one
assertion stands out clear, and that the reader must not lose sight
of, and that is, “ to appropriate rent by taxation ” is to extirpate
pauperism. To emphasize the theory that rent is considered by
Mr. George to cause all the ills that society suffers from, and
especially the labourer, we must make another quotation. He
says :—“The essence of slavery is that it takes from the labourer
all he produces save enough to support an animal existance, and
to this minimum the wages of free labour, under existing con-
ditions, unmistakably tend. Whatever be the increase of pro-
ductive power, rent steadily tends to swallow up the gain, and
more than the gain.” Now, this assertion that rent swallows up
the gain, and causes the slavery of the labourer, cannot be borne
out by facts ; for, apart from our economic upsetting of the
assertion, we find that out of a hundred fortunes upon which
probate duty was paid in England last year, which amounted to
twenty-six millions sterling, only five millions, or less than one-
fifth of the whole, was left by landlords ; the remaining twenty-
one millions, or more than four-fifths of the whole, was left by
captitalists—who were mill owners, cotton brokers, bankers, etc.
So when Mr. George says :—“All I wish to make clear is that,
without any increase in population, the progress of invention
constantly tends to give a larger and larger proportion of the
produce to the owners of land, and a smaller and smaller pro


portion to labour and capital.” We must distinctly and decidedly
aver that so far as capital or the owners of capital are concerned,
it is grossly untrue. For the purpose of illustrating his argu-
ment he speaks in this wise ;— ‘‘ Take some hard-headed business
man, who has no theories, but knows how to make money: say
to him— ‘ Here is a little village ;in ten years it will be a great
city—in ten years it will abound with all the machinery and
improvements that so enormously multiply the effective power of
labour. Will in ten years, interest be any higher?’ He will
you ‘No.’ ‘Will the wages of common labour be any higher;
will it be easier for a man, who has nothing but his labour, to
make an independent living?’ He will then tell you ‘No. The
wages of common labour will not be any higher; on the contrary
all the chances are that they will be lower. It will not be easier
for the mere labourer to make an independent living; the chances
are that it will be harder.’ ‘ What then will be higher ?’ ‘Rent;
the value of land. Go, get yourself a piece of ground, and hold
possession.’ And if, under such circumstanoes, you take his
advice, you need do nothing more. You may sit down and
smoke your pipe; you may lie down like the lazzaroni of Naples
or the leperos of Mexico; you may go up in a balloon, or down
a hole in the ground ; and without doing a stroke of work,
without adding one iota to the wealth of the community, in ten
years you will be rich ! ”
This plausible rigmarole, in which rent is maintained to
be the only cause by which people can lie around and grow
rich, is in the highest degree absurd and false. In another
part of the book, page 284, we are told that—“ Everything
could go on as now, and yet the common right to land he fully
recognised, by appropriating rent to the common benefit.”
Precisely so ; that is exactly what we are contending. And
the nitrate kings, the railroad kings, the factory lords ; the
engineers of the steel trusts, oil trusts, cotton rings, and the
innumerable other combinations of capitalists will, “ without
doing one stroke of work,” and without “ lying around like
the lazzaroni of Naples,” ride around in fine carriages,
and sail in superb yachts, and 101 l in luxurious mansions, and
not in ten years grow rich, but remain rich, fabulously rich,
without having to wait ten years for its consummation. And
the common labourer will not find it easier “ to make an inde-
pendent living” than before. That there may not be the
faintest doubt in the mind of the reader that Mr. George con-
tends that rent taken by private individuals alone enables
people to loaf around and grow rich, we will take another excerpt
from the greatest work of “ the greatest economist and social
reformer of the world.” ' He says :—“ Thus, to relieve capital
and labour from all taxation, direct or indirect, and to throw
the burden upon rent, would be, as far as it went, to counteract
this tendency to inequality ; and if it went so far as to take
in taxation, the whole of rent, the cause of inequality, would


lie destroyed. Rent, instead of causing inequality, as now,
would tlien promote equality. Labour and capital would then
receive the whole produce, minus that portion taken by the
State in the taxation of land values, which being applied to
public purposes, would be equally distributed in public benefits.
That is to say, the wealth would be divided into two portions,
according to the part each had taken in the work of production,
The other part would go to the community as a whole, to bo
distributed in public benefits to all its members.” So ho
writes on page 311, whereon he says that if the State “ went
so far as to take in taxation the whole of the rent, the cause of
inequality would he destroyed .” Now let us turn to page 320,
wherein he shows that it will not do anything of the kind—
even from his own pen does he write it down. He says :
THE DUKE OF WESTMINSTER AND THE ASIDES OF
NEW YORK.
“ The Duke of Westminster, who owns a considerable part of
the site of London, is probably the richest landowner in the
world. To take all his ground rents by taxation would
largely reduce his enormous income, but would still leave him
his buildings and all the income from them, and doubtless
much personal property in various other shapes. He would
still have all he could by any possibility enjoy, and a much
better state of society in which to enjoy it. So would the
Astors of New York remain very rich.” Now, it is more than
evident to the most superficial person, that if the Duke of
Westminster continues to receive the income from the enor-
mous number of buildings that ho has, which the taxation of
land values does not touch, “the cause of inequality" would
not he destroyed As to whether the Duke of Westminster
should or should not, receive this income, is not the question.
The assertion of Mr. George is, that the State appropriation of
rent will destroy inequality, and “ the great cause which con-
centrates wealth in the hands of those who do not produce,
and takes it from the hands of those who do, would be gone.”
And he shows that it will not. Now, supposing we look at
whether the Duke of Westminster has ever contributed to
production in any way, and should, consequent!}-, receive the
income as his due reward. Why, the argument is reduced to
an absurdity. The ancestors of the noble Duke went over to
England in the train of William the Conqueror, and every
descendant of this tenth-century marauder has waxed fatter
and grown idler than his predecessors, through taking the
produce of the toilers from those remote times to the present
year of grace. So when Mr. George (same page, 320) says :
“ Wealth would not alone be enormously increased ; it would
be equally distributed. I do not mean that each individual
would get the same amount of wealth. That would not be equal
distribution, so long as different individuals have different


desires. But I mean that wealth would be distributed in accord-
ance with the degree in which the industry, skill, knowledge, or
prudence of each contributed to the common stock,” he cannot
surely mean that his Grace is going to devote any “ industry,
skill, knowledge, or prudence to the common stock,” all the
while he is to be in receipt of an income from his buildings that
will yield him, according to Mr. George, “ all he could by any
possibility enjoy.” How wealth can he equally or equitably
distributed in accordance with the degree in which producers
contribute to the common stock, when they who have not
produced, and necessity does not compel to produce, are going
to receive “ all they can by any possibility enjoy,” no one but
“ the greatest living exponent of the Single Tax” can divine.
And that this is contradictory no one can truthfully deny.
Take again the other case he cites, namely : The Astors of
New York. Ho (meaning after all taxation of land values
is taken by the State) says : “So would the Astors of New
York remain very rich.” And yet says in the same paragraph :
“ The monopoly of land gone, there need be no fear of large
fortunes.” Verily, this is a conundrum : The cause that will
enable people to “ remain very rich ” will at the same time
prev out large fortunes. This is like “ The peace of God, which
passeth all understanding.” That the Astors will remain very
rich, single or multiple tax notwithstanding, there can be no
doubt ; for they, like the Duke of Westminster, have plenty
of buildings from which they can draw a princely income.
The Astor estate includes over 1,000 buildings in the heart of
the city of New York, and one of the buildings alone is worth
£400,000. The taxes upon the estate amount to nearly
£IOO,OOO per annum; and the annual income is £1,000,000.
The late John Jacob Astor had an income of £3,287 per day,
or nearly £137 per hour. So we may safely conclude that
this family are quite as “ cute ” as that “ hard-headed man ”
which Mr. George trotted out as an awful example, who could
grow rich in ten years by taking a block of land whereon a
city was to grow ; and who could “go up in a balloon, or
down a hole in the ground, and without doing one stroke of
work, and without adding one iota to the wealth of the
community,” grow very rich. To comment further upon such
contradictions and palpable absurdities is to “ break a butterfly
on a wheel,” or point out that our earth is a spheroid and not
a flat pancake.
HERBERT SPENCER AND MR. GEORGE.
All that remains of Mr. George’s fine spun theory that now
needs to be discussed, is the difference between the plan
proposed by Herbert Spencer, which is in part quoted in
Progress and Poverty, and that suggested by Mr. George.
Spencer’s plan was definite and logical so far as it went ; and
he clearly saw that it would not “ cause any serious revolution


in existing arrangements.” He knew perfectly well that the
mere State appropriation of rent would not be the “ simple,
yet sovereign remedy," that would “ extirpate pauperism ”
and the rest of it. And he made no such claim for it. His
proposal, that the State, or Society, should own the land, and
lease it; and that State officials should collect the rent—
although it is at variance with his later writings—was, at
least economically, as sound as the ten per cent private
individual-o wner-lessee-collectorship proposal, advocated by
Mr. George.
And instead of Mr. George saying that Spencer endorsed
the State ownership of laud, or State appropriation of rent;
he should have said, that relatively to himself,Spencer 'proposed
it, and he endorsed it; for Spencer’s proposal was made as
early as 1851, and Mr. George’s as late as 1879. Other writers
in the last and present century also enunciated the same
theories ; and all Mr. George did was to adopt Spencer’s plan,
and propose to modify it by private collectorship of rent in
one part of his argument, and suggest its negation in another
part. He also, by-the-bye, waxed wroth at Spencer’s hesitation
at confiscation. Which is exceedingly interesting in the light
of his recent speeches in Adelaide, where he has been climbing
down his confiscation prop with the rapidity that a man slides
down a greasy pole after he has secured the coveted prize.
In Adelaide (21st April) he ridiculed the idea that the single
tax involved confiscation, and advanced, as an argument in
support of his assertion, that he had “ never said anything
about confiscation in the Colonies.” In Progress and Poverty ,
alluding to John Stuart Mill’s dictum—“ The individuals
called landowners have no right in morality and justice to
anything but the rent, or compensation for its saleable value ”
—Mr. George says, pretty decisively, “ In the name of the
prophet—figs ! If the land of any country belong to the
people of that country, what right, in morality and justice,
should the people pay its saleable value for their own P ” And
in reply to Herbert Spencer, remarking : “ Had we to deal
with the parties who originally robbed the human race of its
heritage, we might make short work of the matter !’’ Mr.
George says; “ Why not make short work of the matter
anyhow ? For this robbery is not like the robbery of a horse
or a sum of money, that ceases with the act. It is a fresh and
continuous robbery, that goes on every hour and every day.
It is not from the produce of the present—a robbery that
deprives of their birthright the infants that are now coming
into the world. Why should we hesitate about making short
work of such a system ? ” Yes, that is in the book. “ But in
South Australia there was a different state of things.” ~ .
And, “ the thing could not come all at once, and there must be
some modifications in the beginning.” . . . “ The people who
were raising objections were constantly ignoring that this


•would come gradually.” And these are the latter-day
utterances of the author, as a popular lecturer.
In short, the whole of his book is made up of the theory
that all the ills of society are due to landlordism, and that
the immediate confiscation of rent is the only cure for them.
Now, in Australia, he hesitates about his remedy, and anyone
with half an eye can see that misery and distress in this
country are not merely attributable to rent flowing into the
pockets of private individuals. Hence, when we And tirade
upon tirade against landlordism, and passage after passage
written for the purpose of pointing out that he alone pushes
the problem to its ultimate conclusion, and clamours for its
immediate adoption, we must take it all cum grano salis. The
salt is very necessary, considering that Mr. George says :
“We have weighed every objection, and seen that neither on
the ground of equity or expediency is there anything to deter
us from making land common property by confiscating rent.”
And that “ these principles have not been pushed to their
necessary conclusions, as I have pushed them, from the indis-
position to endanger or offend the enormous interest involved
in private ownership of land.”
How these claims for thoroughness, and the outpourings
of indignation against compromise, accord with his ridiculing
the idea that the Single Tax involves confiscation, only a fetish
worshipper can imagine, and only a casuist could reconcile.
One thing remains, before concluding, by giving a resume of
the theories and objections contained in the book that we
have been discussing, and that is to glance at Mr. George’s
proposed method for collecting the tax, and see wherein it
materially differs from that proposed by Mr. Herbert Spencer.
In one* passage of Progress and Poverty the use of the
machinery of the State is mentioned as the means for effecting
it; while in another passage, in a preceding pagef, the land-
lords as private individuals are to do it; “By leaving to
landowners a percentage of rent.” The State letting the land
and collecting the rent being reprehended ; but perhaps it
will be better to give this quotation in extenso, to make it
clear. “ Let the individuals who now hold it still retain, if
they want to, possession of what they are pleased to call
their land. Let them continue to call it their land. Let them
buy and sell, and bequeath and devise it. We may safely leave
them the shell, if we take the kernel. It is not necessary to
confiscate la,nd, it is only necessary to confiscate rent. Nor to take
rent for public uses is it necessary that any new machinery
should be created. The machinery already exists. Instead
of extending it, all we have to do is to simplify and reduce it.
By leaving to landowners a percentage of rent, which would
probably be much less than the cost and loss involved in
attempting to rent lands through State agency, and by making
* Pago 294. f Page 288.


use of this existing machinery, we may, without jar or shock,
assert the common right to land by taking rent for public uses.
.... In this way the State may become the landlord without
■calling herself so, and without assuming a single new
function.” That is what he urges on page 288, and eclipses
on page 294. “ And as under all fiscal systems some part of
the public revenues is collected from taxes on land, and the
machinery for that purpose already exists and could as well
he made to collect all as a part, the cost of collecting the
revenue now obtained by other taxes might be entirely saved
by substituting the tax on land values for all other purposes.”
Here clearly enough can be seen that the machinery that
collects a part, is in the future to collect the whole. In that
case it will he done by the agents, officials, or tax gatherers of
the State ; for it is they who collect a part, and who then will
collect the whole. And surely the landlords are not to make
one collection, and then the State officials collect from them.
But there, the proposal is too absurd to be entertained for one
moment, for there can he little, if any, doubt that if all the
individuals who are now landlords are to retain possession of
their land, they are going to do with it as they please. And
they are going to demand what rent they please. Where it
has hitherto been as much as they could exact, it would be to
their friends and relations the least that could be claimed.
In that way the family example would he followed by the
joint stock company, till land values fell within these charmed
circles to zero. As it would be a mutual rent-paying-rent-
collecting business to he handed over to the impersonal State,
the land value would he under such favourable conditions just
so much as they mutually pleased. The “ percentage ” that
the State would leave the landlords would he treated as a
huge joke ; and any such arrangement would he as impossible
of enforcement as are some of the musty statutes that were
passed in the reign of King John. But the fact is, Mr.
George’s improvement upon the plan of Herbert Spencer is no
improvement at all. Is it not a tax ? A single tax. A tax
upon land values that is to he taken by the State for the pur-
pose of running the State. And this tax is not a thing of air,
a something like dew or manna that falls from heaven, it is
to he so much wealth that labour has produced, and which
labour,’ of course, has got to pay. And if the tax is to be
imposed by the State, it will have to he collected by State
officials. The land that has value, that a tax can be imposed
upon, will have to he assessed —yes, by State officials ; and
the valuations upon such assessments, that is the tax upon
land values, will have to he State enactments, enforced by
State officials in the employ of the State, and, therefore, re-
sponsible to the State. Fancy, all the landlords —-the lame,
the halt, the blind; the old men, women and children who
now own land—suddenly finding themselves simply rent
collectors; periodically attending the Treasury, for the pur


pose of shooting into a big bin all their rents —less the - “ per-
centage ” that the Government would leave them. Then Mr,
George would exclaim—let us give it in his own words :
“ What an enormous saving might thus be made can be in-
ferred from the horde of officials now engaged in collecting
these taxes.” And may we not justly exclaim—What an
enormous saving of moonshine might have been made, if Mr.
George had stuck to type-setting instead of wasting his time
upon such social reforming. Social reform, save the mark t
It is simply social moonshine. Herbert Spencer’s proposal,
which was to merge separate ownership of land into the joint-
stock ownership of the public: the land to be let by the
nation to its members, and the rent to he collected by public
officials, was at least reasonable and economical. But Mr.
George setting out to supersede it, by neither public owner-
ship nor private ownership, and private colleotorship and
public collectorship of the rent; because it would, if carried
out on Spencerian lines, “ involve a needless extension of
governmental machinery—which is to he avoided,” is about
as naive a proposal as any man claiming to he an economist
could possibly make. No wonder that bourgeois economist.
Professor Thorold Rogers, whom the Single Taxers are for
ever quoting, says in his latest book, The Economic Interpre-
tation of History, Mr. George's theory “ is entirely the outcome
of economical fallacies, hitherto treated as indisputable
truths.”
TRADES UNIONISM.
In conclusion, we will review the ground we have covered,
and at the same time, in view of the great labour stuggles
that are moving the world, note Mr. George’s remarks upon
Trades Unionism: and in doing so we shall find that his
attitude towards the organisations of the workers for the
improvement of their condition is at a parity with the rest of
his premises and conclusions. lie shakes hands with the
Trades Unionists with one hand, and stabs them with the
other. He says, he speaks of Trades Unions without preju-
dice, “ for I am still an honorary member of the union which,
while working at my trade, I always loyally supported.”
And then he proceeds to say ;—“ The methods by which a
Trade Union can alone act, are necessarily destructive ; its
organisation is necessarily tyrannical. A strike, which is the
only recourse by which a Trade Union can enforce its demands,
is a destructive contest—the struggle of endurance involved
in a strike is, really, what it has often been compared to —a
war ; and like all war it lessens wealth. And the organization
for it must, like the organization for war, he tyrannical. As
even the man who would fight for freedom, must, when he
enters an army, give up his personal freedom and become a
mere part in a great machine, so must it he for workmen who


organise for a strike. These combinations are, therefore,
necessarily destructive of the very things which workmen
seek to gain through them—wealth and freedom.”
I, myself, am a member of a trade union, and therefore
know what I am writing about when I declare that this state-
ment of Mr. George concerning trades unionism is a gross
misrepresentation. It is like all his plausible assertions :
they contain a grain of truth and a whole conglomerate of
error. What seems to be a calm, dispassioned statement of
fact, is in reality a tissue of plausibility.
Now, before anything can be destroyed, it has to exist :
that is obvious. Therefore, as wealth and freedom do not
exist for the workmen, their organizations cannot possibly
be destructive of them. To destroy anything that does not
exist is a physical impossibility. The cause that brought
trades unions into existence was the want of something they
had not got: namely, the opportunity to obtain a decent
livelihood under healthy and pleasant conditions. And the
trade unionists find themselves impelled by the stern necessity
of present economic conditions to band together into trade
union combinations in order to realize it. That they give up
wealth and freedom in order to gain it is manifestly absurd.
And I can assure anyone who is not saturated with Georgian
delusions, that when the working classes obtain the opportunity
to live, move, and have their being under healthy conditions,
and amid pleasurable surroundings, that they are not going
to destroy them. Furthermore, I unhesitatingly declare that
only by closer and wider organization within every country,
and internationally with every country, can the workmen of
the world obtain for themselves, their wives and children, a
better state of things than the} - are enduring to-day. That
Mr. George's antagonistic attitude towards trades unions is
productive of evil was shown by his copyist, Mr. Farrell, who,
in his articles—“ The Philosophy of the Single Tax ” —stated
that “ Trades unionism is another reed upon which labour is
beginning to learn that it has leaned far too confidently. . . .
The fact is that trades unionism has no power, in itself, to
better the general condition of the whole field of labour, and
therefore can only help some labourers to the loss of others.
.... Like protection by tariff, trades unionism is warfare,
and not only warfare between labour and capital, but between
labour and labour ” Trades unionists, to any extent of course,
are not likely to be influenced by anything that Mr. George
or Mr. Farrell may write, in opposition to the only means that
the w orkers at present have of preventing themselves sinking
into a condition “ below that of dogs.” And certainly not
now, considering that Mr. George has now abandoned and
started ridiculing the only thing that he contended—however
illogically—could benefit labour : namely, the confiscation of
rent. The trades unionists are not likely to break up their


organizations because Mr. George says they are tyrannical; or
throw away this mighty power of combination that they
possess, because Mr. Farrell presumptuously declares it to be a
broken reed. In fact, this the trades unions of Australia
practically declared, when the Trades and Labour Council of
Sydney decided “ that Mr. Henry George was no friend of
labour.” The United Labour Party of New York were even
more emphatic, for the committee passed unanimously the
following resolution : “ That we consider the course pursued
hy Mr. Henry George, as a member of this Union Labour
Party, as unmanly, void of every principle of a gentleman—
his action that of a traitor —and not desiring his fellowship
any longer, we declare him expelled from this organization.”
More need not be said, other than to recall the main
features of our criticism. We set out to prove that Progress
and Poverty was not the profound, logical demonstration of
politico-economic phenomena that it is claimed to be. We
have shown—even in this brief sketch—that Mr. George has
not mastered the fundamental principles upon which modern
society is based. Consequently, his whole theory is nothing
but a castle in the air. We have shown that his definitions
are no clearer or precise than those he pretends to illuminate.
We have pointed out what ho denounces, and the manner in
which he writes of those who propose measures which cannot
be squared in the single tax circle. We have proved beyond a
shadow of doubt that if Mr. George is “ the greatest economist
and social reformer of the world,” all hope must be abandoned
of any higher stage in human development; and exclaim with
Schiller, “ The fool king rules this world.” Hut it is not so.
The groat upward movement of humanity rolls on unceasingly ;
and millions of men and women unweariedly proclaim the fact
through denunciation and through applause. Each are equally
hard to bear. But once this light of a brighter day dawns upon
men and women who would be brave and free, through the
medium of science, they swerve not one hair’s breadth from
the path that beckons them on to the heights ; whereon man,
woman and child will stand erect, and exercise their, full
powers by living in accord with all the principles that hsiman
enlightenment can give them. Then, and not till then, can
the inhuman struggle for existence be given its quietus. We
have mastered the blind forces of nature and made them bend
to our will. Wo now have to so control ourselves that the
work-a-day labour of the world shall not be an ever-grinding
ceaseless toil for the millions of men. We have to so order
our society that labour and pleasure, and pleasure in labour,
and wealth and happiness, shall be the common lot of the
common people of the civilised world. This is not too much
for any rational being to claim. And before it, the hying in
steamships and railways over oceans and continents, the
lightning passage of thought by electricity from polo to pole,


and the photographing and measuring of the stars will be
human achievements that will pale into utter oblivion before
it. But it is not to come by mere sentiment, or through hero
worship; it must be effected by intelligence and determination,
by the desire to have it and the will to achieve it. And when
this resolve assumes a definite and tangible form, then will
the shibboleths of “ supply and demand,” “ buying in the
cheapest and selling in the dearest market,” “ free compe-
tition,” and the other huckstering fetishes be dispelled, and
they will gather roun’d their hideous forms the cloak of night,
and vanish into the regions from whence, if man had been
wise, they never would have emerged. Their baleful influence
is now passing away, and all we have to do, is to see with
their annihilation that we hasten their departure ; and sub-
stitute for the havoc that they have wrought the harmony that
must prevail in every human community, where the forces of
production are held by the society, for affording to each and
all its members alike, the greatest breadth and length of life.
Erratum.
Page 16, ninth line from bottom, for community read commodity.
P. W. WHITE, PRINTER, MARKET STREET, SYDNEY.


