

A
REPORT
OF THE
SPEECHES
OF
CHARLES KENDAL BUSHE, ESQ.
(HIS MAJESTY'S SULICITOR GENERAL,)
IN THE
CASES
OF
EDWARD SHERIDAN, M.D.
AND
MR. THOMAS KIRWAN, MERCHANT,
FOR MISDEMEANORS
ALLEGED TO BE COMMITTED IN
VIOLATION
OF THE
CONVENTION ACT.
TO WHICH ARE ADDED,
THE LATE CHARGE OF THE
LORD CHIEF JUSTICE DOWNES;
AND THE
ACT OF PARLIAMENT.
DUBLIN:
PRINTED FOR M. N. MAHON, 116, GRAFTON-STREET ;
And to be had of all the Bookseller.
1812.


THE
SOLICITOR GENERAL'S
SPEECH,
ON
DOCTOR SHERIDAN'S TRIAL.
GENTLEMEN OF TllE JURI',
IOFFER myself to jour attention, with Very
little hopes of engaging it.- You have 'vvit-
nessed such displays of a splendid eloquence—
so many enthusiastic appeals have been made
to your passions you have been so' dazzled by
light, and so' heated by fire, that I must, at
least, wait until the temperature of your minds
shall have cooled—l must allow you to re-
cover from the intoxication of your feelings, or
I must despair of making any impression by an
address, in which,: it is my determination, to
confine myself exclusively to the only two to-
pics, which seem to have been forgotten this
day;—at least they seem to have been, thought
B


of comparative insignificance —the law and the
facts of the case now before you.
Gentlemen, it is not my inclination, or my
duty, and I disclaim the right to address you
upon any of those popular topics, which have
been so laboriously and passionately urged by
the Traverser’s counsel.—l recollect the place
in which I stand—l know, that I am in a court
of justice, and not in a house of parliament.
1 shall not stop to enquire how far those Gen-
tlemen may have abused that latitude of dis-
cussion, which is permitted to those who defend
an accused man. I wish not to abridge the
fair exercise of such a privilege—although I
may be allowed to observe,' that it has been in-
dulged in this day, without stint, and carried
to its utmost limits. Be that as it may, a colder
duty devolves upon me—l prosecute the man
whom they defend, and God forbid, that in
doing so, I should, appeal to any thing but your
understandings; or, if I had the talent of per-
verting. your minds, through the medium of
your prejudices—that I should avail myself of
such, a power,, in the prosecution of the indivi-
dual now upon trial, or any other man. You
yvill give me credit, Gentlemen, for the wish to
discharge my duty, and,not to transgress it; and
I am not, willing to impute to you a different
intention. lam sure, that it is unnecessary to
remind'you, that you are not impannelled to de-
cide upon those great,political and constitu-i


tlonal questions, which have been so much agi-
tated this day—that you are not legislators~hut
jurors; and that your oaths bind you to a fair
verdict, between the Crown and the Traverser.
But it has become very necessary to observe
upon the confusion of jurisdiction, which has
been contended for this day ; and the very unfair
attempts, which have been made, to induce you
to usurp the authority of the Court. Gen-
tlemen, your exclusive province is to decide
upon the facts , in controversy between the par-
ties ; instead of which, you have been clamor-
ously called upon to interpret the laws of the
land. The mummery of sending up into a jury*,
box, a dozen copies of an act of Parliament,
has been resorted to, and you have been called
upon to decide upon its policy, as if you were
senators , and to construe its enactments, as if
you were lawyers. You have been told, that
its provisions are difficult of interpretation—
that learned counsel have differed upon them;
and it has been objected to the Convention
Law, that it requires professional astuteness to
expound it;—and yet the same advocates call
upon twelve respectable citizens, to resolve,
upon their oaths, all those intricate and en-
tangled questions, as if your habits, or your
education, or your studies, enabled you to decide
them. If this be fair, and justifiable in the
Counsel for the Traverser, it would not, at least,
be fair in me; and I protest solemnly, that if


I knew a popular topic, upon which I could
mislead you upon the law, I would not urge it
to you —and I assure you, that in what I shall
address to the Court, upon the Convention Act,
I shall think myself precluded from directing a
a single observation, or a single look to the jury-
box,
I know, Gentlemen, that we live in extraor-
dinary times ; I know that factious and wicked
men have taken the most' unjustifiable means to
pre-occupy and mislead the public mind—l know
that the press has overflowed with the most au-
dacious and libellous publications, presump-
tuously dictating to the Judges of the land, in
the discharge of their duty, and inculcating
upon Juries, a contempt for the authority of the
Court ;s—l know that county meetings have been
convened throughout the island, that Country,
Gentlemen might enlighten the courts of justice,
by theirxeadings upon acts of Parliament; —and
I know that the Keeper of the Great Seal has
been taught the law by a Justice of the Peace.
But, Gentlemen, I trust in God, that those
monstrous and alarming novelties may never find
their way within the walls of a court. They well
become the agitators, and the demagogues out of
doors, who, without such practices, could not
inflame, or mislead the public mind : but I trust
that the temple of justice may never be pro-
phaned by doctrines so offensive to the principles
4


©f, the Constitution. That Constitution defines
with rigid exactness, the respective duties of the
Bench, and the Jury-box. Every constitutional
mind is appalled by the alarm which is excited,
by confounding the functions of those contiguous
tribunals. Every one would be shocked hy the
notion, that the Judge should interfere with the
Jury’s right to decide upon the fact, and yet it
is not more revolting to constitutional maxims,
than’that the Jury should arrogate to. them-
selves to pronounce upon the law.- —They are,
equally, encroachments, and invasions upon
our pure administration of public justice, and
if ever they be permitted, woe to the Con-
stitution ; it could not survive such an assault,-
What is there in the Constitution, the subject
of so much eulogy and declamation this day, so
valuable, as the administration of justice? W r c
love the Constitution, because it gives us, for
the preservation of public peace, and the adjust-
ment of civil rights, a perfect administration of
justice, unknown to other countries, which, in
its turn, supports, maintains, and preserves that
Constitution. Woe then to that Constitution,
(I borrow the strong exclamations pf Mr. Goorm)
woe to it, when its first principle is invaded, and
its corner stone subverted. I make every allow-
ance for the advocate; —I know how much his
duty to his client demands from him.—He may
stand excused for calling upon you, for this pre-
posterous usjirpalion of the Court’s authority.
5


but you could not stand justified, if you obeyed
the call. If this were a civil action, if a ques-
tion of property depended between two parties,
should the counsel call upon you to break away
from the Court, and construe a limitation in a
deed, or a devise in a will, —should you not laugh
at them ? What then is the difference ? If you
would not have a right, in the one case, how can
you in the other, or does a trial of this nature
warrant your assumption of power, because, not
the property of your fellow-citizens, but the
peace of your country is at stake ? If any man, —
not an advocate, —gave you such advice, would
you consider him as a friend ; —and when an ad-
vocate gives it, —though you may forgive him
for his zeal, —will you act upon his counsel ?
And yet. Gentlemen, if this be justifiable, where
is the confusion to stop ?—-Why have they not
called upon the judges to decide upon the weight
of the evidence, and the credit of the witnesses ?'
Why have they stopped halfway, in the discharge
of their duty; and when they threw the statute
into your hox, why did they not send up the
issue to the Bench ?
I own that I am warm upon the subject, and
anxious to establish this distinction. No man,
attached to the constitution or acquainted with
the laws of his country, can be indifferent upon
such a topic but lam more—l am interested
in it. My Right Hon. and Learned Friend, and


mj’self,—as the sworn advisers of the Crowji in
matters of law, —have given our opinions upon
the construction of this statute, when called
upon to do so; —and if we have,been wrong, in
that opinion, we are deeply responsible.—Of
my own opinion, I think with unaffected humi-
lity ; when it is supported by his, I feel an
honest confidence, that it is not mistaken; but
even that confidence, I feel, not without defer-
ence to those learned and respectable persons,
who may have seen the matter, in another point
of view. I expect from them the same charity,
and the same fairness. They will not impute to
us more, than error of judgment; and if we are
mistaken, let us stand rebuked, —though not
abashed, because no one will ascribe more than
mistake to us. Let us stand rebuked, I say, but
by whom? Who is to judge between us, and
those, who differ from us ?—Are we, and our
characters, at the mercy of a Jury, usurping the
interpretation of the law ?—Are we to be judged
by the presumptuous nonsense of Newspaper cri-
ticism ? Is our knowledge of the laws of our
country to be appreciated by the ravings of
Country Gentlemen, declaiming upon acts of
Parliament ?—God forbid ! —We appeal, from
such arrogated and audacious tribunals, to you,
my Lords, the sworn Judges of the Land—You
are to interpret this Act of Parliament, upon
your oaths, and your high responsibilities. By
you, let us be judged,—we disclaim all other


authority—if you say, that wc have beet? right>
we have done our duty to our Sovereign, and
our Country;—lf we have erred, I repeat it again,
we are deeply answerable.
To decide this question, and to have the law
ascertained, and the public mind quieted upon
this important subject, have those prosecutions
been institutednot for the purpose, as has
been unjustifiably asserted, —of persecuting
Doctor Sheridan, or of subjecting any honest
man to punishments Doctor Sheridan has been
warmly panegyrized, and though I have not the
honour of knowing him, I doubt not, that he
deserves the eulogies, which, in a trial of this
nature, have been so unnecessarily heaped upon
him. I will go further, and say, that I doubt
not but that he conceives himself to have acted
Justifiably, and violated the laws of his Country,
without any intention of doing so. I can well
believe, that he, and other worthy men, have
acted under those mistaken impressions, which
the misrepresentations of the Convention Act
have suggested to so many;—but it is not the
less true, that if he has violated that law, he
must be convicted. No man can be so weak or
malignant, as seriously to impute to Govern-
ment the wish to inflict upon him those mi-
serable sufferings, which have been anticipated,
and deplored with so much misplaced pathos—
example, and not punishment, is our object. If*


he be innocent, in point of fact, and has been
falsely accused; nay, if a reasonable doubt
can be entertained of his guilt, or if you shall
hear from the Court, that,*in point of law,
he has not violated the statute, I trust, that you
may acquit him. None of his advocates, or
friends, will rejoice in such an event, more than
myself—but if you should acquit hint; let your
acquittal rest upon some such solid principles as
I have suggested, which will justify you to your
Country, your consciences, and your God. I
only deprecate that most formidable of evils, —
characteristic of bad times, —a popular verdict,
which has been clamorously demanded from you
this day,—a verdict which confounds every
principle dear to public justice, and exhibits a
Jury in the disgraceful act of trampling on the
laws, >vhich they are sworn to administer.
Let me now call your attention to those facts,
upon which you are bound to decide. Doctor
,I Sheridan is .charged with having participated in
an election at 'Llffey-street Chapel, on the Slst
of July, of five members, to represent the Catho-
lics in a Committee, (appointed on the 9th of
July, at an Aggregate meeting,) on the pretence
of petitioning Parliament, for a repeal of the
penal laws. In order to establish that fact, two
witnesses have been produced, to prove what
occurred at the meeting in Liffey-strect Chapel,
who had been sent there, for the purpose of
c


observing what should pass. If they have sworn
truly, they have proved the charge, in the most
distinct and satisfactory manner; and upon com-
paring theirtestimony with,that of Mr. Huddle-
ston, you will observe, that the number of paro-
chial delegates, whom they represent to have
been elected on the 31st, exactly corresponds
with the nilmber, which he states to have been
announced on the 9th of July. Those persons
have been cross-examined, with the utmost seve-
rity, and have been treated, as if their story had
been, from the beginning to the end, a shameful
fabrication; every artifice has been practised to
embarrass, or confound them—they have been
exposed to that unequal contest, in which persons
of their rank, or indeed, of any rank, are exposed,
when opposed to a professional antagonist. The
vulgar cry of spy and informer has been halloed
against them ; and any man, who heard the
cross-examination, would believe, that the Coun-
sel had been instructed to deny the existence of
any meeting at Liffey-street Chapel, upon that
day. But, Gentlemen, no witnesses have been
produced to impeach their moral character, or
contradict their testimony; they swore, that Mr.
Kirwan and Dr. Burke, and many more persons,
now in this Court, were present, and partook in
the election. If their story were a fabrication,
why not produce those Gentlemen to contradict
it ? Why not prove, by them, that they were not


present at any such meeting, or that if they were.
Doctor Sheridan was not ? I need not pursue
this argument further—the Counsel, who was
instructed to controvert the fact, has saved me
the trouble; he asked those witnesses, whether the
resolutions which Dr. Sheridan proposed, at that
meeting, were not reduced to writing, and actu-
ally put his brief into their hands, calling, on
them to read the resolutions, which really passed.
Well, then, we have got so far, as that there was
such a meeting: that Dr. Sheridan presided at
it—and what remains ? Why, a question, upoji
the accuracy of their recollection, as to the sub-
stance of the resolutions. Gentlemen, unim-
peached men have given you their oaths upon
that fact, and who has contradicted them ? Did
you not, yesterday, hear the whole bar of the
Traverser’s Counsel exclaim in chorus, that they
had 500 witnesses to contradict them, and that
the resolutions were not as stated. What has
become of the 500 ? Not one of them has been
produced;—Mr. Kirivan is by my side ; Doctor
Burke is in my eye,—they were here yesterday—
surely, if they had been produced, and had
stated, upon their respectable characters, that
the'Crown’s witnesses had been mistaken; —if
the original of the Counsel’s brief, containing the
genuine resolutions, had been exhibited, and de-
monstrated the mistake; surely you would not
have been left in your present darkness ; —but no


such light is afforded to you. Witnesses in
Court, who could contradict ours, are withheld—
the written document in their hands is suppress-
ed ; and you are called upon rashly to disbelieve,
what they will not controvert; —to impute, by
your verdiet, perjury to the witnesses for the
Crown, and to declare upon your oaths, that you
do not believe, that which they will not deny.
Gentlemen, I am at a loss, in discharging this
duty, to discover, what I am to reply to—one
Counsel asserts his client’s innocence, in point
of fact —the other glories in his crime, in point
of law- —nay, the one half!of each Counsel’s
speech is an answer to the other: they alternately
rail against the witnesses, or declaim in favour
pf the offence. What has been their conduct,
as to Mr .Huddleston, the remaining witness?
What has been left unsaid, or unattempted, in
his cross-examination ? Two hours of precious
and irrecoverable time have been consumed, in
attempting to discredit a witness, who has only
proved tlie proceedings of the Aggregate Meet-
ing, of the ,9th of July', at which Lord Fingall
presided. , No suborned miscreant, who had
attempted to take away an innocent man’s life,
was ever treated w|th more asperity-—no advo-
cate, retained for a felon, at the Old Bailey , ever
plunged tnore desperately through a cross-exa-
mination, trembling for the wretch, whose only
defence was, the hope of confounding his prose


cutor, or supporting his alibi. The man’s feel-
ings were agonized—he was stretched on a rack
and tortured—-his. private life anatomized—his
most secret sentiments scrutinized-—he was call-
ed upon to swear to his religious opinions ; and,
even in this Court, public disgust was clamor-
ously excited, by exhibiting him as a recreant
from the religion of his ancestors—his birth, his
connexions, his country, his faith, his morals, his
circumstances, all ransacked—all exposed. He
was asked was he not a Deist, was he not an
Atheist, had he not been a Catholic, was he not
a Protestant, had tie not been an Officer, was he
not a Reporter for the Newspapers, was he not
an Englishman —nay, to crown the climax, was
he not a Camhridgesh /re-man, had he not taken
notes, and lost his memory; 'had he not wished
for an employment, and lost his conscience.
What would any stranger, who came into this
Court, have supposed, who had looked upon the
victim on the table, and heard, and seen the
Counsel at the Bar ? Would he not have ima-
gined, that the most shameful fabricator of the
most impudent lie was undergoing well deserv-
ed chastisement for his falsehood ? What did the
Counsel himself say to him ? Sir, I apprise you
that lam shaking your credit. Gentlemen, why
so shake his credit ? It required not the storm
of Mr. Goold’s eloquence to subvert it—a
breath frbm Lord Fingall would have dissipated


it. That Noble Personage sat under jour box
at the moment, and sits there now—why did he
not, why does he not come forward and assert,
either that such a meeting did not exist, or that
he did not preside in it, or that no such resolu-
tions were passed ? His oath I should not require ;
were he on his honour (knowing, as I do, his
high reputation for public, and for private
worth,) to have so declared, I protest for one,
that I should abandon so much of this prosecu-
tion, as depended upon any assertion, which he
should so contradict: I see other noble and
honorable men about me, —all alleged by
Huddleston to have been present on that occasion.
Why have none of them come forward ? How
do they and my Lord Fingaix reconcile it to
their feelings, to sit by, and hear it asserted, that
the witness has sworn falsely, in charging them
with having assisted at the meeting of the 9th of
July f Will they say, that they were not at such
meeting, or will they have it understood, that
they and their friends struggle not for justifica-
tion; but impunity? Is it the fact of the assembly
that is controverted ? I have not a right to ap-
peal to public notoriety—l must observe upon
evidence merely—but I may observe also upon
the want of it; and I ask again, if that fact be
denied, why not produce those persons m ost capa-
ble of contradicting it? 1 ask, into what has
shrunk the pompous triumph of the defence ? I


ask, what has become of the reiterated assertions.
Within and without this Court, of the legality of
the delegation ? It is reduced to a miserable de-
nial of the fact, without the production of a wit-
ness to support it. Perhaps it will be said that
the meeting was not denied, but that the purport
of the resolutions has been misrepresented by
Huddleston. With what an argument has Mr.
Goold furnished me upon this topic ? Do you
remember the zeal and the fire, I had almost
said, the rage, with which, after labouring to
shew, that there was no such assembly at all, be
addressed the witness, and said :—Sir, upon your
doth, -were not all passed that day ,
reduced to writing, and have they not been pub-
lished with Lord Fingall’s signature in every
newspaper in Dublin? Such was the question.
Gentlemen, for God’s sake, what has become of
all the newspapers in Dublin ?. Why has not
the secretary, who transcribed the resolutions,
and sent them to the press > be.cn produced ? I
ask again, why the noble chairman, now sitting
before me, and who signed them, has not been
produced? The word tutored, has been warmly,
I shall not use a stronger phrase, certainly with
more warmth than decorum, applied to the wit-
nesses for the Crown. It is a vulgar and a silly
insinuation, which the counsel has been instruct-
ed to make. Who is so absurd, as to suppose,
that those who carry on these prosecutions.


would condescend to such practices ? I hate no
fear, in the face of our profession, and the public/
to offer our characters, as a refutation of the
slander P -What interest has any man in .the con-
viction of Doctor Sheridan , that' he should
achieve it by subornation ? What motive can
be imputed to any person, acting for the Crown,
but a wish to assert the law, and maintain the
public peace ? Those, who deal in such insinu-
ations, would do well to remember the nature
of their own defence, consisting in clamorous in-
vective against the credit of witnesses, whom,if
false, they could contradict, and will not. Let
me not be answered, by the trite observation that
Lord Fingall and his friends, and Dr. Burke ,
and Mr. Kirwan; could not be produced, because
they could not be asked a question, the answer
to. which might criminate themselves. The
reply, is obvious. .If the witnesses for .the Crown
have sworn falsely, those gentlemen could not
criminate themselves, their, answers.must acquit
them and Doctor ; Sheridan ; and, it is .only
upon the supposition, that the testimony for the
prosecution is true, that any,danger could result
from producing them. Suppose that the wit-
nesses for the Crown are base,and infamous, yet
the most base and infamous men may swear truth.
Is there no corroboration of their evidence, ,in
the silence of those, who could contradict them ?
Why, has no one been produced to account for.


Or deny the coincidence alleged by them, that oil
the 9th of July, Lord Fingall announced a con-
vention of a particular kind, and that in twenty-
two days afterwards an election takes place in
Liffey-street, returning for Mary's parish the
exact same number of delegates, which had been
required for every parish by Lord Fingall’s
proclamation ? Why has the defence been con-
lined to unfounded assertion, and popular cla-
mour ? I ask you again, what is the fair result of
such a defence ? I ask you, will you venture,
upon such a defence, to convict the Crown’s wit-
nesses of perjury ?—I ask you, will you venture
to hang a doubt upon their testimony, when the
Traverser’s counsel could have removed every
doubt, and refused to do it? I tell you again, in
anticipation of what you shall hear from the
Bench, that if you entertain a doubt upon the
fact, you ought to acquit; but pause,—pause
awfully, before you entertain it. It must be no
light, capricious doubt ; such as man finds not
as a justification, but seeks for as an excuse. It
must be such a doubt, as a sound understanding
can suggest to an honest heart. If you can en-
tertain such a doubt, acquit. I will not use the
confident language of the Traverser’s counsel;
I will not say, find such a verdict, if you dare ;
but I say, find it, if you can.
0


My 'Lords, I turn from the Jury to five
Bench, —to address you, upon the law of the
case. I have little more to do, than to go over
the same ground which the Attorney Genera:!
has trod "before me, at the risque, 'common to all
who follow him, of effacing his impressions.
Mr. Burrowes has, however, so strenuously con-
tended for a different construction, that I am
bound to advert to Ms argument, and, if l ean,
refute it. Lie has reasoned on three several pro-
positions : Tirst, That the delegation, prohibited
by the Statute, is one for general representation;
anti hot One for a particular purpose. Secondly,
That the word pretence means falsepretencc,and
not'real purpose, and that if the Object of the
delegation be really to petition, no offence ii
committed: and Thirdly, that by the proviso in
the statute, the right df petition, *by the means
of delegation, is saved. I shall invert his order,
and beginning with his third proposition, which
relies upon the proviso, 1 shall only remark, thaft
it must stand or fall with his second, and abide
its fate,’because if it be admitted that pretence
means real purpose, then his construction of the
proviso, which, lie says, saves something mit of
the enactment, becomes nugatory; for then'the
statute'would prohibit real petitioning by dele-
gation, and the proviso would save it, that is,
the statute would do nothing. He must, there-
fore, shew tha t pretence means false pretence, or


the proviso is of no avail to him. In considering
that proposition, I shall not. resort to poets or.
dictionaries for the meaning of the word, but.
being-in a court of law, shall, at once call your
attention to an act of parliament, enacted in Eng-
land, 13. Car. 2. 5. upon the same subject, .and
from which our Convention Act has been copied,
with as little variation as the different circura-.
stances of the two countries would permit. The
object of both wps to restrain the abuse of the
right of petitioning. In England , the mischief
to be prevented was the collection of mots ; in
Jreland, the assembling of self-created parlia-
ments. and conventions. Every one, who knows
the history of the two countries will, admit that
such were the respective evils at the times those
laws were enacted; and it will be seep that they
were made in pari materia. The word pretence
is used in both ; and if I can shew, that in the
English act, it does not mem false pretence, but
purpose and object, whether real or fictitious, I
certainly shall have gone some length in ascer-
taining its signification in the Irish statute,
which has been borrowed from the English ,
The title of the English act is, “ An act against
tumult and disorders, upon pretence of pre-
c.f paring or presenting public petitions or other
“ addresses to his Majesty or the Parliament. 1 '
The title of the Irish act is, “ An act to prevent
«■ the election or appointment of unlawful as*


fC semblies, under 'pretence of preparing public
“ petitions, or other addresses to his Majesty or
tc the Parliament.” The preambles are almost
(considering the difference of objects,) the same.
Now the very object of the English act is to li-
mit the number of persons who shall prepare or
present petitions to the King or Parliament, to
twenty in the one case, and ten in the other ; and
it lias been the law of England from that day to
this, that no greater numbers can prepare or pre-
sent petitions, however real: Now, in this act,
the word pretence is used exactly as in the Irish ;
“ no persons -whatsoever shall repair to the
King or Parliament, upon pretence of present-
** ing or delivering any petition, &c. &c. above
“ the number of, &c. &c.” It will remain, then,
for those who can, to shew, that in the two sta-
tutes the same word is to have two different
meanings. If it be asked, what meaning is to
be given to the proviso in the Irish statute, the
answer is obvious. It is not an exception or
saving out of the act of any thing enacted in it;
for whatever is so excepted’ is to be found in a
distinct saving’ in the enacting clause; but it is
such a provision as, your Lordships well know, is
to be found in several statutes, in the nature of
a protestation, to exclude at| unjust conclusion.
It is as much as to say, let no one suppose that
this act invades the sacred right of petitioning.
It only enacts that the right of petitioning shall


not be exercised through the medium of delegated
assemblies.
Let me now call your attention to the absur-
dity which must follow from giving to pretence,
in the Irish statute, the meaning of false pretence.
The first section declares that all assemblies,
committees, or other bodies of persons elected,
or in any other manner appointed to represent
any portion of the people, under the pretence of
petitioning for, or in any other manner, procur-
ing an alteration of matters established by law,
arc unlawful assemblies ; and it shall be lawful
for any mayor, sheriff, justice of the peace, or
other peace officer, and they are thereby required
to disperse all such unlawful assemblies, and, if
resisted, to enter into the same, and apprehend
all persons offending in that behalf. Now if
pretence means, false pretence, no magistrate
would be warranted in dispersing a meeting,
really and l)ona fide assembled for the purposes
of petitioning, and who is to decide that delicate
and difficult question ? Can it have been the in-
tention of the legislature to entrust such a deci-
sion to any peace officer ; and if so, how is he to
decide it ? How is he to ascertain, whether the al-
leged petition be real, or fictitious, except by
permitting the assembly to meet, and watch its
conductuntil it shall have concluded its business ?
That is, suffer it to adjourn sine die, in order to
determine, whether he ought to disperse thpsQ


who have ceased to assemble. The statute also
authorizes him, if resisted, to enter into the
meeting; if, then, pretence means false pretence,
the legality of his entry must depend, not upon
his inference from his observations of the pro-
ceedings,—for, upon this supposition, he has
not been allowed to observe them, —but upon
the soundness of his conjecture, as to wfiat he
should observe, if admitted; —that is, he will
be a trespasser, or not, according to the guess
which he may make outside the door, as to the
teal object of the meeting within:
The second section is not pointed at the as*,
sembly when met, but at those, who in any way
partake, or concur ip the election to it, and they
axe declared guilty of a high misdemeanor, nay,
this is extended to all those, who publish
or give notice of such an election. Now, anT
nouncing the election, or partaking in it, are
clearly offences, which may be committed,
and completed, although the assembly itself
should never meet; but according to the
construction contended for, they could never he
prosecuted, until not only the assembly had met,
but until it should be ascertained by its meeting,
that its pretence of petitioning was fictitious;
that is, the present prosecution is premature,
It should have lain in abeyance until the Ca-
tholic Committee had met, and until the nature
of its ipstitutipn been proved, by the courso


of its proceedings. No interpretation of a
statute can be sound, which leads to such ab-
surdities ; and I cannot try this reasoning by
a fairer test, than by supposing, that all which
has been urged in argument, were inserted in
the statute. If nonsense should be the result,
the argument cannot be good. Suppose the
act to have stated, that all such assemblies were
at the first moment unlawful, provided that it
should appear, after their sittings were con-
cluded, that their petition were fictitious. Sup-
pose it enacted, that every peace officer ■should
disperse them, provided always, that he was of
opinion, after they had met, that their peti-
tion was fictitious. Suppose it -enacted, that
every peace officer should be at liberty to enter
the meeting, provided that, before be entered it,
he should be convinced, that no real petition
was to be proposed in it. Suppose it enacted,
that, merely to publish a .notice of an election
for such a meeting, should be u high misde-
meanor, provided always, and not otherwise,
that thereafter it -should appear, that no real
petition was -the object of the meeting. I can-
not conceive a fairer test, by which to try, -and
decide the-construction of this act. .
■Look again at the saving in the statute, for
the Houses in Parliament and Convocation. If.
pretence means false pretence, then the legist
lature has declared, that Parliament alone shall


meet on the false pretence of procuring an altef-*
ation of matters established by law. Look at
the words* “ under pretence of petitioning for,
* e or in any manner procuring, an alteration of
* c matters established by law in church and
<c state.” If pretence means false pretence, in
the first part of this sentence* which relates to
petitioning, it must, in the second, which re-
lates to procuring alteration, and then the mean-
ing will be* that all assemblies are unlawful,
except the Parliament* which pretend falsely to
procure such alteration* and the necessary in-
ference must be, that all assemblies, except the.
Parliament, are lawful which profess truly to do
so. This absurdity must follow* unless pre-
sence, in the same sentence* shall be held to
have two opposite meanings.
. I dome now to Mr. Burrowes’s first argu-
ment, which* as well as I can understand it, is,
that there is a distinction between general re-
presentation, and delegation for a particular
purpose; and he has endeavoured to establish
that distinction, by reading the proceedings of
some assembly, against which, he says* this sta-
tute was levelled, and which announced an in-
tention to usurp' legislative authority* and to
change the fundamental laws and establishments
of the country ; and he says, that such an as-
sembly would be within the act, but that an
assembly, for the exclusive purpose of peti


tioning, would not. 1 - I apprehend that his argu-
ment is built upon a sophism, and a mistake of
the principles of this law. It is not, as he'
would suggest, a law against bad objects, to
be achieved by the assembly when met. It is
a law against the very act of assembling. • It is
a law founded on the same principles as the
Whiteboy Acts, in which that rage for associ-
ations, which always has been the characteristic
of all ranks in this country, is denounced, by
declaring it a high crime and misdemeanor, for
persons assuming any name, or badge, or de-
nomination, not usually assumed by his Ma-
jesty’s subjects, to assemble, although no act ; has
been committed, or no arm raised. It is a law
to prevent mischiefs, not to punish them when
committed—it is a law passed on the recollec-
tion of the various conventions, and assemblies,
and associations, which had, from time to time,
threatened the peace of the country. Igo not
tack to former centuries—the Dungannon
Meeting, the Volunteer Convention at the Ro-
tunda, the meditated Parliament at Athlone , are
fresh in the recollection of many of us. In
contemplation of those mischiefs, which rqme-
sentative associations are calculated to produce,
was this act framed ; and the crime, denounced
by it, is complete, whenever a representative
body is elected, with the view of procuring a
change in matters established by law, though
the mode of doing so should be by petition.
E


Mr. Bunnowfcs seems to think, that in order to
complete this crime, legislative authority must
be usurped. Does he mean to say, that no as-
sembly is within this act, unless it displaces Par-
liament, and enacts laws, and imposes taxes ?
Does he mean to argue, that the Legislature had
declared that to be a misdemeanor, which the
Jaw had before declared to be high treason?
Must the act, which speaks of petitioning Par-
liament,. only apply to assemblies, which have
displaced Parliament ? What would Mr. Bur-
howes say of an elected and delegated assembly,
if such a ope should exist, which, professing to
prepare, a petition, should sit from July to
February, and, day after day, and. week after
week, assemble and debate,, and do every thing
but petition,—which should publish inflamma-
tory and incendiary discussions, upon all political
topics; which should mimic and travesty all
the proceedings of Parliament,—appoint com-
mittees—and receive reports ; which should su-
persede. and bestride the Legislature, by the dis-
cussion, of public, and the courts of justice, by
the discussion of private grievances ? If such an
assembly should exist, would he say that, because
it abstained from imposing taxes and enacting
laws, it would not fall vvithin the Convention
Ad ;—that its innocence should depend, not upon
.what it did, —but what it did not; —that its
members should not be guilty of a misdemeanor,
because they were innocent of treason g


I think, if he said so, he would much mistake
the law; I think, if I said that their guilt consist-
ed in such acts as I have supposed, I should mis-
take it too—we should both be wrong, and our
cbmmon sophism would be, that we tried the le-
gality of the assembly by the test of its acts, and
not by the test of its constitution, The framers
of this law well knew the tendency of such asso-
ciations as it prohibits—they well knew that
worthy and honourable men might engage in
them, as I have no doubt that worthy, and ho-
nourable, and loyal men would engage ip the Ca-
tholic Committee, with the purest and the best of
motives. But the policy of the law is pointed at
the probable mischiefs, and the very preamble of
the act is directed to the dangers, which, in the
language of the statute, may ensue. • What man
can answer for the intermixture of those very
different characters which must find their way
into such ah assembly ? I know that the Catho-
lic Nobility and Clergy, a,mongst whom are to
be found the most respectable of men, were to be
constituent parts; but I know that every county
was to send ten, and every parish in this City to
send five members. Who will answer for the
description of persons that must find their way
into this motley congregation? It is not from
such men as Lord Fingall, and Lord Southwell,
and Sir Edward Bellcw, and the other honor-
able men of the Catholic persuasion, that such
danger is to be apprehended —short lived, indeed.


would be tbeir influence. Perhaps the worst
men would not be the most numerous in this as-
sembly—it signifies not; a small minority of agi-
tators is always sufficient for mischief' The his-
tory of mankind shews that they have always pre-
vailed—in every such assembly they float, and the
good are precipitated.—But the policy of this act
is not merely pointed at the intermixture of bad;
but the degeneracy of good characters. What
man can answer for himself, in going into a self-
constituted political society ? his first steps are
deliberate; his first motives arc good; his pas-
sions warm as he proceeds ; the applause, never
given to moderation, intoxicates him; the vehe-
mence of debate elates, and the success of elo-
quence inflames him; he begins a patriot, he ends
a revolutionist. Is this fancy or history ? I well
remember, who can forget—the first National As-
sembly of France ? Composed of every l thing the
most honorable, gallant, venerable and patriotic
in that kingdom ; called together for the noblest
and the purest purposes, the Nobility and the Pre-
lacy, united with the representatives of the peo-
ple, and the three estates promised the regenera-
tion of the country. What was the result ? The
wise, and the good, and the virtuous, were put
down, or brought over byvthe upstart, and the
factious, and the demagogue; they knew not the
lengths they were going; they were drawn on
by an increasing attention, —step after step, and
day after day,—to that vortex in which have been


buried even the ruins of every establishment; reli-
gious and political, and from whose womb has
sprung that colossal despotism which now frowns
upon mankind. What has become of that gal-
lant Nobility? where are the pious Prelates of
that ancient kingdom ? one by one, and crowd
by crowd, they have fallen upon the scaffold, or
perished in insurrection. Some—less fortunate—
drag out a mendicant exile in foreign lands; and
others, condemned to a harder fate, have taken
refuge in a Tyrant’s Court, and are expiating the
patriotism of their early lives, by the servility of
their latter days;
My Lords, and Gentlemen of the Jury—l
have digressed involuntarily, I hope not irrele-
vantly, from.the argument, upon the law of this
case, to the consideration of the policy of the
statute. It was necessary, for nothing has been
more misunderstood; it has been foolishly and
wickedly asserted, that this statute and these pro-
secutions have been levelled at the Roman Catho-
lic cause ; the charge is false; if this act were
violated by any other class of men in the state,
whether Protestants, Presbyterians or others; I
knowthc fairness and the impartiality of my Learn-
ed and Right Honourable Friend to be such,
that the religion which they professed would
never have shielded them from prosecution. It
has been clamorously urged, that the Govern-
ment has declared war against the subjects’ right


of petitioning, which Mr. Burrowes has insisted
is illimitable, and, like the freedom of the press,
not subject to previous restraint, and only con-
troulable for subsequent excess; this is a most
mistaken view of the Constitution: there is no
such principle known to our Constitution as
those illimitable rights; our Constitution exists
by its restriaints, its controuls, its checks and ba-
lances. The Royal Prerogative is defined within
a rigid boundary ; the privileges of the Nobles
are ascertained by jealous limitations, and, if the
rights of the people were not circumscribed, woe
be to the people, and woe to that Constitution,
which has been this day so eulogized, and so
much misrepresented ; the state would be disor-
ganized, the democratic part would prepon-
derate, and anarchy would be the consequence.
The contrary is new doctrine, the growth of
modern and licentious times—such was not the
opinion of my Lord Somers, and the great men,
the Whigs of his day, who, in the Bill of Rights,
laid the corner-stone of the Constitution in King
William’s reign. In that second Magna Charta
they asserted and established this right of peti-
tion, as the birthright of Englishmen ; but they'
did not venture to establish it, except as subject
to the restrictions imposed on it by the statute
of Charles 11. Y our Lordships know, that this
has been decided by the highest authority,—that
when, upon the trial of Lord George Gordon,
another opinion was contended fyr at the bar.


all the Judges unanimously declared that such
was the law. That law was never enacted here,
but the misfortunes of our country have made
another and a different restriction of the right to
petition necessary. Those laws speak a common
principle, though a different language. In
England, the people are told, that even the ines-
timable privilege to petition shall not be a pre-
text for a mob ; and in Ireland they must be told,
that it shall not be a pretext for a convention.
No rational man will say, that for the fair and
legitimate purpose of petitioning the Parliament,
a convention of three estates, consisting of nearly
six hundred persons, sitting in a public theatre,
without limit or controul, can be necessary; the
public peace forbids such an association, and the
law emphatically has declared, that there shall be
but one Parliament in the country.. I repeat if,
it is new and unconstitutional doctrine to talk of
the unrestrained rights of the people. What is
that most precious right of the people of these
countries, which the Catholic Committee is about
to usurp ? The right of representation ! That
which distinguishes us from all the nations of the
Carth! Is it unrestrained, and, until the announc-
ing of this Catholic Committee, was it ever un-
controuled? The rights and qualifications of
electors are measured by property, situation and
independence. The freeholders of the country
alone can exercise them ; and some classes are
excluded, on account of their supposed depend


\
cnce. The title to be an elector must be ascer-
tained by registry, and identified by.record;
The capacity to be elected is confined .within ne-
cessary restrictions; the law of election is com-
plicated, and nice, and a particular tribunal, is
constituted to administer it. The King’s writ
issues to the public officer, and, under the hea-
viest responsibilities, he obeys and executes it.
When the senate is convened, the members are
under the controul of their speaker. Their very
privilege of speech is definite, and their duration
depends upon the King, who can prorogue or
dissolve them. ; Such is the utmost right of re-,
presentation, which the freest constitution upon
earth allows to the people ; and, if the popular
part of that constitution were not thus restrained,
it would degenerate into wild democracy and
fatal anarchy.. Compare this right of represen-,
tation with that claimed by the Catholic Commit-
tee, and, in the contrast, behold the wisdom of
the Convention Act, and the necessity of these,
prosecutions. See what is the constitution of
those self-created Parliaments, which that statute
denounces as illegal, and which this prosecution
is instituted to put dow'n. What is their law of
election ? what is their qualification of freeholders
what is their description of candidates ? I assert
not too much, when I assert, if the legitimate
Parliament of therealm were, to be assembled, as
th is Committee has been, that the constitution
would not survive the first election. What


is their claim to this monstrous assumption of
power ? It grows actually out of their numbers,
and the Catholics assert it, because they are four
or five millions of people. What then are for our
five millions to elect ? Whose writ summonses
them ?—what officer in each county is to hold the
election ?—who is to decide upon the votes ?—-
who is to identify the successful candidate ?
Every man of the four millions is qualified to be
an elector or a representative ; and in the county
of Meath, my jLord Fingall, in the exercise of
either character, might be jostled by a beggar or
a rebel, claiming a superior qualification. Can
it be the Constitution, or the Law, that what is
denied to the Parliament, shall be allow’ed to a
.Committee, —and that all the evils of democracy
shall be let loose upon the land; universal suf-
frage, promiscuous eligibility, and indiscrimi-
nate representation ? But suppose this extraor-
dinary meeting to assemble, who is to control
them if they run riot ? Who is their Speaker ?
Who is their Serjeant at Arms ? Who will have
the authority—if any one has the courage—to
check licentious and disaffected declamation?
Who is the man, of any rank, that would have
spirit or power to interrupt or rebuke a factious
orator ? which of the loyal men in that assembly
would venture to chide an inflammatory harangue,
offensive to his feelings and odious to his princi-
ples?—lf, in such an assembly, a rash young man,
inflamed by debate, should loudly assert, that the
F


glorious Yeomanry of Ireland were the extermina-
tors of their countrymen, and should.eulogize and
hold up to veneration and respect, the rebels of
1798, as patriots and martyrs, —who is there to
call him to order ? What man, in a popular and
self-constituted assembly, would venture to inter-
rupt him ? The very nature and constitution of the
assembly generates danger and encourages excess.
Compare such a constitution with the estab-
lished authorities of the land, all controuled.
Confined to their respective spheres, balancing
and gravitating to each other; —all symmetry —
all order—all harmony. Behold, on the other
hand, this prodigy in the political hemisphere,
with eccentric course and portentous glare,,
bound by no attraction—disclaiming any orbit,,
disturbing the system, and affrighting the
world!


Mr Lords,
And Gentlemen of the Jury —
XT is now. my duty as counsel for the
crown, to observe upon that evidence .for the
prosecution, which has not been contradicted,
and upon that defence for the traverser, .which
has not been supported,—The learned and
able advocate for Mr. Kirwan, has left to
me, as he always does to those who follow
him, much to do, but he must forgive me
if X say that I feel my duty upon the pre-
sent occasion to be more troublesome than
formidable, and that its difficulty consists ra-
ther in the variety and inconsistency of the
defence which I have to encounter, than in the
weight or value of the arguments which he has
urged j I find it difficult even to class the topic?


of his multifarious defence. The law has been
re-argued, the facts have been re-disputcd; the
array has been challenged, points of variance
have been insisted upon; the indictment has
been said not to be supported in fact, and the
crime charged by it, has been justified as inno-
cent in law, and eulogized as meritorious. This
is a short/sumraary and faint sketch of those
multiform defences which have been attempted
against the present prosecution, and which have
prolonged a criminal trial now to the fourth,
day, a consumption of public time, unpre-
cedented in the legal annals of this country.
I have not taken notice of the irrelevant
and unjustifiable discussion of a political sub-
ject in a court of justice, of the unprovoked
declamation upon catholic emancipation, in a
place where such a question never can be decid-
ed, and ought never to be agitated. I allude
not to those minor ornaments of the speech of
Mr. Burrowes, so utterly unconnected with the
subject upon which you are to decide; his his-
tory of a dinner at the Rotunda, and his eulogy
upon what he calls that memorable festival; I
merely speak of such parts of his speech as may
be said so justty belong to this place, and I can
discover nothing but a defence incongruous and
inconsistent, unable to rest upon any single


point, and obliged to sustain itself .by spreading
oyer as much ground as it can cover; I wish to
set Mr. Burrowes and his colleagues face to
face, and call upon them to reconcile his argu-
ment of three hours upon the law, with their
cross-examinations of six against the fact. I
wish to know if they dispute his law, or if he
questions the sufficiency of their cross-exami-
nations. If it be true as he has argued, that the
law of this case is with the traverser, that upon
a sound construction of the Convention Act,
Mr. Kirwan has not been guilty of any offence,
and that the facts imputed to him as a crime
constitute his glory ; how did it become neces-
sary to put forward the gentlemen who act with
Mr. Burrowes, one after another, to bring into
doubt those very facts of which his client boasts,
and to do sq through the medium of cross-ex-
aminations, prolix beyond example, wasting
the public time, and disgusting the public feel-
ing by a desperate and abortive attempt to re-
present the witnesses for the crown as suborned
and perjured: if on the other hand, those wit-
nesses he suborned and perjured, if all which
they have sworn be fabrication and imposture,
what has been the necessity for,consuming .the
greater part of a day in controverting the con-
struction of a law which, upon that supposition


it is altogether unnecessary to interpret; I re-
peat it,-1 am at a loss how to meet this many
faced defence, which defies pursuit and eludes
contact.
Quo teneam, vultus mutantem Protea
nodo ?
I wish not to abridge the fair discharge
of an advocates duty, which I know calls upon
him to resort to every available topic in his
clients case, and to omit nothing however incon-
sistent, by which he may serve him. But Mr.
Burrowes ■would scorn upon this occasion the
claim of such a privilege; he has assumed a lof-
tier tone, and certainly no man js more qualified
by virtues and by talents to sustain it. He is not
forsooth the counsel of any petty client, or
brought here to accomplish the impunity of any
individual, he claims higher behests than those;
he is the advocate of a peoples rights, coming
boldly forward to meet a great question, he is
the champion of a nations cause! the liberty of
his country is his client. He must forgive
me if I "examine those high claims, and if
I recall those circumstances of the present
trial, upon the recollection of which, I ex-
pect that he will abandon those borrowed


plumes, and lower those lowering preten-
sions. I repeat it, no man that I ever knew is
more calculated for the most dignified discharge
of the grandest duties; but upon this occasion,
lie will recollect that though he came down with
all his force, though his advance in column was
magnificent and imposing, he has not disdained
much of that skirmishing and petty warfare
which rather bespeaks the partisan than suits
wdth his higher character. Has he yet forgiven
his client for putting him forward in the chal-
lenge of the array, that desperate experiment to
represent to an irritated people, the government
of the country as corrupting the administration
of justice. Does he forget that he was for a
moment imposed upon to believe, and employ-
ed to make the triers and the court believe that
preposterous paradox, which common sense re-
pudiates, and which nothing but metaphysics
could sustain, that because Sir Charles Saxton
had obtained a copy of the pannel after it was
formed, he therefore of necessity was a party
in the formation of he forget the
■issue, of that unjustifiable charge, and the
solemn verdict of the triers upon it, when
it appeared that no other advantage was ob-
tained by the crown except an opportunity
to prepare challenges to the jurors, by seeing


a copy of the pannel after it was formed; that
upon further enquiry it appeared that there was
in this, no superiority over the traverser, for
that his own attorney had the very same advan-
tage, and that the crown might with equal jus-
tice and truth have challenged the array for hav-
ing been framed by Mr.'Kildhall, as Mr. Kir-
wan’s counsel had challenged it, for having been
framed by the crown solicitor. Does Mr. Bur-
ro vves forget or forgive the further aggression of
his client, who after making him the dupe of
this attempted imposition, put him forward on
the following day to state a rash, audacious and
intemperate affidavit, in which that unfortunate
man had the presumption upon his oath to real-
tedge that slanderous charge upon the subject
of the panel, which upon the former evening
had been refuted and condemned by the solemn
.verdict of the triers, and the reprobation of the
court; and in which, a new slander was intro-
duced aspersing the integrity, and defaming
the character of the honorable foreman of that
■jury, and the other gentlemen impanelled with
him; a slander consisting of a variety of char-
.ges, all of which Mr. Kinvan swore he. had
. reason to believe, and expected to be able to
•prove, and all of which, upon investigation
turned out (p be utterly unfounded and insqp


portable :—I mean not to assert, and lam most
unwilling to believe, that Mr. Kirvvan fabricat-
O *
ed those base charges, or wished to impose them
upon the court, knowing them to be false; on
the contrary, I have no doubt that he was per-
suaded of their truth. It is the pitiable con-
dition of faction to be credulous, there is some-
thing about it which distorts the judgment and
perverts the mind; no man under its influence
sees fairly or thinks directly; it is even less dis-
tinguished by its passion for misrepresentation,
than by the voracious credulity with which it
swallows every thing which is false. How
otherwise can I account for it, that a man in
the rank of a gentleman should desperately
hazard the false and shameful assertions which
fill that affidavit, which the court has declared
ought not to pollute its files ?
Another instance of the- smaller game
which Mr. Burrowes has not thought it beneath
him to play upon this occasion, is the insidious
offer of a special verdict, and the clamorous
appeal to the counsel for the crown to put the
law of the convention Act into a shape for de-
cision by the dernier resort. My lords; this
appeal could neither be intended for you, nor
for the jury; it is calculated for the public*
and in the face of the public will I expose it.


What is the meaning of calling for a special
verdict, but to imply a doubt upon the
law ? What is the reason upon the former
trial, before the law was announced by the
unanimous court, wdiile it w r as supposed to
be in doubt, and while the opinion of one
counsel conflicted with the opinion of ano-
ther, that no such proposition was made ?
Why did not Mr. Burrowes then come for-
ward, and why has he deferred this demand
until the Court of King’s Bench had pro-
nounced a deliberate opinion upon a solemn
argument 2 Does he expect that the King’s
Attorney General and myself will compromise
our offices and betray the constitution of our
country, by implying in a consent for a spe-
cial verdict that the Court of King’s Bench
is not an authority upon the criminal law; —that
we will sanction the presumptuous slanders of
a factious press, which daily arraign the Com-
petence and question the authority of the first
legal tribunal in the land: he is much mis-
taken if he thinks so: I ask him again, why
did he not offer this upon the trial of Dr.
Sheridan ? I will not suppose a reason timvor-
tliy of him, and of the former Jury—l will
not suppose that he declined to make such a
proposal from a confident expectation of a ge-
neral verdict from that particular panel—l will
8


not be seduced, even by bis example, Into
the insinuation of any thing unworthy against
honorable men. I believe those gentlemen to
have been as honorable and as worthy men as
those whom I now address. I believe their ver-
dict to have been found upon pure and con-
scientious motives—l respect them for not hav-
ing presumed to wrest the law from the court,
and for having assigned the insufficiency of tbe
evidence as the cause of their verdict—whether
they were right in such an opinion or not, it is
not for me to determine; —l cannot but respect
those gentlemen, and I am sure that you respect
them too, but their verdict, gentlemen of the
Jury, though it may influence, must not go-
vern you—you are sworn upon your oaths, not
upon tfieirs —you are to consult your judg-
ments, not theirs—you are to lie down on your
own pillows, and you are to answer to your
God not upon their consciences but your own.
I am satisfied that they are all honorable men ;
I know many of them to be so. I wish that
Mr. Burrowes had done equal justice and shewn
equal candor to the Jury whom I now address —I
wish that he had not, by an unworthy sarcasm
revived the refuted slanders of the challenge to
the array and of Mr. Kirwan’s affidavit —I wish,
that he had not told you, that he would not give
you the trouble of deciding upon the facts, but
B


would treat you to a point of law, with which
he would not compliment your predecessors.—
I own that it gave my heart a pang to hear an
honorable and generous man go back to a con-
fated defamation, and rally the discomfited,
and disgraced assault which had been made upon
the fairness of the Sheriff's panel, and the cha-
racters of the individual Jurors :—if I thought
that this had moved from his own heart, I should
wish to expunge from my recollection some-
thing so unworthy of that pure source, but I
attribute it not to him, but to his client; to those
instructions, which in a desperate and factions
case, call upon him to struggle for a verdict,
however to be obtained ; and I remind him tri-
umphantly of all those facts, that he may learn
from them the true nature of the service in which
he is now engaged, that he may undeceive him-
self as to the magnanimous character with which
he conceives himself to be invested, that he
may recall the other circumstances of the trial
to his recollection, that he may remember the
points of variance and special pleading, upon
which the geography of St. Mary’s Parish was
called in aid of the liberties of Ireland; that
.he may admit that if his defence has been as it
certainly has been brilliant and splendid, its
;Course has been attended by some satellites,
which like other satellites, have not a little


eclipsed its lustre, and that if his client be a nation,
and if his cause be a people’s rights, he has de-
fended them in no other manner than he would
have defended a,thief at the Old Baily.
In this manifold defence, the first topic
to which I shall advert is Mr. Burrowes’s repe-
tition of his former argument upon the law of
the Convention Act.—Much as I admire the
talent and ingenuity which he has displayed, I
must be permitted to say, that he has not upon
the present occasion, argued with more force
than upon the former, and unless he has argued
with more effect, I shall not conceive myself
called upon, or indeed authorized to discuss a
second time as a matter of law argument, that
upon which the Court has already solemnly de-
cided : and therefore, unless I shall hear from
your lordships, that doubts have been excited by
Mr. Burrowes, as to the propriety of your for-
mer determination, I shall certainly abstain from
any further reasoning, which' might seem to
imply my doubts of the soundness of your de-
cision, and shall not compromise the deference,
which I think every professional man owes to
the judgment of a Court of Justice, by bring-
ing its authority into question
[Judge Day.—l remain unshaken in my-
former opinion, jand I am the more'persuaded of


that being the right construction of the Act,
fi om the observations which I have since heard
in opposition to it.]
Solicitor General continued.—The At-
torney General and myself were most happy to
find that your Lordships had permitted Mr.
Burrowses a second time to discuss this question,
and not only did not object to such a proceed-
ing, but rejoiced that a further opportunity
should be offered, of w'eighjng the value of
those arguments, which he might wish to ad-
vance :—but now that your Lordships have
again declared your deliberate and solemn opi-
nion, I shall not think myself at liberty to do
more, than to announce it as the fixed and set-
tled law' of the land. —I trust, that such an ad-
judication will open the eyes even of those, who
are determined to be blind upon this subject.—.
I trust, that no one will now hold the alarming
language or promulge the formidable doctrine
that the criminal law is unsettled, because only
the Court of King’s Bench has pronounced upon
it, and that the subjects of this realm are at li-
berty to go on in experimental and intermediate
violation of that law, until, mayhap the House
of Lords may be called upon to decide upon
it.—Upon a former occasion, I stated my opi-
nion upon this statute, with reserve and diffi


donee, although _ I was supported in it by the
profoundest lawyer, and one of the wisest men
who lives. I could not be over confident even
in his opinion, when I knew that learned and
able men had differed from us, but now I am
warranted to assume another tone —I am not
now to argue in support of my own fallible con-
struction, but to announce and insist upon the
highest authority, which I recognize in this land
as long as the constituted and lawful authorities
of this land are suffered to exist: so long the
criminal law of the country is attested in the
most unequivocal manner, when pronounced by
the Court of King’s Bench; and so long as that
adjudication stands unreversed, it is emphatical-
ly the law, and let him that hears it so announc-
ed, disobey it at his peril. Let no man enter-
tain the visionary and frantic notion, that this
law, so pronounced, lies in abeyance, because
perhaps upon some future occasion it may be
brought under the consideration of the dernier
resort, that in the mean time the King’s subjects
are absolved from the obligation of obeying it;
and that the opinion of counsel is to supersede
the authority of the Judges, and what the King
cannot do, dispense with the law of the coun-
try : the proposition for which we contended,
and which I understand your Lordships lo have
now established, I shall broadly and frankly


stale.—That all assemblies of Representatives or
Delegates returned by election, which assume
to represent the People, or any portion of the
People, are unlawful Assemblies, although the
sole purpose of such Representation or Delega-
tion be to petition Parliament, if the object of
such Assembly be by such Petition or other-
wise, to procure an alteration of matters establ-
ished by law in church or state—r-that such As-
semblies may be dispersed by the magistracy,
and that all who concur in the election of mem-
bers to such Assemblies, are guilty of a misde-
meanor. Although I feel myself precluded from
any argument in support of your Lordships de-
clared opinion, I trust, that I may stand excused,
if I shall make one observation, suggested by
iTr. Burrowcs’s mode of treating the subject
yesterday ; —the principal difference , between
his late and his former speech, is that origin-
ally he struggled for the restrained construction
of the word prefence, and insisted that it must
be construed as false pretence; and yesterday
lie urged that topic less strenuously, but com
tended for a distinction, which in his former ar-
gument he had put less forcibly, between gene-
ral Representation and Delegation for a particu-
lar purpose, admitting that general Representa-
tion is criminal, but alledging that Delegation for
a particular purpose is not so : let me suggest;


to his accurate and candid mind, that this is no-
thing but a shoot and offspring from his parent
sophism upon the meaning of the word pretence
and must abide its fate. If pretence means as
wo contend, purpose whether real or' feigned,
then the statute must be read as if the word were
purpose, and then the enactment must be the
very thing which he controverts, namely, that
a Delegation for the purpose of Petitioning for
an alteration of matters established by law is an
illegal Assembly : and this necessary conclusion
will not be at all affected bv his remaining argu-
* O O
ment, grounded upon the proviso in the statute,
because if the object of the Act be such as I
have stated, then the proviso can never be con-
strued to destroy the whole enactment, and to
render the statute nugatory, by repealing every
thing contained in it. The construction of the
statute and the proviso must therefore be thus
reconciled. The latter must be considered as de-
claring the general right of petitioning to be
unimpaired, and the former to restrain the ex-
ercise of that right through the medium of De-
legation.
From some passages in Air- Burrowes’s
speech, I ,should he induced to suppose, that he
did not so much dispute your Lordships judgment
as he disclaims your, jurisdiction, aud that he


considers your Lordships to have arrogated the
province of the Jury, in the interpretation of
this statute :—I did not expect that I should
have heard it gravely asserted by his lips, that
the Jury were the proper; tribunal for the inter-
pretation of the statute law ;—I shall never until
corrected by the highest authority, cease to con-
sider, and to call this the most monstrous propo-
sition that ever shocked a legal Inind. I know
that for disputing this alarming and popular no-
velty, I have incurred much obloquy from what
Mr. Burrowes calls the censorial power of the
People, and have been represented as the advo-
cate of arbitrary doctrine, but that shall never
intimidate me into a concession of the first prin-
ciples of my profession, and an abandonment of
the elementary maxims of the constitution.—l
never, until I shall be taught my error by some
higher authority than the Newspapers, will hear
with patience, or treat without reprehension,
the assertion, that according to the British ju-
risprudence, Acts of Parliament are to be inter-
preted by juries.—lf Air. Burrowes asserts that
proposition and is right, I am grieviously igno-
rant; but I grapple with him upon the question,
and am not afraid of the result: where does he
find this position stated ?—in what legal autho-
rity has he discovered it ?—he may find the rules
for the construction of statutes elaborately dis


cussed, and minutely distinguished in our most
authentic books, and that nice and difficult part
of our science reduced to precision, and he has
learned where your Lordships have learned how
to apply those rules. But gentlemen of the Ju-
ry, when and where have you studied them?—
what has been your preparation for the judi-
cial office ?—are you apprized of all the dis-
tinctions between statutes penal and remedial,
and of the different views which may be taken
of each ?—is it not, my Lords, to be lamented,
that at this time of day, we are without any re-
corded adjudication by Juries upon the statute
law ?—is it not to be lamented, that if it be
their province to decide the law, yet that the
law has been so, perverse as not to provide for
its own uniformity, and that the adjudication
of one Jury upon a statute is not to be an au-
thority to govern another, but that there may
in fact be as many laws as there are Juries: Mr.
Burrowes has much perverted the libel Act,
which he has thought it necessary to read to
the Jury, in order to persuade them that they
must interpret the Convention Act: does that
Act provide that Juries are to decide questions
of law ? bertainly not. Had that been the
case, the Legislature would at once have so
enacted.—Before that statute, the Judges had
claimed as questions of law, the decision upon
C


two matters which are in their nature, more pro-
perly questions of fact.—They had _ insisted,
that in libel cases, the Jury should merely de-
cide upon the fact of publishing, hut that the mo-
tive of the publisher was immaterial, and that
the tendency of the libel to produce the effects,
or convey the meaning imputed to it was matter
of lawj and only to be interpreted by the Bench.
In this the legislature has corrected them ; and
Juries now, in cases of libel, are to judge of
the motive and the tendency, as well as of the pub-
lication of the libel.—But does it follow, that
because the statute which is adeclaratory one, has
declared, that such was always the fair province
of the Jury, and that these were in reality ques-
tions of fact, that Juries are in all cases to pro-
nounce upon all law, and to interpret all sta-
tutes—that because each Jury is to pronounce
upon the tendency of each ephemeral and fu-
gacious libel; that therefore every successive Jury
is to form partofa moveable and shifting tribunal,
to construe in infinite varieties, the fixed and
immoveable laws of the land.—Surely such an
illogical conclusion was never before offered to the
human understanding. I was not less surprized,
to find Mr. Burrowes claiming this privilege for
you, gentlemen of the Jury, upon your right
to find a general verdict in a criminal case, and
arguing seriously, that because a jury finds a


general verdict it decides the law. I did not
think, that it could be necessary to suggest to
his very discriminating mind, the most obvious
and common place distinctions.—Does he not
know, that when the jury find a general ver-
dict, they apply the law which they hear from
the Bench, to the facts which they decide upon
their oaths, and do not decide the law.—Let me
remind him of the top common case of murder
■ —a man is indicted fur that crime, and his guilt
or innocence depends upon those shadowy dis-
tinctions which distinguish it from manslaughter:
the judge tells the jury the legal distinctions be-
tween the several classes of homicide, and tells
them (we will suppose one familiar case,) that
if they believe that the killing was sudden be-
fore the blood heated by adequate provocation,
had time to cool, they ought to find a ver-
dict of manslaughter, if otherwise of murder.—
They find a verdict of one or the other.—Does
any legal, or indeed any rational man suppose,
that by doing so, they pronounce or decide the
law of manslaughter and murder? certainly not.
—lf they did, that law would fluctuate with
every homicide, and change with every jury
they merely decide by their verdict, .the facts
upon the hypothesis of which the one way or the
other the law depends, and apply the law to those
facts.—lf I shall be told that they may misapply


that law, and believing the facts which, constitute
the crime, acquit, or disbelieving them con-
vict; I answer that if they do so, they violate
the law and dq not decide it, that they exercise
the power which unfortunately all men possess,
of doing what is wrong; but do not establish
a right to do so. I am ashamed that it should
be necessary to argue such a set of first prin-
ciples in a court of justice. The mere censure
to which I have been exposed for my opinions,
and the charge of introducing arbitrary doc-
trines, of which, I should blush to be guilty;
would not be a sufficient apology for my seri-
ously treating such a question—it is the sanc-
tion which the high authority of Mr. Burrqwes’s
name, must give to the popular delusion which
must be my justification. I request that this
argument of his, may be compared with the
pompous offer of a special verdict, so clamo-
rously reiterated in this trial, and let me exhibit
him as answering himself:—what is the result
of a special verdict? the determination of the
judges upon the law ! If they are wrong the
opinion of the court of error, which, in this
country, consists of the twelve judges is resorted to.
If they err, the correction of their opinion by the
courtof final judicature follows. What is the mean-
ing of all this decision, and re,-decision by judges
upon judges, if his latter argument be well,found


ed, that juries alone arc to decide.upon-the law?
suppose a special verdict found, according tp his.
last argument; we all know, that a, jury can find
nothing by a general verdict, which they may
not detail in a special One. Now, by his argu-
ment, their general verdict may pronounce
upon the law, and interpret the Statute,
and then the, special verdict for, which he
has clamored, would exhibit a legal monster;
a finding upon the law, But go a step further;
and see what his special verdict would be, if you
combine, his argument with the, cross-examina 7 .
tions of his colleagues. They, strenuously dis-,
pute all the facts of the case,, and then his spe-.
cial verdict .would negative the. facts and assert :
the law. Conppare again.gentlemen of the jury,
his call for a .special verdict, and his argument.
for yoip* judicial authority, with..his challenge;
to the array, and his clients , affidavit against ,
you individually ; and the. resplt, will be,That
Mr. Kirwan objects to you, as unworthy to, try
any, fact, and Mr. B,Ur( ; owes insists that you-
are infallible in the interpretation.of. the,law.
I must now.gentlemen of the jury, re-
quest, your attention to those facts, and that,,
evidence upon .which Mr. Burrovves has scarcely
condescended to remark, but which his col-
leagues have, laboriously struggled ,to impeach.


Before I allude to the testimony of any one of
the witnesses, let me repeat an observation,
common to them all, which I urged upon a
former occasion ; —three persons have solemnly
deposed in a court of justice, to the facts which
constitute the crime, of which Mr. Kirwan
stands accused:—no imaginable motive can he
assigned for their committing wilful and delibe-
rate perjury—no witness has been produced to
impeach the moral character of any one of them,
or to represent him as unworthy of credit.—•
The facts to which they have deposed, have
been impliedly admitted to be true, by almost
every word of Mr. Burrowes’s speech, which
lias been a justification of his client, and not
a denial of the conduct imputed to him. Those
foots are from their nature capable of contra-
diction by hundreds of persons, and not one
person has been produced to contradict any one
statement made by the witnesses for the crown :
I borrow then, the strong expression of the
Attorney General, and I ask you, whether it is
not an insult to the understandings of a jury,
to call upon you upon your oaths to convict
three men of deliberate , perjury, who swear to
what the leading counsel for Mr. Kirwan is in,
structed not to deny, but to boast of, because
his other counsel have been desired to treat as
fabulous, every thing- which he has gloried in


as meritorious. Apply this reasoning to the
evidence of Mr. Huddleston—that gentleman
has a second time been treated with great aspe-
rity, his private history, his misfortunes, nay,
his religious opinions' have been all scrutinized
in a severe cross-examination; he has been
called upon to account in a court of justice for
his having abjured the roman catholic faith, and
nothing calculated to excite disgust and preju-
dice against him, in these irritable times has
been omitted. lam sure if it had been neces-
sary to investigate the nature of his religious
belief, and discuss the comparative merits of
his former and his present tenets, he could not
have fallen into the hands of a more profound
and accoinplished divine than my learned friend
Mr. Goold, and that the public could not fail
to be highly edified by his lectures in divinity.
’But much as I respect his high erudition, and
his intimate acquaintance with the fathers, with
Thomas Aquinas, and Thomas a Kempis,
and the whole Corpus juris canonic!, ho must
excuse me if I presume to doubt the relevancy
of so much learning so uselessly displayed;
and if I ask him of what avail it is,to his client,
to shew that Mr. Huddleston is not so good an
ecclesiastic as himself. If he supposes that by
such a cross-examination he discredits Mr. Had-
dles :on, let me remind him of what Mr. Hud-,


dlestbn has sworn, and let me ask him is he
instructed, seriously to persuade you gentlemen
of thp jury, that what he has sworn is a fabri-
cated tale, a there invention by the govern-
ment, suggested by subornation, supported
by perjury. Mr. Huddleston has sworn to
nothing whatsoever, on the 9th of
July, Ist], lord Fingall presided at an aggre-
gate meeting (numerously attended) in this
city, in Fish amble-street theatre, at which cer-
tain resolutions were passed, which have been
since published in the newspapers, with lord
Fingall’s title of honor subscribed to them. Mr.
Huddleston has stated the names of several
gentlemen now in this court, who attended and
acted in that meeting. If it be not true that
such a meeting ever took place, or if Mr.
Huddleston has misrepresented what occurred
at it, why have none of those gentlemen been
produced to contradict, him, and why are you,
left to the hazard of inferring his discredit
from a cross-examination as to his religion;
why has not lord Fingall himself been produc-
ed ?—I have the honor to see that noble per-
son now before me, and he must excuse me
if I observe upon the extraordinary and afflict-
ing situation, in which the defence of this pro-
secution has placed him—l shall say nothing
inconsistent with that high respect for his eba


racter, which I unfeignedly feel, and which I
shall not be restrained from expressing by the
only thing which could restrain me, his pre-
sence : I know his private worth, and his pub-
lic spirit j I have not the slightest doubt of his
meaning well, and being actuated by .pure and
honorable motives in all that he has done,
though he must allow me to say that I consider
him as an instrument in the hands of others, as
grievously mistaken, and as acting under a
gross delusion but he must permit me to ex*
press w'hat I feel for his situation, and for the
trial to which his noble heart has been exposed j
when I see him now a second time condemned
to sit by in a court of justice, and listen to ad-
vocates hired to deny within those walls, that
conduct and those acts which he has been taught
out of this court to glory in as patriotic and
meritorious: which he has sanctioned by his
presence and authority, and to the public
avowal of which, his title of honor stands pledg-
ed in every newspaper in the empire. Gen-
tlemen of the jury, I say as long as lord Fingall
sits silent in this court, it is an idle waste of
time to cross-examine Mr. Huddleston—it is
useless, if it were possible, .to represent him as
infidel or infamous. My lord Fingall, sits there
his compurgator 5 his silence sets him up and
supports his testimony even if it were other-
D


wise exceptionable, and upon that testimony
I shall not affront your feelings and your intel-
lects, by making another observation: but let
me turn again to my learned friend Mr. Bur-
roues, and ask him in this part of his case,
bow be has supported his claims to a national
defence,, and to a public cause; let me remind
him, that it is now seven or eight months since
the government of the country has been at
issue with his client upon the one single ques-
tion; whether a committee to be convened
under lord Fingall’s proclamation, (far such I
must call it,-) of the resolutions,, of the 9th of
J uly, be lawful or not; and that up to this hour
no man in any place has been candid or fair
enough to admit those resolutions! 1 know
what evasive circumlocutions may be contrived
as substitutes for this simple admission, I can
suppose the noble lord to be taught to say in'
answer to any question, “ that he is engaged
in a lawful and constitutional pursuit;” but I
know that up to this hour, that meeting and
those resolutions have never been admitted, and
that the allegation of their existence, has only
been encountered by a cross-examination into
Mr. Huddleston’s religious opinions. I calf
therefore again upon Mr. Burrowes, to weigh-
well his pretensions to the manly and dignified


advocacy of a great national question. I call
upon him to lower his tone —1 say to him—De-
spend from your iambics.
jProjice ampullas & sesquipedalia verba.
I come next to the evidence of John
■Sheppard, and shall in the first place, observe,
that the gentleman who cross-examined him,
must have considered his testimony as highly
injurious to his client, if believed, or he never
would have taken so much pains to discredit it:
Upon the minute details of it, it is quite unne-
cessary that I should decsant; I defend it in the
abstract by this general observation, that he has
stated the occurrences of the 3 1st of July, in
Liffey-street Chapel, to have occured in the
presence of great multitudes, and has named
several persons, all present during this trial, as
having acted in the election of that day, not
one of whom has been produced to contradict
him.—One of those gentlemen sat in the gallery
while he gave his testimony:—l mean Dr. She-
ridan, the person alledged to have been most
active in the proceedings, and a person whose
production could not have subjected him to any
risque, for he is now an acquitted Delegate:
he is a gentleman of profession and character;
and if Sheppard either swore falsely or inaccu


rately, could easily have contradicted him
a different line of impeachment however, was
adopted with this witness, and as no one else
would contradict him, an experiment was made
to make him contradict himself: whether that
experiment was successful or not, I frankly
own that lam unable to assert; I should rather
suppose that it has failed, because Mr. Burrowes
in his address to you, made no observations upon
his evidence, nor did he pretend that he had con-
tradicted himself.—Let it not, however, be suppos-
ed that I pledge myself for his not having done
so:—you gentlenien, must judge for yourselves,
as to the effects of his cross-examination, and if
you are able to form any opinion upon it, your
heads and mine must be made of very different
materials.—My learned friend, Mr. Burne,
must not suppose me to insinuate, that his dis-
charge of that duty was unnecessary or prolix;
he must permit me, however, to say, that it was
somewhat No one discharges his
professional duty with more ability and effect
than he does; but he will remember, (I am
sure, I shall never forget it.) that he cross-ex-
amined John Sheppard for three hours and a half,
by Shrewsbury clock there are limits to the
human faculties, and I must confess, that at
last mine were so exhausted by this process, that
I was unable to carry away a definite idea, or


even a distinct sentence:—the victim on tho
table at last swam before my eyes, and some
confused buzzing sounds like the repetition of
a catch word in the examination; notes, drafts ,
copies , informations , etcetera ; etcetera, rung dis-
cordantly in my dizzy head, and tingled in my
ears.—Gentlemen, if such were the effects pro-
duced upon a mere suffering auditor, what must
have been the sensations of the witness himself,
and let me ask you, if the man had fallen into
contradictions and inconsistencies, who could
have been surprised at it? who has sufficient
confidence in his own memory or nerves, in his
own strength of body or of mind, to suppose that
he could come out from such an ordeal more than
alive—let me put it to the candor of my learned
and- ingenious friend, JVIr. Burne, how does he
suppose that he would have endured such a
peine forte ST dure himself? let him imagine
himself nailed to that chair, and that chair fast-
ened to that table, and another Mr, Burne, if
another could be procured, sitting down in re-
gular assault before him, and for three hours
and a half battering and beleaguering him like a
besieged town ? let me ask him how he thinks he
would feel about the time that his adversary be-
came tired of the attack: really gentlemen, no-
thing is so unfair as to judge rashly of a man’s
credit who has been exposed to sixch a trial. I


will not say that the witness did not sink in the
contest, though I cannot say that he did, but
of this lam sure, that if after so many rounds,
he had given in, the mere length of the combat
would account for the victory. , We know that
many a woman has had to complain of violation,
who neither yielded to her passions, or was
overpowered by force, but who has been worn
cut by the fatigue of resistance, and subdued
by perseverance, whose lover has succeeded
neither by his beauty or by his prowess, but be-
cause he was indefatigable. Such a swain is ir-
resistible. But gentlemen of the jury, jests
apart, what is the fair influence of such a pro-
ceeding upon your minds, and }i°W are men'
acting upon their oaths, to treat such an affront
to their understandings ? You have heard also,
the third witness, M‘Donough, cross examined
by Mr. Burton without stint and with the same
effect. Mr, Burrowes has not in his speech insi-
nuated that he was entrapped into a single con-
tradiction ; but if he had, what a faint and falla-
cious gleam would such a contradiction have
offered to mislead you, and would you allow
yourselves to he directed by it at the desire of
those who had an opportunity of pouring in full-
and unequivocal daylight upon every thing
doubtful, and who have refused to do so.
When therefore they loudly demand your verdict


in contradiction to the witnesses whom we have
produced, let me silence the call, by pointing out
to them now in this Court, lord Fingall and
Mr. Hay, and Dr. Burke, and Dr. Sheridan*
and all those many persons, who could have
contradicted every particle of the crown’s case*
and whom they have not dared to bring forward;
It was in the consciousness of this weakness,
that Mr. Burrowcs lias called upon you for a
finding, not to be built upon your disbelief of
the evidence, but upon your opinion of the po-
litical influence of your verdict.—He has called
upon yon for a healing verdict, and has told you
that the last verdict was most healing. Gentle-
men, I shall never hear without reprobation
such a call upon a jury : I trust that no such
dreadful precedent may be established, as the
finding of popular and political verdicts. If
tl ( ie public mind requires to be healed,.! trust
that the consciences of jurors may never be
bruised into a nostrum for the purpose; that
jurors may never turn state empirics, and fancy
that they are prescribing for the distempered com-
monwealth j that they are politicians and not-
jurors, and that they are at liberty to perjure
themselves for the good of their country. No
verdict can be righteous which is not founded
upon the evidence, and the public weal can ne-
ver be advanced by frustrating the adrainistra


tion of justice. In the name of God, if you
disbelieve the evidence which you have heard,
nay if you reasonably doubt it, acquit Mr.
Kirwan—if you do not, fabricate not doubts
for yourselves, which no fair mind, or sound
head can sanction, merely to atchieve what
you may may think a public good. Take tbe
law from the Court, and for the fact, consult
your understandings and your consciences, but
compromise not your oaths, and trifle not with
your solemn duty.-
Gentlemen, the law Und the fact of
this case were not sufficient for those advocates
of public liberty who defend Mr. Kirwan; they
considered their defence incomplete, unless they
attempted to non-suit the crown, if I may so,
and they have accordingly relied upon two
points of variance between the indictment and
the evidence upon which it becomes my duty
to address their lordships. Those points were
suggested yesterday by Mr. Perrin’s ingenuity,
and if for a moment they appeared embarass-
ing to the court and deserving of a serious an-
swer, every one who heard him, must attribute
it to the able, and eloquent,- and lawyer-like
argument, by which he supported what I think
upon enquiry it will be found, even he has fail-
ed to establish: —the first point is, that the in


dictment states the resolutions of the 9th of
July, in a manner differing from the testimony
of Mr. Huddleston applied to that allegation.
The indictment states that, a resolution was car-
ried upon that occasion, that a committee of
roman catholics should be appointed, to cause
petitions to be presented to parliament for the
repeal of the Penal Laws, and to procure sig-
natures thereto in all parts of Ireland i and
that such committee should consist of the ca-
tholic peers, and their eldest sons, of the catholic
prelates and baronets, and of ten delegates
from every county, and five from every parish
in Dublin. Mr. Huddleston’s evidence sup-
ports this indictment in all particulars, except
in that part of the resolution which relates to
the procuring signatures to the petition in all
parts of Ireland —upon that he has been silent,
and it is alledged that this is a fatal variance be-
tween the indictment and the evidence. In the
first 'place my lords, the transactions and reso-
lutions of the 9th of July, form no part of the
offence imputed to Mr. Kirwan by this indict-
ment. He is charged with having.acted in an
election on the 31st of July, and the resolutions
of the 9th of July, are merely stated as intro-;
ductory matter to that charge, in order to show
that the election in which he acted, was an
election fot delegates, to sit in such a commit-
E


life as is described in the former resolutions,
that is, a committee to procure by means of
petitions, a repeal of the penal laws. That
election is the crime prohibited by the act, and
Charged by the indictment, and if every thing
necessary to constitute that offence, if the cor-
pus delicti be all well charged in the pleading,
and supported by the evidence, it is impossible
to say, that there has been any variance, merely
because something not necessary to the constitu-
tion of the offence has been stated as inducement
in the indictment, and not supported by the
evidence. For instance, if the indictment had
alledged in the introductory part of it, that one
of the resolutions was, that the committee
should make preparations for a certain festival
to be afterwards given, and that the witness had
not proved it, no one would argue that there was
a variance: because the preparing of such a fes-
tival is not essential to the offence prohibited by
the statute, and charged by the indictment.—ln
the same manner procuring signatures to the
petition, which is the passage omitted by Mr.
Huddleston, is no part of the offence charged,
nor at all necessary to it, and as every thing sub-
stantially necessary to it has been proved as
laid, it cannot be held that there is a variance.
In indictments for murder, the offence must be
proved substantially and not minutely, and an


indictment alledging that A. gave the mortal
o o o
wound, and that B. and C. were aiding and
abetting, is supported by proving that C. gave
the , wound, and that A. and B. were aiding and
abetting.;—These indictments often state one
kind of weapon and its value, and the evidence
is frequently of a different weapon, without
any proof of value, and yet such indictments
are well supported. The true test is—whether
the substance of the offence as charged has
been proved;—the second variance insisted upon,
is, that the indictment charges that the election
at which Mr. Kinvan assisted, was for a district
in the city of Dublin, called St. Mary's Parish,
and that it appears upon the evidence, that
part of that Parish is in the county of Dublin,
inasmuch as the Catholic Parish of St, Mary’s
comprehends three Protestant Parishes, one of
which, (St. George’s,) is partly in the county
of Dublin. This objection was argued as if the
indictment had alledged, that the Parish of St.
Mary was in the city of Dublin, and if that
had been the case, the evidence would certainly
have appeared inconsistent with it. But your
Lordships will observe, that there is no such
allegation in the indictment, which merely
alledges that the district for which the election
was held, was in the city of Dublin, and that
such district is commonly called St. Mary’s Pa


rish. Now it is perfectly consistent, that the
district for which the election was held, should
he all in the city of Dublin, and should
be called St. Mary’s Parish, and yet that St.
Mary’s Parish should not only comprehend all
that district, but also extend to part of another
in the county of Dublin, and it would not fob.
low that such district was the less in the city or
the less to be called St. Mary’s Parish, because
St. Mary’s Parish extended beyond that district.
There is a street in this town, one side of which
is in the city, and the other is in the county of
Dublin. If I should say that a certain man liv-
ed in the city of Dublin, in a place called Great
Britain-street, my assertion would not be false,
because the other side of the street is in the coun-
ty ; his residence is not the less in the city, because,
his opposite neighbour.resides in the county; and
because Great Britain-street is a name common
■to both their residences :in truth t ( his is rather a
question for the Jury upon the fact, than a va-
riance between the pro,if and the pleading. If the:
Jury should conceive the witness to, haye sworn,
impliedly that the election was partly for the
county of Dublin, then the indictment which
ailedges it to have been an election for a city
district might be said to be falsified, but no such
construction can be given to the evidence
36


The Chief Justice. —[We shall take
care that this point be reserved for the opinion
of the Judges, in case of a verdict against
the traverser, and for that purpose we must get
from the Jury a decision upon the fact, whether
the election in Liffey-street was confined to the
representation of the inhabitants within the
city, or embraced the whole extent of the pa-
rish, part of which is in the county.]
In that view of the case, see my lords, and you
gentlemen of the jury, what are the facts:—
the election in LiffeyrStreet chapel on the 31st
of July, takes place in consequence of the re-
solutions of lord Fingall’s meeting on the 9th
of the same month. That fact would not be
disputed any where but in this court, and there
has been abundant evidence of it. There is
but an interval of twenty-two days between the
two meetings. The election takes place in this
city, is declared to be for a parish, and the
exact number of delegates is returned, which
lord Fingall’s resolutions required to be return-
ed for a parish in Dublin. The persons con-
curring in the election, speak of a proclama-
tion which had that day issued from the Castle,
and that proclamation is in proof, and refers to
the resolutions of lord Fingall’s aggregate meet-
ing. Now in those resolutions the catholics are


called upon to return ten delegates for every
count}', and five for every parish in this city,
and how can it be supposed that a parochial
meeting in the city of Dublin, which elects
five members and no more, could have had it
in contemplation to return any of those mem-
bers for the county, the inhabitants of which,
if they acted in obedience to those resolutions,
must have elected ten to represent themselves.
Will Mr. Kirwan’s counsel demonstrate that
lie has not violated the law of the land, by
shewing that he has disobeyed the proclamation
of lord Fingall, and that the election in Lifl’ey-
street was so stupidly managed, that contrary
to' the mandates of that proclamation, the
county of Dublin were to have two sets of re-
presentatives conflicting with each other? Hut
upon what is this alledged variance made to
rest ?—upon the cross-examination of Mr. Shep-
pard, saying, upon his belief and hearsay that
he understands that part of St. Alary’s catholic
parish, comprehended the parish of St. George.
No witness has been produced to prove the fact
positively, and if there had, has any witness
been produced to prove for what'district the
election was intended? I ask again as in ano-
ther pa;t of the case, why have not doctor
Sheridan and doctor Burke been produced ? the/
might have sworn that the election was partly
38


for the county; they might account for the dis-
obedience of lord Fingall’s resolutions, as in-
tentional or accidental—they might have told
you that they did not intend to pursue them,
and did intend to elect city delegates for the
county, although the county was to have elected
members for itself; or they might have asserted
that they blundered the election, and in point
of fact, made a return different from that which
was required from them, or that which they wish-
ed to make. But in the absence of any such
testimony, are you gentlemen of the jury to pre-
sume in favor of Mr. Kirwan, that he and his
friends were acting in direct contradiction to their
own professed objects, and acquit him by impli-
cation of having transgressed the law, by convict-
ing him of having frustrated his own most delibe-
O O
rate intentions ? v
Gentlemen of the jury, Mr. Burrowes
has Jabored to awaken your jealousy, by
calling the present prosecution an arbitrary
attack upon the subject’s right of petitioning,
and he has represented the King’s Government,
as having declared war against the constitution
of the country. —He is never more eloquent
than when inspired by those ardent and virtuous
feelings which animate his zeal for the constitu-
tional and free principles, which I know to be
dear to his heart; I must appeal however to his


cooler mind, and ask him if the law of the coun-
try prohibits petitioning by delegation ; whether
those that enforce that law can be justly held up
to public odium, as having taken up arms
against the constitution ? and 1 would further
ask any man of plain unsophisticated under-
standing, uncorrupted by refinement, whether
he seriously believes that such an assembly as
lord Fingall’s resolutions of the 9th of July have
announced to the public, be in reality a mere
and a fair proceeding in the exercise of the right
to petition. I would ask him, whether an as-
sembly, consisting of between six and seven-
hundred persons, {for I believe the Attorney
General has much under-rated their numbers,)
comprehending all the orders of the Roman
Catholic, people, partly self-appointed, partly
returned, by all who may choose to return them,
collected in a theatre, with open galleries, for
the admission of mobs and note takers, sitting
as long as they please, from day to day, and
month to month, under no man's controul, sub-
ject to no discipline; debating publicly all de-
scriptions of topics, and circulating those de-
bates over the empire, by the means of a licen-
tious press, be in reality an association, for the,
purpose of, exercising the legitimate right of
petitioning the Parliament.—l rely not at this
moment, upon the uncontradicted testimony of
the witnesses for the crown, that the members


returned to this committee were to manage the
other affairs of the catholics, as well as conduct
their petition to parliament; but. [ put it ge-
nerally to every man’s common sense, whether
the very formation of the assembly j bears any
resemblance to the mere exercise of the right
of petition, whether any man can believe that
such a society would stop there, and whether
any established government could te justified
in permitting such a committee to exist, if the
laws of the land were sufficient to suppress it.
Mr. Burrowes is obliged to admit, that whatever
description of assembly the Cdnvention Act
prohibits, is in its origin unlawful, he has con-
ceded that the Catholic committee might, by
its conduct fall within the Convention Act; and
thus has been compelled to argue, and he must
allow me to say he has argued feebly, that it
is upon its subsequent conduct, that its illegality
must depend, and has exposed himself to call
those inconsistencies, which, 'on a former occa-
sion were pointed out, and which result from ad-
mitting that an assembly may be illegal in its
inception, that the magistrate may immediately
disperse it as such ; that any man taking the
smallest part in the formation of it, even adver-
tizing an election for it, is guilty of a misde-
meanor, although the assembly should never
F


meet, and yet that its subsequent demeanor
is alone to decide on its unlawfulness: I shall
not repeat what I formerly said of the danger-
ous nature of such associations, and of the po-
licy of that law, which being founded on their
probable mischief, strikes at their original for-
mation ; but I ask who can answer for the du-
ration of such an assembly as the Catholic
committee ? Mr. Burrowses has been instruct-
ed upon this occasion, to bespeak the favor, of
the Jury, by insinuating* that if government
had not rudely interfered with their meeting,
they would themselves have dissolved in a mo-
ment after voting their petition, and have
died a suicide death in five minutes after assemb-
ling. Gentlemen, this was no bad topic in
a defence which rejects nothing, but in hinting
such a result to you, was Mr. Burrowes obey-
ing his instructions, or speaking from his expe-
rience ? Is such his recollection of the sittings
of the Catholic committee ? Was he aware
that he would he called upon to reconcile such
a suggestion with a very different description of
the Catholic committee upon the former trial,
when in one of the most eloquent passages of
the most eloquent speech he not merely argued
upon the necessity for such a committee perpetu-
ally existing, not merely asserted that the Catho-
lics never had been without such a committee


for half a century, but described in glowing lan-
guage the comprehensive duties of such a con-
vention, assembled for the purpose of keeping
up a perpetual appeal to public opinion,
watching the course of public events, abating
prejudices, obviating difficulties, hovering, if
I may so, over the catholic interests with per-
manent superintendance, riding in the whirlwind,
and taking their chance of directing the storm.
If Mr. Bqrrowes be now instructed to talk of
their five minutes existence, and their suicide
dissolution, let me suppo.se for a moment that
those who have instructed him so to speak,
had shortly before they so instructed him, at
what he calls a memorable festival, pledged
themselves and him to a different sentiment.
Let me suppose that they had announced by
one of the solemnities of such a meeting, their
prayer " that the catholic committee might be
dissolved by catholic emancipation,” and thus
of necessity have implied their determination
that the committee should permanently con-
tinue until 'parliament should have conceded to
their wishes, and yielded the last trench in
the contest. I would then desire him to recon-
cile his former and his present speech with each
other, and with his client. I would ask him
whether it was a justifiable charge which accus-
ed the government of a wish to obstruct the sub


ject’s right to petition, because they put in’ force
the law against unlawful assemblies, and I
would tell him, ■ that those against whom he di-
rects the charge, are as much attached to the
free constitution of the country as he is himself,
and that because I value and cherish the sacred
right of petitioning, I trust not, merely, that it
may never be invaded and never forfeited, but
that it may never be abused.
I wish that he had spared another to-
pic, and had not charged the government of
the country with a determination to put down
the catholic, people. I should, hope, and I be-
lieve that those words hastily escaped his lips,
and that he had scarcely uttered them, till he
wished to retract them., They suit not with his
character, who is less distinguished by splendid
talents than by the virtues of his heart, and
who I am sure would not condescend to adopt
the vulgar calumny which flings indiscriminate
obloquy and imputes intolerance and bigotry to
every man engaged, however conscientiously in
the discharge of public duty. I shall not deny
that the imputation coming from him wounds
me, and that I had hoped that in twenty
years in’which I have not ceased to love and ad-
mire him, and in which I have labored to de


serve his esteem, I had not earned the charac-
ter of a bigot: I acquit him of intending such
a charge—but those who are every day indulging
in such an accusation, little know the men
against whom they direct it; they little know
the exalted and noble personage who presides
in the government of this country, or the cha-
racters of those who have the honor to serve him,
if they suppose them to be actuated by bigotry
and intolerance, or of prejudice against our
fellow subjects on account of their religious
opinions. Intolerance! —every sound understand-
ing condemns, and every honest heart abhors
such a sentiment. There is no man who will
not embrace the abstract principle of toleration
•—there is no man who will deny that religion
is a question between man and his God. and
that every man should be unmolested in the free
exercise of his particular faith. What is so
strongly expressed in the introductory resolu-
tions of the 9th of July, to which lord Fih-
gall’s name appears, is a truism and first
principle. As a first principle, no one will deny
that civil disabilities ought not to affect a man
for his speculative tenets —as a first principle,
I would say that the privileges of every free
country, ought, like the mercy of Heaven to
be open to all persuasions, and that my poli-
tical opinions would not less revolt against an


exclusive constitution, than my religious prin-
ciples would be shocked by an exclusive salva-
tion.—Those principles .founded upon abstract
justice, ought to be strained to the highest
in their application to the affairs of mankind,
but what is their application, and by whom is
it to be made ? With relation to the affairs of
Ireland, the prevailing delusion of the coun-
try, consists in always treating the question of
catholic emancipation, as a question of meta-
physical first principle, and in representing
the Penal Code as an original aggression com-
mitted by persecution and intolerance against
the professors of the catholic faith —those who
reason so, much mistake and much forget
The Penal Code grew out of political events,
connected with the most calamitous periods of
our history, and is the fruit of civil discord and
distracted times—l wish not to recall the me-
mory of those misfortunes —that they should
have produced a necessity for such laws every
one must lament —that such necessity should
have ceased, and that the severest provisions of
those laws should have been repealed every one
must rejoice. But with respect to what remains,
the wisest and the best men in the empire differ
from each other, both as to the principle, the
time, and the degree. Some of the warmest ad-
vocates of the measure consider it a serious ques-*


tiou of concession on the one hand, and se-
curity on the other, and would tremble rash-
ly to apply an abstract principle to an estab-
lished order of things, without providing against
all the danger which even the best changes
are calculated to produce in political con-
cerns. What then is the fair result from
the tendency of this grave and comprehen-
sive and delicate question ? Surely every man
attached to the peace of his country, must
answer, —leave it to parliament. Entrust it
not to popular discussion and agitation, alarm-
ing in proportion to its importance, in self-creat-
ed conventions. Let the Catholics approach
the throne and the legislature with their peti-
tions in the manner in which they well know
that they may be conducted, but let them not
suppose that those petitions are to be made
a pretence for a distinct and Catholic parliament.
The wisdom of the legislature must be suppos-
ed adequate to the difficulties of the emp’re, and
to that wisdom let them be submitted.—l mean
not to adopt a course, which I have reprehend-
ed in another, and discuss a political question in
a court of justice: I am no political character,
but I am anxious to repel the charge of bigotry,
and to disabuse, if possible, that prejudice which
would identify an opposition to the Catholic
committee, with intolerance to the Catholic re


ligion.—l trust that it is neither bigotry or into-
lerance to maintain the law and the public peace,
and I am sure that no man, whether he is bound
by official duty, or interested individually in the
tranquillity of the country can answer it to him-
self, if he stands by and sees a self-created
Convention defying the laws, and bearding the
government. Let the Catholics, I repeat it,
pursue their object legitimately; but let them
not cut their way to the temple of the constitu-
tion through the wounded laws of the land :
That cannot be permitted.—l trust that parlia-
ment may throw the portals of that temple, open
to them as my heart, as far as is consistent
with the interests of the empire, the connection
of the islands, and the safety and integrity of
the constitution : I trust that the legislature in
its comprehensive wisdom may so adjust and
reconcile, and secure the interests of all, that a
system may be established, which though not
young, I hope that I may live to see; which
will leave to the Catholic nothing to complain
of, and to the Protestant nothing to fear. But
is this desirable consummation to be at-
chieved by the formidable and illegal as-
sumption of the Catholic committee ? I speak
with alarm and reprobation of that commit-
tee as a body—l know at the same time, that


many of its members, several valuable men hi
my own profession, the noble lord who has at-
tended during the greater part of this trial, and
his friends and his connections engaged in it
O O
originally with fair, objects and pure motives,
not knowing that they were violating the laws
of their country, and blind to the danger of
such an association, and the mischiefs into
which it precipitates the most innocent and
well meaning: but while I do justice to their
motives, I shall not shrink from speaking my
mind of the body to which they belong, and
shall assert my firm conviction, that the Ca-
tholic committee has been the deadliest foe
of the Catholic cause, and has been calcu-
lated beyond all other measures, to'disgust its
friends, and give triumph to its enemies.—
What I repeat, it is the pretence for this fran-
tic project of a convention ? a proceeding only
calculated for a disorganized government, and
an extreme case' ? Are those the days of
nimede and the revolution ? Has our King re-
belled against his subjects like John, or abdi-
cated them like James ? Has any thing hap-
pened to put the people Upon constituting a
new representative ?—Our empire is powerful,
our constitution is free, our administration of
justice is perfect, our parliament is enlighten-
ed, our Prince is magnanimous; we enjoy
Ct


every blessing that should inspire love for our
country, and courage to defend it.
Gentlemen, I have disclaimed the right
of calling upon you for a healing verdict, but
allow, me to say, that if yon are satisfied of
Mr. Kirwan’s guilt, (and 'otherwise I wish not
for his conviction,) I doubt not that your de-
cision will be salutary to your country. Pu-
nishment'is not the object of this-prosecution,
which is not vindictive, but. exemplary : I trust
that its effects,will be to bring back to their ha-
bitual respect for the Jaws of their country, the
noble lord, and honorable and worthy men who
have, been misled upon .the Convention Act,
who have been .induced i to persevere in its
violation by- error, and who. have.unfortunately
engaged themselves in. the infatuated project of
establishing the Catholic committee.—l trust
that their eyes rnay be opened; that they may
not J)e , influenced by false shame to persevere
in what is wrong, but feel that true pride and
honor consist in acknowledging and retracting
a fault. , I trust that their example may be fob
lowed by others; that harmony may be : restored
amongst us, and that the consequence of this
trial may be the establishment of the law, and
the pacification, of the country.
FINIS.
