

A Record of the Actions of
THE HONGKONG VOLUNTEER
DEFENCE CORPS
in the
BATTLE FOR HONG KONG
December, 1941.




A RECORD OF THE ACTIONS OF THE
HONGKONG VOLUNTEER
DEFENCE CORPS
IN THE
BATTLE FOR HONG KONG
DECEMBER, 1941


Printed by
YE OLDE PKINTERIE, LTD.
Hong Kong
First published 1953
Reprinted 1956


FOREWORD
In justice to the officers and men of the garrison of Hong Kong,
it will be well to place on record certain points which, though obvious
to us at the time, may not be equally obvious to future historians.
The requirements of empire strategy in other theatres of war
rendered it impossible for full provision to be made for troops forming
the garrison, who were consequently deficient of much essential
material. We were lamentably weak as regards sea and air power;
we had few anti-aircraft batteries, and those we had were very short
of ammunition for training purposes; we had no radio-location
equipment; the infantry battalions were, until just before the actual
outbreak of war, without mortars, weapons on which the enemy so
largely relied; and, owing to shortage of manpower we had to rely
for transport mainly on personnel whose reliability was very much
an unknown quantity.
It was especially unfortunate that the situation in other theatres
of war had not permitted earlier despatch of infantry mortars and
ammunition. Ammunition for the three-inch mortars arrived in
November 1941, and then only 70 rounds per battalion—for practice
and war. The men had had no previous practice or preliminary
shooting with the two-inch mortar; in fact, two-inch ammunition was
actually served out in battle. There was neither pack-mule equipment
nor carrying equipment for the three-inch mortars.
Our inability to make air reconnaissance was a serious handicap;
our only knowledge of enemy dispositions and troop movements was
obtained from ground observation, and was limited to such enemy
forces as were actually in contact with our troops. The impossibility
of making sea reconnaissance, and our consequent uncertainty
regarding the safety of the south coast of the island necessitated our
keeping troops in places where enemy landings might be made. This
reduced the number of troops available as reserves for counter-attacks.
Our scanty forces had to guard the whole coast-line of the island as
well as cope with an invading force at one particular point.
The Japanese domination of the air not only enabled them to
observe our positions and troop movements and direct their artillery
fire, but also to use their air-force to cover infantry attacks. In the
later stages of the fighting, their dive-bombing attacks played an
important part in their capture of Mount Cameron and advance along
the line of the gaps. Furthermore, the scanty opposition to the
frequent enemy air-raids had a disheartening effect on our troops,
particularly during the last few days when the enemy aircraft were
able to attack us almost with impunity.


In addition to the advantages which the Japanese possessed in
complete sea and air domination, and their enormous preponderance
in artillery, they had considerable superiority in numbers of fighting-
men. They put into the field three divisions against our two brigades.
In addition, during the fighting on the island, our troops, for reasons
given above, had to maintain static defence, and it was thus possible
for the Japanese to throw overwhelming numbers against one particular
sector.
Japanese agents had an easy time during the period immediately
preceding the outbreak of hostilities. Until the actual declaration
of war it was impossible for us to take action against Japanese nationals
and pro-Japanese Chinese in the Colony. The enemy had complete
maps of the island, on which our fixed positions were shown. On
both mainland and island Japanese troops were led by local guides,
sometimes willingly, more often under compulsion. Saboteurs
disrupted our communications and, in one instance, actually cut the
‘leads’ of a demolition after the covering-party had withdrawn.
Armed enemy agents sniped our troops at night; others were caught
signalling to the Japanese troops. We learned later that several local
Japanese, some of them well-known, had received citations for the
work they had done prior to and during the period of hostilities.


THE DEFENCE PLAN
Previous to November 1941, when the garrison comprised four
regular battalions, the Defence Plan had been that one infantry
battalion, the 2/14 Punjab Regiment, should operate on the main-
land, fighting delaying actions. This battalion was to make its
final withdrawal to Devil’s Peak Peninsula, where the Ma Lau Tong
Line had been constructed. Two infantry battalions, the 2nd Royal
Scots and the 5/7 Rajputs, and one machine-gun battalion, the Ist
Middlesex, together with the HKVDC were to form the island
defence. Two HKVDC units, the Field Company Engineers and
the Mobile Machine Gun Company, were also to operate on the main-
land; the Field Company being responsible for the road and railway
demolitions and the M.M.G. as covering troops.
On the news of the despatch of the two Canadian battalions,
a new Defence Plan was prepared. This was modelled on a plan
suggested in 1938. It was decided to have a complete brigade on
the mainland, and to hold the enemy there as long as possible.
Detailed reconnaissance work was carried out, and the so-called
“Gin-drinkers Line” was selected. Work on this was pushed forward
rapidly despite the fact that it was the malarial season. The Royal
Scots, who were working in the vicinity of Tsun Wan, a notoriously
unhealthy district, suffered severely.
The new plan also entailed an alteration in the formation of the
HKVDC. The Mobile Machine Gun Company had no role to
perform in the new scheme, and the members of that unit were
consequently transferred to Nos. 1 and 2 companies.
The mainland forces, under the command of Brigadier C. Wallis,
were as follows: the 2nd Battalion Royal Scots (Lieut.-Colonel S. M.
White, MC) held the left sector from the Texaco Peninsula to the
Shing Mun Redoubt; the 2/14 Punjabis (Lieut.-Colonel G. R. Kidd)
were in the centre, and the 5/7 Rajputs (Lieut.-Colonel J. Cadogan-
Rawlinson) were on the right, the end of the line being the sea near
Shatin railway-station. Owing to the extensive front, each battalion’s
lay-out consisted of a line of platoon localities, the gaps between
which were covered by fire by day and by patrolling at night. One
company only of each battalion could be kept in reserve, and this
was normally located in a prepared position covering the most
dangerous line of enemy approach. The reserve company of the
centre battalion (2/14 Punjabis) was employed initially as “Forward
Troops” on the Taipo Road to cover the demolition parties and to
delay the enemy’s advance.
The Field Company Engineers of the HKVDC, under Major
J. H. Bottomley, were responsible for the demolitions on road and
railway from Fanling back to Shatin, and were consequently also in
the forward area; as also were HKVDC Armoured Cars, under
2/Lieut. M. G. Carruthers. No. 1 Company HKVDC (Captain


A. H. Penn) was at Kai Tak airfield, acting as local protection and
as reserve for the Gin-drinkers Line. One platoon of No. 1 Company
had recently been equipped with Carriers, and this platoon, under
2/Lieut. R. Edwards, was patrolling the Castle Peak Road. Mainland
artillery comprised one troop of 6 inch Howitzers, one of 4.5 inch
Howitzers, and two troops of 3.7 inch Howitzers.
On the island were the Ist Battalion Middlesex (Lieut.-Colonel
H. W. M. Stewart, OBE, MC); the Ist Battalion Winnipeg Grenadiers
(Lieut.-Colonel J. L. R. Sutcliffe) and the Ist Battalion Royal Rifles
of Canada (Lieut. Colonel W. J. Home). The HKVDC units on
the island, under Colonel H. B. Rose, MC, comprised four batteries
and one AA battery; three rifle companies, three machine-gun
companies, one LMG anti-aircraft company; Corps and Fortress
Signals; the Field Ambulance Company, the ASC Company; Supply
and Transport Section; Pay Detachment; the Stanley Platoon, the
Special Guard Company, the Hughes Group, or ‘hughesiliers’ (Home
Guardsmen who were later to make themselves famous); and the
Nursing Detachment.
The Island Commander was Brigadier J. K. Lawson, MC, of the
Canadians.
It was unfortunate that neither the Royal Scots nor the Rajputs
had sufficient time to become acquainted with their battle positions.
In fact, of our six infantry battalions only two knew their roles in
detail—the Middlesex, who were on beach defence on the south and
west of the island, and the Punjabis who had throughout been
“Mainland Troops”. The Canadians, who only arrived in the Colony
on November 16th, had no time even to become acclimatized, much
less to leant the peculiar geographical features of the country. Another
month or two would have made a vast difference.
THE OPENING PHASE
During the first few days of December, the political situation
became critical. By December 7th all troops were in their battle
positions. Major Grey with the Forward Troops was at Fanling,
maintaining frontier observation posts. With him was z/Lieut. I. B.
Tamworth with a demolition party of HKVDC Engineers.
At 0445 hours on December Bth, our Intelligence picked up a
Tokyo broadcast giving code instructions to Japanese nationals that
war with Great Britain and the U.S.A. was imminent. Word was at
once sent to Major Grey, and orders given that the forward demolitions
should be exploded.
By 0645 the garrison had been warned that the British Empire
and Japan were at war; but to the vast majority of the civilian popu-
lation the first intimation came at 0800 hours when Japanese aircraft
attacked Kai Tak airfield and damaged or destroyed five RAF and
eight civil planes, thus putting our entire air force out of action.
Shamshuipo barracks were also attacked, but there were few casualties,
the troops having already deployed.


At 0800 hours our observation posts beyond Fanling reported
that enemy troops were crossing into Laffan’s Plain by the hundred.
The force there was estimated at a battalion, and later information
showed that this advance force attacked on a two-battalion front,
one making across country by way of Lallan’s Plain, the other using
the Taipo Road.
Opinions varied as to the strength of the Japanese forces. It is
now known that Lieut-General Sakai used two divisions, with a
third in reserve. The strength of the division which later landed
on the island was given by the infantry commander, Lieut-General
(then Major-General) Ito Takeo at rather more than 20,000 men, and
we can assume that the total Japanese force was about 60,000 men.
In accordance with his instructions, Lieut. Tam worth destroyed
two bridges at Lowu, completing the demolition by 0830 hours.
While doing this, he and his party were within easy rifle range of the
Japanese sappers who were constructing a bridge over the Shumchun
River. Tamworth then withdrew to Gill’s Cutting, where four mines
had previously been prepared. By arrangement with Major Grey, and
after all transport had been withdrawn, Tamworth exploded the mines
and established blocks on the road and railway. He then withdrew
his party to Taipo Market, where Major Bottomley was waiting.
Meanwhile the Punjabis were slowly withdrawing. The Japanese
battalion moving down the Taipo Road was a constant menace to
their left flank, and Major Grey decided not to attempt any delaying
action until he had made sure of the two main demolitions, No. 731
and R. 34, about a mile north of Taipo.
Here Captain K. S. Robertson had prepared three more bridges
for demolition and, on the visible approach of the enemy, at about
1200 hours, these demolitions were carried out successfully. After
destroying petrol pumps in Taipo Market, the Field Company with-
drew with the Punjabis to a line running inland from the north side
of Taipo Causeway.
It was on this line that Major Grey decided to stand, and soon
after 1500 hours the Japanese advance party attacked and was driven
off. A platoon of Punjabis had been posted wide on the left as a
flank guard. At 1830 hours an enemy detachment, led by three
Chinese guides, walked into the ambush, and practically the whole
detachment was wiped out. At about 1900 hours the Armoured
Cars participated in another ambush, when a Japanese platoon, moving
down the road in close formation, was annihilated.
The Japanese then commenced outflanking tactics, sending
patrols through the hills, and Major Grey withdrew his troops south
of the Taipo Causeway. Meanwhile Major Bottomley’s men had
prepared three more demolitions, which were exploded successfully;
Forward Troops then withdrew to the vicinity of Cheung Shiu Tan.
The Japanese advance during the day had been rapid, but there
was no slackening off after nightfall. The enemy continued to press


forward in small parties, led by guides who knew the least-frequented
paths over the hills, and the Punjabis were continually in danger of
being outflanked. At 2030 hours Captain Robertson blew up the
railway tunnel. The explosion unfortunately destroyed Major Grey’s
communications with his left flank platoon, under Lieut. Biair, and
it was necessary to put a time-table into operation. The Japanese
continued their outflanking movements, and Major Grey decided on
another withdrawal. At 2200 hours and 2230 hours the next two
road-bridges were destroyed. At the second of these Captain F. A.
Redmond had provided two circuits—one an electrical one, one a
time-fuse. Sgt. R. J. V. Everest lit the time fuse, but some of the
Japanese advance party were on his heels and they cut the fuse. They
were presumably congratulating themselves upon having saved the
bridge when the electrical circuit was completed and bridge and
Japanese went up together.
At midnight Forward Troops were at Taipo Mai, but enemy
patrols were soon again threatening the left flank and at 0100 hours
on the 9th a further withdrawal was made to the Fo Tan Valley.
At 0200 hours Field Company Engineers were withdrawn to
Kowloon Railway Station, leaving two demolition parties near Kowloon
Reservoir. Major Bottomley reported that all demolitions had been
successfully carried out along the Taipo Road.
On the other route, the Casde Peak Road, where the enemy did
not appear, all demolitions were successful, except at the Dairy Farm,
where a daring saboteur slipped in after the covering party had with-
drawn, and cut the leads. He was killed while trying to repeat this
feat at the next demolition.
At dawn on the 9th, the Punjabis were on Tau Fung Shan
Monastery Ridge, near Shatin, their last point of withdrawal before
reaching the Line. Here they had artillery support as well as full
co-operation of the Armoured Cars. During the day the Japanese
offered a number of excellent targets for the artillery. At 1800 hours
Major Grey withdrew his men to the Gin-drinkers Line. Forward
Troops carried out their role excellently and inflicted heavy loss on
the enemy.
THE MAINLAND BATTLE
Throughout the afternoon of December 9th, enemy patrols were
active along our front. In the left sector, on the tracks leading south
from the Kam Tin area, men of the Royal Scots had several encounters
with the enemy, and confirmed that their patrols were in many cases
led by local guides. The enemy scouts and snipers were well-
trained and knew their work. They carried small camouflage nets
rolled on their shoulders and their quilted uniforms were designed
for the insertion of grass and twigs.
Now that the fighting had come near Kowloon, arrangements
were made during the night for the evacuation of Chinese villagers
from places near the battle area. Also at 2200 hours the last CNAC


planes left Kai Tak aerodrome for Free China. With them went
Lieut.-Colonel H. Owen Hughes, HKVDC, who was to act as liaison
officer with the 7th Chinese Military Zone.
THE SHINGMUN REDOUBT
As can be seen on the map, the longest part of the line, that
extending from Texaco Peninsula to Shingmun Redoubt was also the
most vulnerable. It was held by the Royal Scots; ‘A’ Company
being on the right, with a platoon occupying the redoubt; ‘B’ and ‘C’
companies holding the centre and left, with ‘D’ Company in reserve.
It was expected that the redoubt would effectually prevent any enemy
penetration into the Shingmun river valley. During the early part
of the night there was much enemy activity along our front, chiefly
against the Punjabis’ position. The Punjabis’ line was very thin,
where it joined with the Royal Scots line at Shingmun, and Brigadier
Wallis moved the reserve company of the Rajputs (under Captain
H. R. Newton) across to strengthen this weak spot.
Soon after 2300 hours Captain Newton reported that Japanese
were moving down the Shingmun Valley, below the reservoir, across
his front. *A’ Company Royal Scots reported having heard explosions
from the direction of the redoubt, and heavy enemy pressure in the
Pineapple Pass area. Within an hour it became all too clear that the
redoubt, together with the artillery observation post, had fallen into
enemy hands at the very first onset.
This was a major disaster, for the redoubt was the key position
to the left sector, and its loss endangered the whole of the left flank,
and indeed the whole of the Gin-drinkers Line. ‘B’ and ‘C’
Companies Royal Scots, positioned on the Texaco Peninsula and on
the road leading from Tsun Wan to Pineapple Pass, now had their
right flank exposed.
During the remainder of the night there was confused fighting
in the Shingmun Valley, where the Rajputs finally hustled the
Japanese back past the reservoir and into the redoubt. A proposal
was made by Lieut.-Colonel Kidd for an immediate counter-attack on
the redoubt, but this was ruled out on the grounds that the nearest
troops that could be spared were a mile away, that the ground was
rugged and precipitous and the enemy at the redoubt probably far
superior numerically to any force we could bring against them without
seriously weakening other parts of our line.
As the line appeared to be weakest in the area immediately west
of the redoubt, ‘D’ Company Royal Scots (Captain D. Pinkerton),
which had been acting as reserve company, was put in on the left
of ‘A’ Company. As a further reinforcement, the reserve company
of the Winnipeg Grenadiers was brought across the harbour and
stationed at the junction of the Taipo and Castle Peak roads.
At about 0930 hours on the 10th the enemy pushed forward in
force from the Shingmun Redoubt. The Rajputs engaged them


and with artillery support, drove them back with, as Captain
Newton reported, heavy losses. A proposal was made that Captain
Newton’s company should follow up their success and make a counter-
attack on the redoubt, while the enemy in that area were demoralised.
A forward movement of the company, however, would have left a
wide gap on the left of the Punjabis’ position; and the Japanese
were already pressing attacks all along the Punjabis’ front, and trying
to infiltrate. By midday Newton’s company and *A’ and ‘D’
Companies Royal Scots were fully occupied in repelling attacks as the
Japanese patrols sought to exploit their success and force a passage
between our Centre and Left Sectors.
It was fortunate for us that the demolition of the bridge near
Au Tau on the Castle Peak Road prevented the enemy from getting
any of their transport past that point. The Japanese managed to
get a tractor-drawn battery of 5.9 Howitzers on to the Kam Tin
aerodrome, and this battery bombarded Stonecutters Island and Mount
Davis consistently. Attempts to remove the demolitions on the
Castle Peak Road were prevented by H.M.S. Cicala, gunboat, which
was covering the left flank of the Royal Scots, and which successfully
broke up every attempt of Japanese working parties to repair the
damage to the road. The little gunboat also did splendid service in
bringing flanking fire to bear on enemy troops pressing forward to
attack the front held by ‘B’ and ‘C’ Companies Royal Scots —the
Pineapple Pass track. At about 1500 hours Japanese aircraft
commenced vigorous attacks, and though their dive-bombing on that
occasion was most inaccurate, the gunboat had little chance. At
about 1615 hours she received a hit which necessitated her going to
Aberdeen for repairs.
It having been decided that any attempt to recapture the
Shingmun Redoubt was out of the question, it was vitally necessary
to alter the line and to withdraw ‘B’ and ‘C’ Companies Royal Scots
from their exposed position.
This was done after dark. The troops withdrew quietly; the
enemy, though actually in contact with them, not realising that any
movement was being carried out, and the withdrawal was completed
without incident though “the two companies required a certain
amount of adjustment before dawn.” The new line ran from the
south end of the Shingmun Reservoir through Golden Hill to
Laichikok, and was the weakest part of our defence, as it included
the Pass west of Golden Hill, which was regarded as one of the two
“very vulnerable features.”
THE BATTLE OF GOLDEN HILL
During the early hours of the nth, the Japanese patrols, feeling
their way forwards, came into contact with our men on the left of
Golden Hill. During the remainder of the night they were busy
bringing up their reserves and infiltrating in small parties through
the very thin line of defence. The attack came at dawn all along


the line held by ‘B’ and ‘C’ companies. By 0700 hours the enemy
had occupied Golden Hill. The two companies of Royal Scots were
absolutely overwhelmed by superior numbers. Both company com-
manders were killed and more than sixty of the men were casualties.
The remainder fell back in considerable confusion but were not
overrun. A complete disaster was prevented by the vigorous action
of ‘D’ Company, stationed on the right of Golden Hill. These
counter-attacked the enemy and succeeded in regaining possession of
the hill; and, though they were unable to hold it in face of the large
numbers of the enemy attacking, they were able to keep possession
long enough for the remainder of ‘B’ Company to extricate itself
from what might have been a complete trap. Carruthers’ armoured
cars and Edwards’ carriers were rushed forward along the Castle Peak
Road and covered the retreat of *C’ Company, while the Reserve
Company Winnipeg Grenadiers was moved forward towards Laichikok.
These measures checked any further Japanese forward movement
in the area; though, considering their numbers—it was estimated that
the attacking force was two battalions—the pause in the attack seems
strange. Actually for the remainder of the day, the enemy made no
further attempt to push forward in the Laichikok area, though there
was considerable activity along the front of the Rajputs, particularly
around Shatin station area.
The situation, from our point of view, was sufficiently depressing.
The enemy, by holding Golden Hill, could command the road junction
and a considerable part of the Taipo Road, and this endangered all
the units which were using the Taipo Road as a line of supply;
namely, the Punjabis, one company of the Rajputs and two Howitzer
Troops.
THE WITHDRAWAL FROM THE MAINLAND
December nth.
These two disasters made it impossible for us to hold the
Gin-drinkers Line; indeed, west of the Shingmun Valley, held by
Newton’s Rajputs, there was no line. The Royal Scots, one company
of Grenadiers, a platoon of No. i Company HKVDC, the Carrier
Platoon and two Armoured Cars were extended obliquely back almost
to Shamshuipo. At midday orders were given for a withdrawal of
all troops under cover of night; the Rajputs and Punjabis were to
retire to Devil’s Peak, the remainder to Kowloon Peninsula, where
they would embark for the island.
As soon as orders for the withdrawal were given out, the
HKVDC Field Company Engineers began to get busy. Lieut.
Tamworth with Sgt. Palmer and a party carried out demolition work
at the Cement Works and the China Light and Power. Personnel
of the Dock Company thoroughly demolished the docks. The Field
Company also had the task of salving as much transport as possible,
and vehicles of all kinds were rushed to the Vehicular Ferry. No. I


Company HKVDC also had an arduous task. One platoon was
already in action near Laichikok; a second was manning the carriers;
and the remainder had to guard against a surprise attack on the
aerodrome, cover the withdrawal of troops being evacuated from the
east side of the peninsula, deal with Fifth Columnists, looters and
rioters, and finally complete the demolition of the aerodrome.
The withdrawal of three battalions from their forward
position was a most difficult and hazardous operation. There had
been no previous practice for want of time; the night was exceedingly
dark; the troops had to break off contact with the enemy and move,
in some cases, across the front of the advancing Japanese. The two
battalions on the right flank had the hardest task. The Rajputs,
followed by the Punjabis, moved along the line of the Passes—
Kowloon Pass, Shatin Pass, Grasscutters Pass—to Devil’s Peak.
This would have been a strenuous march for light-armed troops
in daylight. The two Indian battalions were carrying all their stores
and equipment and the night was exceptionally dark, rendering
progress along the hill tracks slow and laborious. In addition, the
Punjabis in the rear were in close contact with the enemy, and for
much of the march, were actually fighting a rear-guard action. It
was a remarkable feat that both battalions arrived at Devil’s Peak,
not only intact, but without losing any of their military stores.
In comparison the Royal Scots and the one company of Grenadiers
had an easy task. They retired towards Shamshuipo and Mongkok,
covered by the Carriers and the Armoured Cars, and were taken across
in launches and ferry-boats. When all had been evacuated—just
before midnight—the armoured cars, less one, which had been knocked
out, and the carriers were shipped across on the vehicular ferry-boat.
On the other side of the peninsula, No. i Company HKVDC
completed the demolitions at the aerodrome and then withdrew from
Kowloon City Pier, using the R.A.F. launch.
The troops on Stonecutters Island were withdrawn by ferry-boat
during the same night. These comprised a battery of the HKSRA,
under Major Mills, two platoons of No. 3 Company HKVDC
(Major E. G. Stewart) and some R.E. details. The island had been
shelled and bombed consistently for three days and practically every
building had been hit, but the casualties had been surprisingly small.
No. 3 Company had only lost four men wounded, Cpl. F. E. C. C.
Quah and three Other Ranks.
The evacuation was carried out successfully, all stores removed
as far as was possible, and the remainder, together with the wireless
installations, demolished before the troops embarked. Unfortunately,
soon after the troops had disembarked at the naval yard, the ferry-boat
was sunk, and all stores and kit were lost.
While these withdrawals were proceeding satisfactorily, the
Rajputs and Punjabis were continuing their arduous march on Devil’s
Peak. The Punjabis were unable to carry out the timed programme


for the withdrawal, but through no fault of their own. The
rearguard, comprising part of HQ Company, under Lieut. Forsyth,
was cut off from the main body at Shatin Pass, and so withdrew down
the road to Kowloon City, where they became involved in fighting
with Fifth Columnists as well as with advancing Japanese patrols.
With Pte. B. A. Gellman of No. I Company HKVDC acting as
guide the Punjabis made their way through the streets of the town
to the Star Ferry Wharf. Conditions in Kowloon at this time were
far from pleasant; on the withdrawal of the civil police, rioting and
looting had broken out; shops and houses were being looted and
Fifth Columnists were busy sniping any of our troops who could be
attacked. At the Star Ferry, Forsyth took over charge from the police
and for the remainder of the night the Punjabis guarded the wharf
and assisted refugees onto the ferries, which ran continuously. Soon
after dawn the advance partly of the Japanese appeared and occupied
Kowloon Railway Station. A military police in Salisbury Road
adjured the advance party of Japanese to “double up there and get
a move on”. Then, realising his mistake, he obeyed his own
injunction. The Punjabis engaged them for some time, but on the
approach of the main body of the enemy at about 1000 hours, Forsyth
embarked his men on the last ferry-boat, which left the wharf with
light automatics and rifles firing from her stern. An RAMC Orderly,
wounded in the neck, unable to reach the wharf, swam across the
harbour—no mean feat in such told water. A Punjabi signaller,
similarly cut off and unable to swim, made his way across the harbour
in a life-belt.
Two other companies of Punjabis, delayed by enemy action, did
not reach Devil’s Peak until long after daybreak. Meanwhile the
Rajputs, who had arrived first, manned the Ma Lau Tong Line, with
one troop of 3.7 Howitzers in support.
THE ISLAND BATTLE
THE PERIOD OF WAITING
Already by December nth the Japanese had shown signs of
activity in the near vicinity of the island. On the morning of the
nth the enemy made a landing on Lamma Island and our guns at
Jubilee Fort and Aberdeen went into action against them. During
the afternoon of the same day a party of Japanese in sampans tried to
make a surprise landing on Aberdeen Island, occupied by 3rd Battery
HKVDC (Captain C. W. L. Cole) and a platoon of Winnipeg
Grenadiers. The attack was repulsed by machine-gun fire. Later
still, a concentration of about a hundred junks was seen off Lamma,
and these were engaged by our artillery. On the 12th the Japanese
were seen to be occupying George Island, near Lamma, and there was
considerable activity in that vicinity. This constant menace of a
surprise landing on the west or south-west of the island enforced us
to keep troops on beach defence all along the threatened coast-line.


December I2th. EVACUATION FROM DEVIL’S PEAK
Throughout the day air raids and shelling of the island continued,
chiefly along the North Shore.
On the mainland the Ma Lau Tong Line was bombed
continuously, and at about 1700 hours an attack was launched on
the left of the line. The enemy was about one battalion strong, and
the attack was repulsed with considerable loss to the Japanese. Other
attacks developed along the line, equally unsuccessful, and there was
heavy bombing and mortar fire. It was decided to evacuate the
position and concentrate all troops on the island.
After nightfall the evacuation began and proved even more
hazardous than the previous one. Launch crews deserted and many
launches had been damaged by enemy fire and were unserviceable.
Officers from HQ were sent down to accelerate matters and these
took personal charge of launches, manned in many cases by volunteer
crews. The old W.D.V. Victoria, under charge of Major A. J. Dewar
and Captain C. G. Turner, did excellent work. By 0130 hours on
the 13th the Punjabis had all been evacuated. By 0400 hours
most of the Ist Troop R.A. and one company of Rajputs were
across, though the mules had to be left behind. The tide was now
out, which necessitated the men being ferried out by sampan, and
as daylight was not far off the situation was critical. The Royal
Navy was then called on to assist and responded nobly. Three
M.T.B.s were sent from Aberdeen and a fourth, which had been
covering the right flank of the Ma Lau Tong Line, was also called
in. H.M.S. Thracian also arrived from Aberdeen. Despite all
difficulties the evacuation proceeded rapidly. ‘A’ and ‘C’ Companies
of the Rajputs were holding the second and shorter of the Lines, the
Hai Wan Line. These troops were in close contact with the enemy
and a withdrawal was no easy matter. Fortunately the rough
handling which the enemy had experienced a few hours earlier had
discouraged them from any attack in force. One company covered
the withdrawal of the other, and then retired as rapidly as possible.
Daylight had come and the operations were clearly visible to the enemy
but the last men reached ‘Thracian’ safely and were taken to
Aberdeen.
While the last contingent of the Rajputs was still in transit,
Lieut.-General Sakai sent over a flag of truce with a letter to H.E.
the Governor. The letter made demands tantamount to unconditional
surrender and threatened that, in the event of a refusal, the town and
island would be subjected to heavy artillery and aerial bombardment.
The demand was rejected categorically.
In expectation of an attack on the island, certain preparations
were made which could not have been done during peace time. In
these the Field Company HKVDC took a prominent part. The
Hong Kong Engineering Corps was formed, and Major J. Smith


(HKVDC) established depots at Happy Valley, Kennedy Town,
Pokfulam, Repulse Bay and Stanley. Unfortunately the recruitment
did not come up to expectation, in fact, barely 200 workers were
available. The Corps, under the command of Major Bottomley, in
the absence of Lieut.-Colonel R. D. Walker, MC, who was ill,
carried out a considerable amount of work during the next few days.
The whole front from Shaukiwan to Kennedy Town was wired, sheds
at North Point were destroyed and gun bases were constructed in the
Naval Yard.
December 13 th.
During the day artillery fire was intensified. One of the 9.2
guns on Mount Davis received a direct hit and was knocked out. 4th
Battery HKVDC (Lieut. K. M. A. Barnett) at Pak Sha Wan was
specially singled out for attention. Belcher’s Fort was set on fire
and other serious fires were started in Kennedy Town and West
Point. By midnight further fires had developed, and the Fire Brigade,
which had been hard at work for many hours, asked for military
assistance. The fires were finally got under control by midday on the
14th, but they had a very disturbing effect on civilian morale.
December 14th.
Shelling was equally heavy on this day. Two guns at Belcher’s
Fort were put out of action and an AA Battery at Mount Davis was
completely wrecked. 4th Battery HKVDC was again pounded
■ —the B.C. Post and all internal communications being destroyed.
Lieut. Barnett was wounded and went to hospital and, through some
extraordinary error, the Chinese personnel of the Battery were sent to
Stanley. Their place, however, was filled by a few British gunners,
and 2/Lieut. Sleap took over command until Barnett’s return.
The new organisation was now completed and the island was
divided into two Brigade areas. West Brigade (Brigadier J. K.
Lawson, MC) comprised the Middlesex, Royal Scots, the Punjab
Regiment. The Punjabis were holding the shore-line from the Naval
Yard westwards to Telegraph Bay; the Middlesex carried on from
that point to Stanley peninsula, and were also responsible for the coast
between Causeway Bay and the Naval Yard. The Royal Scots were
in the area around Happy Valley. Brigade HQ was on the road
100 yards West of Wongneichong Gap. East Brigade (Brigadier
C. Wallis) comprised the Rajputs, the Grenadiers and the Royal Rifles.
The Rajputs held the coast-line from Causeway Bay eastwards to
Sai Wan; the Royal Rifles were mainly along the coast from that
point to Stanley; and the Grenadiers were in the Repulse Bay-
Deepwater Bay area. Brigade HQ was at the point where the Shek-O
Road joins Island Road—overlooking Saiwan.
After hostilities began on the island, the Grenadiers were attached
to West Brigade.


The HKVDC units were positioned as follows:
ist Battery (Captain G. F. Rees) Cape D’Aguilar.
2nd Battery (Captain D. J. S. Crozier) Bluff Head, Stanley.
3rd Battery (Captain C. W. L. Cole) Aberdeen Island.
4th Battery (Lieut. K. M. A. Barnett) Pak Sha Wan.
sth Battery (Capt. L. Goldman) Sai Wan Hill.
Field Company Engineers (Major J. H. Bottomley) HQ at
Tai Hang.
Corps Signals (Captain A. N. Braude) HQ at Peak Mansions.
Armoured Car Platoon (2/Lieut. M. G. Carruthers) HQ at
West Brigade HQ
No. 1 Company (Captain A. H. Penn) Tytam Valley.
No. 2 Company (Major H. R. Forsyth) Pottinger Gap and
Big Wave Bay.
No. 3 Company (Major E. G. Stewart) Jardine’s Look-Out.
No. 4 Company (Captain R. K. Valentine) High West, Victoria
Gap and Mount Kellett.
No. 5 Company (Captain C. A. D’Almada) Mount Davis.
No. 6 Company (Captain H. A. de B. Botelho) The North
Shore.
No. 7 Company (Captain J. G. B. Dewar) Magazine Gap,
Wanchai Gap, Middle Gap.
ASC Company (Major F. Flippancc) HQ Deepwater Bay.
Hughes Group (Major the Hon. J. J. Paterson) North Point
Power Station.
The Supply and Transport Section (Major H. G. Williams) was
attached to HKVDC, HQ, which had moved on the 14th from
Garden Road to Peak Mansions. The Field Ambulance Company
(Lieut.-Colonel L. T. Ride) was widely distributed. The Pay
Detachment (Major C. de S. Robertson, MM) was attached to Royal
Army Pay Corps. The Nursing Detachment (Mrs. Braude) was
attached to Army Hospitals.
December 15th. THE ATTEMPTED LANDING
Throughout the day there was systematic shelling of the pill-
boxes along the North Shore, held by ‘C’ and ‘D’ Companies of the
Rajputs. Three were completely demolished and two others were
badly damaged. The most accurate fire came from a high-velocity
small-calibre gun hidden in one of the Kowloon godowns. Aberdeen
and Sai Wan were also shelled.
During the day a “Command Observation Post” manned by men
from the HKVDC Signals, was established on the Peak. This
operated well, although the O.P. was forced to move several times as,
despite every precaution, enemy artillery continued to find it and put
down heavy concentrations.
Later in the day a collection of craft was seen in Kowloon Bay.
Concentrated fire by the 6 inch Howitzers set two craft alight; the


remainder scattered. In expectation of a raid that night, orders were
given that in the event of machine-gun fire being heard from the
North Shore, searchlights should be depressed to illuminate the
harbour.
At 2115 hours, No. 2 Platoon, Royal Rifles, opened fire from
West Fort, Pak Sha Wan. The No. 2 searchlight of 4th Battery
HKVDC was depressed and showed Japanese in considerable
numbers crossing the Channel, using a junk, small rafts and rubber
boats. The battery promptly opened fire and sank the junk, besides
doing considerable damage among the rafts. The small-arms fire of
the Canadians apparently accounted for the remainder. The
Japanese counter-batteries quickly opened with howitzer and 3 pdr.
fire; the searchlight was hit and considerable further damage done to
the fort. Again, at about 2245 hours, the enemy was observed to
be attempting a crossing from San Tong and Sam Ki Tsun Bays.
Fire was opened by aid of the West Fort fixed beam and the North
Shore Lyon Light. 2/Lieut. Sleap reported four enemy craft sunk.
For its prompt action the depleted 4th Battery was commended.
Later that night H.M.S. Thracian carried out a daring raid.
She made her way from Aberdeen across the enemy front on the
peninsula to Kowloon Bay where she sank two ferry-boats filled with
troops.
December 16th.
There was again heavy shelling of the North Shore. There
were also numerous air-raids during the day on Mount Davis, Shek-O,
Lyemun and Aberdeen, where H.M.S. Thracian was hit, causing
casualties. The shelling continued throughout the night and there
was also heavy long-range mortar fire on to the North Shore, where
more pill-boxes were damaged.
December 17th.
At dawn there was a mass air-raid, followed by a heavy
bombardment. Lieut.-General Sakai then sent another flag of truce
with proposals similar to the previous ones. He added a hint that
rejection would mean a more intensive and less discriminating
bombardment. Hostilities were suspended until 1600 hours; after
which the bombardment recommenced. The Field Company
Engineers at Tai Hang received a considerable share of this and orders
were given for their HQ to be moved to Repulse Bay.
December 18th.
There was again heavy shelling of the North Shore, but our
counter-batteries were at last able to hit back vigorously, and they
silenced the enemy guns on Devil’s Peak, at Gun Club Hill and on
the water-front.


The morale of the troops was good but the strain of waiting for
the inevitable enemy landing was not pleasant. It appeared as if
the Japanese were none too eager to make the attempt; at least, not
until the North Shore defences had been ‘softened’ by their artillery
and bombing attacks. This delay was all to the good for us, for
every day was of value. Hong Kong was fulfilling its role as
“an outpost of empire”, since the duty of an outpost is to delay
the enemy and inflict as much damage as possible before being
overrun.
THE LANDING
For the attack on the island, Lieut.-General Sakai brought up
the 38th Division, which had been in reserve during the fighting on
the mainland. This division was commanded by Lieut.-General Sano,
but the actual operations on the island were entrusted to the infantry
commander, Major-General Ito Takeo. The three infantry regiments
of the 38th division were commanded by Colonel Doi, Colonel Tanaka
Ryosabura and Colonel Shoji Toshishige.
After the war, in March and April 1947, three of these com-
manders, Lieut.-General Ito and Major-Generals Tanaka and Shoji,
were tried in Hong Kong for atrocities committed by the troops under
their command during the period of hostilities. Their war-diaries
were produced in evidence. We thus have a clear account of the
enemy forces and of the progress of the battle as seen from the
Japanese side.
From these accounts it appears that the 38th Division was
composed as follows:
The Right Flank Group. This was under the direct command
of Major-General Ito and consisted of two battalions of the 228th
(Colonel Doi) and all three battalions of the 230th Regiment (Colonel
Shoji), with other details.
The Left Flank Group. This was acting independently under
the command of Colonel Tanaka. It consisted of two battalions of
the 229th Regiment, with other details.
The Divisional Reserve Infantry. This was two battalions; one
from the 228th and one from the 229th.
The Right Artillery Group. This apparently included at least
one Mountain Battery.
The Left Artillery Group.
The Kowloon Garrison Force. Strength and composition not
known, but apparently composed of ‘garrison’ or second-line battalions.
An Armoured Unit; light tanks.
Engineers, Signals, Supply and Transport, etc.
The total strength of the division was given at rather more than
20,000 men.


A Japanese infantry regiment (Rentai) normally consisted of
three battalions (Daitai), and each battalion was larger than one of
ours, as it usually comprised a HQ company, a machine-gun com-
pany and four rifle companies. General Ito gave the strength of
each infantry battalion (which included an unspecified number of
gendarmerie) at 1,100 men. The whole force which landed on
the island on the night of December 18/19 was seven battalions, or
rather more than 7,500 men. These were landed in two waves,
timed for 2030 hours and 2230 hours.
On the 19th the Divisional Reserve and both artillery groups
were brought over, and later, as resistance on the island proved to be
stronger, and the Japanese losses considerably greater than had been
anticipated, more troops were brought across from the other two
divisions. It appears that three more Rentals (nine infantry battalions)
were brought over, together with some artillery and some ‘garrison’
battalions.
The attack came on the front from North Point to Lyeemun and
three separate landings were made. Colonel Tanaka with the 229th,
acting independently, took the left or east flank; Colonel Doi, with
the 228th, the centre; Colonel Shoji and the 230th, the right or west
flank. Tanaka’s men landed at Sbaukiwan. Their task was twofold
—to occupy Lyeemun and Sai Wan, and to force a way into Taitam
Valley, either over Mount Parker or through Quarry Gap. They
landed in two waves; the first battalion to land was sent against
Lyeemun, the second against Quarry Gap. Both battalions were to
rendezvous in Taitam Valley.
The 230th landed in the neighbourhood of North Point, also in
two waves, and moved straight inland towards Jardine’s Look-Out
and Wongneichong Gap, which was their principal objective. They
apparently moved across country until they reached Sir Cecil’s Ride.
Colonel Doi’s men landed west of the Docks. Their task was
to take care of the bridge-head and, when possible, push troops
forward to support the 230th. Doi and Shoji were to rendezvous
somewhere in the vicinity of Wongneichong Gap.
Orders seem to have been somewhat vague and it is not surprising
that Major-General Ito reported that he lost touch with all three
units for twenty-four hours. Shoji also spoke feelingly of “the dense
fog” which obscured the landscape on the morning of the 19th.
The fog was mainly mental, and Shoji was by no means the only
sufferer.
The night of December 18/19 was exceptionally dark; the sky
was overcast and there were frequent showers of rain. In addition
the Japanese artillery fire had set fire to the oil tanks near North
Point, and the strong wind brought the smoke in a dense pall over
the northern part of the island. The result was darkness almost
impenetrable. This, we are told, handicapped the Japanese, but was


much worse for the defending force, whose effective field of fire was
reduced to a few yards. As one man later expressed it, “You couldn’t
see a Jap at the end of your bayonet.”
LYEMUN AND SAI WAN
Tanaka’s men carried out their task well. The first battalion
landed on time, overrun No. 2 Platoon of the Royal Rifles, captured
Lyemun Barracks and the 6 inch Howitzer Battery there, and at
2130 hours attacked the much battered 4th Battery at Pak Sha Wan.
No. 1 gun was overrun, but the enemy did not press the attack.
Lieut. H. T. Buxton, believing the fort to be in enemy hands,
collected what men he could and withdrew towards Lyemun Barracks,
hoping to join with the Canadians there. The party was ambushed
and Buxton was killed. Meanwhile the sentry on No. 2 gun was
reporting to Lieut. Barnett that “nothing unusual had occurred.”
Barnett thought otherwise and, with the nine remaining gunners,
opened fire on Shaukiwan, where he guessed correctly that the enemy
was landing.
For some unknown reason, the Japanese made no further attempts
to capture the fort, which was completely isolated. On the morning
of the 20th, Barnett’s party was joined by the survivors of a platoon
of ‘A’ Company, Rajputs, from West Fort. On the 21st, the position
being hopeless, Barnett surrendered.
These men of the Tanaka Butai were tough and seasoned fighters,
and, as will be seen, they were given a large share of the fighting on
the island. They were also the most ruthless and were responsible
for most of the atrocities committed during the fighting. At about
2230 hours they overran the sth (AA) Battery HKVDC at Sai Wan
Hill, the gunners being still unaware that a landing had taken place.
Half-a-dozen were bayoneted, some thirty escaped and twenty
were taken prisoner. These were tied up and kept in confinement
for some hours. They were then taken out and bayoneted, and
their bodies were thrown over the wall. Two Volunteers, Bdr.
Martin Tso Hin-chi and Pte. Chan Yam Kwong (Medical Section)
were left for dead, but managed to crawl away later.
The Salesian Mission at Shaukiwan was being used as an
Advanced Dressing Station, manned by Canadian and British medical
personnel, under Major S. M. Bamfill (RCAMC). When the
Japanese arrived there, they first murdered two wounded officers of
the Rajputs, who were being brought in by ambulance; then they
confined the doctors and orderlies in one room for several hours. In
the early hours of the morning of the 19th, the prisoners were taken
outside, stripped, lined up along the side of the nullah and bayoneted
amidst shouts of laughter from the Japanese onlookers. Three men,
Major Bamfill, Dr. O. Thomas and one orderly, had miraculous
escapes.


The only point that can be quoted in favour of Tanaka’s butchers
is that they did not harm the women; the nurses, V.A.D.s and
members of St. John Ambulance; and that they were not so bestial
as the men who later perpetrated the massacre at St. Stephen’s Hospital.
THE HUGHESILIERS AT THE POWER STATION
Meanwhile the troops forming the first wave of the Doi and
Shoji Butais were making their way on shore between North Point
and the Docks. Scarcely a pill-box remained undamaged and the
thin line of Rajputs, ‘C’ and ‘D’ Companies only, could not hold
the massed attack. Once ashore, as has been said, Shoji’s men pressed
straight on inland, leaving Doi’s men to do the ‘mopping up’.
It was apparently Doi’s men, therefore, who were responsible
for the first of the atrocities on the island, when a number of
members of St. John’s Ambulance Brigade and A.R.P. workers were
arrested and later executed, mostly by beheading.
The Japanese quickly captured the Sugar Factory, and ‘C’
Company was overrun, though a few section posts continued to hold
out for some hours. Further west, Captain Newton with part of
‘D’ Company put up a strong resistance, though Newton himself was
killed. At the Power Station the enemy came up against the
‘Hughesiliers’. These veterans found themselves acting as front-line
troops, in which role they acquitted themselves right nobly.
As a counter-attack, ‘B’ Company Rajputs, under Captain R. G.
Course, moved in from the west side, striking towards Tai Hang,
where they hoped to join up with some survivors of ‘D’ Company.
2/Lieut. Carruthers took an Armoured Car along King’s Road in a
gallant attempt to reach the Power Station; a platoon of Middlesex
followed behind. The Armoured Car was knocked out by a direct
hit from a mobile anti-tank gun, and Carruthers was the only man
not hit. The Middlesex platoon came under the same fire and half
the men were shot down. Most of the survivors managed to reach
the Power Station, where they did splendid work.
At 0145 hours Major Paterson reported that the Power Station
was entirely surrounded by the enemy. He was ordered to hold on
as long as possible in order to assist any other units which might be
resisting in the area. Also it was hoped that ‘B’ Company Rajputs
would soon be able to strike in that direction.
‘B’ Company did make some considerable headway; one platoon
penetrated as far as Braemar Point, and was joined there by the
survivors of ‘D’ Company —thirty-five men, all the officers having
been killed. The Rajputs could not hold their ground, however,
much less move towards the Power Station, and at about 0230 hours
the Company withdrew to a position north-east of Leighton Hill.
Units of the Middlesex holding two pill-boxes in Causeway Bay, tried
to connect up with the Power Station, but this attempt also failed.


Major Paterson and his men, thus isolated, made one of the
finest defences of the whole battle. They held the Power Station
throughout the night; and, when driven out, continued house-to-house
fighting. A party of a dozen Middlesex and Volunteers held the
main office building until it burned over their heads. Part of the
fighting centred round a derelict omnibus in King’s Road, the so-
called ‘Battle of the Bus’. It was here that Pte. T. E. (“Tam”)
Pearce told Paterson that he would as soon be killed under a bus
as roasted alive inside a burning building, and “at the time there
seemed to be quite a bit in what he said—not much choice either
way”. It was here too that after Cpl. R. P. Dunlop and Ptes. V.
Sorby, Pearce and J. Roscoe had become casualties, the last man,
Pte. G. E. Gahagan, drove off an enemy patrol single-handed, killing
the officer and four men with five rounds.
Captain J. K. Jacosta was killed and Captain R. G. Burch
wounded, but the fight continued until well into the morning of the
next day, the 19th, when the enemy completed their mopping-up.
A few of the Hughesiliers managed to get away; Major Paterson with
the others surrendered when the ammunition was exhausted and
further resistance impossible.
THE FIGHT AT QUARRY GAP
When the Hughesiliers and details of the Middlesex and Rajputs
were still holding out on the North Shore, Tanaka’s second battalion
and all three of Shoji’s battalions were advancing against our second
line.
To meet this attack we had two companies of the HKVDC
between Blue Pool Road and Mount Parker. On the left was No. 3
Company (Major Stewart), spread out over a wide area. No. 7
Platoon (Captain L. B. Holmes) occupied three forward posts on the
Ride north of Jardine’s Look-Out. Lieut. B. C. Field with Sgt.
G. J. White and 18 men of No. 9 Platoon occupied the two pill-
boxes on the south-eastern slope; the remainder of that platoon and
No. 8 Platoon (Lieut. D. J. N. Anderson) held section posts on Blue
Pool Road, Stubbs Road, Wongneichong Gap, south end of the Ride
and Stanley Gap.
On the right of No. 3 Company was the whole of the Mount
Butler feature undefended. Beyond that was No. 1 Company with
HQ in Taitam Valley Bungalow. No. 1 Platoon (2/Lieut. B. S.
Carter) was in Quarry Gap, No. 2 Platoon (Lieut. J. Redman) at
Repulse Bay View, too far away to be of any immediate assistance,
and No. 3 Platoon, under 2/Lieut. R. S. Edwards, with the four
carriers, was patrolling the Reservoir Road. On the right of No. 1
Company was ‘C’ Company Royal Rifles, who were holding the
eastern slope of Mount Parker, with one platoon near Boa Vista.
This latter company was in danger of having its flank turned
by the enemy advance to Sai Wan Hill. The Japanese announced


their capture of the hill by a loud-speaker; the position was promptly
shelled and a counter-attack was made by two platoons of Royal
Rifles, while a platoon of No. 2 Company HKVDC was brought
up from Pottinger Gap. The counter-attack failed; there was some
confused fighting in and around Sai Wan, both sides feeling for each
other in the dark. Further west the RA personnel from the battery
at Lyeemun, which had been overrun, were assisting the gunners of
the other 6 inch Howitzer Battery, below Mount Parker, to keep the
enemy from overrunning that also. At one point, where the Japanese
actually reached the gun position, a gunner officer staged a one-man
counter-attack and drove off the enemy single-handed.
Captain Penn, OC, No. 1 Company HKVDC received word
of the enemy landing at 2234 hours and, as telephone communication
with Quarry Gap had been interrupted by shell-fire, went there
himself. He informed the Royal Rifles Company of his intention
and was told that the platoon at Boa Vista would be sent to the Gap
as a reinforcement. Unfortunately the Canadians were unable to
find the way in the intense darkness, and by the time they contacted
the guide sent by Captain Penn, the fight in the Gap was over.
Captain Penn ordered up the L.G. section, under Sgt. F. L.
Curtis, from Company H.K. Reserve, and sent it to occupy the knoll
on the eastern slope of Mount Butler. Cpl. F. M. Thompson with
six men manned tbe weapon-pits near P.B. 45 further down the slope
towards Taikoo, and the remaining fifteen men were spread across the
gap itself, the Vickers Guns, under Sgt. J. P. Murphy, on the right;
the L.M.G.’s about 25 yards forward on the Taikoo path. In all
there were two officers and 29 men. This would have been a
scanty force to hold the Gap in daylight; in pitch darkness, where
every circumstance favoured the attacking force, it was little more
than a forlorn hope.
In view of the non-arrival of the promised reinforcement from
the Canadians, Captain Penn sent back for CSM Edwards to
come up from Taitam Bungalow with the HQ party, and also
intended to withdraw Cpl. Thompson’s party from their advanced
position, but the attack came too quickly. In the Taikoo valley
beneath them a few scattered Rajputs were still resisting—the remains
of ‘C’ Company; others had retired and dispersed over Mount Parker.
The enemy, despite the darkness, advanced comparatively rapidly,
using the path and adjacent tracks.
By 0030 hours Cpl. Thompson’s position was attacked. The
defenders, badly handicapped by want of Verey flares, fired on fixed
lines until the enemy rusbed the position. Three men, two of them
wounded, arrived back at the Gap, another made his way back over
Mount Parker.
Soon after 0100 hours the attack came almost simultaneously on
the knoll and the Gap. Sgt. Curtis’ party had only just reached their
position on the knoll and had barely time to get the gun in action


before the rush swept on to them, but they inflicted considerable loss
on the enemy at point-blank range, and then fought it out with
bayonets. There were two survivors.
The enemy advancing up the Taikoo Path were at first believed
to be some of the Rajputs retreating. Carter shouted, “Who the
Hell are you? Answer or we fire,” and the reply was the banzai
yell, followed by a charge. The little party swept the path and
adjacent hillside with Vickers and L.G. fire for ten minutes and broke
up every attempt of the enemy to rush the position. The darkness,
however, enabled the Japanese to crawl in close and throw grenades,
and also to infiltrate through the very thin line. Captain Penn was
struck on the helmet by a grenade splinter and was temporarily stunned.
At about the same time the LMG’s were overrun. Carter, left
alone on the left side, moved to the other flank and found Sgt.
Murphy, with only three men of his gun-crews left, trying to with-
draw his guns, the enemy being already in his rear. Carter ordered
him to put the guns out of action and fall back along the Taitam
Path. As the Japanese were now through the Gap, Carter, concerned
for the safety of the HKSRA battery in the valley behind, withdrew
down Taitam Path with Sgt. Murphy’s party and two others. Penn,
on recovering, collected three more survivors, one of whom he sent
back to Company HQ to bring up the CSM’s party. The messenger
never arrived, and Penn, after waiting for about twenty minutes,
during which time he had the satisfaction of shooting a Japanese
officer in the very act of sending up the success-signal, realised that
the position was irretrievably lost, and withdrew to Taitam Bungalow.
In this fight No. i Platoon had 19 killed, wounded and missing.
Meanwhile Carter had got word to Lieut. Bompas, commanding
the battery, which at once opened fire on the Gap and adjacent ground.
Tanaka’s two battalions made no further movement during the
night. At dawn his left or easterly battalion, which had penetrated
as far as Sai Wan Hill, began to bring heavy pressure against the
two companies of Royal Rifles which were holding a line from
Mount Parker to Pottinger Gap, linking up with No. 5 Platoon
(Scottish) HKVDC. His right battalion moved forward into Taitam
Valley.
On arriving back at Taitam Bungalow, Captain Penn and 2/Lieut.
Carter collected the survivors of No. 1 Platoon, the HQ party and
a few Rajputs—in all, about thirty men—and disposed them to cover
the bungalow and the battery.
At dawn the battery commenced shelling the enemy on the
opposite slopes, below Mount Parker. This continued for some hours;
the Japanese, evidently unaware how small a force was opposing them,
made no attempt to advance against Penn’s front, contenting them-
selves with long-range fire.


THE FIGHT AT JARDINE’S LOOK-OUT
The three battalions of Shoji’s Rentai, as has been said, were
moving towards Jardine’s Look-Out, mainly using Sir Cecil’s Ride.
Major Stewart received word of the enemy landing from West Brigade
at 2240 hours—nearly two hours after the landing had taken place—
and asked for reinforcements. These were supplied from the HQ
Company, Winnipeg Grenadiers, under Captain Bowden. Four
platoons were sent up and were placed as follows:—Lieut. Macarthy’s
platoon was astride the Ride, immediately below the pill-boxes; Lieut.
Birkett’s platoon was sent to occupy the summit of Jardine’s Look-
Out, but as Birkett found the ascent impossible in the rain and
darkness, this move was postponed until daybreak; Lieut. French’s
platoon was in the gap between Jardine’s Look-Out and Mount
Butler, where they could use the broken catchwater as a trench; and
Lieut. Mitchell’s platoon was in Stanley Gap. In all there were
some 230 Canadians and Volunteers to hold a large area of broken
and difficult ground in face of the three battalions under Shoji’s
command.
The enemy advance party ‘bumped’ the first of our posts on the
Ride just before midnight. This post was held by L./Cpl. D. Hung’s
section, which gave the enemy a very warm reception, on the strength
of which, apparently, a report was sent back to Shoji that the whole
area was ‘heavily fortified.’ After about half-an-hour the main body
of the Japanese appeared, and L./Cpl. Hung withdrew his section to
the next post, known as JLO 2. There was a long and stubborn
fight here. The Japanese located the position of these forward
defended areas by sending ‘suicide squads’ in front, to make as much
noise as possible and draw the fire of the post. At JLO 2 they
attempted to cut the wire, but the wire-cutting party was detected and
wiped out each time. Eventually the position was taken by the
Japanese sending over a constant shower of hand-grenades, under
cover of which some of them crawled under the wire. After that
the fighting was hand-to-hand. Captain Holmes was killed; Sgt.
E. Zimmern, wounded, gave the order to withdraw to JLO 3 and
was killed while trying to cover his men’s withdrawal. L./Cpl.
E. Hing was killed at about the same time. L./Cpl. Hung with a
few men retired but, being cut off from Stanley Gap, made his way
into Happy Valley.
The third post, JLO 3, was not attacked, the Japanese preferring
to by-pass it by going up the hillside. L./Cpl. F. R. Zimmern,
finding that he could do nothing in that area, withdrew his section to
Stanley Gap, where he and his men were a welcome reinforcement.
As soon as it became evident that the Japanese were in
considerable strength, another request was made for reinforcements.
West Brigade then ordered up ‘A’ Company Winnipeg Grenadiers,
under Major Gresham, from Deepwater Bay; their positions around
Little Hong Kong being taken over by personnel from ‘Thracian’.
‘A’ Company unfortunately missed the way, crossed Violet Hill and


became so ‘involved in thick undergrowth’ that Major Gresham halted
and waited for daylight. At dawn the company found itself facing
enemy troops, presumably from Doi Butai. Major Gresham was
killed and the company annihilated.
Shoji’s advance troops, working to time-table, waited for dawn
before advancing further. Shoji stated that he sent one battalion
round either side of Jardine’s Look-Out and the third assaulted the
summit. This delay did us no good, since the promised reinforce-
ment of ‘A’ Company Grenadiers did not materialise; and it served
the enemy in good stead in one instance. Macarthy, whose platoon
straddled the Ride, withdrew to his day positions a quarter of an
hour before dawn, and it was just at that time that the Japanese
advance troops came along the Ride. Their rubber footwear made
no sound and it was. impossible to see them in the darkness.
Macarthy was thus ‘by-passed’; at dawn three of his men joined Sgt.
White’s party in Pill-box 2, the remainder withdrew across the small
valley to protect the Brigade HQ shelters.
Why the enemy did not attempt to rush the two pill-boxes under
cover of darkness remains a mystery. They certainly knew where
they were. It was an error that cost them dearly when daylight
came.
At about 0630 hours, at first light, the Japanese advance party
‘bumped’ the section post held by L./Cpl. R. Ma’s section. They
did not apparently expect this and there was considerable confusion
and shouting, and the main body halted, bunched on the Ride.
There was just light enough for Lieut. Field to see this enemy
concentration in his rear; he opened fire from P.8.l and “the Nips
caught a packet”. Massed on the Ride, they were unable to deploy
or take cover quickly. This broke up the first assault on Wongnei-
chong Gap.
L./Cpl. Ma’s section gave a good account of itself and held the
attack for about a quarter of an hour. The leading enemy platoon
which had advanced in close formation was almost completely
“written-off” and the enemy suffered many more casualties before
they eventually worked around the flank and took the position with
a bayonet charge. Of the nine men in the section five were killed
and three wounded.
Just before 0700 hours a company of Japanese, working up the
stream-bed to avoid the fire from the pill-boxes, rushed Wongnei-
chong Gap, driving back Cpl. M. S. Lau’s section there. The
success-signal went up, but the customary shrill yell of triumph was
rudely cut short by Field who opened fire on the enemy while
massed in the Gap and again scattered them with heavy losses.
Cpl. Lau, with three of his men, held the Gap until the enemy
took Police-Station Knoll (now occupied by House No. 1, Repulse
Bay Road). Lau, the last survivor, cut his way through to the
Deepwater Bay Road and joined with ‘B’ Company, Middlesex.


From Wongneichong Gap the Japanese started an attack up the
hill towards Stanley Gap, held by Mitchell’s platoon of Canadians
and two sections of No. 3 Company, under Lieut. Anderson. The
attack made litde headway against Anderson’s LMG’s and Field
gave valuable assistance by shooting up parties of the enemy who
tried to make their way along the ridge. By 0730 hours, however,
another enemy attack developed from the east side, the enemy coming
along the slope above Reservoir Path. Mitchell’s men had to change
front to meet this threat. The Japanese were in overwhelming force
and Mitchell’s men were literally swamped., A few got away; Mitchell
was killed, as were most of his men. Anderson was killed, Stewart
was wounded and the position was overrun. Stewart, with six others,
retired into the Company HQ shelter; another party, under CQMS
E. C. Fincher, held out in the store-shelter —until the Japanese blew
in the front with a mortar-bomb in the afternoon. Except for these,
the Gap was in enemy hands by 0820 hours.
The identity of this force which came from the east and overran
Stanley Gap is not clear. It seems most likely that it was the
battalion which Shoji declared he sent round the east side of Jardine’s
Look-Out. At his trial, however, he stoutly maintained that none of
his troops had attacked Stanley Gap, and that the capture of the
position and the subsequent atrocities committed there, were the work
of a battalion sent forward by Colonel Doi. As the court exonerated
Shoji, the historian must do the same. The atrocities referred to
were committed on wounded Canadians and Volunteers after the
Gap was overrun. These were mishandled in various ways; one was
kicked to death, others finished off with rifle butts and bayonets.
The fate of the other wounded, who were left to die slowly of
gangrene and thirst, was probably more unpleasant.
The further advance of the enemy south of Wongneichong
Gap, which was the task of the Doi Butai, was checked by a mixed
party of men of the HKRNVR, under Lieut.-Commander J. C. M.
Grenham and Lieut.-Commander P. Dulley, and Indian gunners of
the HKSRA, under Major Crowe. Before dealing with this phase,
it will be well to continue the account of those units which were
still resisting in the Jardine’s Look-Out area.
Macarthy’s platoon and two sections -of No. 3 Company (under
Cpl. J. F. C. Mackay and L./Cpl. G. E. K. Roylance) which were
posted west of the Gap, were not overrun. They fell back to guard
the shelters at Brigade HQ and Blue Pool Road. Captain Bowden,
OC, HQ Company Grenadiers, arrived and took command, but
was killed a few minutes later. At 1000 hours the Japanese took
Brigade HQ and Brigadier Lawson, the Brigade Major and all
personnel of Brigade HQ were killed. Macarthy’s men still continued
to hold the shelters on the north side of the road and the two Volunteer
sections withdrew to the road-bend, to wait for the counter-attack.


In Mount Butler Gap, French’s Canadians held out until about
0900 hours, when they were attacked from both sides. French
was killed; the survivors tried to cut their way through to Taitam
Valley, but very few succeeded.
On the summit of Jardine’s Look-Out, Birkett’s men, coming up
soon after dawn, found the Japanese in great strength swarming up
the northern slope, they having also apparently found the ascent
impossible in darkness. A stubborn fight continued throughout the
morning, the Canadians holding on gallantly against very heavy odds
—according to Shoji, there was an entire battalion there. Birkett
was twice hit and finally killed; his platoon sergeant, Marsh, was
wounded and disabled. Eventually at about 1330 hours the survivors
made their way down the west side of the hill, hoping to reach
Happy Valley. Field went out from P.B. 1 and rescued a party
of five, whom he brought back to his position.
The defence of the pill-boxes was a truly magnificent effort.
Field had twenty of his own men with three Canadians, and this
small party, completely isolated and unsupported, held the pill-boxes
throughout the day, inflicted very heavy losses and occupied the
attention of the greater part of Shoji’s force. During the day, the
Japanese were unable to make use of the Ride or to occupy Wong-
neichong Gap, the slopes of Mount Nicholson or the ground to the
westward down to Tai Hang Road. This would have afforded an
excellent line for a counter-attack on Jardine’s Look-Out, but, as
Brigade HQ was in enemy hands, it was impossible to get a
message through.
After the enemy took Stanley Gap, efforts were concentrated on
the pill-boxes, heavy mortar-fire alternating with infantry attacks and
attempts to infiltrate. All attacks were repulsed. The dead ground
near the pill-boxes enabled enemy snipers to crawl in close and fire
at the loop-holes, and in P.B. 1 seven out of the crew of eight
were hit, but the fire of the machine-guns never slackened. L./Cpl.
K. C. Hung, badly wounded, carried on pluckily throughout the day,
and Pte. G. White, at a time when Lieut. Field had been wounded
for the first time and was lying unconscious, set a fine example
by keeping up rapid and accurate fire, though his loop-hole was the
most exposed, and three men in quick succession had been hit there.
Later he was wounded and the gun wrecked, but he carried on
with a rifle.
The enemy made two attempts to advance along the catchwater
which runs between the two pill-boxes. The first was frustrated by
Lieut. Field, who went out and lobbed grenades into the catchwater;
the second by L./Cpl. N. Broadbridge and Ptes. G. Jitts and T.
Leonard. About midday an attack nearly succeeded, a party of
Japanese getting on top of P.B. 1 and throwing grenades in through
the loop-holes. This enemy party was wiped out with the help of
some of the men from P.B. 2. By this time P.B. 1 was a complete


wreck with all guns knocked out. Lieut. Field then moved his
remaining men into the open and continued the defence with rifle and
L.M.G. fire. By 1500 hours the Japanese gave up infantry attacks,
contenting themselves with intensified mortar-fire. Field decided to
hold the position with a few men only and sent away L./Cpl.
Broadbridge with a dozen men, including five walking wounded.
These got through safely and joined the Middlesex at Leighton Hill.
During the day Lieut. Field was severely wounded on four
separate occasions, and the wonderful determination and fighting-
spirit he showed under the circumstances was beyond all praise. At
about 1800 hours he collapsed from exhaustion and loss of blood.
L./Cpl. K. C. Hung had again been wounded—mortally, Cpl. Rix
(Canadian) was disabled, and of the little party only Sgt. White
was unwounded. Just before dark, a Japanese officer came in with
a flag of truce. Sgt. White went out to meet him. The officer
offered them their lives if they surrendered, and White, who was down
to his last five rounds, accepted the terms.
To do them justice, the Japanese kept their word after their own
fashion. The seriously wounded men were left to die; but those able
to walk were spared; and those who survived the next day’s march
lived to reach the prison camp.
In Wongneichong Gap, Major Stewart with CSM V. H. White,
Sgt. G. Winch and four OR remained in the HQ shelter. The
enemy apparently decided that it would prove too expensive to
“winkle them out”, and made no attack on the shelter. On the
night of the 22nd, having been without food for four days and
running short of ammunition, they evacuated the position and made
their way, in pairs, back to our lines.
Colonel Shoji stated in his war-diary that “after sixteen hours of
hard fighting” his troops took their objectives. He gave his losses
as “over 800”. The defenders lost 160 out of 230 men engaged.
Of nine officers, six were killed and two wounded.
THE ACTION OF THE MTBs
Meanwhile a very gallant attempt was being made by the Second
Motor Torpedo Boat Flotilla, commanded by Lieut.-Commander G.
H. Gandy, RN (retired), to attack enemy shallow-draft vessels which
were ferrying troops from the mainland to the island. These were
presumably the two battalions of the Divisional Reserve; the two
Divisional Artillery Groups and other units.
At 0730 hours on the 19th, six Motor Torpedo Boats made a
rendezvous at Green Island and were ordered to attack in pairs.
MTB’s 07 (Lieut. R. W. Ashby, HKRNVR) and 09 (Lieut.
Kennedy, RNVR), made a successful attack and sank one enemy
landing-craft, set another on fire and forced a third to run for the


beach. On their return, 07 was hit in the engine-room by a shell
and had to be towed back by 09. The second pair then went
into the attack, but by this time the Japanese had stopped ferrying
across the harbour. MTB 18 (Lieut. J. B. Colie, HKRNVR)
received a direct hit in the conning-tower, killing the commander and
the Lieutenant (Sub-Lieut. D. McGill, HKRNVR). Completely out
of control and burning heavily, she crashed into the sea-wall alongside
Chatham Road near the Kowloon Docks. MTB n (Lieut. J. C.
Collingwood, RN) was hit, but managed to get back.
By now the Japanese were shelling from both sides of the harbour
and Japanese aircraft were attacking the MTB’s with light bombs
and machine-gun fire. Under the circumstances, the other two boats
were ordered not to attack, but the signal apparently never reached
MTB 36 (Lieut. D. W. Wagstaff, HKRNVR), which went into
the harbour and was last seen lying stopped off North Point, under
heavy fire. Her captain, the Lieutenant (Sub-Lieut. J. C. Eager,
HKRNVR), the Coxswain (Petty-Officer Bowden) and all hands
were killed.
Our casualties in this action were almost 50 per cent of personnel
engaged. Two boats were sunk; one badly damaged and one slightly
damaged, and it was not thought that adequate results would accrue
from any further similar attempts.
For his part in this action Lieut. R. W. Ashby was awarded the
Distinguished Service Cross.
THE WITHDRAWAL FROM THE SHEK-O PENINSULA
AND THE EVACUATION OF THE TAITAM VALLEY
Within little more than twelve hours from their initial landing,
the Japanese had made substantial progress. Shoji’s men were engaged
in ‘mopping-up’ in the Jardine’s Look-Out area, which, as we have
said, occupied them for most of the day. A battalion of the Doi
Butai had taken West Brigade HQ and was pressing southwards
from Wongneichong Gap. In the east of the island one of
Tanaka’s battalions was in Taitam Valley, with nothing to oppose it
except one HKSRA battery and Penn’s handful; the other battalion
was attacking the two companies of Royal Rifles on the east slopes of
Mount Parker.
The enemy advance to Sai Wan threatened East Brigade HQ.
This consequently withdrew to Stone Hill near Stanley. Brigadier
Wallis also decided to withdraw the troops from the Shek-O Peninsula,
which, in the event of an enemy break-through at Sai Wan, would
be cut off. These troops comprised two platoons of Royal Rifles and
two HKVDC units; the ist Battery which was at Cape D’Aguilar
and No. 3 (Scottish)' Company which was distributed along the
peninsula from Pottinger Gap to Island Bay, with HQ in Mitchell’s
bungalow.


At 0400 hours No. 2 Company was told to hold itself in
readiness for a counter-attack, but the order was countermanded; and
at 0800 hours orders were given to retire on Stanley. At Cape
D’Aguilar Captain Rees destroyed his guns and Ist Battery proceeded
by road. Bdr. P. Wilson, Acting BQMS was sent back to obtain
supplies but was never seen again; he presumably ran into the enemy.
Captain Crozier, commanding 2nd Battery, which was at Bluff Head,
mustered all available private cars and sent them out to assist in
the withdrawal. Both units arrived at Stanley at about 1500 hours.
The gunners, for the next few days, acted as infantry reserves by
day and as coast-watchers by night. Major Forsyth with the Scottish
Company occupied Sugar-Loaf Hill.
In Taitam Valley the Japanese made no attempt to attack frontally,
apparently believing that they had a large force to deal with. Penn,
having with great difficulty established telephone contact with East
Brigade, asked for reinforcements. He was told to hold his ground
as “a counter-attack was being initiated from Wongneichong area
which would sweep the enemy out of Taitam Valley.” In point of
fact, the two companies in that area were at that moment trying
desperately to hold their ground against the whole force of Shoji’s
attack. This is a striking example of the difficulties of the Higher
Command due to the break-down of communications, and consequent
absence of up-to-date information.
By 0800 hours the men of the Royal Rifles on Mount Parker
were finding it difficult to hold their ground; and the 6 inch Howitzer
battery below Mount Parker was in danger of being overrun.
As the morning wore on, large numbers of the enemy made their
way past Penn’s left flank, and the situation both of his small force
and of the Battery became precarious. At 1130 hours Lieut.
Bompas was ordered to put his guns out of action and withdraw to
Stanley; and shortly before midday, Captain Penn was also ordered
to withdraw the party in Taitam Valley and No. 2 Platoon from
Repulse Bay View; 2/Lieut. Edwards with the Carriers was to remain
to cover the withdrawal of the Royal Rifles from Mount Parker.
By 1600 hours the withdrawal had been completed; the Royal Rifles
of Canada, Nos. 1 and 2 Companies and Ist and 2nd Batteries
HKVDC were concentrated in the Stanley area. Thus the whole
north-eastern part of the island was in enemy hands; this area
included Taitam Reservoir.
THE FIGHT AT POSTBRIDGE
From Wongneichong Gap southwards the attack was carried
on by units of Colonel Doi’s 228th Regiment, presumably the battalion
which had overrun Stanley Gap; and these found their way barred
by the defending force at Postbridge, a large house south of the Gap.


The naval contingent had arrived there by chance. During the
previous night a report had been sent to Aberdeen that “a house near
Wongneichong Gap was signalling to the enemy”, and a naval
party of ten men volunteered to investigate and went up from
Cornflower Base at Deepwater Bay. The party included two senior
officers, Lieut.-Commander J. C. M. Grenham and Lieut.-Commander
P. Dulley. The house indicated proved to be the HQ of a
HKSRA battery, commanded by Major Crowe. The party went
on to search other houses, and, soon after dawn, was fired on at
close range, returned the fire and withdrew to Postbridge. Here
Major Crowe and Captain Atkinson collected some of their gunners.
Soon after 0800 hours the Japanese opened heavy fire on the
house. Captain Airey (HKSRA) was killed and Mr. G. G. Tinson,
the owner of the house, who was assisting in the defence, was
mortally wounded.
Contact was made with Naval HQ and Lieut.-Commander
Grenham asked that a company might be sent from Repulse Bay
area along the catchwater; thus enfilading the enemy, who appeared
to be mainly around the police-station knoll. This promised
reinforcement never arrived. A runner was sent back to the Ridge,
asking for Vickers guns and ammunition. The guns were sent—
unfortunately, still in boxes and thick oil.
At 1030 hours a reinforcement was sent up from Deepwater
Bay. This comprised a naval detachment from ‘Thracian’ and
another party of the HKRNVR. The officer in charge of the
party, not clearly understanding the situation around the Gap, brought
his transport too far up the road and came under point-blank fire,
rifle and machine-gun, from the knoll. There were a number of
casualties. Most of the survivors and some of the wounded later
made their way to Postbridge.
Contact was made with a battery, which opened fire on the knoll
and demolished the police-station building. A number of Japanese
crawled down the slopes below Mount Nicholson, using their ground-
sheets as camouflage. They were betrayed by the wind, and were
severely shot up.
In the early afternoon a party of Winnipeg Grenadiers came up
the Deepwater Bay Road, the advance party of ‘B’ Company which
had been sent to participate in the counter-attack on Wongneichong
Gap. This diverted the enemy’s attention and there was a lull in
the attack on Postbridge.
THE COUNTER-ATTACK ON WONGNEICHONG GAP
AND JARDINE’S LOOK-OUT
As has been said, by 1000 hours West Brigade HQ had fallen,
though the shelters north of the road were still held by some of
Macarthy’s men. The fact that the whole Brigade staff, as well as


the personnel of HQ East Group Artillery had been killed and that
Brigade telephone lines were in enemy hands may have been the
reason for the delay in making a counter-attack, but it was probably
the paucity of troops available for such an effort. It was impossible
to withdraw any of the troops holding the shore line from Causeway
Bay round to West Bay, since this would merely invite another
enemy landing; and the only troops that could be spared were the
Royal Scots, and part of the Punjabis and Grenadiers.
At i too hours Lieut.-Colonel Kidd moved ‘B’ and ‘C’ Companies,
Punjabis, to the position east of Leighton Hill, to relieve pressure
on the Rajputs. From there the Punjabis pushed towards Tai Hang.
It was not until 1300 hours that our counter-attack developed.
The two Punjabi companies were ordered to strike north-eastwards
towards the North Point Power Station. ‘B’ Company Rajputs,
which included the survivors of ‘D’ Company, was to advance east-
wards from Leighton Hill. ‘A’ and ‘D’ Companies Royal Scots
were to attack from Middle Gap and the Filter Beds respectively,
with Wongneichong Gap as their objective, and ‘B’ Company
Winnipeg Grenadiers was to advance from Deepwater Bay and attack
the Gap from the south side.
The personnel of the Field Company Engineers HKVDC at
Tai Hang was formed into an infantry unit under Captain K. S.
Robertson and Lieut. I. P. Tamworth, and attached to ‘D’ Company,
Royal Scots.
Only eight field guns were available for supporting this advance.
By 1630 hours it became clear that the enemy was in much
greater strength than had been anticipated. It had been estimated
from visual observation that “the enemy in the Jardine’s Look-Out
area was about one battalion strong.” As we now know, the whole
of Shoji’s Butai was there, together with one battalion of Doi’s while
both of Tanaka’s battalions were by now in Taitam Valley, not far
away. This constituted a force which, even allowing for casualties,
was larger than our total infantry strength.
‘B’ Company Punjabis (Major Kumta Prasad) made considerable
headway, but the Rajputs were held up. The Royal Scots attacked
gamely, advancing along either side of Mount Nicholson.
Unfortunately, the line of approach from Tai Hang Road to the
pill-boxes, which Field had been keeping open all day, was not
attempted.
It was not until after the pill-boxes had been overrun that ‘D’
Company Royal Scots fought past the shelters where some Canadians
were still holding out and one platoon actually reached Sir Cecil’s
Ride, but had to fall back immediately in face of vastly superior
numbers. The attempt to re-take police-station knoll failed and
‘D’ Company lost heavily there. Captain Pinkerton was wounded
for the second time (he had previously been hit at Golden Hill);


Captain Robertson was badly wounded, as was 2/Lieut. A. H.
Mackenzie, a former member of the HKVDC, commissioned to
the Royal Scots. ‘D’ Company fell back to Mount Nicholson at
2200 hours and joined the platoon of Winnipeg Grenadiers there.
Tamworth joined the Canadians in the shelters where he found
Lieut.-Colonel Walker, who had been wounded earlier in the day.
This party in the shelters held out for one more day, but was then
forced to surrender.
On the left, or north, of our line, the two Punjabi companies
fell back to a line north-west of Leighton Hill.
Throughout the remainder of the night of December 19/20,
the position here remained unchanged. The two Royal Scots com-
panies ‘dug in’ as best they could on the east slope of Mount
Nicholson. ‘B’ and ‘C’ Companies Royal Scots were brought up
on their left; then ‘B’ Company Rajputs; then the two Punjabi
companies. Leighton Hill was held by ‘Z’ Company, Middlesex;
this comprised some thirty-five men withdrawn from the pill-boxes
along the west shore, commanded by Captain F. T. Man.
December 20th
THE EVACUATION OF POSTBRIDGE
Throughout the early hours of the night the Japanese had attacked
heavily against the small force holding Postbridge, which, since the
failure of the counter-attack, was now isolated. At midnight the
enemy opened an intense mortar bombardment, setting fire to the
house, the whole front of which was demolished. Lieut.-Commander
Dulley was killed at this time, Captain Atkinson of the gunners was
badly wounded and there were many casualties.
It was decided that the position was no longer tenable. Major
Crowe and his men retired first. The naval party made a defensive
position in rear of the house; the wounded were lowered down the
fifty-foot bank, and the party retired and eventually reached Aberdeen
in the early hours of the morning.
The defence of Postbridge was a very fine effort. It was
unfortunate that all reserves were engaged in the counter-attack on
the north side, so that the small garrison was unsupported.
THE JAPANESE ADVANCE
At dawn the Japanese had their forces disposed as follows: on
the eastern side of the island was the Divisional Reserve, two battalions
strong, preparing to advance southwards from Taitam Valley and
Sai Wan to Stanley; Tanaka’s two battalions were in the vicinity
of Stanley Gap, preparing to move towards Repulse Bay; one battalion
of Colonel Doi’s 228th was near Wongneichong Gap, ready to
advance on Deepwater Bay, the other battalion was still on the North


Shore; Colonel Shoji with 230th (three battalions) was prepared to
strike westwards from the Jardine’s Look-Out area, his final objective,
as he says in his diary, being High West.
Of these four enemy thrusts, that of the Doi Butai towards
Deepwater Bay was the first to materialise, and here the enemy came
up against stiff opposition at the Ridge.
THE FIGHT AT THE RIDGE
On the previous day, after the enemy had taken Wongneichong
Gap, orders were given for the evacuation of all ASC stores from
Deepwater Bay to the junction of Pokfulam and Island Roads. When
this was completed, the ASC personnel was formed into an infantry
unit and attached to a ‘mixed force’, under Lieut.-Colonel Fredericks.
This contingent included most of the HKVDC, ASC unit, under
Major F. Flippance, with whom were Captain D. L. Strellett and
Captain R. R. Davies.
This unit was first sent to Bennet’s Hill in expectation of an
enemy thrust in that direction; but as the attack did not materialise,
a move was made at midnight, December 19/20, to the Ridge. On
their way along the Repulse Bay Road, the party met the wounded
naval men coming down from Postbridge. The buildings on the
Ridge, five in number, formed the HQ of the RAOC and the
troops in occupation comprised RAOC and RASC personnel with
a few naval ratings, all under the command of Lieut.-Colonel
Macpherson (RAOC).
At daylight on the 20th the Ridge came under heavy mortar fire
from Wongneichong Gap and there was considerable enemy activity,
though no actual infantry attack was made. Later in the day,
it was decided to send the RASC men back to Shouson Hill.
The advance party, under Captain Strellett, came under heavy fire
as soon as they reached the main road, there were several casualties
and the party made their way back to the Ridge with difficulty.
During the afternoon the enemy fire was intensified; the enemy
snipers were active and at about 1600 hours an attack was launched
from the hillside to the east, which was beaten off. The position
remained unchanged here during the remainder of the day—the
Japanese not pressing the attack but keeping up continuous fire, both
mortar and rifle.
THE JAPANESE ADVANCE TO REPULSE BAY
Colonel Tanaka sent off his advance party before dawn; they
moved along the catchwater, which runs along the slope of Violet
Hill, and were thus able, unseen and unopposed, to reach a point
directly above the Hotel. From this point they attacked. It was
0930 hours when Lieut. Grounds (Middlesex) reported that the
Repulse Bay Hotel was surrounded and that the Garage was in enemy
hands. Grounds had with him a platoon of ‘B’ Company Middlesex


and some naval ratings withdrawn from the mine-control station at
Chung Am Kok, also a small party of HKRNVR from Aberdeen.
The situation was critical and the only available reinforcements were
from the Stanley area.
THE STANLEY FRONT
As soon as the situation at Repulse Bay was known, a Relief
Force was sent from Stanley. This force had a two-fold task; to
break the enemy attack against Repulse Bay Hotel and to attack
towards Wongneichong Gap from the south. The attack was led
by No. 6 Platoon (Scottish Company) under Lieut. D. L. Prophet,
followed by No. 5 Platoon (Lieut. W. Stoker) and ‘A’ Company
Royal Rifles, under Major Young.
Prophet’s men pushed forward along the Island Road, while
Stoker’s platoon, working along the flank, engaged the enemy who,
in considerable force, were moving down from Violet Hill towards
Repulse Bay View.
Contact was made with the small garrison at the Hotel which
had been since early morning fighting Tanaka’s advance party. The
Japanese had occupied the Garage and had with them as prisoners
four naval ratings and a Middlesex private. The garage was shelled
by a howitzer at Stanley View and a successful attack was launched
by No. 6 Platoon HKVDC. The enemy suffered heavy casualties
and withdrew and the five prisoners escaped.
The Canadians and Volunteers quickly cleared the enemy from
the vicinity of the hotel and patrols were then pushed forward towards
the Ridge, where Macpherson’s force was holding out. A Canadian
platoon occupied ‘Eucliff’ to provide covering-fire for a further advance.
This platoon, however, came under heavy fire from the enemy on
Middle Spur and suffered losses.
Colonel Tanaka, for some reason, did not press his attack, and
matters remained static in this area throughout the afternoon. At
nightfall the Canadian and Volunteers held Eucliff, the Hotel and
the high ground east of it, while the Japanese held most of Middle
Spur and the slopes of Violet Hill. Attempts to push forward and
connect with the force holding the Ridge were unavailing.
On the other side of Repulse Bay there was also fighting.
Japanese patrols had pushed across the hills and reached Island Road
north of Deepwater Bay. This, together with the thrust at Repulse
Bay, threatened to cut the island into sectors. In an attempt to clear
the route from Aberdeen to Repulse Bay, some of ‘A’ Company
Punjabis were withdrawn from the pill-boxes on the north shore and
moved via Aberdeen along Island Road. This party, some forty
strong, found the way blocked near Shouson Hill by a strong force
of Japanese and throughout the afternoon and night a fight continued
here; the Punjabis at first attacking but later, as the enemy strength
increased, being forced back on the defensive.


THE NORTHERN SECTOR
West Brigade was now under the command of Colonel H. B.
Rose, MC, Commandant HKVDC, in succession to Brigadier Lawson.
The command of the HKVDC devolved on Lieut.-Colonel E. J. R.
Mitchell, QBE.
Throughout the morning the Japanese made efforts to gain the
higher ground on Mount Nicholson, held by Royal Scots and
Grenadiers. By 1700 hours their efforts were partly successful and
they gained a foothold on the main ridge, but the steep ascent to the
summit was beyond their efforts. At 1930 hours Lieut.-Colonel
Sutcliffe launched a counter-attack, sending ‘C’ Company Grenadiers
from Wanchai Gap, via Black’s Link. There was artillery support
for this, but after half-an-hour’s fighting the Canadians were forced
to fall back, and during the early part of the night the Japanese made
further progress towards the summit. Further north the Royal Scots
and ‘B’ Company Rajputs held firmly.
The Japanese did very little attacking on this day, and possibly
were resting their troops after the strenuous efforts of the previous day.
December 21st
THE RIDGE
Early in the morning, at about 0300 hours, a platoon of ‘A’
Company Royal Rifles from Repulse Bay area reached the Ridge and
reinforced the troops there. The other platoons of ‘A’ Company
and the two Scottish platoons were held up and soon after dawn a
heavy enemy attack forced these to withdraw and the Ridge was
again isolated. Throughout the day there was desultory fire on the
houses.
After nightfall Lieut.-Colonel Macpherson decided to send the
RAOC personnel to Repulse Bay. Fredericks was given command.
A party was sent out, under CSM Hamlon (RASC) to reconnoitre
a route along Middle Spur. This party had a brush with the enemy
and retired to ‘Overbays’.
The fate of the men who left the Ridge that night is a story of
its own, and a grim one. In the dark it was impossible to keep
touch; Japanese patrols were on the alert; few of the men knew the
direction. A number were cut off. The remainder approached
the hotel, which was by then closely invested by the enemy, and had
to run the gaundet of machine-guns as they made their final dash
through the glare of a searchlight. Less than a dozen men got
through.
Those who surrendered, having lost their way on the hillside,
were taken, together with Hamlon’s party, to ‘EuclifP. They were
tied up and beaten with rifle-butts. Some hours later the prisoners
were taken out to the lawn, roped together in threes, and butchered.
Hamlon, shot through the face, was left for dead but contrived to
crawl away; he was the only survivor.


Many days later Lieut.-Colonel Ride (HKVDC) saw the
corpses of these Canadian and British soldiers piled in heaps, their
hands still tied behind their backs.
The force left to hold the Ridge comprised some twenty
Canadians and forty of the RASC, half of these from the HKVDC.
Rations were short and there was practically no drinking water.
REPULSE BAY AREA
Major Young launched an attack northwards soon after midnight,
under orders from Major Templar, RA, who had taken over
command in the Repulse Bay area. The attack went well for a time
and made considerable headway. A platoon of ‘A’ Company reached
the Ridge, as has been said. Soon afterwards, however, there was
a counter-attack and the Canadians and the Scottish platoons were
forced back towards the Hotel. ‘EuclifP was evacuated, being too
exposed to enemy fire, and the Canadians were concentrated around
the Hotel, the two Scottish platoons occupying the high ground,
where Repulse Bay Mansions now stand. Major Templar reported
that any attempt to ‘break through to Wongneichong Gap’, with
the force at his disposal, was out of the question.
THE BATTLE OF RED HILL
In the Stanley sector efforts made during the previous night by
‘B’ Company Royal Rifles to move northwards by way of Stanley
Mound and Violet Hill had proved abortive. It was decided to try
to link up with the troops in the northern sector by attacking through
Taitam Valley, the area which we had tamely given up two days
earlier. Brigadier Wallis planned an attack along the main Island
Road to Taitam cross-roads, which was to be the first objective. From
there, if things went well, the attack would continue through the
valley to Stanley Gap. The troops detailed for this operation were
two companies of Royal Rifles and No. i Company HKVDC,
all under the command of Lieut.-Colonel Home (Royal Rifles).
Captain Penn, with better knowledge of the terrain, suggested
that Netting Hill and Bridge Hill should first be occupied, since
this would cover the left flank of the road advance, and also fire could
be brought to bear from the summit directly on to the cross-roads.
It was then decided that 2/Lieut. Carter, who knew the country well,
should lead the way up the hills with ten riflemen from No. 1
Company HKVDC, followed by a platoon of Canadians. The
road attack was to be led by the Carriers (No. 3 Platoon) followed by
the rest of No. 1 Company and the HQ Company of the Royal Rifles,
under Major Macauley, MC.
The flank party, strengthened by the inclusion of Lieut. E. M.
Bryden and a section of Vickers guns from No. 2 Company
HKVDC, moved off at 0915 hours; the road party a few minutes
later. Near ‘Brinville’ the Carriers came under heavy fire; one man


was killed and F./O. Thomson, who was acting as Intelligence Officer,
was badly wounded. A section of Royal Rifles, led by Lieut. Fry,
and accompanied by Lieut. Bompas (HKSRA) was sent to occupy
Red Hill. Captain Penn took his LMG’s forward to where he
could bring fire to bear on Cash’s Bungalow, from which the enemy
was quickly driven.
The Japanese on Red Hill were reinforced, as could be seen from
the flanking party. Both Fry and Bompas were killed, and the
Canadians were driven back down the slope. The LMG’s at the
foot of the hill then came under heavy fire, and within a few minutes
Captain Penn and 2/Lieut. Redman were both wounded and
disabled, and Sgt. N. L. White was mortally wounded, as well as
other casualties. Major Macauley then sent back for reinforcements
since it was impossible to advance further while the Japanese held
Red Hill in force.
Meanwhile 2/Lieut. Edwards with the carriers, followed by some
of No. 1 Company and a few Canadians, had pushed forward to within
striking distance of the cross-roads. An enemy battery on the slope
beyond the reservoir was engaged by the Carriers and most of the
gunners were shot down. Edwards went forward with the riflemen,
covered by the carriers, but found the enemy in strength. Edwards
and Cpl. J. M. Houghton were killed. The remainder fell back to
the carriers, where Sgt. G. Lemay took charge. Lemay decided to
stand his ground, hoping that the flanking party would soon afford
covering-fire for another attack on the enemy position.
Carter and his ten men took the crest of Notting Hill without
difficulty, but Bridge Hill was strongly held. Captain Clark, with
a platoon of Canadians, came up, and an obstinate fight continued for
several hours. The Japanese were eventually driven off the crest of
the hill by the expedient of setting fire to the undergrowth. Bryden
then brought up his MG’s and, at about 1400 hours, fire was directed
on to the cross-roads, but by that time Lemay’s small party, out-
numbered and outflanked, had fallen back. Fire was then directed,
at extreme range, on to the crest of Red Hill, but with little apparent
effect. At about 1600 hours enemy light tanks were seen on the
road near Taitam Tuk Dam, and these were engaged by Bryden’s
guns.
By 1700 hours the Japanese on Red Hill had been reinforced,
and now outnumbered the attackers heavily. Major Macauley
ordered his troops to fall back to the vicinity of Palm Villa. At
1800 hours the flanking party was recalled-—and that ended the fight
for Red Hill.
Sgt. Lemay’s party had only just returned, when orders came
that they were to proceed to Repulse Bay Hotel to assist in the
defence there. There were only two carriers left. Sgt. Lemay’s
party set off at 1800 hours, reached the hotel without incident, and
took an active part in the defence there, as will be told later.


DEEPWATER BAY AND SHOUSON HILL
Colonel Doi’s forces had already isolated the Ridge and pushed
on across the golf-course. By 1600 hours they were attacking Pill-
box 14 and Brick Hill, both held by men of ‘A’ Company Middlesex.
H.M.S. Cicala (gunboat) was sent round from Aberdeen. The
gunboat entered Deepwater Bay and vigorously shelled the enemy,
breaking up the attack for a time. The Japanese aircraft attacked
her with bombs and machine-gun fire, and she was eventually holed
and sank later in Lamma Channel.
Throughout the previous night, as has been said, forty men of
‘A’ Company Punjabis had been engaged with the enemy at Shouson
Hill. They had fought hard and had lost nearly half their strength.
Lieut.-Colonel Kidd went to the scene himself. He was killed and
only four of the Punjabis were left standing.
Captain (temporary Major) A. J. Dewar (RASC) with some
twenty of the HKRNVR occupied and held the two houses on
top of Shouson Hill. This ‘island of resistance’ fought magnificently
and held out until the final surrender four days later. Major M.
Hanlon (RAOC), with a few of his men, held the RAOC Depot
at Little Hong Kong while Major H. Marsh (Middlesex) collected
some fifty men, of various units, and defended the ‘Combined Com-
pany HQ’ in the same area.
These individual efforts prevented the Japanese from penetrating
further but P. 8.14 was taken and the Middlesex position on Brick
Hill was overrun, despite gallant resistance. Some days later (on
the 29th December) Lieut.-Colonel Ride saw on the beach a pile
of headless corpses, with hands and feet tied, which showed what had
been the fate of the wounded men of the Middlesex.
At the seaward extremity of Brick Hill there was the 17th
Battery HKSRA. The 0.C., Captain Bartram, went out in front
of the position with a tommy-gun and a bucket of grenades, and put
up a stout fight before being killed. Lieut. Fairclough conducted the
defence from the gun position. The position was eventually overran.
Fairclough was wounded and left for dead. Under cover of darkness
he climbed down the cliff to a cave, where he remained for four
days. He then swam to Aberdeen, only to find that the fighting
was over. He later escaped from Shamshuipo Camp—but that is
another story.
THE NORTHERN SECTOR
In this area the Japanese at dawn pushed forward vigorously at
Mount Nicholson and along Black’s Link, forcing back the Royal
Scots. They also pushed back our line further north, which exposed
the flank of ‘B’ Company Punjabis, which had been moved across to
fill the gap between the Royal Scots and the Rajputs. Major Prasad
withdrew his company to conform.


At 0700 hours Brigadier Rose arranged another counter-attack,
and ‘C’ Company, Winnipeg Grenadiers attacked from Middle Gap.
Some ground was made but the Japanese were firmly dug in on the
eastern slope of Mount Nicholson. At 0815 hours the Canadians
fell back; the enemy attacked in turn, and finally by about 1000 hours
reached the crest of the hill. From this position they could command
the whole of the western slope, Middle Gap and the east slope of
Mount Cameron. The Grenadiers on Black’s Link had to withdraw,
and our next ‘strong point’ was Mount Cameron, held by ‘C’ Company
Grenadiers.
As a reserve for this area, men of ‘D’ Company Punjabis were
withdrawn from the pill-boxes on the north shore and sent to Wanchai
Gap, at which place were now located the HQ of both West Brigade
and the Grenadiers.
The Japanese followed up their success at Mount Nicholson by
making an attack along King’s Road, while from a position near the
Power Station they directed a heavy mortar fire on to the Naval Yard.
At 1030 hours there was another enemy landing, this time in the
Causeway Bay area; and it was reported that ‘the house-tops in the
area were crowded with them.’ This force was presumably the
advance party of either the Suzukawa or the Kanki Butai, both of
which were brought across during this and the following day. An
A.A. Lewis-gun post at Watson’s Factory, Causeway Bay, manned by
men of No. 6 Company HKVDC, was overrun. By noon the
Japanese were pressing their attack down King’s Road, and every
gun in the Naval Yard was out of action, due to intensive mortar fire.
Our ‘Line’ now ran as follows. West side of Causeway Bay—
Leighton Hill—Wongneichong Village—Mount Cameron—Bennet’s
Hill. The units holding it were, from North to South, ‘C’ Company
Punjabis; ‘Z’ Company Middlesex; ‘B’ Company Rajputs; *B’ Company
Punjabis; four companies of Royal Scots; ‘C’ Company Grenadiers (on
Mount Cameron); ‘D’ and ‘B’ Companies Grenadiers, holding from
Mount Cameron to Bennet’s Hill, inclusive; then mixed units of ‘A’
Company Middlesex, Sappers, Naval Ratings, Officers and men of
the HKRNVR and men of administrative details.
At Repulse Bay there were ‘A’ Company Royal Rifles (less one
platoon); a platoon of Middlesex; a naval party; two platoons of No.
2 Company HKVDC and the Carriers from No. 1 Company
HKVDC.
At Stanley there were the remainder of the Royal Rifles, ‘C’
and part of ‘D’ companies Middlesex, withdrawn from the pill-boxes;
1 st and 2nd Batteries HKVDC and the residue of 1 and 2 Companies
HKVDC.
Of the other HKVDC units, No. 3 Company, having lost all
its officers and 70 per cent of its personnel, had practically ceased
to exist. Some of its survivors were with the Middlesex at Leighton


Hill, some at Stanley, some attached to No. 6 Company HKVDC.
Nos. 4 and 7 Companies, which were much below strength, were
forming a second line of defence behind Mount Cameron. No. 5
Company was in the Mount Davis area, in case of a surprise landing
in the West Point area. No. 6 Company was still distributed along
the North Shore on A.A. defence. 3rd Battery was still on Aberdeen
Island. 4th and sth Batteries had been “written-off”. The
Armoured Car Platoon, with only two vehicles left, was operating in
the North Sector. It had done excellent service during the two
counter-attacks at Wongneichong Gap.
December 22nd
THE LAST FIGHT AT THE RIDGE
Early, at about 0500 hours, a telephone message was received
from Repulse Bay that all officers and men capable of doing so should
retire after dark and make for the hotel. At 1000 hours the
Japanese made an attack, which was beaten off with considerable loss
to the enemy, but it was evident that this was only the prelude to
a full-scale assault on the Ridge. Fortress HQ left the decision
to Macpherson, as to whether to fight it out, try to withdraw or
surrender.
Both food and water had run out by now. At 1500 hours the
Japanese opened with shell and mortar fire and it was clearly only
a question of time before the houses were completely demolished.
Lieut.-Colonel Macpherson then ordered Captain Strellett to put out
a white flag. The latter did so, and had it shot out of his hand by
a machine-gun burst. Lieut.-Colonel Macpherson then walked to the
door holding a flag, and fell, badly wounded. This ended the
attempt to surrender.
Orders were then given for the evacuation of the position that
night. Two men remained to take care of the wounded. The forty
officers and men who were left split up into small parties and made
their way over the hills. They had barely gone before the Japanese
broke in. They found only Lieut.-Colonel Macpherson and about
thirty other wounded. These were treated in the same manner as
the prisoners at ‘EuclifF. Six days later Lieut.-Colonel Ride saw
their corpses piled in a heap some fifty yards from the house.
Captain Strellett’s party reached ‘Twinbrooks’, where, on the
morning of the 24th, they were surrounded and had to surrender.
Another party, with CSM S. D. Begg in charge, made for
Repulse Bay, which was already in enemy hands. At Eucliff they
were fired on, went over the wall and took refuge in a natural
cave below the house, where they found several Canadians. The
following night (the 23rd) Begg gave orders that all who could swim
were to follow him and at 1930 hours he led the way into the water.
At that moment CSM Hamlon ‘a mess of blood’ joined the party —
having just left the scene of the Eucliff massacre.


The phosphorescence in the water betrayed the swimmers and
the Japanese swept the surface of the bay with machine-gun fire.
Some of the swimmers were hit; some died later of cold and exhaustion
in the water. It was not until 1700 hours on the 24th that Begg
and two others reached Stanley, after nearly twenty-two hours in the
water. CSM Hamlon remained, and later joined a party, including
Major Young and CQMS J. Meyer (HKVDC) which reached
Lamma Island.
WITHDRAWAL FROM REPULSE BAY
During the previous night the men of the Royal Rifles had
made a great effort to push forward to ‘Altamira’ on the main road
and so cover the withdrawal from the Ridge; but they were pushed
back by overwhelmingly superior numbers and by dawn were back
in the hotel area. Throughout the morning Repulse Bay was under
heavy mortar fire from the enemy on Middle Spur. Sgt. Lemay
took his Carriers into action against them and Lieut. Prophet moved
No. 6 Platoon to the ridge immediately south-west of the hotel and
engaged the enemy with MG and LMG fire. With the assistance
of the artillery in the Stanley area the position was partially stabilised.
The Japanese, however, continued their attacks fiercely. Their two
battalions, though much reduced in numbers, were numerically far
superior to the defending force. One of the Carriers received a direct
hit near the entrance to the hotel and the other was later put out of
action near South Bay Road bridge. Sgt. Lemay’s party was then
attached to No. 6 Platoon. The Canadians were forced to fall back
to the hotel, leaving the Volunteers holding the ridge above.
Major Templar decided that the position was no longer tenable.
Defence of the hotel itself with the enemy holding all the higher
ground, would be impossible. He gave orders for a withdrawal
under cover of night. The position was complicated by the presence
of civilians, including women and children. It was first decided that
they should accompany the troops and No. 6 Platoon was detailed to
act as guard for these civilian evacuees. The order was cancelled
later as it was decided that the civilians would run far greater risk
by making their way through enemy patrols than by remaining in
the hotel.
The evacuation was to be made via the tunnel leading from the
hotel to the Lower Beach Road and thence past the Lido up to
the main Island Road; from there the withdrawal would be either by
the road or over Stanley Mound. To safeguard this route it was
essential that the bridge crossing the Lido Road should be occupied
and held to prevent the enemy coming from the direction of Repulse
Bay View towards Lower Beach Road. No. 6 Platoon was detailed
for this task and Lieut. Prophet moved with his platoon towards
Violet Hill area and throughout the afternoon they were in action
against the enemy in that area. Several patrols of the enemy were
engaged and driven off. In a further attempt to clear out the enemy


snipers, the undergrowth was fired. At 1600 hours the platoon
withdrew, leaving a section under Sgt. T. Stainton, to deal with any
further enemy movement in that area.
At 1930 hours the platoon moved out again as a fighting patrol,
with orders to hold the bridge at all costs from 2000 hours until 0300
hours on the following morning (the 23rd), by which time it was
hoped that the members of the garrison would be well on their way
to Stanley. Japanese snipers near the bridge were dealt with, and
the Volunteers occupied the bridge without further incident.
The evacuation of the hotel, even when unhampered by civilians,
was no easy task. The outposts were withdrawn and the men
assembled in the hotel, but the Japanese pressed forward the moment
the outposts moved in. An enemy patrol entered the north wing of
the hotel, but these intruders were detected and dealt with quietly and
unobtrusively. Lieut. ‘Benny’ Proulx (HKRNVR) was detailed to
lead the party, as having most knowledge of the country. The
troops were all in their stocking-feet to avoid noise, but the first
three men who went down the narrow tunnel made such a din, their
steel helmets and accoutrements rattling against the sides, that Major
Templar decided to risk sending the remainder out by the road.
Proulx, missing the others, returned up the tunnel to the hotel, but
found only Japanese officers to whom to report, so made a hasty exit.
The men followed the route indicated as far as the main Island
Road, then split into small parties and made their way by devious
routes over the hills. All reached Stanley safely, though one party
of three, whose sense of direction is evidently not their best asset,
found themselves at dawn back at the hotel, with all the weary work
to do again.
Most of the wounded were removed with the troops, but two
Scottish Volunteers had to be left behind, and these owe their lives
to the hotel nursing sister, who on numerous occasions stood between
them and the Japanese bayonets during the next three days.
Meanwhile No. 6 Platoon was covering the retirement by hold-
ing on to the bridge. Right well did they perform their task. At
2000 hours, just before the evacuation started, the Japanese made a
fierce attack on the bridge. They overran Cpl. Sharp’s section, but
were driven off by a bayonet charge and later by L.A. fire.
Intermittent assaults were made during the next five hours, but all
were repulsed; and the Volunteers, having held their position for the
stipulated time, withdrew at 0300 hours on the 23rd. They went
back along the main road. Near Frederick’s house they encountered
a party of Japanese whom they put to flight with hand-grenades and
a tommy-gun burst. On arriving back at Stanley, No. 6 Platoon
joined Nos. 5 and 4 Platoons near Stanley View, while Lemay took
his party on and rejoined the remains of No. 1 Company (now under
2/Lieut. Carter) on the isthmus.


THE NORTH SHORE
In the early hours of the morning Japanese landing-craft were
seen near the Naval Yard. The pill-boxes opened fire and the boats
sheered off westwards. A report came that an enemy landing had
been made. Strong police patrols were sent out through the Central
and Eastern Districts and found that the rumour was incorrect.
Throughout the night and continuing up to dawn, enemy
launches and landing-craft kept the North Shore defences on the
alert. Our pill-boxes frequently opened fire on Japanese craft.
There were, however, no surprise landings; and it appears that these
demonstrations were intended to compel us to keep troops along the
North and East shores.
At Causeway Bay and North Point, however, the Japanese had
been busy ferrying more troops across, and had, according to their
reports, two more complete infantry regiments, or six battalions, on
the island.
THE ENEMY BATTLE - LINE ON THE 22nd
The Japanese forces were approximately as follows: On the
front from Causeway Bay to Bennet’s Hill they had the remains of
the 228th (Colonel Doi)' and 230th (Colonel Shoji) Regiments,
together with another newly landed Regiment (number not given).
Tanaka’s two battalions of the 229th were engaged at Bennet’s Hill
and Repulse Bay. In the Stanley area there was the Divisional
Reserve together with another Regiment, probably under Colonel
Suzukawa. They had, in other words, fifteen battalions on the island,
though several of these must have been less than half strength. In
addition they had apparently five or six battalions of ‘garrison’ troops.
DEMOLITION OF OIL INSTALLATIONS
During the morning, acting on orders from the War Office, it
was determined to destroy the oil installations on the mainland.
Artillery fire was brought to bear on the Texaco tanks at Tsun Wan,
the Shell tanks at Tai Kok Tsui and the RN tanks about a mile
south of the Cosmopolitan Docks. It was impossible, however, to
shell the Socony tanks at Laichikok as they were close to the hospital
of the women’s prison.
THE ENEMY ADVANCE ALONG ‘THE LINE OF THE GAPS’
At 0900 hours the Japanese started an attack in the Middle Gap
area. The Canadians on Mount Cameron were heavily mortared and
dived-bombed. They could make no reply to the dive-bombing
except by rifle fire, and the ground was too rocky for them to dig in.
Later there was a heavy bombardment of the Royal Scots positions
further north, particularly the flat ground known as Mount Nicholson
Camp. By the early afternoon the Japanese were consolidating their
positions on the northern lower slopes of Mount Cameron within a
hundred yards of the Royal Scots forward defended localities.


During the afternoon Brigadier Rose judged that, from inform-
ation available, the enemy was concentrating between Little Hong
Kong and Mount Cameron, with the intention of attacking north-west
towards Wanchai Gap. As a counter-measure, Nos. 4 and 7
Companies HKVDC were brought forward to a line running from
Wanchai Gap to Mount Kellett. Lieut. G. H. Calvert (HKVDC,
HQ) collected all available men from Volunteer HQ and brought
them down to strengthen the line.
During the afternoon the enemy attacked the centre of our line,
and, though the attack was repulsed with considerable loss to the
enemy, a serious gap was made between the left flank of the Royal
Scots and the right flank of ‘B’ Company Punjabis. After dark an
attempt was made to re-adjust the line, but the enemy attacked while
the move was in progress, the full force of the attack falling on the
Punjabis. Major Prasad had only eight men of his company left
owing to casualties and dispersal. An enemy break-through was
prevented by ‘B’ Company Rajputs which took the Japanese in flank.
The enemy, apparently unaware of their near-success, did not press
the attack. ‘B’ Company Middlesex, withdrawn from coastal defence,
was hurriedly sent in to fill the gap.
On the southern sector of our line there was little action during
the day. An attack south of Mount Cameron was pushed back by
‘D’ Company Grenadiers. At Bennet’s Hill the enemy was also
repulsed.
STANLEY FRONT
After the enemy occupation of Repulse Bay, Stanley was
completely isolated. Our troops occupied the line of hills—Chung
Am Kok, Stanley Mound, the Twins, Notting Hill and Bridge Hill;
but they were in serious straits. The Howitzers were short of
ammunition—only 45 rounds left. Food was also running short.
Once again, the Navy came to the rescue and the provisioning and
supplying of the Stanley garrison was carried out by motor torpedo-
boats from Aberdeen. The water supply to Stanley had been cut
off by the Japanese capture of the Taitam Reservoir, and water had to
be strictly rationed.
CONDITIONS DETERIORATING
In the evening a serious report concerning the water supply/was
received from the Director of Public Works. No water was coming
from Taitam; the Aberdeen supply was out of action for at least three
days, and only a trickle was coming from Pokfulam. . . . “The
town (of Victoria) is now helpless.”
Our troops were now beginning to feel the strain. The three
battalions which had fought on the mainland had been on the move
for fourteen days with practically no rest. The past three days had
been days of continuous fighting without pause for sleep or opportunity
to eat. The Japanese with their vast superiority in numbers could


afford to rest their men; we could not. They had the initiative; we
were compelled to try to anticipate their attacks. There was a
growing feeling among the rank and file that further resistance merely
postponed the inevitable and was not worth the waste of life, though
among the higher ranks it was well understood that every day, every
hour, was of vital importance to the Empire war effort, and that we
should fight it out to the bitter end.
December 23rd
MOUNT CAMERON
Soon after midnight the Japanese made a violent attack on
Mount Cameron, held by ‘C’ Company Grenadiers with a few from
other units intermixed. The enemy pressed the assault without
regarding losses, and eventually superior numbers told. The
Canadians, outnumbered ten to one, had their line of defence changed
to a number of isolated groups fighting independently. Some of the
survivors made their way back to Magazine Gap; others continued
to resist. Lieut.-Colonel F. D. Field (RA) went forward to Wanchai
Gap with the only reserves that could be spared —forty men of
the Royal Marines under Captain Farrington. These joined the
party of Royal’ Scots in Wanchai Gap, and patrols were sent forward
to Mount Cameron. There was a considerable amount of confused
fighting in the dark, and conflicting reports came back regarding the
situation. At dawn it became clear that the Japanese held the summit
of Mount Cameron, while ‘A’ Company Royal Scots and the Marines
were still in position from Wanchai Gap to St. Albert’s Convent,
which was being used as a hospital. The survivors of the Canadian
company were at Magazine Gap in support.
This serious loss necessitated the withdrawal of West Brigade
HQ to Magazine Gap.
THE DEFENCE OF LEIGHTON HILL
Further to the north the situation was becoming critical. The
Rajputs, much reduced in numbers and short of ammunition, fell
back at about 0800 hours, exposing the right flank of ‘Z’ Company
at Leighton Hill. The garrison at Leighton Hill consisted of thirty-
five men of the Middlesex and the seven survivors of Field’s platoon
of No. 3 Company HKVDC. They had in all six Vickers guns.
This small force had held Leighton Hill against all attacks for
two days. The whole surrounding area had been shelled continuously
until it was reminiscent of Flanders in 1918. The Japanese had
made a number of unsuccessful assaults; but now, after the with-
drawal of the Rajputs the enemy could infiltrate into the streets and
houses adjoining the area.
There were no reserves to send in. At Fortress HQ a party of
some fifty men was collected—gunners, spare signallers, and some
Royal Scots details returned from hospital and this party was hurried
down to Happy Valley, where it occupied the Lee Theatre and the


houses adjacent. This served to strengthen the line, but Leighton
Hill remained isolated. The enemy attacks continued violently and
it seemed to be only a question of time before this ‘strong point’
fell into enemy hands.
At midday our line ran from Pill-box 55 on the North Shore to
Leighton Hill; thence to Canal Road, St. Albert’s; Wanchai Gap
and Rennet’s Hill.
At 1500 hours the Japanese launched an attack across the race*
course. They were repulsed with heavy loss.
Throughout the afternoon both Wanchai Gap and Magazine
Gap were heavily bombed. ‘The position of every gap was
unenviable; for the nature of the country was such that local defence
was bound to be restricted and confined to the gap itself, thus
providing an excellent target for the enemy air force, which did not
fail to take full advantage of the opportunity.’
At 1730 hours the Royal Scots made a local counter-attack and
‘A’ Company secured a foothold on the western slope of Mount
Cameron. This they held throughout the night.
THE WITHDRAWAL TO THE STANLEY ISTHMUS
Stanley Mound changed hands twice during the day. It
remained in the hands of the Japanese and a counter-attack by ‘B’
Company Royal Rifles failed to dislodge them. The attack came
also on Stanley View held by No. 2 Company HKVDC. No. 6
Platoon held positions on the Chung Am Kok side of Stanley View,
and the Japanese made an attack on the forward section but, in doing-
so, exposed themselves to the flanking fire of Pte. Walker’s section.
These men, at a range of barely 150 yards, had easy targets, and the
attacking force was virtually annihilated. The attacks were renewed
during the afternoon, the brunt falling on L./Cpl. Sharpe’s section
on the hill immediately overlooking Island Road. L./Cpl. Sharpe
was killed and there were a number of other casualties. Prophet
then withdrew his platoon to join No. 7 Platoon (Lieut. Bryden) on
the ridge running from Stanley View to Chung Am Kok. Here the
Company held its own against infantry attacks, but was subjected
to harassing fire from the higher ground on Stanley Mound.
Brigadier Wallis decided that, with the force at his disposal, it
was not feasible to attempt to hold the line of hills, and that his
troops could put up a better resistance on flatter ground and on a
narrower front, where communication would be easier. The company
of Royal Rifles had already withdrawn, and orders were sent to
Major Forsyth to bring his men back from Stanley View. Brigade
HQ was now reconnoitring the area and preparing three defensive
lines; the first, north of Stanley Village; the second immediately south
of St. Stephen’s College main buildings and the third running from
St. Stephen’s Preparatory School to Tweed Bay.


THE SHORTAGE OF AMMUNITION IN THE NORTHERN SECTOR
The Ordnance Depot at Little Hong Kong, though still in our
hands, was virtually isolated, owing to the Japanese pressure in the
Deepwater Bay area. This was a very serious situation, for there
was a grave shortage of ammunition, particularly for guns and
mortars, in the Northern Sector.
After dark, eight ammunition lorries were sent out, escorted by
an Armoured Car, with 2/Lieut. Carruthers in charge. The attempt
to get through was successful, and six of the lorries returned safely
with their loads. Without these, the troops would have been in
even worse straits. Unfortunately it was impossible to obtain hand-
grenades, which would have been of the greatest use in the street
fighting which was developing in the Northern Sector.
December 24th
THE LOSS OF LEIGHTON HILL
At dawn our positions showed little change. ‘Z’ Company still
held Leighton Hill. From there the line ran along the outside of
the race-course to Morrison Hill and Mount Parrish. The remains of
the two Punjabi companies and the composite company of Rajputs
(now reduced to two platoons) held here. South of Mount Parrish
were the Marines. The houses near the Monument were still held by
details of ‘B’ Company Middlesex, with whom were some of the
survivors of No. 3 Company HKVDC. The line through St.
Albert’s to Wanchai Gap was held by the Royal Scots. During the
night the Japanese had made no further progress on Mount Cameron
and, in fact, ‘A’ Company Royal Scots was now holding the northern
as well as the western slopes. South of Wanchai Gap, the Grenadiers
held the line down to Bennet’s Hill; these were intermingled with
contingents of RN, RNVR and HKRNVR. Little Hong Kong was
still holding out and the party of HKRNVR, under Major Dewar,
still held the summit of Shouson Hill.
The main enemy attack was in the northern sector, where the
Japanese sent in all three regiments, though two of these were by
this time less than half-strength. Throughout the morning there was
intensive shelling of Leighton Hill. At midday there was an infantry
attack which was beaten back with heavy losses to the enemy. By
the afternoon, however, the position became untenable and Captain
Man was ordered to withdraw if he possibly could. At about 1645
hours the withdrawal was made and, despite the fact that the Japanese
had infiltrated past both flanks, most of the defenders succeeded in
getting away with their guns. They joined the mixed party of
gunners and Royal Scots details in the area between the Lee Theatre
and Canal Road. Eight of the garrison, who were holding the
further end of Leighton Hill, found their retreat cut off, and stayed
to fight it out. This included two members of Cpl. Broadbridge’s
party from No. 3 Company HKVDC—Ptes. L. A. Fox and H.
Wong. Both of these eventually got away. Fox reached Chungking
and later fought in Burma.


MORRISON HILL
Following their capture of Leighton Hill, the Japanese directed
an artillery barrage on to Morrison Hill, held by a platoon of ‘B’
Company Middlesex. By 1800 hours all the Middlesex machine-
guns had been knocked out, and the Japanese then commenced
pressing infantry attacks. Major R. E. Moody, DAAG, collected
a party of military clerks, spare signallers, military police, etc., some
thirty men in all, and took them down to strengthen the force at
Morrison Hill. It is worthy of note that this party held Morrison
Hill until the final surrender.
FIRES IN THE CENTRAL DISTRICT
There was very heavy shelling from both sides of the harbour
during the early part of the night. The artillery fire was directed
on to the Central District, the Naval Yard and Victoria Barracks. A
large fire was started near the China Fleet Club, which seriously
impeded forward movement. Later there were other fires in various
parts of the town. By midnight the Fire Brigade, worn out with their
efforts during the past few days, asked for military assistance which,
under the circumstances had to be refused, as there were no men
available.
THE BREAK - THROUGH AT STANLEY
Throughout the morning the Japanese had been bringing up
troops in the Stanley area with the obvious intention of breaking
through the defences on the isthmus. Major Forsyth, HKVDC,
took charge of the Stanley Village area, as Forward Commander.
The three platoons of No. 2 Company HKVDC were sent out to
re-occupy Chung Am Kok, to prevent enemy penetration there.
Stanley Village itself was held by the Company HQ Group of No.
2 Company—ten men in all. On the east of the village was the
Stanley Platoon, HKVDC, under Lieut. Fitzgerald, with a section
of Middlesex machine-gunners in support in No. 1 Bungalow. On
their right was Captain Weedon’s company of Middlesex with part
of ‘A’ Company Royal Rifles.
Monastery Hill was held by a platoon of Middlesex and a section
of No. 1 Company HKVDC (Cpl. E. C. Drown). Further
back was the Second Line —the low ridge immediately south of St.
Stephen’s College, occupied by the men of Ist Battery HKVDC
(Captain Rees). Sgt. Murphy with another section of No. 1
Company was in position at the north-east corner of the prison. At
the Preparatory School were the rest of No. 1 Company HKVDC
and a platoon of Middlesex.
The Japanese evidently intended to force the defences without
further delay. They had enormous numerical superiority, for in
addition to the two battalions of the Divisional Reserve, they had
another full Rentai —some five battalions in all. They also had light
tanks.


The Scottish Company while moving out to Chung Am Kok,
passed through the right flank of the Japanese attacking force, and Cpl.
Leith’s section was engaged in hand-to-hand fighting and routed the
enemy opposed to them, bringing away with them a quantity of
Japanese equipment.
Immediately after the area was occupied, the Japanese attacked
vigorously, forcing No. 6 Platoon to fall back. No. 5 Platoon was
cut off and isolated. Being unable to make their way to Chung Am
Kok, the men of No. 5 Platoon fought their way back to the isthmus
and joined the third line of defence near the cemetery. During
the night the other two Scottish platoons were attacked continuously.
Sgt. Stainton, who had throughout done magnificent work, was
seriously wounded at close range by a wounded Japanese officer, who
was in turn dealt with by Cpl. W. E. MacFarlane. Despite all
attacks, the Scots held their ground throughout the night.
On the isthmus the attack developed at 2050 hours when three
enemy tanks came down the road. A light anti-tank gun, positioned
on the road, scored two direct hits on the leading tanks, which caught
fire; the third tank escaped. A strong infantry attack was then
launched, the brunt falling on the left flank at Stanley Village. The
handful of Scots held their ground gamely; Major Forsyth was
wounded but refused to go back. The Stanley Platoon and the
Middlesex machine-gunners also held their position and every attack
was beaten back.
At 2230 hours Forsyth was again wounded seriously and was
carried into the school-house adjoining the police-station. The
Volunteers were losing men fast and Fitzgerald asked for reinforce-
ments. Soon after midnight the Stanley Platoon fell back to a line
with the Middlesex in the Bungalow. The Japanese by this time
had control of the beach on the east side (Stanley Bay) and were
sweeping the road-fork with machine-gun fire. Both the Middlesex
guns were put out of action; of the 28 men of the Stanley Platoon,
fourteen had been hit while every man of the Scottish party had been
killed or wounded. By 0100 hours on the 25th the position became
untenable and Fitzgerald decided to withdraw. The survivors of
the Stanley Platoon and section of Middlesex made a hazardous
withdrawal along Fort Road, and were joined by five wounded men,
the survivors of Forsyth’s party. CSM T. Swan, badly wounded,
refused to leave his wounded commander, and remained to ‘fight
it out to the finish’. Neither he nor Forsyth was ever seen again.
Fitzgerald’s men made their way to the Preparatory School, where
Major Templar (RA) and Captain Weedon (Middlesex) were forming
the third line of defence.
Meanwhile on the right flank the Japanese had broken through
along Beach Road soon after 0100 hours. The Middlesex machine-
guns had continued firing until they were overrun, and the enemy
losses must have been very high. The company of Royal Rifles,
barely half-strength, fell back along Prison Road. The break-through


was complete. Monastery Hill was still held by details of Middlesex
and Volunteers, but this was now isolated, and the Japanese pressed
on past St. Stephen’s College to our second line. Here they were
held up.
Captain West (Middlesex) had placed a platoon of his company
in the centre of the ridge, and the men of ist Battery HKVDC
were holding the line from Prison Road to Fort Road. The Battery
had been reorganised into four infantry sections. On the extreme
right was Sgt. Millington’s section lining the Prison Road; a/Lieut.
H. S. Jones had a section covering the road entrance to the College;
on his left were two sections under 2/Lieut. H. G. Muir, one in the
vicinity of Barton’s Bungalow (now Bungalow C.), the other one
holding the lower slopes at the south end of the football ground.
At approximately 0200 hours on Christmas morning the machine-
guns opened fire. The first attack of the Japanese was along Prison
Road, and Sgt. Millington’s men were hotly engaged. Then the
enemy attacked across the football ground, where the machine-guns
took heavy toll; and later all along the line. The attack was heaviest
on the right and Millington’s section suffered worse. Throughout
the early hours the struggle continued along the ridge. Captain Rees
was badly wounded and disabled, and the line grew thin as more
men were hit. Just before dawn the Japanese stormed the ridge at
a point immediately south of the tennis-courts. Two of the Middlesex
guns were overrun and the enemy broke through the centre of our
line. The two sections on the right were forced back towards the
prison and Sgt. Millington was killed. 2/Lieut. Jones rallied his
section and brought them back in a gallant effort to retake the position,
but the odds were far too heavy. Jones was killed, as were half
his men and the rest fell back, still fighting, towards our third line.
The two sections on the left were also forced back. On the
extreme left our men fell back to the Preparatory School, where the
Japanese were again held up by the mixed force of Middlesex and
Volunteers there.
2/Lieut. Muir with the remainder held on for some time. They
made a stubborn stand in and around Barton’s Bungalow. All enemy
attacks there were repulsed. Eventually the Japanese brought up a
flame-thrower and drove back the defenders, but they retook the
position after a fierce hand-to-hand fight. It was a fight to the
finish; no quarter was given and the battle-crazed Japanese ‘fleshed
their steel’ on every recumbent body, alive or dead. There were no
survivors of this section.
This fight at the ridge in which seventy Volunteer gunners and
about thirty men of the Middlesex held up the attack of twenty times
their number of Japanese, flushed with victory and ‘fighting mad’,
will forever be one of the proudest memories of the HKVDC.
Of the 3 officers and 65 men of the Battery, 35 were killed and 5
were wounded; the Middlesex lost 22 out of 29 engaged. But the


Japanese counted their casualties by the hundred, piled along the
ridge and around the bungalow, for the men of ist Battery, like their
comrades of the Middlesex, ‘died hard.’
December 25th
THE LAST STAND AT STANLEY
At daylight on the 35th the two Scottish platoons on Chung
Am Kok Peninsula found their positions practically surrounded by
the enemy, who were in considerable strength. The Japanese had
infiltrated past both flanks and were now in the Chung Am Kok
Fort. It was decided to attempt to recapture the fort and Prophet
took forward a fighting patrol of twelve men to attack the enemy
on the summit of Chung Am Kok height. The patrol worked up
to within fifty yards of the objective, and Pte. I. F. Grant actually
reached the summit, and was killed there. Further advance,
however, was impossible; half the men were hit and the patrol was
forced to withdraw. The Scottish position was under constant
mortar and machine-gun fire and the Japanese were closing in.
Prophet then decided, after consultation with Bryden, to evacuate and
return if possible to Stanley. Prophet, with Ptes. Kempton and
Tillery, set out in an effort to locate sampans which might be used
after dark. They found it impossible to make their way to any
of the beaches and, in fact, were cut off from the others, and made
their way back with difficulty. It was then decided to hold the
position until nightfall, after which each man should try to make
his way to Stanley as best he could. Throughout the afternoon the
position remained static, the enemy putting down heavy mortar
concentrations, but not attempting to come to close quarters. After
dark the position was evacuated. Prophet and some others swam
across, arriving at Stanley about 3100 hours; the others made their
way by devious routes back through the enemy lines. The Japanese
were probably not on the look-out, for the surrender had already been
made, though the men of No. 3 Company did not know it.
At dawn on the peninsula the position was obscure. The men
of the Volunteers and Middlesex at Monastery Hill had been forced
to withdraw and had made their way back successfully to Stanley
Fort. The Stanley Platoon had been ordered back to the Fort, where
Captain Skipwith detailed them to act as HQ guard for the last stand.
HQ Company Royal Rifles had been recalled from their position
north-east of the prison and had fought their way through the enemy,
with the loss of one-third of their men. The survivors of ist Battery
HKVDC and of No. 5 Platoon were also back at the Fort.
At the Preparatory School there were still the remains of ‘A’
Company Middlesex (now commanded by 3/Lieut. King, the only
remaining officer) and part of No. x Company under 3/Lieut. Carter.
The Japanese had already infiltrated past their right flank and were
in the Tweed Bay area. The two subalterns decided to withdraw.


which was the only course they could have taken. Cpl. Drown’s
section had already been brought back from its advanced position and
Sgt. Murphy’s section managed to make its way back from the north
end of the prison, complete with guns and equipment.
In the vicinity of the Fort a last line of defence had been
prepared, and this was now manned by the survivors of the Royal
Rifles, Middlesex and Volunteers. Major J. Watson (HKVDC)
withdrew all spare gunners from 2nd Battery, formed them into an
infantry unit, under Lieut. S. J. G. Burt, and brought them down to
strengthen the line.
The enemy made no infantry attacks during the day. It seemed
probable that the Japanese commander was resting his troops after
their previous day’s efforts, and was making preparations for the
final attack on the. following day. There was, however, heavy shell
and mortar fire, and air-raids continued throughout the day. At
about 1400 hours Captain Crozier observed a large enemy concen-
tration on the heights of Chung Am Kok (these were apparently
preparing for an attack on Prophet’s and Bryden’s men) and 2nd
Battery opened fire with good effect. This drew a terrific bombard-
ment from the Japanese counter-batteries; the No. 2 gun was knocked
out and extensive damage done to the Battery.
The defenders were in a sorry plight. They had few mortars
and no mortar bombs. The Middlesex and Volunteer machine-guns
had all been knocked out. For weapons they were now reduced to
their rifles and the one gun at Bluff Head. They were very short of
ammunition. For several days they had been on short rations of food
and water. They were completely exhausted after so many sleepless
days and nights. They had barely enough men left to hold the line;
and it was evident that the intensive bombardment, to which they
could make no reply, was only the prelude to a full-scale attack.
THE HOSPITAL AT ST. STEPHEN’S COLLEGE
The main building of St. Stephen’s College was being used as
an emergency hospital. In the hall there were some 65 patients,
with another 30 in the adjoining class-rooms. The Staff comprised
Lieut.-Colonel G. D. R. Black (HKVDC), Captain Whitney (RAMC),
a Sister from the Military Hospital, six VADs, Chinese nurses of
St. John Ambulance, together with hospital orderlies.
At 0530 hours on Christmas morning, while the fighting was
still continuing along the ridge, “about 150 or 200 Japanese broke
into the hospital”. They started bayoneting the wounded men,
driving their bayonets repeatedly through bodies and mattresses.
Lieut.-Colonel Black and Captain Whitney went forward in an
endeavour to stop them. Black tried to bar the doorway to prevent
more Japanese entering. He was shot through the head and
“bayoneted dozens of times” as he lay on the ground. Whitney
was also shot and then bayoneted repeatedly. The massacre continued


until 56 of the patients in the hall had been stabbed to death. The
others concealed themselves under beds and in dark corners. One
of the few survivors was CSM Begg, who had previously been one
of the three survivors of the Euclili adventure.
In the morning the surviving wounded were driven upstairs at
the point of the bayonet and, together with the hospital orderlies,
confined in one small room. There were in all about forty of them.
Throughout the day, at intervals, men were taken out, one by one,
and butchered. Two or three of the seriously wounded men died in
the room. At 1700 hours a Japanese officer came in and told them
that they were very lucky—‘Hong Kong has surrendered; if not,
all will be killed.’ After dark all the wounded men who could stand
were forced at the point of the bayonet to carry out the bodies of
their murdered comrades and the blood-soaked mattresses to a great
fire, which had been made from broken school desks.
Still more horrible was the treatment of the women, all of whom
were wearing Nurses’ uniform and Red Cross arm-bands. They were
confined first in a small room upstairs. The four Chinese nurses
were raped by Japanese soldiers repeatedly, then taken away, and have
not been seen since. Three of the British nurses were also taken
away at intervals, and their dead bodies were seen next day. The
other four were raped again and again throughout the morning and
afternoon. In the evening a Japanese officer told them also that
they were lucky that Hong Kong had surrendered; for in another
hour they would have been dead.
The four nurses did what they could for the few wounded men
who had survived the massacre. Blankets, dressings and drugs had
been destroyed or removed by the Japanese. It was not until the
morning of the 26th that Lieut. Stoker (HKVDC) was able to
reach the hospital and take the four nurses away. The wounded
were removed later in the day.
THE HOSPITALS AT HAPPY VALLEY AND ST. ALBERT’S
The Jockey Club at Happy Valley was being used as an
emergency hospital. The Japanese arrived there on the evening of
the 24th. The nurses were confined in one room, and four of them
were taken out and raped. Further measures, which presumably
included a massacre of the patients, were prevented by Dr. J. A.
Selby, who managed to distract the attention of the Japanese officers
until they were too drunk to do any harm.
At St. Albert’s Hospital the Japanese tied up the members of the
nursing staff—sisters, nurses and orderlies and trained a machine-
gun on them. They were diverted, however, by finding one of their
own wounded officers in one of the beds and well cared for, and after
a couple of hours released the prisoners.


It is strange that the enemy should have been so pleased at this,
since their treatment of our own wounded was either to leave them
to die slowly or to “flesh their steel” on non-vital parts. An officer
of the Middlesex, shot in the leg, whilst lying on the ground, received
two sword-slashes and no less than fourteen bayonet-stabs. Yet he
managed to crawl away after dark, and, so far as is known, is alive
and well today.
There was only one known case of the enemy picking up a
wounded British soldier. Pte. J. E. Mogra, of No. 3 Company,
HKVDC who had been shot through the body, called out in Japanese
for water. A Japanese officer came to him and, on learning that
Mogra had been born and had lived most of his life in Japan, not
only gave him water but ordered that he should be picked up with
the Japanese wounded. He refused, however, Mogra’s request that
the other British wounded should be given water. Mogra died two
days later, but told his story to some of the other prisoners first.
THE LOSS OF BENNET’S HILL
In the Aberdeen sector the Japanese attacked soon after midnight,
and a number of them reached the northern slopes of Bennet’s Hill
and dug in there. By 0300 hours the enemy again advanced in
this area, trying to infiltrate west of Bennet’s Hill, where they
were held up by the HKRNVR. Desultory fighting continued for
some hours. At about 0800 hours the enemy drove in our defences
east of Bennet’s Hill and made a deep salient. ‘B’ Company
Grenadiers was preparing for a counter-attack on this salient, but the
impromptu ‘truce’ which was ordered at 0900 hours prevented this
from being carried out. When the period of the truce ended, the
opportunity had been lost; for the enemy there had been heavily
reinforced. Colonel Tanaka sent in all that was left of his 229th
Regiment. By 1400 hours the enemy had completely surrounded
Bennet’s Hill, and an hour later the men of the Grenadiers there
were forced to surrender. ‘B’ Company Grenadiers, the HKRNVR
and the mixed force on the sea-front were forced to withdraw to
conform, and it appeared to be only a matter of hours before the
Japanese broke through to Aberdeen.
THE LAST STAND IN THE NORTHERN SECTOR
At dawn on the 25th our positions were roughly as follows:
From the sea-front to the Lee Theatre were remains of ‘B’ and
‘C’ Companies Punjabis, together with a mixed force of gunners,
British and Indian, and Royal Scots hospital cases. Morrison Hill
was held by a platoon of ‘B’ Company Middlesex and Major Moody’s
party of ‘oddments’; with these were the twenty survivors of Captain
Man’s ‘Z’ Company. The houses by the Monument were held by
the remainder of ‘B’ Company Middlesex and a handful of Volunteers.
‘B’ Company Rajputs was on Mount Parrish; to the south of Mount


Parrish were Farringdon’s Marines, linking up with the Royal Scots
who held the line from there to St. Albert’s and thence to Wanchai
Gap.
Although there was still a threat of an enemy landing in the
Central District, it was decided to remove all troops from shore
defences; and ‘D’ Company Middlesex was sent in to support the
Punjabis. The residue of ‘A’ Company Punjabis was also withdrawn
from the pill-boxes and moved to Fortress HQ. This left the whole
of the shore-line unguarded except for No. 5 Company HKVDC.
The enemy pressure against Morrison Hill was to some extent
relieved when at 0600 hours a Bofors AA gun was taken down to
Morrison Hill, and, at short range, shelled the enemy out of the
Craigengower and Civil Service Clubs.
Nearer to the sea-front, however, the Japanese advanced steadily,
infiltrating from house to house. Here we were at a serious
disadvantage, since we could not make the use of artillery fire in such
a congested area without causing heavy loss of life among the civilian
population. The Japanese had no such scruples and put down heavy
mortar concentrations, some of them lasting half-an-hour. The
Middlesex and Punjabis fought splendidly; but what mortars we had
were useless for want of ammunition; we had exhausted our supply
of hand-grenades and even SA ammunition was running very short.
By 0630 hours the enemy had made a penetration along the
sea-front, threatening to outflank the defenders at the Lee Theatre and
Morrison Hill. Lieut.-Colonel Stewart, commanding the Middlesex,
began preparing a second line of defence; O’Brien Street —Wanchai
Market—Mount Parrish.
At 0900 hours two British civilians, captured at Repulse Bay
Hotel, came across under a flag of truce. They told of the incredible
number of guns and troops they had seen on their journey, and
emphasised that in their opinion further resistance was useless.
Major-General Ito sent a message that he would not initiate further
hostilities for three hours. His demand for surrender was refused.
The ‘truce’ was apparently honoured by the Japanese troops in the
vicinity, but Japanese planes continued to bomb Stanley, Aberdeen
and Mount Gough; their artillery continued to shell the Gaps from
the Kowloon side; and Tanaka utilised the time to reinforce his line
at a threatened place.
At midday the Japanese artillery on the island opened up
vigorously and there was a strong forward movement of the infantry.
A tremendous assault was made on Mount Parrish and 1 , though the
Japanese lost heavily in the attack, they got to close quarters with
the Rajputs there. In a hand-to-hand struggle, one platoon of the
Rajputs was cut off; the other was driven back. The loss of Mount
Parrish opened a way along Kennedy Road to Fortress HQ. Road


blocks and anti-tank mines were put out, and the last reserve, a platoon
of ‘A’ Company Punjabis, was moved out along Kennedy Road to
prevent further penetration there.
Lieut.-Colonel Stewart reported that his men, though fighting
well, were being slowly but surely overwhelmed by vasdy superior
numbers, and at 1400 hours he ordered the troops to withdraw to
the ‘O’Brien Street Line’. This was no easy matter since our men
were everywhere in close contact with the enemy. The men, by
now utterly exhausted, had to retire as fast as they could run and
man the new line before the enemy could take advantage of their
withdrawal.
THE LOSS OF WANCHAI GAP
Further south, the Japanese planes made numerous dive-bombing
attacks on Wanchai Gap and Magazine Gap. At the latter they
dropped incendiaries which set the hillside alight. By 0900 hours
the men of ‘A’ Company Royal Scots had lost their foothold on the
slopes of Mount Cameron, and were back in Wanchai Gap, which
was attacked continuously by dive-bombing planes and by heavy
concentrations of mortar fire throughout the morning. At midday
an infantry attack was made and was beaten back. Air and Mortar
bombing was intensified during the afternoon, and at about 1430
hours the Gap was overrun.
Magazine Gap was the next objective of the enemy. Brigadier
Rose reported that it could hold out for two hours at most.
THE SURRENDER
At 1450 hours Captain Man reported “the line is breaking”.
Lieut.-Colonel Stewart suggested forming yet another line from the
east end of the Naval Yard to Fortress HQ.
It was felt now that everything possible had been done. “This
advance of the enemy along the line of the Gaps, the possession of
those Gaps by him, thus giving him an open line of advance to the
Central Districts, the fall of Bennet’s Hill, the isolation of the force
at Stanley, the deployment by the enemy of such superior forces and
armament, the exhaustion of our troops after sixteen days of continuous
battle, with no reliefs for any individuals, our vulnerability to
unlimited air-attack, the impossibility of obtaining more ammunition
for the few remaining mobile guns, the serious water famine
immediately impending—these were the factors which led to the
inevitable conclusion; namely, that further fighting meant the useless
slaughter of the remainder of the garrison, risked severe retaliation
on the large civilian population and could not alter the final outcome..
The enemy drive along the north shore was decisive.”
At 1515 hours the capitulation was made.


The strength of the military units
as follows:—
forming the
garrison was
Officers
Other Ranks
Headquarters, China Command
33
—
Headquarters, Royal Artillery
6
—
8 Coast Regiment, RA
J 9
518
12 Coast Regiment, RA
16
387
5 AA Regiment, RA
25
563
i HK and S RA
14
860
965 Dct. Bty. RA
3
144
22 Field Company, RE
7
213
40 Field Company, RF.
7
220
RE Services
18
54
2 Royal Scots
35
734
1 Middlesex
3 6
728
Canadian Staff
14
78
Winnipeg Grenadiers
42
869
Royal Rifles of Canada
41
963
5/7 Rajputs
*7
875
2/14 Punjabis
15
932
HKVDC (all units)
94
1,665
Royal Signals '
7
r 7 7
RAOC
15
i'7
RASC
14
183
RAVC
2
3
RAMC
26
146
RA Dental Corps
4
6
RIASC
—
13
HK Mule Corps
3
250
RAPC
3
25
IMS
5
55
Killed
Missing
Wounded
Total
Off. O.R.
Off. O.R.
Off. O.R.
Off. O.R.
Royal Navy
2 45
— 14
— x 4
2 73
Royal Marines
— 4
— —
— —
— 4
RNR & HKRNVR
12 6
5 4
6 4
2 3 I 4
HK Dkyd Def Corps
— 18
— 9
1 4
1 3 1
APPENDIX I
STRENGTH AND CASUALTIES
This gives a total of 541 officers and 10,778 other ranks.
Excluding the HKVDC there were 447 officers and 9,113 other ranks.
The number of casualties, as given in Lieut. General Maltby’s
final figures were:—
Killed or Died
of wounds Missing Wounded Total
Imperial Officers 74 62 \
Imperial Other Ranks ... 595 696 > 2,300 4,414
Indian Other Ranks 376 31 1
It is not possible to give accurately the total of killed and
wounded for each individual unit. The heaviest loss fell on the
Rajputs, who lost 100% of officers and nearly 65% of men. Next
were the Royal Scots and the Royal Rifles of Canada, who lost more
than 50%. The other three battalions each lost between 40%
and 50%.
The naval casualties were given as follows:
The Japanese losses were never published in any reliable form.
Various statements were made, ranging from the somewhat low figure of


HKVDC STRENGTH AND CASUALTIES
Strength Killed & Missing Wounded
Total
Unit
Off.
O.R.
Off.
O.R.
Off.
O.R.
Off.
O.R.
Corps HQ & S & T
II
43
I
2
—
I
2
Corps Artillery HQ
3
2
—
—
—
—
—
—
ist Battery
3
65
2
33
I
5
3
38
2nd Battery
3
83
I
7
—
4
I
11
3rd Battery
3
75
'
—
—
—
—
—
4th Battery
3
94
—
9
I
II
I
20
5th (AA) Battery ...
2
65
—
25
—
5
—
3°
Field Coy Engineers
12
in
—
8
4
4
4
12
Corps Signals
2
38
—
4
I
3
I
7
Armed Car Platoon
I
28
—
4
—
4
—
8
No. 1 Company
4
100
I
26
2
19
3
45
No. 2 Company
4
94
I
24
—
25
I
49
No. 3 Company
4
no
2
35
2
33
4
68
No. 4 Company
4
74
—
4
—
3
—
7
No. 5 Company
4
94
—
2
—
3
—
5
No. 6 Company ...
5
9 1
—
5
—
3
—
8
No. 7 Company ...
3
38
—
2
—
—
—
2
ASC Unit
7
6?
—
26
—
7
—
33
Stanley Platoon
I
28
—
8
—
6
—
r 4
Pay Detachment
3
14
—
—
—
—
—
—
Fortress Signals
2
15
—
I
—
I
—
2
Hughes Group
4
68
I
17
I
13
2
30
Recce Unit
I
7
—
—
—
—
—
—
Field Ambulance ...
5
164
—
3
—
4
—
7
Nursing Detachment
9
3
248
12
I
1 54
21
4
402
1,996 killed and 6,000 wounded, as given in a Japanese paper published
on December 29th, 1941, to the very high figure of 7,000 killed
and 20,000 wounded, as given in a Tokyo broadcast a few days later.
Lieut.-General Maltby’s estimate was 3,000 killed and 9,000
wounded; based on the statement by the Japanese commander that he
had 9,000 wounded to care for, and therefore required to turn our
wounded out of most of the hospitals. A senior officer of the 230th
Regiment told the writer that the Japanese landed on the island a force
comprising eighteen battalions of first-line troops, each of which in-
cluded a number of attached gendarmerie, together with four battalions
of ‘garrison troops’, and a considerable amount of artillery—a total of
about 30,000 men, of whom “nearly half” became casualties. He
instanced the three battalions of the 230th regiment, which landed
3,200 strong, and finished with “less than 800”. He reckoned the
Japanese losses at 14,000 on the island and about 1,000 on the
mainland and during the period preceding the landing. His estimate
was 4,500 killed and 11,000 wounded. We may take it that the
three infantry regiments of the 38th division were, to all intents
and purposes, “written-off”, and the other three badly mauled.
Their heaviest losses seem to have been incurred during their
attacks at Mount Cameron and at Stanley, on both of which occasions
their massed “banzai” charges proved very costly.
The high proportion of killed to wounded in our casualty list
is due to the fact that we were mainly withdrawing and had to leave
the seriously wounded cases behind; and, as has been said, only on
one occasion did the Japanese pick up our wounded.


These figures were first made out by unit commanders during
the period in the POW camp; and have since been amended several
times.
Twenty-one members of the HKVDC, non-commissioned officers
and men, received commissions in the regular forces either before
or during the period of hostilities. Of these eight were killed and
one died of wounds.
APPENDIX II
HONG KONG VOLUNTEER DEFENCE CORPS
ORDER OF BATTLE
Commandant Colonel H. B. Rose, MC
and-in-Command Lt.-Col. E. J. R. Mitchell, OBE, ED
Adjutant Captain E. N. Thursby, KSLI
Quartermaster Lieutenant G. H. Calvert
RSM WO I F. C. Jones, Surreys
RQMS WO II A. E. Kew
Armourer A/S/Sgt. W. D. White
OC Corps Artillery Major J. Watson
2nd-in-Command Corps Artillery Major N. Garland
OC ist Battery Captain G. F. Rees
OC 2nd Battery Captain D. J. S. Crozier
OC 3rd Battery Captain C. W. L. Cole
OC 4th Battery Lieutenant K. M. A. Barnett
OC sth AA Battery Captain L. Goldman
OC Field Company Engineers Lt.-Col. R. D. Walker, MC
OC Corps Signals Captain A. N. Braude
OC Armoured Car Platoon 2/Lieutenant M. G. Carruthers
OC No. 1 Company (Rifle) Captain A. H. Penn
OC No. 2 Company (MG) Major H. R. Forsyth
OC No. 3 Company (MG) Major E. G. Stewart
OC No. 4 Company (Rifle) Captain R. K. Valentine
OC No. 5 Company (MG) Captain C. D’Almada e Castro
OC No. 6 Company (AA) Captain H. A. de B. Botelho
OC No. 7 Company (Rifle) Captain J. G. B. Dewar
OC Army Service Corps Company Major F. Flippance
OC Supply and Transport Section Major H. G. Williams
OC Field Ambulance Lt.-Col. L. T. Ride
OC Pay Detachment Major C. de S. Robertson, MM
OC Stanley Platoon Lieutenant C. J. Norman
OC Hughes Group Major The Hon. J. J. Patterson
OC Fortress Signals Major J. P. Sherry
OC Reconnaissance Unit 2/Lieutenant E. B. Teesdale
OC Railway Operation Detachment Cadre Captain I. B. Trevor
Commandant, Nursing Detachment ... Mrs. I. M. S. Braude






