

NEW SOUTH WALES.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.
1. The Rural School.
11. Education for Indus-
trial Purposes.
111. Secondary Education.
IV. The University as a..
Public Institution.
A REPORT FOLLOWING UPON OBSERVA-
TIONS OF AMERICAN EDUCATION.
By
P. BOARD, M.A.,
Director of Education.
Price, 6d.
54326 SYDNEY; WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER. —1909.
Issued by the authority
of the Ho „' j' Am HOGUE, M.P.,
Minister of Public instruction.


NEW SOUTH WALES.
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC INSTRUCTION.
I. The Rural School.
11. Education for Industrial
Purposes.
111. Secondary Education.
IV. The University as a Public
Institution.
A REPORT FOLLOWING UPON OBSERVATIONS
OF AMERICAN EDUCATION.
By
P. BOARD, M.A.,
Director of Education.
SYDNEY I
WILLIAM APPLEGATE GULLICK, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
54326 a j 1909.
Issued by the authority of the
Hon. J. A. HOGUE, M.P., Minister of Public Instruction.




CONTENTS.
Introductory Letter ... ... ... ... ... ... v
Suggested Scheme of Educational Organisation ... ... vii
The Rural School ... ... ... ... ... ... 1
Education for Industrial Purposes ... ... ... ... 10
Secondary Education ... ... ... ... ... ... 23
The University as a Public Institution ... ... ... 39
Appendix A.—lndustrial School, North End Union, Boston,
Mass. ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 58
Appendix B. —Trade School, Lynn, Mass. ... ... ... 60
Appendix C.—Trade School Law, Connecticut... ... ... 61
Appendix D.—The Standard American University ... ... 63


INTRODUCTORY LETTER.
The Honorable J. A. Hogue, M.P., Minister of Public Instruction, —■
Sir,
I beg to submit for your consideration a Report upon some
educational questions that arise out of the present position of public
education in New South Wales.
Dating a visit to America this year I teas aide to spend the greater
part of March, April, and May in the United States and Canada. It
teas not possible to male any complete investigation of American
systems of education in that time, nor teas that the object I had in
view. Aty object rather was to study in America the educational needs
of New South Wales in the light of American experience.
In many respects the conditions prevailing in America tesernblc
those in this Stale. America has had a comparatively brief history.
It has had to frame its educational machinery to suit the needs of
widely settled peoples. It has had to tool- at the actual needs of (he
country as they arose, rather than to the experience of older countries,
for guidance as to the hind of educational organisation it should adopt.
While the influence of European schools is unmistakably evident in
American education, especially in the East, there is a genera' sense of
freedom from traditional practice that enables the American, people
readily to adopt new policies in education as soon as the occasion for
them arises.
My inquiries while embracing in n minor degree many phases of
education were mainly devoted to four questions that have a direct
bearing on the problems immediately presenting themselves in this
State. In this Report these problems are discussed with such references
to America as serve to illustrate the conclusions advanced. This
Report also aims at suggesting practical expedients rather than at
setting up ideals that are at present out of reach. There can be no
finality in educational organisation. It must be a growing thing.
There cannot be a lime when, whatever advances are made, educa-
tional organisation is finished. The changing requirements of new
States such as those in Australia, constantly call for modification to
suit the more complex conditions that come with increasing population
and to suit a country that tends to he more and more self-contained
as far as its industries ate concerned. It is therefore the aim of this
Report to indicate on what lines progress may now be made.


Four topics arc here treated. The first is the rural school, and the
second, industrial education, the one a question affecting country
interests, the other mainly a question for the cities. The other two
hare reference to the higher education of the secondary schools and
the University, especially as these institutions concern the whole
Stale.
The visitor to America is impressed both by the widespread belief
of the piople that a (good education, first in an elementary school and
afterwards in a high school and college, is a necessity to a successful
career, and by the readiness of people to provide both the lower
and higher grades of instruction. The idea sometimes unfortunately
expressed in Australia that ■instruction in the three It’s is sufficient
for ike majority receives no countenance in the United Slates and
Canada. It is felt that the progressiveness of the country is to a
great extent conditioned by the number of children who continue their
education into some of the higher forms beyond the elementary grades.
One can scarcely conceive any proposal that would he more impossible
of acceptance by the American and Canadian people than would be
a proposal to place any restriction on the number of schools for
adruuei d instruction.
During my tour I had the advantage of interviews with many men
of long experience in the administration of elementary and secondary
schools and of universities, and these interviews showed that some
of the problems discuss < d in this Report are only gradually finding a
solulinii in America. It was interesting to find, especially with regard
io secondary education, that some of idle questions that have recently
been discussed in New Souh Wales are now the subject of similar
discussion in Ihe American States.
An attempt is made in this Report to approach the subjects discussed
from the point of view of the school as contributing to the progress of
ihe country, so that ihe scheme of public education may be such as to
increase the number of those who will be effective contributors to ihe
general well being.
I have the honor to he.
Sir,
Your obedient servant.
P. BOARD,
Under Secretary and Director of Education.
Sydney, Ith July, 1909.




Chapter I.
THE RURAL SCHOOL.
In all countries the Rural School is a problem to educationists. How
can the children of the pioneer settler he reached 1 How can the
necessary buildings and equipment for school purposes be provided ?
How can the difficulties of distance be overcome 1 How can teachers
be obtained 1 How can they be retained 1 How can the elementary
training be adapted for those who can get no more and yet remain in
the rural area ? How can the rural child be brought within the reach
of higher instruction ? What should be the nature of the higher
instruction, so that on the one hand the rural boy may not be excluded
from the occupations of the city, and on the other hand that the city
shall not draw away those who should be the mainstay of rural
industry ? To sum up these ; How can the rural school be made a
contributor to State prosperity in the proportion corresponding to the
reliance which the State has to place upon its rural producers? These
questions constitute what is known as the Rural School problem.
Notwithstanding the advanced efficiency reached in some forms of
education in Germany, reports of recent visitors to Germany show that
the rural school there is still in the most rudimentary stage. The law
fixes the maximum number of children to one teacher at eighty, and
most country schools remain under the care of one teacher for all
grades of pupils till the number reaches eighty. In New South Wales
there are very few country schools under one teacher having more than
forty children, and none that have more than fifty. The provision of
suitable buildings for country schools in Germany is also poor..
Professor Hanus, of Harvard, who recently visited Germany, says:
“ No words are strong enough to condemn the outrageous disregard for
properly-ventilated schoolrooms that are almost universal in Germany.”
In America the school buildings are of a much better type, and the
main difficulty there rather centres in the obtaining of suitable teachers
for the rural schools. One result of this difficulty is seen in the short
periods of each year many country schools are in operation. In large
numbers of localities thp rural school is at work for a period of only
seven months of the year, and closed altogether for the remaining
portion. In New South Wales the closing of a school with more than
A


fifteen children in it for more than a week or two at a time is of very
rare occurrence, while schools of from ten to fifteen children are open
on the average at least forty weeks in the year.
Several circumstances contribute to the difficulties of the small
country schools. The question of expense lies near the root of them
all. There are at present in operation in this State :
(a) 330 schools with an average attendance less than 10.
(b) 353 ~ „ „ between 10 and 13.
(c) 341 „ „ „ „ 13 and 16.
(d) 343 „ „ „ „ 16 and 20.
(e) 419 „ „ „ „ 20 and 30.
(/) 350 „ „ „ „ 30 and 50.
Taking the aggregate of all schools with less than fifty pupils in
average attendance, we find there are 2,136 of them, with 40,690 pupils
costing £8 2s. 6d. per annum per pupil.
By comparison the city child is educated at a much lower rate, the
cost in the city and suburbs of Sydney being £4 13s. per head.
The difficulty of maintaining a supply of teachers for the small
country school is experienced in America in a more acute form than in
Australia. Many districts in the United States find it necessary to
operate their small schools for only a limited number of weeks in each
year owing to their inability to obtain teachers the whole year round.
Higher rates of pay would doubtless do something to relieve the
situation, for the rural teacher in America is not well paid; but this
remedy would be only partly effective. The difficulty in obtaining
comfortable residence, and the lack of congenial companionship, are the
main causes of the reluctance on the part of teachers to take up work
in outlying districts or to retain it when they do take it up. If the
country school is to get fair educational treatment, it must have a class
of teachers who have had a fair education and a reasonable degree of
training ; but the very qualifications that enable them to do satisfactory
work for the children inside the school, at the same time make them
dissatisfied with the conditions they sometimes have to face outside the
school.
Another handicap upon the country school is found in the distances
which children frequently have to walk to school. The conveyance
of children to school by vehicle is adopted in several parts of America
to overcome this difficulty, but the expense of this method has acted
against its adoption in many districts.


But the most important drawback from which the country school
suffers is the lack of higher instruction beyond the elementary grades.
The one teacher has under his care, say, twenty children of all ages from
5 to 15 years, and of all grades of attainment represented by those ages.
By adopting a method of classification, he arranges these into two general
divisions for some of the work of the school, but in some subjects he
has to make at least five groups in order to maintain a scheme of pro-
gressive work for his pupils. How to keep all his pupils busy, and not
busy merely, but occupied in such a way that steady advancement is
secured, is the problem of the country teacher, and he finds this to be a
tax on his resourcefulness and his energy that the single-class teacher of
the large school has not to face in anything like the same degree. With
these groups in elementary work, the boy or girl who seeks more
advanced instruction can get but little of the teacher’s time and atten-
tion. The result is, that the child, whose capacity would make it well
worth while to give him more than an elementary course, is in many
cases obliged to leave home for higher work, or give up all hope of
extending his education any further.
These are the handicaps upon the rural school. The question is the
more serious, and is so regarded in America as well as here, from the
national point of view. The best brain power in the community is not
necessarily found in the cities and towns : and there is a distinct
national loss when for lack of opportunity for higher instruction, the
brainy boy of the small rural school is obliged to remain discontented
with the very limited education of the elementary school.
In order to put the rural school in any way on an equal footing with’
the town school, the claims of rural occupations have also to be con-
sidered. The school should become an agent in increasing the produc-
tiveness of the country areas by laying the intellectual basis for rural
enterprise. At the same time the country boy cannot be excluded from
the city occupations. While the drift from the country to the city is-
frequently a subject of complaint, the question may be asked whether
the undesirableness of rural life is not often due to the fact that the
man who brings up a family remote from the town feels that not even
his brightest boys have any chance to qualify themselves for the occupa.
tions of the town. The taste for rural life is often the result of giving
the qualifications for rural life, and the country school cannot render a
better service than giving an increasing number the qualifications for
doing rural work intelligently and with an interest in it.
The considerations stated kbove are those that have to be taken into
account in discussing the means of improving the rural school. What


may be done to increase the educational facilities of the country children,
so that more advanced instruction may be placed within reach of those
who need it, and so that the instruction may be made to fit the require,
ments of the pupil who is to make his living largely by rural production 1
In America what is known as the Consolidated School has been tried.
The experiment has met with varying success. The best known instance,
probably because it has been most frequently described, is that of the
Macdonald Consolidated School at Guelph, in Ontario, Canada, a school
which is doing excellent educational work, but, mainly owing to local
conditions, has failed as a consolidated school. Three other schools
established like that of Guelph, through the munificence of Sir William
Macdonald and the insight an 1 organising skill of Dr. Robertson, of
Montreal, have been more successful. Consolidation on similar lines
has been carried out in several States of the Union, notably in Ohio.
Consolidation consists in the establishment of a centrally-situated school
to take the place of a group of small schools, the pupils from which are
conveyed to the central school. The movement towards consolidation
has met with a good deal of opposition arising out of the reluctance to
give up the small local school in favour of one to which pupils have to
be conveyed, but this opposition has gradually disappeared as the
advantages of the central school became more apparent. These
advantages arise from the larger teaching staff which the larger school
can afford, and consequent upon that, the better classification of pupils
made possible by the larger staff, the better equipment of the larger
school, and the better opportunities for advanced work that are afforded.
It cannot be claimed that consolidation brings about any saving of
expenditure.
Consolidation of schools has already been tried to some extent in
New South Wales. There are at present forty-seven schools to which
children are being conveyed by vehicle from smaller centres at which
small schools would otherwise have to be established. The Department
here has met with the same local opposition in many places that has
been experienced in America; here, as there, the advantages gained
have in most cases gradually removed opposition.
In order, however, that the Consolidated School may fully justify the
closing of small schools in the neighbourhood, it is necessary that it
should provide a type of instruction that is not practicable in the
smaller school, and the instruction which differentiates the Consolidated
School from the schools it displaces should be definitely organised to
meet the practical needs of a rural centre. As long as the central
school is only a duplicate of the small school as far as its programme of


■work is concerned, the mere fact that it is larger or has three teachers
instead of one is not sufficient to overcome the reluctance of country
residents to give up the small school close to their door.
The schools organised by Dr. Robertson under the Macdonald Fund
in Canada recognise this, and provide as part of the school work courses
in Manual Training, School Gardening, and Domestic Science. It will
be at once seen that a country school providing these courses meets
some of the special circumstances of the country boy and girl. The
parents feel that their children are receiving in it a type of instruction
that has a distinct value in rural life. New South Wales has at
present no such consolidated school. The rural residents feel themselves
handicapped by their remoteness from centres where these advantages
are made available, and the country districts, and through them the
State, are losing the value of the increased productiveness of citizens
who are turned out of school equipped with the power to handle tools
effectively, with intelligence trained with direct reference to the
problems of the soil, and in the case of girls, with a domestic training
that plays an important part in making rural life attractive. A course
in Manual Training trains the boys in the use of all the common tools,
and in the hands of a trained teacher leads to the simpler forms of
farm carpentry. The course in elementary agriculture gives to both
boys and girls an interest in agricultural principles and processes. By
the use of the school garden as the school laboratory, under the guidance
of the teacher, the pupil becomes not a mere recipient of information
but rather an inquirer and an experimenter. If the boy, for example,
has learnt to perform the operation of budding and what it means to
the orchardist, or has learnt how to use the Babcock tester, or has
ascertained by actual experiments made by himself the value of carefully-
selected seed wheat, and has been taken through elementary courses of
work such as these examples represent, he is likely to find a, new interest
in the farm and begin to feel that the intelligent farmer does not find
his occupation to be all dreary drudgery.
This work need not in the slightest degree lessen the standard
attained in all that is valuable to him in the ordinary subjects of the
school course. In fact, experience has shown that such practical
instruction has given a mental alertness that has assisted the ordinary
acquisitions of the pupil.
For the girls the course in Domestic Science includes needlework
leading to the making of ordinary garments and the use of the sewing
machine, demonstrations in plain cookery for practice in their homes,


lessons on home sanitation and home decoration, and such forms of
domestic gardening as are suitable for girls. The school would also
have a well-selected library.
A school such as this would soon give a new interest to rural life, and
contribute in no small degree to remove from the country home the
monotony and lack of interest which lead so many young people to cast
longing eyes towards the attractions of the town.
To carry effective instruction of this kind into every one of the two
thousand small schools of New South Wales is evidently impracticable.
It is impossible to make every teacher an agriculturist. But a grouping
of small schools by a system of consolidation would go far towards
making this class of instruction possible in agricultural districts. There
are many localities in the agricultural areas of this State where five or
six small schools are situated within a radius of 4 or 5 miles of a central
point. What cannot be done for six small schools of fifteen children
each, might be done for one school of ninety children placed in a
position accessible to the pupils of the surrounding localities, especially
if there were four or five of such consolidated schools in one district.
In a system of schools where this concentration had been effected,
resulting in attendance of eighty to ninety children in each, training in
the use of tools, instruction in elementary agriculture and elementary
domestic courses would be practicable for the elder pupils. The staffing
of such a school would also make it possible to give to those who needed
it a degree of higher instruction, the lack of which is often felt by the
parent who has to bring up his children in a rural settlement.
Under the system of training teachers now in operation in this
State a certain number are being trained each year to teach elementary
agriculture, and the majority are being trained in the use of tools,
while all are being prepared in the methods of Nature Study. But
more than this is needed to meet the immediate needs of the rural
schools. An organisation of visiting instructors with experience as
teachers and sound knowledge of the principles and methods of the
various forms of rural industry, would best meet the needs of the
situation. These teachers might be distributed in the districts of the
State where one particular form of industry predominates, orchard-
growing, dairying, poultry-farming, or general farming, and by visiting
the schools within an assigned group in rotation give instruction to the
elder children of a kind suited to the prevailing form of agricultural
production in the district. A competent teacher, such as would be
needed for this work, would also be of service to the adult members of


the community in the district in which he worked, though his services
in that direction would need to be subordinated to the claims which
the schools would make upon him.
This plan need not be costly. There are teachers now in the Service
who are doing in their individual schools the type of work that is
required, and are doing it in a way that commands the respect and
confidence of the practical farmers in their neighbourhood. In some of
these cases the teacher has been able to give advice, the value of which
has been readily recognised by farmers.
In another section of this report reference is made to the teaching of
agriculture in the District Schools of the State which are attended by
hoys of a more advanced age, and the linking of these schools with the
higher institutions for agricultural teaching. But a great difficulty
frequently presents itself to the boy of the small country school in
reaching the higher school in the district centre. Attendance there
frequently means that he must board away from his home. The power
of the State to help in this direction is necessarily limited.
An important step, however, might be taken by an extension and
rearrangement of the scholarship system. At present the system of
scholarships is bringing the majority of the country children who win
them into Sydney to attend High Schools. By the organisation of the
District Schools as proposed elsewhere in this report, the type of
education given in them should correspond to that of the metropolitan
secondary school, and in that case there would exist no ground for
encouraging a drift of the country scholarship holders to Sydney schools.
To meet this changed condition such a rearrangement of the scholar-
ships would be desirable as would allocate them to given districts and
make them tenable at the District School. The scholarships would
thus be entirely localised, being competed for within the district and
held for education within the district. This method would, moreover,
secure a more general distribution of them throughout the State.
Another result might reasonably be expected in the increased local
interest that would be aroused in the local District School, an interest
that in some country towns where a strong public spirit exists would
possibly manifest itself in scholarships locally established.
A scholarship system works on the principle that it is worth while
to enable the boy with the best capacity to make the most of it. The
benefits are for those who give promise of profiting most by them. The
only method of determining this is by competitive examination as at
present, but under the system of distribution proposed above, the


competition in each district would be confined to those within the
district. The scholarships which carry with them a small money grant
w'ould be made available to those who must leave home to attend the
District School ; and those scholarships which carry no money grant
would be no longer necessary, since the education of the District
School is already free.
Turning to another and different phase of the rural school question,
the elementary work of this type of school, as has been mentioned, is
hampered by the necessity imposed upon the teacher of attending to
pupils of all stages of advancement from 6to 14 years of age. The
system of requiring a greater degree of study from text-books on the
part of the elder pupils might well be adopted to lessen this difficulty.
Reference is made elsewhere to the danger arising from the improper
use of the text-book in teaching, a danger which a visitor to American
schools cannot help realising, but in the case of the small school under
one teacher, its use is a necessity. There are now many text-books
available which might be used by pupils from 10 years of age upwards
in the small school where the teacher can give only a very limited
portion of bis time to his direct personal instruction of these children.
Where the text-book is used judiciously, it develops in the pupil a self-
reliance in study that compensates to a large degree for the loss of
direct teaching.
This discussion of the question so far has had reference to what the
State Department might do for the small country school. But the very
circumstances oi these schools impose on the residents concerned at
least one obligation that lies outside the scope of the Department, an
obligation which presents no difficulty in the town areas. This is
concerned with the accommodation of the teacher. Much of the
difficulty that exists in the supply of teachers for the small country
schools is found in the absence of suitable board and lodging for the
teacher. A reasonable rate of payment for this accommodation is
always forthcoming, and a more ready response on the part of residents
to provide it would frequently assist materially in the staffing of the
schools.
The considerations submitted in this section havngn view the answer
of some of the questions raised in the beginning of this discussion. The
suggestions made may thus be summarised :
1. The concentration of groups of small schools into one central
school by means of the conveyance of pupils.


2. The provision in the central school of instruction in the use of
tools, in elementary agriculture and domestic work.
3. The appointment of visiting teachers of agriculture to groups of
schools.
4. The rearrangement of the scholarship system to provide
District Scholarships for District Schools.
5. The increased use of text-books for the elder pupils of small
schools.


Chapter II.
EDUCATION FOR INDUSTRIAL PURPOSES.
The process of educating for national prosperity requires a form of
education much more industrial in its aims than that which has held
the field in the past. This aspect of educational effort is occupying
attention at the present time in almost every civilised country. The
needs of the boy who is proceeding to a professional career have been
made the object of administrative care everywhere, and much has been
done for the young man of from 18 to 20 years of age, who, having
chosen an industrial career and worked at it for three or four years, finds
the need for more complete instruction to make himself an efficient work-
man. But a larger section exists whose preparation to become produc-
tive elements in the community has received very scant attention.
This section comprises : —l. The pupils who leave school at 14 years
of age or under that age. 2. Those who choose industrial callings
without any intention of entering what might be called the mechanical
professions. With regard to these there has been a gap in educational
schemes. It is to fill this gap that efforts are now being directed in
Great Britain, in America, and in several European countries. Germany
lias probably made the greatest advance in the solution of the question.
In America it is the subject of inquiry, and several States are moving
towards practical results.
An estimate, based upon figures for this State, shows that out of
every 100 boys who reach the age of 12 years, 88 stay at school for
another year only, 49 of them reach the age of 14 before leaving, and
of these only 17 reach the age of 15 while at school.
Some of these who leave before 15 years of age drift about for two
or three years, and then finding their deficiences telling against them,
endeavour to improve themselves by further instruction, but these are
comparatively few. It is doubtful whether the full meaning of this has
found its place in public opinion. At the age of 14 a boy’s mind is
just beginning to open to the significance of the world about him, and
in the three or four years following that age he is capable of a much
more thorough assimilation of usable knowledge and a readier acquisi-
tion of it than at any other period. Much has been said of the
importance of the training a child receives to the age of 7, but those
who have had to deal with the adolescent realise that it is especially in


the later teens that the practical trend and ultimate value of the life
is determined. What the boy learns and experiences during that
period, as a rule, settles the question whether the community is the
richer or the poorer for his being added to it. The bias given before
the age of 7 may be diverted, for it is a bias unconsciously acquired,
but the conditions o£ the teens are conditions that rest upon the know-
ledge gained, the tastes formed, and the skill acquired, and these settle
the future career. This is the period when every atom of educational
effort is most fruitful of productive energy, and the State that does the
most for its youth between 14 and 18 has secured one at least of the
conditions of pre-eminence.
The question then arises, why do so many pupils leave school at or
before 14 years of age? The absolute necessity for earning money at
that age supplies one reason. The indifference of the parent supplies
another. The immature and undirected desire of the pupil for partial
independence supplies another. These reasons, however, taken in the
aggregate, appear to be inadequate. There is another and a very
important one that calls for consideration. Is it not that in a very
large number of cases the boys and girls and their parents do not think
a further attendance worth while, because the work of the school is not
sufficiently intimately connected with the practical needs that they are
beginning to realise 1 The lad is now looking ahead, and wants to find
in his school work some element of training for a place in the scheme
of things ahead of him. Since he does not always find it in the school,
he goes to seek it amidst the fortuitous circumstances of life outside.
The injunction, “ avoid early specialisation,” in education has been
advanced so long and so frequently by theorists that it has almost come
to be accepted as a fundamental principle applicable in all cases. The
dictum ignores the hard facts of the case. The boy who, having finished
his primary course, leaves school at 13J years of age in order to drive a
milk cart, at once specialises in milk-cart driving, whether the theorist
likes it or not. He goes outside the school to specialise in one direc-
tion, because he is not given the opportunity of doing it in any direction
inside. The fact is, that the injunction to avoid early specialisation
has drifted into educational theory from the consideration of the
requirements of those only who can continue their education almost to
adult age. For them it holds good. But the validity of the rule as a
general principle can only be sustained on the understanding that the
period when school work can be directed to special purposes is a varying
one, determined by the prospect of the longer or shorter school life of
the pupil. There is a commonly recognised body of knowledge and


standard of mental development that constitute the primary education
which should be the possession of all, but beyond that, the time when
a bias in one direction or another should be given to the training has
to depend on the question whether two, four, or seven years more can
be given to the pupil’s education.
The considerations stated above underlie the movement towards
industrial education that is gradually finding concrete form in America
and Europe. In the State of Massachusetts particularly, a valuable
departure is being made under the directing hand of Professor Hanus,
of Harvard University. The object of the organisers there and else-
where is to provide an education by which the young student at every
stage shall learn not merely how to do things skilfully, but why he does
them in a particular way, an education that will save the artisan from
being himself a machine by enabling him to see the work in his hands
in its relation to the whole scheme of which his work is a part, and
that will at the same time give him some interests that lie outside the
routine of his daily toil. The problem is a complex one.
The solution gathers round the various classes of pupils for whom
provision has to be made. These may be grouped thus :
1. The pupils who must leave school with only an elementary
education.
2. The pupils who stay at school till the age of 15 or 16, and then
leave to take up a skilled trade.
3. The pupils who stay longer at school with a view to entering
the technical professions.
This report deals with the question as it relates to these three
classes.
Pirst, the pupils who get nothing more than an elementary education.
These the State must always have, though it may be hoped the
proportion of them will diminish with the growth of a higher
conception of parental responsibility in this direction. It has first to
be recognised that a boy cannot be taught a trade before the age of 14.
The school is sometimes blamed because it does not do it, but among
the sins of omission which the school has to carry, it is surely only
through thoughtlessness that this one is included. What, then, can be
done for the boy under 14 who is to look to mechanical employment to
earn his living? Yery much can be done. He can be taught to use
his hands in making things which are to him worth making. He may
be trained to be deft-fingered instead of being clumsy-fingered. He mav


be taught that only good hand work is acceptable, that what is not good
is bad; that there is no work that can be passed as merely “good
enough.” He may learn the value of accuracy in detail and the
consequences of small mistakes. He may be trained to be a young
solver of problems by. the practical difficulties he has to face and
overcome in his manual training. He may be taught to lay out in a
drawing the plan of the work he wants to do. He may learn to read
an elementary plan in order to give it concrete form. He may exercise
his inventive powers in designing something that appears worth
making. In, the later stages he may learn that some forms are more
beautiful than others, and his artistic sense may be called to the aid of
his handwork. He may learn to express himself in materials as well
as in language. He may be so trained that brain works with hand,
and hand with brain. And along with it all he may acquire an
attitude of respect for all skilful, honest manual work.
This is no statement of a fanciful idea in education. All this has-
been done. It is being done. And when it is done, is not the
foundation of efficient craftsmanship soundly laid 1
What has been stated will give some general idea of the aim of what
is known as “manual training” in the elementary school. The various
processes of the school which are employed to bring about the results
need not be stated here in any detail. They begin with the youngest
class of the school and take the various forms of paper folding, paper
cutting, cardboard modelling, basketwork, modelling in plastic material,
wirework, woodwork, and ironwork. The meaning of the work is
frequently misapprehended because it does not proceed by “ teaching ”
(as that word is popularly understood), but rather by training; and
while the result of the former is seen in what the child knows, the
result of the latter is less, obvious and is found in what the child is.
The former is measurable ; the latter immeasurable. Its value, too,
does not lie merely in the foundation it lays for efficient tradesmanship,
for it is a serviceable training for the boy who is to be a lawyer as
well as for the boy who is to be a blacksmith.
, Manual training has now received almost universal recognition as a
necessary element in elementary education. There is scarcely any town
of importance in Britain or America that has not adopted it, and
everywhere the various educational questions that gather round it,
questions of methods, questions of adjustment to other studies, are
being earnestly discussed. ; It is, however, with regard to the interests
of the boy who leaves school with only a primary education that the
subject is discussed in this report, and to him itjs indispensable.


It is at this stage in the boy’s career that further educational
provision is needed to fill in the gap between the fourteenth and
seventeenth year of age. The Continuation School developing into the
Trade School is beginning to do it in those countries where this subject
has received most consideration. The character of this type of school
might be briefly indicated. In the first place it has to deal with
pupils who are in employment, and consequently it must either be an
evening school, or there must be some arrangement of the terms and
conditions of the pupil’s employment that will admit of his leaving his
work for certain periods in order to attend in the dayt'me. Where a
sufficient development of public sentiment on the question is being
Waited for, it is an evening school. But in Germany and in several
towns in both Britain and America, provision for a boy’s absence from
-Work to admit of a specified number of hours of daylight instruction,
is made either by means of legislation to that end, or through the
voluntary action of employers. It has to be recognised that, as a
■ general rule, study demanded in the evening from one who has spent
the day in physical toil is very much less effective than the study
pursued when the body is free from physical fatigue. The principle
cthat concentrated mental effort is a pleasant relaxation to one who is
■ tired in body does not hold good with the ordinary boy. Hence in
■parts of Germany all persons under 18 must be allowed by their
-employers to attend schools of the Day Continuation type for a
.minimum period of six hours a week, and local authorities have the
power to make this attendance compulsory. In America, so far, this
provision is left jo voluntary arrangement; but in any country the
absence of this provision makes the Evening Continuation School a
necessity, while with this provision for limited day-school attendance
the evening school is a valuable supplement.
The Continuation School, as its name implies, continues the education
given by the Primary School. It, however, does not furnish the same
range of matter for study, nor does it follow the same methods. This
may be illustrated by the treatment of drawing, which is a subject that
necessarily enters into any fundamental scheme of industrial instruction,
and must be treated specially to meet the needs of the artisan. “ This
is accomplished,” says the Boston Commission Report, “by giving less
attention to developing the technique of the draftsman’s calling, and
more attention to expressing the mechanic’s ideas in the language of
drawings. This involves rough sketching, the making of rough working
drawings with dimensions, the proper scaling of drawings, the solving
of mathematical prob'ems relating specifically to such work, and the


interpretation of the drawings of others.” A similar adaptation takes
place in the treatment of English. The course of reading combines with
such literature as will tend to give an interest in things that lie outside
the boy’s work, other literature that has a distinct relation to it. The
scientific magazines, the lives and work of inventors, the works of
reference that may be used to throw light on industrial topics in which
the student has a direct interest, all these need to be used to serve as a.
basis for the student’s English composition, and at the same time
stimulate his ambitions, and train him in independent inquiry. In the
same manner all subjects should stand in direct relation to the needs of
the student, as both an artisan and a citizen.
The subjects that should enter into an Evening Continuation School
course cannot be rigidly specified, since some subjects must be preferred
to others, according to the class of student forming the majority. At the
age of 14 to 16, it is not advisable to segregate boys who are engaged-
in the same calling. The instruction needs to be sufficiently general in
character to make it a useful foundation for any specialised trade-
instruction that may follow at a later stage. In order that it may
serve this purpose, the subjects of English, Manual Training, Trade
Arithmetic, Industrial Drawing, and Elementary Science should form
the principal part of the work of the Continuation Schools of the-
industrial type. The plan of work, moreover, should be in two-year
courses, to correspond with the period of the boy’s life between 14 and.
16 years of age. No school confined to evening hours can be regarded
as equivalent to the daylight school, but as long as the majority of boys
enter upon employment of some kind at the age of 14 without provision,
for day attendance in the terms of their employment, the Evening-
Continuation School is a necessity.
I now pass on to the second group for whom provision has to be,
made in a scheme of industrial education, those who st-iy at school to
the age of 15 or 16, and then leave to take up a skilled trade. This is
a group which will increase in number, as the belief in extended
education as indispensable to successful industry and complete citizen-
ship becomes more widespread. These students have the advantage of
two years of day-school instruction, unhampered by the demands of
wage-earning work, and can therefore cover a much wider range of
study and training than the boys of the first class referred to.
For these the Day Continuation School is required. As it is usually
about the age of 16 that boys enter into a trade, the course for the
school would be arranged for two years. The studies of the school


would comprise English, Manual Work, Elementary Science, Industrial
Drawing, and Trade Arithmetic, of the same character as that of the
evening school already described, but wider in its scope, while
additional subjects, which make for a broader outlook and widened
interests, would be included. A course in Industrial History, in Civics,
in Mathematics, especially dealing with practical Geometry, the use of
algebraic formulae and graphical representation, would enter into the
curriculum. A scheme of this kind would provide, for the boy whose
future will be that of the skilled artisan, a type of training that would
not merely give him the foundation for whatever trade he enters, but
would, at the same time, make him a citizen capable of forming intelli-
gent conclusions on the various social and economic problems that
constantly present themselves to the manual worker. It would be the
object of such a school to develop the industrial intelligence which
leads to good citizenship.
Passing into active employment at about the age of 16, the Trade
School is required to educate the youth in this new phase of his career.
It should be clearly understood that a Trade School is not a Technical
College. The Trade School is distinctly a place where trades are taught
with a view to producing efficient tradesmen. The minute subdivision
of labour following upon the organisation of manufactures in large
concerns, and the use of machinery for finely differentiated purposes,
has made it necessary that if the mechanic is to be saved from being
himself a mere bit of the mechanism, he should know much more of his
trade than the isolated part he is called upon to do. The insufficiency
of the apprenticeship system, moreover, has made it difficult in some
trades for the yduth to get the full knowledge of his trade within a
reasonable time. The Trade School is to supplement the shopwork of
the youth in such a way as not merely to develop in him a dexterity in
his trade, but also to enable him to see the underlying principles of his
work, and to acquire a stock of knowledge bearing upon it. The output
of the Trade School, operating in conjunction with the workshop, is the
skilled craftsman working with manual dexterity and with some know-
ledge of the science of his work.
A Technical College, on the other hand, has quite a different work to
do. If this is not so, the word “college” is quite inapplicable to it. It
should prepare for the technical professions, and qualify for directive
positions. Its special function demands that there should be a thorough
study of the theoretical groundwork of technical occupations. While
manual dexterity is valuable to the college student, and a knowledge
of trade methods exceedingly important, his main concern is with


scientific principles and their modes of application. The training of
the College is, therefore, of a totally different kind from that of the
Trade School. It demands a more matured mind, a much more pro-
longed-course of study, and a much wider range of study. In Sydney,
at present, the Trade Schools of the city are mainly conducted in the
Technical College premises, hut the work of a Trade School is not to be
confounded with the work of a College. In America the higher
institutions, represented by the Institutes of Technology —as, for
example, those in Boston and Chicago—are entirely separate from the
Trade Schools of the cities, and stand, both in aim and in character,
for an entirely different type of education.
In some of the Trade Schools of America the training is given in the
daytime, and attendance thereat precedes the entry into actual employ-
ment. Care is taken that the methods adopted are those that prevail
in the ordinary work of the trade. Combined with instruction in the
theoretical and practical aspect of the trade are courses in mechanical
drawing and shop arithmetic. In the Baron de Hirsch Trade School of
New York City, the course of instruction extends over only five and a
half months of full day attendance, and the effect of this brief period
of preparation is seen in the statement made in the report of the
Massachusetts Industrial Commission. “Calculations have shown that
whereas $5-39 a week is the average pay for young men in New York
when they enter an occupation without any previous training, the five
and a half month’s instruction in this school enables them to receive on
an average $7 - 54 a week.” In Appendix Aan account is given of an
interesting organisation in Boston, which makes one whole year at a
Trade School the first year of a term of apprenticeship.
It is sometimes contended that Trade School teaching received before
entering upon the practical work of the trade can be made sufficient.
The experience of a few of the American schools is in that direction.
The President of a large and successful Trade School thus expresses
himself : “Trades can be taught in schools as well and as thoroughly as
professions in colleges and universities. Advancement in trade
knowledge and manipulation is much more rapid in the school than in
the shop. The school course tends to produce a more skilful, all-round
mechanic than the shop method, and the school graduate is more likely
to reach the highest development in his trade than his associate trained
entirely in the shop. In nearly every case the trade school pupil shows
a greater interest in his courses of instruction than does the learner
in the shop in the commercial work in which he is engaged.” This
statement, however, may be taken as a testimony of the efficiency of some


Trade Schools, but not of their sufficiency. It is generally recognised
that the Trade School alone will not turn out the fully skilled mechanic
ready to take up the work of his trade. Its place is in supplementing
the workshop training. It makes possible a new form of apprenticeship,
by which portion of the responsibility, which under old systems of
apprenticeship rested upon the employer, but which modern conditions
of industry make it difficult for him to discharge, is now discharged by
the Trade School working in co-operation with the workshop. The
enlightened employer now requires his apprentice to attend a Trade
School, and affords facilities for his doing so within his working hours-
The Trade School occupying daylight hours is one of the most
important agents in industrial education. While its main business is
to teach a trade, it also aims at making an intelligent tradesman who
has been trained to look all round and beyond his work, who has made
his trade the central point round which has been gathered a body of
knowledge of other related subjects. It is this related knowledge
which, added to manipulative skill, makes the difference between the
resourceful craftsman and the merely routine mechanic.
The Trade School should be able to appeal to employers in such a way
that learners of a trade might attend for deßnite periods at the day
courses. In Appendix Ban extract is given which shows the working
of such a school in its relation to one large manufacturing concern.
Very many of the Trade Schools of America are connected with and
supported by large manufacturing firms, who establish these schools for
their own apprentices. In most of the schools of this type the boys
attend during their working hours.
Keeping in view the distinction between a Technical College and a
Trade School, the demand for several Technical Colleges in the city of
Sydney has little to support it. These institutions, in order to do
collegiate work, must be expensively equipped and serve the needs of a
limited number of student-*. One C3ntral college should be sufficient in
this city, as is found to be the case in cities of similar size elsewhere.
The Trade Schools, however, are intended to meet the requirements of a
much larger number, and might reasonably be brought within easy
reach of those who need them by being established in suburbs where a
sufficient number of students is likely to be maintained. The proper
placing of these schools should, however, be determined by real
industrial needs, and not by the local desire to have one more public
institution and one more public building within a municipality.


The third class of persons for whom education of an industrial
kind is required are those who can stay at school to the age of 17 or
18. This extended period of education gives them the opportunity for
qualifying for the higher technical professions or for directive positions
in industrial concerns. For these, various methods of training have
been adopted. In some cases it is claimed that the best preparation
for the professional training of the University or the Technical College
proper is found in a good general course of secondary education
extending over four years without any specialised study.
In other cases institutions are organised to prepare specifically for
the higher technical professional training, and are thereby differentiated
entirely from the ordinary secondary school. The Stuyvesant High
School in New York in its industrial division is one of these, this
school, (which hy the way cost £250,000 to erect and equip,) being
furnished with all that is required for an advanced engineering school.
A third type of school is the Secondary or High School which gives the
usual four-year course, but provides in the last two years for an increased
portion of the student’s time being given to those subjects which,
without being immediately technical, lay a sound foundation of the
kind of knowledge which the technical student will afterwards require.
Whatever special arguments may be advanced for these various
methods of preparation, consideration of a practical kind point out the
third as the most generally practicable. If the High School course
throws no emphasis on certain necessary subjects for technical study,
the student is handicapped in his later course by having to extend his
work in those directions then. If, on the other hand, his preceding
course has been too highly specialised in a technical direction, he is
liable to lack the broad intellectual training which is essential to the
real professional outlook. And again, schools preparatory to higher
technical work have to cater for those who have diverse ends in view,
and these schools need therefore to carry their specialisation of study
no further than is necessary to furnish a foundation for any one of the
various higher courses that are to follow. This is especially important
in a city that has many industries, but no one industry that is
predominant and distinctly characteristic.
This third type of school, then, is a Secondary or High School,
offering courses of study extending over four years, giving in the first
two years the general culture obtained from the usual studies of the
Secondary School. This, however, is combined with more advanced
manual training than the Primary School could afford, and the


language study also is confined to a living language. In the last two
years the work is arranged with the ultimate technical training
definitely in view. With continued study of English and a Modern
Language, emphasis is now laid on Mathematics, Science, Drawing, and
Manual Training. The student who has had this preparation should be
able to bring a well-cultivated mind to the more advanced work which
the College and the University have to offer.
Another question which has arisen in this connection is whether
High Schools which provide for this differentiation of studies should be
established apart altogether from those which do not. In America the
institution of M.anual Training High Schools appears at first sight to
have sprung from the idea that this separation is desirable. It is
doubtful it this is really the case. This kind of school has more
.probably arisen from the need for some preparatory Technical School
without regard to other considerations. There is, however, a strong
reason against the separation of this kind of High School from others.
One of the most valuable elements in Secondary School and University
training lies in the association of students of differing tastes and
ambitions. Anything in the nature of segregation of students who
have a common aim, by cutting them off from school association with
those who are working towards other ends, must entail the loss of one
of the best influences associated with education at this plastic period of
life.
Moreover, these students, notwithstanding the special bias in the
later years of High School course, have much to study in common with
those who are not so specialising, and the establishment of separate
schools would involve a duplication of work without any corresponding
advantage.
The essential point, therefore, is that to which reference is made
elsewhere in this report, that fully organised High Schools are required
that will specially provide the opportunity to give increased attention
in the latter years of their courses to those groups of subjects that have
a special relation to the class of work which the student proposes to
follow up afterwards, and that will permit those who have differing
aims to have the benefit of association.
An attempt has now been made in this report to show, in outline, in
what way an education for industrial purposes can be organised so as to


Class I.
(Boys who leave school with
only a primary education.)
Class II.
(Boys who can stay at school
2 years beyond the primary
course.)
Class III.
(Boys who can stay at school
for 4 years beyond the primary
course.)
Primary School —
Primary School —
Primary School—
8 years.
8 years.
8 years.
Evening Continuation
Day Continuation
High School—
School —
School—
i years.
2 years.
2 years.
Trade School—
Trade School —
Technical College and
2 years.
2 years.
University —
4 years.
.meet the needs of the three sections into which the boys who yearly
eave the elementary schools are divided. The following shows in
tabular form the arrangement as here suggested :
No reference is made in this report to the industrial training of
girls, that being a subject that requires separate treatment. Nor is any
reference made to agricultural education. The whole question is
considered here distinctly and only as a city problem. It is as a city
problem that the subject of the training for industrial efficiency of the
youths of the city who now drift about aimlessly and wastefully in what
should be the most educative period of their lives, has to be considered
in its bearing upon the welfare of the State as a whole.
In proposing the extension of Continuation Schools and Trade
Schools, it is a matter of great importance that this extension should
be systematic, so that however gradually such an enlargement of
educational facilities may be brought about, it should throughout be a
part of and a fulfilment of some definitely arranged scheme such as has
here been outlined. The schools established need to be schools of clearly-
marked type and aims, and these distinguishing characteristics need to
be carefully maintained. The Continuation School should not straggle
'off into the functions of the Trade School. The Trade School should
do its own distinctive work and not encroach upon the work of the
Technical College. With the scope of each institution clearly marked,
• the student may pass naturally from one institution to the other. The
boy, for example, who has properly completed his two years’ course of
-work in the Continuation School must pass out of it, that type of school
having given him all it.has fqr him. It will thus become possible to
standardise the various agencies for industrial education, and thus, on
the one hand, secure a oonsecutiveness in work that goes far towards


thoroughness in results, and, on the other hand, afford to the public
who are interested in the matter a mean o of estimating the degree of
industrial training that any student has received.
The financing of a system of Trade instruction has received consider-
able attention in America, and within the last two or three years has
entered into the legislation of some of the States. Speaking generally,
the £62,000,000 that the United States spend annually upon education
are drawn, in order of amount, from —first, local taxation; second, State
funds; third, Federal endowment ; fourth, school lands.
Some of the effects of depending mainly upon local taxation for that
portion of education that is participated in by all, that is, Common
School and High School education, are such as not to commend this
method of raising revenues for these purposes. With regard, however,
to those forms of education that are less general and more localised,
that is, those forms that require city institutions in which the rural
population has no share, as in the case of Trade Schools, it is realised
that local taxation is a legitimate source to which to look for financial
support. In most cases, however, a certain amount of State money is
devoted to supplement the amount derived from local taxes.
Several States draw their money for Trade instruction from the
general education rates, but in others a special tax is levied for the
purpose. In the State of Wisconsin, by legislation two years ago,
power was given to the local education authority to levy a tax of one
half mill in the dollar (equal to about one-eighth of a penny in the
pound) of the assessed value of the city for the purposes of supporting
Trade Schools. In the State of New York a State subsidy is made
payable through the Commissioner for Education to cities establishing
Trade Schools, and the City Council in each case is then required to
make an estimate of the expenditure required, and, “ after deducting
therefrom the amount of State moneys applicable to the support of such
schemes, include the balance in the annual tax budget of such city.”
In Appendix C will be found a copy of the law of Connecticut
providing for Trade instruction.
The suggestions contained in this chapter may thus be summarised :
1. The establishment of systematic manual training as a part of an
elementary school course.
2. The provision of Evening and Day Continuation Schools for
pupils 14 to 16 years of age, with two-year courses.
3. The institution of Trade Schools to supplement workshop practice
for pupils of 16 years of age and over,
4. The modification of High School courses to admit of qualification
of pupils for higher technical instruction.


Chapter III.
THE SECONDARY SCHOOL.
New South Wales has probably gone further than any other
Australian State in its provision of education beyond the primary
stage. By its system cf Superior Public Schools, it is giving at
present two years instruction beyond what has been recognised as a
primary school standard to 9,000 children. It has, moreover, a system
of High Schools, five in number, providing a complete secondary course
to 800 pupils. As far as legislative enactment is concerned, there is
provision in the Public Instruction Act for any such extension of
facilities for higher education as may be deemed necessary.
The scheme cf higher education, as far as it is at present carried, is
extremely inadequate. The Superior Public Schools simply continue
the work of the Primary School for two years for those who remain for
that time at school, but the majority who complete the primary course
at 13 remain at school only until they reach the age of 14, and thus
receive less than a year of higher instruction. The pupils at this stage
are unsettled. They are looking forward to early entry into employment
rather than to entry upon a new stage of their education. Excepting
the few who work for some definite purpose, such as preparation for a
teaching career, or for entry into the Public Service, the work of the
Superior Public School suffers in the majority of cases from the lack of
aim on the part of the pupil, while the teacher who puts his best work
into this class finds his pupils dropping out before any part of his
scheme of instruction has reached any definite end.
This difficulty is partly due to economic conditions that lie outside the
reach of educational organisation, but it is also partly due to the fact
that there is nothing in the organisation of higher instruction in this
State to suggest to parents that their children on leaving the primary
classes have any clearly marked grade of instruction before them. The
absence of a sufficient number of fully organised High Schools has led
to a comparative disregard of the need for advanced education.
As a result, the proportion of the people in this State who have had
more than primary school instruction is small. The province of Ontario
m Canada, with a population only about 25 per cent, greater than New
South Wales and spread over an area only a little less, has 143 Public
High Schools. Forty-two of these are Collegiate Institutes, that is,
they provide a fifth-year course, by means of which the student who


has graduated through the High School can take his first year of the
Arts Course of Toronto University. New South Wales had last year
in its state schools an average attendance of 8,368 pupils receiving
instruction beyond the Primary standards; Ontario had 23,229.
Reducing to a common basis of population, Ontario had just twice as
many pupils receiving higher education in every hundred of its
population as New South Wales had.
Taking one of the eastern States of the Union, for the purpose of
comparison, in Massachusetts the number of pupils receiving Public
High School instruction is 9 6 per cent, of the total school enrolment;
in New South Wales the proportion receiving Secondary instruction is
5 per cent. On the Pacific Coast, the comparatively newly-settled
State of Washington has thirty-four High Schools for a population
somewhat less than that of New South Wales.
For every one person with a superior education that New South
Wales drafts out into its working community every year, Ontario drafts
out two who have had their education carried forward to that period of
life when it has the greatest effect in developing intelligence, in
training the judgment, in creating resourceful and well-informed people.
The question arises whether a distinctly marked intellectual superiority
in the one people over the other is not likely to follow upon a difference
of this kind, and whether it is not likely to show itself in the material
prosperity of the States.
The appreciation of High School education in the States and Canada
is, moreover, not confined to the cities. Out of a total of 30,331 pupils
enrolled in the ! Pligh Schools of Ontario, 29 per cent, are the children
of parents engaged in agricultural pursuits. In this way Canada
enables the producer on the land to feel that his occupation does not
cut his children off from the higher educational advantages.
What is true of Canada in this respect, is true of all the north-
eastern, middle, and western States of the Union. Especially in the
western States, where the cities are still in the making, and the
agricultural industries are depending upon land made fit for productive
purposes by irrigation and other mechanical means, where settlement is
scattered, the demand of the people for advanced instruction for their
children is insistent. There is a universal impression that if the boys
are to “get on,” they must have the High School course; if the girls
are to hold their place in the community, they must go to the High
School; and further, if personal effort on the part of the student or the
stretching of the family purse will admit, the boy or the girl must go


on to College. It is not a question of getting education quickly, for it
is generally recognised that to gain each mile-post in a completed
education, a definite period of time must be spent. In the Primary
School the pupil must pass through the eight grades, in the High School
through a four years’ course, in the College through a four-year course,
and in the Professional School a three or a four year course. Whether
the American boy does as much work in the time periods that might
reasonably be expected is very much open to question, but the time
element is there, and there is very little endeavour to make a short
cut to an educational stopping place by cramming for examinations
before a legitimate course of instruction has been completed.
In the consideration of the question of Secondary Education, impor-
tance should be attached to the element of time occupied by the
Secondary School course. It is not merely time for the acquisition of
examinable knowledge that is needed, but time for mental growth,
time to make the knowledge gained a part of the mental fabric, and
time for the laboratory and library work in each subject that will
make the student a self-dependent investigator.
The organisation of a Secondary School system on a satisfactory time
basis necessitates two preliminary conditions : —l. The determination
of the standard of admission to the High School. 2. The maintenance
of a strenuous working spirit on the part of the student.
In America the Primary School course is theoretically arranged in
eight yearly periods of work covering the school attendance of the
pupil from 6to 14 years of age. In many cases it is not completed at
all. The standard reached at the end of the eighth grade is somewhat
higher than that of the fifth class in the schools of this State, but
not quite equal to that of the sixth class. The character of American
Primary School work does not enter into this report. It has some
features which one would not wish to transplant to Australian soil.
The place which the use of text-books hold in the American Primary
School is in marked contrast to the Australian practice, but on the
whole the schools suffer from the excessive use of text-books. These
tend to deprive the instruction of that close contact with reality which
can only be given by the direct oral and personal communication of
teacher with pupil.
The termination of an organised Primary course is the legitimate
beginning of a Secondary course. In this State the termination of the
Work of the fifth class has been regarded as finishing the Primary
Course. If the work of the High School is to be done in four years.


care must be taken that the work of the fifth class is thoroughly
completed before the pupil passes into High School work. This can be
done by the average boy, whose attendance at school has been regular,
by the time he reaches his fourteenth year of age. The average age of
the boys in the sixth class of Sydney schools is slightly over 14- years.
An arrangement of this kind would establish a definite relation between
the Public Primary School and all the various types of higher schools,
and would remove the absolute lack of co ordination that now prevails.
The second condition presupposed by a fixed number of years for the
Secondary School is the maintenance of steady application to work on
the part of the student. A visitor to America who spends only a short
period in the country is not justified in expressing a definite opinion on
the point, but to an inquiring visitor, it certainly appears open to question
whether the work of many of the High Schools is sufficiently strenuous,
and whether four years’ work should not make for higher standards at
the end of that time than they do at present. On mentioning my
impressions in this direction to educationists in different places, I found
that there were several who confirmed them, while others would not
deny that more work might be done in the High School. The recoil
from a narrowing system of external examinations has in some cases
resulted in a superficiality of study ; while the system of gaining credits
as the condition of admission to the University without an adequate
system of tests has not been favourable to close and thorough applica-
tion to real study. The point is specially important in any jjublic
system of secondary education. The Public High School is not an
institution for ; the lazy boy. It is intended to give the chance to the
boy to make the best possible out of the mental capacity he has. It
should provide conditions that are favourable to sound and steady
work, but those being given there should be no room in a Secondary
School, especially a publicly supported Secondary School, for the boy
who fails to put his bestetfort into his work.
These considerations raise the question, how is the efficiency of the
Secondary School to be secured, and how is a guarantee of that
efficiency to be given to the public 1 This question has been already
discussed in this State, but no finality reached. In the United States
at the present time an exactly similar discussion is going on, and the
problem presents many points of resemblance both there and here.
The judgment expressed in this report has been arrived at after a
consideration of the circumstances in New South Wales and a discussion
of the question with many professors of education, superintendents nf
schools, and principals of High Schools in America.


Tn discussing the question in this report it will be necessary to repeat
fa gome, extent what has been already said in previous discussions.
j n the first place, the testing of a school by means of public
examinations upon standards which have no organic relation to courses
of study in the Secondary School is a method found to be unsatisfactory
everywhere. This method of testing consists in the first place in a
statement of a top limit of attainments, irrespective of the nature of
•the preliminary stages or work occupying the years of instruction before
that limit is reached. Under this method the teacher who wishes to
make a good showing in the examination, must be guided in the
construction of his three or four years’ programme of previous work,
not by a consideration of what is educationally sound, but by a very
careful consideration of what has been usually set in examination
papers. The manual of public examinations becomes the text-book to
which he must most refer for guidance in the treatment of his subject.
It is in the Secondary School course rather than in the Primary that the
evil of this system of examination is most felt. The Primary School
course comprises a range of instruction which is of such a fundamental
character, that there is in all good Primary courses a generally
recognised sequence and range of subject matter that must form the
foundation for all future work, in whatever direction that future work
may lead. It is when the superstructure of secondary work comes to
be put upon this foundation that variety and choice become important.
Prom the end of the primary course the field of knowledge in each
subject broadens out, and to both teacher and student many paths
across the field lie open. It is the choice that is made at this point
that enables the school to become adaptable to various purposes, and
many excellent programmes of work may be laid out, all of which,
though differing in character, may lead to equivalent sum totals of
acquired and usable knowledge, mental outlook, and critical judgment.
One is justified in assuming that granted two groups of boys of average
mental capacity, both under properly qualified teachers, and working
faithfully for four years, equivalent degrees of knowledge (though not
the same knowledge) and equivalent powers of judgment and equivalent
■width of mental horizon will have been acquired or developed by the
two groups, even though between the two there were many variations
m the topics that entered into the lessons given, and in the arrangement
°f the matter that comprised the course in each subject. These
variations would be due partly to the different needs of the two
groups and partly to the different methods of the two groups of
teachers.


After all, the matter of importance is that a stated number of years
should be spent in sound and diligent study of certain subjects adapted
to the student’s future needs, that the study should be under the
guidance of thoroughly qualified teachers, and in schools that afford
proper facilities for good work.
What is needed is a guarantee that such conditions are met.
Let this position be first considered with regard to admission to the
University. If these conditions are met in their relation to the subjects
that are required for admission to the University, and appropriate and
sufficient guarantees to that effect are given, there should not be any
need to impose upon such students a further examination framed upon
a standard which may or may not be in accordance with the course of
study which for the previous four years they had been following.
What, then, would be the best means of providing these guarantees 1
The system of placing schools on an accredited list by the University
is open to objection. One receives the decided impression in America
that the practical working of the accrediting system has led to easy-
going work in some of the High Schools ; that while a definite ground is
covered, it is not dealt with sufficiently thoroughly to give the sound
grip of a subject that is brought about when the student has to bring
his knowledge to the test of an examination. Some of the eastern
Universities, while insisting on four years High School study, still decline
to admit students without examination, on the ground that the putting
in of a required time at a given study, while very necessary is, taken
alone, not a sufficient guarantee of proficiency.
The therefore stands thus, how to save the secondary schools
from the narrowing effects of the externally imposed examination
standard, and at the same time guarantee that the student who enters
the undergraduate course will have such well-grounded attainments
that he will not have to be dropped out in his first year ?
The solution is in the combination of systematic and thorough
inspection of the schools , with an examination of pupils carried out as
a supplement to the inspection of the school. By this means the con-
ditions referred to above as being necessary would be tested. The
inspection would show whether the programmes of study were satisfac-
tory in their range and in their adaptation to the pupils’ needs, whether
the teaching staff had the requisite qualifications, and whether the
school afforded the proper facilities for good work, while the examina-
tion supplementary to this inspection would show whether the work of
such students had been sound and thorough.


It will be seen that such an inspection is not of the kind that
would be made by the specialist in a single subject, nor is it of the
kind that would be made by an officer whose greatest concern would be
to see that the Secondary School prepared its boys for the University.
It should be an inspection by an officer capable of taking a broad view
of the actual aims and purposes of the Secondary School—those aims
and purposes that concern the welfare of the 85 per cent, of pupils who
leave the Secondary School for a career, as well as of the 15 per cent
who carry their studies on to the University.
Looking at the conditions of this State, it is clear that if New South
Wales is to keep pace with other countries the number of young people
who receive advanced instruction must be largely increased, and that
to secure this end the number of public High Schools will need to be
multiplied. And this multiplication of High Schools will be called for
not only in the metropolis, but in many of the country towns.
Having in view the present conditions of advanced instruction, the
need for a material extension of public facilities of higher education,
and the fact that to a very large proportion of the students this higher
education will lead to ends other than University work, the work of
inspection and supplementary examination would be best placed in the
hands of a State officer. It is a work in which the State is the most
concerned, and the guarantees of the efficiency of the Secondary Schools
should come from a public department directly responsible to the
Government of the country for the discharge of this duty.
The officer appointed to carry out the work of inspection, and to
supervise the examination of individual students supplementary to
inspection, should have had an experience in the management of
Secondary Schools, and have a wide outlook over the whole field, so that
the various aims which these schools have to fulfil for various classes of
students should receive due consideration. As far as the internal
working of the school is concerned, his position would be a consultative
one ; but, granted a satisfactory programme of work, he would insist
that such a programme should be efficiently handled by the staff, and
thoroughly treated by the pupils before any diplomas or certificates
were awarded to any graduates of the school. In any case the Higher
Schools under the State Department must be regularly inspected, as
are those which are at present in existence, and there should be no
need of duplicating that inspection.
The Education Department of New South Wales has at once a large
field of work for such an officer in its High Schools and in the District


Schools now being organised as Secondary Schools. But outside the
schools of the Department, there are those of secondary character that
would welcome both the inspection by such an officer, and the State
certificate that would follow upon the inspection and examination con-
ducted. Having in view this particular phase of the Department’s
work, it would become advisable to obtain for the position the services
of an officer from outside the State, concerning whom no question of
prejudice could arise in the execution of his work. The number of
schools of really secondary type outside the Department is small, and
the increase of the number is likely to be at a comparatively slow rate.
A system of State inspection, with State certification of individual
pupils, applied to existing schools that have any legitimate claims to
be regarded as Secondary Schools, could have nothing but a good effect
on the schools themselves, and would certainly serve to give to the
public a reliable guarantee of their efficiency that would take the place
of the somewhat hollow and meretricious methods by which the public
is now left to form its judgment.
With regard to the relation of this reform to the needs of the
University, it would not be unreasonable to expect that a certificate of
preparedness for University work issued by the State under these
conditions to any student would be sufficient to warrant his admission
as a matriculant, provided that the certificate covered such subjects as
the University deemed necessary for entrance to its various schools.
As a precedent for the recognition of a certificate of this kind may
be important, it may be mentioned, although the two cases would not
be quite that Columbia University accepts the college entrance
diploma of the Education Department of the State of New York as
satisfying the conditions of entrance to its College, this certificate
being awarded upon examination based upon the programme of work
prescribed for the High Schools of the State, taken in conjunction
with the credits obtained by the student during four years at the High
School.
As has been stated elsewhere in this report, almost all American
Universities require as a condition of entrance that four years’
satisfactory work should have been done in the High Schools. The
examination is supplementary to the fulfilment of that condition. This
emphasises the fact that a student must receive a sound, secondary
training, a training in which the time element is an important factor,
while the examination is subordinate, though necessary, and is regarded
as an educational agency, and not a mere test.


Such a scheme as has been proposed would, by placing the exami-
nation in its right place, entirely alter the attitude of the Secondary
School student towards his work. His mental energies would be
concentrated upon his work, upon getting a sound,‘all-round grasp of
his subjects of study, without regard to the question whether the phase
of the subject he was studying did, or did not, fit into what was required
by some external authority which had nothing to do with drawing up
his programme of work.
It would also set the Secondary School free to suit its work to the
large majority who had no higher instruction in view. It would mean
that the Secondary School becomes the key of the educational arch. It
would be self-dependent, acting with the idea constantly in mind that
it was preparing the majority of its students for entering upon their
life’s career immediately upon their leaving its doors.
A system of State inspection of High Schools, which extends its
scope so as to embrace Secondary Schools that lie outside State control,
would carry with it the registration of Secondary Schools. Much has
been said and written on the necessity for the registration of Secondary
teachers, but it has been found in England that the practical carrying
out of any scheme of that kind is surrounded with difficulties that have
so far prevented a successful issue to the attempts that have been
made. In this State the investigation of the question has shown that
the same difficulties exist here. The main question after all in which
the public is concerned is that of the efficiency of the schools, and any
system that will secure that any given school is efficient will, in doing
that, also secure that the teaching staff is efficient, since the proper
qualification of the teaching staff is an essential requisite for an efficient
school. The registration of the schools would ultimately provide a
means for registering teachers.
The extension of State inspection to schools which are not under the
direction of the Department of Public Instruction would necessitate
the constitution of an adjunct administrative body which would deal
with matters relating to secondary education, especially with such
matters as the factors which should determine efficiency, the registration
of schools, and the qualifications of teachers. Until these matters
relating to the schools which are not under departmental control are
placed under the direction of a body holding a position entirely
independent of alh private interests, there can be no adequate guarantee
to the public of the efficiency of the schools concerned. Until such a
body is constituted by legislative enactment, it might take the form of


a'Council appointed by the Minister of Public Instruction and composed
of officers of the Department of Education, members of the professorial
staff of the University, and representatives of Secondary Schools
selected from those schools that submit themselves to State inspection.
In previous discussions of this question, the proposal was made that
the third element of the Council above referred to should consist of
representatives elected for the purpose by the Secondary Teachers 1
Association, but there does not appear to exist at present any association,
the membership of which is made up of teachers of Secondary Schools,
properly so-called, as apart from teachers of private elementary schools.
And, moreover, under a system of State inspection, and until legislation
on the question is possible, the action of the Council would be concerned
only with those schools which bring themselves within the scope of such
inspection. Among the functions of such a Council as is proposed,
would be comprised : —l. The registration of schools found upon inspec-
tion to be efficient. 2. The determination of the conditions of efficiency.
3. The registration of the qualifications of teachers who are employed
in registered schools, and whose work there is found to be efficient.
4. The regulation of examinations at certain definite stages of higher
education.
The registration proposed in the above scheme is primarily a
registration of schools, while the registration of teachers is restricted to
those who work in efficient schools. Beyond this, as far as the public
interest is concerned, there is very little absolute need for the registration
of teachers j but in the personal interests of other teachers, the Council
might, in order to assist registered schools in obtaining satisfactory
teachers, keep another register of those whose qualifications the Council
had a means of testing, and whom it found efficient. This would
however, be subordinate to the main purposes of the Council.
Deference has been made to the regulation of examinations. The
mere certification of pupils without examination not only fails to secure
public confidence, but is not conducive to strenuous work in the
Secondary Schools. The inspection of schools by a University not only
presupposes that the main work of a High School is to prepare students
for a University, but in a State where Secondary Education is
increasingly conducted in publicly-maintained institutions, it super-
imposes another inspection upon the inspection which it is necessary
that the State should make in its own schools, and thus brings about a
duplication which is both wasteful and unnecessary. Under the
scheme of inspection by a State officer, as suggested, the examinations
would not then stand as a testimony to the fact that a boy had been’


successfully coached up to a certain standard after a careful study on
the part of his teacher of the track the examiner would be likely to
follow, but it would be a testimony to the fact that the boy has passed
intelligently through a systematically arranged course of study,
sufficient in its range, and at the conclusion had shown that he had
gained a thorough mastery of it.
The work of all the' schools engaged in the higher education at
present, is seriously broken up by the number of examinations for
which pupils have to be prepared. Three examinations conducted by
the University, the Junior, Senior, and Matriculation, examinations
for admission to the Public Service, others for admission as teachers,
others for employment by banks and insurance companies, others for
the railway service,—all these claim the attention of the school, and
under existing conditions the school cannot disregard them. Not only
does the student seek to have a hall-mark put upon him, but there is an
urgent demand, and an absolutely legitimate demand, from employers
and others, that there should be some documentary guarantee of the
educational attainments of young people with whom they have to-
deal.
The examination of pupils is both a valuable educational agent and
a commercial necessity. How can the rightful ambitions of the student,
and the requirements of the various bodies that require evidence of
educational attainments, be met, without the breaking-up of school
organisation that now follows upon these different demands 1 It is
clear that it cannot be done without the standardising of secondary
instruction. This means that there should be such an organisation of
higher education that certain definite stages in a boy ; s career should be
marked by an equally definite standard of attainments and mental
equipment, and that such standards should be capable of being
represented by certificates that will carry with them a clearly understood:
value.
The American High School, whatever it may suffer from in other
directions not mentioned here, has gained much from its organisation
in four-year courses. The boy who has “graduated” from the High
School at the end of his fourth year, carries with him a diploma of
“ Graduation,” which represents a well-understood degree of education,
and has a generally recognised value throughout the States. Everyone
knows what it means. The holding of it is a necessary condition to,
entering many of fthe Universities. It is a condition to beginning,
studies in many of the technical institutes. It is demanded by many
B


commercial firms. Wherever presented, the diploma indicates that the
holder of it has passed satisfactorily through four years of systematic
study and instruction.
In this State at present “ a Secondary School course ” has no meaning,
or only a very vague one. It may mean that a pupil has been at a
Secondary School for one year to be ‘ finished off.” There can scarcely he
any conception of education more deplorable than that. It: may mean
that he has put in a period of study on narrow lines, and scraped through
an examination, after which he sells his text-books with delight. This
is, perhaps, a few degrees less deplorable. On the other hand it may
mean that he has had four or five years’ close study under well arranged,
courses of instruction, given by thoroughly competent teachers. But
in that case he has no certificate to show that his secondary education
has meant that to him, and there is no machinery in existence through
which such a certificate may be awarded.
There are three clearly marked stages in an education—the comple-
tion of an elementary course, the end of two years’ work in the
High School, and the end of four years’ High or Secondary School
work. The end of two years of High School work has to be
regarded as a definite stage, inasmuch as a large number of pupils
are obliged to seek employment at about 16 years of age, and no
arrangement of higher instruction would be complete that does not
provide for the requirements of that class.
Any certificating system must accompany these natural points of
transition in the pupil’s career. Certificates marking these three—the
elementary, the intermediate, and the leaving stages—would acquire a
significance in the public mind that could not be easily mistaken if the
schools were organised as proposed. The provision for the intermediate
and leaving certificates is in the highest degree desirable, but to the
issue of an elementary certificate valid objections might be raised. It
could be gained by many children at the age of 13, and would induce
the belief that their education was sufficiently complete at that stage,
whereas it is desirable to encourage the attendance of children for at
least two years beyond that age. The certificate, therefore, should be
of the nature of one that qualifies for higher instruction rather than of
one that indicates that an elementary education is complete.
The Intermediate Certificate would provide an incentive for many
pupils to remain for the two years’ further instruction necessary to gain
it. The conditions for obtaining it would be—first, the regular atten-
dance for two years after qualifying for High School work second, a


satisfactory school record during that time; and third, the passing ot
an examination on the work of that 'period. The conditions for the
Leaving Certificate would be similar, but requiring four years instead
of two.
With pupils certificated to certain standards, with certain standards
of time devoted to instruction, with teachers of defined qualification,
with a co-ordination of various stages of instruction, secondary education
would be standardised in such a way as to furnish those who need it
with a means of estimating educational attainments. It would then
become possib'e to eliminate the examinations that now break up the
work of the higher schools.
The various bodies that look for evidence of educational standing now
conduct examinations which closely resemble one another in the general
character of the tests applied. They differ to a certain extent in the
range of study required, while in some of them special stress is laid on
certain subjects. But on the whole the various examinations closely
approximate to two standards, one of them corresponding to what might
well be accomplished in two years of a Secondary School course, and the
other requiring a four years’ course. This being so, the Intermediate
and the Leaving Certifica'e would fairly indicate the standards of edu-
cation required. Where proficiency in specific subjects is insisted upon,,
as, for example, in the Matriculation examination, or the examination
held by some banking institutions, the student with one of these ends
in view would take care that his proficiency in the specific subjeots.
required was such as to secure their appearance on the face of his
Intermediate or Leaving Certificate. The competitive element that
enters into some of these examinations would not be in any way affected
by the substitution above proposed, since the relative standing of
different candidates would always appear on the examination records.
In proposing to other bodies that the Intermediate and Leaving.
Certificates should be accepted as educational standards, the Department
of Public Instruction will need to set the example by adopting them
with regard to its own requirements. Among the examinations for
which the higher schools have to prepare candidates, are those of candi,
dates for acceptance as Probationary students and of candidates for
admission to the Teachers’ College. These should be abolished under
the scheme as outlined, and the intermediate certificate test be accepted
the one and the leaving certificate test for the other. These tests
somewhat higher than those now in force, but the time has arrived
n n °thing less should be required of those who propose to enter the


teaching service of the State. The two-year course which those who
are admitted as Probationary students have to undergo would then
correspond exactly with the third and fourth years of the High School,
while those who enter the Teachers’ College will do so with a four
years’ course of secondary education completed.
Further reference may now be made to the extension of facilities for
higher education under the Department of Public Instruction. There
are at present five High Schools carrying students to the standard of
the Senior and Matriculation examinations. These schools need to be
organised into departments, and their work arranged to meet the
requirements of the two stages of education referred to. In addition to
these, District Schools have been placed in twenty-three country towns
throughout the State. The attendance of advanced pupils at these
schools is already sufficient to show that they meet a want that is felt
in country districts. The District Schools need now to be organised
for four years’ secondary work, so as to provide for the country pupil
a degree of education equal to that supplied by a metropolitan High
School. The Department is now able to command a supply of
teachers trained and fully qualified for work of this class, comprising
men and women who have had teaching experience and have specialised
in various directions while graduating at the Sydney University.
The District School, however, should be adapted to the locality in
which it is placed. It is not meant to be only a preparatory school to
the University. Most of these schools are situated in agricultural dis-
tricts. Some of them are in mining and industrial centres. In all of
them there are pupils who propose to enter upon some form of com-
mercial career.
Of all these the provision for the study of agriculture is the most
important. One of the most hopeful signs of the time is the increasing
desire for agricultural education on the part of those who expect to
make their living on the land. The provision for education of that
kind is mainly confined to that given at Richmond Agricultural College
.and the Hurlstone Agricultural Continuation School, the latter prepar-
ing pupils for the former. The work of the Richmond College is much
hampered by the want of any special preparation on the part of students
-who enter there. A year’s work in the College has to be spent in
instruction in elementary science, and the elementary application of
science to agriculture that should be completed before the student
reaches the age of admission to the College. The District School should
supply this deficiency.


11l Canada much attention has been given to agricultural education.
An interesting extension of the work of the Guelph Agricultural Col-
lege is noted. In several of the towns of Ontario, where a High School
is in operation, a graduate of the Guelph College has been placed, and
he has a double duty to perform. He is, in the first place, the special
teacher of agriculture in the local High School. But in addition to
this, he is the agent of the College, and as such is the agricultural
referee for the district. In the latter capacity he is open to be con-
sulted by the farmers of the district on any practical difficulty that
arises on their farms. If he can assist with suitable advice, he does so.
If the subject is one requiring the services of a specialist in some one
section of agronomy, he communicates with the College, and the
specialist is at once sent out to the locality, or if this is not necessary,
the needful advice is sent by post. This system is rightly regarded as
a very valuable one from the point of view both of agricultural teaching
and the interests of the practical farmer.
Such a scheme might with advantage be adopted in New South
Wales. It presupposes co-operation between the two departments of
Education and Agriculture, but the extent to which this already exists
shows that no difficulty is likely to arise in that direction. The teachers
of agriculture in the District Schools would best be drawn from those
who have gained a diploma in Agriculture at the Richmond College (or
later on, those who have graduated in agriculture at the University),
and have had also a term of training in the Teachers’ College. Men of
these qualifications would become the best Science masters of the
District Schools in agricultural districts, and from the nature of their
qualifications might profitably act as the agricultural referees and
agents of the Department of Agriculture in the district. Whether it
is considered desirable that they should act in the latter capacity or
not, they would render a service which would make the District School
an efficient agent in such an agricultural education as is suited to the
Secondary School.
One important result for higher education that would follow from
■such a scheme would be found in the preparation of boys for the
Agricultural College and for the new agricultural school within the
University. At present there is no preparation of this kind in the
country districts. Under existing conditions the College and University
.must lay the foundation which should bo laid before the student reaches
their doors. Moreover, by placing agricultural science in its due place
in a Secondary School curriculum and maintaining around it the subjects
.°f general culture, inclusive of one language other than English, the


College and the University would receive from these schools a supply of
students prepared to enter upon the higher courses of study which
these institutions should represent. The country boy whose ambitions
lead him to the higher training would come to regard the four-year
course of the District School as the necessary preparation for his higher
work; while if he did not aim so high, the work of the school would
enable him to enter upon agricultural industry with a fair groundwork
of scientific knowledge.
Reference has so far been made only to agriculture. There are
towns in the State where District High Schools are needed, and where
mining is the chief industry. In these schools the work of especially
the last two years would have its character determined by the aim of
most of the students towards the higher courses provided by the
University or the Technical College in mining engineering. The course
in the District School would in that case give the necessary preliminary
training in Drawing, Mathematics, and Science. And again, in the
schools of city and country, provision is necessary for the special studies
required as a preparation for a commercial career.
An attempt has now been made in this respect to indicate certain
lines of development in secondary education in this State. It is
evident that existing agencies are inadequate to meet the needs
especially of country districts, for higher education. The suggestions
made may be summarised as follows :
1. The organisation of Secondary Schools in four-year courses.
2. The provision under the Department of Public Instruction of
an Inspector of Secondary Schools.
3. The institution of certificates— (a) a qualifying certificate for
admission to High Schools; (6) an intermediate certificate ; (c)
a leaving certificate.
1. Provision for the inspection of Secondary Schools not under
State control by the State Inspector of High Schools, and the
registration of efficient schools so inspected.
5. Following on the above, the institution of an advisory council
of secondary education.
6. The organisation of District Schools as High Schools, with four-
year courses.
7. The appointment to District Schools of qualified teachers of
agricultural science who might act as agricultural advisers.


Chapter IV.
THE UNIVERSITY AS A PUBLIC INSTITUTION.
The University in America stands intimately related to the people.
The son of the farmer, as well as of the city man, looks forward to
entering it. Its graduate is sought after in every department of
industry. It is the place to which the nation looks for new discovery
and for the results of research, and does not look in vain. Its doors
stand wide open, and the inquirer after specialised knowledge feels no
hesitation in seeking it there. In some States the University is a
public utility, as are the waterworks and the post-office. The American
people act as if they believed in their Universities as necessities. And
this is the kind of belief that expresses itself in hard cash, cheerfully
paid by the people to maintain their Universities ; in fact, the
Universities fill such a large part in the life of the people, come into
such close contact with the practical interests of the people, that they
are felt to be indispensable. The American University is the biggest
expression of the American ideal of democracy.
The sentiment that lies behind the American attitude to the University
is this ; If a University is to be a real living force in a community, a
power making for the prosperity of the State, and if it is really worth
while for the highest knowledge to become available to all who are
in a position to apply it to practical purposes, and who feel the need
for it in their daily occupations, then it is not sufficient that the
University should wait for those to climb to it who need its help. It
must come out to meet them. There is a call for an aggressiveness in
action that will make the whole community feel the accessibility of
University help, and for a policy that will make the University a
storehouse of specialised knowledge readily available to everyone who
needs it. President Yan Hise, of Wisconsin, the leading State University
In America, thus expresses the spirit of his institution: —“ The
aggressive business man does not wait for the consumer to go to the
wholesale establishment to purchase his articles. He gets his products
out to the retail stores by advertisement, by travelling agents, and in
other ways. Also, more and more, the manufacturer is beginning to
establish retail stores in various parts of the country to sell his goods.
Are we to be less aggressivfe in education than we are in business 1 ’1
Wisconsin University has given a very definite answer to its president’s


question by carrying the influence of the University, not only into all
the cities and towns, but into the remote rural centres of the States.
“ Our University” is familiar to large numbers of people in Wisconsin
who are unable to become its graduates, but who have enjoyed in some
form or other the advantages of its assistance.
The undergraduate courses of this University are formed with a
distinct relation to the practical needs of the student. Its Arts course
makes definite provision for the student to take up in the last two
years the studies he needs, either for prospective career or for the
higher technical or professional studies he proposes to follow later on.
The Chemistry course may be taken as an example to show how the
science teaching of the University is made technological in character.
The Director of the Chemistry course writes in his last report:—“ The
Chemistry course has been outlined in form of six courses of study —
namely, a general course, a course for industrial chemistry, a course for
agricultural chemistry, a course for physiological chemistry, and a
course for food chemistry. The last course is also adapted for those
that desire to fit themselves for sanitary and hygienic laboratories.’>
“ The study of bacteriology enters largely into the first two of these
courses, and biology into the remaining four.” The Chemistry course
has grouped with it courses in Mathematics, French, and German.
These quotations from the Director’s report show how definitely the
character of the course is determined by the practical use to which it
is to be put by the students.
Similarly, other courses of this University are organised with the aim
of enabling the student to acquire the specialised knowledge that the
State requires. Behind the work of this State institution, there is
the idea of making the student a capable contributor to the prosperity
of the State.
This, of course, may be described as utilitarian, and a lowering of
University ideals. The University of sixty years ago was defined by
James Russell Lowell as “a place where young men spend a good
many years in learning nothing that is useful.” And the spirit that
restricted the Universities to the study of the Humanities, and
restricted the term Humanities to a very limited range of studies, is
still sometimes apparent in the endeavour to give a subordinate place
to the applied forms of knowledge.
There is no reason why the distinct specialising of instruction should,
exclude the studies that are generally described as humanistic or
cultural, and that go to the making of the all-round man ; in fact, in


America the Universities that are most definitely directing their
higher work to technological and professional ends are also those in
which stress is laid on a strong alliance between the Arts course and
the schools of applied science. The University above referred to,
which has gone furthest in bringing itself into close contact with the
practical needs of the State, is also one of the strongest in its college
of liberal aits. If it were not so it would be matter for regret. No
one, and especially no one who is in sympathy with modern University
development, wishes to see the University confine itself to turning out
men who are merely technical experts and nothing more, men who have
no outlook into the world of ideas beyond the limits of their field of
specialisation. But at the same time the highest education is not
that which enables the student to enjoy his books in the arm chair of
his leisured hours, but rather that which best enables him to render
service by doing something that other people want done. Why may
not a University combine in all its output a public serviceableness
with a broad range of intellectual vision 1
The position of the Arts Course is undergoing a slow but gradual
change in many American Universities. In some cases the number of
men who graduate in Arts is becoming smaller in proportion to those
who graduate in professional schools. This is attributed in some
quarters to the entry of a large number of women students who
invariably take the Arts courses and those courses only ; and as a
consequence the young men become less satisfied with a University
training that embraces nothing more than an Arts course. The reason
for the change probably lies deeper down. Most men, fortunately for
the State, are not born to a life of leisure, and they want more than
the Arts course can give. The end to which the Arts course leads does
not stand in any sufficiently definite relation to their life’s work to
make it the sole aim of several year’s work at the University. As a
result, the number of students who complete the four years’ study,
which constitutes the Arts course in most American Universities, shows
a smaller rate of increase (and in some instances a decrease) in
comparison with the numbers taking technical and professional courses.
There seems no good ground for regret that this should be so, provided
that the course in liberal studies maintains a right relation to other
courses.
A visitor from Australia to America cannot help observing the
terminology that is used to express two phases of the work done in
the Universities. ' One constantly hears of the “ College ” and of the
“ University.” The term, “ College ” work, is applied to the courses of


study in Arts extending over four years and leading to the degree of
Bachelor of Arts. The term, “ University ” work, is being confined to
the studies that follow on the completion of the four years’ under-
graduate courses in Arts or of such part of that course as is necessary
before beginning the professional studies. The time appears to be
coming in America when a University can only be regarded as such if
it has strong professional schools with high standards, and well-attended
graduate courses devoted to research work.
In all the leading Universities strong graduate schools are developing,
and though it was at first feared in some quarters that this movement
would be prejudicial to the undergraduate departments, results have
shown that a department that has a strong graduate school is also
the one in which the undergraduate school has also the greatest
vitality. Apart, however, from the relation of graduate schools, which
in many instances are being regarded as the University proper, to the
undergraduate or College grades, the graduate work represents the
most important function of a University as a public institution—that
of research.
As has been pointed out by the President whose words have already
been quoted, the University that exists as a truly public institution
has to fulfil three purposes—(l) to give opportunities and facilities for
research and creative work, (2) to give instruction in the higher
branches of knowledge, and (3) to place its specialised knowledge
within reach of those who can use it beneficially. The important place
now being assigned to the first of these is making the American
University an ever growing power in the advancement of both the
United States 'and Canada. Taking only a few of the leading
Universities, there are at the graduate school at Chicago University
1,226 students ; in Columbia, New York, 931 ; in Harvard, 531 ; in
John Hopkins, 518; in Cornell, 246 ; in Wisconsin, 232; in California
(Berkeley), 319; in McGill, Montreal, 66. It is difficult to estimate
what it means to a country that all these men, having laid the
foundations in their undergraduate course, should now be devoting
themselves to the investigation of definite problems in the laboratories
of Universities throughout the country, and by their creative work
making new departures in fields of human interests. To the graduate
in arts, the library is his laboratory; and the same methods and
principles that guide the student in the chemical room or the workshop
of the engineer are being applied by the advanced student of literature,
or economics, or sociology, or political science, or ethics in the library,
and out of both library and laboratory comes the now knowledge.


While, however, the American University is devoting itself to a
development of research work, a review of this movement suggests a
possible danger. The danger lies in allowing a student to become
absorbed in research work when he has not laid a sufficiently broad
and thorough groundwork of knowledge beforehand. Research may
be carried out at a sacrifice of sound scholarship. It necessarily involves
a study of a subject within a limited range, and, undertaken too
exclusively, fails to give a sound professional training. That this
danger is not an imaginary one is certainly suggested to a visitor to
some American Universities.
Apart from this danger, which is easily avoidable, it is worth
recognising that the carrying out of research work in the graduate
school is the highest function of a modern University. The first aim
of the highest type of American University is to add to the sum of
human knowledge, and its place in the academic world is determined
by its success in attracting students who have this aim in view. The
real work of a University is not that of the first year or two of an arts
course, but the work done in the professional and graduate schools.
(See Appendix D.)
It is highly significant that the work of the undergraduate in his
first two years, when he is laying the general foundation of his study
in liberal arts and science, should be known as a College course, while
only the superstructure of more specialised study should be characterised
as University work. It means that a modern University must stand
for increasing the sum of human knowledge primarily, and then as
an agent of instruction. A University in which the time of the
professorial staff is unduly taken up with the instruction of the
undergraduate can neither properly develop the graduate school nor do
the original creative work which, more than anything else, distinguishes
the University from the College.
Several of the American Universities are State institutions, while
others are private foundations. Of the two types, the State University
is promising to become the greater factor in the national progress. It
differs in spirit and general policy from the privately-endowed University.
That difference has been thus expressed by President Van Hise : “The
public University feels a special obligation to the State which supports
it, whereas the private foundation feels no exceptional obligation to
the Commonwealth in which it is located.” In the State University
"its field of investigation covers all of the practical problems of
the Sfate—agricultural, industrial, political, social, moral. It aims to


become the instrument of the State in its upbuilding.” This statement
very clearly shows the fundamental line of cleavage between the
State and the privately-supported Universities of America. The State
Universities are concerning themselves with the whole life of the
community, while at the same, time they are maintaining high standards
of scholarship for those students who look to it for diplomas and
degrees. The fact that these Universities really do for the State
what they aim at doing is evidenced by the liberality with which
popular legislatures vote money for their maintenance. The State
University of Wisconsin, which, through its high standard of scholar-
ship, and the far-reaching benefits it confers, stands first among these
institutions, receives a sum nearly equal to one-seventh of the revenues
of the State.
From the point of view of the obligation of a University to the
State, Cornell presents features of interest to the Australian. Founded
by private benefaction, and hitherto largely maintained by private
funds, it has gradually expanded the scope of its operations in order
to meet the demands of the State as a whole, and for this purpose
has received large sums of State moneys for buildings and for the
maintenance of some of its schools. It is splendidly fulfilling the
purposes for which these public moneys have been given. It stands
as a University depending partly on private endowments, but as the
proportion of State funds placed at its disposal gradually approximates
its income from private sources, it is assuming many of the characteristics
of a State institution by recognising its direct responsibility as a
contributor to the development of the State. The State of New York
is now profiting do an extent difficult to estimate from the work of the
Engineering, Agricultural, and Veterinary Schools at Cornell University,
not merelv in the instruction given there, but in the public services
rendered.
The position and character of Cornell at once reminds one of the
conditions under which Australian Universities are supported. Large
private endowments are supplemented by public funds, and the pro-
portion of income from public moneys is steadily increasing, until the
financial interest of the State in the institution as represented by
expenditure on buildings and annual endowment closely approaches,
if it does not exceed, the proportion due to private benefactions.
The question naturally arises whether, with the increase of State
endowment, there is a corresponding widening of the contact of the
Universities with the interests of the States. Is the Australian
University becoming increasingly available to students ? Is it mainly


a metropolitan institution ? Are the opportunities for University
assistance being spread over a -wider area of the State 1 Is the
University becoming an institution to which those on whom the State
depends for its prosperity and the students outside its walls can look
for assistance ? These questions doubtless need not be answered here,
but some consideration may be given to what these questions suggest.
In the first place, referring only to the Sydney University, how is the
availability of this University to a larger number of students to be
secured 1 Looking at the Arts courses alone, the influence of the
University is enjoyed only by those who can attend the lectures given
within its walls and whose residence within the metropolis thus becomes
necessary. With a University situated on one edge of a State com-
prising 300,000 square miles, this condition excludes from its benefits
hundreds of earnest students who are prepared to work hard, but desire
guidance and oversight in their study in order that it may be systematic
and purposeful and have some definite aim. These students arc unable
to leave home and board at considerable expense in the city for three
years in order to bo present at all lectures given at the University.
The University consequently loses a large part of what should be
its constituency, and the country districts, where, after all, the most
earnest students and the most patient investigators are frequently
found, are in the position of being forced to regard the University as a
city institution with which they can have no concern. There is at
present practically nothing to connect the country resident (and it is
to be remembered the country resident is often the country’s producer)
with the University. If he is fairly well off he may send his son to
Sydney. If he is not, he may occasionally hear of a party of students
in his vicinity, or he may hear of a lecture being given by a professor
in a country town more or less remote from him. But beyond this,
what is the University to him? If he thinks about it at all, he
regards it as an institution so exclusively metropolitan with regard to
the students who attend it, and so exclusively metropolitan with regard
to the range of service it renders, that it can scarcely be wondered
at if the existence of the University simply serves to accentuate in
his mind the undesirableness of following a country occupation and of
bringing up a family in a rural township. As a result, it does not
occur to the resident of Bathurst, or of Grafton, or of Hay, that the
University of Sydney is in any sense the University of New South
Wales. And under these circumstances both the country resident and
the University are losers, the, former losing what the University could
give to him or his children, and the latter losing the moral and:


material support that comes from a widened sphere of usefulness and
a widened constituency, and the State'is a loser through its highest
learning being available to only a few.
On the other hand, it must be admitted that those who urge the
necessity of actual attendance at the University have a strong case
If, as has been said, “ the University is not a school, it is an
atmosphere,” one of the strongest elements in the education it imparts
is missed by those who are unable to enter into the corporate life of
the institution. Mere participation in the studies of the University
represents but a fraction of what the University means to the student
whose education is rounded out by contact with other students and
personal touch with the instructional staff, and with all that goes to
make the “ student life ” a preparation for the larger life outside
the University. From the standpoint of intellectual growth and efficient
-study alone, the absent student suffers an immense disadvantage in the
loss of the direct inspiration and guidance of a group of men who bring
to their work ripe scholarship and enthusiasm for their subjects, while
■ outside of the purely intellectual activities of a university he also
loses the character-forming influences that come from that side of
-university life for which no substitute can be found.
Between these two conflicting considerations, is anything possible ?
Is the University to remain with its doors closed to all students who
cannot bear the expense of living for three years in Sydney without
earning anything? On the other hand, is the University to constitute
itself a mere examining and degree-giving body to a section of solitary
rural students who never know anything of the mental attrition that
comes from association with other students ? Is there no possible
compromise 3
In this connection the expei ience of Canada is of value. The Province
of Ontario has a population of 2,250,000 people, occupying' 260,000
square miles of territory. Like New South Wales it has a com-
paratively small population spread over a large area. Ontario has
■eight persons to the square mile and New South Wales five. Ontario
lias three universities of high s'anding. The problem of bringing the
University within reach of the largest possible number of the people
has presented similar difficulties in Ontario and in this State. The
difference lies in the fact that Ontario has done something to solve
it. That province has, rising on the foundation of its public schools,
a far-reaching system of high schools, providing four-year courses of


secondary education and carrying their pupils to matriculation standard
at the end of the fourth year. There are 143 of these high schools.
But as these institutions would only quality the student to satisfy the
admission requirements of the Universities, the problem of enabling
the youth of the country town to graduate in the University still
remained. A step further then was taken. It was arranged by the
co-operation of the Universities and the State Department of Education,
thus : A certain number of these high schools have been organised
and staffed so as to provide another year’s course for all their
matriculated students, this coarse to correspond with and be equivalent
to the first year of the Arts course in the University. These students-
at the satisfactory conclusion of their year are admitted to the-
University as second-year students. High schools providing this year’s,
instruction are distinguished by the name of Collegiate Institutes, and
there are forty-two of them. The collegiate institute is an important
constituent of the Canadian system of public education, and its
importance lies in the fact that it carries instruction of the University
level into all the largest country centres and relieves the student who
aims at graduation in the University of at least one year of the
expense of living at a distance from home. The necessity for spending
the remainder of his time at- the University secures to him the
benefits of the organised University life. This system is a compromise-
between the conflicting claims of the two sides of the problem, but
it is an extremely reasonable compromise. In order that it might be
operative in any State it implies the following conditions : —l. A well-
distributed system of high schools supplying complete courses of
secondary education. 2. A selection of these for the higher collegiate-
work. 3. The staffing of these collegiate High Schools with teachers
of high qualifications. 4. The co-operation of the University with the
Education Department, so as to secure that the student admitted
from these schools to advanced standing in the University shall possess
the necessary attainments for such standing.
This compromise would still require the stu lent to put in two years
of attendance at the University; but as these Collegiate High Schools,
in course of time commanded popular support the largest and strongest
of them might even take two years of the course in close collaboration
■with the University faculty. Canada again furnishes an example of
this stage having been reached. Vancouver is a town of about 200,000
people and possesses a publicly-maintained college affiliated with McGill
University, Montreal, 3,000 miles distant. This college carries students
through the'first two years’ work of the “liberal arts and science”


course of McGill, and they are then admitted to third-year standing
in the University —that is, at a stage when they can enter into the
professional schools.
These institutions indicate that Canada has determined that if the
student cannot go to the University, then the University must go to the
Student. Behind it of course lies the conviction that University educa-
tion counts for much in a career; but this conviction cannot be wide-
spread amongst a people accustomed to regard University education as
a luxury to which their geographical position forbids them to aspire.
A further illustration is supplied by California where the high school
course is extended from four to six years, the last two years taking the
place of the first and second years of the four year Arts course in the
University of California. The end of the second year of this course is
regarded as the point at which specialisation should commence, and
the University, the legitimate scene for that specialisation, while the
work of the first and second years is “ the continuation and partial
culmination of secondary education.” By this means there is provided
a wide approach to the higher teaching which it is the special duty of
the University to supply.
The means of extending University benefits above referred to rest
with the University and the Education Department. The suggested
organisation of District High Schools to which reference is made in the
section of this report dealing with secondary education should in time
open the way for the provision of this approach for the benefit of the
country student. Under the present system of training, the Depart-
ment is now obtaining the services of teachers of high qualifications
who have been trained to teach, and have also gained high academic
standing as graduates of the University. The provision of well qualified
instructors being once secured, there should be no difficulty in such co-
operation between the University and the Department as will open the
door to higher education for many country students who are now unable
to gain it.
Another means by which attendance at a University is made possible
in America rests with the student and depends upon his personal
• qualities and the strength of his ambitions. It is a striking character-
istic of a large number of Universities in both the United States and
Canada that hundreds of students are supporting themselves either
■wholly or in part during their undergraduate course by working at what_
ever they can get to do during the long vacation. This is specially
marked in the Universities of the West. In the University of the


State of Washington, where there are this year 1,600 undergraduates,
no less than 55 per cent, of them are wholly or partly supporting them-
selves, and 26 per cent, of them are wholly self-supporting. These
young men are prepared to take any reputable employment that offers
during the long vacation. In these western cities one frequently meets
with a waiter in a hotel who is an undergraduate in a University.
One student earned a living by sawing wood. Many get employment
in engineering workshops, others work on farms, and some in offices.
It will be readily understood that these men have a very serious purpose
in going to the University, and that by them their University training
is regarded as the accumulating of a working capital by the use of
which they intend, in their own phrase, to “ make good.” The con-
ditions that make this possible, however, are scarcely parallel with those
that prevail in Australia. The long vacation in America extends over
five months. Here the longest period of absence from lectures is hardly
three months. In America again, the immense population makes it
much easier to obtain employment of a casual character. It is, there-
fore, difficult to say to what extent those who are desirous of paying
their way through the University would have an opportunity for
doing so.
In America, too, the State Universities charge no tuition fees. A free
University is considered essential in a democracy. Every aspiring
student who has the mental qualifications to take up the higher studies
finds the door open to him, and the postponement of his career is all the
price he pays. It would be hard to estimate what it has meant to
Canada and the United States to remove from the way of the talented
and ambitious youth the financial obstacles to a training in a University
that has vocational needs distinctly in view.
The University extension organisation is a most important agent in
bringing the outlying student into touch with the University. Further
on in this report this subject is dealt with, and reference will be made
to the possibility of making the extension movement assist in the
graduation of the country student.
I wish to lay emphasis on this point, that the University should not
be a merely metropolitan institution—that as far as is practicable the
best brains in the community should have the facilities for gaining the
benefits of the University, and the residents of country districts, where
the work that lies at the foundation of the State’s prosperity is done,
should be brought to recognise that the University has an interest for
them by the removal of all, or at least some, of the obstacles in the way
of their sons and daughters reaching it. To do this may mean the


sacrifice of some of the ideals of old-world universities, but it will
also mean the substitution for them of new ideals adapted to the needs
of a young State, in the upbuilding of which the University should
take a larger share.
The question of entrance requirements is one that arises in the con-
sideration of the modem University. In America the question seems
to be constantly under discussion. There is evidence in the discussion
of a change of attitude with regard to the relation of the University
to the whole educational fabric. The new attitude is one to be heartily
welcomed.
The University, in obedience to tradition, has stood apart from the
rest of the educational organisation. It has been an institution which
has fixed its condition of admission-on somewhat arbitrary lines, without
regard to the question whether such conditions were co-ordinate with
conditions governing other educational agencies. This attitude has
been the natural outcome of the historical development of the University -
But the establishment of universal compulsory systems of primary
education and the consequent development of popu'ar secondary schools,
have brought about a change in the position of the Universities. It has
become necessary that the Universities should be fitted into educational
schemes. Instead of standing by themselves, supplying the needs of
the few, and accessible by’ means of a limited number of lower schools
of somewhat accidental origin, they now stand as the highest of an
ascending scale of institutions which are, or should be, definitely
organised to provide progressive instruction for the many with th&
greatest possible benefit to the community and the least possible waste
to the individual.
A University that has not become an introgal part of an organised
scheme of education leaves the secondary school between the upper and
the nether millstone. The secondary school must look to the primary
school for its pupils and make its work at the lower end conform to the
condition of those whom it receives,, while again its work at the upper
end is forced to conform to conditions imposed upon it by the institution
above it. The process has been one of building from the top down-
ward instead of from the bottom upward.
The three stages of education—primary, secondary, and University—-
are determined mainly by the various ages at which youths are
obliged to branch off from their educational work into money-earning
employment, and by the standards of intellectual development coincident
with those ages. If these three stages are to be interlocked so as to


provide continuity of progress, and promote the greatest efficiency in
individual training, it is necessary that the University should carry the
pupil on from what is the natural termination of a secondary course,
just as the secondary school has to take him on from the natural
termination of his primary course. On his reaching the door of the
University, the reasonable question would be, not, “ Has he satisfied
the arbitrary tests imposed for admission here 2” but “ Has he satisfied
the tests which show that the work of the secondary school has been
properly done V’ The two questions, looked at closely, are totally
different. It may be asked why each grade should not build on the
finished work of the one below it, so that the pupil passes from the
High School to the University in the same way that he passes from the
Primary to the High School.
The Secondary School has to give the boy the training in liberal
studies that fit him for life, since most boys pass from the High School
into practical affairs. Why should not the studies which, by the end of
a Secondary School course, fit the boy for life also fit him, if he then
desires it, to enter the University ?
There are certain studies which are universally recognised as the
foundation of a liberal education, while outside of them there is a wide
range within which the young student’s mental bias and natural
capacities and interests may with advantage be allowed some considera-
tion in determining the course to be followed.
The “ unit ” system adopted throughout America in measuring
admission requirements specially lends itself to freedom of study in the
Secondary or High School. The unit of study is defined as “ the equiv-
alent of a course pursued throughout one year in a Secondary School,
with five recitations a week.” Fifteen units are required for admission
to most of the Universities. Cornell, as an example of a University
of the highest standard, prescribes for admission to the College of Arts
and Sciences :—English, 3 units ; History, 1 unit ; Algebra, 1 unit ;
Geometry, 1 unit ; Foreign Languages, 4 units ; Elective, 5 units.
The electives are chosen from a list of subjects to each of which a unit
value is assigned. The prescription of fifteen units makes it necessary
that at least four years’ work should be done by the average student in
the High School. The advantage claimed for the system lies in its
flexibility, so that a student may receive credit for solid work in what-
ever field of study he may take up.
I refer again toi this question in the portion of this report dealing
with Secondary education. The point emphasised here is that the


Universities are relaxing the detailed prescription of requirements, and
simply demand that the foundation on which they should be asked tc
build should be the results of four years’ solid education in the High
Schools. The end of whatever courses are followed there is the
commencing point for the University work.
It will be observed from the example quoted above that at Cornell
Latin is not now a required subject for admission to the College of
Arts and Sciences leading to the degree of Bachelor of Arts. It may
be considered strange that there does not appear to be any fear on the
part of the Cornell authorities that the graduate in Arts who has
done his duty as an undergraduate will be any the less a cultured
representative of the University, or a thoroughly efficient member of
the community. But why this should be considered strange it is difficult
to say. The American actually looks upon his University career as a
preparation for life, and he aims at putting into that career the elements
that correspond most closely to the various elements of the life he hopes
to lead. He does not even stop to consider what the Englishman of
five centuries ago found it advisable to study, evidently thinking that
the conditions he has to face to-day are different from those of the
Englishman of antiquity.
All the phases of University organisation, so far referred to in this
report, have a bearing upon the question of increasing the value of the
University as a public institution and a factor in national prosperity.
Perhaps, however, no development of the University has been more
fruitful in this direction than the extension movement in America.
The University; which has made most effective use of it there is that
of Wisconsin. In that State thousands of persons are being brought
into touch with the State University whose circumstances would other-
wise preclude them from any contact with it.
A scheme of University extension has existed in New South Wales
for many years, but is recognised by those who have it in hand as
being very limited in its usefulness. It is still in the form initiated
by the University of Cambridge forty-two years ago, consisting of the
delivery of short series of lectures. The lectures are delivered by
acknowledged experts, and are in themselves of the highest value.
The practical results, however, are not commensurate with the value of
the work done by the lecturers. The weak point appears to lie in the
relation of the audience to the lecturer. The audience frequently
consists of a large number of persons who find in the lectures a
pleasant intellectual titillation, and an interesting method of spending


an evening. The lectures furnish a means by which philosophy and
art can be introduced into polite conversation. Perhaps this is a result
worth having. But let us not call this kind of work University
Extension. From the point of view of the audience, it might properly
be classed as high class evening entertainment for the intellectually
inclined. The weakness does not lie with the lectures nor with the
lecturers. It rather lies in the fact that the audience is made up more
of listeners than of students. At Wisconsin “the extension counts
it a greater service to the State to stimulate and encourage a hundred
earnest learners than merely to amuse a thousand listeners,” writes
the Director of the movement. So long as the few students are merged
in a mass of mere interested listeners and do not come into personal
touch with the lecturers, with whom they can discuss their personal
individual problems, and so long as the lectures stand unaccompanied
by prearranged courses of reading or practice on the part of the
student, just so long the lectures fail in their primary purpose. To
make the lecture courses effective, they need to become supplementary
and auxiliary to previously arranged courses of reading. As stated in
the report quoted above, the lecture series is “ supplemented by pre-
liminary readings, based on a printed syllabus of the lectures, and by
discussion, questions, and formal papers.” An organisation of this
kind saves the movement from mere dilettanteism.
The most important departure yet made in the direction of University
extension, is the establishment by the University of Wisconsin of its
correspondence department. This has only been two years in operation
and has already 1,325 students in different parts of the State associated
with it. No less than 371 of these carry on studies of University
grade as distinct from High School, elementary and vocational courses.
Its object is primarily to assist in their studies those who, having
entered into various occupations, have found, the need for more
advanced instruction, and are prevented from attending courses at the
University. It is another instance of the University reaching out its
hands to help the country resident. The work as at present organised
at Wisconsin gives one or more courses in the following lines ;
Agriculture, Business and Industry, Engineering, Mechanical Drawing,
Highway Construction, Languages, History, Home Economics, Political
Economy, Political Science, Sociology, Philosophy, Education, Mathe-
matics, English Literature, Physical Science, Law, and Pharmacy.
“ These courses are prepared by the members of the University faculty,
and each course represents a definite amount of work corresponding
to an equivalence of work done in residence in the University.” In


order to bring about personal contact between lecturer and student as
far as possible, Study Groups are formed where the number of students
following the same course is sufficient, and the lecturer -who has the
course in hand visits the group once a fortnight and deals with individual
difficulties. This procedure saves the system from what is the weakness
of all correspondence-study systems, the dropping off of students
through difficulties which dishearten them. In one of the group centres
where the employees of a firm have been encouraged to take up the
work, a room is placed by the employer at the disposal of the group
for the fortnightly meetings with their visiting instructor. In another
instance the fees for the course are partly paid by the employers.
The correspondence-study courses are likely £o develop so as to become
a means to assist the absent student to graduate. Granted that a
student has first matriculated, the correspondence courses may be
arranged to be equivalent to the studies pursued by undergraduates
within the University, and the system of defining the student’s standing
by “ units ” of credit fixes at any time the relation in which he stands
to the College course. This method might be adopted to enable the
student to get through part of his Arts course, leaving it obligatory
upon him to attend at the University for the final year for his Arts
degree or for the years of his professional course.
Such an organisation in the Sydney University would supply another
method of bringing the country student into touch with the University
by first of all helping him in his own home, and then requiring him to
attend at the University for his third year’s work in Arts, or for the
work of the professional schools.
There is a very large class in the community that has received
nothing more than an elementary education. We have been disposed
to regard these as permanently unfitted for the reception of University
teaching. The time has gone by when these persons can return upon
the track of their lives and take up attendance at Secondary Schools.
They have incurred parental or business responsibilities which make
that impossible. They have possibly reached a stage at which the
acquisition of a foreign language and of the necessary knowledge of
mathematics for regular admission to the University has become quite
impossible. But does it follow that these persons are utterly unfit
for University teaching? They have, it is true, entered upon their
careers with only a good elementary training ; but since then they have
been learning much in the school of experience—they have been
facing, perhaps very thoughtfully, some important problems, and they


have gained from literature a mental training and a width of outlook
that sometimes equals that of the student whose academic opportunities
have been much greater. There are very many persons in the community
of whom this is true; and of these persons it is additionally true
that though they cannot pass an examination in a foreign language
or in mathematics, they have the mental capacity, accompanied by a
keenness of insight and power of judgment, that eminently qualifies
them for some of the highest teaching that the University has to offer.
In literature, economics, political science, philosophy, history, the
teaching of the University 7 would meet with a ready response from
many whose previous education has been gained from the elementary
school, the lending library, and their experience of the world. Not
in mere lectures, but in classes for serious study, there is room for very
valuable extension work.
It cannot be too strongly emphasised that a University located in
Sydney is not a national institution as long as it does nothing to
carry its help and influence to the student who, on account of the
nature of his occupation or the shortness of his purse, cannot spend a
residence of three years in Sydney. But if by the means suggested,
or by any other, the necessity for attendance be reduced to one year in
the Arts course, or to the years of the professional courses only, the
University would at once become a power in hundreds of country
homes, and very little that is essential in University organisation
would be sacrificed. Many a student would be prepared to economise
sufficiently to take up a year’s residence in Sydney who finds it absolutely
hopeless to give up his employment and reside for three years in Sydney.
The important sacrifice would lie in the student’s participation in
university life being restricted to one year instead of three, but to most
students one year would impart very much of what is to be gained from
that side of the University’s work. And even if the sacrifice were
greater it would be worth while.
The University of Wisconsin has another department through which
it helps the intellectual activity of the people. It recognises that in a
self-governing community the discussion of public questions is of thet
highest value in the formation of an enlightened public opinion. It
therefore gets into contact with the debating societies of the State,
and instead of leaving them to discuss the inane topics that so often
make the meetings of such societies futile, the University supplies to
them lists of subjects which have such an immediate bearing on questions,
of the day as to make (an intelligent opinion about them a matter of
public importance. On any of these subjects being chosen, the University


supplies matter on both sides of the question, either in the form of
newspaper clippings, articles from magazines, or references to books.
As an example, the Commission form of Municipal Government has
become a live question in several cities. This department of the
University has accumulated a large mass of current printed matter,
containing arguments of writers on both sides of this question, and this
matter is available as a loan to any society in the State that wishes to
discuss the question. The University of Wisconsin in this way again
makes itself a reality to the people whom it serves by helping them
to form opinions on a basis of knowledge calculated to make the
opinion intelligent.
From what has been stated, it will be seen that the American State
University regards itself as an institution existing to push ahead in
every direction all those interests of the State and of the people that
call for specialised knowledge. It helps the student who wishes the
better to understand Shakespeare just as well as the man who requires
scientific help in the management of his farm. It maintains a strong
graduate department where each graduate is concentrating mental
energy on specific problems arising out of the deficiencies of present-
day knowledge. As a result, there are no sections of the people that
regard the University as foreign to their interests.
To what extent do Australian Universities fill such a place 1 Granting
that, situated as they have been in sparsely-populated States, they have
splendidly fulfilled the purposes which their limitations permitted, has
not the time arrived when the Universities of the Old World should
no longer set the standard and establish the precedents for them to
follow 1 May it not be expected now that the Australian University
may ask itself, what is it that this State needs that the constitution
of the University, its learned faculty, its facilities for investigation,
enable it to supply 1 May it not look beyond the group of students
who are so placed that they can enter its doors to the wider needs
of the community to which it can in various ways render service 1 In
short, should notan Australian University be in fact a public institution
spreading its influence over a wider area ?
Whether this end would be better gained by a modification of its
government is not discussed here. The representation of the State on
the Senate is generally admitted as necessary, but beyond that one or
two questions may be asked. Does the election of senators by the
alumni not imply that the alumni are the only persons interested in
the policy of the University 1 Are the students of the past the only
persons so interested in what the University does that they should hold


a monopoly of electoral rights? If the University is to serve public
interests, should not those who represent the varied producing, com-
mercial, and industrial activities of the State, and have the necessary
intellectual outlook, share with the Government and the alumni in the
opportunity of making their wishes known ? The University of Sydney
might become the University of New South Wales, planted in Sydney,
but catering for the needs and adapting itself to the conditions of the
whole State.
It is in the belief that the University of Sydney can increase its reach
that this section has been written. While maintaining high standards
of scholarship, it may extend its benefits to those who do not now
participate in them. It has already developed professional schools, of
which a University in a comparatively small population might well be
proud, but there is a wide field waiting for the benefits it can bestow.


Appendix A.
INDUSTRIAL SCHOOL OF THE NORTH END UNION, BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS.
Extract from “ The Apprenticeship System,” by C. D. Wright (United
States Bureau of Education.).
This organisation is peculiar in its nature. It undertakes to teach the art of
printing, and at the same time secure some employment for its apprentices. The
apprenticeship indenture at the school carried on hy the union consists of an
agreement by three parties—the master printer, the pupil apprentice, and the
North End Union School of Printing.
The boy is hound to the master printer for a term of four years, with the
express understanding that one year of the term shall be devoted to school training,
and if the apprentice fails to perform the work of the school of printing in a
satisfactory manner, or proves idle, unteaehahle, or disobedient, the master
printer has a right to he released from all obligations under the apprenticeship
contract.
The school of printing, which has been in operation about nine years, is under
the supervision of a hoard of master printers. This hoard consists of some of the
best-known printers in the country. The pupils at the start were young men who
were at work in printing offices during the day, the school being in session three
evenings each week, the object being not to make more but better printers. This
method did not work satisfactorily, because the average boy, after labouring in a
printing office all day, was not an ambitious student at night. His term of
employment and prospect of advancement seemed to him so uncertain that the
extra effort on his part was not by him deemed to be worth while, and so his
enthusiasm, if he ever had any, soon waned.
After four years’ trial of the evening school, it was decided to turn it into a day
school, and make the term one year. Its prospectus stated that the aim was
simply to give the pupil an intelligent start in his trade, and instruct him in the
essentials of good printing, so that, with subsequent practice, he could become a
successful workmanj To give him some training in the school, and then set him
adrift to find his place in the trade, was not considered as fair to him, or of any
benefit to the trade itself. Consequently an indenture form was adopted, drawn
up along modern lines, with terras and conditions such as would attract any
ambitious boy who wished to learn the printing trade.
This apprenticeship agreement covers a term of four years, the first year of the
term being spent in the school of printing. No wages are paid the first year,
while a tuition fee of SIOO is charged, and a close scrutiny of a boy’s qualifications
for the work is constantly exercised. At the beginning of the second year the
apprentice enters his employer’s workroom, and receives $9 a week for the first
six months, then $lO a week for the next six months, and is gradually advanced,
until the last half of the fourth year he receives sl6 a week. The working time
of the school is the same as in the regular workshop, and the apprentices are
responsible to their employers for regular attendance and faithful performance of
the work in the school.
The superintendent of the union school emphasises the direct connection which
this school has with the employing class, and states that the exploitation of a boy
in the interest of the employer, or vice versa, has never actuated the conduct of
the management, and that the gentlemen who constitute the advisory board give
much time and thought to the problem of the apprentice trade school. The


superintendent also made strong statements, in the course of this investigation,
relative to an apprenticeship system of the right sort, to the effect that it was an
agreement between two persons to perform certain acts which are of mutual
advantage, and that an apprenticeship indenture is essential to the success of
trade training if the shop is to supplement in any large measure the school
training. He believes that the problem of trade training is made very complex
by the system of specialisation, and that the shorter the time required for a
beginner to learn a process the quicker he is apt to be made a productive unit in
the factory, so that unless an apprenticeship system had some indenture scheme
guaranteeing to the boy an opportunity to learn his trade as a whole at a fixed
wage, with steady increase, resulting in more rapid advancement in trade training,
it would not be, after all, a proper system. This is also the view of the General
Electric Company.
The peculiar indenture at the North End Union, in the opinion of the directors
of that interesting scheme, will guarantee to the employer continuous service of a
boy for a definite time, and a better grade of boys (for an employer will not enter
into a contract covering several years with a boy not selected with care), while
the employer will get more faithful service, because the boy realises that his
interests are bound up with those of his employer, and that his advancement
depends upon how he improves his opportunity.
Mr. Samuel F. Hubbard, the superintendent, states that it depends largely
upon the employing class to provide facilities in the shop so that a boy can utilise
the education which he received in the training school, and that, on the other
hand, when he enters the school he ought to get into some relationship with the
trade. This is the principle carried out at the North End School. Mr. Hubbard
doubts the value of a part time idea, on the ground that employers have informed
him that they could not be bothered by such a scheme, yet we see that on an
advanced basis such a scheme works well in Cincinnati.
An apprentice at the North End School is allowed to give a note for SIOO for
his tuition, the superintendent not believing in having an outside party pay the
boy’s tuition fee.
The following data are interesting as showing the practical workings of the
union from a money point of view ;
North End Union , Boston.
Income for five years, ordinary apprenticeship, without the school.
First year —
26 weeks at $4 $lO4
26 „ at 5. 130
Second year —
26 weeks at $6 156
26 „ at 7 182
Third year—
-26 weeks at $8 208
23 ~ at 9 234
Fourth year —
26 weeks at $lO 260
26 ~ at 11 286
Fifth year—
-26 weeks at sl3 338
26 ~ at, 15 390
$2,288


Income for the same time, one year of which is spent in the school.
First year in the school
Second year—
-26 weeks at $ 9 $234
26 „ at 10 260
Third year—
-26 weeks at $ll 286
26 „ at 12 312
Fourth year—
-26 weeks at $l4 364
26 „ at 16 416
Fifth year —
26 weeks at $lB 468
26 „ at 18 468
$2,808
Income, five years, one year in school $2,808
Income, five years, shop apprenticeship 2,258
$520
Less tuition 100
Net advantage of one year in school ... $420
Appendix B.
TRADE SCHOOL MANAGED BY THE GENERAL ELECTRIC COMPANY, LYNN,
MASSACHUSETTS
Extract from “ The Apprenticeship System,” by C. D, Wright (United States
Bureau of Education).
Seven years ago or more this company established an apprenticeship system
based on new methods of procedure, with a view of accomplishing the very best
results. The system comprehends a machine shop, tool-making, pattern-making,
and a foundry. Fqur years of apprenticeship are required. Apprentices are paid
9 cents per hour the first year, 12 cents the second year, 14 cents the third year,
and 16J cents the fourth year, and a cash bonus of SIOO is given. Graduates of
high schools, or those who have completed a three-year course in such schools,
may have their apprenticeship reduced one year.
The significant feature in the General Electric Company’s system is the practical
training of apprentices in large “ training rooms.” The boys are in these rooms
for two years, after-which they are placed in different departments of the factory
This is considered the great point of advantage in the General Electric Works.
Educational courses are provided by the company in academic branches which
will assist the apprentices to obtain a better understanding of machines and
machine parts, and will make them acquainted with the problems and calculations
connected with the reading and comprehension of mechanical drawings, and with
the sketching and designing of auxiliary tools needed in modern manufacture.
The school sessions are held during the working hours, and the apprentices are
paid the same wages during these hours which they would receive if they were
working in the shops.
Of course, some foremen object to this method, because, as they say, it interferes
with production, but the company insists that on the whole it is for the best
interests of all. The course of study in, the school sessions comprise arithmetic.


elementary algebra, mensuration, elementary trigonometry, elements of machines,
power transmission, strength of materials, mechanism, elementary electricity,
mechanical drawing, machine designing, and jig and fixture designing.
********
Great care is exercised in selecting applicants, as well as in the weeding-out
process during the trial period. The company insists that instruction in the
class-room is a necessary part of the apprenticeship system. Six hours a week of
this instruction are given for ten months of the year. About one-fifth of the
apprentices at the works are at school at one time, and the services of one man
are required to give them the academic instruction. The plan of paying the boys
while receiving this education makes them feel the importance of the education,
as well as being an inducement for those who might otherwise not be willing to
obtain it at the sacrifice of wages.
The teacher in the school must be a man who has had engineering experience
and has the pedagogical qualities of a good teacher besides. He must be
acquainted with the needs of the factory industries in general, and know how to
adapt theoretical school-training to the educational needs of the machine trades.
The work in science and mathematics is very concrete, and applies to the factory
conditions of the General Electric Company. The problems are carefully selected,
and are based upon actual occurrences in the factory. This method has the
double advantage of initiating, the apprentice into the technicalities of the
business, making him acquainted with the various kinds of apparatus manu-
factured and the different material used for each, and at the same time
familiarising him wi’th the solution of the same class of problems which he will
meet later on as journeyman and foreman.
Mechanical drawing is not taught for the purpose of developing mechanical
draftsmen, but as'a means of teaching designing of tools, jigs, and fixtures needed
for manufacturing on a large scale. The boys are taught to sketch out special
tools, jigs, and fixtures which may be required from time to time for labour-saving
purposes. This is not considered a question of executing fine drawings, but
rather of sketching quickly for the immediate use of the machinist and tool-maker
a required tool, which, when once made, is liable to remain in use for a long
period. The teaching of mechanical drawing in this respect differs from
instruction in reading mechanical drawings.
A feature which belongs to the General Electric Company alone, so far as
ascertained, consists in examinations in the school work, which are held
frequently during the year, with a final examination at the end of the course to
determine to some extent the standing of each apprentice and the wages which
the company considers commensurate with his value as a journeyman.
* * *;> a « & m
The efforts of the General Electric Company to establish a new up-to-date
apprenticeship system have met with results satisfactory to the company, and
the system has been copied in some degree by others. Certainly the company
has shown its desire to connect the science of apprenticeship with the science of
industrial education, and, so far as this investigation show's, they have succeeded.
Appendix C.
CONNECTICUT.
An Act concerning the establishment of Free 'Public Schools for Instruction in the
Principles and Practice of Trades.
Extract from “Report of Commission on Industrial Education,” Massachusetts.
Section 1. Any town or school district may, by vote of such town or district,
establish and maintain a free Public School for instruction in the principles and
practice of such distinct trades as may, with the approval of the State Board of


Education, be designed by the board of school visitors, town school committee, op
board of education of such town, or the district committee of such district.
Such school shall be open, under such rules as may be prescribed by said school
officers, to all residents of this State, but no child under 16 years of age shall
be admitted to any such school who has not completed the studies of the eighth
grade in the public schools of the town in which said school is located, or ah
equivalent course of study approved by said school officers. Said school officer*
shall make rules and regulations with reference to the management of said school,
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act. The instructors in any such
schools shall be experts in the trades respectively taught by them.
Section 2. Two or more towns may, by vote of each said towns, unite for the.
purpose of forming a trade school district and establishing schools under the
provisions of this Act, and the school officers of the towns so united may make all
arrangements, agreements, and regulations necessary to the organisation and
maintenance of such trade school district. The said school officers of each of the
towns constituting such district shall appoint one of their number to be a member
of the trade school committee of such district, and the committee so appointed
shall be a joint committee on behalf of the several towns constituting the district.
Each town shall be entitled to one vote in said committee. Every district
organised under the provisions of this section shall continue for at least five years,
but at the end of such period of five years any town may dissolve said district by
withdrawal therefrom by vote of such town ; provided that notice of the intention
to so withdraw shall be given in writing to each of the other towns comprising
said district at least three months before the termination of said period.
Section 3. The buildings, equipment, and courses of study, and the qualifications
of the teachers of every trade school established as hereinbefore provided shall be
subject to the approval of the State Board of Education ; and the attendance at
each such school, together with special reports upon the specific work done and
the actual results of instruction therein, shall be annually certified, under oath,
on or before the first Monday in July, by the secretary of the board of school
visitors, town school committee, board of education, district committee, or trade
school district committee, as the case may be, to said Board of Education ; and
no payments shall be made by the State on account of such school, as hereinafter
provided, unless'said certificate has been filed with and approved by said State
Board of Education, and unless application for State-aid for said school has been
made to the board of control by said secretary, and approved by said board of
control.
Section 4. The Board of Education, or board of school visitors of any town, or
the committee of any town, school district, or trade school district wherein a
trade school has been established under the provisions of this Act shall, annually,
on the first Monday in July, certify to the comptroller the amount expended
within said school-year for the maintenance and support of said school, and the
comptroller shall, upon application of the State Board of Education, draw his
orders on the treasurer in favour of said Board of Education, board of school
visitors, or committee for a sum equivalent to one-half the amount so certified as
having been expended for such support and maintenance ; provided that the
amount so paid by the State under the provisions of this section shall not, in any
one year, exceed in the aggregate 50,000 dollars ; and provided further, that said
sum shall be expended towards the support and maintenance of not more than
two such schools, and if application is made in behalf of more than two such
schools, the board of control shall designate the two such schools for the support
and maintenance of which such payments shall be made.


Appendix D.
Extract from Report of a Special Committee of the National Association of State
Universities which met at Washington in November, 1908.
(The Report aims at specifying the conditions for a typical institution of learning,
which might be called the Standard American University.)
We suggest the following formulation of principles underlying the organisation
of such an institution, and we may define the Standard American University to
bean institution—(l) which requires for admission the completion of the curriculum
of a standard American high school, with a four years’ course, or, in other terms,
the completion of a course which will enable the pupils to offer not less than
fourteen five-hour units, or equivalent; (2) which offers in the college of literature
and science two years of general or liberal work, completing or supplementing
the work of the high school; (3) which offers a further course of two years, so
arranged that the student may begin work of University character leading to the
bachelor’s degree at the end, and reaching forward to the continuation of this
work in the graduate school or the professional school; (4) which offers profes-
sional courses, based upon the completion of two years of collegiate work, in
law, or medicine, or engineering ; (5) which offers in the graduate school an
adequate course, leading to the degree of doctor of philosophy.
It is recommended that this association recognises any institution, in whole
or in part, doing work of this grade as in so far doing work of University quality.
Sydney : William Applegate Gullick, Government Printer. —1900.
