





A REPOET
OF THE
Passage of the Andrew Jackson
FROM
LONDON TO AUCKLAND,
IN THE YEAH 1865.
BY A PASSENGER.
AUCKLAND:
PRINTED BY W. C. WILSON, “HERALD” OFFICE.
PRICE TWO SHILLINGS.


PREFACE.
It was my original intention to commit to press, in
addition to the following summary, the papers which
I edited on hoard under the head of “ The Adventurers'
Saturday Journal,” but I was deterred from doing so
by the expense their printing would haV© entailed in
Auckland, and I therefore resolved to insert in the
summary, extraats from the private log-book, kept by
Mr. J. E. H. Cook, the chief officer, to whom I am
much indebted for the assistance he rendered me.
I trust that my endeavours to supply our friends in
Great Britain with an account of our voyage will afford
interest to them, and that they will take, into due con-
sideration the difficulty of fully applying the mind on
board-a-ship, to such a trivial undertaking, even, as this.
I have acted in conformity with the wishes of many
of my fellow passengers. If my efforts to please them
have met with success, J have also attained the object
I had in view.
M. DUDLEY TAYLOR.


A SUMMARY
OF THE INCIDENTS CONNECTED WITH OUR VOYAGE FROM
LONDON TO AUCKLAND, NEW ZEALAND, IN THE TEAR, 1865.
Passages previously made by the Andrew Jackson.
New York to San Francisco ■
Six passages out in 103,101, 97, 90, 86,
and 791 days respectively,
i Six passages home in 92, 90, 86,84, 83,
and 82 days respectfully.
Puget's Sound to Fetral, in Spain - -- -- -- in 95 days.
New York to Liverpool ---------- - in 15 days.
Liverpool to New York - - - - ------ in 14J days.
New York to St. John’s (a distance of 700 miles) - in 64 hours.
The Clyde to Otago (including 15 days detention in
1 the channel) - - • in 87 days.
Java to English Channel - -- in 83 days.
The Andrew Jackson is an American built, and Glasgow owned
dipper ship of 2500 tons burthen, and 1253 tons register.
It is almost needless to state that great excitement
prevailed among us on Wednesday, the 17th of May,
1865, the eve of our bidding good bye to England.
Many of us availed ourselves of an invitation, given by
Messrs. Houlder, Bros., to a farewell tea meeting, at
the Sailor’s Institute, Mercer-street, Shadwell, after
which several addresses were delivered by gentlemen
acquainted with New Zealand, and who had spent a
considerable portion of their life-time out there.
About ten o’clock, when this was brought to a close,
we moved in a body to the Shadwell Basin, where our
ship was lying, and. we set to work as quickly as possi-
ble, to arrange our luggage and prepare our beds.
Happily, we witnessed comparatively few parting
scenes, either here or when lying at Gravesend, at both
of which places we took in passengers.
At 5‘30 on Thursday morning, we hauled out of the
London docks, and proceeded down the river in tow of
steam tugs Sir William Wallace and Uncle Sam, Mr.
Grant, pilot, being in charge of the vessel, and at nine
o’clock we made fast to the lower buoy at Gravesend,
where we remained all night. The crew were engaged


during the day in preparing the ship for sea. At eight
E.m. the anchor watch was set, and the white light ex-
ibited in the starboard fore-rigging.
At 5'30 a.m. on Friday, the hands were turned out,
and took in stock and fodder for the voyage. During
the afternoon the Government Surveyors passed the
ship, and at 5‘30 p.m. we continued on our journey in
tow of steam-tug Uncle Sam. At nine o’clock we came
to anchor off the Nore, and lay there till five o’clock
the following morning, when we hove up the anchor,
and sailed down the Channel, with the assistance of the
tug, till eleven o’clock, at which time we dispensed
with it, a light breeze from E.S.E. carrying us, amid
beautiful weather, through the Downs. At one
o’clock, when off Dover, the yards of the ship were
backed to enable the pilot to go ashore. At
four o’clock we passed Dungeness, and at eight
Beachy Head, bearing N.E. | E. of us.
Our position on Sunday was, latitude 50° 12' N.,
longitude 2° 5' W. In the absence of a Chaplain, Mr.
Seaman, second class passenger, conducted the service;
an undertaking which he continued throughout the
voyage. Sunday on land is generally the day in the
week that persons sit down to a dinner somewhat
apart from the common order, but on board
it is quite the reverse, and so most of us found it.
One mess failed to procure the allowance of salt beef,
the articles for consumption being thus limited to a few
potatoes (or spuds). Ten men comprised this mess,
and the number of eatable potatoes amounted to nine.
The difficulty of apportioning them equally, was
avoided by one man forfeiting his share, and satisfying
himself by devouring the contents of a box of sardines
which he had brought with him. With the exception
of the first cabin passengers, whose comforts were not
more than commensurate with the amount of their
passage money, we had to take our turn as messmen.
This post filled up our leisure hours with such innocent
amusement as securing the day’s provisions, making
bread without yeast, carrying up beef, pork, and
pudding (commonly called “duff”) to the cook’s
galley, and bringing it back when ready. A man is
naturally out of his element when thus occupied, and
when engaged in washing up, appears as much out of


place as “a bull in a china shop.” At first we found
it hard to succumb such an ordeal; but eventually we
became use to it, and went through the routine of our
duties as a matter of course.
On Monday, the 22nd, at noon, we were 20 miles S.
by W. of the Lizard Point, and at eight o’clock off S.W.
of the Scilly Isles, when symptoms of sea sickness
were visible for the first time. We passed through the
Channel very fortunately, but immediately on leaving
it we experienced some rough weather, the wind
gradually veering from E. to S.E., and on Friday, the
26th, increasing to a moderate gale, causing the sea to
rise.
About 11 a.m. an incident occurred which might
have proved fatal. The rolling of the ship caused a jar
of chloride of lime and of Sir Wm, Burnett’s disinfect-
ant fluid, to fall from their position in the single women’s
compartment, and break, scattering their contents on
the floor, and producing great fumigation. The women
were carried up one by one to inhale the fresh air. By
this means and the use of restoratives some of them
soon came round. Considerable alarm however was
felt for those who from illness were confined to their
beds, and the persons who generously volunteered to
bring them up.
On the following Monday the wind began to subside,
and subsequently changed to W. by N., attended with
fine weather; but next day a moderate breeze from
E.S.E. brought rain with it. On the succeeding Wed-
nesday we were about 250 miles to the westward of
Cape Finisterre; and on Sunday, the 4th of
JUNE
we sighted the west end of Madeira, distant 33 miles.
The Madeira Islands are three in number, situated
in 32° IST. latitude, and between 16° and 17°
W. longitude. The largest, called Madeira, is 75
miles long and 60 broad: the -capital town is Fauchall,
in 32° 28'II. latitude, and 17° 50' west longitude. They
were discovered by the Portuguese, in 1519, to whom
they are now subject.
On Tuesday, the 6th, we were in latitude 28° 6' N.,
and longitude 19° 41' W., and in the north-east trade


winds; a steady breeze from N.E. during tbe previous
three days carrying us into them.
The trade winds extend generally to about 28° on
each side of the Equator, and there is, in most places, a
considerable space of light variable winds between them,
in which westerly winds mostly prevail, forming a kind
of monsoon near the Equator in several parts of the
globe. The N.E. and S.E. trade winds prevail in the
open sea, in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, and from
the extent of the latter, they generally blow more steady
in it than in the former: and the S.E. trade wind in
the Southern Atlantic ocean blows steadier than the
N.E. trade wind to the northward of the Equator,
where the ocean becomes contracted between the Cape
Yerd and the northern extremity of the coast of Brazil;
but toward the West India Islands, the N.E. trade
generally blows steady between E. and E.N.E. The
trade winds are only constant in the ocean at a con-
siderable distance from land, for large islands and con-
tinents obstruct the regular current of the atmosphere,
and thereby produce either periodical or variable winds.
When land is heated by the influence of the sun, the
atmosphere over it becomes rarefied, the air acquires
motion, and a wind is produced, blowing from the ocean
toward the land. Under the Equator, and two or three
degrees on each side of it, the winds are variable, though
generally east; and here it is sometimes calm for a
month together.
A notice was issued on the 7th, to the ©fleet that no
single females were allowed the use of the deck beyond
the mainmast after dusk, a restriction which was pro-
ductive of much discontent; but this, like many other
orders, was in a great measure slighted, no attempt
being made to keep them in force.
On Sunday, the 11th, we passed S. by W. of St. An-
tonio, one of the Cape de Yerd Islands, at a distance of
110 miles.
The Cape de Yerd Islands are situated between 22°
41' and 24° 48' W. longitude, and between 14° and 17°
N. latitude, about 348 miles west of Cape Yerd.
They were discovered in 1460 by the Portuguese, to
whom they still belong. They are about 20 in num-
ber; the principal are St. Jago, Brava, Togo, Mayo,
Bonavista, Sal, St, Nicholas, St. Eucia, St. Yincents,


Santa Cruz, and St. Antonio. On the coast of Africa,
south of Cape Yerd, is the small island of Goree, be-
longing to tne English, of considerable importance on
account of its trade.
On Tuesday, the 13th, the respective compartments
underwent fumigation for the first time, by the use of
boiling tar, chloride of lime, and Sir Wm. Burnett’s dis-
infectant fluid, a step which was continued every Tuesday
and Saturday during the hot weather, and indeed a
very necessary one for the preservation of our health.
On the same date the days for washing clothes were
appointed:—the single men and women, Wednesday ;
the married, Thursday.
On the 11th a bag was placed on deck for the recep-
tion cf letters, and we were requested to have them m
readiness; thecaptain expecting, as we were approaching
the Equator, that he would be able to send them by a
homeward-bound vessel. Unfortunately his expacta-
tions were not realised.
Thursday, the 15th, was rendered melancholy by the
death of Mr. Davis, a third class passenger. He was
brought upon deck in the early part of the evening, and
placed on a bed prepared for him. About eight o’clock
he suddenlv changed for the worse, and at half-past his
spirit had taken its flight to another world. ■ The poor
man was in terrible pain, though quite conscious to the
last. His medical advisers induced him to try what a
sea-voyage and the climate of Hew Zealand could do
for him towards the recovery of his health, but their
advice was acted upon when it was too late; consump-
tion, disease of the heart, and dropsy, having made too
deep an inroad into his constitution-
Hursthouse, in his work on New Zealand, says—
“ The salubrity of the climate of New Zealand is a
feature which invalid families, who emigrate to the
continent to escape the British winter and the British in-
come-tax, would do well to study. The 58th and 65th
regiments have long been stationed in New Zealand,
and the following officially compiled tables of the health
of the troops stationed in different parts of the world,
by Dr. Thomson, of the 58th, prove the salubrity of the
climate to a remarkable degree, and have been the means
of drawing considerable attention to New Zealand
among our invalid classes.


GEN EE AL MOETALITY.
Number of soldiers in 1000 who annually die from
different diseases on various military stations.
New Zealand ..... 8^
Australia ...... 11
Great Britain ..... 14
Cape of Good Hope .... 15
Malta IS
Canada ...... 30
CONSUMPTION.
Number of soldiers annually attacked in 1000, and
the number who annualy die from Consumption, on
various stations.
Attacked. Die.
New Zealand - - - 60 B*7
Cape .... 98 3-o
Australia .... 133 5-8
Malta .... 120 6 0
Canada - . - - - 148 67
Great Britian ... 148 B*o
At 10 o’clock, on the 16th, Davis was buried ac-
cording to the sea custom, Mr. Seaman conducting the
service, which he commenced with that mournful and
suggestive hymn:—
“ Oft’ as the bell with solemn toll
Speaks the departure of a soul,” Ac.
sung to the tune of the “ Old Hundred.”
A subscription was subsequently raised for his widow,
to enable her, if she wished, to return to England with
her children.
On the 17th, a little shark was caught, and afterwards
skinned and eaten. Four ships were on our leeside for
several hours during the day, but they refused to bear
too in answer to our signals. At 8 p.m. we spoke the
French barque St. Charles, from Bordeaux, bound to
San Francisco, out 33 days. We were at that time 27
days out. Permission was obtained from the Captain
to give her three cheers, which we did in true British
style. Our position on this day was lat. 7° 46' N.,
long, 26° 24'W., where we lost the NJS. trades, and
entered the “ variables.”
On the 18th, we sighted a French barque steering to
the northward.
At 9.30 p.m. on the 19th, a hard squall came upon
us from eastward, giving us but little warning of its


approach. In an instant, the ship was lurched on her
aide, and the passengers sent rolling down to leeward.
Sail was shortened with all possible speed; five of
them, however, were split.
The first number of “ The Andrew Jackson Weekly
News” appeared on the 20th, and in the same week
“ The Adventurers Saturday Journal,” under distinct
editorships, in writing, there being no printing press
on board.
On Saturday, the 24th of June, between the hours
of 7 and 8 a.m. we crossed the Equator, (out 85 days
from the Downs), and at noon our lat. was 28' S.,
and long. 31° 51' W. Our slow southward progress
during the previous ten days, owing to adverse winds,
made us despair of ever reaching the line. Some of
the passengers’ ideas of this imaginary line were very
confused. One was heard to ask whether it would
impart a perceptible jerk to the ship on crossing ;
and another, on looking through a telescope, at the end
of which was placed a piece of cord, was so deluded
by the trick as to positivly affirm that he distinctly saw
“ the line.”
The Equator or Equatorial line, is a great imaginary
circle of the terrestrial sphere, whose poles are the
poles of the world. It divides the globe into two equal
parts, called the northern and southern hemispheres ;
Eassed • through the east and west points of the
orizon, and at the meridian is raised above the hori-
zon as many degrees as the complement of the latitude
of any given place. When the sun comes to this circle,
the days and nights are equal all round the world.
The Equatorial line is applied in the same sense to the
terrestrial sphere, as the equinoctial line is to the
celestial sphere.
On the 26th, we sighted the Island of Fernando de
Noronha, bearing S.W. by W., distant 24 to 26 miles.
At noon, the bearing of the Pyramid of this desolate-
looking spot was W. £ S., distance 12 miles.
Fernando de Noronha has not unfrequently been
visited or seen by ships bound to India and further to
eastward, occasioned by the currents having horsed
them to the westward after the failure of the N.E. trade
winds. This island has on it a rocky peak, called the
Pyramid, which is very remarkable, and seems to lean


or overhang to the eastward, when it bears S.S.W.
The S.W. point is perforated, off which is a sunken
rock, dangerous to approach. From the S.E. part of
the island a reef extends to eastward, and some sunken
rocks at nearly a league’s distance from the shore.
There is also said to be a reef on which the sea always
breaks, about three miles from the east part of the
island, with a channel of 10 to 15 fathoms within it, and
that the Pyramid is shut in with the highest hill when
upon the rocks.
The currents generally run strong to the westward
about Fernando deNoronha, therefore ships intending
to anchor here, make a practice of passing round to the
north end of the island, which is formed by a chain of
several small islets, very near each other.
This island extends nearly ten miles, about S.W. and
H.E., and is about 2£ miles broad; the shore is rocky
and the surf frequently high; at such times there is
no landing. It is not advisable to touch at this island,
except in cases of necessity, for it appears that water is
a scarce article in the dry season, and when procurable,
cannot always be got off from the shore on account of
the surf. There is little rain, and sometimes two years
have elapsed without any. The road of Fernando de
Noronha is unsafe to be in with northerly and north-
west winds, which are said to prevail from December
to April; at other times, they are mostly south-east or
easterly, and sometimes at north-east. The well which
supplies ships with water, is near the site of the late
governor’s house, but landing the casks and getting off
the water is inconvenient. The wood is cut on a little
island near the north point of the large one, but is not
easily got into the boats on account of the rooky shore.
Fernando de Noronha was formerly peopled with
exiles from the coast of Brazil, and was well defended
by forts built on the plains most eligible for its security ;
but it is now said to be uninhabited. It is hilly, uneven
land, and seen at 10 leagues distance in clear weather.
The Pyramid, as computed by General Brisbane and
Mr. Eemken, in 1821, is in latitude 3° 55J' S. and in
longitude 32° 16' W., measured from Funchall, by good
chronometers, and also by measurement to Bio Janeiro.
Boccas is a very dangerous low island or reef, a little
above water. Ships which pass between Fernando de


Noronha and the Brazil coast, are particularly cautious
in the night, if not certain of their relative position from
Fernando de Noronha ; for the strong westerly currents
are liable to sweep them to leeward.
On the Ist of
JTJLT
Mrs. Hastie (3rd cabin) gave birth to a boy.
On the 2nd our position was latitude 15° 40' S., longi-
tude 35° 58' W., or nearly 36° to the westward, and about
220 miles only, E. by H. of Porto Seguro on the coast
of Brazil, which is situated in latitude 16° 27' S., longi-
tude 38° 58' W.
At noon on the 10th, our latitude by dead reckon-
ing was 33° 8' S. or 48 miles to the northward of
the latitude of the Cape of Good Hope, but consider-
ably to the westward of the meridian of the same ; our
longitude on this day being 28° 60* W., the Cape lying
in 18° 19' E.
On the evening of the 11th we exchanged signals
with the British ship Racehorse, from London, bound
to Swan River, on the S.W. coast of Australia, with
convicts, out 43 days. There was probably some mis-
take made as to the number of days the Racehorse was
out at the time we came upon her, or she met with
more favorable winds than we did near the Equator ;
which is evident from the fact that the Andrew Jack-
son, then out 62 days from the Downs, overhauled her,
and in a moderate breeze quickly left her in the rear.
The first opportunity we had of satisfying ourselves
as to the reported sailing qualities of the Andrew
Jackson, occured on the 13th, 14th, 15th, and 16th,
on which days she traversed a distance of 296, 311, 306
and 321 miles respectively, making a total of 1234 miles
in four successive days, and averaging 308 j miles per day,
or a fraction over 12J knots per hour.
Supposing the entire distance from London to
Auckland to be 17000 miles, and that the above rate
of sailing could have been sustained throughout the
passage, the journey would have been completed in
65 days, 2 hours, 36 minutes.
We reached the meridian of the Cape on the 18th,
iu latitude about 46° S. The Cape lies in 33° 66' S.


At 8 - 30 p.m. on the 19th, we were all aroused by
the cry of fire! that most terrible of catastrophies at
sea : happily, however, the anxieties of all were soon
quelled by the announcement “ all’s right.” The alarm
was produced by a candle, which, on burning low, set
fire to the grease that had collected at the bottom of
the lamp, in the single women’s compartment. The girl
who first observed the flame, suddenly snatched the
lamp off the hook on which it was suspended, thereby
admitting an additional current of air, and increasing
the blaze. This caused her to lose her presence of
mind, and foolishly threw the lamp on the floor,
and shriek “fire!” The general impression was that
either the hold, or the provision store room, contiguous
to the cabin was in names. It was, as Shakespeare
says, “ Much Ado about Nothing.”
About noon on the 21st, signs of an impending gale
were visible, and from two o’clock till four a.m. the next
day, it raged with considerable fury, heavy seas
breaking aboard. Four hours later a large iceberg was
descried at no great distance from our lee bow. Mr.
Cook, the first mate, adjudged it to be 1200 feet high ;
400 feet above, and 800 feet below water. In conse-
quence of the' hazy state of the weather we had not an
opportunity of clearly seeing it, though its presence
was rendered strongly manifest by the cold chill it
cast over the atmosphere. We afterwards met with
several more, and numerous pieces of drifted ice, near
Prince Edwards, Crosets, and Kerquelen’s Islands.
We suffered extremes of climate to an intense
degree. We left London in beautifully mild weather,
and in the tropics where we naturally anticipated hot
weather : we experienced it with Farenheit’s thermo-
meter, standing at 96° in the shade, rendering our
complexion the colour of old copper; but we little
expected to go so far south as 53° 31' S., or nearly 3°
lower than the limit recommended for great circle
sailing, in the summer time. Our position was
certainly ascertained by dead reckoning, but there is
little doubt of our making sc much to the southward.
The universal opinion was that we exceeded 54°, and
many and bitter were the sentiments expressed as to
the course we were being taken. The captain’s object,
we can only imagine, was to meet with stronger and


more settled winds, and thus to shorten the passage ;
but in doing so he lost therespectof those whose lives were
in his keeping. To find ourselves in close proximity
to a large iceberg on the morning after a hard gale,
when the ship was sailing at an average of 13 knots an
hour, at which time, had she struck against the
iceberg, it would have launched us in a few hours into
eternity, was a matter for deep reflection and grave
concern.
AUGUST.
On the 16th of this month at 4 o'clock p.m., Miss
Turner, 3rd cabin, aged 15 years, died, after an illness
of five weeks; and shortly after 8 o’clock the same
evening was buried. At 6 - 45 p.m., Mrs. McTlfride,
gave birth to a boy. So far we retained our comple-
ment of passengers, two deaths, and two births.
On the above day our latitude was 35° 67' S., and
longitude 165°8'E., by observation,and thegeneral topic
of conversation was as to the day we should probably
arrive at our destination; many also expressed their
anxiety to be in time for the mail, having had no
opportunity of communicating to those dear to them,
nothing could be more natural than that they should
evince a strong desire to allay their anxiety. There is
ever, even with the most brilliant prospects for hap-
piness, a feeling of gloom on quitting the home of our
youth, in leaving the individuals with whom we have
lived, and the objects with which we have been sur-
rounded. A thousandlittle incidents whichhappened to
us in well known places, come crowding on our minds.
Each kindness we have received starts up fresh from
the page of memory, and seems to fix a hold upon the
heart, that renders the parting more sad and difficult.
But when those close links which join parent and child
must also receive a shock; when those ties, whose
fibres have clung so long and so firmly around us,
must be loosened; pain will mingle with those new
hopes which have arisen within us, however deep and
intense they may be. There may have been some
among us to whom separation has afforded relief, and
engendered anticipations of better days to come. A
drunken husband, an inconsistent wife, a relentless


father, or a contentious mother, prompted, it is possible,
the emigration of one or more of us. We know not
with whom we have associated on board; whether with
those who have committed breaches Of the laws of
their country, and sought refuge in a foreign land
from a public demonstration of their guilt, or with
honest and upright persons, whose motive for trans-
lating themselves to a distant colony has been to seek
there that success or repose which the late sphere of
their labour failed to afford. One thing, however is
certain: we had too many on board whose serpent
tongues were incessantly busy in issuing false reports,
and whose sole end and aim seemed to be to damage the
reputatation of their fellow passengers. They had
not the frankness or courage to keep aloof from those
whom they represented as being so base and con-
temptible ; but, as all slanderers do, carried on their
vile deeds under the cloak of friendship.
On the 19th, we were distant some 68 miles from
Three Kings, on the coast of New Zealand, lying in
lat. 34° 6' S. long. 172° KX E, and at 5‘30 p.m. we
reduced the distance about 30 miles, and sighted the
islands, bearing E.N.E.
• ’On the following day their bearing was N.E. by
E. \ E., and distant 80 miles.
■ On Monday the 21st we sighted the North Cape,
bearing W. by S. distant 18 to 20 miles.
At 6 a.m., on the 22nd, sighted the mainland to the
south-eastward. At 1 o’clock Edward White, aged
24, died, regretted by all on board. He appeared to
be one of the last whom death would call away. His
burial took place at 11 o’clock. At noon sighted Cape
Brett, bearing S. distant 20 miles.
At 5‘30 p.m., on the 23rd, we had an excellent
view of the Boor Knight’s Island, from a distance of
one mile, bearing W., and had strong E. and S.E.
winds, until arriving in port at noon the following
day.
Mr. J. E. H. Cook, chief officer of the ship, and
Mr. Seaman, a second class passenger, received
testimonials from the passengers: the former for his
steady conduct, and careful attention to us; and
the latter for his kindness in conducting the Sunday
services throughout the passage.


Everything in Auckland at the present time is dull.
The railway is progressing very fast : there are two
men and a hoy, employed in working it, —at least so I
heard from reliable sources, —and I think they have
also a wheelbarrow provided them. There is no such
thing as being pulled about by persons on the wharf
and in the town anxious to know your trade or calling ;
far otherwise ; the state of affairs is so depressed, that
unless you bestir yourself for employment, you may
content yourself by walking up and down the streets
with your hands in your pockets, whistling, “Hard
times come again no more.” Eighteen months ago,
things were very different; hands were much wanted
then, and none but idle scamps were out of employment.
Perhaps Such a state of affairs may recur, and all we
can say is—“ the sooner the better.”
LIST OF PASSENGERS.
Mrs Helen Montague; Mr. A. Gethin; Mrs. Merritt
and child; Walter, Martha, Claudius, and William Cato 5
Pierre Bucas; Paul; Sarda; Charles Sarda 5 Penelope, Wal-
lace. J-ames, Charles and Penelope Massey; Mary Ann
Porter; David and Janet Steele ; Catherine Cassidy ; Agnes
McCormick; Hannah and Ann Evans; Patrick Kehilly;
Jas. McCafferty ; Rosanna Hanley ; Geo , Janet, and Grace
Mcllfride ; Wm. and Ann Reid ;' Hugh and James Montgo-
mery’ ; Maria and Frederick Crabb; Emma, Elizabeth Maria,
Richard, Emma, and Chas. Arthur Barton ; Mary, Elizabeth,
and Mary Ann Frodsham; Ellen Roebuck; Catherine, Ca-
therine, Anne, Sarah, Elizabeth, Rose, and Ellen Hunter ;
Geo. Robert, Ann J., William, John James, and Mary C.
Graham; Kate, Teresa, 'Ann, and 1 Lizzie Ryan; Sarah,
Elizabeth Ann, Thomas Henry, and Charles Cook; Jessie
and Francis Currie ; Annie Currie ; Fanny and Ellen Seanes;
Sarah E., Harriet, and Ambrose Warburton; Mary, Wil-
liam, Clara, and Thos. Element; Sarah Bosley; Edmund
Wrigley; Mary, Rose, and Ann Doran; Samuel and David
Dunlop; William and Mary Chapman 5 Mary Jane Robson ;
Rhoda Baker; William, Mary, Abia, and Sarah A. Dobbs 5
Thomas Brennan ; Samuel Dobbs ; Thos. Robson ; Thomas
and William Scudder ; Ann Shanley ; Michael, Mary, Ellen,
William, Johanna, Bridget, John, and Eluabeth Doyle;
William Curtis j Thomas Lcadbetter; Henry Tidd; Arthur


Bryne; Denis Brannigan, Patrick Kavenagh; James Kir-
naghan; Margaret, George, Edward, and Sarah Grover;
John, Mary, Mary, Ann, Emma, Elizabeth, Francis, Jane,
James, and John Laurence; John and Leonora Eastwood;
Mary, Louisa, W. Thomas, Arthur, and Louis Eady; Thomas,
Lydia, Sarah, Thos. W. ; Hannah, Susan, and Annie Sea-
man ; William Trotter; James and Elizabeth Wells;
William and Martha Kehoe; Thomas, Harriet, Thomas
Edward, and Frederick Robinson; Lewis Samuels;
Walter Green ; James McKerr; G. W. Lester; William,
Ellen and Samuel Nichol; James and Elizabeth Beattie;
Jane Reid; William Reid; Ann Parker; Frederick Crabb;
Mary Ann and Frances Murphy; William, Mary Ann,
Mary, Arthur, Allan. Hugh, and Margaretta Graham;
Ann J. Graham; J ames Rafferty; Thomas and William
Granger; Edward White; L. P. Halpin; Pat. Chrystal;
Cad water and John Barker; William Barker ; John Willis;
James Jones; James Sandbatch; Patrick Murphy; John,
Georgina, William, Emma,and George Hastie; James Bloom-
field; William Akid; Richard Scudder; Samuel, Eliza, and
Sarah Ann Shelden; John, Sarah, Mary Ann, Martha,
Keziah, and Sarah Murphine; W illiam and Emma Strange ;
Joseph Evans ; Elizabeth, Emily, Susanna, and John Henry
Evansj; Edward, Isabella, Sarah, and Henry Turner ; John
Jane, Mary Ann, and William Martin; Charles, Mary
Ann, Emma, Mary Ann, and Alice Riley; John, Mary Ann,
Bhzabeth Ann, Mary Ann, and Lucy Davies ; George, Helen,
Thomas, and Clara Richards ; Thomas, Emma, Mary Jane,
Hannah, Thomas, George, and John Smith; Wm. Lan-
caster ; Ellen Aikle ; William Eady ; Margaret Halpin ;
John and Henry Robson; Mary Smith ; William File, Emily
and Tempy Sexton, Richard Clarke, Patrick Gorman,
Frederick and Eliza Aley, John Owen, John and Martin
Monaghan, Wm. and Mary Denison, Wm. Rogers, William
Nicholl, James and Isabella Wallace, Margaret Small, Thos.
Nicholl, Rose Ann Ridley, H. Walker, Simpson Moore,
and Patrick, Peter and Thomas McDermott; Bridget Qanley,
Ellen Nicholl, Alfred Aley, Mason Dudley Taylor.—
Total, 273.


