

SR N 080 FAH V.67 XIV
no 1145 1145
A REPLY
TO
JUDGE BURTON,
ON THE
SUPREME COURT
OF
NEW SOUTH WALES,
OF
‘THE STATE OF RELIGION’
IN THE COLONY.
By
W. ULLATHORNE, D.D.
Ah! [?]
SYDNEY:
W. A. DUNCAN, GROROM STREET.
1840.


I<»
T>ls SATrIOLIS 1195T17U72
OF GREAT BRITAIN,
WHICH AMONGST ITS MEMBERS, NUMBERS THOSE WHO MERGE
THE LUSTRE
OF EXALTED RANK, STATION, INFLUENCE,
and talent,
NTO the yet more illustrious titles of defenders OF the truth
AND REDRESSORS OF WRONG;
71113 D2?53932
~f the catholics of new south wales from
UNMERITED WRONGS,
INFLICTED FROM RANK AND STATION.
IS RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED,
RY THEIR DEVOTED SERVANT,
7H2 AUTHOR.


ERRATA.
Page 23, line G, for favour read fervour.
Page 73, line 6, for Orpan’t read Orphan'*.
Page 73. line G. for Todd Wall* read Sod Wall*.
Page 73. II lines from the bottom, for I'awfc/roo read /•im&or.v.


INTRODUCTION.
One of the judges of the supreme court of New
South Wales has composed a book. This work is
of considerable bulk and elaborately compounded.
Six hundred pages of hot-pressed octavo are pre-
sented to the public in a garb of green, which,
according to Shakspeare, is the color of jealousy;
the back is ornamented with a golden church,
which rests on the name of Burton and the figure
of a kangaroo. Yet, however gay and imaginative
may be the exterior, its heavy inward contents
would fain be taken for the documentary demon-
stration of a great and w eighty grievance. It is
put forward as the manifesto of one of those «Uira
parlies of men who become discontented because
from the nature of things they can be no longer
dominant. They have here poured together, as
into one common receptacle, all their statistic
griefs, their arithmetical tears, and pecuniary dis-
tresses.
Mr. Burton professes to give the English nation
“ The State or Religion and Education in New
South Wales.” A statement on this subject, at
once full, faithful, and impartial, would indeed be
valuable, and the Catholics of this colony would
be amongst the first to hail its appearance. An
account of the history', the condition, the wants, or
ihc prospects of the church of England exclusively.


could never be made a ground of objection. But
this work is, from one end to the other, luade the
covert of an attack upon the Catholic portion of the
community, and the assault is made with most un-
fair and unmanly weapons. The honorable judge
strives to exhibit us as being contemptible in every
respect, except the unaccountable advantage of our
receiving a greater aid and support from the govern-
ment than the church of England; how truly, the
following pages may make apparent. The means
by which he labors to achieve this view of the case
are, I regret to say, such as suppression of truth,
addition to facts, and the transposition of circum-
stances from their legitimate order. Placed where
should reign the most calm impartiality, in a po-
sition which supposes the most serene and unparty-
clouded mind, on an elevation which gives to his
statements the whole weight and dignity of the
judicial character—he coldly and deliberately
misstates our case, insults the Catholic people,
question! the sincerity of their clergy, derides their
creed, and sneers at the most holy of their sacra-
ments. The book is a party view of a party ques-
tion, and the case is stated, as will be shewn,
unfairly. It so far resembles Demosthenes in
style, that the reasoning cannot be separated from
the passion. But the passion is cold and the rea-
soning excited. An appeal to hatred, masked in
zeal for religion, is made the ground of a call for
money. The work is evidently not intended for
the clear atmosphere of New South Wales, where
the real facts are open as the day, but for England,
where the remoteness of the spectator from the


scene of action, and the denseness of the obscure
medium of communication, so easily change the
simple realities into shapes and shadows of a mar-
vellous show. “ A member of the church of England
in Australia” he says. “ haras for http to his brethren
in Great Britain His object h undoubted. He
is the recognised lay leader of a politico-religious
party. Shortly'previous to the arrival of this book,
his health was drank, eoran episcopo , at the dio-
cesan dinner, as “the constitutional lawyer, who
would never support any other than, that
the Established church of England is the National
church wherever the national standard wanes? ’f
The object of this party, as stated by themselves,
is twofold. TO rest the church of that minority to
which they happen to belong “ upon the lands of
the colony, which present the readiest means of
support and to secure this by an act of par-
liament. In other Words, for ever to revive
that Corporation Act, which once gave to a few
clergymen the one-seventh of all tho territorial
possessions of New South Wales; and, as was
stated by one of the speakers at the late dio-
cesan meeting, “to raise the clergy above being
mere dependents on the will of those among
whom they ministered/ 7 § With respect to tho
other creeds in tho colony, and especially the
Catholic third of the community, Mr. Burton would
graciously extend to them the insult of “ toleration.”
As if he were a Jupiter, the shaking of whose curls
• p.m
f Spweh of Mr. C. Ctapboll, Bjd«j Honld of Joat 30lh.
t Bvlm, p. 919.
$ Bj4mj Herald, Speech of Mr. C. Ctrapbell.
a


sid cf iMrte Ike
» ibuiger, be ttefadm. Aadin
Uhatquarter 1 From a church Which Im Mkmls
tt»exhibit os email in iioaben, contemptible krlts
Johtßtaot£r,and' ridiculous- In itoenne. Thisrivml
dioiidh'Jalb irUtk he ttflks ofeateringihio
' t 4kdmmljaw***d'’ by government;
.itohfltotway tile Thiliokinitt
headland in Wito light eboi 1 It will be
constituted the tafMii the
reference and proof, to these itinerant dedaimers
who Tex the soil of oar native country, and who
go about, armed with the authorities of judge* and
of bishops, disturbing the peace of our countrymen,
and filling the whole frame of society with fever
and distraction. This unfair attack of Mr. Burton’s
upon ns, is but one such of a series. We may be
said to have the first intimation and promise in the
Bishop of Australia’s interview with the Jesuits, in
Canterbury cathedral, 1835. f We have a riper in-
stance in the extravagant statements of the Rev.
Mr. Willis, in Bath, of 1897. We reach the highest
case in the Archbishop of Canterbury’s errors on
the subject in the house of peers, in 1830. We
next descend, and find the Bishop of Exeter
charging his clergy against us in the same year;
and now the only additional aid that could be sup-
plied to a cause so difficult, is furnished in the
grave authority of a judge of the supreme court of
New South Wales.
We may console ourselves with the hope that
things cannot go much farther. Mr. Burton seems
• f .no.
♦ p.aoe.


to have reached the climax when, in oondbding ids
work, he disoorers the plan of the Jesuits tottSfoe
poflflpttiion of New Holland* as a conTenientmid-
way station between Asia and South America, md
grounds hisproofoon a sermon of the Prnlnstiat
Bishop of Australia. It is therefore totheCatholios
of England, as well as to those of the colony, 'that I
respectfully present this little book, incomplete,
because time urged, but, I trust, aoauat* a»<m
shield for our shelter and defence.


CHAPTER I.
THE DARK AGE.
All great histories are distinguished by the
patriarchal simplicity and poetic colour of their
opening, by the rare and uncertain records and the
dark obscurity of their second period, by the grand
display of contests, calamities, and alternating pros-
perities of their later times, and by the calm, phi-
losophic glance from retrospection to the prospective
future, at their close. The peculiarity of Mr.
Burton's work is, that it combines all these, with
many other qualities, through every part. But we,
my dear reader, who can make no such pretension,
must be more orderly, clear, and brief.
The colony of New South Wales was founded in
the year 1788. The newly arrived population,
1080 souls, mixed of all creeds, were provided with
a chaplain of the Church of England, but with no
other pastor.
So early as the month of June in the year 1700 w
a territorial provision was made for that church,
“ by allotting, in each township which should be
marked out, 400 acres for the maintenance of a
minister, and 200 acres for the maintenance of a
schoolmaster.”*
In 1794, the population having been increased
by a few free settlers and 4000 prisoners, the Rev.
Samuel Marsden was added as a second chaplain
to the colony, t
For the next six years, up to 1800, Mr. Burton
describes the colony as being “so destitute of spi-
* Barton, p. 2.
t Ibid. p. 6.
n


ritual grace ” that it was left under the care of these
two clergymen. He has, however, omitted to men-
tion, that the Rev. Mr. Fulton arrived in this year,
and was sent to officiate at Norfolk Island.* And
it may be further remarked, that as yet there was
no concentrated population existing, except in the
two small townships of Sydney and Parramatta,
with their vicinities; and that the few scattered
farms, even most remote, were none of them much
further than twenty miles from Parramatta; that
even three years later, the population had only
reached the number of 7097 souls; of which, as
Mr. Burton correctly remarks, “a great number”
were Irish Catholics, and opposed to the ministry
of these gentlemen amongst them. It is observable
that whilst at this period Mr. Burton deplores the
imaginary wants and privations of Protestantism,
he expresses no feeling of compassion for this
“great number” of poor Catholics, who were thus
cast away from all spiritual aid, from all divine
consolation, whilst, at the same time, they were
necessitated to “ oppose” the ministry of the strong
man who was not of their creed. His only regret
appears to be that they could not, even with all their
privations, be brought to the ministerings of Church
of Englandism. The clergymen are repeatedly
represented, in the orders of the first governors, as
almost unattended by their own people; until, at
length, as the judge observes, a governor “had to
be informed bp the clergyman , that five or fix persons
only attended divine service , and it was then that he
determined to go to church himself, and stated that
g ihe expected that hie own example would be followed
by the people .* ” —(p. 7.)
When the Spanish discovery ships arrived at the
•colony in 1793, no kind of place of worship had as
▼et been anywhere raised. The clergyman preached
wherever he could find a shady spot. And Collins
* Bw’ l Report, p» 83.


states that “ when the priest belonging to the com-
modore’s ship observed that there was no church
built, he lifted up his hands in astonishment, and
declared, that had the place been settled by his
nation, a house for God would have been raised
before any house for man.” *
la September, 1796, a temporary church was
opened at Parramatta. Decent places of worship
were now to be seen at the two settlements. In the
year 1800, a permanent church was erected at
Parramatta, and Governor Hunter laid the found-
ation of St. Philip’s in Sydney. Of this last
church, Peron observes, that in 1802 it progressed
very slowly, “the governor thinking, and with
reason, that there were other buildings of more
importance.” It is a curious point of canon law,
that the first Protestant church erected in Sydney,
with its parish, were directed to be called the
church and parish of “ St. Philip,” not in honour
of that Saint, but “in honour of the first governor of
this territory ,” whose Christian name was Arthur }
whilst the church and parish of Parramatta were
directed to be called the church and parish of
“ St. John,” not in honour of that Saint, but “in
honour of the late governor , Captain John Hunter.”
And that these dedications were not made in virtue
of any ecclesiastical ordination, but by the direction
of his Excellency Governor King, expressed in a
standing order of date July 23rd, 1802. t
One of the chaplains left the colony in 1800$
and from the year 1807 to 1810 Mr. Fulton “ offi-
ciated temporarily ,” in the absence of Mr. Marsdem
Mr. Burton is pathetic in his painting of the
ceaseless labours, the journies, the privations and
difficulties, encountered by these first apostles of
New South Wales. And yet he has done them
less than justice. To their clerical he should have
added their civil duties, and their te'ls on the
• Collins' N. S. Wales, 2nd Ed., p. 330.
t Standing Oiders, PU Ist, p. 113.


magisterial bench. This would have given the
shadows and made the picture perfect. Then,
again, what a rich light would have been thrown
forth to the proper point of view. These last la-
bours demonstrate the “ obstacle*” encountered in
the first. Men in those days, and especially the
simple-hearted Catholics from Ireland, could not
understand the text, “compel them to enter” as
expounded from the pulpit, until they had heard
it repeated by the same reverend lips from the
judicial chair. “lam a Catholic” says the un-
happy culprit, at once confessing all his crime.
“Go to church or be flogged” decides the reverend
magistrate. What a picture! How like apostles
are those figures in the foreground! And how
beautiful the landscape with its rural scenes be-
yond. For these reverend pastors have also other
flocks to feed. We are informed by Mons. Peron,
the French naturalist who visited the colony in
180$, tha* “ Captain Macarthur is not the only one
to whom sheep had proved the honorable source of
considerable profit. Mr. Palmer possesses 800
sheep; Mr. Marsden a much larger flock. This
gentleman,” he continues, “ the pastor of Parra-
matta, is owner of .651 acres of land, 103 of which
are subject to various culture: independent of his
flock, his farm supports 26 horned cattle, 30 hogs,
and 10 goats. This farm lies at some distance:
the buildings are spacious and well fashioned s the
garden and orchard already combine mcrt of the
fruit trees of Europe. The site of the farm is
seven or eight miles from Parramatta, yet was 1
carried there on a charming road in a very hand-
some one horse chaise.”*
On the 16th of November, 1790, Captain Tench,
after taking a walk in his company over all the
cleared and cultivated land at Rose-hill, which was
the first iiame given to Parramatta, wrote down
• Piah«fti»> Voyage «•!. 11, p. *2O,


the fact, that the Rev. Mr. Johnson was the “ best
farmer in the country.’ * It appears, from the
same authority, that both these gentlemen resided
at Parramatta, the great farming district, the one
as chaplain to the settlement, the other of the regi-
ment, and that divine service was performed at
Sydney only one Sunday in the month, “ when aU
the convicts are obliged to attend church, under
penalty of having a part of their provisions stopped,
which is done by the chaplain , who is a justice of' tie
peace. ln 1808 came the Rev. Mr. Cowper, and
in 1809 the Rev. Mr. Cartwright. In 1810 Mr.
Marsden returned. Mr. Fulton wps “continued on
the establishment .” And we have thus four chap-
lains, one for each of the three existing districts,
including the Hawkesbury, and one for the penal
settlement of Newcastle, of *IOO souls: the entire
population, amounting at this period to 10,453
souls, comprising Dissenters and a very large pro-
portion of Catholics.
At this point of our history, there springs up a
question. Why does Mr. Burton pass over the
arrival of the Rev. Mr. Fulton ? Why does he at
first officiate but “ temporarily ?” And why is he
then “continued?” What means this delicate
gradation of phrase!
To aid us in clearing up the difficulty, let us
turn to the honorable judge’s account of the be-
ginnings of the “ Romish” church in the colony,
page 13. “ Although,” he says, “ from the cir-
cumstance that all Irish convicts have been uni-
formly transported to New South Wales, they
formed, soon after the establishment of the colony,
a considerable portion of the population, and of
these the great majority professed the Catholic
religion, its members had not the benefit of their
own religion? rites till the year 1803, when the
Rev. Mr. Dixon, a priest of their communion,
* T«Mh’f Accosaiy P«r{J«ckMo, p.T4.
t Cwpm pp.loiad 144.


under sentence of transportation, received a coir
ditional emancipation, with permission to exercise
clerical functions as a Roman Catholic priest.”
We need not stay to copy the emphatic italics of
Mr. Burton, but may proceed, with this assistance,
to answer the question. The Rev. Mr. Dixon and
the Rev. Mr. Fulton were transported together,
from the same country, at the same period, under a
like sentence, and for similar political offences;
although our impartial judge entirely forgot die
case of Mr. Fulton, whilst he occupies two pages
with that of Mr. Dixon. The indulgence granted
to Mr. Dixon is issued in the form of a proclama-
tion, by his Excellency Governor King, of date
April 21st, 1803.
“Jcdgag a cxpdi— tad tiariwibk. in rwiqtiaci of • cor—aictti—
ft— the B—ly of 81— for tk cokoko tod war dapa—t, to put «
hbi a eoadk—al —ipttioa, to ooablo kio to —dot hit clerical naetkas as
a Bee—CaSwttc prieel; which ho htoqoahisd hhaaolf for by tht ragalar aad
«i—pkry coudoet ho hat ■—ifa—d riaoa hit loridt— ia the etlooj; tad his
kariag Whoa Wo oath of aliogjaaco, abjantaoa, aad dadaratka, pretcrihod by
" Which aoniioiinn shall raawia ia fall fono aad titet, as loag as ho, the
said Bov. Mir. Dima. (and m atktr frim) shall strictly adhere to the rales aad
—alati— which ho has this day heaad hi—elf hy oath to ih—a, as wall as all
o—r Wfalati— hereafter to be —de the—a hy his Majesty's romaor ef this
territory far the thao hoiag. Aad ia cm of say deviatiea thoraftou by the said
Mr. D—a, or cay of Us coagiagatiaa, it will lesssia for the gator— of this
territory to rasp sad nek rolfeoas susublios, aad la deal with the offtaders
—srdisg to kw."
By the binding of this oath, the Rev. Mr. Dixon
is made to swear—“ that, together with his congre-
gation, he will oherve, with all becoming gratitude,
that his and their toleration proceeds from the piety
and benevolence of their gracious sovereign—that
he will only perform his clerical duties once in
three weeks, at the settlements of Sydney, Parra-
matta, and Hawkesbnry, in rotation; the magis-
trates being strictly forbidden to suffer those Ca-
tholics who reside at the places where service is
not performed, from resorting to the settlement and
district at which the priest officiates for the day.”
He is made to swear, tardier, “that he will perform
service at nine o’clock in the morning. That he


will allow no improper behaviour during divine
service. That he will be responsible to the magis-
trates for his congregation going regularly and
orderly home. And a certain number of police
shall be stationed at and about the places during
the service. And in case of any deviation from
these, and other regulations, by the Rev. Mr. Dixon,
or any of Lis congregation, it will remain with the
governor to suspend their religious assemblies, and
to deal with the offenders according to law. 1 * *
It appears that, when, by virtue of a communica-
tion from the home government, Mr. Dixon obtained
his emancipaton, he at the same time received his
missionary powers from the proper ecclesiastical
authority. In March, 1804, a gang of prisoners,
placed near Parramatta, who appear to have been
suffering at the time under a cruel course of treat-
ment, formed a conspiracy and broke out into
insurrection. The leaders were hung in chains,
and the rest either confined in cells or sent to penal
settlements; but this occasion was taken to suggest
to government, that the most favourable opportunity
for such conspiracies would be the Catholic assem-
blies for divine worship. Numbers, of course, assem-
bled there, though comparatively few at the Esta-
blished Church; and the suggestion was made the
ground of depriving Mr. Dixon of his allowances,
rations, &c., whilst every obstacle was, as a matter
of course, put in the way of his performing duty.
Mr. Dixon obtained permission to leave the country
in 1808. For the information of my English reader
1 may add, that his reverend companion in misfor-
tune of the Church of England still continues in
the colony, a prosperous gentleman; that, in 1812,
the magistracy was added to his chaplaincy; that
he also conducted a school, “ attended by most of
the sons of the higher classes ;f” and that we shall
again meet with him before we have concluded.
* BwtAß, pp. 14-16.
t Bifft’i JUprt, p. 84.


Under the sane charge of being implicated in
the affaire of 1796 v with Sir. Dixon and Mr. Fulton,
and undera similar sentence of court martial, two
other Catholic clergymen were sent out to the
colony. The Rev. Mr. O’Neil received from the
home government his pardon and recall in 1809.
It is believed that the home government had been
satisfied of the innocence of both Mr. O’Neil and
of Air. Dixon. Mr. Harold was, on his arrival,
placed at Norfolk Island, where he officiated.
After Mr. Dixon’s departure, he returned to Sydney.
But the government naving promulgated a regula-
tion requiring the whole prison population indiscri-
minately to attend the Church oi England, under
penalty of twenty-five lashes the first refusal, fifty
lashes the second, and transportation to a penal
settlement on the third refusal, and this regulation
having been vigorously enforced, I regret to state
.tbaty in the midst of this persecution of consciences,
which passed bard upon the poor Catholics, Mr.
Harold applied for leave to returnhome; which,says
a manuscript of some date back, now lying before
me, “was soon granted him.’* The flock left
without a pastor, great exertions appear to have
been made to Protestantize the entire population;
hut the Catholic faith is not so easily rooted from
the heart where it is once planted, and still less so
by means of violence.
The Church of England, now again without a
rival, will for a short time occupy our sole attention.
At the close of 1810 the church of St. Philip,
Sydney, was consecrated by the Rev. Samuel
Maraden, principal chaplain.* In the course of
the month following, we find the same reverend
gentleman appointed by “the principal land-
holders of the settlement,” in conjunction with two
other gentlemen, to pay rewards in gallons and
half gallons of spirits, or an equivalent of money.
♦ Gazette, December 32,1810.


to all who should destroy native dogs; at the rate
of a gallon of spirits, or one pound sterling, for the
complete skin of a dog, and half a gallon, or ten
shillings, for the skin of a pup.* Some time later
the same reverend gentleman erected to himself a
windmill, which, we are told by Mr. Wentworth,
kept no Sabbath, but worked as regularly on Sun-
days as on week days, even in the very race of his
congregation and of Mr. Commissioner Bigge
himself.*f
Sometime previous to 1817, the Rev, Mr. Youl
was added to the establishment. The population, of
all communions, now reached the number of 17,214
souls. In the following year arrived, as a further
addition to the establishment, the Revs. Messrs.
Hill and Cross. And, on the decease of Mr.
Youl, in 1820, he was succeeded by the Rev.
Mr. Redd all.
At this period of our colonial history, it is shown,
from certain papers laid before the tlouse of
Commons on April 18, 1826, that during the years
from 1815 to 1824 a practice had obtained in the
colony of inflicting torture, “ contrary to law,” for
the purpose of eliciting disclosures; in exercising
which, the clerical portion of the magistracy played
a conspicuous part. Of the three clergymen thus
reported to have been employed two were particu-
larly active, and of their deeds of mercy one or two
instances will be as much as my English reader
will be able to endure.
PENRITH.
“ James Pharos, who was accused of robbery, which be at first confessed sod
afterwards denied, was, on the 18th of Way, 1822, sentenced jbe flogged every
morning until he confessed where lb” stolen property was.” Amongst the three
presiding magistrates was the Rev. £V. Fulton.
PARRAMATTA, April 24/ft, 1822.
Reverend Samuel Mandcn presiding on the bench.
“ James Blackburn, attached to the prisoners* barrack, brought forward with
four others yesteiday at the barrack, having been detected in the fact by the Rev.
Mr. Warsden.
“ The prisoner is sentenced to receive twenty-five lashes every morning, and be
• Gazette, January Id, 1811—in O’Hara,
t Wentworth's Australasia, vol. Ist.
c:


kgfion bn*d awl water. until be tell who era the four men that were with, him
gambling.
t FAERAMATTA.jyyUt.IB32.
Bee. Samoel Maredea. one of the two sitting magistrates.
* J John Downs add Hugh Carroll, attached to Patrick’s gang, brought forward
for making mroy with six poaada foorteea shillings, the property of Mtohaw
Finnegan.
"** Ordered to be confined in n solitary ceil oa bread and water, and every
torond meriting te receive twenty.five lashes, until they tell where the money is
concealed.”
PARI AM ATT A, October 4th. 1823.
, JUv, Hamy fallen, ooe of the two magistrates present.
"Thomas Smith, servant to Thomas Wilson, to receive twenty-five lashes
awry second morning nodi ha prodace the property; and if. alter receiving one
honored lashes, ha does not produce the saio property, to be sent to Port Mac-
quarie for the remainder of his sentence.”
But enough! I should not haye touched upon
such things, had not these persons been exalted as
models of the apostolic life, whilst the poor Catholic
and his priest are covered with all revilings. The
general canons of the church, enforced in England
from tile earliest times, prohibit any clergymen
ftotn M implicating himself' in secular transactions ,”
and also from “ the shedding of blood ,” even law-
fully, pain of suspension from his clerical
fractions!
It was towards the close of 1817* that the Very
Rev. Jeremiah O’Flinn, the Catholic archpriest,
entered the colony. Before sailing he had applied
to the home authorities fer their sanction to his
•officiating. The ship was departing, no other ves-
sel would fellow for some time, and he had not
received it. Trusting to a friend to transmit it
after him, he sailed. It came not. His zeal was
not only manifested among his flock, bnt drew
converts round him, and the eyes of government
upon him. He wrs directed to produce his per-
mission, or hold himself in readiness for departure
by the next ship. Unwilling to abandon his poor
people, he concealed himself nntil a petition, then
going over the country for signature, should be pre-
sented, in favor of his being allowed to stay. He
was seized upon and lodged in gaol. A petition
• In my account of the ** Catholic Mission” 1 have erroneously placed this event
in 1818.


from four hundred persons was presented; Go*
vernor Macquarie brcame incensed at this “ pre-
sumption/' and, on the 15th of May, 1818, die
archpriest was sent by force out of the country.
In a little work describing the Catholic Mission
in this country, 1 had written of this period as
follows:—“The blessed sacrament had been left
by the archpriest in the dwelling of a Catholic of
Sydney, where, for two years after his departure;
the faithful, as many as could, were wont to as-
semble, there to offer up their prayers and receive
consolation in their miseries. It is remarkably
beautiful to contemplate these men of sorrow round
the bread of life, bowed down before the cruci-
fied, no voice but the silent one of faith, not a
priest within ten thousand miles, to offer them that
pledge of pardon to repentance, whose near pre-
sence they see and feel.”
At this “ sole consolation” of the afflicted, it haw
pleased the judge of the people of this land to utter
a heartless scoff —a scornful, unhallowed scoff;
which, in its style and manner, is borrowed from
the infidel and the exploded sophist of the last
century. I shall not repeat what would pain the
heart of every Catholic, and shock the good feel-
ings of every Protestant. Let us set aside, for a
moment, the faith and feelings of four-fifths of the
Christian world —of the Greek and oriental com-
munions as well as of the Catholic church; let us
pass over the belief of many Protestant creeds,
and of the most eminent divines of the church of
England, in a real presence ; let ’is not consider the
same doctrine as held by the living divines of Ox-
ford,* and the “ verily and truly ’ of the church of
England catechism; let us limit ourselves to the
narrowest doctrine of a symbolic presence —in this
sense, at least, Mr. Burton has respectfully enume-
rated the communicants of his own church; is
* The Tracts for the Time*, and especially the Catena I’ulrum of those tract*.


there not still left a more powerful argument of the
grace of the Divine presence, and a more expres-
sive token of the Divine remembrance, than the
Mercy Seat before which the Israelite bowed down!
Viewed, then; by the light of his own opinions—
considered as a memorial of the Divine presence,
and as a medium of Divine communication —this
“ sole consolation’* of an afflicted and bereaved
people should not have drawn, from a Christian
minister of law and justice, the cold-eyed sneer, as
if from a heartless breast. Mr. Burton has himself
Written a parallel passage on a meaner subject*
When he describes the first planting of the colony,
and feelingly regrets, that, whilst it is recorded
that men drank round the national flag as it rose,
and was exalted on high, no prayer, and no be-
coming act of religion marked the ceremony of the
day; is it of the bit of bunting he speaks, or of
the symbol of his country and her empire ?
With this subject we may appropriately close
our account of the dark age of the Australian
church.
• Pp. 4-4.


CHAPTER II.
THE MIDDLE AGE.
When the intelligence of the arbitrary andxfiwl
treatment of Mr. Flinn reached home, it jU
considerable sensation. The case was brought
before the House of Commons by LprdDonoqgl*'
more, then member for Cork, at the instance of ( the
Right Rev. Dr. England, the present. bishop
Charleston. The government were compelled*.
consequence, to give up all further idea of an
elusive church of Englandism in the colony; and
Earl Bathurst found it expedient to apply to tho
proper authority for the appointment of two Catholic
clergymen.
The Rev. John Joseph Therry, and the Rev.
Philip Conolly, received, in consequence, their
appointment am} mission from the Right Rev. Dr.
Slater, bishop in the Mauritius, whose jurisdiction
at that time extended over these colonies; and from
the government, a salary of £ 100 per annum each.
Earl Bathurst verbally assigned as a reason for the
smallness of stipend, that “it was chiefly intended
for a proof of tneir possessing the sanction of go-
vernment; that he knew they did not require more,
because the Catholic people were more generous
than others in supporting their clergy.” These
gentlemen landed in the year 1820, soon after
which the Rev. Mr. Conolly proceeded to Van
Diemen’s Land, where he remained until his death,
in 1889, and the Rev. Mr. Therry was left alone for
the space of six years. One of the most remark-
able features of the judge’s book is its omissions


and suppressions. That, in a work of 000 pages,
purporting to shew forth the religious history of
New South Wales, and the spiritual means that
have been applied for the reformation of its prison
population, Mr. Burton should give no further ac-
count of the Rev. Mr. Therry, Sian the erroneous
surmise that “his services were probably divided
between New South Wales and Van Diemen’s
Land,” because his name does not appear on the
establishment,* will not only surprise every body
in the colony, but most people out of it.
On their arrival, Governor Macquarie conveyed
to the Catholic clergy what he was pleased to call
“ his instructions*’ for their guidance in the perform-
ance of their clerical duties. This singular docu-
ment bears date 6th June, 1820. After making
several other injunctions, he strongly advises them
“ to endeavour not to make converts from the Esta-
blished church, or generally from the Protestant
church, but to confine their spiritual ministry ex-
clusively to those who are of the Romish church ;*’
that ** within their own flock, which is very nu-
merous, they will have enough duty to perform
conscientiously.” Whilst he only advises this as from
himself, he at the same time warns them of their
peril on the subject, from the strong operation of
the laws of England. “In consequence of the
melancholy effects lately produced by large popular
meetings in England, under the banners of itinerant
political demagogues, long practised in the aits of
faction,” the governor deems it expedient to expect
the observance of the following regulations from
peaceful-minded clergymen, in the gathering to-
gether of congregations for Catholic worship in
New South Wales. Ist. That they have fixed or
certain stations at which to celebrate Divine service,
and that they give notice thereof in writing,' under
their hand, to the‘ magistrate* of the district, and
♦ p.w.


that they do not assemble their flocks at any other
place for divine service, without giving a similes
notice at least three days previously. 2nd. That
they confine the public celebration of mass to Sabt
bath day, and to the holidays of the Church ff £t •*
gland . 3rd. That they administer the consolations
of religion exclusively to those of the Roman Car
tholic faith. 4th. That they adopt the same hmm
for celebrating mass as those prescribed to the
clergy of the Established church, for the sake ef
the convenience of mustering the prisoners. 6th.
That they do not, on any account, assemble, or sane*
tion the assembling o£ large bodies of people at
their religious ceremonies, such meetings being dan-
gerous in this colony, and strictly prohibited by
reemt laws passed in England . 6th. “ That they do
not interfere with the religious education of orphans,
in the government charitable institutions of this
colony.’ These institutions being, at the very time,
half filled with Catholics, and established (in theiv
then constitution) by this very man, who assigns
as his reason for thus excluding the Catholic cler-
gyman, that, “ by the fundamental regulations of
these institutions” —regulations he must himself
have ordained —the children, Catholic as well as
every denomination of Protestants, were “to be
instructed in the faith and doctrines of the church
of England.”
The governor, as he reaches the end of his string
of odd conceits, contrives to wind up the conclusion
of the document with a contradiction; for he
expresses his onfidence in “the integrity and
purity of views” of these very same clergymen;
and, however strange and discordant the words
may sound when heard from the same quarter, he
declares his readiness “ to advocate and support the
religious liberty of their flock , and to maintain their
(the clergy's) own just rights and privileges .”
But the Rev. Mr. Therry was not a man to be


overawed by the arbitrary assumptions of power,
npr to circumscribe himself and shrink up in his
Sacred duties at the nod of dictation, because
bigotry had found a voice. The governor, gt
length, discovered something of ids mistake, nor
*as, be sorry for the opportunity of conciliation
afforded him, by an invitation to lay the foundation
stohe of the first Catholic church commenced in the
colony. This event took place on the 29th of
October, 1821. The governor, attended by his
suite, received from the hand of the reverend chap-
lain, robed in his priestly vestments, the silver
trowel with which, as Mr. Therry read the service,
he performed the ceremony, the choir responding
from a tent. To the address on the occasion,
which was read by Mr. Therry, the governor made
the following reply: —
**lt has kn a gnsst gratification to mo to witness and waist at Ik* ceremony
■Mr perfarmed; and I nave every hope that the consideration of the British
fovnrnmeot, mi nppljiif the Roman Catholics of this colony with itkiHuM
niorgymoo, will be the aeons of strengthening and augmenting (if that be poo*
dhh) the ettochmcnt of the Catholics of Now South Wows to the British govern*
■toot; and will prove an inducement to them to continue, as 1 hnva ever bad
them to be, loyal and faithfal subjects to the crown.”
A letter from the governor's hand, of the same
day's date, lies before me, in which, transmitting
a copy of this address for publication in the Gazette,
be declares that it contains his “ real sentiments."
In the year following, being on the eve of de-
parture from the colony, Governor Macquarie
addressed the Catholic chaplain, from on ship-
board, in the following terms: —
** Skip Surry, Pmrt Jmeham,
“ ISlfi Ftkrmmry, 1833.
** Dui Sin—l shall not fell to aovo Earl Bethnnt, on my mrival in England,
to inatrnct Sir Thomas Btisbaoo to catond farther omittance towards completing
the Reman Catholic chapel at Sydney.
“ I maaoia, in hnato, dear Sir,
** Toon very truly,
*lttha Rev. J.J. Therry, ice. &c" -** L. MACQUARIE.
That Governor Brisbane received some such
imtnictioa seems evident; for, the private lands
defected for the erection of the church, which, ip
n&w the cathedral of St. Maty, baiting bcea^-


hausted, and Mr. Thenry haring/on that
addressed to hb Excdlency a memorial, praying
for the assistance of government —a memorial
which was signed and supported by one of the
judges, and by twenty-six magistrates of the ter-
ritory—the governor transmitted through the co-
lonial secretary a most favorable reply, of which
the following passage, at the conclusion of Mr.
Goulbum’s letter, gives the substance: —
“ Afar tk anxiety 10 gcoenJly Mt, tb« eteeriety ef epeoiaf i fmb «etee»)p
tioa far the tommmm »ii-«f the! wMjpewV pIMwl, mi «k|Mt ■ 11 liHij.
natendly aaggwts itself; aed iaan Ik Uiat mt be oeeaed, laa diracke be
tbe governor ie eelar tbe mo of tbie pvnMrt br«m eqeel te M mm
t9tml of ell sech additional doaatioao. - . n
-1 beve tbe boeer to be. Hex. Sir,
Y *“ Aetk*
With the exception of two or three sums, which
are small, very small indeed, compared to the
amount of donations, the word and honor of go-
vernment, thus vouched, remains to this day unful ■
filled; whilst the face of the country was in the
act of being strewed over with Protestant churches,
at the sole cost of government.
In the year 1823 the population was estimated,
by census, at 29,783 souls, of which 13,814 were
prisoners in a state of bondage. Of these, spread
through every part of the colony, the well-disposed
had no aid or consolation from their religion; the
evil, no means for their moral regeneration but
such as the government was dbposed to provide.
In 1821 me first minbter of the Presbyterian
church of Scotland arrived, in the person of the
Rev.'Dr. Lang. And, in 1826, the Rev. John
M'Garvie was added to that establishment.
In the year 1821, during the course of the inves-
tigations of Mr. Bigge, who was sent out by Earl
Bathurst with a commission to report the stale of
the government, we find the reverend clergy of the
Anglican establishment disappearing from their
seats on the magisterial bench. Of the principal
chaplain, in his capacity of magistrate; although
o


the commissioner shews himself throughout his
apologist; and although he defends his general con*
duct from the severe charges of Governor Mae*
quarie; he Is, nevertheless, compelled officially to
report, that—“ It is in proof, that his sentences are
not only in feet more severe than those of the other
magistrates; but that the general opinion of this
colony is, that his character, as displayed in the
administration of the penal law, is stamped with
severity.”* Well might such a man write, that
“ his reflections at times were so powerful , that he
envied the situation of the most menial servant , who is
fret from the sacred and solemn responsibility of the
care of immortal soub.”^
We have now come to record the arrival erf the
first dignitary of the church of England. The
fenerable archdeacon, Thomas Hobbs Scott, seems
to have been in earlier life a wine merchant. He
was then attached, in capacity of secretary, lo Mr.
Bigge, when sent out on a commission from govern-
ment lo investigate the state of the colony. On
their return to England, it was thought advisable
to recommend the formation of an archdeaconry
In the colony, which should be supported by a
salary of £2OOO per annum. This being approved,
Mr. Scott was ordained, and received the appoint-
ment, the salary, a seat in the executive and le-
gislative councils of the colony, and, from a res-
pectable body of speculators, a directorship in the
Australian Agricultural Company, which had re-
ceived a grant from the Crown of one million of
our colonial acres.
The archdeacon arrived in May, 1825, and his
arrival was presently announced by proclamation
“to off his Majesty’s subjects.” In the course of
tins year, we find ten chaplains of the Anglican
church “ performing spiritual duties at only ten
* (Tifp’a Re part, p. 91.
i Latter of Mr.Mtraden to Governor qneted in Wentworth, roL 1.


stations.”* In the month after his arrival, the
archdeacon held his visitation, and in the course
of his pastoral charge gave intimation that public
provision was about to be made for Protestant par
rochial schools exclusively. The soul of the one
solitary Catholic chaplain was. already warned of
what this portended to his people. There was the
living instance of the orphan schools dwelling be*
fore his mind. From these, die government had
expressly excluded both him ami his religion.
Yet were they half filled with Catholic children;
with the children he had himself baptized, and for
whom he was responsible before God; the children
of poor, unhappy, comfortless and defenceless pri-
soners, who looked to him for help in this their
greatest distress, and he could give them none—*
who saw their children taken from their arms by
that authority which could alone protect their
natural rights, and delivered into the clerical hands
of those under whose superintendence they were
brought up in a hatred of that faith which gave to
the present misery of those parents hope, and in a
contempt of that worship which, amidst their trials
and punishments, alone gave them consolation and
a motive for endurance; whilst the affections of the
child were doomed to be for ever cut asunder
from those of the parental heart. What p. fountain
for the regeneration of the fallen parent, had those
feelings been allowed to continue flowing! It is
not a little remarkable that, at the very time the
Rev. Mr. Therry was urging, in his correspon-
dence with government on the subject of these
schools, the disastrous results of their prototype,
the charter schools of which had recently
been declared, by the commissioners appointed by
his Majesty’s government to investigate their state,
to be but nurseries, in a great measure, of disease,
ignorance, and cruelty; it now turns out, that those
* Bwtw, p. 10.


▼ery orpbio schools which wore the subject -of
Mr. Therry’s anxiety, and the allusion t» which
was taken as a* offence, were in-many respects-in
a similar condition. The archdeacon haying made
his report to the governor that* on his arrival, “the
diMwsses m mhmiktnmr nwd horrid Hate of disease,
arimm from the neglect qf the masters of both insU~
Having before his eyes such a sample of the
results of this system of kidnapping from the help-
less members of Ins flock to swell the numbers of
the church of England, and seeing preparations
for extending a similar exclusive and catch-all sys-
tem through every parish in the colony; the
Catholic chaplain was bound, by all that is sacred
in the offce of his charge, to protect the Catholic
people by such lawful means as Providence placed
within, the limits of his power. He accordingly
announced, by an article in the Sydney Gazette,
his intention of immediately forming a Catholic
Education Society, open however to the members
of other communions, for the purpose of raising
private funds for the education of those children
who were placed beneath ins pastoral care. In
the same article, the. opportunity presented itself
of announcing his intention of applying for burial
grounds separated from those of the Anglican
church; assigning, at a principal reason, hie desire
of avoiding collisions and interferences with the
clergymen of another meed, one of whom had
more- th*n once requited the payment of burial
dncsi fob. Jfo informant of Catholics, where he had
not officiated; which, whan refesod by the friends
of thadeparted, had hawMameted by him in his
cnanckym a magistrates In concluding the ar*
Ikto'iMfe Therrydeemed it expedient!© remove
any possibility <of his by any
one* as acting sunder the Influence >«rf vindictive
* :&***!£ a*


feeling, by declaring his " unqualified respect*'’
for the clergy of the church of England, without
exception. It so happened that, by a blunder of
the printer, the word aagnatyM was curtailed of 11
syllable, and printed quakfisd; and, although the
editor of the Gazette apologized lor the blunder in
his next following number; although Mr. Theny
himself afterwards reprinted the article in its cor-
rect form; although he ever disclaimed, both the
sense conveyed in that typical error, and all inten-
tion of disrespect; although the article itself, on
examination, shows that it could never have been
written as at first printed: nevertheless, the article,
with its mechanical error unexplained, was sent
bjme to government, and Earl Bathurst was in-
duced to deprive the writer of his salary and of his
official appointment as colonial chaplain, making,
however, an offer of £3OO, to enable him to leave
the colony—an opportunity which Mr. Theny
considered it his duty to decline. That the ex-
pression of supposed disrespect against the Protes-
tant archdeacon and clergy was ue ground of this
act, I am able to verify from the terms of a com-
munication made by Earl Bathurst, on the subject,
to the Right Rev. Bishop Poynter. And although,
after this took place, Mr. Therry gave every ex-
Elanation, and took various occasions to express
is regret that any thing written by him should
have given offence to the archdeacon; notwith-
standing the well supportedpetitions that were
addressed in his favor; Mr. Therry was not again
restored to his chaplaincy and stipend, until the
year 1837. That considerable trouble had been
taken to impress the colonial office unfavorably in
his regard, appears evident: even so late as 1832,
there existed strange and erroneous notions in that
department, with respect to his character and con-
duct. This may explain to Mr. Burton, why he
did not find the Rev. Mr. Therry's name “ on the


estaUkhmont,” and may save him the expense of
anv farther fwwnfg.
Mr. Burton, to his conjecture respecting Mr.
Tneny, adds the observation in a note, that, from
the official returns of mnrmgre in 1828, “it appears
there was another priest in the colony from whom
no returns could be obtained.” Half a line thus
written by the judge in groping ignorance; often
calls for a whole page of information to set his
reader again on a right path. I need not remind
my cornual reader that the marriage of a prisoner
requires the written consent of the governor, and
that this emsent must be applied for in the ap-
pointed forms by the officiating clergyman. There
was but another Catholic clergyman in the whole
colony. Mr. Therry’s applications were either
passed over unnoticed, or he was told at length
that application must be made through the other
clergyman,as being a colonial chaplain. Being thus
considered by the government as non-existent, he
gave in no returns. During all this time Mr.
Therry found bars, and material obstacles of alt
kinds, opposed to his spiritual miniaterings. The
hospitals* the factory, the gads, and all government
establishments, wereclosed against him. The very
criminals* when condemned to death, in their
gMxment of bitterest ignominy, were obliged to pe-
tition die judge for the indulgence of being allowed
to receive the consolation of his ministry. When
access was even by this mediation obtained, he was
not uofreqnently subjected to interruptions and
annoyances from that class of subordinates who
instinctively know where they may play the inso-
lence of petty office, and with whom they are
allotted the privilege to presume.
When the sick m the hospitals of the interior
catted Air him by name, he received, officially, the
intelligence at the hands ef government, but no
rneane were attbrded to enable him to attend. These


he must himself provide. In the year 1630 tOtehd
Kirsons were condemned to death at Maitland,
r. Therry was called for. The distance was then
a laborious journey of 130 miles by land, through
an unfrequented country. He applied to govern-
ment for means to travel, by land or sea. It was
refused. He went the jouriley at his own coat.
In the course of the same year there were other
criminals sentenced to die at Bathurst. The ‘major
in command wrote through the military secretary,
requiring Mr. Tberry’s presence. Again he crossed
the mountains without aid. Often he had to visit
the dying by stealth. Many are the well remem-
bered instances of firmness and decision displayed
amidst his trials. He arrived one Sunday intoning
from Parramatta, after performing his first service
there, and found file temporary chapel, a govern-
ment bxylding, closed against him: he entered dt
the window. He was informed of one that was
dying in the hospital. At night he came to the
door: a sentry opposed his entrance. “ I must,**
said the man of zeal. “My orders; I cannot,** said
the soldier, crossing the entrance with bis weapon.
“ A Catholic is dying—l am the priest—his eternal
loss or salvation may depend on you—which is
your first duty?** The soldier clapped his musket
to his side, and the clergyman passed on. This
state of things continued until 1828, when Mr.
Therry received a letter from the colonial secre-
tary, granting him permission to attend dying Car
tholics in Sydney,
The walls of the only Catholic church bad now
stood for years without a roof; thMMpmise and
pledge of government made in 1822 remaining un-
fulfilled. Persons were sent so far as to the Mau-
ritius and Calcutta to collect aids of money, but,
owing to accidents, with small success. In 1828,
to a renewed application made to government, Mr.
Therry receive! the reply, that “ government had


not the means(although, this very year, £11,600
were issued for the use of the ehurch corporation)
—but “ that government would do what was abso-
lutely necessary to put the building in a condition
for divine service...... whenever it may have the
means at disposal.” Tenders did accordingly reach
the colonial secretary’s office; but they were consi-
dered too high: and, although Mr. Tfaeiry made
SA offer to complete the building at a deduction of
£ISOO, the undertaking was abandoned. After the
passing of the Emancipation Act, a petition was
drawn up and presented to the governor and legis-
lative council, signed and supported by several of
the principal officers of government, by thirty-seven
magistrates, and 1400 merchants, land and house-
holders; in which petition they passed a high
eulogium on the Rev. Mr. Therry, repeated toe
assurance of his. well known expression yf regret
“ that any document published by him should have
given offence to the venerable archdeacon, and
prayed that bygone differences may be forgotten,
and that they may be no bar to such assistance as
his Excellency had power to influence, atld dispo-
sition to extend, towards the completion of the Ca-
tholic church; without which assistance, they
apprehended, that, instead of being, as it might be,
a temple of piety, it wiU become a rum*”
In the year 1828 we find fourteen chaplains of
the church of England, besides the archdeacon.
These were provided with eight churches and six
chapels, ana each chaplain was provided with a
residence. The population was now estimated by
census at 3M98 souls, of which 25,248 were given
as ProtesflH of all denominations, and 11,236
wore returned as Catholics.* In the course of the
following year three catechists were added, with
respectable salaries.
in 1825 it was reported that '* ten chaplains per-
[?]


£•
a.
d.
Church of England Clergy, including £1000 for building*
11.494
4
4
Krag'a School ....
1,405
0
0
Carried forward....
/12,899
4
4
formed service at ten stations. We are now informed
that “fourteen chaplains and three catechists attend
fifteen places of public worship, and officiate at
fifty-three services, seventeen of which it is not
possible to perform every Lord’s day.”* This short
step into favour would be almost inexplicable, were
it not for the fact that two Presbyterian and two
Catholic clergymen were now in the colony, and
performed the office of spurs to the lagging paces
of Anglican zeal.
“ Notwithstanding,'* ujs Mr. Burton, “ the archdeacon's urgent and frequent
appeals to all quarters for increased spiritual omens, this state of tbiagt eeadnued
with so little alleviation, that, in Septerober.lß33—(the population then amount!wr
to 60,794 souls, of whom, 16,151 were convicts, 43,095 being Protestants (of aU
denominations), and 17,238 as Roman Catholics)—-his excellency the governor,
in representing the religious means of the community to the right honorable the
secretary for the colonies, could only enumerate * an archdeacon, Ifteen ebqplsie*.
and four catechists,’ as belonging to the church of England; and that, with .ranpast
to places of worship, the church of England possessed at that lime, in Sydney and
within forty miles of it, seven stone or brick churches of moderate sin eng re-
spectable appearance, besides two others of the samp description in more remote
parts of the colony, and several less permanent buildings in various places."!
Meanwhile, how stands the Catholic communion,
of which Mr. Burton repiningly complains, as
being unfairly preferred by government before the
church of England ?
The Rev. Mr. Dowling had taken the place of
Mr. Power, who expired in 1830. The Rev. Mr.
M'Encroe was added in 1832, and the vicar-general
arrived in 1833. The vicar-general and two cler-
gymen, receiving small stipends each, comprised
the entire establishment. As to churches, there
were the walls of one in the act of being roofed at
Sydney, and the fragments of the walls of two
others in the interior; but not a single permanent
roof under which to shelter a congregation. The
relative cost of the establishments for this year was
as follows: —
• Burton, p. 10.
ll.*<Aad Dnpiicli of 8k R. Bowkc, of September, 1833.
E


jii 1 -• . .
<kk»ScMl
BiM|ht ferwaid... •
&
ill
4
0
4
o
JWhkl School*
I
4
tentg«Mai«( Tim
£40
o
o
Chnrch of England total....
£19,071
6
8
fhorchaf Scotland
£600
0
0
CMhetk Chaplains
450
0
0
CaltaOic Schools
350
0
0
Cathofic total ,
. £800
0
0
\ t
,1896 lines to the Chnrch and School Corporation
Ditto ditto
«"8B £
IMA TKM» .....
£. s.
d.
0
0
0
0
o
1831
1833
Ditto
Ditto
<|itto ......
14.0S0
0
n
ditto
Total expanse of seven yean....
0 10
The year which closes this narrative of the mid-
Wt ao& of the Australian church, closes also the
waastence of the church and school corporation, of
which w© shall speak more fully in the following
chapter. A gift of one-seventh of the territory of
the cohmy had been ceded to the church of mg-
hind, with the understanding that that church was
tu be of no further charge to the colonial revenue;
notwithstanding which, we find issued from the
treasury, during the period, the following annual
4tcms:~~
These handsome, round, unbroken numbers
were all the detail and explanation presented to
the public. As the Sydney Herald m its fourth
number observed —“ Into what channels the pre-
cious stream had flowed, or what barren land it
had watered with its golden current, was more
than any man could discover.” What monuments
were left behind by all this wealth, for the advan-
tage of posterity, appear to be equally uncertain.
The churches were mostly built in Governor Mac-
quarie's time. The only architectural achievement


of the corporation extolled by Mr. Burton is the
erection of “two chapels, with school-housesad-
joining, the former at the cost of £llO, the latter
at £319/’ What other occupations, except the
performance of service by ten chaplains at ten
stations, and afterwards fifty-three services by
fifteen chaplains at fifteen places of worship—some
three and a half services per chaplain per week—
seems to be equally unknown. A principal em-
ployment seems to have been in the calling of the
apostles before they caught men. They stood on
the shores of this rolling Factolus, threw their
apostolic nets at the proper season, and landed
their draughts of gold fish. The contemporary
thoughts and feelings of the colonists on the
ject are best expressed in their own langaattfe.
“ It does appear more than inconsistent,’* says me
Sydney Herald, of May 9th, 1831, “that the Ca-
tholic, with 12,000 of his profession, and other
sects, with perhaps an equal number of individuals
of their respective persuasions, should feel satisfied
with £SOO per annum amongst the whole , whilst
the Established church should be paid one pound
per head for her flocks, and receive an enormous
grant of one-seventh of the territory besides.”


CHAPTER III.
THE CORPORATION.
The vast territory comprised within the boun-
daries ofKew South Wales is graphically deleted
by Judgeßurton as a “royal domain,” lying at
the disposal of The one-seventh of
which* m extent and value, being given, in all
fa^ure-timesj to the clergy of a church whose com-
punioa is a diminishing minority of the'people,
which the same writer describes as being
“easy to be,spared,” and as “an offering which
cost the royal donor nought.”t
Mif A bad, ease is commonly a long one: I shall be
Jbrief than the judge on this subject. We
have seen that the colony had not been more than
iwo years established when, for the support of the
church of jßggland, a regulation was madeaUotting
409 acres in each township for the maintenance of
a clergyinanpand.aoo acres for the maintenance of
a schoolmaster. This regulation was continued
and renewed up to the year 1826 ; the clergyman
and schoolmaster not the less continuing to enjoy
their salaries, houses, and allowances. At this
period, its operation ceased; and, in its place, “as
a provision towards the maintenance and support
oltheEstablished church of England in the colony,”
in addition to all lands already set apart for educa-
tion, and all such colonial revenue as had been
already set apart for the same purpose, and all
glebe land formerly set apart for me support of the
church clergy —his Majesty, George the Fourth,
by power ofletters patent, requires and enjoins the
• P. 19.
« p.mk


governor “to set apart in each and every county,
hundred, &c., into which the colony might be di-
vided, a tract of land, comprising one-seventh pert
in extent and value of all the lands in each and
every such county, to be thenceforward called and
known by the name of the clergy and school estates
of such countyand the governor is required to
make grants thereof to a corporation, wfaicn corpo-
ration is to consist of the governor, die chief justice,
members of legislative council, archdeacon, and
nine senior chaplains. This corporation liras em-
powered to sell one-third of the whole, and to cul-
tivate, lease, or mortgage, the remainder; the met
proceeds to be appropriated—one half to the im-
provement of the said lands, and the motion of
churches, parsonages, and school houses ; the other
equal half to be applied to the support of the dergy
and schoolmasters of the church of England.
The establishment to be provided for, at 'the
period of this royal donation, consisted of an arch-
deacon, twelve chaplains, two orphan schools, and
fourteen day schools.
How this vast scheme of church aggrandisement,
unparalleled in the world’s history, would have
been ultimately found to operate: how this mon-
strous monopoly of the soil, one-seventh in exterit
and value, in one continuous and unbroken block,
of each individual county —spreading, likeßriareus,
from one body and one will, a hundred strong and
mighty arms, over all the face of the country —how
this would have affected the interests and the in-
dustry of the farmer, the grazier, and the merchant:
how the continually increasing weight and accu-
mulating influence of such a corporation, wfaidh
must aeon have become an exclusive, a close-shift,
and a secretly working ecclesiastical oligarchy,
not merely claiming a tithe of produce in this place
and that, but one-seventh of the firm and solid
earth—to which more from the remainder must


have continually alluviated, whilst aU that lay along
its endless boundaries would beat its mercy—what
weight and influence, 1 saw, such an ecclesiastical
oligarchy must ultimately have exercised; on one
aide, against the liberty and independence of the
Civil government, and, on the ether side, against the
freedom and the rights of the people: above all,
how, under the pressure of such an all-pervading,
iUknitable, and irresistible domination—and the
more wealthy the more corrupt it must have be-
come* the more sacred in its own self-assumption,
the more blind-sighted and terrible in its zeal—how,
tinder such a church domination, the unfortunate
Catholic, and equally unfortunate Dissenter, would
he reduced to a worse than Egyptian bondage:
all this, with various other vistas of but gloomy
promise, that seem opening up to contemplation in
these temporal regions of spiritual dominion, belong
father to the pursuits of the politician, the econo-
mist; andthe philosopher, than to the consideration
of the present writer. A clergyman may, how-
ever, be allowed to observe, that the power of this
corporation chnrch would not ultimately become a
spiritualising influence: it would be temporal and
earthly, not heavenly. Separated from the people
by indepcn dence, raised above them by affluence,
enjoying die luxuries of life by right, and assimi-
lated into an exclusive society; whilst the good
things of this world, combined with the natural
desire to advance their families, would supply con-
tinue temptations to ambition and intrigue—such
an incorporate clergy would possess but little in
commdn with the feelings, the wants, the cares, and
the thoughts, of the great mass of the population.
Their own connexions would be proud of their al-
liance* but between the clergy and the people the
mutual relations would beat points of repulsion, and
teota&symbathy and attraction. Jibr would the sys-
tem teaditfae mosl eflectaally* at last, to secwro the


continual increase of their numbers. vWewftH
know how corporate bodies work withpensooal
interests. The fewer the numbers the greater jthe
share of spoil. Each additional claimant demands
a new sacrifice from the possessor. Then* again,
we should have gradually created a sort of clerical
caste, a body of Christian brahmins, wins their
mortification and self denial. Valuable appointr
merits would soon be found descending in fcmilwa
We should have a line of priesthood almost as oerr
tain in its course as a succession of title,
entail of property. I may be reminded of Aaron
and his race; but be it also remembered, that
when, in the old law, the Almighty himself, ap-
pointed a lineal priesthood, for that very reason
he also forbad them to hold territorial possessions*
He gave them residences, but made them depoudr
ant for support on the contributions of the people; ■
In a return of colonial revenue which was laid
before the House of Commons, in December, 1630,
after observing that additional instructions under
the sign manual, of date June 13th of that year,
had directed this corporation to be dissolved, the
royal commissioners add the following remarks:—
“ Wc are sorry that this plan of providing for the clergy and the schools
yet been attended with success, nor had the effect of superseding the necessity of
grunting pecuniary allowances for their maintenance and support, nor cnn we
entertain the hope that the present stipends and allowances can in fntiun he
dispensed with.
“ No adequate funds for the proper cultivation of the estates a# sat apart am
provided, and it can never be expected that the clergy, having no ysmintef
interest in the improvement of them, should, at their own cost and risk, undertake
so unprofitable an adveatare: the reserves are conaeqneatly suffered to lenuin in
an unproductive stele, while settlers, desirous of acquiring wad, are drivsa U) seek
locations remote from the improved districts.
*' This circumstance, as we have learned frem the best authority, has had gnat
influence in encouraging the establishment of various distant settlements, epon
the inconvenience and disadvantage of which we shall lake the liberty to remark
mem particularly hereafter;”
The commissioners then report the expense of
the corporation church establishment, for Ihe
year 1828, as amounting to the total sum of
£22,406 3s. sjd.; of which amount the sum of
£19,800 was advanced out of the colonial revenue,


“to pay the stipends of the clergy, and the sx-
penscs of the school establishments.” The popu-
lation is given from a census taken in November of
the same year as 36,508 souls, of which 25,248 are
returned as the number of Protestants of all deno-
minations, 11,236 (not much short of the one half)
as Catholics, 05 as Jews, and 10 as Pagans. In
addition to these sums, there ware added £4OO for
the support of two Presbyterian clergymen, and,
for the Catholic population of nearly one half, and
certainly out-numbering the members of the
church of England, the sum of £l5O for one cler-
gyman, and £6B 3s. for the support of one school.
During five years of the reign of the corporation
it has been shown that, independent of the funds
of the corporation accruing from sale and rent of
land, and of items paid out of a parliamentary
grant towards the support of the church during the
year 1826, the church of England cost the colonial
government the sum of £91,569 17s. 4d.; whilst
the church of Scotland, during the same period,
cast the colony £1,966 6s. Bd., which is less than
one-fiftieth part of the cost of the church of Eng-
land; the cost of the Catholic church for the
same period reaching a still less amount.
From the same parliamentary papers of colonial
revenue, of date Bth December, 1830, we may ob-
serve, in further illustration of the state of things
then in existence, that the whole number of the
congregations of the church of England in the
colony were given as being estimated at 6,000 per-
sons; and that the] entire sum received in the
colony for “ church pew rents,” as accounted for
to government, reached no more than the amount
of £2BO 12s. 3d.
It was at the close of 1829 that the corporation
received an intimation of his Majesty's intention to
revoke [the charter; and all its proceedings were
suspended. Mr. Burton complains bitterly of the


difficulties encountered by the corporation (hiring
the period of its short history, and speaks highly
of its intrinsic efficiency and management, whilst
others, as well informed, tell another story. No
lands, he observes, were granted until the begin-
ning of 1829; yet they possessed the old glebes,
&c.; and in the course of that year alone were
granted the number of 435,765 acres, of which
they rented part, and sold to the quantity of 15,993
acres 34 perches.
Mr. Burton is high in praise of “ his most gNH
cious Majesty King Geoige the Fourth,” as being
the “ royal donor” of this corporation, giving the
merit oi its^revocation to “ his Majesty’s successor,
King William the Fourthand he then proceeds
to compare the policy of the two monarch*. The
judge seems totally to forget, that, as he has him-
self stated, the first intimation of his Majesty's
intention of dissolving the corporation reached the
colony as early as 1829, and that William the
Fourth did not succeed to the throne until the
middle of the following year; that, in short, the
intention of Hs dissolution originated from “ the
royal donor” himself. With this remark, I shall
close my account of the church and school cor-
poration.


CHAPTER IV.
THE BURDEN OF JUDGE BURTON’S BOOK.
From tie year 1833 to the year is the pe-
riod which, according to the lamentations of Judge
Burton, exhibits the Anglican church in the nadir
of her desolation, and the church Catholic in her
jritatt of favor and prosperity.
• After citing the celebrated despatch of Sir
Richard Bourke, of 30th December, 1833, in which
h& excellency observes that —“ It cannot be said
tbM a provision for religious instruction has been
neglected in New South Wales, the large sums
voted annually for clergy and schools witnessing
the contrary, &c.,” Mr. Burton observes that—
"tmiahallearj rnr'ld ■«! nmwnrtn mjiiHiliti tir Ai number of tkuthof
Bmllri clnT t «i aMe that up to that tine any minister of religion had been ap*
psStoMmltortotoSlatd or Montoe Bay, the wretched inaates in captivity at which
sajlatmtoamaamed to upwards of 1308 psnsrw. Thalastnimhila coavidsrahls
additions were made, assisted by the governor, to the ministers of the Scotch chnrch
and the Roman Catholic etatgy; the estimates ft* the former eamaraaite heUw
ooMhird is.reomt pato for 1833 than it had beanie the previous year„ and
tor 4mm of dm latter asore than doable ; whilst provision was made In the esti-
mhtoa for 1834 for four miaisters of the Established church of Seotlaad, and tor a
Boss** Catholic vioaNgeneral and six Catholic chaplains; and the amount for
ri w l* was increased fourfold. In the estimate tor 1835 provision was
'it* tor the same nambsr of Pmabytorina ctorgy end Catholic deryy < aad in the
vflj—f«— for IsK> province was awda for tight miaisters of tiu Kstablishod
chnrch of Scotland, and for a bishop of the chnrch of Rome, a vicar-general, and
six Catholic chaplains; whilst mo dditim was mads to to mm tor pf Hrrgymtm qf
ikt ekunk tf Emglnd until tto yt or 1837, end mm mUkmmi or reran winded hy
tkt rovomor of too colony until tfUr tho posstof of tto act, vts.,m Voattotor,
1836. Aad in Bayard teat ciwamstsara took ptama which was aottood as tho
report of tho Diacswa committre, vix., tin wtara of the Bishop of Australia to hia
ctarn in 1838 without aa additions! dmgjaum—* which was owing,’ stota foe
«to foe retosil of hit Majesty’s |ovsramenl to aaactioa ary allowance
towards the expaire of the passage, or uncaring a residaaco or moans of sapport
for any additional dtogjaMto*”*
This passage condenses much of the substance
of Mr. Burton’s work. The same things are re-
peated and re-transposed to Very weariness*. A list
• Fp. 1«3.


of the Catholic clergy who arrived within this
period is given twice over,* one who was pre-
viously appointed being added over and above,
and the catechists drawn up underneath, to in-
crease the formidable array. To augment still
farther the Catholkophohia of his Protestant reader
by the terror of this enumeration of Catholic
clergy, he throws the Presbyterian ministers into
their ranks—an office for which they will scarcely
thank him—and opposes this imaginary combina-
tion against the numbers of the church of
shewing, that in 1835 their united numbers were
within four of that church, whilst in 183 d the
equality was made complete.! His own church
he exhibits as a feeble band of fifteen clergymen,,
sinking under the weight of mental and bodily
toil, four only being covered with the honors of a
university degree, and three nearly worn out by
their exertions.:): And he introduces and encores
the scene of a bishop, after all his labors and re-
monstrances in England, returning to the colony,
alone, mortified, and desolate, “to preside over a
church destitute of clergymen for the due and de-
cent performance of her ministrations. ”||
Let us now clear out the facts from that confusion
and entanglement into which Mr. Burton has
thrown them ; reduce the repetitions of Catholic
numbers, which served a purpose, to their single
reality; take things in their time and order, and
understand the case.
In 1833 there were on the establishment of the
church of England in the colony, an archdeacon,
fifteen chaplains, three catechists, the head of the
king’s school, and a missioner to the aborigines;
whilst the Catholic establishment consisted of a
vicar-general and two chaplains. The very clerks
and pew-openers of the church of England—a class
of persons described by Mr. Bigge a few years be-
• Pp. 67, 107.
t P. 104.
* P. 64.
I) Pp. 66, ion.


fore as being all prisoners—received morefrom
government by £339 than the whole of the Cathodic
clergy. The demand for clergymen in the colony
is not to be estimated by the numbers of the popu-
lation, but by the extent of country over which
those numbers are spread. Deduct the Dissenters
from Mr. Burton's numerical demonstrations of
the wants of the church of England, and the
Catholic population is not much short, if any thing,
of the numbers of the Anglican church, whilst
they are spread over an equal extent of territory.
The want of Catholic clergymen was urgent, imme-
diate, and unquestionable. Great social evils had
accumulated from this want. There were not
sufficient, by the utmost activity, to baptize the
children, celebrate marriages, ana attend the dying.
The public voice, and the entire press, cried out at
the period in conformation of the fact. In the view
of all this, the vicar-general petitioned the govern-
ment for four additional clergymen, and the appli-
cation passed the council without a dissenting
voice, and with the general approbation of the
public. The clergymen only applied for in 1634
arrived at the close of 1836, ana are the very same
persons provided for in 1836 t there were no others.
The adoitional numbers from 1833 to 1836 con-
sisted, in all, of the bishop and three clergymen,
and of these three one never entered the colony,
it being found nccessarythat the Rev. Mr. Gotham
should remain in Van Dieman’s Land, which was
without any pastor, whilst, of the two chaplains
who arrived, one was unfortunately killed by an
accident whilst travelling in the course of the fol-
lowing year. With respect to the four catechists,
who are paraded through half Mr. Burton’s book,
and their names drawn up in a list twice over, in
order to increase the show of our numerical force,
one unfortunately died on the passage; and, as to
the other three, they pair off, in a comparison of


numbers, with the four catechists of the church of
England, with the disadvantage on their side of
never having received or looked for any salary or
support from government.
With respect to the church of England during
this period, although Mr. Burton declares empha-
tically, and in italics, that “no addition was mads”
nevertheless, we have the arrival of the Rev. Mr.
Styles in 1833. He was appointed, it is said, to
“a station which then became vacant;” but the
clergyman he succeeded neither died nor left the
colony; the circumstance of vacancy was unantici-
pated. Again, Mr. Rusden arrived in 1834 , but
he, says Mr. Burton, Supplied the place of an-
other clergyman.” How so ? The judge has else-
where himself shown the fact, that Mr. Rusdetds
was a new appointment, to a newly formed district,
—that Maitland never had a clergyman before. At
the close of 1836, after all the judge’s complaints
against the government for undue preference shown
to the Catholic portion of the community, how
stands the actual result? There have arrived in
the colony during the period, a Catholic bishop
and two chaplains; whilst a bishop has been also
appointed, and two chaplains have arrived, for the
church of England: the relative numbers of the
two churches being—a bishop, sixteen chaplains,
the master of the King’s School, and one miseioner
to the aborigines, of the church of England; and a
bishop, vicar general, and four chaplains, of the
church Catholic.
With respect to the two clergymenwhom our inde-
fatigable antagonist represents as disappearing from
the estimates, but as being still in the colony (a style
of false insinuation which pervades the book),
the one was the Rev. Mr. Cotham, who remained
in Van Diemen’s Land; of the other, it is strange
that Judge Burton, after twice writing his name,
should forget the lamentable death of the Rev. Mr.


whict causedat the time a greatsezh*
aation in Sydney, and whose remains were followed
to the grate by 7600 persons—by far the largest
assemblage ever known in New South Wales.
When Mr. Burton and the Diocesan Committee
state that the Protestant bishop returned alone,
Costing to the refusal of Ms Majesty* government to
sanctum mams of support for any additional clergy-
menj' they are guilty of injustice towards his
Majesty's government in the very face of the docu-
ments before them. The application was made by
a memorial from the Society for Promoting Chris-
tian Knowledge; and the answer of Lord Glenelg,
throughthe pen of Sir Gapge Grey, is dated De-
cember 2, 1836. In this letter Lord Glenelg
expresses himself deeply sensible of the want of
clergymen; participates in the feelings of the me-
morialists ; has no doubt of the necessity of imme-
diate efforts to remedy the evil; and is prepared to
act under a sense of that necessity. “ But,” he
says, <# the actual measures requisite to meet the
exigency can be efficiently or usefully arranged
only by the governor and legislative council of the
colony, as the body to whom matters of internal
legislation have been, in the first instance, con-
fided/’* The case, then, is clear. So far from
being a “ refusal,” there was an offer of “ Sanction
but the case being one of application for colonial
money, must originate in the colony. And, accord-
ingly, the memorial is transmitted by Lord Glenelg
to the colonial government, and is supported by his
recommendation. It arrived whilst the Church
Act was in agitation, and was amply met by the
passing of that act. The whole sum, therefore, of
the minister pf state’s offence, as he stands accused
by Mr. Burton and the Diocesan Committee, lies
in his having refused, in this case, to expend the
miftiey of the cotanists until the vote had been ori-
Pkpen, on lUlifion* Intftmetion hi AntMln, llth Much, 1187.


ginated in die colony. This principle of cMuloct
equally explains the faet about which Mr. Burton
has conjured up so much difikrulty—of the Catholic
bishop having received the small stipend of £l5O
Eer annum at the time of his appointment fronfthe
ome government, although it was raised, onhls
arrival in the colony, to £5OO. ' Money had beeti
voted by the council for chaplains only, the ap*
pointment of a Catholic bishop not having been
expected by that authority. There being nctfaidg
more voted, the bishop could only receive a chap*
tain’s salary until further provision was made for
the case by the governor and council* with *hom
all such matters originate; as was stated by Lord
Glenelg in the case of increasing the Protestant
clergy. This was explained to Dr. Folding by
Lord Aberdeen at the~time; and it was intimated
that, as a matter of course, the bishop would be
duly provided for.
Mr. Burton’s complaint about there being no
clergyman appointed to Norfolk Island or Moreton
Bay is unjust against three parties—against the
home government, against the colonial government,
and against the Protestant bishop of Australia.
As to Moreton Bay, it was at that time contem-
plated to break up the settlement, and the prison-
ers were being gradually removed to Norfolk
Island ; and, with respect to a provision for Norfolk
Island, it will be seen by the despatch of Lord
Glenelg of 30th November, 1835, that so early as
February, 1832, Sir Richard Bourke had stated to
the home government the necessity of placing a
clergyman there: chat, in December of the same
year Earl Ripon had suggested the placing of one
of the colonial chaplains in the settlement: that
this could not be carried into effect—owing, I may
add, to the well-known fact that none of the chap-
lains would engage to go to Norfolk Island. The
noble lord continues to state that, up to the period


of his letter, though he had used every endeavour,
he could find no clergyman of the church of En-
gland, qualified for the office, who was willing toun-
dertake it; am} that the in England,
with all his tfnxie*y oil tbesohject, “had been
equally unfortunatethat “ he therefore felt it his
duty to enquire in other quarters, and hoped to ob-
tain a clergyman of some other denomination.” In
Alfoifv the fetilt was not (as Mr. Barton ddihOmibfO
gbverfamerit, which had shttfvh f Very
fiM'ipthfii batten; but in the ffictthat notfa ttn&e
OMMyrnaSr of the church of England cohl#
Him, dither* In dr out of the colony, ‘trhd codldbfe
hsotfght tb * encounter the supposed
Nqrfidk Island.”


CHAPTER V.
THE CHURCH ACT.
One of the titles to undying memory won by Sir
Richard Bourke, presents itself in his having pmced
the religious liberty of the people of this country
upon the basis of perfect equality. Tfan charter
which constitutes tnis great principle the law of
the land is called the Church Act, and was passed
on the 20th of July, 1836.
The governor having observed that the inhabi-
tants of this colony were of different religious
persuasions: that, besides the numerous followers
of the church of England, there were large bodies
of Catholics; and a smaller proportion, but of a
respectable class, of Presbyterians of the church of
Scotland; besides Dissenters from the church of
England of many different denominations: that,
for administering the offices of religion to these
three denominations of Christians, tne provision
made by government was most unequal and dispro-
portionate in its distribution, and not generally
acceptable to the colonists, who provided the funds
thus distributed: that the magnitude of the sums
annually granted for the support of the church of
England in New South Wales was very generally
complained of: having been addressed in council
by a petition prepared at a public meeting, and
very numerously signed, praying for a reduction of
this expenditure: observing, further, that in a new
country, where persons of all religious persuasions
are invited to resort, it would be impossible to
establish a dominant and endowed church without
much hostility, and great improbability of its be-
G


coming permanent: perceiving that the inclination
qt coronists, which kept pace with the spirit .of
was averse to such an institution;
apd tearing the interests of religion would he pre-
jndiced by ifs/esttslisupeß£ that, it, on
tihj, (Contrary, airport were given as required to
cjury one of the mvasions of cnristians
indifierentiy, and the management of the temporal-
iticfbf their churches lei.*to themselves; the public
tfearipyhught be in tune relieved from a coarider-
iddacharge, and, whatia of much greater import-
wtce, the people wopld become snore attached to
sheir and be morewilling to listen to,
asai obey* the voice of their respective pastors:
on the ground of these views, winch I have given
tfjCtt**wordscfSr Rickard which it
.he (Hfiailt to find anything more wise in
policy, more ample in extent and depth of consider-
ation or mere phUosophiclia reasoning and oppli>
cahilkyto tite case in hand—the governor, in nis
dissolution hyorder of the
ging mcaumfilof the Church and School Corpo-
ration, to recommend to ins Majesty’* government
an aowaugemept such as was calculated to give
genial eatkfeotion to the colonists, by “placing
npoa an equitable footing the eupport winch the
principal Christian churches m the oetaayigighc,
be the present, claim from thepublic purse.”
The changes widen took place in his
Mcqcaty’s govemmeat inter the arrival home of Sir
aichard Bouxke’s despatch, and die importance of
e subject, delayed the repfty of the minister for
the colonies until the 30th of November, 1831. ■ Jn
pi despatph Lord Gleaelg expressed hi* own and
tifegnTirniywittV acknowledgment to Sir Richard
tp /which the British ministry were disposed to
attach great importance. The general principle


laid down by degoveroor was itibbdy aMMttj!
itedfetails were* Me to the tegislterepoteii iMw
the colmtyt
rapidly multiplying' under me# pnodlkd< diirah&
stances, tedoomprisiag greatatefehuiwdT Viitefe s
teriamr aud Rotten Catholic** aswfefi eft iut«{bm
of the church of England, iris evident;** sdyi>titt
nobleldrd, *thatthe attempt toselok dnytee
chutch an the exclusive object efpublic cudoteteuti
evdn if it were advisable m tmr ter KBtejffi
would not be long tolerated,” * TOteiywft
proposed nde,” the minister ef atete adte ■ cflHHb
be contested. The amount of
is tobethe condition and meatete of jroWifeAh)!**'
Founded on this principle, an ad
by the governor intothe fegldutirre' osdndf add
passed without opposition, of which the JbUiftdtyfc
is the tenor and substance :
Entitled, 7 William IV., No. 3. An acttopfnc
mdte the tedding of churches and chapels; ana to*
provide for the maintenance of mndstersof i retlg|te
in New South Wales*—Passed 2S*h Jufr, 1630. ‘ J
It is the advancement or
tiafc religion and die promotion of good
that whenever a sum not less than £3ob shotthave
beefc raised by private contribution, and apdHed
towards the building of a church, chap#, '
dwelling, the governor may, with advice Ofthe
executive council, by warrant wider bis hand,
issue from the colonial treasury in aid of the un-
dertaking a sum not exceeding the' said prtetfe
contribution, the whole sum so issued teany shigfe
case not to exceed £IOO6.
2nd. Whenever it is shewn that there is resident;
within a reasonable distance of the proposed chdftH
or chapel, a population of 160 adnte wha sI&H
havesubscribed a declaratkm oftbofr teenttei'to
attend the aforesaid church or chapel, the gOVefnoC,
wife his executive council, is empowered to issue


a yearto the minister thereof:
he shalltosuea salary
otf>£ls6 a . jresir * if 600 adults, then £3OO a 1 year,
which is the highest stipend to be asued.
the nuaher of parous be less than 100,
pistipeudef £loft may be issued under certain
c^peobdeiroumstaaers.
,»i4th. ilf the numbers subscribing shall have in-
creased since, and the stipend issued is less than
£2oo* on showing this, the stipend may be also
increased up to that amount
>*£&, Where there is reasonable cause for de-
laying' toe erection of a permanent church or
chapel, and:a sum m not less than. £SO has been
Cmsed by private contributions towards toe main-
tenance of a minister, toe jgovemor end executive
ooimcttmay issue a sum equal in amount, not
ddoeeding £IOO, towards the maintenance of said
minister*: *
uaOki Once in every year proo£ such as may be
required,- shall be produced to toe governor and
executive council, of sufficient and regular per-
formance of the duties in respect of which stipends
are Msued failing :which, such stipend may be
withdrawn tor such time as shall seem proper.
v ftoi. 1 not lem than three nor more than
&ee,afaall be nominated by contributors, and the
dumb or chcpel andlaad be to them conveyed in
trusty nnd to them shall be issued the aforesaid
studs ih cod af their erection.
u«hv <Said trustees may receive gifts of land, &c.,
fdrehurchjiurposes.
Mhi Kot less than one-sixth part of said churches
onldhlpofa shall be free sittingß for the use of toe
poarJCfi f In-- .*
chuiches erected fend clergy idea appointed prior
i ’ ,
These are the contents of that act of which Mr.


Burton and his particular friends
act to the provisions of whack they are indebted
for oil that activity, all that increase of clergymen;
and all that money, whether privately ooilected br
publicly contributed, to the church of Englandy of
which heboasts and glories. He has shown
under the operation of tiiis act, thirty clefgymei*
have already been added to his communion. He
anticipates an increase in the same ratiofor several
years to come. If the church of England can no#
collect her £IOOO per annum for general
and her £13,500* per annum towards her public
worship, whilst this, instead of diminishing, bas in-
creased the issue from the colonial treasury on her
behalf; if, in addition to all this, she can add
£3OOOI collected in England from private re-
sources, and her £4ooo| from public bodies?: if
religious societies in England are prepared to add
their £SO per annum and their gratuities of £l5O
besides, || in addition to the provision of the Church
Act; what has the colonial church of England; to
thank for all these good tilings but that very act?-
Who ever thought of contributing one farthing of
their fortune towards the erection or maintenance
of a Protestant church in the colony before 1 Or,
even when possessed of one-seventh of the territory,
who thought of obtaining any considerable increase
to their clergy until the Church Act awoke them ?.
And, if this act has likewise introduced a consider*
able number of Presbyterian, and some few Catho-
lic clergymen; it is to this very circumstance that
the Anglican church owes her newly kindled zeal,
and that energy in collecting money of which Mr.
Burton is so proud. What would, or could, the
Diocesan Committee have done, had there hot ex-,
isted a Catholic church against which to beat their
heated heads? Where would Mr. Burton.have
found or invented materials for a book? What
• Butti, p. 71.
f P. 76.
t P. 67.
1| P. 76.


a&e* the, Anglican clergy, almost any were, Billed
iiii ife pteesenccof that church against which itis
the end of their lives and die object of tfadr reti-
Sit to protest? Ht>w can Protestaritiamat all
the church Cathbfe? how can she
protest against nothing For want of fuel fervor
<bcs. Ii lh«i the <uhiwch Act has of necessity
gs&n some aid to the Catholic church— Burton
numbers us at twenty-one, Lis own church at forty-
three, and the Presbyterian at twenty-three* eleiv
gymen,bosideßrDis9enters—oixty-sixPrOtestairt mi-
nisters against twenty-ooe Cathoßc; if the Catho-
Iks church, being established, has, in combiaaticr*
with theChorch Act, awakened all this fervor, in-
spfredall this church of England energy, brought
together all tMs money, introduced all these cler-
gfmeai, raised or commenced so many Protestant
cnterchefc; if they arc alleged by Mr. Burton and
his phrity asithe ground* of all their further claims
add cijfccthtioas v if these are the inspiring moaves
aft dll.their hnpeak ; If we are so useful to the ad-
vancement o« their canals; why all this ire and
indignation against us, except that it serves those
Very purposes ? if, as Mr. Burton says, they alone
ate'nch,albnedf station, alone honorable ineu,
alone innumerable, alone the holders- of a good
chbse; why all this fear and apprehension, all this
Ihborhnd exertion, all this writing and “ contest,”
to use the judge’s word, for tbepurjioae of annihi-
lating nothing?
;.r ;
Mr. Burton and his friends may affect to account
us, whilst they strain every exertion of their power
in pyopf of the contrary* we hiyye no such tear or
ajppvehenswn with. respect {q them. We shall
* P. 112.


follow out our duties with our people just asgffpo
other communion existed; ana we would advise
the clergy of other oommumohs, as they tofluje
peace, to do the same in their Own regard, end wot
to trouble us. But, if they will assail us unpro-
voked, with books, and judges, and letters, and
sermons, and speeches, we only hope that the An-
glican clergy will continue to increase and multiply.
The more they muster, the more promising ouf
cause. For, either your numbers give you little to
do, and provoke reflection that way; or some of you
are taken with fits of an intermittent zeal, the symp-
toms of which manifest themselves in an assault
upon our church; and this invariably terminates in
awakening thought, directing enquiry, and sending
converts to the nearest priest, in numbers propor-
tionate to ,the length and strength of the attack.
Experience enables us to calculate these effects
witn an almost mathematical precision. Nowhere
does Catholicity so flourish as in the neighbourhood
of an anti-Catholic church clergyman. How,
then, can we regret these outbreaks, except for the
sake of the sufferer ? And for him we cheerfully
make much and ready allowance; for we know
how difficult it is for the most quiet and peaceable
to resist the temptation occasionally. The “ dam-
nation of popery,” which was Sterne’s Cheshire
Cheese , is found to be such an excellent household
article, to which he can always apply himself when
he has nothing else prepared:—
"Just,” said the Rev. Rector of Coxwold, '< as when I have little to eat, or
little to give away. I have always recourse to my Cheshire Cheese; just so do I
act when I have little to say, or little to give my people—/ Save recourse to the
abuse of popery. Hence, I call it my Cheshire Cheese. It has a twofold advantage;
it costs me very little, and 1 find by experience that nothing satisfies so
well the hungry appetites of my congregation. They always devour it greedily,
and return home gratified with the repast, and extolling the liberality of lie
donor.”
Whether, therefore, we consider the present
numbers of the Anglican clergy, their funds, their


churches, or their exertions, they are bound In a
debt of everlasting gratitude to the passing of the
Cbubch Act,and to the establishment in this colony,
thereby, of the Catholic church.


CHAPTER VI.
THE ESTABLISHMENT.
After perusing the last chapter, the present
Mould be unnecessary, were it not that in the
minds of some persons there still clings a sort of
prestige about the image of the Anglican church,
as if, even at this hour, she were, in fact and right,
the dominant and exclusive establishment of the
colony. This, like other idle superstitions, it
is our duty to remove. This duty is at present
the more pressing, as Judge Burton and some of
his party are labouring to hold up and cherish
the foolish, erroneous, and exploded notion by
the powers of quibble, exercised in the use of
certain old words M r hich belong of right to another
state of things in another country, and of which
time and events have changed the sense—such
as, “ constitution,” “ lan ,” “ church of England,”
“national church,” “church and state,” &c., &c.
Now, all this mystification is easily cleared off by
just letting in a little light, which will enable us to
see distinctly the actual state and condition of
rhingg.
Mr. Burton affirms that “ the dissolution of the
Church and School Corporation was followed by a
revolution in the constitutional principles of the
colony." t As, liOMever, this “revolution” was
brought about by the operation of la\v, and not of
violence; as it was a result of the combined and
unanimous act of the British government and the
* I ought to express my acknowledgment*, in this chapter, to aa able
pamphlet, entitled, " Femarki on tht Slatui of the Preihylerian church, iu ill
Hritith coloniet," by Mr. Tames Thomson, of ffobart Town.
♦ P.
If


colonial legislature; as it was received at its pro-
mulgation by the general acclamation of the peo-
ple ; we thank the learned judge for his phrase,
receive his admission, and beg to call in question
the feet, requesting him, in explanation, to define
the words revolution and colonial constitution.
The judge next presents us with a body of
sophistry, dressed in a'masquerade of law, with a
view of showing that this so called revolution
could not by any right of possibility take place.
Let us briefly define, state the question, and ana-
lyse its contents. An established church is, 1
conceive, a church which is recognised, in its pos-
sessions and privileges, by the temporal govern-
ment of the state. The word established qualifies
a church in its civil, legal, and external relations,
in contradistinction to its spiritual and internal
attributes. Amongst those internal attributes are
to be found ordination and jurisdiction, or mission :
amongst those outward relations which mark a
union with the state are to be found recognition,
protection, and support by the civil government in
temporal possessions and rights therefrom arising
This distinction between the outward and civil
connexion, and the intrinsic and spiritual power of
a church, is essential to the understanding of the
present question. The church of England derives
such ordination and jurisdiction, or mission, as she
possesses from herself; but that civil recognition
and maintenance, by which alone she is established ,
is derived from the law of the land. The question,
as regards this colony, stands not as Mr. Burton
has put it—ls the church of England the national
church ? Of the English nation it undoubtedly is,
by law, the exclusive establishment. But, is the
enurch of England the exclusively established
ohuich of the British empire? In this exclusive-
ness, is that church to be considered an unchange-
able part of the essence of the state, so that by law


it cannot be changed ? The very question involves
in itself a metaphysical contradiction, which anni-
hilates the judge's assertion ; but, waving this, let
us look at Mr. Burton's proofs. He begins with
the first chapter of Magna Charta, runs through
“ the various statutes made in favor of worship and
religion,” and comes to an appropriate close with
the Emancipation Act, backing this formidable
array of statutes with the common law’: from
w hich, I can only infer, that, as this national, con-
stitutional, and established church, described in
Mr. Burton's law, was Catholic at the time of
Magna Charta, by law ; schismatic in the reign of
Henry VIII., by law ; made thoroughly Protestant
in that of Edward VI., by law’; again Catholic at
the accession of Mary, by law’; once more Pro-
testant, by law, in the time of Elizabeth: Presby-
terian and Puritanical, by Act of Parliament,
during the commonwealth ; again Protestant, by
law’, at the restoration of Charles II.; and now
Prelatical and Presbyterian, two sisters side by
side, by law, since the Scottish union ; Mr. Bur-
ton's argument, if it proves any thing, proves that
this one, sole, national, constitutional, established,
and essentially exclusive church, has, at the least,
seven times changed the essential constitution of
the British empire during the course and progress
of Mr. Burton's argument. This unchangeublc
essence has, upon the learned judge's showing,
departed seven times from its constituted substance,
by the operation of its own law’s. Mr. Burton has
thrown a “ revolution'' amongst our ideas of a high
order indeed; for he not only destroys to their
base every extant system of philosophy, but up-
roots along with them the deeper foundations of
common sense.
But we have not yet narrow* d the tjiiestion to
its just precision. It stands thus : Js the church
of England, by virtue of the constitution, the es.-


clusively established church of the British co-
lonies? Passing over those cases in which the
establishment of the Catholic church was gua-
ranteed at the period of their cession; passing over
Canada, theMauritius,&c.; is the Anglican church
exclusively established by their constitution or by
law, in those colonies where no such guarantee
by treaty exists? Now, passing ever the older
example of Catholic Maryland ; passing even the
recent one of Ceylon, where the British govern-
ment restored the establishment of the Catholic
church after it had been destroyed on that island
by its previous possessors, the Dutch ; passing
over such instances as Madras and other of the
Indian provinces—over Newfoundland, Trinidad,
Barbadoes, &c., where the Catholic church is
estab’ished and supported by the state; passing
over the fact, that there are at this moment twenty-
five Catholic bishops in the colonies or foreign
possessions of the British empire, the far greater
number of whom receive support from, whilst all
are recognized by, the state; let us confine our-
selves to the case of New South Wales.
If the Established church of England, as an
establishment , were an essential part of our colonial
constitution—if it were so, even to the exclusion of
other established churches—it would be so either
by common law or by statute law. Mr. Burton
alleges and strongly urges both together in proof
of his position. That the existing church of Eng-
land by law established, the church now under
consideration —that church the duties of whose
ministers and curates are marked out and defined
by the Act of Uniformity—should at all come under
the contemplation of common law, cannot possibly
be. For this church had its beginning in statutes;
and was restored, after being destroyed, by sta-
tutes ; and we have already seen how much “ the
memory of man runneth to the contrary.”


In treating the application of the statute laws, we
must carefully distinguish, and bear in mind, the
distinction between two classes of clergy who be-
long to the church of England. Those only are of
the establishment, and are contemplated in the
“various statutes made in favor of worship and
religion,” who, being “ministers or curates,” hold
a benefice or curacy. There are others who are
equally ordained in that church, w ho subscribe her
articles, who celebrate her ritual, and who are, in
every sense, clergymen of the church of England,
except that, holding no benefice or living, they are
not of the establishment of the church of England
The civil rights and privileges arising out of the
legal union with the state are founded on the tem-
poral benefice. Annihilate the benefice and you
annihilate the establishment.
The now established church of England is
founded on the Statute 1 3, Charles 11. This statute
is entitled :—“ An Act for the uniformity of the
Public Prayers, and administration of Sacraments ,
and other Hites and Ceremonies, and for the purpose
of making, ordaining , and consecrating Jiishops ,
Priests , and Deacons, in the Church of England."
This act declares, that “ all ministers in any church,
or any other place of public worship, within Eng-
land, Wales , or Eci wick-upon-7'weed, shall use the
morning and evening prayer, celebration and ad-
ministration of both the sacraments, in order, as
mentioned in the book annexed to this act, entitled
‘The Book of Common Prayer, &c.;’ and the
morning and evening prayers therein shall, on
every Lord’s day, be solemnly read by every mi-
nister or curate, in every church or chapel, or other
place of public worship within this realm.” The
Act of 5, Ann. 8, for securing the preservation of
the church of England by law established, w hich
is cited by Mr. Burton, expressly quotes the Act of
Uniformity as being the foundation of the establish


meat of that church, and limits its settlement by
law “within the kingdoms of England and Ireland ,
the dominion of Wales , and town of Berwick-upon-
Tweedy and the territories thereunto belonging. ” The
statutes form the basis of Judge Burton’s argument;
yet, so far are they from proving that “ the Pro-
testant reformed religion is established by law in
New South Wales,” that they prove the contrary.
The Act of Uniformity expressly limits the Esta-
blished church of England to the churches, chapels,
and places of worship “within England , Walesy
and Berwick .” The Act of Union with Scotland,
fsth Ann.) establishes the Presbyterian church in
that kingdom; and, as that church shuts the church
of England out of her communion, it was found
expedient to enact a clause for the preservation of
the latter, to impose an oath on the sovereign to
maintain and preserve the latter within the king-
doms of England and Ireland, the dominion of
Wales, and town of Berwick, with the territories
severally belonging to these kingdoms, this domi-
nion, and this town. Yet, though during the reign
of Queen Ann the future sovereigns were bound
by oath to maintain and preserve the Protestant
church of Ireland, it was not legally united to the
Established church of England, and brought under
the operation of the Act of Uniformity, until the
union with that kingdom in the year 1800. It was
by an express clause in the articles of union that
these two become “ united into one church lt was
only then that law was provided for “ the conti-
nuance and preservation tor ever of the said united
church, as the Established church of that part of the
United Kingdom called England and Ireland. ’ ’ Sta-
tute law, then, limits the Anglican establishment to
England, Ireland, Wales, and Berwick. All these
acts contain and speak their own express local
They are utterly inapplicable to this
colony, owing, amongst other circumstances, to the


want of canonical titles and benefices. The clergy
of the colony are not, in the legal and canonical
sense of the word, parsons ; that is to say, they are
not corporate persons, holding permanent livings,
by right of canonical appointment and succession.
“ The episcopal office itself,” as Mr. Burton justly
remarks, “ depends solely upon the royal letters
patent for its creation, which contains a clause
enabling the crown to repeal them.” * But, of the
question of fact, on which that of applicability
would rest, did not the statutes contain their own
expressed local limitation, we shall speak imme-
diately. No judge or jury could ever find a church
or chapel within England, Ireland, Wales, or Ber-
wick, in New South Wales. The statute law is so
far from giving the Anglican clergy of the colonies
the rights and privileges of belonging to the esta-
blishment of the church of England, that it ex-
pressly,and byanespecial enactment,excludes them
from the rights and privileges of that establishment.
The Act 59, George 111., expressly states that the
clergy destined for the cure of souls in his Majesty’s
foreign and colonial possessions are “ not provided
with the title required by the canon of the church of
England of such as are to be made ministei s” This
at once shuts out the Protestant colonial clergy from
the Act of Uniformity, and from those subsequent
acts which only reinforce that act, and which toge-
ther form the web of Mr. Burton’s argument. The
clergy destined to the cure of souls in the colonies
are not “ of such as are to be made ministers” by
the power of that act. They are so far from having
been described or included in any former statute,
that the object of this very Act of 59, George 111.,
is to supply the want of a legal provision for their
ordination. And this act, which creates their legal
existence, is so far from constituting them members
of the national Established church, that it even
• P. 290


pcohabhsthem from performing any service within
itddjtathdartas, and makes them legally incapable
“of holding or of being admitted to anybenefipe\ot f
am#. ecclesiastical dignity soever within the United
Kingdom , or of acting as curate therein , without the
previous consent and approbation in writings under
band and seal, of the bishop of the diocese in which
any such benefice is situated; nor without the consent
of, the archbishops and bishop of London . ’ ’ Thus fa®
regards persons ordained in the United Kingdom
for the colonies. And it is further enacted, that no
person admitted into holy orders in the colonies
“ can officiate in any church or chapel in England or
Ireland* without special permission of the archbishop .”
The colonial Protestant clergy, therefore, however
they may be of the communion of the English
church, have yet no title to ordination as ministers
of the national Established church, and are by law
excluded from any right to hold her temporalities,
perform her ministrations.
One-word on Mr. Burton’s argument from the
coronation oath and the Catholic officials’ oath *
The judge’s sophistry on this point is the same as
that of his friend the Protestant bishop, in his formal
complaint to the British government on the subject
oil the Catholic bishop’s dress and appearance; it
dbponds on a quibbling mistake of the meaning of
theiwords “realm” and “kingdom.” There are
three realms or kingdoms, and many vast domi-
nions besides, which are beneath the empire of the
British.crown, some of which never were either
realms or kingdoms; and amongst these is the
odsony- of New South Wales. These oaths are
limited by their own terms, and the coronation’
oathby the act requiring its declaration. The ex-
tdhstas of die coronation oath is expressly limit&k
knlboiact of Queen Ann, to within the kingd#m£ o£
Boghmd jand Ireland, dominion
ofTßerwick.. The phrase “ this realm, ’' has*in th#


Act of Uniformity, a still narrower limitation, as
applicable to the present subject. The Catholic
official’* oath is limited by the words “ this resdm”
and “ United Kingdom.” These oaths, if they
prored any thing in the present case, would prove
too much; for Mr. Burton admits the fact, that
there are dominions under the British crown ia
which the Catholic church is established by treaty
to the exclusion of the church of England. In
fine, these oaths are without an object wherever
the Anglican church is not by law established.
Having disposed of the judge’s law, we come at
length to the facts.
The English church has never been in New
South Wales by Act of Parliament established.
No act of legislation has ever interwoven its esta-
blishment with the colonial constitution. During
the short reign of the corporation it became, in so
far, the creature of the king, not of the constitution,
and, on its own showing, it would °ven then have
perished but for the fostering care u* the colonial
treasury. It has, before and since, been, as an
establishment, the creature of the minister for the
colonies and of the colonial government. An
omission of a single item in the annual estimates
would have annihilated its establishment. Its
former head, an archdeacon, was —its present head,
a bishop, is—the creature of the king, not of parlia-
ment ; the continuance of the episcopal office de-
pends on the will of the sovereign. No act, even
of the local legislature, much less of parliament,
ever established the church of England in this
colony on a legal basis until the Church Act; and
this act establishes three distinct churches at the
same time, and upon a system of perfect equality.
The church of England, the church of Scotland,
and the church Catholic, are the three churches
established by the colonial law, whilst a provision
is also left open to other denominations. In
i


reply to all insinuations about the government
being Protestant, and thus giving to a certain
church a sort of pre-eminence, I would observe,
that there is nothing in the state of the law to pre-
vent the governor and every member of council
from being Catholics tomorrow, except the Lord
Bishop of Australia, who in that case would h ive
tp vacate his seat, as it is held on the express con-
dition of his being a Protestant.
We may be satisfied, then, that notwithstanding
Mr. Burton’s arguments, there is no dominant
established chvrch existing in New South Wales.


CHAPTER VII.
THE ORPHANS.
The orphans left behind them by prisoners are
thrown on the state for support. The orphans of
immigrants, left without mends, are equally 89
abandoned. The younger children of prisoners
serving out their bondage would be equally unpro-
vided for, but for the care and provision of govern-
ment. It is for the reception 01 these children that
the orphan schools are provided. They must be
supported and brought up by government some-
where, and the question that remains is, where and
how this can be done for the best, and without too
great an expense. The Female Orphan School, at
Parramatta, was founded by Governor King so
early as the year 1800. A fund was raised towards
its support by placing an ad valorem duty on all
goods imported into the colony from any port east
of the Cape of Good Hope, and upon all goods
from any other part of the world, not being of
British manufacture.* The Male Orphan School,
at Liverpool, was instituted by Governor Mac-
quarie. Both these institutions were placed on
their present arrangement by the last-named go-
vernor. A large proportion of the inmates received
into these schools until the year 1836 were Catholic
children, placed there by the hand of power against
the reluctant will of mothers, or the protest of the
clergyman who had baptized them; for all Catholic
instruction, and all the practices of our religion,
were systematically excluded. This was a cause
of general discontent amongst the Catholics of the
• Standing Orders, pi. I, p. 104.


14 letter was, in consequence, addressed,
fctffhe*absence of the archdeacon, to the senior Pro-
ftfeEant chaplain, making enquiry as to whether 4
CdlheHe clergyman could be admitted into those
estdbHdhmenfe'tfr instruct the Catholic children;
£qd v npon an answer being received to the effect
that f* the schools were in their constitution essen-
tially and exclusively Protestant," the lay com-
mittee of the cathedral church of St. Mary’s, on the
pert of the Catholic community, addressed a peti-
tion to the governor and council, praying, as they
felt themselves hound in conscience to do, that
Catholic children in a state of destitution should
be ;heiie£forth placed in some institute where'
aFrcould Deceive instruction: in die religion of
r patents, and be taught those obligations it had
bedd engaged they should be taught at their bap-
tram, afad that a stop might thus be put to that
Idtetroctibn of the feelings between permit and
>ch9d .which had wrought so much injury and dis-
cbntent. A sum of jfflOO was accordingly voted in
ithit year for the establishment of the Institute for
Catholic Destitute Children. In the year subse-
iqneht, this vote was raised to £BOO, and is now
&M)00 per annum. The Protestant schools are
extensive and well-provided establishments, with
tracts of land attached. The Catholic Institute is
situated on a barren tract of sand, and the rent of
the house, at present in a ruinous condition, is paid
out of this vote of £lOOO. The numbers received
into the establishment are from sixty-five to seventy.
Until the present year little more could be done
than to provide for subsistence and gradually fur-
nish the house. Three of the Sisters of Charity
have recently devoted some months —I need
scarcely add gratuitously—in accordance with their
institute, to form the schools, and arrange a proper
system of education. A great number of Catholic
children, of all ages up to twelve years, arc at pre


Male Orphan School (130 boys)
Female Orphan School (170 girls).
£
T*f >■
fiLssa t n
Total..
sent detained in that scene of vice and coafrMfeb
nation, Ike Female Factory, for want oil an tist&r
blishment in which they may be received* The
estimated expenses to government of the Protestant
orphan schools for the year 1890 were as follows
Mr. Burton quotes with approbation the protests
entered by two honourable members of council,
Messrs. Campbell and Jones, against the vote Of
£6OO, made in the year 1830, for the commence-
ment of the Catholic Orphan Institute. These pro-
tests were made on the ground that Catholic orphate
of those in destitution, being children of the state,
should be brought up Protestants. Had then
gentlemen pushed their protest in every direction
into which tneir principle carries them, they would
find that all the subjects of the state are the children
of the same family. Let us suppose that the
children of the families of these gentlemen had
been brought by the course of events to a ishte
calamity, and that the Divine Providence had cant
them for support upon a Catholic state ; where
would be these protests ?


CHAPTER VIII
EDUCATION.
Mr. Burton has a curious argument, which
labors to shew that, “ the state being the parent of
every child within it ,” and “ the state having deter-
mined that one religion only is true;” therefore the
state ought to educate all children as church of Eng-
land Protestants. I deny the minor. If the state
has determined any thing on the subject, it has de-
U*mined the Episcopalian religion to be “only true”
in England; the Presbyterian religion to be “ only
true”in Scotland; the Catholic religion to be
♦Nmly true” in the Mauritius; and all these reli-
gJona together to be “only true” in New South
Wphs. Again, that we may stop this incessant
noise about “ our Protestant state; ” what is the
but the three estates of the constitution,
and of these one only is in law and fact church
9C , England Protestant. Had he said, “the
Queen has determined one only religion is true,”
which every other person has also done, he would
have spoken truth; but what is this to the argu-
ment?
The first Catholic schools in the colony were
established after the arrival of Sir Thomas Bris-
bane in 1822. In the year 1828 their expense to
government amounted to £6B 35.; the Protestant
schools of the same character reaching, for the
same year, the amount of £2,650 15s. 2d. The
estimates of the year 1833 were, for Catholic
schools £350, for church of England schools of
same class £2,232 Is. 4d. 'Hie estimates for
public education in the year 1841, which have


been recently laid before the council, stand as
follows: —
£• ft* 4*
British and Foreign ...
Total for Protestant education.... .£6,106 0 7
Total Cor Catholic education 1,346 J4 4
With this estimate his Excellency the Governor
has, “ rather for the sake of explanation than with
a view of introducing any new system,” submitted
to the council his views on the important subject
of education in the following minute:—
“ A* stated in my financial minute, the estimate for schools is this year framed
upon the system which has been followed since 1836, notwithstanding it upon
wnich I consider faulty. Though apparently baaed upon the principle or
it is very unequal in practice ; and toe rule which we profess to be guided by it
net even invariably or impartially followed.
** The rule is, that the assistance given to aay school shall be measured
sum which is raised for its support by private contributions ; bat it is welLhftMrn
that exceptions from this rule are made in favour of certain schools, solely because
tiny have been longer established than others—exceptions which I caonoC ctm-
aider to be founded on any principle of utility, expediency, or justice.
“ That the rule is faulty in practice cannot, 1 think, be denied, inasmuch as
under it every religious sect or denomination is anxious to have its own
schools; and, as a necessary consequence, many more schools are estaUUbed
than in our thinly scattered population are wanted or can be supported In
cCeisney; and, in consequence of the amount of private contributions Mine
the measure of public assistance, the poorer denominations, or those which «Und
most in need of assistance, obtain the smallest share of it. Whilst, Umdfore; I
repeal that the government can have no object in view in this matter separate fruot
the welfare of the people, and no desire to force upon the people of this eolony a
system of education which they are not prepared to receive, 1 think it toy duty to
St fairly before the council my opinion of the evils of the course whkh w* are
lowing, and to declare my readiness to introduce a better system whenever it
may be called for by the advancing progress of public opinion. At the sasse
also, I think it right explicitly to state, that a deliberate and anxious consideration
of this very important subject has led roe to conclude, that the only way in which
education can be extensively advanced in this colony will bo found to be by the
institution of government schools, from which no persons shall necessarily be
excluded by reason of their religious persuasion, and by giving to no other schools
whatever any assistance from government.
“ The failure of the plans of education which have hitherto been brought for*
ward may, I think, dearly be traced to the error of proposing that other schools,
almost in an equal degree with those of the government, should receive awisfoocn
out of the public funds.”
Mr. Burton has made a remark on the plan of
education contemplated by the governor in hip
speech on opening the council in the year 1830 ;
which is both untrue in itself, and unfair and un^


jWrttoWords kts Excellency. It is well known that
tke governor has done everything which lay in lie
power to establish some efficient system of educa-
nob, which should embrace the wants of every
denomination without wounding the conscience of
anr. The plan at that time proposed was, that
“ the schools under the immediate control, either of
government, or of a’ board of education, should
he established on the principle of the British and
Foreign School Society; leaving to every religious
community the option of continuing their own
schools, or of founding new ones, on the under-
standing that they will receive from the government
pecuniary assistance towards the support of them
equal is amount to what they derive from private
contribution.” Mr. Burton says this would have
presented the " extraordinary anomaly” of giving
support to the schools of tne church of
Ihtitml. whilst it gave entire support to teachers
of Catholic tenets. The contrary would have been
the case. For there is nothing of a positive nature
hs the British and Foreign School system to which
any Protestant could object, and the Bible is made
a school book; whereas, no Catholics could consci-
entiously send their children to these schools —so
that the half support would have fallen to the share
of the Catholic communion.
Mr. Burton observes that “ there exists no col-
legiate establishment in the colony at which young
mm can be brought up in the principles of the
church of England.” The Ring's School is, how-
ever, an establishment of this description. It was
opened in the year 1832, at Parramatta. Its ex-
panse to government in the year following was
£1405. when Mr. Burton stated that the sole ex-
pense of this establishment to government at pre-
sent is £lOO per annum towards the support of
dm head master, it should have been added that
a large building with its appurtenances have been


erected at the public charge, and at a comidefafcln,
cost. Mr. Burton adds the remark, that “no
exertion is made at the existing schools to reach a
higher range of learning than is sufficient for the
occupations of pastoral or commercial life.”*
The Australian College was founded for the use
of the Presbyterians, and the sum of £3500 ad-
vanced towards its erection by government, first as
a loan, since made a grant. Mr. Burton remarks
that “ the operation of the Australian College, for
the education of ministers in the principles of the
church of Scotland, is delayed for the present for
want of funds.”t
The object proposed to government, in providing
for the passage of the four “ecclesiastical students-
to be also employed as catechists,” of which the'
judge has made so great a figure in his book, was
the establishment of a seminary, with the twofold
purpose of providing clergymen for the ministry,
so as ultimately to save expense of passage money
to government, and of providing respectable Catho-
lics with a respectable education. This seminary
has, without any further aid from government,
been gradually established ; and four of those clef*
gymen who arc at present on the government
establishment have completed their education and
been ordained out of this institution, which, al-
lowing for the original expense for their passage, of
which the judge complains, has already saved the
government an expense of £2OO. There are at
present in the Catholic seminary four students in
divinity, twenty-one seminarists, and fourteen day
attendants. I may observe, in passing, that of the
Catholic clergy on the establishment three others
also came out from home free of all cost to govern--
ment. '
• P. 297.
♦ r. 208


CHAPTER IX.
THE YEAR 1839.
The judge takes up 140 pages of his work with
a laborious detail of the several duties, more espe-
cially of the clergy of his own church, and de-
scribes the field of their labors. His account of
the church of England is carefully prepared; the
circumstantial minuteness of a considerable por-
tion of the details would seem to imply a direct
communication with the parties praised. Whilst
the church of England returns are given up to the
latest date, those of the Catholic church are taken
from the returns for the year 1836, as given in
Montgomery Martin’s history of the British colo-
nies. Judge Burton shows in various parts of his
work that he has access to the latest accounts and
returns respecting both churches whenever it suits
his purpose. At the period for which these re-
turns were given there were not more than five
Catholic chaplains in the colony, and their time
was in great measure occupied by travelling from
place to place: add to this, that there were not at
that period more than three Catholic churches
sufficiently advanced to receive a congregation, and
that the official returns give only the numbers at
that time attending the one principal service of the
Sunday. Mr. Burton gives the sum total of the
congregations of the church of England for the
year 1839 at 7000, of the Presbyterians at 2000, of
the Wesleyans at 1450, of the Independents at 300,
Baptists 300, Friends 50. The total of the Catholic
congregations is given at 2450, but this is for the
year 1836. A number amounting to not much less


than this estimate may occasionally be found as-
sembled at the Cathedral church alone. In the
parallel which Mr. Burton runs throughout this
account between the relative Protestant and Catho-
lic populations, he has borrowed for the nonce the
numbers of the Dissenters for the especial use and
service of the cause of the church of England,
although he shows that their actual congregations
assembled amount to 4000 persons, equal to more
than one-half the numbers assembled by the church
of England : this is one of the judge’s favorite
fall acies. The injustice done to the actual wants
of the Catholic church and to the comparative
labors of her clergy could alone induce me to the
task, from which under other circumstances I
should shrink, of detailing more faithfully the real
extent and amount of their labors as compared to
those of the clergy of the church of England in
the year 1039.
COUNTY OF CUMBERLAND.
IKntE.ST.WT 871) X 0 .£,7. (ITHIILIC
I’ahimi of St Philii-’s. — A chap-
lain ; cnurch contains 800 sittings;
attendance, morning GOO to 700, after-
noon 300 to 400.
Parish or St. J amts’. —A chap-
inn; church contains 1500 sittings;
attendance, morning T2U<>, afternoon
,<OO, evening 400.
Parish or Sr. Law ntsi r—A chap-
lain ; church in course of crccUon. A
large temporary chapel in use, attend-
ance not given.
Parish or St. AxmiLw's. Cathe-
dral in course of ercclio..
Coos's Riven.—A chaplain; church ,
attendance 100.
There arc, also, two Presbyterian
« hurches. two chapels for W csltyans,
one for baptists, one for Independent*,
cue for Friends.
The C«iiiidiial Cucrch.—Con-
tains 2000 persons; attendance, first
serviee 560, second service from 1800
to 2000, afternoon 700.
Two Tkui'orart Chapels. —lu
Kcnl-strcet, attendance 70; in Abet-
crombie-place. attendance 320.
Two C'iiai-i.ains.—One for the pa-
rish of St. James’, the other for St
Philip’*.
There are two services in St. Mary’s
every morning of the week. The dntics
of the clergy on the Sunday commence
at 7 a. m. and conclude at half-past ft
r.si., with scarcely any intermission.
On the week days they arc occupied in
church duties from 7 a.m. to 10; from
11 to 3 r.n. in the hospitals, institu-
tions, and amongst the sick; at 4 come
the burials; and night sick calls are
not unfiequent. 1 his by no means in-
cludes all or even the most tedious and
responsible of tlieir duties ; add from
lour to five hours of church duly more
than once j-tr week in the evening.
From Sylory is attended Longbotlom,
Brisbane Water, and occasionally Port
Macquarie.


. PHOTESTANT.
Total church of England attend*
hhce at three charches
3300
CATHOLIC.
Total Catholic attendance at one
church and taro small chapels.
Communicants in (he month:—
St. Jems'
40
at lowest average
Communicants in the month:—
Mary's ...........
3340
676
64
St. Philip’s
37
Abercrombie* place
Total....
77
Total....
630
There are, also, a Catholic and a Protestant
chaplain appointed to the gaol and penal establish-
ments in and about Sydney. The Protestant bishop
claims allowances to the amount of £lso* for the
Protestant, which are not asked for by the Catho-
lic chaplain. Mr. Burton gives a most just praise
to that valuable institution, the Benevolent Asylum,
for the aged and destitute poor. It may be ob-
served, us a further illustration of the period which
i have designated the dark age of our colonial
church history, that old inhabitants say the design
was first suggested by its having been perceived
that that much injured man, the Catholic arch-
priest, had gathered from the streets beneath his
humble roof some few poor decrepid creatures,
collecting what he could for their support; and
Mr. Wentworth says that the commencement of
this valuable institution was opposed by the senior
chaplain of the English church.| This, however,
cannot be said of other clergymen of that church,
and especially of the Rev. Mr. Cowper, whose
exertions on its behalf have been great and most
praiseworthy.
Mr. Burton has observed, that the churches of
Sydney cannot contain the number of applicants,
and that he has, in consequence, been seriously
affected by knowing young men who, brought up
in the church, could not, for the want of accommo-
dation, attend her ordinances, and these have
either fallen away or gone to other places of wor-
ship.| Now, deduct at both churches the number
* Despatch of Sir George Gipps to Lord Gienelg of Nov. 9th, 1838.
t Wentworth, voi. Ist., 3rd edition, p. 374. $ P. 274.


of attendants from the number of sittings, and
there will remain 400 sittings vacant. In the
single Catholic church half the space is clear of
seats, that the people may stand and kneel the
more closely; and yet it is not unfrequent to find
some 200 persons outside unable to obtain en-
trance.
pj^aamirirA,
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain; church contains 700
persons ; attendance from 500 to 600.
Two Presbyterian ministers, and a
Presbyterian church in course of erec-
tion.
Two Wesleyan chapels.
Church of England communicants,
each month, from 70 to 80.
CATHOLIC.
A chaplain ; church contains 460
persons; attendance 400. The clergy-
man attends five stations, at distances
of from five to eight miles from Parra-
matta.
Catholic communions per month, in-
cluding establishments, 235.
The Female Factory, the Hospital, and four
large iron gangs, in or about Parramatta, make
the duties more than one clergyman can perform:
for this reason, the Catholic chaplain stationed at
Liverpool, a less laborious district, resides part of
the week in Parramatta, and gives a part of his
labors, gratuitously of course, to that district.
This is, I presume, the origin of Mr. Burton's
dreams about there being “ tw o or four” priests
always in Parramatta. There were, certainly,
three English church clergymen there resident.
MUMTan’S (KU3.E..
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain ; church contains 200;
attendance 50.
Monthly communicants from 4 to 7.
Chaplain also attends a gang at
Pennant Hills once a month, and Lane
Cove once, in a school which holds
100; attendance fren 20 to 30.
CATHOLIC.
This district is included in that of
Parramatta, and under the same chap-
lain.
ILH'VSiBPQDL.
PROTES ANT.
A chaplain ; chu ch contains 300;
attendance 200: t .tends a chapel at
seven miles distan e; attendance 40.
A Presbyterian minister.
Occasional Wesleyan service.
Church ‘of Kogland communicants,
monthly, from 11 to 18.
CATHOLIC.
A chaplain ; church not yet com-
menced ; service performed in a room
of the General Hospital; attendance
200.
Service also performed at four sta-
tions : at Irish Flats 20 attend, at
Kemp’s Ottk 30, at Irish Town 20, at
Botany Bay 20.
Communions in the month 24.


(QAmmgu.'VQm*
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain; church contains 300;
attendance 100.
Service performed to a road party.
A Presbyterian minister.
Church of England communicants
monthly 10 to 15.
CATHOLIC.
A chaplain; church contains 450
persons; average attendance 300.
Five stations attended monthly, at
distances severally of 8,30,40, 35, and
54 miles ; average attendance at each,
from 100 to 250; miles travelled in the
year 2000.
Communicants in Campbelltown, in
the month, about 50.
appdh.
CATHOLIC.
A chaplain; church in course of
erection; attendance 90 ; three stations,
at distances of 15 and 30 miles, at-
tended by from 30 to 40 persons each;
miles travelled, about 1040 per annum.
Communions per month, about 7.
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain; temporary chapel; at-
tendance 35.
MAiaiSLl.Aj'L
PROTESTANT,
A chaplain attends at seven stations,
at distances of from 5 to 10 miles, and
one at 15; at two places 120 each
attend; at the others, from 20 to 40.
CATHOLIC.
Attended from Campbelltown or
Appin.
BSiyiL©©^
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain; church ;no returns
given by Mr. 8., except of 12 pupils of
the chaplain’s, residing in the parsonage.
Station at South Creek, 11 miles.
CATHOLIC.
Attended from Penrith,
psswtM:.
PROTESTANT.
Chaplain resides at Castlereagh;
church at Castlereagh contains 150;
attendance 60, at Penrith from 20 to
60, at Emu Plains 12; occasionally a
station 20 miles distant.
Wesleyan chapels at Castlereagh and
Nepean.
Communicants at Castlereagh from
3 to 10.
catholic.
A chaplain; church in course of
erection; service performed in court
house; attendance 200. Service also
performed at Mulgoa, distance 12 miles,
attendance 50, and at live other stations,
at distances of 6jt, 15, and two at 20
miles. Attendance from 30 to 50 at
each.
Miles averaged per annum, 4600 at
the very least.
Communions per month 16.
wmmm .
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain; church contains 450 ■
attendance 320; attends Richmond
Smiles distant, attendance 60; visits
Curryjong, 15 miles distent, every fort*
night.
A Presbyterian minister and a Wes-
leyan chapel.
Church of England communicants
not given.
CATHOLIC.
A chaplain; church nearly com*
pleted ; contains 800; attendance 600.
The chaplain visits six stations monthly,
each having small chapels, at distances
of from 12 to 35 miles; attendance
from 60 to 120 at each. Until very
lately, the Rev. Mr. Brady had the
Penrith district also under bis sole care.
His travels average 25 miles per day, or
8000 to 9000 per annum.
Communions per month 55.


ipflTir ir©wra..
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain performs duties as far as
Sackville Reach, a distance of 14 miles.
A Presbyterian minister.
CATHOLIC.
Attended from Windsor.
B&wigft iHAwaisssiyiiaifc
PROTESTANT.
Chaplain attends the Colo and Mac-
donald branches of the river.
A Wesleyan chapel.
CATHOLIC.
Attended from Windsor every month
COUNTY OF NORTHUMBERLAND.
3Ji3S3Aff31 W&YERo
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain; performs service in a
temporary church and at five private
residences, at distances from 6to 12
miles each.
A Presbyterian minister.
CATHOLIC.
Attended occasionally from Sydney,
distant 33 miles by sea; a church to
be commenced,
[?]
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain ; church contains 300
persons ; attendance 230, afternoon 40 ;
attends a station, distant 12 miles,
monthly ; and the Williams’ River, 40
miles, quarterly.
Communicants 6.
CATHOLIC.
A chaplain and a temporary chapel;
attendance 100.
Chaplain visits Port Stephens.
Communions per month 8.
There are at Newcastle a large iron gang, a gaol,
and hospital.
EAST BSIAOTILaKIDu
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain; church in course of
erection; present chapel contains 100
persons, and is filled, some standing
outside ; has charge also of Morpeth.
Communicants not given.
CATHOLIC.
A chaplain ; church contains 450 ;
attendance 300 ; the chaplain attends
six stations, each once in six weeks—
at Richmond Vale, 10 miles, 30 attend ;
at Sparke’s, 8 miles, 40 attend; at
Williams’ River, 15 miles, 50 attend ;
at Dungog, 40 miles, 80 attend; at
Hinton, 5 miles, 40 attend; at Cooley
Camp, 9 miles, 60 attend ; travels GO
miles per week, above 3000 per annum.
Communions per month 30.
VJE37 MAIfiLAItIOu
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain; church iu course of
erection ; performs a second service at
Paterson, 14 miles distant. Officiates
monthly at Glendon, 24 milts distant;
Patrick’s Plains, 5 miles further; Ra-
vensworth, 15 miles beyond; St. He-
liers, 22 miles further ; Page’s River,
17 miles from thatstation ; St. Aubin’s,
22 miles from that; Aberdeen, 6 miles
from that again ; Sherton, 13 miles
from the last; occasionally at Jerry’s
CATHOLIC.
A chaplain; church about being
commenced; a. temporary chapel; at-
tendance not given, but the number of
Catholics is greater, considerably, than
in East Maitland ; visits the following
stations :—Black Creek, 16 miles, each
month; Patrick’s Plains, 31 miles,
quarterly , also, Jerry’s Plains, 17 miles
beyond; Merton, 1.0 miles further away;
and Muswellbrook, 20 miles further—
making a zigzag journey of 63 miles


PBOTESTANT.
FHin, 9 mile* from last itat ion, and
ClMit Park, 7 mile*.
Two Presbyterian ministers.
▲ Wesleyan chapel.
CATHOLIC,
from Maitland; Upper Paterson, 25
miles, every six we&s, and Wollombt
quarterly; attendance at Jerry’s Plains,
30; at the other stations, from 70 to 80
each, and more. The chaplain travels
on an average 10 miles a day, or 2300
per annum.
COUNTIES OF DURHAM AND BRISBANE.
chrtqh.
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain attends the Williams* and
Paterson Rivers.
Two Presbyterian ministers in this
district.
CATHOLIC.
Attended from Maitland.
COUNTY OF GLOUCESTER.
STgPHIiliSS.
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain; church at Stroud; con-
tains2oopersons; attendance,morning
130, afternoon 70.
Chapel at Carrington 17 miles dis-
tant; contains 150; attendance, morn-
ing 30, afternoon 20.
Chapel at Bond, distant 10 miles;
contains ISO; attendance,3omorning,
20 afternoon.
CATHOLIC.
Attended from Newcastle,
COUNTY OF MACQUARIE.
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain; church contains 600;
attendance 250.
CATHOLIC.
Attended twice a year from Sydney,
200 miles by sea, clergyman payiug
his own expenses.
At this settlement is placed the penal establish-
ment for all especials, or prisoners of the educated
class, invalids, and cripples. Mr. B. enumerates
102 especials, 338 invalids, 64 cripples, and 27
insuie. There are a small female factory, gaol,
and" hospital.
COUNTIES OP BATHURST, WESTMORELAND, COOK, AND
WELLINGTON.
©3? BATSa^BIST.
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain; church contains 300;
“ well attended.” Officiates at Coom-
iof, 40 miles distant, monthly.
A Presbyterian church and minister.
A second minister at Cox’s River,
CATHOLIC.
' Chaplain ; church in course of erec-
tion ; temporary chapel attended by 90
to 100 persons. The chaplain attends
twenty-six stations; Weagdon, 40
miles from Bathurst. Cabee 66, Mud gee
90. Juugy 140, Macquarie’s River 120,
Summer’s Hil! 30, a second station at


PROTESTANT. CATHOLIC.
A Wesleyan chapel. aix miks distant. Wall tag ton W 9
miles, Murrumbidgw 130, DabboJdQ,
Werry’s Plains 20, another station 27,
' Grobtngbon 42, Lacklaa 60, Biiiihula
60, Lacklan River 80, Carryamy 90,
Orpan’s Creek 25, a second station 30, Todd Walls 35, Vale of Clwyd 42,
Mount Victoria 52, Rose Vale 40, Cherry Tree Falls 70, and Bingan 60 miles ;
each of which is visited quarterly, together with various small intermediate stations.
In a recent private letter the Rev. Mr O’Reilly says, “ During my last journey,
I was led to proceed on from one sheep or stock station to another, until I found
myself 350 miles from home. 1 found no residence, but many stations and numbers
of Catholics, who often came from distances when they heard of me. I received
above 70 to the sacraments.”
A second clergyman has been also resident two years in this district withoat
any expense to government.
Mr. Slattery performs service at Bathurst when Mr. O'Reilly is abaent, and
when he returns Mr. Slattery proceeds to visit some of the following eleven
stations:—first station at 27 miles distance ; second at 60 ; third at 90; fourth at
60; fifth at 35 ; sixth at 25; seventh at 50 ; eighth at 35; niuthat32; tenth at
40 ; and eleventh station at 35 miles distance—these are all visited twice a year.
Communions per month from 35 to 45.
©»©©MJ3S3.a. s 3 Pi^sKlBo
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain and chapel.
CATHOLIC.
Attended from Bathurst.
BflJiKD@SlSo
PROTESTANT.
Church erecting.
CATHOLIC,
Attended from Bathurst.
COUNTY OF CAMDEN.
suttoso poanss'/o
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain; chapel contains 70;
attendance from 30 to 40; church in
course of erection.
CATHOLIC.
Attended from Campbelltown or
Appin.
usnnjm.
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain, who also attends Bong
Bong.
CATHOLIC.
Attended from Campbelltown.
aLL&WABiTIfIo
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain resident at Wollongong
attends this district.
A Presbyterian minister and chapel.
CATHOLIC.
A chaplain; church in course of erec-
tion at Wollongong. Temporary cha*
pel ; attendance 200 ; officiates wuekly
at Dapto, 8 miles, attendance 120 ; at
Yambaroo, 25 miles, monthly, attend-
ance 80; at Shoclhaven, 60 miles,
monthly, attendance 100 ; average tra-
velling per annum 3252 miles.
Communions per month In the dis-
trict 46.
COUNTY OF ARGYLE.
<a£m®yji?L
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain ; a church ; chaplain offi-
ciates also at three stations, within 15
CATHOLIC,
A chaplain ; a church about being
erected. The chaplain, in transmitting
I,


PROTESTANT,
mites, once or twice a month ; at two
stations once in six weeks, one 25 miles
distant, the other 7 miles further; twice
in the year officiates in five more distant
stations, at from 5 to 15 miles from
each other.
A Presbyterian minister and place of
worship.
CATHOLIC,
his baptismal returns for tbe year,
states that they were performed in five
counties, whilst travelling over a space
of 10,000 square miles. Tbe chap-
lain’s life is one of continued travel;
and, with the view of dissipating any
impression made by Mr. Burton’s in-
sinuation, which is all be has to say
oo the subject, that the Catholic priest
of Goulburn resides at Yasc, GO miles
off, I shall give an extract from the
Rev. Mr. Lovat’s report of his mis-
sionary dudes for thies months, merely remarking that they are the first I light
upon, and that the rest of the year’s labors are of the same tenor:—
“ 1839.—N0v. 7th, Goolburn, 125 miles from Sydney. 9th, Ryans, 10 miles
Inna Goulburn; 20 or 30persons attend. 11th, Bungadore, 40 miles from Goul-
bnrn; 12 to 24 persons attend. 12th, Gnndaroe, 20 miles from Bungadore;
about 12 persons attend. 13th, Yass, 27 miles from Gundaroe ; from 20 to 30
persons attend. 14th, Fitzgerald’s, 25 miles from Yass; about 12 persons attend.
Same day to Jngion Creek, Mnmimbidgee River, 20 miles or even more from
Fitzgerald’s; about 20 persons attend. 15th, to Yass, 40 miles; l€th and 17th
at Yass. 18th, to Gonlburn, 60 miles. 19th, to Mr. Faithful’s and back, 20
miles. 20th, 21st, 22nd, 23rd, at Goulburn. 24th, Carey’s, Lake George, 30
miles ; I2to 16 persons attend. 25tb, 25 miles from Carey’s. 26th,
Molonglo, 14 miles from Bungadore; about 20 or 30 persons attend. 27th,
Qucanbeyan, 12 miles at least; about 20 persons attend. 28th, Yarralumla,
Limestone Plains, 10 miles; about 6or 8 attend. 29th, Yass, 40 miles at least
from Yarralumla.
“ Dec. 2nd, Gundaroe, 27 miles from Yass. 3rd, Goulburn, 45 miles from
Gundaroe. 6th, Bungadore, 40 miles from Goulburn. Bth, Molonglo, 14 miles
from Bungadore. 9th, Qneanbeyan, 13 miles from Molonglo. 10th, Gap, Lake
George, Garey’s, 25 miles at mat. 11th, Goulburn, 40 miles (about). 12tb,
Gunning, 30 miles from Goulburn. 13th, Yass, 30 miles from Gunning. 14th,
15th, at Yass. 16th, Goulburn, 60 miles from Yass. 26th, Ryan’s, 20 miles
there and back. 28th, Gunning, 30 miles from Goulburn. 29th, Yass, 30 miles
from Gunning. 30th, Gundaroe, 27 miles from Yass. 31st, Ginnindery, Yarra-
lumla, 40 miles from Gundaroe.
“ 1840.—Jan. Ist, Yarralumla. 2nd, Queanbeyan, 10 miles. 3rd, Bungadore.
20 miles, and Goulburn, 40 miles. sth, Maquirk’s in Georgians, 40 miles from
Goulburn; about 20 persons attend. 7th, Binda Vale, 12 miles further. Bth,
9th, Maquirk’s. 10th, to Hogono, to Richlands, at least 25 miles at Hogono, 12
at Richlands; 30 or 40 attend. I2th, Goulburn, 40 miles from Richlands.
19th, Gunning, 30 miles from Goulburn. 20th, Yass, 30 miles from Gunning.
21st, Geelong, Ryan’s. £., 40 miles from Yass. 24th, Burrowa Plains, &c., 60
miles journey to and fro. 26tb, Geelong ;25t0 35 persons attend. 27th, Mrs.
Russell’s, 10 miles from Geelong; 12 persons attend. 28th, Fitrge raid’s, Bor
10 miles from Russell’s. 29th, Jngion, 25 miles from Fitzgerald’s. 30th,
Gobaraloog on the M arm rabid gee, 12 miles from Jugion; 15 to 20 persons
attend. 31st, Rilamacat, 15 or 16 miles up the Toomal; about 12 persons
attend.
“ fas. Ist, Bombala Plains, 15 miles at least; same day back again to Darbalara,
about 35 miles; €'persons attend next day. 3rd, Money-money Flat and Bur-
burrowa, Cane’s, Port Pbilip-road; 10 or 12 persons attend; Traffe’s, Bor 10
persons attend. sth, Fitzgerald’s, 35 miles. 6th, Yass, 25 miles. 10th, Goul-
burn, 60 miles. 17lh, ten o’clock, p.m., to Molonglo, 54 miles from Goulburn.
18tb, twelve o'clock at noon to Goulburn, 54 miles, arrived twelve o’clock at
midnight. 19th, Bamballa in Camden, 30 miles from Goulburn. 20th, by Mr.
Barber, Mr. Shelly’s, to Goulburn, about 35 miles. 23rd, Carey’s, near Lake
George, 30 miles from Gonlburn.”


COUNTY OF KING.
CATHOLIC.
Attended from Goulburn or Yass.
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain at Arkstone Forest; tra-
vels from bouse to house; frequently
going from 10 to 30 miles to hold an
afternoon service.
A baptist minister on tlie River
Crook well.
COUNTY OF MURRAY.
yass.
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain, who vl-iu the different
stations within thirty miles.
CATHOLIC.
A chaplain; church to be com-
menced ; the chaplain’s duties are of the
same character, and to the same extent,
as those of the chaplain at Goulburn ;
each takes the other’s place when ab-
sent. Without this arrangement, such
labours could not be performed. Mr.
M'Grath has travelled as far as Two-
fold Bay.
Communions in the two districts in
the course of three months 102.
[?]
PROTESTANT.
Ihe chaplain itinerates through the
south-east part of this county.
CATHOLIC.
Attended from Yass and Goulburn.
COUNTY OF BOURKE.
P©iaiT PMDILiLIIP {SSOEILI3©mME=)
PROTESTANT.
A chaplain; church in course of
erection.
Presbyterian minister.
Wesleyan and Independent chapels.
CATHOLIC.
A chaplain ; temporary church ; at-
tendance 700; three services on Sun*
day ; two on week days.
Communions average 50 monthly.
A second clergyman, without go-
vernment aid, attends Geelong, &c.
In giving this account, I have condensed the
prolix narration which Mr. Burton has given of
the labours of the church of England, without
omitting, that lam aware, any of the facts; and
have simply supplied his omissions respecting those
of the Catholic clergy. I need not remind the
Catholic reader that the ritual and preaching which
terminates a Protestant clergyman’s duty forms but
a small portion of that of the Catholic priest, and
that the latter is liable to be called away any hour
of day or night, to visit the sick, to the most distant
points of his charge. It should be remembered
that most of the Catholic missions are of very recent


formation. It will be seen that, with every disad-
vantage of mere commencement, want of churches,
comparative fewness of clergy, and extent of their
travels from home, Mr. Burton, in returning the
numbers attending the Catholic congregations,
even on the Sunday alone, and at the places of
residence only of the clergy, ought, in justice, to
have returned the number of the Catholic church-
goers as being, at the very least, equal in amount to
that of the church of England. And, if we add to
this the stations and establishments, this number
will be about doubled.
I would add one remark with reference to the
penal settlement of Norfolk Island. Mr. Burton
complains of there being two Catholic clergymen
there established, and entertains us with his con-
jectures as to the cause. It is simply this, that the
one Catholic chaplain receives the same salary with
the Protestant, and shares it with a second, the
two together receiving no more than the one
Protestant.
Such was the actual state of things in the year
1839.


CHAPTER X.
A TISSUE OF ERRORS.
The judge’s errors are divisible into the three
classes—errors by insinuation, errors by direct
statement, and errors by false argument. In order
to show more clearly the animus of the learned
writer, we shall exhibit specimens of the two first
kinds of error. Amongst the first may be numr
bered his continually taking possession of all the
Presbyterians, Methodists, and other Dissenters*
whom he shows to be numerous, as well as all those
who are of no religion, or of any church, as though
they were members of the church of England,
whenever he wishes to prove her wants, or our com-
parative numbers, or to make out a numerous
display; although he counts but 7000 church-
goers, including the compulsory attendance of
prisoners; and although he remarks that “ the
number of those who care for the church are per-
haps few in comparison to those for whom the
church cares.”
Another error of this kind consists in his always
taking the Catholic returns for 1836 whenever it
suits him to diminish our numbers, and the last
accounts up to 1839 whenever it suits him to mag-
nify our importance; whilst he never fails of
information respecting his own church up to the
very latest date; and the Catholic government
returns, as well as the Protestant ones up to 1839,
were equally accessible.
A third error of this kind lies in his repeated
insinuations of Catholic clergymen being still in
the colony, but no longer on the estimates—the


inference from' which is plain enough—when those
clergymen hare, in reality, been either placed in
another colony, or have departed life. Another
error of this kind consists in his constantly enume-
rating catechiste, ecclesiastical students, and other
persons, as being on the Catholic establishment,
when no such thing is the ease. But enough of
this kind. They prove him of the same school as
his right reverend friend who endeavoured to show
tile government that another bishop wished to
obtain has recognition by the shape of his garments,
when he was already recognised, as far as any
bishop could be, by Whig and Tory ministers, by
tiie acts of the colonial legislature, and by the
sovereign to whom his lordship addressed himself
on the occasion of his appointment. Let u come
to positive mis-statements.
Mr. Burton has made a statement which is most
egregiously unfair in itself, and unjust to the
government, with respect to the religious instruction
of the prisoners, at the period from their being
landed out of the ships to that of their being
assigned to service.* He would have served his
cause better by silence. Sir Richard Bonrke, in
answer to the queries of the Prison Discipline So-
ciety, transmitted by Lord Glenelg, states that—
“ Some boars of the day during this period are, when required, allotted to their
receiving religious instruction from the clergy of their uveral comwnuuout, who
attend at Hyde Park to impart it. To give longer time for this coarse of instruc-
tion, Dr. Folding, the Roman Catholic bishop, shortly after his arrival in New
South Wales, requested that the period between the arrival and assignment of the
convict should be lengthened, which was done accordingly. He has, as regards
theso of his communion, attended to it with grant earnestness and segalarity ; and
there is reason to believe that the result has been beneficial to those who received
his admonitions, and to the public in general.”
Hereupon the judge breaks out into open excla-
mation mat this “ clearly implies a charge of
neglect against the Protestant clergy which they
do not merit.” He declares “ they were uninformed
on the subject,” mid asks, “ Why was not a distinct
communication made to them that the views of
• p. m.


government admitted of such a relaxation of the
convict system; and why was not the benefit
equally extended to Protestant convicts, whether
applied for or not, if it were so beneficial to Homan
Catholics?” Now for the facts. Time is allotted*
when required, for the prisoners to receive instruc-
tion from the clergy of their several communions.
This time was found to be insufficient for working
any permanent good. The Catholic bishop applied
to have it somewhat lengthened. The request is
granted. This did not materially lengthen the
space between arrival and assignment, for they were
formerly kept a fortnight on ship-board—they have
been since landed earlier. That this permission
for time to give a longer, more systematic, and
comprehensive course of instruction, was either
limited to Catholics, or unknown to Protestants,
cannot be correct. Every prison ship lands pri-
soners of both denominations; and the clergy of
each communion, if in attendance at all, must have
known when the period for assignment came, and
that allowed for instruction ceased. It is impos-
sible that the Protestant clergy should have been
uninformed of the change from its commencement;
for it is an undoubted fact that, at the commence-
ment of this arrangement, the Protestant prisoners
were regularly conducted to the Protestant church,
as well as the Catholics to theirs. The Protestant
bishop and his clergy attended; and twice, at
least, at the beginning, did the Protestant church
bell announce this fact to the whole town. The
fact of this Protestant attendance and course of in-
struction was announced in the Sydney Monitor, if
not in the other papers ; and the editor asked the
question as to who could have suggested so excellent
an arrangement. If the Protestant bishop and his
clergy soon tired of the task, or thought it an unne-
cessary one, are we or the government in fault ?
Or, are we, therefore, to desist from a system which


hMte* betft imad useful to public mondity.l ilt is
that a considerable number of the piisoK-
excepting those of any comnuiaien,
'are found on arrival, owing to early neglect of the
circumstances of their lives, to be ignorant of the
first principles of morals, and to have no distinct
ideal of the fundamental principles of Christianity.
M*; .'Burton calls the giving a few days on arrival to
of these principles “ a relaxation, of the
system.” Is this the language of a judge ?
What I - of a guardian of the public rights and
morals 1 Are we to be accused and complained of
dwospse our system enables us to do this with some
efiapt, for the reason that others do not choose to
continue any endeavour at all ? The circumstance
gifrikhese persons being seen “ standing, lying, and
draec&ng about St. Mary’s church,” is easily ex-
,yiained» The system of instruction is a laborious
3 one, both tor the clergy and for men unaccustomed
3toi mental exercise, as it includes both general
tfecriUDca and much individual converse, grounded
3Ki<{tjtto especial frame of mind, disposition of cha-
Lcaoteiv and tone of feeling, of each particular person.
We course of instruction occupies most of the day,
arid necessarily requires some change and variety.
require air and occasional relaxation,
aadijufkie weather some portions of the instruction
have been given outside the church; but the
ritorgy are at all times to be found in the midst of
then> Mr. Burton carps at the evidence of the
Catholic vicar-general before the parliamentary
committee on transportation as to the results of this
system of instruction; and, finding no more solid
gfcasp tor an objection, he lays hold of nothing.
Was, as to men assigned up the country not finding
their way into the Sydney gaol, 1 need not remind
thejadge that every case of committal for trial in
the supreme court does pass the person through
that goal; and, of the number of 555 prisoners he


lias himself stated as being the total number cm*
fined in the colonial goals, chiefly waiting their
trial on Ist February, 1839, he states that 288*—
more than the one half—were inmates of the gaol at
Sydney.
Hie judge states that in 1838, of the two chap-
lains receiving allowances for attending the New-
castle gaol, the Catholic received £SO per annum,
and the Protestant £25, as voted,* without adding
any further explanation. At that period there was
no Catholic clergyman resident —he had to travel
from Maitland; whilst the Protestant chaplain was
resident Now that there is a Catholic clergyman
resident, he receives no allowance for this duty.
Mr. Burton questions my questioning the accu-
racy of the census of 1836, without condescending
to notice my reason, j* viz., that various Protestant
masters return their servants without troubling
themselves to enquire as to their religion, and such
as are not returned individually as being Catholics
are all made Protestants. Thus, in the census of
1833 the whole of those belonging to the shipping
were set down Protestant at a sweep, which saved
trouble and swelled party numbers. But Mr.
Burton questions the accuracy of the census him-
self, on the account of “ inducements which may he
held out to ignorant and vicious persons , in unfortu-
nate circumstances , uninstructed in the truths of reli-
gion, to profess an adherence to a form of faith the
ministers of which represent themselves as authorised
to exercise powers affecting their future condition,
which the Protestant clergy disclaim This means,
if any thing, that the conversions to Catholicity
have affected the census. I need not remind the
judge, that all those who neither profess nor cane
for any religion are always accounted Protestants
in any question of comparative numbers. Persons
declare themselves Protestants or Catholics, at-
• P. 286.
t P. 303.
: P. 304.
M


tending :the Catholic service or not attending it;
that is all the census contemplates. Would Mr.
Buftonput down every convert as being of the
tweed he has abandoned] The relative claims of
the two churches to the extent of spiritual power
do not enter into the present discussion. Tfv tract
from which Mr. Burton took the above idea claims
the paternity of the Protestant bishop, and the ar-
gument which be perverts on the subject of the
word Catholic in the Apostle’s creed is taken from
the Rev. Mr. M‘Encroe’s letter in reply to that
tract—a tract written for the purpose of removing
impressions made by the circumstance of the num-
bers of criminals who had embraced Catholicity
after sentence of death. There are few Catholic
clergymen, of any experience, who cannot recount
various and frequent instances of Protestants ap-
plying to them, in the doubts with which their
nunds have been shaken in the course of constantly
repeating, whilst saying the Apostle’s creed, the
words “ I believe in the Holy Catholic Church .”
Tbey are struck at first with the fact, that, instead
of believing in the church which is alone so desig-
nated, they protest against her, and this prompts
them to further enquiry. So much for the “per-
version of meaning scarcely attributable to ignorance ,”
which this impartial and upright judge, in his
l * utmost charity” ascribes to a venerable clergy-
man.
Mr. Burton asserts that the funds by which
the Catholic churches are being erected in the
colony are derived from other sources than the
donations of their adherents in the colony.* This,
an regards resources out of the colony, is not true,
although he has shown this to be the case with
respect to his own church. He adds, that very
tow Catholics are among the landed proprietors.
This is not true. Several are very large landed
• P. 306.


proprietors; and of the middle and smaller claw
of proprietors they form a large proportion. :11
The “ludicrous circumstance” which this gtaafrA
and decorous person has thought fit to quote, to
illustration of our mode of obtaining assistance
from Protestants, is merely disgraceful to the
party who have brought it forward. The real fhote
of the case, as I have received them from the
party concerned, are simply these. The Rev. Mr,
Brady was preparing for the erection of a church
at Penrith; meeting, by accident, a Protestant 6t
the neighbourhood who had several Catholic aam
signed servants, he told him he intended to call far
a subscription. Mr. Brady received the reply t?ia*
he “ would be happy to see him,” called, and w,vs-
received, not merely with a refusal, but with dfew
courtesy and disrespect. The ground of such ap-
plications as these, which are made by those of all
communions, is, that the master has Catholic Ser-
vants and laborers who are not unfrequently nu~
merous, and who, being prisoners, have no wages.*
and yet require a place of worship. Mr. Burton
introduces Mr. Brady’s letter into his book as a
specimen of the education of a Catholic priest.
Now, Mr. Brady states in that letter that he was-
educated in France ; and, I may add, in a college
situated in Normandy, where none of his country*
men resorted; thence he passed to the Isle of
Bourbon, where fifteen years of his life were spent
in the ministry, during which period he had not
more than three or four opportunities of conversing
in the almost forgotten tongue of his native country.
When T first met the Rev. Mr. Brady in London,
some two years previous to the date of that letter,
he was from these circumstances unable to converse
in English, and we were obliged to have recourse
to the French language. In one of the numbers of
the Dublin Morning Register of the year 1828, there*
is a letter written by the celebrated Field Marshal


Brqdyphidressedfrbm Vienna to a oebtive of the
Btevi Mr. Brady—-Dr. James Brady of Duhtiix.
TheiGeaaal,'Wbd rose to all the honors the go-
vernment of Austria could bestow, apologises for
not wriUnr the memoirs of his life, among other
reasons, “because writing had become distressing
to him, especially in his native language, which,”
imsays, “he had almost forgotten.” The ortho-
granny of this letter, it is remarked by the person
who corrected it previous to insertion, is such as
Would be found in the composition of a foreigner.
The sum of the controversy spoken of as having
taken {dace on the occasion of Mr. Brady’s letter
amounts to this, that one party stated that Catholics
withhold the Bible from the people; to which
rile other replied, “we allow the use, not the
afttate.' 1 let us suppose that Mr. Burton’s ap-
pointment had been to the Mauritius instead of
South Wales. Let the first letter he
should write in French after arrival, and address
privately on private matters, be jeeringly thrown
taefeite tno public through the channel.of a news-
paper, and he thence caught up by a grave dig-
nitary and inserted m a work intended for per-
manency. Does this circumstance appear to Mr.
Bolton as “ludicrous,” or as simply indecent?
With respect to Mr. Brady’s literature, I feel
strongly tempted to translate from the French
language a concise “ Philosophy of History,” writ-
tear by his pen, for the especial instruction of
thote who, without any knowledge of the indi-
oaH his learning into question; and,
did' ‘space allow, I might add the high com-
pliments paid to his zeal and virtues by the
Prefer Apowtoliqne, oad the chief justice of the
Iste of Bourbon/inserted in the Gazette of that
Isfend wrthe occasion of his departure, in which,
amongstudier things, it is testified that “he had,
at his own cost, formed establishments in which


p6OP children were supported aid
virtue.” The real ground of
Rev. Mr. Brady is one of the disiT
terested, and laborious clergymen in the
and has received a considerable number of converts
into his church. It would be satisfactory to com*
pare the letter printed by Mr. Burton, with the
original in the hands of the person to whom it wafc
addressed.
The accusation of “ aspiring demeanour” which
Mr. Burton brings against “the leading clergy of
the church of Rome in the colony,”* may be safely
left with those to whom they are personally ac»
quainted.
His account in support of this charge, <rf the
Catholic bishop appearing and being received alia
public levee “in the foil habit of his office, at the
head of his clergy in canonicals, ” t only shows the
judge’s ignorance of ecclesiastical costume, and a
slight defect of courtesy.
As to “the indecorous struggle” which Mq.
Burton describes as “ ensuing between the different
denominations of Christians, and lamentably be*
tween ministers of the same denomination, their
greatest weaknewuwnnd the strongest argument of
the church of Rome:” I can only say that thefolk
and blame lies with Protestantism and its funda-
mental principle —not with Catholicism. The
extract with which, by way of illustration* Mr.
Burton closes the appendix to his work, in the Shape
of a vile and vulgar attack upon a respectable Pres-
byterian clergyman, who has lived for fourteen
years in the colony without the suspicion of an
imputation on his character, will, I am sure, hip
approved by no one. The letter of Philanthropes,
which is headed in large capitals with the nameutf
the present writer, and which Mr. Burton has
thought of sufficient importance to extract iiuiu. a
•P. 308.
t P. 200.


ramber «f the Sydney Herald, of last year’s date,
and preserve in bis pages,* appears not to me to be
in any manner distinguished from a great many
productions of a similar character which appeared
about that time, and were not considered as requi-
ring* any notice or attention. As, however, Mr.
Barton has embalmed it, I may be permitted to
observe, that its falseness in point of matter is about
equal to its coarseness of manner.
The judge’s fears about the future empire of the
Jesuits over New Holland,')' suggested by his friend
the Protestant bishop’s sermon, if they are intended
to be serious, are too absurd for comment. I can-
not at all share i i his apprehensions.
= Mr. Burton states that “the influence of the
Sisters of Charity over the females confined in the
Factory began to be strongly felt at the time the
waiter left the colony.”); This is a correct remark;
and»> as such purifying and hallowing influences
were, more than any other want, required, one would
have thought that this to a Christian judge would have
been a subject of gratification, and not of grievance
and complaint. I cannot compliment Judge Burton
either upon his gentlemanlike courtesy, or upon his
good feeling, in the manner in he has repeat-
edly introduced these ladies into his book. They
have been of no expense to government; the sums
offered on: the application of a third party for
passage, they declined receiving. Their resources
ave> their own private funds. It is the sublime
characteristic of their institute to serve Almighty
God in the person of the poor gratuitously, and
wkh the unreserved devotion of their whole life.
When these ladies attend the Factory, the Catholic
inmates are alone mustered to hear their counsel
and instructions. Protestant ladies have been
equally assiduous, if not so persevering in their
attendance; and ibis may be ascribed to their
* Appendix No. Id, p. 104.
t P. 306.
t P. 306.


having other and more immediate cares and dUtioa.
I regret that Mr. Burton should have allowed ilia
party feelings to carry him thus far. I regret it for
the credit of the colony. The infidel, the revolt
tionist, the atheist, have respected the Sister of
Charity. In the language of their holy
“ their protection is in their sacred character; they
have no cloister but their virtuqyL.When that
fearful pestilence, the cholera, hHIq Dublin,
and the poor were abandoned to VBK&te, and an
archbishop of a certain church publisned a mandate
to dispense his clergy from attending the bed of
death, lest they should take contagion into their
families; these ladies thought it no derogation from
the rank in which they had been educated, to* be
found by day and night with the stricken and mi-
serable poor; they clung to them for Christ’s sake
and the sake of blessed charity; they sustained
their writhing and blackened frames in their hor-
rible agonies; passed from the dead to the dying,
as if in a battle field, and received the last conta-
minated breath of thousands. When they devoted
themselves to remedy, so far as lay in their power,
the moral pestilence which they were told so fear-
fully raged amongst the poor of their sex in New
South Wales; the least of all things that they could
have anticipated, in opposition to their devoted
task, must surely have been that they, to serve the
purposes of party, would ever be treated with less
than respect by a judge of the supreme court, whose
dread responsibilities they might hope, in the hands
of God, to be the means of somewhat lightening
and relieving. But, in the confidence that so un-
precedented an act of conduct will never agairi
become a reproach against New South Wales, let
us hasten to a conclusion.


CHAPTER XI
CONCLUSION.
Tax Judge Burton aims in bis
" State y 3 an d Education in New South
Waks” is on the surface of the wo. k;
visible without search. “ A contest,” he says, ‘he
perceives is already begun.” “He will not avoid,”
ne says, “ any part of his own proper duty on such
an occasion.” “ A member of the church of Eng-
land, in Australia, he turns for help to bis brethren
in England.” The help he wants is money. Of
this article his brethren in the colony, he tells us,
are collecting considerable quantities, and are re-
ceiving yet greater sums from the government.
It is* U kewise, his wish to obtain for the clergy of
bis own particular church, whose numbers he
would increase to legion, a legal and everlasting
possession of one-seventh part of the soil, that
every one of them may be straightway constituted
an independent gentleman; independent, not only
of his people, but —as time would quickly show,
were it brought to the test —independent of the
duties expected from him, and equally independent
of any needful possession of the clerical qualifi-
cations for his office. This large and ample inde-
pendence he prefers resting upon the lands of the
colony, as being “ the safest and securest” To file
Other religious communions of the colony Mr.
Burton and his friends make the gracious offer of
“ toleration." Now, of all the evils inflicted by the
tyranny of man on man, whenever blind bigotry
has found a lodging for its spirit in the heart of
brute force, this “ toleration,” the boon which


Mr. Burton offers to all, is the most intolerable —
an insult under the hypocritical mask of a favor.
The stepping of petty man in his paltry presump-
tion between the Almighty Creator and the devout
gratitude, the consciencious duties, the devout
oblations of His creature; the spotted eclipse
caused by the shadow of atomic mortals, that come
with all their condescension between the glorious
God, whose blessings shine upon us and our im-
mortal spirits ; the gracious consent of a man tp
tolerate, that is, to endure, that you as well as he
shall conscientiously and freely serve God, so long
as he is so pleased, and you so grateful; surely,
this “ toleration' must be one of those names of
blasphemy which men use in thoughtless ignorance
of what they import. :
Mr. Burton can scarcely look towards the British
ministry to help the consummation of his desires
on the score of this book ; for, as he assails their
principles whenever he questions, so is he unjust
to their conduct whenever he would handle facts;
His appeal is to a party of a certain colour. Had
this been the appeal merely of one high church-
man to others, it were of no concern to us. But
the judge has deliberately come down from the
grave, the elevated, the tranquil position which hiS
office assigns him ; he has stepped to the middle of
the dusty arena; and there, enrobed and dignified
beneath the public glare, he calls out the Catholic
church of New South Wales to a politico-religious
“ coruest hoping by success, however won, to
obtain money and “ help” from the spectators.
Does he deserve the palm of success ? I think my
reader is satisfied that in this “contest,” into
which he flung himself unprovoked, if he presents
himself as an opponent, he deals his blows unfairly;
if as a champion, without cause of provocation or
armour of proof; if as a gentleman, he masks the
mien of honour; if as a partizan, he betrays his
N


own, whilst he yields arms to the party confronted;
if as a plteader, be bungles his client's cause; if as
a lawyer, he aims at destroying the fountain prin-
ciple of law—equality of right; if as a judge, he
stops at one side of the case, quits the central posi-
tion of the bench, sides with the related party,
arrests the hearing in reply, and gives judgment
against the party accused uncalled upon for de-
fence. Nay, he is himself accuser, pleader, decider,
executioner of this undefended cause, at the whole
world’s length of distance from the witness on the
other side—he in England, we in New South Wales.
It never entered my head that there was any
harm in lightening the fatigue of the learned
judge*s book with now and then a smile. But
mirth does not always spring from gladness; it
inay be but the momentary escape from pain ; and
I <JoSe the work with feelings and reflections of
inOre than melancholy. For the sanction of the
Judicial character has been made the instrument
to injure us in our dearest religious
equality. The influence which that sacred office
confers on its possessor has been employed to
awaken against us the prejudices, armed with the
passions, of our countrymen in the remote land of
our origin. False arms have been forged for the
iise of our enemies. A magazine of this dangerous
inunition has been fitted and supplied to the hands
of those wild declaimers and reckless bigots who
rise out of every corner of our native land, to stir
dissension and wrong the rights of religious justice.
We Catholics have been wronged, grievously
wronged, and by one whose appointed duty it is
to protect us in our rights. That name and cha-
pter of a British judge which were given by the
hand of power for our use, have been turned against
ftp, to Our abuse. You have
V Stuck u> with your tongue,
" M6«t aerpeit-like. upon the rttj heart."


You have for years industriously picked upjjte
stories told against us, gleaned gross falsehoods from
time-serving newspapers—which your length of
public life should have taught you how to value —
you have carried them in your bosom, you have
embalmed them in your dislikes; you have gone
to England, you have scattered the devices of out
enemies over the high places of influence and
power, endorsed them with your name, and with
the seal of your judicial character have stamped
the falsehoods tiue.
This is not the first occasion you have given us
to fear your especial presence on the bench. The
Catholics of the colony remember your commonly
reported connexion with that vile production of
short-lived existence, the Sydney Standard, which
w as not inappropriately designated the high church
and Burton paper, inasmuch as such of its column*
as could be spared from insulting us were devoted
to your particular opinions in politics. The writer
of that paper has been lately removed from the
gaol in Sydey to the gaol at Newcastle, that he may
exercise no influence in our society.
No Catholic can forget your decision in the case
of the adulterer and bigamist Maloney; nor the
consequences to which that decision must have led,
had it not been corrected by the sounder judgments
of Sir Francis Forbes and Sir James Dowling, your
brother judges. Your decision was conscientious,
no doubt; but it is the tricks played by prejudice
upon the blind side of conscience we have the
greatest reason to dread and apprehend. This
Maloney, a Catholic at the time, was married to a
Catholic wife, by a Catholic clergyman ; but the
ceremony was performed in a private house, there
being no Catholic church at the time in the colony.
The government not only sanctioned these Cathouc
marriages by express permissions, but made annual
calls for their registry. Some seven years after


this marriage, the clergyman who celebrated the
rite being now dead, the witnesses removed to a
remote part of the country, and it being commonly
supposed that the registry could be nowhere found,
Maloney introduced anotner woman under his roof;
and, being reproached for this by his wife, he not
only turned her with their four children in a pen-
niless and starving condition out of doors, but called
upon the Catholic clergyman to marry him to the
woman he had sub-introduced. Being charged
with his former marriage, he resolutely denied its
having ever taken place, and challenged the pro-
duction of either witnesses or register. Being
urged on his obligations to the woman and children
he had abandoned, he swelled into swaggering inso-
lence. These scenes were enacted and repeated by
Maloney in the presence of the present writer.
Finding that his schemes obtained not their end,
and the affair becoming one of notoriety, he ap-
plied, as a last resort, to a Protestant clergyman,
and the ceremony of marriage was performed. He
heard that the eye of justice was upon him, and I
saw the wretched roan sink at once from his confi-
dence into the most abject and dismal fears, crouch-
ing and imploring, in his endeavour to avert the
fete which his guilt but too surely anticipated.
The case came on. The witnesses to the previous
marriage were produced. The registration was
providentially discovered on the very morning of
the trial. It was shown in evidence that the mar-
riage rite had been duly solemnised. But a private
dwelling had been made use of for the want of a
church. The wife of that marriage was shown to
be still living; and, with the fruits of it, four
children, cast out and in great distress. On the
ground that the English Marriage Act was applicable
to the circumstances of this colony, and without
any especial act of colonial legislation, and on the
mere absence of the fact of the use of a parish


church for the ceremony or publication of banns
(there being no parish church, strictly so called; in
the colony; and many vast districts, as the judge
has now himself shown, were without a church of
any description; so that, if you applied the English
act, disorder and social disorganization must pre-
vail ; as to a great extent it did from the bare want
of clergymen to perform the ceremony) —on the
mere ground of the applicability of this inap-
plicable law, which was made for the totally differ-
ent circumstances of another country —(1 accuse
not the judge’s conscience whilst I apprehend the
existence of unconscious prejudice) —Mr. Burton
would have decided against the validity of this
Catholic marriage, and the only one which under
the circumstances could have taken place. And,
but for the joint decision of his brother judges, not
only would this man, a licensed publican, who, in
the eye of nature, in the eye of religion, in the eye
of common opinion, and now in the eye of law,
was an adulterer, a bigamist, and the deserter of
his children to starvation, have been delivered
from all civil responsibility; but, as a necessary
consequence of this decision, every child born of
Catholic marriage, of that marriage which the
government recognised and sanctioned by its acts,
would have been reduced to dishonor, the suc-
cession of all Catholic property have been made
unsafe and precarious, and the colony have been
thrown from end to end into a broil and ferment of
litigation of which no man could calculate the end
or consequences.
The Catholic clergy you represent as insincere,
as aspiring, and as ambitious, even to the ridiculous
extent of aiming at empire. The Catholic laity
you seek to degrade and hold up to contempt as a
body. “ The Catholic and convict party” That is
the phrase by which you express your favorite as-
sociation of ideas in our regard. If by this you


would insinuate that the Catholic communion is
made up of the prison class, 1 need only refer you
to the complaints made by your own side of the
press at the great proportion of Catholic emigrants
who enter the country. s ‘ The Catholic and convict
party” If in the word convict you comprehend,
as it would seem, the emancipists; who gave you
power to stretch the law beyond its term, to punish
after the laws have ceased to punish, and to make
freemen your prisoners ? Would the political acts
that brought many of these men from Ireland
transport diem now ? To hold men down in de-
gradation whom no law degrades—is this the way to
raise them up ? Is this mercy ? Throwing aside
policy, is it even justice ? “ The Catholic and convict
party” Are these words convertible ? Is a Catholic
a convict and a convict a Catholic, as a matter of
course; or what is your meaning 1 If by these words
you would express the relations of duty between the
priest and the prisoner, you are so far right; hut
they are not of one party. As well might you say
“the judge and criminal party” The Catholic
clergyman is to he more frequently found amongst
this than amongst any other portion of society.
He “ seeks not the just, but sinners.” He has a
divine example and makes no apology . Shall the
judge of sinners he his reprover ? “ The Catholic
and convict party” Why did not the words of the
condemned man at Norfolk Island return to your
startled ears as you wrote the sentence —“ What is
dome, your honor , to make us better ?” What sig-
nifies the receipt of money, the building of churches
fer fashionable resort at one end and for compulsory
attendance at the other, and the making of certain
clergymen independent? “ What have you done to
make us better? ” Is it by keeping aloof from all
association, and by calling them the hard names of
their degradation ? or, by mingling amongst them,
cogvecsing with them, and entering with our fed


ings into their individual conditions, after the
example of our blessed Saviour ? If this be made
our reproach and offence, then welcome be it;
but we did not expect it from a Christian judge.
They are “ a forfeit to the law.*’
“ Alas! alas!
Why all the souls that were were forfeit once,
And he that might the 'vantage best have took
Found out the remedy: How would you be,
If he, which is the top of judgment, should
But judge you as yon are r O think on that;
And mercy then will breathe within your lips.
Like man new made.”
If “of law there can be no less acknowledged
than that her seat is the bosom of God,” shall the
minister of law arrest the healing operations of the
minister of God ? If “ her voice be the harmony
of the world,” shall her minister throw into that
harmony his works of discord ? If we have tanght
all men, even those who have not her countenance,
to “ do her homage and admire her as the common
mother of their peace and joy,” shall this, her
minister, burden us in return with his complaints
and criminations ?
You have not only sought to sink us into a party
of a degraded class, but that holy religion whicn
is the basis of our morals, that religion which is
the best motive of our social conduct—of those
morals, of that conduct, whose acts and omissions
you are called to decide upon in our utmost need ;
of that religion you have expressed your contempt;
her teachings you have derided; at her holiest
of rites and sacraments you have mocked and
scoffed—you, who, by the noblest function of your
office, are required to throw your protection over
the very criminal, when he pleads not guilty , until
the voice of others and the strength of undoubted
evidence have clearly proved his guilt; you, upon
whose freedom from bias, upon whose clearness
from prejudice, upon whose right discernment of
our conduct with its motives, depend our rights,
our possessions, our liberties, our lives, and that


property more valuable than all, our reputation.
Your prejudice against us, and your efforts to de-
grade us, are now matters of common fame. What
innocent Catholic may not dread crimination?
And what bad Protestant may not be tempted to
get up an action ? And what calculations may not
be made, in ignorance, upon conjectural chances ?
What Catholic witness can give that evidence
which is to guide your decisions with that confi-
dence of credit that gives clearness, when he feeh
himself beneath your observation, knowing, as he
does, your preconceived opinion of the spirit of
that religion under whose ties he speaks, and of
the sincerity of her very teachers. Nor can the
circumstance of his religion be unknown to you,
as it was your practice to bring it conspicuously
forward; for when, as you always reverently did,
you personally administered the oath to the wit-
ness, you first put the question of his being a Pro-
testant or a Catholic; and, if the person declared
himself Catholic, it was then your custom —a cus-
tom contrary to law, a custom altogether uncalled
for, a custom which in your view of things but
cherished the superstition of the witness, a custom
which fed the contempt of the Protestant juryman,
whilst it compelled the other to do what neither law
nor his religion required of him —it was your custom
to turn the book on the other side, and swear the
witness on two dirty pieces of paper pasted cross-
wise on the sacred volume. But, if the Catholic
witness has reason to apprehend your presence,
what must be the feelings of that Catholic who is
arraigned at your bar?—who stands before you,
perhaps, called there by an action got up on the
miscalculation of the influence of prejudice on your
mind. Whilst his faculties are aroused to their
keenest apprehension, and his feelings stung to the
quickest palpitation; whilst his mind overgathers
beneath the shadow of your featured presence, and


liis fears alarm him in that hour of peril, with the
remembrance how frail, how yielding, how swayed
by unconscious motives are often the best of men;
whilst he calls to mind what you have uttered and
how you have laughed at that which was always
the best sentiment within him—his religion; what
Catholic, however innocent, but must be filled with
a dread and an apprehension entirely independent
of his cause, and resting individually upon you—
a dread and apprehension which may even paralyse
his defence, and work the undoing of his cause, of
his character, of his very life. Of what use then to
remind him of that story about the ermine’s purity,
and that if she suffers but one stain she dies of
grief? He will tell us that he sees but the man :
one who, before this accusation, sought to class him
in a degraded party, to prove his convict association,
and to misrepresent and deride his religion. "Why
remind him that now he is no longer that person,
but the solemn judge dressed out in solemn robes,
and bound to be impartial. His apprehensions tell
us that man is ever man, and that change of out-
ward robe works no change of inward character ;
that it is the colour of the man, more than of
the garment, which he fears. In vain do wehlraw
attention to your serene demeanour, and to the
calm, collected brow. He says it was with the
same calm attention, and the same cold and pas
sionless air, that you scoffed at his sacraments,
insulted his creed, and wronged a better cause.
After considering and revolving these things,
may one who bears the burden of an office, neither
less sacred in its sanctions, nor less responsible in its
ministrations than your own, be permitted, in the;
name of those unnumered to whom he ministers,
by the right of that justice the upholding of which
is the common duty of us both, in the spirit of true-
hearted loyalty, and out of respe ct for those vener-
able laws to support which is my strong inclination
t
o


as it is my boimden duty, to entreat you will allow
me to submit to your most serious consideration,
whether it would be at all fit or becoming, or would
maintain the high character and serve the right-
some ends of justice, that you should ever again
preside in the supreme court of New South Wales,
at any time when either a Catholic is the witness
to be brought under examination, or one known
to be of that religion is the party under accusation,
expecting impartial judgment, as administered
without party bias or sectarian taint contracted of
her minister, from his country’s laws.
FINIS.
W, i, Dnnu, hilttr, lHl<ilui|R Ckrwrlt 04», Sydney,
