

With the Compliments of the High Commissioner
AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORGE
IN GREAT BRITAIN.
Treatmervt of the (Sick & Wourvded
OFFIGIAE (STATEMENT.
COMMONWEALTH OFFICES, 72, Victoria Street, Westminster, London, S.W-


I
Wff J'erguson CollectionA|?
II Library" JJ
Canberra J!JJ
i
i
I
j ■• . ■ . • ■
I


AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE IN GREAT BRITAIN.
A letter dated December 14 has been circulated
among Australians in the United Kingdom, by some
ladies who give themselves the title of the " Com-
mittee of Australian Women in London." This
letter contains a number of inaccurate statements con-
cerning the treatment of sick and wounded Australian
soldiers in England, and as it is understood it is also
being circulated in Australia it has been deemed
advisable to make available the facts regarding the
methods adopted by the Commonwealth Authorities
for attending to the requirements of the thousands
of members of the Australian Imperial Expeditionary
Forces who have been brought to England since the
commencement of hostilities in the Dardanelles.
It will be seen that ample provision has been made
for coping with all the circumstances mentioned in the
circular letter, while there is a definite denial to several
of the statements, notably the one in which it is stated
that sick and wounded men walk the streets all night,
having been discharged from hospitals without funds.
Denials of these statements have already been cabled
to Australia. They remain equally without foundation.
It is but a very few years since the Commonwealth
adopted the principle of a National Military Organi-
sation, and to-day finds this British Dominion fighting
by the side of the Motherland in the greatest war the
world has ever known. It was inevitable that a war
undertaken at such short notice, as a matter of fact
without any notice at all, should raise problems, ad-
ministrative and other, of the greatest urgency, which
have had to be solved with the prompt decision which
is always required in things military. As soon as the
Commonwealth resolved to furnish its quota of men to
the Imperial Forces much complicated work was at
once provided for the Commonwealth Offices in
London, which are, of course, Australia's Headquarters
in the capital of the British Empire. When Australia's
troops came to Egypt, and still more when they took
their part in that strenuous conflict on the Gallipoli
Peninsula, the labours of the staff at the Com-
monwealth Office, into whose hands military ad-
ministration was for the time confided, doubled,
trebled, and then quadrupled. As wounded men
from Gallipoli and the Alexandria and Malta
Hospital Stations began to arrive in England
the work naturally increased in intensity until at last
the High Commissioner's Office in Victoria-street,
Westminster, could no longer find room for the staff
required for the special work.
Fortunately the High Commissioner was able to
secure premises in the immediate neighbourhood, which
were spacious enough to house the large staff required
to deal with the multifarious matters connected with
the Australian Forces battling for the future of the
British Empire. The additional room was found in a
building which used to be known as the Westminster
Training College and is situated in the Horseferrv-
road, Westminster. This institution was formerly a
Training College for Weslevan Ministers and covers
some two acres of ground. Here all branches dealing
with Australian matters military out of Australia are
for the present sheltered. Here are grouped all de-
partments of the Administrative Military Service.
Primarily it is the function of these Headquarters to
receive wounded or invalided men from the Hospitals
to whose care they have been confided as soon as they
are discharged, and then to care for them until they
are well enough to return to active service, the first
step to which is taken when, after a second Medical
Examination, they are certified as fit to go to the
Australian Military Depot at Weymouth. From there
they are drafted back to the fighting line as occasion
arises. But there is much to be done before this stage
is reached, and perhaps the best way of gaining a view
of the actual work of Australia's Military Headquarters
in London would be to take each Branch in order.
10,000 Members of the Australian Imperial Force in
Great Britain.
Of the Australian Imperial Force which was sent
to the Dardanelles there are at the present time in the
Motherland 10,000 officers, non-commissioned officers,
and men in hospitals throughout Great Britain, on fur-
lough, or at the Depot at Weymouth. These men have
been sent to England either wounded or sick.
They are landed at various ports, the majority of
them being disembarked at Southampton, Plymouth,
and Cardiff. From these ports they are taken by train
and distributed among the various General Hospitals
throughout Great Britain. The majority of the men
are thus cared for in the London district. At the
present time there are 191 officers and 2,876 non-com-
missioned officers and men in various hospitals in


London, while 22 officers and 1,801 non-commissioned
officers and men are in hospitals outside the London
district. Of this latter number there are roughly 500
members of the Australian Imperial Force at the Ist
Australian Auxiliary Hospital, Harefield Park; 342 at
the Ist Southern General Hospital, Birmingham ; 171
at the 2nd Southern General Hospital, Bristol; 105
at the sth Southern General Hospital, Portsmouth ;
153 at Netley ; and 240 at the 3rd Western General
Hospital, Cardiff.
At the General Hospital he is treated until considered
to be in a fit condition to go into an Auxiliary Hospital.
He remains there until he is in a further state of
fitness, when he is discharged to a Convalescent
Hospital.
In order to get in touch with our men at the earliest
possible moment, postcards bearing the address of the
Australian Military Offices, London, are distributed
amongst the men as soon as they disembark. These
cards are filled in by the patients as soon as they arrive
at a hospital, and are at once posted to the Officer in
Charge, Military Records Office. This information
goes to the Military Records Office, to the Post Office,
and to the Medical Branch, each Branch taking the
necessary action.
From two to six days after the man has been ad-
mitted to a hospital, lists giving such admissions are
forwarded by the Hospital Authorities through the War
Office to our Military Records Office. As soon as these
admissions are reported the information is at once
telegraphed to the Department of Defence, so that that
Department may inform the next-of-kin of the men
concerned. The same information is also sent to the
Intermediate Base at Cairo.
Australian Official Visitors in Hospital.
Whilst our men are in hospital every endeavour is
made by the Australian authorities to get into touch
with them. In this connection it has been found necesi-
sary to place in each hospital permanently an officer,
or a non-commissioned officer, to visit each man indi-
vidually to inquire into his needs, and wherever pos-
sible to see that those needs are attended to. Among
other matters to which these permanent men at the
hospitals attend is to see that the men receive their
letters, and that if necessary telegrams are forwarded
for them to their relatives in Australia. It is also his
task to explain fully to the man any information he
may require concerning pay, furlough, and clothing.
The Same man sees to it that the Australian soldiers
receive any articles Which are issued by the Military
Authorities, the London Committee of the Australian
Red Cross Society, or by the Australian War Con-
tingent Association, or by any other Association that
may be in existence for the benefit of the Australian
wounded.
In addition to this, under the direction of the Medical
Branch, our own medical officers visit the hospitals
and inquire into any complaints which fall under the
cognisance of the medical authority. Whilst in a
British hospital a man is not allowed to have money or
valuables in his possession, but cigarettes, matches,
tooth-powder, postage stamps, and stationery are
supplied.
If in an Australian Auxiliary Hospital, an Australian
Military Convalescent Hospital, or Depot, special
arrangements may be made for small advances of pay
from the O.C.
Men Permanently Unfit.
Should a man be found to be permanently unfit for
further war service, he is returned to Australia, or, if
he has no ties in Australia and is desirous of remaining
in this country, he is allowed to take his discharge in
England on giving a guarantee freeing the Common-
wealth of all responsibility in regard to his return to
Australia.
If, after his medical treatment, a man is found to
be not fit enough to take his place in the ranks as a
fighting unit, but fit for light duty, he is put on to
Home Service where he may be of use to the expe-
ditionary forces.
Should a man have relatives in this country who are
willing and able to look after him, and the case is
suitable, he is allowed to spend his period of convales-
cence with his own people, on condition that he is
properlv looked after and sends a report periodically
from the nearest Military medical officer.
After returning from convalescence, and before get-
ting furlough, he undergoes a thorough medical
examination, and should any reasonable doubt exist
in the minds of the medical officers he is sent before, a
consultation of our most eminent Australian medical
men is held, and whatever recommendation they make
is carried out, the patient perhaps being drafted to one
of our hospitals, where Australian medical officers
are in attendance, for special treatment.
Under this system a man need never complain that
he is not receiving the finest and most up-to-date
medical treatment that the Australian world of science
can supply.
On Discharge from Hospital.
When discharged from hospital men are instructed
to report to the Australian Military Offices, 130, Horse-
ferry-road, London. Further medical treatment, or
convalescence, is then arranged, or if the man is fit,
fourteen days' leave is granted. He is also given a
railway warrant enitling him to travel to a holiday
address within Great Britain or Ireland.
On leaving hospital a railway warrant and an
advance of <£l is made to enable the man to report at
the London Headquarters in Horse ferry-road.
Tt will not be uninteresting to describe how the man
is dealt with at the Australian Military Offices, 130,
Horseferry-road. The men enter a large Assembly
Room, which is well warmed and well supplied with
newspapers and other literature. Here they may
hand over their kits into a general kit-room, a receipt
being given for each kit.
Medical Inspection and Furlough Arrangements.
From the General Assembly Room they are taken in
batches of twenty or thirty to the Medical Inspection
Room. Here they are examined, and those men who
are fit for furlough are given a pass to indicate that
they are so fit. The men then proceed «to the furlough
room, where they receive a furlough pass for fourteen


days' leave, a railway warrant entitling them to travel
to a holiday address within Great Britain or Ireland,
and also a requisition for any clothing they may re-
quire. The man presents his clothing requisition to
the Quartermaster's Store, and is at once supplied. If
it is necessary for him to change his uniform, there is
a dressing-room provided with bathrooms.
Pav Office.
Having thus been dealt with, he now proceeds to
the Pay Office. A sum of between J4,G00 and <£5,000
a day is paid over the counter to men on furlough, and
when it is realised that as against a payment due of ss.
a day for terms ranging from six to twelve months,
many of the men have received only 2s. per day, it will
be understood that the arrears of pay amount to quite
considerable sums. It is no unusual occurrence for
payments of £5O to be made to individual men. On
the other hand, it often happens that, owing to the
relatively large provision made for his wife and
children, a man finds himself in London with a very
small sum to draw with which to enjoy his fourteen
days' furlough. The High Commissioner, however,
has directed that sufficient funds must be provided to
enable each man to enjoy his well-earned holiday.
Needless to say this direction is zealously carried out,
with the result that the Australian Pay Office in
London has earned the blessings of the befriended men.
In addition to their pay, the men also receive Is. 9d.
per day during the period of their fourteen days'
furlough.
Reference has already been made to the large arrears
of pay due to certain of the men. It might, however,
be noted that every encouragement is given to such
men not to draw the whole of their money at one time,
but to look upon the office as their banker, and to draw
on their funds as required. In order, as far as pos-
sible, to avoid inconvenience to the men, the Pay
Office is open from 9 a.m. until 9 p.m. on weekdays,
until 6 p.m. on Saturday, and until 1 p.m. on Sunday.
That the facilities available are taken advantage of
will be realised when it is known that as many as
500 men are paid in a day. In addition to payments
over the counter, money is remitted through the post
to men spending their furlough away from London.
Military Records.
In the Military Records Office there is now a com-
plete record of every casualty in the Australian Imperial
Force. The casualties are cabled from Alexandria
direct to the Australian Military Office and they are
placed on record. In cases where the next-of-kin is
resident in Great Britain information is at once trans-
mitted to the next-of-kin. If a man is moved from
the front, the transport, the disembarkation, the admis-
sion to hospital, the discharge from hospital, the fur-
lough, his arrival at the depot, and his departure
again for the front are duly recorded, and the next-of-
kin or any other person desiring to be notified is at
once informed.
For every member of the Australian Imperial Force
killed, wounded, or missing it is estimated that at least
two inquiries from persons in Great Britain have been
addressed to the Officer in Charge of Military Records.
Between the months of May and October 220,000
papers were dealt with.
Among other things the Officer in Charge of Mili-
tary Records telegraphs to the Department of Defence,
Melbourne, the admission of members of the Austra-
lian Imperial Force to hospitals in Great Britain and
the nature of their wounds or sickness. This informa-
tion is duly conveyed to the next-of-kin in Australia.
Under the Officer in Charge of Military Records come
also the Post Office, Cable Office, Central Registration
and Correspondence Branches, the general control of
the civilian staff, and the supervision of the new
quarters at Horseferry-road.
Commonwealth Bank.
As there were many inquiries from the Australian
soldiers concerning their Savings Bank account in the
Commonwealth Bank, arrangements were made with
the Manager of the Commonwealth Bank in London
to open a Branch of the Bank at the Australian Military
Office. This Branch has been found extremely useful,
and it is proposed to extend it.
Military Post Office.
There has been established at the Australian Military
Offices a Military Post Office, where a large staff is
continuously employed sorting and despatching letters.
As a rule, any letters received at the Australian Mili-
tary Post Office, London, are despatched to addresses
in Great Britain or Ireland within six hours of their
receipt. In order to deal with the great number of
letters which are now being received, and which some-
times by one mail number as many as 150 mail-bags, a
complete alphabetical index of every member of the
Australian Imperial Force in Great Britain and Ireland
is kept. The staff work in shifts of eight hours right
through the 24 hours.
Telegraphic Facilities for the Australian Imperial
Force.
Special telegraphic facilities for members of the
Australian Imperial Force have been arranged by the
Commonwealth Offices in London. Under this
arrangement the men may cable messages at cheap
rates, the cost being deducted from the man's pay, or
they may cable messages limited to twleve words to
friends in Australia at 9d. per word, the charge being
collected from the receivers in Australia by the Com-
monwealth Government.
Soldiers' Inquiry Bureau.
A Soldiers' Inquiry Bureau has been instituted for
the convenience of soldiers passing through here, and
the following is a resume of the kind of business
carried on.
Where to Stay in London.
Some of the men desire cheap lodgings, and are
directed to such places as the Y.M.C.A. establishments,
Union Jack Club, Peel House Institute, and the well-
known soldiers' homes. The rate for bed and break-
fast at these places varies from Is. to Is. 6d.
Quite a large number of the men prefer to stay at
hotels or boarding-houses, and a comprehensive list of
such places has been tabulated and has been posted on
the notice board of the above room. The rates for bed
and breakfast varv from 2s. to ss. 6d.


There are other men who prefer to stay with private
families, the idea of English home life being more
attractive to them while on furlough, and a list of such
places has also been prepared and is constantly being
added to. When the men ask for accommodation,
their requirements are ascertained, and, if possible, a
telephone, message is immediately transmitted to the
hotel or boarding-house at which they wish to stay, so
that the men are expected and welcomed.
Clubs for Soldiers.
Information as to the clubs, etc., which are open to
Australian soldiers in London is also displayed ; among
such places may be mentioned the King George and
Queen Mary Club, "Victoria League," "The Over-
Seas," and " The Maple Leaf."
At all of the§e places the men have free access to
reading-rooms, writing-rooms, lounges, etc., a boon
which is greatly appreciated by them.
Railway Travel.
When the men are granted their furlough their chief
concern in most cases is to visit their homes or where
friends or relatives reside or have resided. To assist
them in this way any information with regard to train
times or general geographical information is at their
disposal. In many cases they desire to combine a
little sightseeing of the British Isles with their more
important business of visiting relatives, and it is the
business of this section to assist the men to do this in
the most expeditious and economical way possible in
conjunction with their free and half-fare railway
tickets.
The Bureau answers inquiries as to the best way to
get to certain addresses and localities in London, and
also the best way to do a little sightseeing in London,
for which special arrangements are made.
Enquiries have lately been received as to where men
can ascertain the address of relatives in the Provinces,
or possibly some old family home ; in some cases they
may only be aware of the town or district desired. To
give a typical case: A man desired to trace an old
relative in a certain district in Leeds. With the assist-
ance of the Guildhall Librarian and by communicating
with Leeds our Enquiry Bureau was enabled to ascer-
fqjp pxaptly what thp man enquired for.
This Bureau is being taken advantage of now to a
highly satisfactory degree.
Accountant's Branch.
The Accountant's Branch might be said to be divided
into three sub-branches—namely, the Accounts Branch,
the Allotment Branch, and the Pay Office.
The nucleus of the personnel of the Accounts Branch
was the Accountant's Staff of the High Commissioner's
Office. This staff dealt with the payment of all moneys
of the Commonwealth payable outside Australia, such
as those covering Naval and Military Stores, the con-
struction of the Australian Fleet, and the Trans-
continental Railway. As the work of dealing with
the finances of the Australian Imperial Force grew, so
the organization had to be expanded. It now deals
with all accounts payable in Great Britain in connection
with the Force. This involves claims covering the
maintenance of wounded Australians whilst in hospitals
in the United Kingdom, the meeting of pay, the pro-
vision of funds at the different Depots and Australian
Hospitals, and the audit of all advance accounts in-
volving an expenditure of <£35,000 a week.
In view of the fact that a ledger account is kept by
the Staff Paymaster in Cairo for each man, it is
especiallv important that every payment made in the
United Kingdom be advised to him. This duty de-
volves upon the Accounts Branch.
It is interesting to note the system by which the
Australian Force generally is financed. The funds in
the first instance are provided by the Commonwealth
Treasury. An advance of—at present £450,000 a
month—is made to the War Office by the High Com-
missioner's Office to cover the cost of stores supplied
to the Australians, and the advance of cash through the
Imperial Command Paymasters to the Australian Field
Cashiers for pay purposes. This system covers also
the Australian Troops at present in France. When
the vouchers are received by the War Office accounting
for the moneys advanced, they are sent on to the High
Commissioner's Office to be dealt with by the
Accountant. In turn the Staff Paymaster, Cairo, for-
wards to the Accounts Branch all vouchers in support
of expenditure incurred by him out of funds received
from the Imperial Command Paymaster in Egypt, and
at this juncture the accounts are subjected to their first
audit. These accounts, it might be mentioned, cover
the whole of the pay of the Australian Force abroad.
Allotment Branch.
The Allotment Branch deals with the payment of
allotments made by the officers and men to their de-
pendents in Great Britain. The number of allotments
registered in the Office is close upon 4,000, involving
a payment every 28 days of £9,000. The privilege of
the separation allowance has not been extended to
the allottees outside Australia.
Here the management is marked by the considera-
tion shown, as the money is sent in the most convert-
ible form—Bank Notes—directly to the allottees.
Payment is made every 28 days in order that the
amount to be paid in each case might be as far as
possible constant. Stamped and addressed envelopes
are sent with the remittances for the return of the
receipt§ :
Special Comforts.
As evidence of the thoughtful care that has been
expended on what we may call the building up of the
convalescent Australian soldier, may be instanced the
well-aired and well-warmed waiting-room in which
the applicant for the Medical Officer's attentions may
rest. The room in which medical examinations take
place is also well warmed, though the proper expression
would be " rooms," because cases calling for a parti-
cular and detailed examination are dealt with in special
and private apartments.
A Free Buffet.
But it may be that our wounded hero cannot see the
doctor or some other official for a few hours. In such
a case he need not leave the building to stroll about the
streets at Westminster. At his elbow he will find an
institution known as the Anzac Buffet, the quarters for


which have been given by the Commonwealth Office.
This is a restaurant in which ali manner of dainty light
refreshments are dispensed to the guests by ladies of
the Australian Natives' Association, to whom this is a
labour of love. In an adjoining and tastefully deco-
rated hall music is provided for those who love melody.
Ample provision has been made by the Commonwealth
Authorities for the comfort of wounded and sick
visitors to these Headquarters, in the shape of dress-
ing-rooms, lavatories, and bath-rooms. Free tickets
for theatres are provided here, and daily parties are
conducted to places of interest in and around London.
Men Met at the Stations.
When the Military Section of the Commonwealth
Offices was moved to the new premises at 130, Horse-
ferry-road, arrangements were at once made to place
Military Police at the entrance to the Offices at 72,
Victoria-street, in order to direct any soldiers who may
come there to the new offices. These Military Police
are on duty both day and night. At each Railway
Terminus the Australian Military Police are on duty
to meet every train coming from those centres in which
Australian soldiers are in hospital. The Railway
Station staff have also been instructed to put any
Australian soldiers in touch with our Military Police,
so that they may be directed to the right quarter.
Complaints.
In dealing with a great number of men it is always
certain that there will be a number of complaints. A
few of the complaints are real, but most of them are
trivial and many are ridiculous. For instance, there
recently appeared in The Daily Mail an article under
the name of Miss Wynifred M. Willis-Swan, President
of the Women's Reserve Ambulance. Among other
things, this lady stated: —
These Australians and New Zealanders are
enduring great hardships in England. Many of
them have no friends. Many have no place to
spend the night, and when, in such cases as these,
their pay is late in coming, they find themselves
stranded.
1 know it to be a fact. I myself have heard of
men, just recovered from wounds received in our
common war, who tried to sleep on the Embank-
ment, but were told to "Move on."
The Officer in Charge of Military Records took this
matter up by the special instructions of the High Com-
missioner, with the result that two days later Miss
Swan signed the following statement:—
I shall but add that Mr. Smart has this morning
taken me over the Pay Department and fully con-
vinced me that there is no truth whatever in the
statement made by me, which I unfortunately
voiced.
This lady also stated that the article was not written
by herself but a Mr. Williamson, a journalist. She
stated that she had read the article hurriedly and had
not noticed the statement that Australian soldiers had
slept on the Embankment.
The above statement from The Daily Mail was also
submitted to the Commissioner of Police, who, through
his Private Secretary, authorised the following state-
ment :
I have to tell you there is no shadow of truth in
this report. No Australian or New Zealand soldier
has ever been seen by any member of the London
Police without a shelter, nor has been " moved
on " on the Embankment.
From the foregoing facts it will be seen that the chief
reason for not being able to promptly and systemati-
cally handle the large number of soldiers arriving in
London earlier in the war was the inadequacy of the
accommodation available at the main office, at 72,
Victoria-street. Since the new quarters were obtained,
however, there has been no difficulty, and certainly no
ground for the complaints embodied in the letter dated
December 14. The importance of paying every atten-
tion to the men from the Commonwealth, who have
fought so nobly in Gallipoli, is fully appreciated by all
connected with the Commonwealth Offices, and every-
thing possible is being done—and promptly done. The
members of the Australian Imperial Force have fre-
quently expressed their satisfaction with the treatment
accorded them.


'
.
. •
'
.
,
¥• .
I
..
.
.
,
'
• ■
1
'
'
-
■
'
'
'
