

W’EMENT OF CURRENT CC
ICY IN RELATION TO At
PRIMARY INDUSTRIES
A RURAL POLICY FOR
POST-WAR AUSTRALIA
Authorized by The Rt. Hon. J. B. Chifley, Prime Minister of Australia.
REPRODUCED AT CENTRAL DRAWING OFFICE, MAHIBYRNONG, W. 3.


A STATEMENT OF CURRENT COMMONWEALTH
POLICY IN RELATION TO AUSTRALIA’S
PRIMARY INDUSTRIES.
A RURAL POLICY FOR
POST-WAR AUSTRALIA
Authorized by The Rt. Hon. J. B. Chifley, Prime Minister of Australia.
REPRODUCED AT CENTRAL DRAWING OFFICE, MARIBYRNONG, W. 3.


AGRICULTURAL POLICY.
Para.
I. INTRODUCTION 1
11. OBJECTIVES OP AGRICULTURAL POLICY 5
111. GENERAL ECONOMIC AND EMPLOYMENT POLICY 6
IV. STABILITY AND SECURITY OP PAHM INCOMES
The Fluctuations of the Past 10
The Present Outlook 13
International Commodity Agreements 16
The Stabilisation Policy 19
Ceiling Prices for Primary Products 20
Organised Marketing 21
Coat of Production Surveys 23
Wool 25
Wheat 26
Meat 28
Dairy Industry - Manufactured Products 30
Peed Grains 3k
V. RAISING FARM EFFICIENCY 35
Biological Research 36
Economic Research 111
Extension Work on Agriculture 1(2
Rural Credit Policy 1(3
Land Settlement Policy
Absorptive Capacity 1(14-
War Service Land Settlement 1(5
Land Values 1(9
Land Sales Control 51
VI. CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT OP RESOURCES
Water Conservation and its Use 52
Soil Conservation 55
Electricity on the Farm 56
Encouragement of Tree Planting 57
Commonwealth Aid to the above Projects 58
Development and Settlement of Northern
Australia 60
VII. IMPROVING THE CONDITIONS 0? COUNTRY LIFE 6l
Rural Housing 63
Telephone Services 6k
Health Services 65
Rural Education 66
VIII. AGRICULTURAL AND GENERAL WELFARE 67


I. INTRODUCTION.
1. The agricultural and pastoral industries provide
about 20 to 25 per cent of the total Australian national
income. The returns from exported primary products provide
the funds which pay for imports of all kinds of consumer
goods and capital equipment needed not only for sustaining
living standards hut for developing further our natural
resources.
2. The prosperity of the people engaged in the primary
industries cannot he regarded as separate from that of the
rest of the community, nor from that of peoples - in town
and country areas alike - throughout the world. Prosperous
conditions for industrial workers here and overseas stimulate
primary production and enable farmers' products to he sold
at payable prices. Stability of employment and rising
standards of living provide stability of returns and rising-
standards for primary producers. The development of
economically and industrially backward countries further
widens our markets. Accordingly, the Conmonwealth Govern-
ment has consistently pressed for policies designed to
promote full employment here and abroad. The attainment
of this objective will confer considerable benefits on
Australian farmers.
3* During the war, primary producers, despite short-
ages of manpower and materials and adverse seasons, have
enjoyed more stability of Income than previously. On
present indications the prosperity of the primary industries
will continue for the next few years. An estimate has been
made of expected gross income over the period 1914.6-1950
which indicates a marked improvement over pre-war years.
This, together with a reduction in farm indebtedness of
some 20 per cent which has taken place during the war,
will put farmers in a good position to meet intensified
competition in world markets after that period. The
present period of prosperity should be regarded, however,
as both a blessing and a warning. Unless Governments and
peoples apply themselves earnestly to the tasks of relat-
ing production to the needs of consumers, and unless primary
producers themselves do all in their power to assist Govern-
ments to achieve this objective through Increasing effic-
iency and by other means there may well be a repetition after
1950 of the troubles which beset farmers the world over
between the wars.
h. Realising the great range and complexity of the
problems coming within the scope of agricultural policy,
the Government early in 19k3 appointed a Rural Reconstruct-
ion Commission to report to it on measures for the
development and rehabilitation of the primary industries.
The Commission has already presented a number of reports
and the Government has begun a systematic and careful
examination of them. The reports which the Commission has
submitted or will finally submit cover the following
subjects :
AGRICULTURAL POLIfCY.


1. A General Rural Survey.
2. Settlement and Employment of Returned Men on the
Land.
3* Land Utilisation and Farm Settlement.
I+. Financial and Economic Reconstruction of Farms.
5. Rural Credit.
6. Farming Efficiency and Factors relating thereto.
7. Rural Amenities.
8. Irrigation, ..ater Conservation ana Land Drainage.
9. Jar® Land Tenure and Valuation.
10. Commercial Kolicy in relation to Agriculture.
The Government has not yet received all these reports,
but those already presented have provided a valuable basis
for the Government in formulating its policy on agriculture
and related problems. However, full examination of all the
reports has not yet been completed.
Many of the matters are of joint concern to Common-
wealth and State Governments. At a later date, when all
the reports have been received and examined, discussions
will be held with the States and the Commonwealth Govern-
ment will issue a more detailed and comprehensive statement.
II. OBJECTIVES OF AGRICULTURAL POLICY.
5* The Government feels that certain general objectives,
may already be clearly stated:
(1) To raise and make more secure the levels of living
enjoyed by those engaged in and dependent upon the
primary industries.
(li) To secure a volume of production adequate to meet
domestic food requirements, to provide the raw
materials for our developing secondary industries,
and to enable an expanding volume of exports to
pay for necessary imports.
(ill/ To encourage efficient production at prices which
are fair to the consumer and which provide an
adequate return to the producer.
(iv) To develop and use our primary resources of water,
soil, pastures and forests in a way which
conserves them and avoids damaging exploitation.
These general objectives may be translated into more
specific terms; nataely:
(i) To promote a successful general economic and
employment policy - domestic and international -
to ensure adequate markets for rural industries.
(li; To provide greater stability and security of
farm incomes.
{ilij To promote more efficient farm practices and so
reduce the cost per unit of output.
(iv) To conserve and develop water, soil and other
natural resources.


(v) To improve the conditions of country life.
The present statement deals with these more specific
objectives.
III. GENERAL ECONOMIC AND EMPLOYMEKT POLICY.
6. The Government regards high levels of employment
hoth in Australia and overseas as a necessary prerequisite
of continued agricultural prosperity. It has taken this
view consistently in its domestic policy and in internation-
al discussions and the support it has received for this
attitude is illustrated in the declarations of the inter-
national conference on Food and Agriculture held at Hot
Springs, United States of America, in May 1943» and of the
first session of the United nations Pood and Agriculture
Organization, October 1945*
7. The Government has subscribed to the objectives of
the United Nations Pood and Agriculture Organisation recog-
nising the principle that the welfare of all peoples is
interdependent, that progress in under-developed countries
means in turn expanding markets for Australia, more varied
Imports, and advancement of Australian standards of living.
The raising of nutritional standards is of concern to
Australia not only from the humanitarian aspect but from that
of a large world supplier of foodstuffs.
8. So far as domestic consumption standards are con-
cerned, the Government has, through its successful price
stabilisation policy, enabled the Australian people to
obtain adequate quantities and varieties of foods at
reasonable prices, and to maintain and improve standards
of diet and health.
9. Recognising in particular the Importance of milk
in the dietary, the Government will at an early meeting of
the Australian Agricultural Council, discuss with the States
measures for maintaining and increasing the consumption of
whole milk and other protective foods.


Income in
Excess of
No. of Primary
Producers
Percentage
Increase
1938-39
1942-43
£5,000
200
500
150
£1,000
4,300
14,600
240
£600
11,600
38,400
230
£400
25,400
72,000
180
£250
53,400
118,600
120
IV. STABILITY AND SECURITY OF FARM INCOMES.
The Fluctuations of the Past.
10. Although the immediate outlook for rural
industries is bright, it is but a few years since agriculture
v/as in the doldrums. Most settlement and expansion had
taken place in the twenties when prices and costs were high;
some of this expansion was unwise. When the slump came
bringing low prices and narrowing markets the conditions of
many farmers became desperate. Markets were everywhere
closing, and the output of the farmers was said to be in over
supply. Quotas and restrictions were being constantly
applied. The question was not how could more of the good
things of life be produced but how to reduce output, and
methods were devised to compensate the farmer for growing less.
Australian farmers suffered very severely indeed from the slump
of the early thirties. There was some recovery in the middle
thirties but just before the war demand slackened again. It
seemed that there was a poor outlook for Australian agricultura
These circumstances leave the warning against over-optimistic
closer settlement and expansion into marginal areas,
11. At the outbreak of war the demand for wool and
meat was strengthened and prices rose and the returns of the
dairy farmer and the egg producer were stabilised soon after.
Of our major exports wheat alone seemed to be in over-supply.
Then suddenly, following widespread droughts and heavy feed-
ing to animals particularly in Korth America, the world v/as
faced with a shortage of all grain but particularly of wheat,
the price of which rose steeply. Demand also increased fer-
tile more Intensive crops and profitable prices were obtained
for such crops as flax, potatoes, vegetables and fruit.
12. The result of all this was a great increase in
the earnings of the farmers although in some areas the price
increase was more than offset by reduction in output caused by
the severe drought of 1944-45* Many farmers were limited in
their production by lack of manpower, and shortage of fertili-
zers and mechanical plant. But in spite of these offsetting
factors the financial position of farmers was greatly improved
since 1939.
This is clearly shown in the following table,
IMCOUBd OF PRIMARY PRODUCERS.
Comparison of incomes in 1938/39 and 1942/43.


Although accurate figures are not available,
it is estimated that the total indebtedness of fanners to
institutions such as government agencies, various banks,
insurance societies, pastoral and trustee companies, has
declined from, in round figures, about £3oom. in June 1939
to about £22+o m. in June 192+5, i. e. a reduction of about
£6om. These figures do not include private mortgages or
hire purchase debts which are also likely to have been
reduced considerably. It seems reasonable therefore, to
assune a reduction of 20J5 generally in rural indebtedness
over the six years. In any case the increase in the gen-
eral price level has reduced the burden of farm indebtedness.
This improved financial position has been considerably offset
by the Inability to maintain upkeep of farm improvements dur-
ing the war. Heavy expenditure will be essential to restore
farms to their pre-war condition and much plant and equipment
will need to be purchased as these become available, ilore-
over repairs and replacements will now cost much more than in
1939.
The Present Outlook.
13. But allowing for all these factors the position
of the farmer is much better than before the war. The pre-
sent problem is not that of finding a market, but rather to
supply the urgent demand for food and raw materials which
comes from every quarter. The market outlook at least for
a few years seems to be very good, and farmers have a chance
to secure their financial position as seldom before. The
annual gross value at the principal markets of the produc-
tion of Australian farmers during the five year period to
1938-39 was £2lom. but with the present outlook, including
the long term contracts with the United Kingdom, it is
reasonable to assume that during the five years 192+6/2+7 to
1950/51 and granted normal seasons, the annual gross income
of the rural community will be in the neighbourhood of £3oom.
12+. While the market for the immediate future
seems assured the outlook for the longer term is difficult to
foresee. On the one hand the terrible dislocation of Surope
will affect production particularly in animal products for
years ahead. After the 1912+-18 war it took Prance and Ger-
many twenty years to recover their pre-war pig population and
their sheep numbers have never recovered. On the other hand
there is the greatly increased production in North America.
By 192+1 the volume of U. 3. food production for sale and home
consumption had risen to 15 per cent above the average of the
years 1935-39 and thereafter it increased steadily to obtain
a record production in 192+2+ at a level 38 per cent, above pre-
war. There are insufficient data to determine what proport-
ion of the American increase has been due to increased acreage
or increased efficiency and how much to exceptionally favour-
able climatic conditions. Assuming normal seasons it is plain
that North America can materially increase her pre-war product-
ion.
15. In the past Australia has depended upon the
United Kingdom for a very big proportion of her market partic-
ularly for the more perishable of her primary products such
as meat, butter, eggs and fruit. During the war Britain


materially increased her agricultural production and la
pledged to a policy of assistance to agriculture. Most of
her increased output has been in milk, grain and vegetables.
Beef cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry have been reduced in
numbers and only this year she has been forced further to
reduce livestock because of shortage of grain.
16. All these events have strengthened the deter-
mination of the various nations to place food production in a
high priority in their programme. A new emphasis has been
placed on food production by the formation of the Food and
Agricultural Organisation of the United nations. Today the
whole v?orld is crying out for food. Multitudes are both ill
clad and hungry, and many are actually in danger of starvat-
ion. Every nation is turning to the farmer for help. ,7hat
more can be done to life efficiency? How quickly can more
and better food be produced?
17. There is a deep and widespread determination
not to allow food shortages to be succeeded by so called over-
supply with unemployment and depression. Price booms follow-
ed by slumps are bad for all. The aim of the Commonwealth
Government has been towards stability of farm incomes together
with the supply, at prices within the purchasing power of the
people, of good food adequate to safeguard their nutritional
standards.
International Commodity Agreements.
18. Where a large proportion of our production is
exported, the stability of prices and returns to primary
producers is largely dependent in the long run on export or
world prices. With this in mind the Government has sought
to conclude international agreements with other countries in
order to secure stability in world prices of primary products,
and to introduce other measures, to safeguard the producer
from violent and sudden changes in his returns. At the forth-
coming United Nations Conference on Food and Agriculture and
on Trade and Employment, proposals for the improvement of the
conditions of world trade will be considered in detail.
The Stabilisation Policy.
19« Early in 1943 in spite of the price control
then operating, prices began to rise in a way that threatened
to lead to serious Inflation. The Government therefore
brought in the Price Stabilisation Policy pegging prices and
wages, using subsidies where necessary to keep down prices
where increased costs were Inevitable, as was generally the
case with imported goods. The adoption of this stabilisation
policy has made possible the holding of the cost of living
over three very difficult years. This policy has helped
to prevent farmers' costs from getting out of hand. The
following items are illustrative of the value of price control
in relation to important products used by the farmer.
Superphosphate which now sells at £5.1.0d. per ton at main
Southern Ports would be £8.1,0d. per ton were it not for the
subsidy paid to keep down the cost of the raw materials.
Similarly locally produced Arsenic which is now pegged at
£34 per ton would coat £7O per ton. Worsted Suits could be


sold for export at 50$ above the Australian retail price.
Soelter now pegged at £22 per ton could be sold for export
at £56 stg. London basis. Fencing Y/lre imported into Hew
Zealand is landed at approximately double the c.i.f. price
in Australia.
During the drought very heavy costs were
incurred by the Commonwealth Government in order to hold
the price level of fodder and feed grains. Had it not been
for this action stock feed prices would have got entirely out
of band.
Celling Prices for Primary Products.
20. The policy of stabilisation has included the
imposition of ceiling prices on primary products; these
ceilings have prevented sharp price rises following periods
of short supply. It is the policy of the Commonwealth
Government to continue to hold firmly to these ceilings
while such products are in short supply. The primary
industries concerned, particularly those industries largely
dependent upon exports, will greatly benefit if costs and
prices are held, so that when keen competition for world
markets returns, they will be in a strong competitive posit-
ion. It is the policy of the Government, however, to
remove ceiling prices on primary products as soon as there is
a balance obtained at reasonable prices between s upply and
demand. This is the more justified in regard to products
for which it is difficult to stabilise prices. Already
ceiling prices received by growers have been removed from
most vegetables and also from apples and citrus fruit. The
policy of lifting controls will be progressively applied
as the supply position appears to warrant it.
Organised Marketing.
21. The marketing of primary products over the past
two decades has been marred by violent fluctuations in prices.
Prices of farm products have fluctuated more widely them costs
and sometimes have fallen to ruinously low levels even though
supply has been only slightly in excess of demand. The Govern-
ment is determined to eliminate this condition of violent
fluctuations in prices and ensure stability with prices known
a reasonable time in advance. This forward price policy
has already been applied to our major products and will be
extended to other primary products when practicable.
Proposals for the orderly marketing of many
primary products, for example, wheat, eggs, potatoes and bar-
ley, have already been discussed by the Commonwealth and
States at the Australian Agricultural Council, and though the
working out of details have been hindered by constitutional
difficulties, it is hoped that satisfactory results will be
achieved.
The arrangements proposed for organised market-
ing of primary products necessarily involve close collaborat-
ion with State Governments but the passing of the referendum
on marketing will make the machinery more simple and in some
cases might make all the difference between a scheme that can
be worked effectively and one that is too complicated. The


Commonwealth would In all oases consult the States,
particularly through the Australian Agricultural Council,
on such schemes.
22, Marketing plans already Implemented include
provision for guaranteed prices. This principle will be
extended to other plans. Guaranteed or floor prices give
stability to primary production but such guarantees imply
some control over production otherwise serious over-supply
may eventuate. Controls generally, and particularly those
over production, are likely to be irksome. It is essential
that they be applied with care and only after close investi-
gation of all the factors. However, some form of production
control must be accepted as a corollary of guaranteed prices.
The alternative is to allow prices to find their own level,
weeding out the weaker producers as the price level falls.
This policy, which has operated for so long and which has
caused so much hardship, can no longer be permitted to
continue. It is of course recognised that adjustments of
prices and production must be made gradually in accordance
with long term changes in conditions of supply and demand.
Patience and care will be necessary in the evolution of a
satisfactory technique of administration. It is the policy
of the Government progressively to extend the method of
giving reasonable stability to the price level, commencing
with the major products. It must be recognised of course,
that with certain perishable products the application of
guaranteed prices is not practicable.
Cost of Production Surveys.
23, It has sometimes been suggested that the cost of
production be established by calculation before a price level
is set. There are, however, very severe limitations to the'
value of such surveys. Variations in the costs as between
one farm and another are often very wide and the selection
of representative farms is very difficult. It is the
intention of the Commonwealth Government to make a close
study of various production costs, and also to study the
movement of farm Incomes. This will be done not only as a
guide to establishing a reasonable floor price but also to
try to ascertain the reasons for the wide disparity in costs
that are so often revealed.
2h. It is essential that prices are not pushed up to
cover costs on uneconomic sized farms or of inefficient
producers. This would only be to the long term detriment of
producers generally. The Government will aim to lift farm
efficiency by every possible means and to set a price level
that will reasonably compensate efficient production. A
price level higher than this will encourage inefficient
production and production under unsuitable conditions of
soil and climate and will be followed by demand for still
higher prices. In this way costs mount up until much
efficient production cannot compete in the export market.
If on the one hand the Government is determined to promote
measures, both international and domestic, to stabilize
prices, there is an obligation on the part of the producers
to do their utmost to Increase efficiency and to lower costs.


Wool.
25. The current Empire Scheme for the marketing of wool,
in the formation of which the Commonwealth played a leading
part, guarantees the purchase of all wool produced until
such time as the surplus wool accumulated during the war has
been sold. This means that the various governments have
underwritten the income of Dominion wool producers until
stocks are cleared. This was estimated to require from 10
to 15 years but now may take a considerably shorter period.
Reserves will be set at the beginning of each season below
which the price of wool will not be allowed to fall; any
prices bid above this level will be to the benefit of the
producer. The Scheme has introduced a most important element
of stability into the income of the wool industry and by so
doing will go far towards stabilising Australia's whole
economy. The industry is also being assisted by research
funds being provided by the Commonwealth Government under the
Wool Use Promotion Act.
Wheat.
25. The returns for wheat have been notoriously un-
even. After the last war the price rose to 7/Bd. per bushel
f.o.b, only to fall in the thirties to 2/3d. That collapse
from the boom in v/heat prices brought ruin to many thousands
of wheat producers. With the agreement of the States, the
Commonwealth Government has sought to avoid a repetition of
this disaster by formulating a Wheat Stabilisation Plan.
The plan accepts the home price of 5/2d. f.o.r. ports as a
guaranteed price for all wheat for a period of not less than
5 years. It provides that 50$ of any sales for export over
5/2d, but not above 9/6d. be placed in a fund to support the
price of 5/2d. guaranteed to farmers when the market falls
below that figure. The other half of such excess over 5/2d..
together with all returns over 9/od., is to be paid to the
farmers.
21, Calculations based upon 19U5/U6 crop indicate
that the price received by farmers will be in the vicinity
of 6/?d. per bushel main ports. There seems every expec-
tation of receiving another high price for 19US/47 and perhaps
the year after. The aim of the plan is to even out the
earnings of the farmer by placing in reserve portion of the
returns when prices are high with the object of maintaining
a payable floor price over a period of years. While the
period over which the price is guaranteed is 5 years, it Is
the intention of the Government to review the position again
at the end of 2 years with the object of extending the
guaranteed price policy for a longer period. Available
money in the fund will be invested and interest earned by
such investments will be credited to the Fund. Should,
however, world prices fall and the money in the fund be
exhausted the Government still guarantees the minimum price
of 5/2d. for the duration of the scheme which Is to be not
less than 5 years.


It Is of interest to note that the latest wheat
crop reports indicate good yields in Canada, a record crop
in the U.3.A. and a 90 per cent crop (compared with pre-war)
in Western Europe.
Meat,
28. Since 1943 the wholesale and retail prices of
meat have been subject to ceiling prices which have been
adjusted in accordance with seasonal and climatic conditions.
Meat required for the Services was purchased by Meat Control
at prices related to ceilings. When the war ended the
Service demand was severely reduced causing a surplus over
local requirements which would normally have to be sold at
export parity. In March 1946, the Commonwealth undertook
to purchase any surplus meat at the ceiling prices, which
then acted as floor pirices, and this meat has been made
available for export to U.K. This under talcing to purchase
surplus meat has now been extended till Ist October when the
new export prices will operate. While ceiling prices have
checked excessive price rises the willingness to purchase
surplus meat at floor prices has given the meat industry in
the meantime a stability that is very important.
29. Export meat prices have been maintained at a
payable level as the result of the long term agreement
whereby Britain has undertaken to purchase all surplus meat
until October 1948. The negotiations recently concluded
with the United Kingdom have resulted in price increases for
beef and mutton and substantial Increases in the case of
lamb. The increases obtained, generally speaking, are greater
than those suggested in the early discussions with repre-
sentatives of the industry. The Government is anxious to
have Introduced a scheme which will ensure stability of
prices over a period of years and it will confer with
representatives of the industry in order to reach agreement
on the principles and details of such a Scheme.
Dairy Industry - Manufactured Products.
30. During the five years ending June 1941 the average
return to dairy farmers supplying wholemilk or cream to butter,
cheese or milk processing factories was only about per
lb. delivered factory on the basis of commercial butter.
These unsatisfactory returns, together with enlistment of men
in the Services and the drift to other more remunderative
occupations led to a falling off in production. To arrest
this decline, and in fact to increase production as far as
possible to meet huge war-time demands for dairy products.
the Government has since lifted the return for butter in
stages chiefly by way of subsidy, to the present level of
l/7jd. per lb., this figure being accepted as covering
reasonable average farm costs. Subsidies were used in
preference to price increases in order to avoid a substantial
rise in the cost of living which otherwise would have
occurred. The Commonwealth has guaranteed this return of
l/7jd. on total production until March of 1948.
31. The Government earnestly desired the dairy
industry to make sound progress. It is also desirous of
assuring to the people of Australia wholesome food at a price
which will encourage increased consumption.


As part of its long term agricultural policy the Commonwealth
proposes to achieve these aims by the following methods -
(1) Assist in raising efficiency of dairy production,
(2) Formulate a stabilisation scheme for the industry.
32. An obvious channel for advancement is to raise the
production standard of dairy herds thereby reducing production
costs. The various State Agricultural Departments are seeking
to increase the average yield per cow and the Commonwealth
Government will do all it can to help. Grants have already
been made to the States to assist them to improve and extend
herd-testing facilities, and to develop artificial insemin-
ation with the object of improving herds and their production.
Recently two New Zealand dairy experts were invited to
examine our Industry with a view to making suggestions for
improvement in farming practices. Also, as a measure of
co-operation with the dairy industry in examination of its
problems, including the determination of a reasonable cost
of production the Commonwealth Government has approved the
appointment of a Joint Dairy Industry Advisory Committee
consisting of representatives of the Dairy Industry and the
Government, This body will carry out a survey and assemble
data on which to assess costs and also to indicate means for
increasing efficiency. In an industry such as dairying,
improvement is a gradual process but it is considered reason-
able to expect that a marked increase in production per cow
should be attained in the course of the years which lie just
ahead.
33- There has been a recent increase in the level of
returns from exports so that a return on exports higher than
current costs should be realised. The Government will discuss
with representatives of the Dairy Industry a scheme whereby
any surplus (or portion of a surplus) of this nature be placed
to the credit of a Dairy Industry Fund to be utilised for
stabilising returns when export values fall below the level
of Australian costs. Subject to approval of such a scheme
by the Industry, the Government will guarantee returns to the
producer equal to that accepted by the Joint Dairy Industry
Advisory Committee as being a reasonable level after a survey
of production costs of representative producers, and of
market outlook has been carried out. This is in line with
recent requests to the Government by representatives of the
industry.
Feed Grains.
3U. Over recent years the Commonwealth Government has
established floor prices for important feed grains and
guarantees have been renewed for the coming season. The
Government is anxious to work out a long term stabilisation
policy that will encourage the cultivation of adequate
supplies of these important grains and will push on with the
necessary legislation if the co-operation of the States can
be secured.


V. RAISING FARM EFFICIENCY.
35. The Rural Reconstruction Commission has pointed
out that much of Australian farming has been at the expense
of soil fertility and that there is a marked unevenness in
the level of efficiency attained. It is of the greatest
importance tnat the general level of our farming efficiency
should be raised and the Commonwealth Government is prepared
to co-operate with the States to this end.
Biological Research.
36. The Government believes that money spent in well
directed research will be recouped many times over. The G.S.
4 I, R, has been asked to submit plans for the development of
biological research which will place this Institution in a
position to give outstanding service to the faming community
The work that lies immediately ahead is full of importance
and hope. The new insecticides like D.D.T. offer a remark-
able opportunity to control pests of many kinds, but their
application requires much careful research to meet Australian
problems and conditions. Very recent experiments demonstrate
that a D.D.T. preparation can be mixed with water in dips
and sprays to control successfully Cattle Tick, which in
many instances have become resistant to arsenical dips, and
Buffalo Fly. It now seems certain that this new method of
attack will prove of great assistance to the cattle industry
of Queensland and Western Australia, 'lew hormone-like sub-
stances that promise remarkable control over weeds that
otherwise threaten to over-run much valuable country are now
available.
37. Australian scientists have demonstrated the wide-,
spread lack of certain mineral elements in many of our soils,
Small applications of such elements down to as low as 1-oz.
per acre in the case of Molybdenum, have given remarkable
results. The deficiency of copper, particularly, has been
found to effect many areas. The work of remedying these
deficiencies has progressed mostly in W.A. and 3.A. but there
are now indications of mineral shortages in widely dispersed
areas in the Eastern States and there is room for hope that
the productivity of much of this country can be materially
increased by applications of small quantities of the lacking
minerals.
36. A new disease which affects the fertility of
sheep and threatens the reproduction of flocks in much of
W.A. and which is now Identified in portion of 3.A. and
Victoria demands -urgent attention. Many millions of pounds
are at stake in this matter. Both State and Commonwealth
officers are engaged in this investigation and if the
successes that have beers won over the many serious animal
diseases in the past are any criterion we can anticipate
conquest over this most threatening attack,
39. There is urgent need to find a legume that will
thrive in Central and Northern Queensland, and help to
maintain soil fertility in those areas. In the meantime
promising results have been obtained following the intro-
duction of a new variety of paspalum which is proving
splendid feed in certain localities in Southern Queensland.


The introduction of lucerne into Rhodes grass stands la also
giving good results in other areas and promises to offer a
means of rebuilding fertility over wide tracts of country.
40. These are but some of the tasks confronting the
Commonwealth and State Research Institutions. This work is
essential if Australia is to make full use of her great re-
sources. The Government is determined that the Council for
Scientific and Industrial Research will be supported in such
a way as to enable it to give a worthy lead in this great task,
of conquest. Grants for the biological work to be conducted
by the G.S. & I.R. have shown a material increase in recent
years. From a figure of £130,000 immediately prior to the
war, the expenditure in the year 1945/46 has more than doubled.
In addition to the above the Government will pro-
vide a sum (estimated at £300,000) equal to that contributed
by growers under the provisions of the Wool Use Promotion Act.
Economic Research.
41. In recent years the importance of economic research
into agriculture and its problems has received greater recog-
nition. The Commonwealth has recently established a Bureau
of Agricultural Economics within the Department of Commerce
and Agriculture. The Bureau is a fact finding body which will
systematically undertake research into the economic problems
of primary industries. The Bureau has already completed an
examination of the horticultural industries, and work in
progress includes reports on the fat lamb, poultry, dairy,
pig-raising, and wheat-growing industries. Detailed surveys
of the horticultural industries are at present being carried
out in co-operation with the State Departments of Agriculture.
Extension Work in Agriculture.
42. While the expansion of research is of great
importance, it is of little value unless followed by extension
services. Whereas research work is shared between Common-
wealth and State agencies that of taking the findings to the
farmer is almost entirely a State function. It is of great
Importance to strengthen these latter activities and the
Rural Reconstruction Commission has made a number of recommen-
dations which no doubt the States will seek to implement.
The Commonwealth will aid in two ways:-
(a) By the extension of joint research efforts in which
officers of Commonwealth and State will co-operate.
The Commonwealth is strongly in favour of this
policy and is pleased to note the recent extension of
this practice in several States.
(b) By the continuation and extension of short courses
arranged by officers of the Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research for instruction of State officers
who have the responsibility of carrying the information
to farmers. The institution of these courses has
already proved beneficial.
The Commonwealth Government regards the strengthening of


extension work as of major importance and will continue with
the States in making this work effective.
Rural Credit Policy.
U 3. The Rural Reconstruction Commission has drawn
attention to the way in which farmers have been handicapped
in their endeavours to adopt improved farming practices by
inability to obtain finance on satisfactory terms. Farmers
have been obliged to obtain credit from diverse sources
including private lenders, insurance companies, traders and
agents, trading banks, co-operative organisations. Government
agricultural banks and Government agents, and this has often
led to credit entanglements which have become embarrassing
in difficult times. In addition the fluctuations in the
economic conditions of the rural community have been accen-
tuated from time to time by activities of leaders who through
paucity of agricultural knowledge have expanded or contracted
credit merely on the short terra outlook for prices.
The Rural Reconstruction Commission has also
emphasised the great need for more effective measures of
reconstruction and rehabilitation of those farm units which
are at present financially and economically unsound, and for
the more effective co-ordination of these measures with the
provision of ordinary banking facilities.
The Commonwealth Government recognises the strength
of the criticisms made by the Commission of the existing
rural credit facilities and also the force of its recommen-
dation for the integration of those facilities with the
measures for financial reconstruction and rehabilitation.
The Government has already established the Mortgage Bank
Department of the Commonwealth Bank. This Department is
already carrying out its function of filling a particular
gap in rural credit facilities pointed out by the Banking
Commission and it is at present providing facilities for
fixed and long-term lending which give the borrower a constant
interest rate and security against the calling up of his
loan, or the possibility of having to make a large reduction
in it, at a time when he is least able to do so.
It is the firm intention of the Government to
take further steps to ensure that adequate credit facilities
are available to farmers so that they can obtain their
various requirements whether for seasonal needs, further
development of their holdings, adoption of improved practices
or for financial reconstruction. The Government also
proposes to seek greater co-ordination of rural credit
facilities generally, including those special measures for
financial reconstruction and rehabilitation.
Many aspects of this problem fall, of course,
within the province of the State Governments and the
objectives which the Commonwealth Government believes should
be pursued can only be fully realised by effective co-oper-
ation and joint action on the part of both Commonwealth and
State Governments. The Commonwealth Government therefore
intends to inaugurate early discussions with the States on
this subject.


Land Settlement Policy.
Absorptive Capacity;
44. A warning Is repeated against the extravagant claims
that were made after the 1914-18 war as to the employment
capacity of the Australian pastoral and agricultural lands.
The economies following more adequate mechanisation will
require less men per unit of output, and thus tend to depopu-
late the country-side. On the other hand, the economies
associated with the use of effective plant enable much land
to be worked more Intensively than was formerly possible,
War Service Land Settlement;
45. In view of the disasters following soldier
settlement after the 1914-18 war, the Government asked the
Sural Commission to investigate and report on the subject of
future soldier settlement. On the basis of this Report the
Commonwealth initiated discussions from which arose the
present War Service Land Settlement Agreements with the
States. All Governments realised the need for a different
approach to the problems of land settlement and careful *
attention is now given to such matters as the selection of
land settlement projects, the selection of suitable men as
settlers, and the financial commitments which the ex-
servicemen are required to undertake.
46. Rapid progress has been made by the Commonwealth
in the investigation of areas submitted by the States and
about 2 million acres have already been approved as suitable
for settlement. Under the Scheme many areas of Australia Eire
now being developed and improved while considerable closer
settlement is taking place. Land settlement if it is to be
successful can never be carried out hurriedly as apart from
developmental work there are legal and other necessary
processes connected with the acquisition and subdivision of
land. At present there is also, as a result of the war a
shortage of physical materials and equipment required for
development. This shortage restricts building activity
everywhere and must Inevitably delay land settlement.
47. Care is being taken that soldier settlement will
not result in overproduction and gluts on the market to the
detriment of existing producers. An agreement has been
reached.on a progressive policy of expansion of horticultural
and vlticultural plantings in the various states under the
War Service Land Settlement Scheme. The details will at all
times be kept under review.
48. The Government is confident that the present scheme
is a well-devised one and that, given normal conditions, the
result will be sound settlement. The plan will not only
assure soldiers of reasonable income without glutting the
markets of existing farmers, but will also create a great deal
of sound agricultural development in many areas of Australia,


Land Values.
14.9. Under the war service land settlement scheme the
capital value of the land will be written down to a productive
basis before allotment. This departure in Australian Land
Settlement policy is a recognition by both Commonwealth and
State Governments of the importance of relating commitments
to productive capacity.
30, A great deal of confusion frequently results from
the fact that a number of different authorities all make
Independent valuations of a particular property and the
Commonwealth has already taken the Initiative in raising with
the States the establishment of a uniform land valuation
service.
Land Sales Control.
51. The Rural Reconstruction Commission recommends
that the system of pegging land prices, which was in operation
during the war period, should continue for at least five
years after the war, but the basis should be reviewed period-
ically and amended, if necessary, to accord with any long-
term changes in general price levels. If controls were
removed too soon, land values would be likely to rise fairly
substantially. This would be particularly detrimental to the
progress of soldier settlement, and would have serious
inflationary consequences. At the recent Premiers' Conference
it was unanimously agreed that the Commonwealth should
continue land sales control, but that the details should be
reviewed by a Conference of Commonwealth and State officers.


VI. CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT OF RESOURCES.
Water Conservation and Its Use.
52. Great emphasis was placed upon water conservation
and its use by the Rural Commission which believes that
"Ultimately shortage of water will be the greatest of the
obstacles to increased population". Because of this great
importance it is essential that the use of available water
should be carefully planned and particularly that a thorough
preliminary investigation should precede the adoption of
every proposal for a new irrigation project.
53. The extension of irrigation for use in live-stock
production provides a very important safeguard in times of
drought and assists in the essential continuity of supply
both of meat and butter-fat. The carrying of water to
farming areas where rainfall is deficient is also of great
importance. In many districts the lack of domestic and
stock water limits all production.
sh. A great deal can be done not only in the retioul-
of water but also in the more effective storage of water on
farms out of reach of water reticulation. The storage of
water on many farms falls far short of requirements. The
use of modern earth-moving machinery has entirely altered
the practicability of conserving adequate water on many
farms. Such plant is beyond the reach of individual farm-
ers but is capable of being economically employed where the
equipment can be made available by government agency. Plant
of this nature can not only be used for making dams but also
in carrying out drainage, forming contour banks, and sinking
silage pits. Such action will not only help to direct and
conserve water but will also help to check erosion.
Soil Conservation.
55« It is recognised that it is absolutely essential
that action should be taken in the vital matter of conserv-
ing soil and soil fertility, and the establishment of the
Standing Committee on Soil Conservation, attached to the
Australian Agricultural Council, is an excellent example of
collaboration between the Commonwealth and States in such
matters. This Committee facilitates the exchange of
information between States and between the States and the
Coimonwealth and enables all authorities to be kept inform-
ed on current developments in methods of conservation.
Electricity on the Farm.
56. Electricity on farms is only somewhat less
important than the supply of water. While it must be
recognised that some areas are out of reach of electric
supply there remains many settled areas where light and
power should be laid on. Australia will not be able to
keep up with world progress unless such aids to efficiency
are supplied.
Encouragement of Tree Planting.
57*■ Much of Australia is becoming denuded of trees


and soil exposed both to the force of wind and water. A
very serious shortage is looming both of timber for milling
and perhaps even more for firewood. Many country towns as
well as farm homes lack beauty and shelter. Something must
be done about this matter or the loss to the Comnonwealth
will be very heavy. Apart from the main forest plantations
there is an urgent need for the encouragement of Conmunity
Plantations within the neighbourhood of towns and villages.
In the better rainfall areas such plantations will later
supply valuable local timber or firewood. In the more expos-
ed areas these plantations will provide essential shelter.
Work of this nature is essential if many of our smaller
inland towns are to remain habitable.
Commonwealth Aid to the Above Projects.
58. It is recognised that developmental land projects
are the responsibility of the States, and many such under-
takings have been included in the list of works prepared by
the National Works Council. However, the Commonwealth has
in the past provided financial assistance to the States for
certain specific schemes of water conservation and develop-
ment. In the case of the large Hume dam under-taking, for
example, the Commonwealth assisted the States by the payment
of £3m or a quarter of the capital costs of the headworks.
Under an agreement with South Australia the Commonwealth
shares the annual loss on the Morgan to Whyalla waterworks
scheme, which supplies Port Augusta, Whyalla and other
northern areas of the State. The Commonwealth has also
agreed to share half of the coat of the necessary investi-
gations connected with the project for the development of
the Ord River District in Western Australia. A request has
been received recently from the Western Australian Govern-
ment for aid in a comprehensive water supply scheme for
certain agricultural areas and the goldfields, and the
Commonwealth has already appointed a Committee which is now
investigating the project.
59* The Commonwealth has assisted in these develop-
mental projects as part of its policy of collaboration with
the States, and it is prepared to continue and expand this
type of assistance in appropriate cases.
Development and Settlement of Northern Australia.
60. The development and settlement of the lands in the
north of Australia is of great Importance in view of
present world conditions. The Northers Australian Devel-
opment Committee appointed by the Commonwealth, Queensland
and Western Australian Governments la planning the develop-
ment of the northern part of Australia in a co-ordinated
way. As a first step the resources of the area are being
surveyed in the sphere of ecology, soils, pastures and
geology. It is proposed in the first stage, to concentrate
capital expenditure and developmental works in selected
productive localities. The Commonwealth is to be associat-
ed on an equal basis in the further more detailed investi-
gations on the Ord River damming and irrigation scheme
and will collaborate by providing scientific, technical
and economic personnel.


VII. IMPROVING THE CONDITIOIS OF COUNTRY LIFE.
61. To a large extent the provision of amenities ia a
responsibility of dtute Governments. The amenities required
on farms or in rural areas are largely dependent on the
Incomes of the rural community v hich are affected by such
matters aa marketing, efficient farm practices, economic
farm size and adequate credit facilities. Developmental
schemes of public works contribute to the improvement of a
country life and, through the .financial Agreement with the
States, the Commonwealth makes a contribution to the repay-
ment of loans raised to provide such facilities.
62. A separate report on Rural Amenities has been pre-
sented by the Rural Reconstruction Commission covering rural
housing electricity water supplies, telephone services,
health and education. The Commonwealth Government will,
when examination of this and other reports has been made,
discuss the conclusion and pecommendations with the States
within whose sphere of responsibility moat of these matters
lie. It is the tyiah of the Commonwealth Government that
the conditions of country life be considerably improved,
so that farmers and their families where practicable may
enjoy amenities comparable with those enjoyed by urban
and city life.
Rural Housing.
63. The farm as a productive unit cannot be entirely
separated from the home and the success of a farming
venture may ultimately depend on whether reasonable hous-
ing conditions can be provided for the wife and children
of the farmer. The provision of domestic water and
electricity helps considerably in improving the conditions
in rural homes. The interest of the Commonwealth in
housing is shown by the agreements made with the States
under which it has accepted financial responsibilities and
will erect houses in country towns and villages for lease
at concession rates to rural workers with low incomes.
Telephone Services.
6k* The Government has already taken steps to improve
the telephone facilities available in country districts.
The Postmaster-Gneral's Department has commenced a large
programme for improved postal, telegraph and telephone
services which includes the installation of more than J+OO
small automatic exchanges giving eontlnous service in the
rural areas of the Commonwealth. The initial charge for
Installation to farmers living some distance from exist-
ing lines has beer, reduced an.; experiments are being Made
with a radio-telephone exchange service in isolated areas.
Health Cervices.
65. If given power -,.t the forthcoming referendum the
Commonwealth proposes to extend diagnostic facilities
into areas where they do not exist at present. This would
include the establishment of centres in such districts
with pathological laboratories, and x-ray facilities, with
staff specialised in the particular needs of the localities-


It is also proposed to extend flying doctor services in
such areas* The national importance of improving health
through higher nutrition standards is recognised hy the
Commonwealth which is carrying out investigations into
technical and economic aspects of the matter.
Rural Education.
66. The primary responsibility for educational matters
rests with the State Governments but the Commission recomm-
ended that the Commonwealth should arrange for the collect-
ion of information about educational conditions in the
various States and in other countries. The Commonwealth
Office of Education has been established to do this work
and the information collected will be available to assist
the States.
VIII. AGRICULTURE AHD GSKERAI WELFARE.
6?. Prosperity like peace cannot be secured in sections.
Agricultural prosperity depends in the long run upon general
welfare. Allowing prices to rise to a level that burdens
the consuming public is certain to restrict demand and
react upon the interest of producers. On the other hand,
where the general level of employment and prosperity are
high the demand for agricultural products expands.
68. Ho country stands to gain more than Australia from
an expansionist world policy. The Agricultural prosperity
of Australia depends upon the widening of world trade. Our
soil and climate enable us to produce a relatively few but
important products for which world markets are needed. If
these are denied us our special advantages are lost and our
development retarded. It is for these reasons that Australia
is vitally interested in an expansionist rather than isolat-
ionist world policy. If security and prosperity can be
widely spread the demand for food and fibre will expand and
Australia's future will be secure, provided agriculture is
efficient and costs not inflated. The Commonwealth Govern-
ment is convinced that this attitude towards world policy
is essential to our welfare and will devote Itself to securing
these aims.
