

r . '■
A SAILOR'S
STORY.
AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY.
Price One Shilling.
LONDON ;
SAMUEL HARRIS k CO.
5, BISHOPBOATE STREET, WITHOUT.
PENRYN: JOHN GILL & SON.
- wir




A SAILOR’S
STORY.
.-i/V AUTOBIOGRAPHY.
Price One Shilling.
LONDON:
SAMUEL HARRIS & CO
5, BISHOPSGATE STREET, WITHOUT.
PENRYN: JOHN GILL & SON.
? I Hi


iI / ' 5 A
fl O T c
PRINTED BY
JOHN GILL AND SON,
LOWER MARKET STREET, PENRYN.


INTROD UCTION
It may be interesting to the Reader to
know from one, well acquainted with the
writer of this Autobiography, that his life is
now spent in endeavouring to do good to the
seamen with whom he comes in contact, and
in trying to guard them against the snares
which beset them on landing in England.
The language is his own, but the history is
a little curtailed.
The headings of the chapters were selected
by a fiend after reading the narrative.


■


JK JS.A I
If the relation of a wild and mis-spent life can be of use in
making any one turn to the Great Creator before it is too late, I
shall be thankful for being the means of drawing one soul to the
Saviour. I make no apology for the plain true Tale of an old sailor.
A. B.
Hospital , 1864, —1865.
CHAPTER 1.
« The breath of heaven must swell the sail
Or all the toil is lost.”
COWPER.
I was born at Liverpool in 1814, of very poor but respectable
parents. My father being a Revenue officer and having a large family
to provide for, I could not expect much from him ; however, it was
against his wish that I went to sea, and contrary to my mother’s wish
too All her care was, that her children should know their Maker
and Redeemer, but I greatly neglected her advice after I left home,
* and fell into many sins. I shipped in a small vessel bound to Leghorn
for my first voyage ; and the nice country and the fine fruit were an
enticement to follow that life ever after. The mate knew my father,
and I was well treated and kindly looked after, but the next vessel I
went into, was quite different. We sailed to Newfoundland and there
the whole crew was discharged. Being very young and not knowing
any one there, except a lad 4 years older than myself, I was easily
led into public houses and the lowest company that sea-faring people
get into, and this laid the foundation for the bad habits of my after
life, and leaves me much to mourn over.


I then went in a schooner belonging to St. Johns, bound to New
York : the mate was the owner’s son, and a very young man. Being
drunk one day, he threw an axe at me which struck me on the thigh
and cut me very much ; he then caught me and bent me with a billet
of wood until I could stand no more. The Captain was afraid to in-
terfere lest he should be turned out of the ship when he reached home.
But I went to a lawyer when we arrived at New York, and he saw
how I was cut, and said he would make the mate pay well for it ;he
gave me some money and sent me to a boarding house to keep me out
of his way. When we came to appear, the lawyer and mate had made
it up between them, the latter having given him a sum of money ;so I
was sent down to the ship again and kept a prisoner in the cabin until
we went to sea two days afterwards, and was worse treated than ever ;
the mate said he would make me pay the fine he had to give to the
lawyer, which he partly did, for when we were being paid off, he re-
presented the case to his father in such a way that he charged me with
the expense of his bribe to the lawyer. So T had very little money to
take, and no way of getting anything to do, for in St. John’s every
thing is dead during the long winter; and if it had not been for a
humane man who took pity on me, T might have starved. He was a
sailmaker, and he kept me and gave me work all that winter, and I
might have learned his trade throughout if I had stopped with him.
But spring came on and men were very scarce, so I was induced
against my master’s wish to ship for the seal-fishery which is a very
money-making trade. I remained amongst the ice till the month of
May, when it would have been useless to stay any longer as the seals
were very scarce, and as our provisions were running short, we made
for St. John’s again. I had very good wages making 120 dollars in
two mouths, but I soon learned the way to get clear of that, and as
much more money if I had had it. To describe the seal-fishery I leave
to other abler hands than mine; but that there is a great deal of hard-
ship attending it, the following adventure will show. We all started
off one morning as the day-light appeared, for the seals were very
thick on the ice because it w'as so closed in they could not get down
into the water anywhere, and we could do as we liked with them.
The men were very eager to fill the ship as soon as they could, hut
there is always some obstacle in the way of getting rich. There were
six of us several miles away from the vessel when the ice began to
break up and open; and the only chance we had then was to make


for the highest piece, or island, and wait until they could see us from
the ship ; you must do the same in case of fogs, which are very fre-
quent among the ice. We made for a very large half island, and
scarcely got well on it when the ice began to open in all directions.
We set about rigging a flag or signal post, by lashing three of our gaffs
together, for we each had one of these, (they are like a boat-hook) and
we set them up between some pinnacles of ice on the highest part of
our island, and then we built a house with blocks of ice, cut with our
knives, which was soon done ; and as we all had our loads of seals,
they came in very handy, for we made a good fire from the fat of the
seals, and took their hides for beds anil blankets ; happily most of
them had their fore flippers on their hides, which served us for a very
good meal that night, and again the next day. It was blowing a gale
from the N.W. and we were in clear water on our island. There was
nothing to be seen but broken ice in all directions, and our prospects
were not very agreeable, with nothing before us but to perish, if we
were not taken care of by Divine Providence. Yet there was not one
prayer put up, nor one word of gratitude offered to the Almighty
for our safety and deliverance afterwards 1 At noon a vessel hove in
sight to windward, and bearing down under small canvass towards us,
she soon made out our flagstaff with its piece of hide for a flag. She
proved to be our own vessel: and quickly came under the lee of our
island, lowered a boat and took us on board, when we were glad
enough to have a plank once more between us and eternity.
I can feel now how very unthankful I have been for the many
mercies I have received from the Almighty, who has carried me through
the world, and not called me away in the height of my wickedness.
We then stood to the northward, hoping to get one day’s work
more to fill our ship : the ice came down the Straits of Belle Isle
loaded with seals, but we could only get a few of them as the weather
was so thick that we dared not go ten yards from the ship for fear of
being lost: we therefore gathered what we could and started for home
once more, where we shortly arrived, all in good health and spirits,
and had a warm welcome from everyone. It was here that I become
intimate with one of the Captain’s daughters, and it would have been
well for me if I had taken her advice in all things, and followed her
instructions, as my story will show.


CHAPTER 11.
“ If reason move not gallants, quit the room ;
Wine above all things does God’s stamp efface.”
George Herbert.
The Captain proposed that I should go with him the summer voy-
age to trade with the Indians, ‘ ‘ paddling ” as they call it, and we
provided everything to suit their taste, but the chief things were fire-
water, old muskets and powder. There was nothing of any note after
onr departure until we reached the harbour of Indianticle and began to
trade, when we had to keep all our wits about us to get the Indians
under control when they were the worse for the liquor we had brought
them. I think now what a shame it is to encourage such a fine race
of men to degrade themselves to such an extent: for the Indians lose,
all power over themselves and commit any crime, even murder, under
the influence of liquor. They brought all sorts of skins, and some
very fine furs to barter with us, also oil in small quantities. We tried
to barter also on the French shore, but there they are so well provided
with everything that it did not answer our purpose to remain. How-
ever they manage to live miserably in the- midst of plenty and seemed
really worse off than the Indians. We went down as far as the Dutch
settlements and then came home again, and traded v ith the English
Planters with our furs and oil. There are Englishmen living there for
years who trade for different houses, and sometimes run very short of
supplies. We received a very valuable exchange for all onr cargo ;
we also brought away an Indian boy, the owner promising to take care
of him and bring him back the following year ; whether he ever did so
I cannot say. When we reached St. John’s the Captain and I were
discharged, instead of bringing the ship to England. The Captain
could not actually write his own name, so that I had to do all the writ-
ing and accounts for him. But he was the most fatherly and best
man that I was ever with, and I went to live with him and his family,
his wife treating me as one of themselves. I paid for my winter’s
board and had some money left after buying a quantity of clothes: by
the daughter’s persuasion I went to school during the winter evenings,
to learn” such navigation as was taught at St. John’s, certainly I did
not learn much, but these were about the happiest evenings I have
spent in my life. Sitting by a good fire, telling stories and singing
sono-s, the dreary winter passed away comfortably enough with my
intended wife, for it was already made up between us that we were to


be married in the following spring, when we came back from the ice.
Sometimes she took me to church on a Sunday when I certainly heard
the minister preach, but I profited very little, as my mind went on a
different tack. However she managed to keep her father and me in
order, for we were both apt to go rather too far.
I went to work with my old master the sail-maker, who paid me
a dollar a day during the winter, so that when the spring arrived I had
a little money to begin the world with. I could not spend much at
St. John’s, there being no theatre or place of amusement; a raffle or a
ball were the only places to go to, so I was quite content with my line
of life, not knowing any other. But things were soon to alter. The
Spring arrived at hist and we were preparing for the ice ; when all the
crew (about thirty) met together and took to drinking and spreeing
away for days, which made my young woman very angry and caused a
falling out between us. I gave up going to the ice with her father, and
this vexed him sadly, and caused him to behave very unkindly to her,
until I begged him not to be angry with her on my account. I would
not make the slightest effort at reconciliation and this I have always
rued, for if I had married that young woman, I have not the least
doubt but that I should have been happy, and my whole life would
have been different. I resolved to leave the place for ever, and
seek consolation in some other part of the globe, and shipped
on board a brig belonging to Bermuda, and went to Trinidad
and from thence to Montreal. But on the last passage all hands
became sick, with the exception of one black man and myself, so
we had to manage by ourselves until we had some assistance from the
pilots in the river St. Lawrence. As I had to do so much of the duty
myself, the Captain thought when he recovered that he could not do
enough for me ; he was as fine a man as ever broke a biscuit, and I
fully believe a sincere Christian. On reaching Montreal he soon grew
better under the care of the owners and the doctor, but the rest of
the crew were sent to the hospital, where two died. The sickness was
caused by all our cooking utensils being of copper, and not properly
cleaned.
Now then mark the difference of my company ! There was a
young woman who came on board for the Captain’s washing, and I
being then the mate of the vessel in place of the former mate who had
died, she invited me to spend the Sunday at her Mother’s house ; as
she was very pleasant and circumspect in her behaviour, and was like-


wise a very pretty Irish girl, I could not well refuse. On Sunday
she came down to show me the way to the house, if I may call it one :
I did not expect to see a palace but a homely comfortable place instead
of the disgusting one it actually was. The moment I entered, my dis-
like became evident and they immediately sent for a pint of brandy
which is the chief drink in that place. There were two sisters who
were making money,as they had plenty of work, but the mother drank
and they followed her example. As soon as I came in, the mother
began a detail of her voyage from the old country which amused me
very much, and I forgot myself so far as not to return on board
for two days. I was ashamed to look the Captain in the face, and
not being able to endure the up-braidings of my conscience for hav-
ing abused his confidence in many ways, I determined to leave the
ship.
CHAPTEIt 111.
“ Do all things like a man, not sneakingly,
Think the king sees thee ; for ills King does.”
Geoboe Herbert,
When I told the Captain my resolve, he started and wanted to
know my reason, so I resorted to telling lies, and said I had a relation
up the country whom I wanted to see, but he knew better and told
me I was in bad hands, who were leading me to my ruin. He advised
me to stop in the ship, and so forcibly did he speak to me, and such
was my shame and remorse, that I thought the deck would open and
swallow me up. I was much surprised one morning by a little boy
coinin'' and telling me Mr. Davicombe wanted to see me. He was the
owner of the last vessel, and a large West India planter. I could not
imagine what he could want with me, and I thought I should have
dropped when I came into his presence, and could scarcely give him an
answer at first; such are the troubles of a guilty conscience !He sent
for me to know whether I would go as mate of another vessel he had
just bought; my last Captain had recommended me to him very highly
and told him I only left in a drunken frolic. I thanked him but re-
fused the kind offer. He then asked me if 1 had any money, and said
if I became embarrassed that I was to apply to him, in return for the
service I had done in bringing his vessel home. When I returned to
the house, a man had just arrived from the Lakes, master of a barge.


He was formerly a boarder of the old woman’s, who had once kept a
seaman’s boarding house, which had failed : as he had plenty of money
there was no lack of brandy, but I did not like him to be paying for
all, so I began to make away with my clothes and whatever else would
bring a dollar. At hist I grew weary of that kind of life, and shipped
for England ; I was to have twenty pounds for the run and to receive
half the money, the other half to be paid when we reached England.
But the bad influence was still so strong that they persuaded me to
abscond until the ship had sailed. When they brought me the news
that she was gone I came out of my hiding place, not the same person
that I was when I first came to Montreal. I was sometimes stung
with remorse, but if I said any tiling about it I was only laughed at and
told that I should never rise to be a rich man with such scrupulous
pretentions, so any good thoughts I found I had better keep to myself.
It was high time to be doing something, and they told me that they
were going to make a mud sailor of me, which means a man who sails
on the Lakes. The next morning I was shipped in the barge with the
master who came to the house, and I went to work once more with a
full determination to lead a better life. But my neglect of prayer was
so great, and the force of example was so strong that I did not alter,
and the master was, if any thing even worse than either myself or the
two other young men who were in the barge, for he led us into every
sort of vice and evil that we did not know before, and thus I became
more reckless than ever. However I did not like being a mud sailor
as there was nothing foreign to see ; so on arriving at Montreal I gave
notice to leave, after having been away for two months. Of course I
went to live in the old place, as I could not very well get clear without
insulting them, and us I went to pay them a trifle of debt they made
me very welcome. It being after Christmas there were no vessels
there, so I shipped in a merchant’s store, to work the winter out,
getting a dollar and a half per day. But what a different winter that
was to the one I spent at St. John’s, and how I wished myself back
again, or else at home : for I began to be disgusted with the place,
never having had one day’s peace since I came into it. Drinking was
the order of the day: go where you would, there was nothing but
drink ; and if you did not take your share you were looked on as
nobody.
I was very glad when the spring arrived, so that I could try some
other place. As soon as the ships began to come in I went to work


as a stevedore, stowing the cargoes, and making from two to three
dollars per day. I wanted to secure a little money to come home with,
and had saved one hundred dollars for that purpose, when there hap-
pened to be a fair at an Indian village about fifteen miles from Mon-
treal, and the young woman and my former master of the barge were
going to it and invited me to be one of their party. After much en
treaty I consented, and there was an end of my good resolves, and of
my money also, for it proved very expensive to the master and me.
As soon as we came back I determined to go to England, for I saw I
could get no good there. I could make plenty of money, but it was of
no use to me, as there was always some allurement to take it away.
Thus the poor sailor seldom spends his own money that he works so
hard for : there are more people looking out for sailors than for any
other class of men : the landsman knows the price of everything, and
is therefore not so likely to be cheated as poor Jack. I soon got a
ship for home, and this time I was firm, although they tried every art
to make me stay. We were soon ready for sea and I was very glad
to be clear of Montreal. But how soon things alter! The ship was
seized for debt as soon as we arrived at Quebec ; the owners had fail-
ed shortly after she left Liverpool, and the news came out in another
vessel after her. Thus I was thrown adrift once more ; but I had made
a fair start for home, though my hopes were to be frustrated.
CHAPTER IV.
Amid the howling wintry sea
We are in Port if we have Thee! ”
I then went to work stevedoring for the remainder of the sum-
mer, and late in the fall of the year shipped on board a barque ciilled
the Vittoria bound to Cork for orders, having saved a little money
this time, but it seemed as if Providence had ordered it for me to be
always poor in consequence of my neglect of Him.
We had a very bad passage of eighteen days and our ship was so
leaky that we could not keep her free. At last within eight and forty
hours sail of Cork a dreadful gale of wind from the westward came on,
and we had to leave the pumps to shorten sail, during which time she
filled with water and broached to, and soon became dismasted, carrying


everything clear from the deck. Next morning when we came together,
we scarcely knew how we were saved the night before : there were only
seven of us out of nineteen, the rest being lost. We had all to lash
ourselves in the best manner we could, for the sea made a clean sweep
over our poor barque ; and in that state we remained for nine days
with nothing to eat or drink, excepting now and then by dint of watch-
ing we found a little wet biscuit, but all our water was stove by the
floating timber. Certainly there was plenty of rain, and we used to
wet our blanket that we had amongst us all, and each would suck a
piece all going to the blanket together that we might share alike. We
were picked up at last by an Irish hooker belongingto Mr. Sullivan of
Bearhaven, and taken to Castletown’s end, where one of our party died
rampant mad from having drunk half a gallon of water on landing :
the Doctor only allowed us two potatoes and a very small piece of
bread and one egg daily. There was a Christian young-lady Miss
Puxley, daughter of the chief officer of the water-guards, who tore up
all her flannel to clothe us. It was laughable to see the Captain in an
old gentleman’s powdered coat, and the boy with the young lady’s
sandals, until our clothes were sent from Cork by the magistrates, two
suits a piece.
1 never received more hospitality from any people in Europe than
from the Irish ; go where we would we were invited in, and they set
all that they had before us to partake of. As for Miss Puxley I shall
never forget her, for she was always doing something to soothe us
under our misfortunes ; she used even to dress my wounded foot every
day ; I dont know how I came by that wound, for just before losing
my senses I recollect that I and some others were furling the fore top-
sail when we were dismasted: how I was saved Ido not know, nor
how a large splinter of the mizen mast was in my leg; we knew it was
a splinter of the mizen by its being painted white, the rest of the masts
being all bright colour. None of those who were with me were saved ;
I alone was spared. I suffered a great deal of pain, my leg being so
swollen when the Doctor extracted the wood; and if it had not been
for the kindness and attention 1 received from those kind-hearted people
and particularly the young lady, 1 should never have survived.
The ship’s-owner paid us a visit at Bearhaven, and just mark the
worldly man ! he said to us “you have suffered a great*deal, but 1 am
suffering a great deal more in the loss of my line ship.” One of our
party answered that if he had been only one half hour on that dismal


wreck, he would have willingly given up not only that ship but all his
other possessions to he safe ashore ! He said it was very hard indeed,
and that he had suffered from fever ever since he received the account
of his loss, which showed clearly enough how much value he set on his
worldly store ! Verily such men have their reward !
The ship was picked up by the Dublin Steamer and towed into
the Cove of Cork eight days after we were on shore. I was very sorry
when the time came to take leave of our kind hospitable friends. For
several years afterwards I tried to find a suitable present to send Miss
Puxley, and during the Chinese war I succeeded,and brought a beauti-
ful piece of silk safely to Plymouth, which however Miss Puxley never
received, as you will hear bye and bye.
CHAPTER V.
“ Thou hast not left me, oft as I left Thee,
Oil to the close, Oh Lord, abide with me !
Key. H. F. Lyte.
A voyage to India was my next desire, and I shipped in a very
fine ship the “ Madras ” of Liverpool, bound to Singapore and China.
On reaching China we were told that we must bring two cargoe of rice
to shore, before we should be allowed to get a cargoe of tea for home,
so we went to Batavia accordingly: but as it was very sickly there
we lost most of our crew and had to get Malays instead : this made us
more sickly still, for they and their wives whom they always take with
them, use such a quantity of chunam and beetle nut, that there is a
constant stench arising from it and their dirty habits. I had
made one trip and part of the second when I had the dysentry
and was forced to stay behind on the consul’s hands, until the ship’s
return. That gentleman treated me very kindly for four months, and
when the ship came back both he and the doctor said I was still unfit
to rejoin her, so the Captain had to pay me off, and I remained two
months longer on the Consul's hands ; through his kindness and the
French doctor’s treatment, I recovered from that most deadly sickness
which carries so many thousands of our countrymen off to eternity.
And now I must pause to say what an ungrateful wretch I must have
been, never offering up one prayer to the Almighty, nor even thanking
Him for my recovery and returning strength and vigour ! It is now


that I perceive my neglect of the Creator of my being, and wonder
with what patience He has home my ingratitude : but my eyes are
partially opening to the many mercies 1 have received at His hands.
I shipped next in a country ship under Dutch colours, and
manned with Lascars, bound to Samarang: we were also to go
to a place called Keo, and get some of our cargo for the King
of Achen for whom we had a great quantity already on board,
but he was never destined to have it. On entering the Straits of
Lumbok we ran aground on one of the coral banks with which that
place abounds. We immediately set to work to lighten our ship and
had anchors out to heave her off, when some Malay proas hove in shdit
bearing down on us. The Captain on seeing them lost all command
of himself : indeed so terrified was he that he at once flew to the rum
cask to inspire him with courage, and bringing a large demi-john on
deck, he wanted every one to do the same. I persuaded our mate who
was a Prussian and a fine young fellow, to serve out one dram each,
and then destroy the remainder, which he did, but unhappily there
was plenty of liquor besides. Something told me that all would not
be right, and I therefore refrained from drinking any liquor, at that
time. Our crew consisted of four Europeans besides the Captain and
mate, and one East Indian Portuguese : we had four guns, six pounders,
with which we might have kept them away if it were not for the
cowardly conduct of the Captain, who was too terrified to make any
preparations for defence or for saving himself or ship, and the mate
was too much in awe of the Dutch law, to venture to take the charge
out of his hands. When the proas came very near us the Captain told
me that he did not know what he should do when they came alongside,
but we might do what we liked, for we were sure to be all murdered
as the Malays seldom spared anyone.
Then I asked him to give us all the powder, for we were deter-
mined to sell our lives as dear as possible ; we had talked the matter
over amongst ourselves and agreed about the Captain’s conduct. He
directly gave us the keys of the lockers and drawers, and the mate
went into the cuddy with the steward and handed up all the ammuni-
tion and arms, a large supply for a merchantman. The rest of us
turned to, and got the guns clear and ready to make as good a fight as
we could. We left all the arrangement of the guns to a Scotchman
who had been on board a man of war, and he went about his work
right cheerfully ; he, McDonald and I shook hands together, swearing


to die by one another, after holding out as long as we could, McDonald
remarking that he was a match for six Malays any time, and that he
knew I could manage another half dozen. In that manner he went
on inspiring us with courage whilst we brought everything into order.
The three proas now anchored about two .miles off and began fishing,
their usual mode of caution, that they may find out what you are, be-
fore beginning their attack. This gave us more time to prepare ;we
hail mustered sixteen muskets, half a dozen pistols, a dozen boarding
pikes, and plenty of powder. Having found half a keg that the
Captain and Steward knew nothing about, we were well supplied with
that article, but scarcely any shot, for we could only find about twenty
rounds all over the ship ; we soon made up that deficiency hy getting
all the bouilliesoup tins there were, emptying them, and then filling
them with old iron bolts cut small for the purpose and stowing them
with ashes, thus making a very good canister shot; our friends con-
tenting themselves by viewing us at a good distance. But in the
evening a breeze sprung up, and they all got underweigh, and came
much closer and began fishing again.
When McDonald had everything in order he called out to me
“A—, we will expend a pound of powder on them by way of salute,
and if they come any closer we’ll give them bouillie soap seasoned well
with ashes ! ” meaning the canister shot that we had made. Our car-
penter who was a Chinaman and had been taken by them once before,
had made a very good lot by this time, and kept contriving everything
he could get for shot, he did not want to be in their hands a second
time, for they greatly ill-used him when they had him before, he des-
cribed them to us as monsters, which we soon found out to our sorrow
was true enough. The blank shots we fired had the effect of keeping
them off all that night, but there was no sleep on board our ship, for
we were watching them and preparing cartridges. We had mustered
all the stockings and socks in the ship to make into cartridge bags, and
we had a. very good lot considering the time,and we were well prepared
to meet them. Kven our cowardly Captain seeing everything in such
good order and the Malays not boarding us that night, began to take
courage and gave a few necessary orders ; but at dawn of day he lost
all control over himself, on perceiving the smallest of the proas hoist
their sails, and a lot of men going from her to the large ones. There
was no mistaking their intentions towards us, the little proa going
away but leaving her men behind. We, meantime were not idle but


trying to heave our ship off, after we had everything ready and keep-
ing a good look out on all their movements ; and they did the same,
hovering round us all that forenoon, not coming close enough to speak,
but viewing us on every side and pretending to he fishing. About two
o’clock that afternoon three more proas hove in sight, one of them the
small one that was underweigh in the morning, and then the others
that were at anchor made sail to join them, and they all bore down
on us in style, regular war-fashion ; there was no mistaking their
movements. They came very close, and passed all round us under
canvass, and then anchored within half gun-shot of us—too close to be
pleasant I assure you ! The mate had as much as he could do to keep
McDonald from firing at them; he said “They are such a nice mark !”
The Captain I thought out of his mind, for I never saw a man so
much afraid of death.
The poor Lascars were praying the night before to Mahomet, and
even the poor Portuguese had his beads and cross in his hands the
whole time, but there were no prayers from any of us ! We deserved
to be slaughtered for our very neglect. Although I did not pray I
must confess I had some curious fore-bodings within my breast, think-
ing of home and all I held dear on this earth. 1 thought 1 should die
in peace if I once more beheld my mother.
CHAPTER VI.
“ If you cannot be what you might have been, yet you can still be something
that Christ w ill value, a humble penitent soul ”
Dr. Temple.
As soon as sun-set began there was a great traffic of small boats
and canoes among the proas : we thought they were going to attack us
at once, but the carpenter told us they were only assembling for pray-
ers ! Such is their lawless mode of life that they think murdering men
no crime. The Steward came running out of the cuddy crying out
that the Captain was going to blow up the ship : we immediately ran
in and there he was sure enough, with a lot of our cartridges, four of
them in a bundle of oakum, and a great many more scattered about.
The lazaret and the hatch were off, and the Captain was sitting on the
deck smoking a cigar, with his legs down the hatchway. On speaking
to him he said “It will soon be over with us, for I intend to heave


tinsmeaning his lighted cigar—“down the hatchway among the
powder and blow us all up.” We however had detected it in time and
put all the powder out of his way and set the Steward to keep watch
over him and give him as much liquor as he wanted and try to make
him insensible, for he was only in our way now, hut he could not get
insensible, so terrified had he become ! So much for our Dutchman ! If
we bad bad an English Captain and crew I believe we should never
have been taken captive by these miserable wretches. As soon as
their prayers were over, six of them got into a boat and hoisted a flag
of truce in her bow, the villains knowing what respect European na-
tions pay to that bit of white rag. And now came the tug of war.
They were nearly alongside when the mate hailed them and told them
not to come : he spoke English but they asked if no one on board of
us could speak Malay? We answered “No, our Captain could speak
it, but he was paralysed and no use.” They asked what ship it was ?
and we told them that it was a Company’s cruiser, and that we should
soon get her off, but they knew better. They then returned to their
proa. Meanwhile we dressed up all our lascars with jackets, blue
shirts or any kind of European clothing that we could find, and flour-
ed their faces all over to make them look like white men, and we gave
them a boarding pike each, which made McDonald laugh at his “paper
soldiers ”as he called them, as they stood in a row on the poop. But
they were nearly all touched with the same complaint as the Skipper:
and we held a consultation what we should do with Attn, for we feared
him almost as much as the Malays ! We now proposed that if they left
us alone that night we would take the long boat and try to make our
escape from them ; but the mate overruled us, saying it was cer-
tain death, for they were sure to pursue us, and easily take us with
their smaller boats : and the Captain would not consent to run the
risk, not knowing the old proverb of “ a good run being better than a
bad fight.” We however abandoned that plan, rather than leave the
Skipper and the poor Lascars to their fate.
We soon saw them getting things in order and bustling about on
board the proas, when another boat came within hailing distance, with
a fellow dressed in European clothes and he hailed us in English, tel-
ling us he would help to get us off if we would pay him. Our mate
made answer that we were able to get her off ourselves, or else to wait
for some ship to pass that way, “so dont you ” he said “ come along-
side on any account, for you may perceive I am well armed and if you


attempt to come I will surely sink you.” The man wanted to supply
us with fresh % fish, but wo told him we were in want of nothing ; he
therefore went back again,and they all began to get their anchors and
come close to us. They then got into their small boats and began
firing at us from the proas, keeping the small boats full of men along-
side all ai med to the teeth : we lay down on the deck, most of their
shots passing over us, for we did not like to expend our small stock of
powder until their final rush, which we knew would shortly take place.
They continued firing for about half an hour, doing very little damage
except wounding four of the Lascars by the splinters that were flying
all around, which caused the other Lascars to be very much frighten-
ed ; and indeed I could not blame them when the Captain set them
the cowardly example of roaring terribly : I never thought a man
could be so frightened. The Malays hearing him roaring made sure
that we were all wounded, gave one tremendous hollo or war whoop,
and dashed to hoard us in the small boats. Now was our time,
McDonald firing the first shot the moment they left their proas, but
they assembled in good order waiting for one another.
We could not see what damage we had done by the first few
shots, but when they came nearer we let fly at them again with mur-
derous effect, so much so that they put back to their proas, shorter of
their boats than when they started, and I think that if we had had
plenty of powder to keep the firing up for any length of time, we
should have sent them away altogether. We now commenced firing
again but with better effect this time, for we wounded eight more of
the poor Lascars who kept up such a mournful dole, that it wjis very
distressing to hear : there being no doctor, all we could do was to bind
up their wounds, and let them lie where they were, which so frightened
the others, that we had to drive them on deck with our cutlasses when
we wanted them again. The Malays fired well this time, and drove us
off the deck, the firing being so warm that we durst not show a head
above the bulwarks.
They now knocked off the firing and took to the boats again, com-
ing boldly on this time. We could see the fellow with European clothes
on, standing up in the stern sheets of one of the boats, waving his
sword to the rest to come on. We waited a moment and then let drive
in amongst them and made our canister tell home upon them, for we
saw three boats sinking ; but the Malays are like fish in the water
and they swam to the other boats and were taken in. Poor McDonald


jumping up to see the effect of our shot received a wound in the shoul-
der from a large splinter of the bulwarks. Our shot had the effect of
checking them only for a moment, when they made another howl or
whoop, and alongside they came in :U1 directions, at once climbing up
the sides everywhere. This bust howl had the effect of frightening
the poor Lascars so much, that most of them took to the rigging to
save themselves ; indeed so horrifying was their war whoop that it
seems ringing in my deaf ears even while writing about it. I never
saw such a set of ill-looking ruffians before, and truly then my heart
began to sink, but it was only with a sort of dogged determination to
die as became an Englishman.
I had drawn my cutlass, for it was no use to stop longer at the
<nms as they were all aboard, when Anderson struck me with his
cutlass crying “ Take to the rigging.” We all took to the rigging and
got into the main top, and when there we had only three muskets,
the rest being left below in the excitement of the time. Indeed they
would have been of very little use if we had had them, for when we
came to over-haul, we had no ammunition but about nine rounds
which McDonald had inside his blue shirt and it kept him in danger
of being blown to pieces with so much tire flying about. However
we loaded our three muskets ready in case any of them should follow
us ; hut they now had charge of the deck, and got all our powder and
the rest of the muskets which we had prepared on deck. They began
to fire down among the poor wounded Lascars until some of them
ventured below where they found no opposition and drove those who
were able to walk on deck, where they were butchered before our eyes
and thrown overboard. Those who could not walk they killed below
and dragged up the hatchway and threw overboard also, saving one
regular negro, for they wanted some Africans to make slaves of them;
we had five on board and only one of them wounded. The fellow
with English clothes then hailed us, and asked us where all the white
men were ? We told him we were all up here and if he offered to fol-
low we would kill any man that attempted it. He said “I do not
want to kill a white man if he comes down, but if not I will soon
make him” —and ordered one of them to get either an axe or saw to
cut the main-mast away, so that we might either fall into the water
or be killed by falling on deck.
In the meantime some of them hauled our poor Captain and the
steward out of the cuddy: the Captain they made fast with some


rope, but the poor steward they made short work of, for they actual-
ly cut him to pieces with their cutlasses and threw him overboard
which made our hearts burn sore to see so cold blooded a murder
committed before our eyes.
The fellow again hailed us and told us to come down, that
nothing should hurt us, and if there were any “seedy boys,” mean-
ing the Africans, he would spare them. We did not know which
way to trust him but asked if he would allow us to keep our arms ?
He said he would if that was any use among two or three hun-
dred men. We considered a long while before we would consent, but
seeing no remedy we at last agreed to come down if he would spare
our lives which he promised to do. That fellow I can safely aver
was an Englishman altho’ he always strictly denied it afterwards ; I
never saw even a native gentleman speak such good English or know
their manners better. Be that as it may, he had a small spark of
humanity left in him, for I conld perceive while they were butchering
the poor Lascars he always turned the other way and let all his fol-
lowers do their awful work. His dress he must have stolen from some
very rich gentleman, for it was of the best sort, and his pistols silver-
mounted ; and I have seen many Europeans blacker than he. How-
ever he never owned to being an Englishman; I only asked the ques-
tion once not daring to do it the second time, for his word was law
among his followers. We came down at last, and he asked if that
was all the white men on board, and we told him yes. “Where is
your Captain?” We pointed to him lying bound on deck; he had
taken the mate to be the Captain. He then asked “Who worked the
guns?” We made answer that the whole of us did; then he wanted
to know who ordered the working of them ? We told him we had no
master—we worked for the best advantage. He said “There are
some of you trained men; but where was your Captain all the time?”
We told him where he found him. He turned and gave the poor
Captain a look of pity and then kicked him once or twice.
We then all went into the cuddy and related the manner that we
got ashore and where we were bound to, when he ordered the Cap-
tain to be set at liberty. We had then some bread and cheese and
wine together ; and he ordered us to give him an account of any
thing very valuable in the ship, which we did to the best of our
knowledge. He called the Captain and ordered him to produce his
papers ; he looked at thepi for a long time, and then asked WS if we


were willing to show his men how to get the ship off and carry her
safe into port ? which we were very willing to do. He then told us
all to sleep in the cuddy and in the morning begin to get the ship off.
This was good news for us, as it gave a chance of escape out of their
hands. He then went out and stopped them from any more murders.
1 was very glad to see the old carpenter escape, for they always ex-
pect a ransom for Chinamen if they have any friends in any of the
nearest ports. They transact that part of the business pretty cleverly,
having scribes on shore who make out papers for that purpose, but
they never let their man go before they receive the money they ask
for him : and they have agents in every port to do their dark business
for them.
The Admiral, as we now began to call the fellow in English dress,
came to us again and warned us against trying to retake the ship,
“for if I find any thing in the least wrong” he said “I’ll hang you like
dogs, therefore I would have you beware that you do not attempt to
escape : but if on the contrary you act uprightly, 1 will represent your
conduct to the Rajah and he will make your life more comfortable.”
He then went in the boat and sent two of the smallest proas alongside
ready to take in cargo at daylight.
As soon as he left us we all sat together not knowing what to
think of it, as we were sure he would fulfil his threats to the letter.
He left a strong guard on board to see that we made no attempt. The
Captain as soon as he was gone, went into his state-room and brought
a bag of money and threw it under the table, saying “ There is £4OO
that he knows nothing about : divide it among the five of you, you
may want it some day or another.” Those words inspired me with
new hope : I took my share, counting under the table, for the guards
were looking in every ten minutes to see that all was right. We then
went into the Captain’s state-room, and each made a belt to put his
money in : there were £3OOO there, but all in dollars and would make
too much bulk, so we took no more, as there was no more in gold.
We then tried to go to sleep, but none of us could get any, think-
ing of what our fate would be when brought before the Rajah or
head Pirate. In the morning the Admiral made his appearance, tell-
ing us to go and see that they discharged the cargo properly ; and
when there was enough taken out, to let him know ; at the same
time he made the Captain put every thing of value in the state-room,
including all his and the mate’s nautical instruments and books; he


then locked them in and took the key himself. He allowed us all the
privilege of getting our clothes and provisions.
We worked all that day at the cargo, discharging it into the proas
that were alongside, when late in the evening we thought there was
enough out of her. We would not try to heave her off that night; hut
a strong breeze springing up in an opposite direction from that we ran
ashore on, and the ship being lightened, she came off herself without
any trouble whatever.
CHAPTER VII.
“ Oh deafer than the sea!
How long the time since Christ began
To call in vain on me! ”
We then made sail for the Island of Lingin, the Admiral, and
forty of his men staying on board of us, so that we had not the slight-
est chance of escape even if we had fallen in with another vessel. It
was three days before we were at the place of rendezvous, and when
we came to an anchor off the Island there was great joy and firing of
guns for such a good prize. We now prepared to go before the Rajah
with the Admiral, so we went ashore shortly after we arrived, and
went up to his house, the Admiral having given orders to carry us up
in a sort of bullock-cart, he himself riding in a kind of chair or
palanquin.
When we came into the Rajah’s presence we had to kneel down,
and crawl from the opening, (for there was no door) up to the middle
of the room on our knees, and then to touch our foreheads several
times to the floor. A fellow' was there to shove our heads close
to the ground, and keep them there a little while. The Rajah was
seated on a kind of a raised place sitting in a very fine chair, and very
richly dressed, the Admiral sat close to him, acting Interpreter, for
the Rajah could not speak one word of English. He asked if we were
all English ? We answered “Yes,” and a very good job for our Cap-
tain that he did not know that he was Dutch, for he would have cut
his head off there without any ceremony, the Executioner being pre-
sent with his instrument. It was like one of our farmers scythes witli
a long handle similar to what we call a flail, and so expert is the fellow


in the use of it that he will cut a beetle from the oft ear of a bullock
without injuring him.
The Eajah told us to consider ourselves his subjects now, and
if there should be the slightest disobedience to his commands we should
lose our heads immediately, making the fellow flourish his weapon
over our heads several times. He then ordered us into a pretty large
house, our future home, and giving us a wife each we were to attend at
his house every morning and there get orders from one of his attend-
ants who could speak English. At present we were placed under the
Admiral’s charge while he was in port, and we were to get the vessel
ready to go to sea again, which gave us good hopes that we were going
in her: but alas how soon were our hopes defeated ! the only one they
took with them was the Captain, to navigate her to Porte De Galle;
and I 'heard afterwards that the poor man was made away with on
sighting that port, so that he might not stand in the way of their bar-
gains there. We had put on board of her several sorts of goods besides
her own cargo to suit the market of that place, there being an assort-
ment of all kinds of merchandise on the Island fit for any market.
They generally took the cargo to the best market, and then returned
with nothing but spice : whatever they did with it I do not know for
there was everything that was required growing on the Island, and
fruits in great abundance, fowls of every description, and very large,
and so many of them that they had no owner; wild peacocks, and
turkeys, and what they call jungle-fowl in any quantity. I cannot
make out why people, blessed as they are with such abundance of every
thing, should go robbing, and plundering, and pirating in the manner
they do. But why do I wonder at them, when in Christian England
so much evil is done every hour of the day.
And now let me remind you again of our neglect; in all our
trials, and distresses we never offered up one prayer to the Almighty
for our safe keeping; nor in our conversation or hopes of deliverance
and escape was there one word of thankfulness for His many mercies.
0, it is now that I feel that neglect and I wonder at His long forbear-
ance ! Even the Malays went morning, and evening to their earthen-
ware god to worship; it was enough to put any of us who call ourselves
Christians to shame, to think they would pay so much respect to their
piece of clay, and we never to bend the knee to the Almighty !
We now had to go to the Eajah’s every day to know what we
shoqlcj do : McDonald and I had charge of one of the Eajah’s pleasure


canoes, and the mate Anderson, and Bruce had another to look after,
and keep in order, and to go with him when he took a trip on the
water. Every morning, and evening we had also to gather the fish
that was paid him every day when the boats returned from fishing,
every boat giving every tenth fish to the Eajah; and we had to clean,
and cure his fish. We built a sort of platform in the river, he giving
us plenty of men to help us ; they used to cure the fish on the sandy-
beach which filled them with sand, and the Eajah would not eat any
of theirs after he tasted what we prepared for him. They used
too much salt altogether, we using very little, and plenty of pepper,
which is a fine thing to preserve fish with in hot countries. We also
made a smoking house, to smoke fish like our conger-eel: and the
Eajah liked it so well that he made the whole of that kind of fish to
be done in the same way. But the shark was the most dainty there.
By our attention to our work, and doing it well, we got into the good
graces of the Eajah altogether : he made us a present of a very fine
sash each, and a well mounted cuirass, for the natives always go armed
there. We might now have lived at our ease, and made ourselves very
comfortable, having everything that we could wish for, but for the
thought of being among such a set of pirates, and thinking of being
slaves for life.
We always kept a good supply of water in the boat that we had,
ready for the least chance of escape; we were very nearly caught one
night going to try, but it only made us more wary for the future. We
had not known that there was a guard on the beach as well as one at
the Eajah’s house, when we were nearly all detected, and poor Bruce
got some stripes from the guard for nothing. We were all ready to
start with the Eajah’s big boat, having a bag full of roasted bread-
fruit, and another of jack-fruit, and bananas, and plantains, as much
as would last for a fortnight on a pinch like that, and we sent Bruce
down to see if the water was all right, when he was surprised, and
taken, and bambooed by the guard. We heard his cries and resorted
to a stratagem to clear us of suspicion. McDonald immediately got
on the floor roaring like a mad fellow with pain, and it happened that
none of the guards could speak English : they were bringing poor
Bruce up to the Eajah roaring too, and covered with blood, the effect
of the bambooing, when we came down asking him if he had found the
Doctor, for McDonald was nearly dead? he took the hint directly, and
when brought before the Interpreter he stated that he went to look for


the Doctor when the guard beat him so. The Interpreter sent away
for the Doctor, mid came down to see McDonald, for he was a great
favorite with ail of them j and he played his part well; lie seemed in
agony by the way he rolled, and distorted his features. The Doctor
soon came, and gave him some carrapota oil, a very good sort of
medicine, and we had to rub him with some of it. It grows on the
Island plentifully. The Doctor then went away with the Interpreter;
and poor Bruce, the only one who wanted the Doctor was released,
but he was-more frightened than hurt: indeed if our scheme had not
succeeded we should all have lost our heads. At daylight the Rajah
sent to know how McDonald was, and we all went to thank the Doctor
for his great skill in curing hint so quickly: the Rajah would not al-
low him to go to work for two or three days after, and we were very
glad to have succeeded so well.
CHAPTER VIII.
“ What blessed light breaks on my soul,
My God, I hear Thee now! ”
Hgber.
We were now more wary than ever, and looked more into the
ways of the different guard’s houses, and tried to find out the best
mode of escape : but we had to keep everything very quiet while we
still hoped to be free some time or other. We saw several vessels pass
by, and we determined to make some desperate effort when any oppor-
tunity offered, and to die or succeed : however things resumed their
former position, and there was not the least suspicion of onr having
tried to make our escape.
The Interpreter hearing us singing one evening, brought the Rajah
down to listen to onr song which greatly delighted him, so that he
sent us several kinds of liquor, and sweetmeats, and we had to go
next evening to his place, and sing for him, and the ladies of the
Court, if I may call it one. This so pleased them all, that we could do
any thing now, and the Rajah gave us free access all over the Island,
and offered us a second wife each, which we refused, hut that was a
great honour; the more wives you had the more you were thought of:
there were a great many wanted us to take them, hut we stood to our
own country fashion.


We were about four months on the Island when there was a ship
seen coming towards the anchorage : we made her out to be an-En-
glish man-of-war, and so she proved to be as we heard afterwards; for
they immediately sent us under a very strong guard into the interior
for a week. By that time she was gone, having only remained two
days, and then went off again. It was so sudden that we had no
chance of making it known, that there were five white men on the
Island; the Interpreter told ns that it was H. M. S. Wolf, and that
the Captain, and several of the crew were ashore one whole day, and
that was all he would let us know concerning her.
So we had nothing for it but to make some bold push for our
liberty. We were so well in favour with the Eajah that he allowed us
to go fishing in separate boats, each of us being in a boat with six or
eight Malays so that there was very little chance that way ; but we
never despaired thinking there would be an opportunity some time or
another. However we grew tired of waiting, and as we started before
day-light we tried another scheme which only partly succeeded, and
we suffered severely for it. In the morning, instead of putting our
fishing tackle, and provisions for the day into the separate boats that
we properly belonged to, we put all our provisions into the first boat
that was launched, and all jumped in, and so took the Malays by sur-
prise, that it was a considerable time before they followed us, part of
the guard getting into one of the Rajah’s fast boats to give us chase.
We would not have minded one or two of them, but there were up-
wards of thirty of them after us; we how-ever pulled and sailed away
from them for about four hours, when an unfortunate circumstance
happened in their favour. During the chase two of the Island proas
hove in sight, and we tried to avoid them; but some of the boats
boarded them, and informed them of our escape. They immediately
gave chase too, and came up with us in about two hours, and as we
w-ere ready to fight, they ran us right down, and picked us up out of
the water : they then bound us very securely, and made for the land.
We now felt sure that our fate was sealed, and that we should not
live many hours longer, but Providence willed it otherwise, and put it
into that savage’s heart to spare us. We W'ere brought before the
Rajah bound very strongly ; and I really believe that all the inhabi-
tants of the Island were there to look at ns ; the women set up such a
crying, and howling that it was deafening. The Rajah asked us the
reason why we wanted to run away, and if we did not know the


penalty ? We answered yes, but we wanted to see our fathers, and
mothers in England.
After a long time he consented to spare our lives on condition
that we would not attempt to escape any more, and we were to be
well flogged for this attempt. We were accordingly stript, and tied to
a large tree in the front of the house, and left until the sun would
hum our backs well, so that the whipping should be more painful ;
then we were flogged with a piece of sea-cow’s hide as thick as a good
sized stick, —the Dutch people call it a Shamhok.—We were so sore
after that flogging that we could not do anything for a fortnight after-
wards : indeed I feel the effects of it to this day. We were then liber-
ated, and put into separate huts, and not allowed to go near the beach
altho’ we lived not fifty yards from it.
We were now very uncomfortable, but we did not give up all hope
yet as long as we had our liberty, tho’ the Rajah would be sending for
us, and threatening us very severely that if we should ever show the
least sign of escaping, we should suffer death directly. Indeed it is a
wonder how he let us escape ; for he used to punish his own people
pitilessly, cutting their heads or legs off, or putting out their eyes for
very trifling offences. We now knew what we had to trust to ; he took
our cuirass, and arms from us which was counted a great disgrace
there. The time thus dragged heavily away for about three months
longer, when we almost began to despair of ever seeing England any
more or getting from among these savages.
We were on board one of the large proas, putting a new mast into
her, for they could not do it themselves ; the Rajah sent us, but his
men were to keep their eyes open so that we should not escape them.
We had nearly finished and the guard hailed to send us on shore, when
we looked round the corner of the Island and saw two vessels quite
close. It did not take us many minutes to man the boat that lay
alongside, and shove off to them without waiting for any of the Malays
to come, but there were two in the boat before us: we made them jump
overboard quickly ; they began bawling to the shore directly, letting
them know what had happened. They launched several boats to give
us chase but we had the heels of them this time, though they were
following pretty close after us : to our surprise when we came close to
the vessel the crew hailed us, and told us not to come any further or
they should fire on us. We made answer that we were white men es-
caping from the Malays, pulling alongside at the same time; the


Captain had mistaken us for natives, but now he only asked If there
were any more of us, and when we answered no, he let drive his guns
amongst our pursuers. I thought that I should have dropped on deck,
and the first exclamation of the whole, of us was just to say thank
God ! and nothing more. The ship proved to be the “ William
Mooney ” belonging to Calcutta, bound to Serrahoye from China, and
the other ship was the “ James Patterson” of London, hound to the
same place.
CHAPTER IX.
■ May I but meet thee on that peaceful shore,
The parting word shall pass my lips no more!"
Cowper.
We now had to relate how we were taken, and a long letter was
written to the Dutch authorities. When we arrived we went on
shore at Serrahoye, and after giving all the intelligence about the ship
and Island, we were sent up to Singapore, and I heard afterwards
that the Dutch men of war burnt the place to the ground, which was
very little use, for they could begin as bad as ever without any houses.
Our ship was the fourth ship that had been taken within two years,
and we were the only men that escaped their hands. The magistrate
in Singapore behaved to us like a father, providing tor us every thing
that was needful; he kept us ashore for three weeks, and then got a
ship for us. But there was not one which would take us all, so we
had to separate, McDonald and I going together, for we resolved never
to part, neither did we for twenty-seven years afterwards. I looked
all over Singapore to find a fuitable present for Miss Puxley, but
could find nothing that I thought she would like, except a couple of
very nice birds, that both died in spite of all my care in carrying
them home. I could find plenty of shawls and purchased two, one for
my sister and one for my brother’s wife : I would not buy any for my
mother as I thought them too gaudy for an old woman.
We were sent for by several of the merchants at Singapore on
purpose to relate how the Malays treated us during our stay with
them : and they seldom let us depart without making us a present of
some sort. We now left Singapore and were bound for Manilla to
discharge the remainder of the cargo of our ship the “Frances Ann,”


of Liverpool; and right glad I was to find myself once more on board
a ship, and among civilized people, after all the adventures of the year
1835. I wrote home by another vessel that one of my shipmates was
going in, to tell them of my misfortune and happy release, and that
they were to expect me in about eight or ten months time. I ought
to have gone straight home from Singapore, and then I should have
seen the only person on earth my heart yearned to see—my mother ;
but it was the will of the Almighty that I should never see her more.
After a pleasant time on board this ship we reached Liverpool.
I will pass over the distress of mind occasioned me by hearing of my
mother's and brother’s death, especially my mother’s ; all my other
misfortunes were as nothing to compare with this; for nothing else
could crush my spirit like it: life seemed a blank and a misery. We
waited the usual time for paying the ship off, which was a week,
McDonald was going home and persuaded me to go with him, which I
did; we remained in Scotland two months, and then we returned to
Liverpool. McDonald left about fifty pounds with his mother, as we
both had all the money from the Dutchman yet by us. After the
deaths I have mentioned I very nearly hove myself away altogether,
for I rambled all over India and the South Seas afterwards, without
caring to come to England where was very little attraction for me.
I would here remark that if any person has the least doubt about
the fact of that Dutch ship, there are several gentlemen to whom I
could write in Singapore who can vouch for the fact.
CHAPTER X.
“Enough, that blessings undeserved
Have marked my erring truck.”
Whittier
After trying to console myself for the loss of my mother and the
best of brothers, I shipped as boatswain of a ship called the Barbary,
bound to Bombay, McDonald with me. One evening, after what we
called “the Saturday night’s bottle,” poor McDonald was very drunk
and quarrelsome, the Captain and mate interfered, but were only
worsted and greatly abused by the whole crew for their meddling in
what did not concern them : the mate and McDonald came to blows,
the poor mate getting greatly cut and hurt on the occasion, which


made me very sorry for him, he being a very nice upright man. The
Captain called me to put McDonald in irons ; this I immediately re-
fuse 1, which caused him to knock me off from doing any more duty
during that passage. He then went into the cabin and armed himself,
and the mates, the doctor and steward, and went among the men,
which only made things worse : for when they saw the Captain and
his party come rushing forward armed, it increased their fury, and
then a serious row began, through the Captain’s rashness. The men
overpowered the few that had arms, and then the Captain was weak
enough to give them more liquor to make things worse, because with-
out it they would not give up their arms. However after that night
things went on more comfortably, it having taught the Captain a
lesson.
I never went to work during the remainder of the passage, which
lasted for a month after the row. If it had been any man but McDonald,
I do not know that I should have refused to put him in irons, but
McDonald ! I could not do it to him.
When we came to Bombay the Captain asked me to resume my
duty, which I agreed to do, on the condition he would erase my name
out of the log book, and think no more of the transaction : but he
would not do that, wanting to keep it as a check, and if anything else
happened, to bring the whole against me when we arrived at home, it
often being the case that a seaman worked the whole voyage for no-
thing : thanks to God, tilings are greatly altered for the better since
then, when by the representations of the Captain, poor seamen were
often imprisoned for veiy slight offences, and not allowed to plead
their own cause.
The Captain not agreeing to take my name out of the log book,
I would not return to my duty before appealing to a magistrate ; and
the ship’s company seeing how I was treated, they all refused any fur-
ther duty until the whole affair was taken out of the log book, or
brought before a magistrate ; this only made things worse on both
sides ; for the Captain reported the ship in a state of mutiny, and
immediately the authorities sent a police force off to bring the whole
crew on shore, when we were taken before the magistrate. He only
asked us to resume our duty which we were willing to do provided we
were forgiven the whole affair; the Captain, however, would not
comply, and the magistrate had no power to enforce it. All that he
could do was to give us a note to say that it had been settled by him


in Bombay. We then all refused going to our duty any more unless
he would grant our request, which he would not do; therefore the
magistrate sent us all to prison for three months, and to forfeit clothes
and wages ; if we should relent before the expiration of that time, we
should be received on board our ship again as usual. But we all pre-
ferred going to prison rather than trust to an uncertainty: the Captain
and mate coming often to see us and to know if we would go on hoard
again, and all of us remaining firm to our first resolve.
We were not very long in prison before there came in to see us a
Lieutenant in the Indian navy, who was a passenger on board, and
knew the whole transaction: he undertook to get our wages and clothes
on condition that we would enter the Indian navy; this we all agreed
to do. He immediately had ns released and sent on board a company’s
cruiser lying in the harbour; at the same time our discharge and
wages were sent to us on board without any further trouble; we all
received forty rupees, or four pounds bounty for joining, and we had
a week’s leave for spending our money : sailors have a great dislike to
carry money to sea with them, so we had a splendid spree as we called
it, buggy driving and horse racing, fiddling and dancing, both night
and day, until it was time to be on board, and shortly after going to
sea bound for the Persian Gulf. The ship we were on board was a
•ISO gun sloop called ‘ 1 the Coote, ” commanded by a commodore of the
Indian navy ; and when we arrived at Bushen there was a lot of men
wdiose term was expired ; you all enter for three or five years, and
then take a fresh bounty, or take your discharge, after having been
sent to Bombay, that being the head rendezvous of the East India
company. These men were sent down from the survey of the river
Euphrates, and another party were to be sent up in their place, so I
volunteered for the expedition, and I was shortly sent on board to take
a little cutter about thirty tons burden up the river. There were
twelve of us on board besides an Arab pilot to take us up to the com-
mandertof the flotilla, which was lying at a place called Mahomady, a
wood station on the river. There had been a lot of flat bottomed iron
boats sent out for the expedition, and also a lot of English boiler
makers to put them together, and I am sorry to say very few went
down that river again: in fact very few ever returned from the exped-
ition that w r ent up. We were about a month before we could go on
surveying on account of landing these boats and preparing for the
workmen.


CHAPTER XI.
“Mysterious are His ways whose power
Brings forth that unexpected hour,
When hearts that never met before
Meet and unite to part no more! ”
COWPER.
We now joined our Captain and lie assigned us our station, about
fifteen miles above where he always lay. We had to carry on in that
manner for about a month when he took the lead himself, we getting
on the ground so very often that he could not take his observations
properly. There were six cutters on the expedition and very hard
laborious work it is, sometimes aground on some mud bank, then you
must jump overboard and try to shove your little vessel off ; at other
times we were going at the rate of seven or eight knots an hour, when
suddenly we were caught high and dry on some sand-bank ; the pilots
being of very little use, for they knew scarcely anything about the
place, or else they pleaded ignorance on purpose to mislead us, so that
we should not know the river ; this caused us a great deal of uneces-
sary work and wet, and burning, for we were scarcely out of the water
before we were dry with a scorching hot sun, such as cannot shine
like it in the hottest part of Africa that ever I was in. Certainly we
were well paid having double pay, and rations during the time we
were on the expedition, and well was that earned : a great many of
our poor fellows never lived to enjoy their hard earnings, but died dur-
ing the survey. The hot winds prevalent destroyed our sleep at night,
and so much sand flying that our eyes were continually watering, and
so greatly irritated that several of our men became nearly blind, and
had to be sent to Bombay. This was in 1837.
Our work was chiefly to place flags in different directions so as to
form angles, that the surveying officer might make his observations
accordingly every day, and in the evening we had to gather these flags
in again.
One morning laying out our flags as usual there was an old mosque,
as we took it to be, where we wanted one of our flags to be placed ;
when a great over-grown person talking good English, came out and
told us not to put our flag there, for he would not allow it, and if we
did, that he would pull it down. The man who was putting it up
whose name was Harwood, told him that it was the terror of all na-
tions, meaning our Union Jack, and that if he offered to banl it Jowq


he would knock him in the head for it : but he never touched it,
thinking I suppose that there would be a row if he did, however we
kept our eye on that flag all day, more than on any of the rest, to see
that it was not disturbed: and when evening came Harwood and I
went ashore to gather in our flags, and having a long way to walk it
was nearly dark before we came to the old walls to take our little
Union Jack down—when we saw something like a sheep or a bundle
of white clothes moving about close to our little flag staff. We did
not know what to make of it at first, but Harwood went close to it
and found it was a woman, speaking to us very imploringly but we
could not understand one word that she said, as it was in Armenian
and Arabic, and Persian. We saw by her actions that she wanted pro-
tection, she was calling every now and then “ English, English ! ” And
patting her breast as if in some pain ; we could hear she was in tears,
and she was getting hold of one of Harwood’s hands, and still kept
kneeling and pointing to our little vessel. We considered what was
best to be done with her, and we determined on taking her up to our
Commander who lay about ten miles away at the other side of the
river, he having an Interpreter with him. But we had a young man
on board who also could understand her. While we were thus consi-
dering there came towards us a great black eunuch and caught hold of
the woman by the hands and began to drag her towards the gates ;
we saw then that it was some old ruins of a house. We told him not
to ill use her, for we would not allow him to do that; she at the same
time held up both her hands, and cried out “English, English !” He
not understanding what we said to him began to drag her along un-
mercifully, when we made him leave her alone altogether, and she
clung to Harwood closely, away from this fellow. He then made a
for assistance, such a roar as might be made by a wounded
elephant, when there came down four more men, three of them armed
with a big stick each, and one of them with a pike. One of them spoke
English, and I afterwards found that he was the master of the house :
they wanted to take her away, but she cried and clung closely to Har-
wood, so that we thought all was not right, and we resolved to keep
charge of her, even if we should be punished or blamed for it, until
such time as we could see our commander ; this we told the gentleman
who could speak English. He said we should be severely punished
for interfering with any of his people, which we were strictly ordered
by our own officers not to do, if we could possibly avoid it. But who


could stand by and see a young lady as she afterwards proved to be,
dragged and hauled, and abused by a parcel of fellows that think a
woman has no soul ! We could not stand it, neither would we allow
them to take her by force : if she was willing to go with them she
might; but if she wanted to stop with us we w'ould protect her with
our lives.
They then tried to take her away from us by force, but we drew
our cutlasses, (we were always armed,) and dared them to take her
from us. During the scuffle they tore her head-dress off, when we
saw a beautiful young lady bathed in tears, and looking so timid, and
frightened : we were then determined they should not have her, but
we would keep her as long as we could under our protection.
When they tried to seize her the second time, Harwood and I
singled out our man each, and played wrestling with them, and
brought them to the ground with such a fall that they did not recover
very quickly : the rest looking rather astonished to see their comrades
fall so suddenly ; and as they did not rise directly, they thought some
of their bones were broken. The fellow who spoke English then sung
out loudly for more help, when two more came dowm to their assis-
tance, the young lady crying piteously all the time. When we saw
that these other two had fire-arms, we were ready to use our cutlasses
if they again attempted to take the young lady from us : we kept edg-
ing toward our little boat all the time, they being afraid to engage us.
At last they made one desperate rush at us, hammering with their
sticks, so that we were forced to drop the young lady for a moment
and slash at them with our cutlasses: they immediately began to run
for it, but when we stopped they did the same, eyeing us all the time ;
and when we began to move towards the boat, they followed us closely.
They loaded their fire-arms, but owing to the length of time since they
had been used, they could not get them to go off, tho’ they tried several
times. They poured plenty of abuse on us, now calling us English
dogs, and children of the devil; .We would not give up our charge
leading her as gently as the time would allow down towards our little
boat which would only carry three—lucky that there were no more of
our men ashore ! when we came within about three or four hundred
yards of the boat they began to throw big stones at us, and tried again
to force the young lady from us, so that we had to use our cutlasses
this time to some extent, wounding all that came within reach. One
of them made a heavy blow at me with a heavy stick, and I putting


up my left arm to defend my head, received the blow on it which
broke my arm ; but that did not disable me.
I told Harwood now to take her on his shoulder, as she showed
signs of faintness, and we would fight our way to the boat. He then
knocked two of the flags together and put her on his shoulder, and
tied her there with the flags and his handkerchief, she being then in-
sensible to everything ; she was so frightened, more for us than any-
thing else. By being tied on his shoulder like a child on a gipsy’s
back in England, H. was able either to run or fight, she not being
very heavy.
They pushed us rather too close so that I had to keep my back
against Harwood’s and the young lady, keeping them off from grasp-
ing and snatching at her, every chance tearing some of her clothes off
from her, and Harwood was making for the boat all the time. So
we managed to make a sort of running fight of it, Harwood clearing
the front and I the rear. As soon as we got to the beach where the
boat lay we made a good run for her, and Harwood had to run into
the water with his load, while I shoved the boat off, and he caught
hold of her gunwhale, and holding on till I shoved the little boat into
deep water ; still Harwood held on while I unlashed the young lady
from off his shoulder and put her in ; he then jumped in himself. I
could not do much with only one hand, indeed if the young lady had
not been so light I could not have lifted her into the boat. The tide
was now taking us toward our little craft, while they on the shore fol-
lowed us along the bank of the river, heaving showers of stones at us
when the current brought us near them.
However we reached our vessel in safety at last, and I was very
glad of it on account of the young lady, and my arm was growing very
stiff and painful. Now that we had the young lady on board safe,
we did not know what was best to be done. As soon as the rest of
our men heard of how she was treated they wanted to go ashore armed
to chastise those fellows and to teach them how to use a lady for the
future. But we pacified them by telling them that it would only stop
the survey of the river. We had a midship-man on board, who more
than any of them wanted to go, right or wrong : but we persuaded him
from it, telling him it would only make things ten times worse.
The young lady on coming to herself seemed quite composed, and
a young man who could speak Persian, made her feel at home ; but
she would not be easy without either Harwoo4 op myself sitting by


her ; and when she found out that my arm was broken in bringing
her on board, she cried, and falling oh her knees almost worshipped
me ; when she was told how she was tied to Harwood’s shoulder we
could not restrain her from nearly worshipping us both.
CHAPTER XII.
’’That more ami more a Providence
Of love is understood.
Making the springs of time and sense
Sweet with eternal good."
Whittier.
f now resolved to go across to the commander that night; and
as our little boat would-only carry three I could not take the young
lady with me, for it required two to manage the boat, and I could do
nothing as both arms were getting very stiff, my right arm from hold-
ing the cutlass so long, which made me anxious to see the doctor.
We therefore made the best arrangement we could for her accommoda-
tion, and I told her that I would faithfully represent everything to
the Commander of the flotilla. She told me how she was placed by
force by her brothers in the house where we found her ; that she was
possessed of great property, and they put her in that place on purpose
to get hold of it. As soon therefore as I and the other two men were
ready, we started to go across the river to the Commander; the night
being very dark, we were a long time before we reached the other side.
When we came on board, and the Commander heard my story, he
seemed very angry, but only for a moment; he then said to me “You
are sure you provoked no quarrel ? ” and I told him that the young
lady was there to prove that they began it all themselves. He said
“Then if that be the case you have acted as Englishman, and I
would not have you act otherwise whilst on this river.” When he
told me that, I felt as proud as if I had been made an Admiral.
The Doctor now put my arm to rights with splints and oakum, and
bandages ; but he was in such a hurry to go with the Captain to see
the young lady, that he did not set it properly ; so that not liking the
job, a fortnight afterwards he broke it again himself, and set it right,
which was ten times more painful than the first time. The Comman-
der made me stop on hoard his vessel that night while he went for


Hie young lady, and brought her on board his own vessel which was
but small; still she hail a little better accommodation for a lady than
what we had for her in our little craft.
Ihe Captain after learning all the circumstances was resolved to
put her in her proper place again ; but finding that it was against the
laws of the country for a woman to possess any property while any
male relatives were living, he took it in hand to that extent that he
gained everything for her by the laws of England, having had her
afterwards baptized in Bombay.
Next day an order came down to the Captain to make us give up
the young lady, they not knowing that he had her already under his
own charge. So he evaded the letter till he found out how far he
could venture to detain her without hindering the survey of the river;
if seemed it would stop the survey if it became known that he had
anything to do with detaining or harbouring one of their subjects.
The brothers came up to a place called Hillah where we were then
lying, and demanded the men who rescued her from her Gaolers, but
our Captain refused to give ns up to be tried by their law: as an English-
man he would protect us: but at the same time lie would give us up
tif the English Resident there, to he tried according to our own laws.
They objected to this because the offence or crime was committed in
their territories. The Captain however had the young lady privately
conveyed to Bassora where there was an English vessel that had
brought out boats for the flotilla, and was going to Bombay ; and the
Captain having his wife on board, she was just suited for the occasion.
Harwood and I lived ashore at the Resident's house for a month,
having to keep ourselves very close on account of the brothers watch-
ing us night and day for a chance to make away with us. We took
very good care to be always well armed when we went about, and this
was the fashion of the country. At the end of the month the Resident
sent us to our ship lying in the Persian Gulf under pretence of being
punished according to our own laws. Therefore on account of our
being kept so very close, and not being able to go out for more than
two hours together without a guard, we saw but very little of the once
mighty city of Babylon, whose ruins this city Hillah is built upon.
What is to be seen of this city is like all the rest of eastern cities ;
they have a very imposing appearance at a distance, but when you
get among the buildings you are lost at once, seeing only dead walls


and squares in all directions ; keeping these walls continually white-
washed or chinamed, gives the towns a very cleanly appearance: when
yon get amongst the buildings they are nothing but mud walls, and
old ruins.
I was very sorry when I was sent down to join the ship, and not
allowed to stop on the Survey. We were sent by the first conveyance
which was a company’s bungalow or country built craft, they having
no steamers but one small thing called the “ Hugh Lindsay ” at that
time, and she was mostly in Bombay, not having power enough to
run against the monsoon. Poor Harwood was very sick on the pas-
sage down and had to go into hospital in Bushire, we having some sol-
diers there at the time.
We were shortly after ordered down to Bombay to refit, an 1 to
run the mail between Suez and Bombay. The news of King William’s
deatli in 1837, was the only mail we ran, for there were some power-
ful steamboats sent out to India that year.
We were then ordered up the Bed Sea to cruise there and gather
tribute at times. Whilst lying at Judda there was a parcel of hands
picked out to accompany one of our Lieutenants, and a Missionary,
as a body guard up to Mount Sinai, and I volunteered but was too
late, so I lost the opportunity of seeing the place where the Almighty
first delivered His laws to Moses ; I do not know that seeing it would
have done me any good at that time for my mind was then thoroughly
worldly. There were plenty of places recorded in the Bible which I
had seen both in the Bed Sea, and Persian Gulf to convince any one,
even an infidel, of the truth of the Bible. If I did not exactly dis-
believe what was spoken in the Bible, I neither followed its precepts
nor did I adhere to its command, therefore all convictions were lost
on me; all my thoughts were worldly, and nothing could make me
think or pray to the Almighty until this affliction came on me.
Altogether we were cruising in the Bed Sea for about twelve
months when Harwood joined us again ; he had been to Bombay but
had not been able to get ashore, therefore he had no opportunity of
seeing the young lady while there ; neither did I see her altho’ I was
twice at Bombay since she left the Biver Euphrates.


CHAPTER XIII.
“ I was not ever thus, nor prayed that Thou
WouliTst lead me on,
I loved to chose and sec my path; but now
Lead Thou me on.”
Dr. Newman.
Orders came up for us to try to get a place at Aden to make a
coal depot for the steamers running the mail between Bombay and
Suez ; and tin’s place being most convenient for it, we offered them
money for a spot of ground to build suitable bouses on : but the na-
tives refused to let us have footing on the place at all. We therefore
bad to make war with them and take their town from them. Whilst
erasing off Aden waiting for some more ships and soldiers from Eng-
land and Bombay, the Shiek of the place sent all the women that he
could away from the town before the war commenced in earnest,
preparing everything he could to give us as warm a reception as pos-
sible, poor fellow, he little knew tin' strength or recources of our na-
tion. He was sending his whole family of women away in a large
country built craft called a doar, when we saw them trying to make
their escape unseen ; we soon gave chase and followed them closely,
firing at them now and then only to make them heave to .and to
frighten them, for we were ordered to fire over them ; we did not want
to strike them or injure them, knowing that the superior qualities of
our vessel in sailing would soon overtake theirs, and make her an easy
prize. It was late in the evening before we came up with her, and
then she would not heave to until such time as we had shot all her
sails away : the fugitives still persisted in running, trying to get new
sails set, thinking that we were doing our best to disable them all the
time that we were in chace : but when we found they would not heave
to, Tve very soon made them, shooting their masts clean away so that
they could not escape us. We immediately down boats and boarded
them : the poor fellows tried hard to stop us, but we soon overcame
the crew, and had them in our possession, and ten minutes after we
were alongside.
Now in the boat that I belonged to there was a prize fighter, a
great big bully : and when we boarded the vessel it was nearly dark
so that we could not see very clear. There were three of us rummag-
ing in her cabin to see wbat we could plunder as much as anything
else, when we heard a woman’s voice screaming in the c-ftbin and we


found the prize-fighter whose name was B—, dragging her to the door to
see what she had, worth taking. On coining to the light, we saw her
arms covered with bangles or rings of gold, which must have been put
on her when she was an infant, for lie squeezed her hands nearly
double in trying to get them off her wrist; he could only succeed in
getting two of them, which put her to great pain, she trying herself to
get them off to give to him. Finding that he could not succeed and
not wishing to lose such a good prize he proposed a most brutal act
to me : but I could by no means be brought to agree with him in his
plan, which was to cut her hands off on purpose to get the gold from
off her wrists, there being no other way for it. The moment he pro-
posed that, I turned sick at the thought of such a cowardly action, and
ordered him to leave the cabin, which order he most reluctantly obey-
ed, threatening if ever he caught me ashore what he would do to me.
I told him to do anything he could with me then and there, as we
both had our cutlasses drawn ; but he refused, saying I well knew the
penalty if he offered any resistance to my commands, I being a petty
officer, and he was not: but he knew that I was as much his superior
with a cutlass as perhaps he was mine at boxing : and a very good
job for that young woman that I was so ; a more cowardly or more
brutal act I never thought could enter the heart of an English sailor !
yet I could not call him a sailor for he was nearly thirty years of age
before he went to sea, being a butcher of an Indiaman when he joined
our ship as ordinary seaman.
When we had ransacked every place, we then thought of getting
the vessel to rights that we might be able to manage her. After col-
lecting all the crew that were alive as prisoners, we made them fast
with a piece of chain together, so that they could not rise against us.
Then our first Lieutenant sent all the other boats on board our own
ship, only keeping one boat with the prize, and sending some of the
women on board. But our Captain sent them back telling our first
Lieutenant that he did not wish to keep any of them prisoners but
return them as soon as we got back ; which he did, keeping only the
vessel, and converting her into a mortar boat, she proved to be of good
service to us in taking the place about a week afterwards.
There were two more men of war, and two more cruisers, and
a couple of transports arrived with soldiers, and next day, after some
heavy firing, the town was ours. The first place taken in Queen


Victoria’s reign. During the action in the height of the firing, the
prize-fighter was missing, and the captain of his gun going to look for
him found him stowed away under some old rope in the cable tier, and
dragged him out more dead than alive ; he would have shot him then,
only the sailmaker begged him off. This plainly shows what sort of
courage these fighting bullies have! That fellow would cut and maim a
poor woman, and make her suffer all the misery of her hands being
cut off without the least remorse ; and had not the courage to stand
to his gun against the enemy of his country for a few hours.
We had now taken the town, and with very little loss on our side;
Next morning we took charge of the place, rooting all the natives out
of the town excepting those who were satisfied to remain under
English rule, which most of them were very glad to he ; and it has
made a flourishing little town of what was a miserable hole.
CHAPTEE XIV.
‘ 0 quicker far is lover’s ken
Than the dull glance of common men
Sir W. Scott.
Shortly afterwards we were ordered down to Bombay to recruit
and refit our ship. We had scarcely arrived before a young lady came
on board with an order from the superintendent of the Indian Navy
for a week’s leave for Harwood and me. You will have no difficulty
in knowing who that young lady was : but neither Harwood nor I
knew her as she was dressed in the European style, and spoke English
fluently, which surprised us very much. When we were sent for on
the quarter deck before the officers, she immediately wanted us to go
in the barge she had alongside. Our first Lieutenant said he could
not really spare us for a week, but she woidd not be put off ; there
was the superintendent’s order, and he had to comply with it. We
therefore had to put on our best rig to go ashore. All our men were
round us while we were washing, and dressing, enquiring who the lady
was who gained us such great privilege : seldom or ever was there a
week’s leave tit that time in the navy.
We were very soon rigged for the shore, one of the officers show-
ing the young lady and a gentleman who came with her, all round the
ship, which pleased her very much : and when we came on the quar-
ter deck her eyes fairly sparkled with gladness to behold us. We


wanted some money from the First Lieutenant, which he had charge of
for us, in what they call the strong chest. When she overheard
what we wanted, she would not allow us to take a single rupee, order-
ing ns into the boat immediately. When we came on shore she had
a carriage waiting for her at the lauding, and wanted us to get in, but
we would not, not having above two hundred yards to walk. She
therefore ordered the carriage to drive slowly on ; it being the fashion
in India if you have only half a dozen steps to go, to take either car-
riage or palanquin. She went on, and stopped at the door of the house
until such time as we came up, then taking us into the house, she
showed or rather introduced us to the master of the house who was a
Parsee, and master builder of the Dock-yard. She then wanted to
know if we were hungry but we told her no. She never minded what
we siiid, but ordered all sorts of eatables, and liquors, even cigars,
and sat down with us ; she was very inquisitive about England, ask-
mo everything that she could think of about the country, and its
fashions. ‘ 1 But she said it must be a tine country by what I see of
the English people here : ” there are a great many English at Bombay
ami there was a regiment of lancers just arrived from England. Two
gentlemen stopped at her Father’s house at Bombay, when she was
quite a little child : the wife of one of the gentlemen, and her mot icr
were very intimate, so much so that they used to go to prayers togeth-
er unknown to her father or brothers. But she had no liking for her
brothers as sisters and brothers have in England : indeed she had
reason, for they behaved very badly to her in putting her into that
house where we found her. It was a religious house, a sort of mon-
astery, and if you did not profess the same religion that they wished,
the people inside made away with you at the sanction of your friends.
She told me there was an immense property left by her mother to her
and that they could not get it in any other way than by putting her
into one of these houses. They saw she always hankered after the
Christian religion which they suspected their mother to have died in.
She also told me that the day we were quarrelling about setting the
flags up, she overheard the whole of our conversation, and asked the
keeper about us : he told her there were hundreds of us come there
lately, and could not tell what we were about, only that the Russians
were watching us with a jealous eye, and that we were a very bad race
of people. But she knew more than he thought she knew about the


English, for her mother had taught her a great deal; and being
always with the English lady, she was not so easily persuaded. She
however resolved that day to place herself under the protection of the
English, and be clear of the entreaties to follow the religion that her
people wanted. If refused she knew the result; one or other of her
brothers could come any time, and if she did not yield to all the rules
of the place she could be put out of the way, and nobody would en-
quire what became of her, “not so” she said “ when you brought me
away, for then they enquired very diligently ; and if it had not been
for the able manner in which the Resident and Capt. Lynch handled
the affair in sending me down privately, and you two receiving your
punishment by your own countrymen on board your ship, none of us
would be here to tell the tale. ! ” They were trying to accuse us of
murdering her, only they could find no proof.
According to the decision of the court we were to receive one
hundred stripes of the cane or bamboo ; but the Resident insisted on
our being flogged on board our own ship, and after a great to do, his
request was granted. If the young lady were not discovered in a
month we were to be brought to a fresh trial : thank God ! they never
had the chance, for we were far from their grasp. During that time
the young lady was baptized according to the Church of England’s
rules, so as to be called a British subject, and they were carrying on
a heavy law-suit on her account.
The Parsee gentleman, and indeed all the European gentlemen
took her cause in hand, and they were fast gaining ground in her fa-
vour. She told me she would never rest until she had seen England,
and our Queen, which wish was gratified shortly afterwards.
After much conversation it grew very late, and time that we should
be'going somewhere to lodge. We were asked to stop there altogether,
but we would not hear of that: indeed I felt rather uncomfortable being
in such a splendid appartment, not being accustomed to such accommo-
dations: When we were going away for the night she made us pro-
mise to visit her every day while our leave lasted, and said she should
never be tired of our company ; when we were taking leave she pre-
sented us with a small basket of sweetmeats that had been sent to her
as a present, and insisted on our taking it.
When we were at the place we intended to stop at, for our time
ashore, we examined our basket and found a paper in it written in
Arabic which we could not understand. We went to a scribe or


money changer ami asked him to interpret the contents of our paper
for us : lie immediately wanted to buy it, when we told him where we
had it, offering what money we wanted for it. But we knew immedi-
ately that it was of some value to make him so willing to give us
money ; we would however not let him have the paper, and then he
told us that it was an order for what money we required, stating no
amount. How little our kind'friend knew of the world ! And how many
would have taken advantage of that order! On learning the meaning of
its contents we resolved not to present it to the mercantile house it was
on : but when we returned it to her she insisted that the whole of our ex-
penses should be home by her during our stay ashore, which were not
very heavy on her after all.
While we were ashore a sort of theatre was formed by the
officers and men belonging to the different regiments of soldiers, there
beinv a good many there at the time, waiting to go up to the Cabul
war and we were invited to form some of the company. Harwood
being an excellent singer and dancer became one of the.hest amongst
them; he invited the young lady to see his performance, and she came
every night while it lasted ; when I spoke to him on the impropriety
of such an invitation, he only laughed at me, and told me that lie
was a fit match for any eastern lady, even to the Sultan’s daughter !
which greatly surprised me. Be that as it may, directly after we came
on board there was an order waiting for Harwood to go and pass Ids
examination to be made a warrant officer ; this did not much surprise
him, although it did every one else. About a fortnight afterwards
there was a very large package sent on hoard to me with a note tcll-
in<r me it was a wedding present from the young lady ; and I was to
have another week’s leave from the ship by the superintendent’s order.
The package contained half a dozen suits of white clothing
and one of blue all complete: when I spoke to Harwood
about them, asking “ Were they intended for the pair of us?” he
laughed and told me that he had plenty now ! He used to be allowed
to "o ashore every evening, a privilege only allowed to married men
and officers while lying in Bombay: and then he told me who the
lady was going to be married to—Himself!
One of the Lieutenants was paying his addresses to her and I
thought she would have married him. I was very glad of Harwood’s
.rood fortune; he, making the remark to me that having won her, he


would wear her. I told him to take care now that he did not get in-
to (trouble ; for this Lieutenant was trying every means in his power,
when he found he was to be married to her, to bring him into disgrace
and to get him flogged if possible. Harwood often resented it as much
as he dare, blithe said the reason of it they all knew. “ After a
little time, when I am able to meet him on equal grounds, I will make
him acknowledge the wrong he has done me ” which he afterwards did.
CHAPTER XV.
“A human heart by Cod's renewing Spirit touched.
Awake from sleep of sin.”
Pollok.
The time for the marriage now came on, a week after Harwood
was made a warrant otticer, and I tried all I could that my old ship-
mate MacDonald should be one of the party ; but he having had his
leave so often was not allowed to go on shore, altbo invited by Har-
wood ; nevertheless he broke out of the ship and joined the first
night of the wedding, which was kept up at the gentleman’s country
seat where the lady was staying and a most splendid set out there was.
Indeed the people in this country have no idea how a wedding is kept
up in the East Indies, the gardens being lit-up in all directions with
lamps of every colour. One of our officers set fire to one of the slight
houses fitted up for the reception of the I’arsee gentlemen where they
sit on carpets ; whether he did it for the purpose or by accident I can-
not tell, but I rather think it was for the sake of seeing how the
Parsees would act. They all rose when they found the place in flames
around them, and walked to a little distance, and there watched.the
'progress of the fire, never offering to remove anything, nor even try-
in” to put the fire out; and if it were not for the few Europeans who
were there, the whole of the gardens and beautiful buildings would
have been destroyed ; the Parsees would not touch anything, or help
to get the fire under.
When we had done we were a set of curious looking creatures,
bein” burnt half black with smoke, for there was more smoke than fire,
and as we were all dressed in white we made a very respectable ap-
pearance for a wedding party ! However our appearance was a source
of amusement and we were soon in order again, there not being much
damage done, and no accident, for the Parsees being fire-worsbipers,


all stood at a very respectful distance, murmuring or praying until
every spark went out ! We went on very gaily again until morning ;
those who wanted to sleep had only to take a carpet and go away out
of hearing of the music, and wrap themselves up if they could bear it,
and sleep away; hut you cannot sleep much in that country before the
morning when the sea-breeze seta in.
When we had hushed in Bombay we went to see the caves of Ele-
pbanta and the Hindoo gods. Some people might think them a
grand sight, but I regard them as an ugly mis-shapen mass of stone.
If I were a heathen I w r ould chose something handsome to worship ;
hut I have been a great deal worse than those people, knowing that
there is an Almighty Creator, and not paying Him the least act of
homage. Never in my whole life have I so much reverenced the
Almighty as these poor devoted beings revere their old mis-shapen
masses of stone or wood ; they pour out their very hearts and souls
in prayer ! It would be well for me and many more if we were to give
a tenth par t of their devotion to the Creator of our being; but I thank
God that my eyes are become partially opened to His words.
After we saw all there was to be seen here, we went to the grand
city of Poonab which is a very line place, many Europeans live there
Indeed I have never spent such a week since, as the one I spent there,
for Mrs. Harwood had my leave prolonged to three days longer;
never had I a happier cruise ashore before or since ! The time soon
passed away and I was to go on board, and sorry I was when there to
learn that poor MacDonald had been flogged for breaking out of the
ship ; when he came to tell me of it, he wanted me to desert with him
hut I persuaded him to stop until our time was out which was only
thirteen months longer. He said ‘ l l cannot bear the disgrace of
being flogged like a thief; ” however he stopped on my account.
We went another cruise up the Red Sea and then came down
again to Bombay. Harwood was removed to the river Euphrates in
charge of a wood station for the steamers : therefore I had no chance
of seeing him that time.
We were now paid off from the Company’s service having served
our time, and wishing to see England again, I shipped in a merchant
ship belonging to London, hound to China first and then to London.
When we arrived in China the war was just begun, and no ships were
allowed to go up to Canton for tea : the only way you could get a


cargo there was to smuggle it, running a great risk of being taken by
the Chinese ; for they were on the look out for all Europeans smug-
gling cargoes in or out of the country. The consequence was, that most
of the shipping was laid up, and the crews employed in smuggling the
cargoes of different ships, six or eight ships’ crews joining together to
load one ship. They all had extra pay for running the chance of
being taken. Our Captain had a cargo in this manner, but it had to
he smuggled down to Marcoa, a distance of 60 or 70 miles, and he
wanted to run the risk without giving any additional pay, to this we
would not agree unless he gave us the customary pay, which was
30 dollars eveiy boat load, hut he would not consent to pay us any
more than our proper wages, therefore some of our men would run for
other ships that paid them ; it was mostly night work, so they went at
night and came back in the morning. If they were not in time for
work, they could afford to pay for a Chinese labourer which was only
a couple of dollars. This made our Captain so mart that he resolved
to put a stop to it; he caused a sea watch to be kept night and day,
that is, half of us on deck for four hours and then relieved by the
other half, but that did not stop them. He then tried to make us
keep sea watch at night and all hands to be kept at work all day from
eight o’clock in the morning until eight at night, and then commence
night watch. But we would not do that; so there were quarrels with-
out number : he then stopped half our provisions, and to save he only
gave us bread and water, we therefore resolved to stand it no longer,
but agreed to go on board the first man of war that came in. This
pleased the Captain very much, for he said we were only expense to the
owners when we would not do our duty as he called it, to smuggle his
cargo and run the risk of having our heads chopped off by the Chinese
without any remuneration whatever but his trifling wages of £3 a
month. We were not long in waiting before the whole English fleet
came in and very glad we were of it. We immediately tied a blue
shirt up in the rigging, which is the way sailors signalize to a man
of war, to tell their grievances. There was a row in a minute, the
Captain ordering the blue shirt to be taken out of the rigging, which
we would not do until the man of war’s boat came alongside. He then
ordered one of the apprentices to go and bring that blue shirt out of
the rigging but we would not allow the boy to go aloft : he ordered
the second and third mates to go and bring it down. We then


manned the rigging and would not permit anyone to go, so the Captain
calling all the mates armed them with pistols and cutlasses, and came
forward saying he would cut any man down who would offer to stop
his mates from obeying his orders. Ho then ordered the third mate,
quite a young lad, to go and bring the blue shirt down, which he was
going to do, when one of our men told him not to attempt it; the
Captain fired and wounded the man in the shoulder. This was a sig-
nal for an outbreak and I do not know where it would have ended had
not the man of war’s boat arrived in time to put a stop to it. The
foolish young fellow of a third mate, seeing the Captain fire, thought he
ought to fire too, which he did, and wounded another man in the
cheek, tho’ only leaving its mark on his cheek, not entering his head;
this so enraged the men, that the wounded man and his chum flew in-
to the rigging and caught the poor third mate and hove him down on
deck, breaking both legs and three of his ribs in the fall. The rest of
the crew sprang upon the Captain and mates and disarmed them, not
without some cuts. The Captain, they made fast to a ring bolt in
the deck, and there he remained until the officer from the man of war
released him, or rather ordered us to release him, which we immedi-
ately did. He began then to call us all mutinous scoundrels, but the
poor third mate was in such pain that he had to order a boat on board
to take him to the nearest doctor.
During this time the Captain gave the officer a very bad account
of most of the crew, saying they were no better than a set of pirates.
And all this happened because he would not allow us to go smuggling
for other ships ! No doubt but that was the case : if he had paid the
same as other ships all this would not have happened.
Tl)e officer was greatly biassed against us on account of the way
he found the Captain and third mate treated, and said he would repre-
sent the case to the commanding officer and have us all punished for
such mutinous conduct. Luckily the Captain of the man of war was
pulling by in his gig, and when he came, and had heard both stories,
lie censured the Captain very much for using fire arms so freely,
and wondered that we had left either him or the third mate alive.
“ Fire arms were not given to you” he said, “to use upon such tri-
fling occasions as that.” He therefore made the Captain give us an or-
der on the owners for our wages, and we all entered on board a man
of war,


CHAPTER XVI.
“ We can never remind ourselves too often of tlic fact that Cliristianitv is a
remedy for human need ; that its leading idea is Deliverance from all the ills
of a groaning world, and its distinctive proclamation is Peace.”
“The Spiritual Life."
We immediately packed up and away for the war ; we were all
distributed among the fleet, there being 35 of us. MacDonald and I
were together again in a 20 gun ship called the “ Nimrod.” The order
for wages I sent home to my sister, and also an order for 450 rupees
(about £45 ) which I sent from Bombay, not being able to spend it
there, Harwood’s lady always keeping me in more money than I want-
ed. It was no use hoarding money orders while going to the war.
The first place that we went to take was Chusan, but we gave it
up, on purpose I believe to get some prisoners that they had belonging
tons. They had the crew of the “Kite” brig besides a Lieutenant
and some of our men, and a woman in a cage, Mrs. Noble they called
her, and they were exhibiting her about the streets ! In the following
year we went to take Canton, and it was there that 1 had the prize
that I intended to send to Miss Puxley. It was a large silk flag of
imperial yellow belonging to the head mandarin of the forces stationed
there. When we made a rush to take the heights and forts, the
Chinese deserted them as fast as they could, but a lot of us gave chase
to this mandarin who was making his escape in a sedan chair or pal-
anquin, carried by eight Chinamen : w r e chased them so close that
they dropped their load just at the gates of the city and ran for it,
leaving their master in the lurch ; he was so fat, that he could not
run but waddled like a duck, which made all our fellows so laugh at
him that they could not run either, in time to catch him before he
reached the gate. However he lost the tail from his head before he
was inside ; one of our chaps having hold of him by it, but he was so
strong that he dragged the hair quite away from his head before he
would stop : thus he made his escape inside the walls of the city where
our General, Sir Hugh Gough would not allow us to follow. The chair
we made a present of to Captain Boucher of the “Blonde” frigate,
and the flag I kept for my share. It was a very large one, about 30
yards of silk besides the ornamented border : I kept it very carefully
all the time we w y ere in commission, intending to send it to Miss
Puxley as soon as I arrived at home : but when we came to Plymouth


to pay off, the manager of the theatre begged the loan of my flag that
he might have things as real as possible : he was having a play in
honor of the war, and our Admiral was to he present. I lent it to him
and he never returned it; telling me when t asked for if that it was
burnt by accident and offering to pay me whatever charge 1 wished to
put on it : I was so angry that I greatly insulted him by saying that
it never was burned and that it was only a pretext for him to keep it:
which I believe to be the case to this present day.
We lost in that skirmish in Canton a very fine young man Mr.
Fox, our First Lieutenant; his leg was knocked off with a chain shot.
He was carried to the doctor’s immediately when he fell ; but in the
hurry and bustle of the time they left one of the leaders of his leg un-
tied when they cut it off, so that he must have bled to death shortly
afterwards. There was another officer of our's wounded by the same
shot, a master’s mate of the name of Kendle. They made Mr. Fox
a Commander on the occasion, as if earthly promotion was of any
avail to a wounded and dying man ! I will not describe the China war,
it is too well known ; but one thing I will say is, that the English name
must be very high amongst the Chinese or else they must have been
very great cowards, to allow such small forces to conquer them and
make them pay so much money : there were troops enough in Canton
alone to eat us all up, if they only had the courage to come out and
face us for a few hours; and we were very few in number, not amount-
ing to above three or four thousand in the field altogether. They even
deserted their wives and little children in the villages : as we passed
through some of them, w'e had as much as we could do to keep the
women from throwing themselves into any pool of water that might
be in the way, and destroying themselves and their children in that
or some other way.
After a couple of days’ fighting the Chinese surrendered to us;
consenting to six millions of dollars to spare the town, and another
million to spare the dockyard, which wars accordingly done on the pay-
ment of the money. They tried hard to get our First Lieutenant after
we brought him dowm from the heights, there being five thousand dol-
lars offered for his head, which they wanted after we had buried him
in Canton : but he was afterwards removed and buried under our own
protection in Hong Kong.
After the peace was proclaimed in China we went to the Cabul


war ; Irani there to different parts of Burmah and India, and at last
received orders for home, which I was very glad of, as it was now
nearly ten years since I left England.
CHAPTER XVII.
“ Tlioujrh a man may not stagger in the streets, yet if he drink merely to
gratify s.*nse he is in the spirit of drunkenness” —
Dr. Rutty.
When I arrived in England my old father came round to see me:
and being paid off I went home to see all who were then alive. Hav-
ing plenty of money I stopped at home one month and then went to
Scotland to bring MacDonald round to Plymouth again, for we had
put our names down for the Caledonia guard ship lying there. It was
then and only then that I learnt to drink to excess: indeed I
never had such opportunities before, not having had so much money ;
and in all our large sea-ports and naval depots you will find plenty of
people to lead you into all sorts of vice and wickedness. I was very
glad when we were appointed to a seagoing ship, a Brig ; there were
twelve of them cruising in the channel at the time, and MacDonald
and I were sent to one.
Having joined our new ship we were to proceed to China, and if
not wanted, to go on to New Zealand : but she never returned ; she
was lost at a very dangerous place called Okicango False. I did not
go with her.
On the passage out to China we had the customary shaving in
crossing the line. There was a sail traced up between the masts and
then filled with water, and any one who had not crossed the line was
brought up and seated on a spar across the sail, where there was a
sort of platform erected for the barber and Neptune and their party.
The barber had an old rusty cutlass with teeth cut like a saw, and he
acted according to the orders of Neptune who s.at in a chair telling
him the number of scrapes to give him ; and if there was much blood
drawn during the operation, the Doctor was called in to cure him,
with a pickle jar for a smelling bottle, the cork being full of needles ;
the poor fellow was always blindfolded, and when he opened his mouth
to complain, they immediately thrust a whitewash brush full of lather
into his mouth. This was composed of soap, tar, and salt water and


the taste was anything but agreeable. Then he was handed to the
Doctor after well scraping with the old saw, and he gave him a couple
of pills not made of the best, and some scent from his bottle, shoving
the needles right into his nose, and often making him bleed. He was
then hove into the sail to be washed, there being a couple of strong fel-
lows called the Bears with great coir mats on them, ready to receive
him. They laid hold of him and never let him go until he was nearly
half drowned, so that to undergo the operation is anything but plea-
sant. But it is a day of great fun and amusement both among officers
and men. You can be clear of a great deal of the roughness of the
treatment by paying a fine in liquor, generally in private. Our doctor
and purser gave us plenty of grog to let them off but notwithstanding,
they had to go through the form: they also gave us a dozen of whiskey
and two dozen of brandy to give the second Lieutenant a good sousing,
which they did to their great amusement; indeed he was so obstinate
that they almost tore the skin off his face and then half drowned him
for his obstinacy, the other officers enjoying the sport of seeing him in
such a plight, for we had officers on board who were as bad as any of us.
But I resolved with others to go no further than the Cape of
Good Hope with this ship. As soon as we arrived at the Cape the
men began to run away at every opportunity.
A fishing party was sent out one Saturday night, and nearly all ran
away or were straggling for there were some caught the next day: the
Captain was so vexeiTthat he drilled us all Sunday afternoon in hoist-
ing the heaviest boat there was in the vessel in and out; thirty six times
we hoisted that boat in and out that Sunday afternoon, and when she
was not hoisted quick enough to his liking, altho’ they ran away with
her each time, they could not please him, for he used to tell us she
must either fly in, or else he would make the decks too hot for us to
walk upon, which made us watch every opportunity to escape from
such petty tyranny; discipline carried to extremes! At the same time
Ido not justify our conduct or over look the evils of insubordination.
The next morning being appointed for sailing we were some of us
watching to see if we could catch the sentries off their guard, so as to
be able to steal one of the small boats to make a run for the shore: but
there was no chance all that night, for there were upwards of twelve or
fourteen of us sleeping on the deck with a bundle of clothes under our
heads ready for a start should there be the least opportunity. At four


o’clock in the morning when they turned the hands up to heave anchor
there seemed no chance, when the Captain of the maintop called
MacDonald and me to go in the Captain’s gig to hook her on for hoist-
ing in. There seemed a slight chance, and we took it, the signal man
also jumping in and two more at the same time, and we should have
been crowded if MacDonald had not cut the painter rope that she was
made fast with, and shoved off. Indeed there could not have been a
greater rush if the ship had been going down. The first Lieutenant
seeing what we were intending to do, called us up again ; he was too
late, for we out oars and were pulling away for the shore as hard as
we could. He sent another boat in chase of us, hut we having a good
start of them, and the smartest boat, we soon out-distanced them. He
ordered the sentry to fire at us which they did but without any effect
for it was scarcely daylight, so they fired at random at the noise of the
boat. We soon gained the shore and then we immediately took our-
selves into the Bush as fast as we could, and moored in a place where
we could observe everything that was passing on board the vessel.
But to oiir surprise we saw in the boat that followed to catch us, some
more running away, the officer who had charge of her being the second
Lieutenant, and he had as much as he could do to keep all hands from
deserting him ; he therefore adopted the best plan of not pursuing us
too far, for he would have lost all his hands if he had : he very wisely
captured the boat we took and made for the ship again to tell of Ids
disaster, and losing two of his men who joined us shortly afterwards.
The Captain on hearing of it went nearly raving mad, and went ashore
to the police, offering a reward out of his own pocket in addition to
the usual reward given for run-away seamen, and he would have stop-
ped a week longer in Simon’s Bay to try to catch us. The Admiral
however ordered him to go to sea, and if any of us were taken we
should be sent after him, but we contrived to get clear that time after
some very curious travelling about from place to place.


CHAPTER XVIII.
“Ye mariners that plough your onward way
Or in tlie haven rest, or sheltering bay,
May silent thanks at least, to God be given
With a full heart—our thoughts are heard in Heaven.”
Wordsworth.
Numerous are the difficulties that a run-away sailor has to contend
with ! In the first place we dared not go near any town lest we might
be apprehended, for we soon heard of the reward offered for us, and
we had to keep as much out of the road of the police as possible.
As there were too many of us together, being joined by the other
two, we resolved to separate on the first opportunity, taking different
routes when we could'get a chance. We kept in the Bush for a week
not daring to enter the towns anywhere, unless we were actually in
want of something to eat. Generally we came to a halt in some out of
the way place and then two of us went into the town or village to buy
bread and wine as we all had a little money with us. In this manner
we continued to keep out of the Police’s clutches, until about ten days
afterwards a farmer rode up to us and asked from whence we came
and where we were going ? We told him that we were going to Port-
Natal which was about one thousand miles from where we were; he only
laughed at us and told us we had a long walk ; then rode away and
gave intelligence to the police, for he could see that we were run-away
sailors. The mounted police were quickly on our track and came up
to us two days afterwards as we were sitting down to eat some raw
fish and fruit, when they at once ordered us to get up and to come
along with them quickly; if not, that they would tie us to their horses’
backs and carry us to the town of Swellendam which was the nearest
town, observing that they had been in chase of us the last fortnight.
They did not consider the men they had to deal with ; certainly we
were no thieves or robbers; but we had previously sworn to one ano-
ther that we would never return to the ship, unless as dead men,
therefore we were not to be so easily caught by six policemen because
they were armed and on horseback. We told them to sit down with
us until we had finished, and then we would go with them, and might
have an opportunity of disarming them without much fighting. But
the sergeant would not allow them to dismount, and thinking we were
very dilatory in obeying his orders struck one of our chaps on the back
with his naked sword. The man being as strong as any two men


immediately caught hold of his horse by the nostrils, and gave him a
kick on tire knee, and twisting his head at the same time, soon brought
both man and horse to.the ground. This then was the signal for attack
and we were not slow in taking advantage of it. We were certainly one
man more than they, but they were armed to the teeth, with a brace
of pistols, doubled-barrelled rifles and heavy swords, we having nothing
but a stick each. When the sergeant was knocked down, Wheeler
(for that was the man’s name) jumped on the top of him and the rest
began to fire. But they had no time as we each singled out our man
and quickly disabled them for as soon as they were dismounted they
were no further use ; they had so much trappings and clothes on that
they could scarcely move. We soon had it all our own way, and dis-
armed them.
The sergeant now had recourse to parley, telling us of the hein-
ousness of the crime of disarming the police force, and if we went
quietly along with him, he would use his influence with the magistrate
and there should not be a hair of our head hurt: moreover he would
take us himself to the Admiral and give us up, and would not accept
any of the money that was offered for us, because we should have to
pay it back if we were taken, as we were sure to be now. But he
little knew the men he had to deal with : they were running from a
petty tyrant, and they would sooner meet death twenty times than fall
into his hands again. The Sergeant now wanted to know what we
were going to do with them, so we went a litttle way off to consult
what was best to he done, whether to give them their arms again or
not, for we were sure to be pursued and taken, and punished if we re-
tained them : we concluded to return them, but not their ammunition
because they could not use it then against us. Nobody was hurt severe-
ly, only a few bruises and cuts happened in the affray. We came back
to the sergeant and returned their arms taking the precaution to wet
the powder well before we gave it up. They immediately mounted and
went off to town quite chopfallen, telling us we were foolish young
men and that we were sure to be taken before long. However their
prognostications had very little effect on us. As soon as they
left, we started, ami not knowing which road to take, came close to the
town that night, and sent three hands in to purchase some bread and
wine, and any eatables that they could get.
While they were away we saw a strong force of mounted police


passing us, we being hid inside a brick kiln until they passed : the
same sergeant and some of the same policemen as were there before,
were amongst them :so we knew what they were after. There were
nine of them this time and I doubt if we could have disarmed them.
The best thing that we could have done was to come close to the town
for they scoured the country a whole week in search of us, but never
got sight of one of us.
That night when our men came back they told us that there was
a great hubbub in the town, which is only a small one, about a gang
being in the neighbourhood, and disarming the police, and they ex-
pected the magistrates would have to send for the soldiers from Cape
Town. Such is the alarm spread in one of these towns that about
one hundred resolute men would easily take it !
We sat down and eat our supper of wine, bread, dried figs, raisins
and apricots, and then placed the look-out, for we never all slept to-
gether, always keeping a watch, more so now than ever, knowing that
the police were hot after us. Next morning we called a council among
ourselves to know what was best to be done, whether to separate or
not: we concluded not to separate whilst we were pursued. We
mustered what money we had amongst us, to see how long we could
hold out, and found that at the rate we were living we could manage
another two months yet; the wine and fruit being very cheap, and our
lodgings cost us nothing as Mrs. Greenfield gave us a bed, and we had
the canopy of heaven for a blanket.
CHAPTER XIX.
“ But remember that I may be the next
To come in at the door,
To call you from all your busy work
For evermore ;
As you work your i.eart must watch!
The next morning we started down a fine river called Broad or
Bread River leading to a place called Braefield which would take us
out of that district, the police not going beyond their own, therefore
we wanted to be clear of them. We now entered the river, walking
Indian fashion up to our middle in the water, sometimes falling over-
head into holes, sometimes earned down half a mile before we could


get sure footing, there being a very strong current running towards
the sea. We never but once came out of the river all that day, and
before we went in again we took the precaution to stand on one leg
while we hove some sand into where we last stepped, then took another
step and so on until we were in the river again. We walked very long
that day from daylight until dark, about sixteen hours, only once stop-
ping to have something to eat, so much were we afraid of being track-
ed. At night when we halted to find some place to sleep on the bank
of the river, we were so jaded that some fell Jisleep directly and we
could not wake them. Being in the water so long caused this drowsi-
ness, but that went away after sitting by the fire a little while. We
lit a fire and put some heavy old logs on purpose to last all night
and then roused the men, they lost their sleepiness when they were
well warmed : we then drew lots to see who had the look-out for the
first two hours ;we only kept two hours a piece. The first watch fell
on the signal man, and then he was to call a young man named Max-
well, which he did.
When we awoke in the morning for we were all very sleepy that
night, there was no Maxwell among us : we roared out as loud as we
could, but no answer. We thought he had gone for more wood and
had fallen down asleep again, but we were soon undeceived, for when
daylight appeared so that we could see to any distance, we each took
a firebrand and started in search of him ; we had not gone very far
when one of our party bawled out “ There is a ♦tiger”! There was one
sure enough standing right over poor Maxwell’s body, all torn to
pieces ! The moment he saw us he picked up the remains in his mouth
and scampered off a little distance, and laid him down again. Wc
however gave chase, and he dropped him at last, terribly mangled.
*We collected the remains and buried them as decently as we could,
wrapping all the broken and mangled pieces in one of his blue serges,
and digging a deep hole in the sand, a grave you could not call it.
We .stuck a piece of plank which we found on the bank of the
river for a tomb-stone, with these words cut out with our knives on it,
“ LET NO WANTON HAND DISTURB THE LAST REMAINS
Oh JAMES MAXWELL OF H.M.S. BRIG.” The death of Maxwell
in such a manner cast a damp over the whole of our spirits that day,
• The Panther is frequently spoken of us a Tiger by natives and travellers
in Africa.


so that we dul not go very far from the place where we laid him.
Indeed we were all swollen by keeping in the water so long, and as
we had plenty of provisions we did not care to go far. We looked
about a little for a clearer place to camp the next night and went to
sleep on the sand, taking the precaution this time of having enough
wood gathered for the night so as not to leave the fire, in search of it,
and so meet with poor Maxwell’s fate.
But our foe appeared again that night, whether it was the same
or not we could not tell, but lie frightened us much ; he was coming
towards us with an awful growl enough to electrify a timid person.
We all awoke and seized a fire-stick and waived it round our heads
making the sparks fiy like a circle of fire works ; this made him come
to a stand not twenty yards from us ; he then gave one thrilling noise
and almost spat fire and ran away from us to a little distance and lay
down there. We could see his eyes like two balls of fire watching
every moment for a chance of one of us. We dared not move till day-
light ; we tried several times to drive him away by throwing a blazing
stick at him ; but it was no use, he would not stir from his crouching
position until morning, and then he went growlingly away. We saw
two young ones following liim next morning.
Now that we were clear of this enemy we made our way to the
nearest town-ship, our provisions being done as we never carried much
with ns ; we arrived at the little town of Braefleld that evening tired
and weary, and the whole of us dared not enter for fear of being taken.
It was my turn to go to the one store in the town, and MacDonald
and I went into it to buy a couple of gallons of wine and as much
bread as we could wish, for it was seldom we could buy bread enough,
there were no bakers’ shops in these small towns.
A gentleman the owner of the store questioned us very closely
and I think he must have known what we were by our dress, and our
not speaking Dutch: we told him a very plausible story, and said we
were in search of work, wherever we could obtain it. He then offered
to ship two of us to look after a little yacht that he had, and to fetch
water from up the river ; the water near the town was always brackish
being so near the sea. MacDonald and I shipped with him and were
very glad of the chance ; he gave us bread and as much wine as we
had anything to put it in, and abundance of dried fruit, and some salt
fish ; indeed we were fairly loaded and w-eut behind the mountain to


our shipmates to tell them the good news ; they were very glad that
some of us were provided for. We now mustered what money we had
among us ; MacDonald and I had each £4 which we gave to them
keeping £1 for ourselves: they intended to travel to Algoa Bay or
Port Elizabeth a distance of about 400 miles from where we were. In
the morning we all shook hands and they started on their route, and
we to join our master. I never so much felt a parting from shipmates,
all that day we could think of nothing else.
When we came back Mr.— gave us two suits of clothes, only to
wear in the yacht, but he gave some other clothes besides, and we
were to have thirty rix dollars a month, beside our food and clothing.
We were now comfortably situated and were in a really Christian
family, for there was no swearing nor any bad conduct allowed on the
premises ; we had to attend divine service every Sunday at Mr—’s-
owu house, himself reading prayers, or else one of his nephews, he
having no sons old enough to stand as parson. Every Saturday
afternoon all work was knocked off and everything made in readiness
for the Sabbath ; and if our master saw us do the least thing on the
Sunday he would be very angry. The people used to come to hear
him read prayers for nearly one hundred miles round, there being no
church nearer; and they generally arrived on the Saturday night,
sleeping in their waggons altho’ there was a house fitted up on purpose
for strangers who had to stop at the place any length of time. Some-
times our little town was like a fair, with strangers and waggons, and
cattle, for our master was the greatest wool-merchant in the Colony.
There were sometimes three or four vessels loading at a time there,
in the wool season. I soon learned the way of stowing wool, and
Jiaving some experience in stowing cargoes in other vessels, I was
entirely employed about that, and gave great satisfaction to my master,
so that he raised our wages ten dollars a month more : when we were
not yachting, we were at work in the wool-store, and indeed we were
as comfortable as could be.
A curious circumstance happened while I was with this gentleman.
His lady was confined to her bedroom for ten years in decline, and the
doctors could not cure her. When my master’s brother and family
came on a visit to them, it being Christmas time, they persuaded
the lady to accompany them in a yachting excursion, and my master’s
brother made me take the yacht far out to sea ; before we could get


back, there came on a regular gale which lasted for forty-eight hours,
during which time I could not set a stitch of canvas on the yacht; we
were therefore obliged to lay to and wait the gale being over ; and
then we found we had drifted about two hundred miles from our own
port, so Mr. — made me make the nearest place I could to land them,
which was Moselle Bay ; the ladies very sea sick and frightened all
the time ; but strange to say it was the means of curing Mrs.— for
she never kept her chamber afterwards, and she was always very kind
to MacDonald and me ; she had a school house made on the occasion,
and she and her daughters used to teach the slaves’ children, or any
others in the town, to read and write, and to make and mend their
clothes. Altho Mr. — was so religious he had about one hundred
slaves, indeed he could not do without them. Ido not know whether
to call them slaves or no, they were serving a kind of apprenticeship.
Few I think of Mr—’s. slaves would have taken their freedom if it
were offered them ; they knew when they were well off : and so did I,
for I would have remained until this time if it were not that the ser-
geant of police, the same whom we had disarmed, came there on duty
after we were there about seven months, and knew Macdonald and me
directly, altho’ we were dressed so differently ; lie would have taken
us then and there, if our master had not interfered. He however said
he should report us when at Swellendam : we therefore thought it was
time to take our departure; and on making it known to Mr—he
asked us if we were the men that the Sergeant said we were ? We
knowing the kind of gentleman he was, told him the truth. Then he
said if we wished to stop he would intercede for us and try to get the
magistrate not to give us up to the Admiral; but this magistrate was
a very strict and upright man, and we were afraid to trust to that:
so Mr.— paid us every farthing of our wages and made us a present of
the clothes that we had ; and gave us as much meat, bread and wine
as a horse could cany, and away we started for the Bush once more.


CHAPTER XX.
“ Whon’eer becalmed I lie,
And all my storms subside,
Then to ray succour fly,
And keep me near Thy side.
For more the treacherous calm I dread
Than tempest bursting o’er my head.’
De Courcy
We started this time with a little more knowledge of the country
and went near a place called Riversdale, where I engaged with a farmer
to do any thing about the farm; and MacDonald went with another man
about four miles from us ; we could see each other every week, and so
did not much mind the separation. We did not stop long with the
farmers : they were hard masters, hours for work being from four
o’clock or sunrise, till sundown, or eight o’clock at night.
In Cape Colony they never plough the ground in the daytime
because the sun is so hot, and the ground so hard and dry, but they
wait (or good moonlight nights when the dew is falling heavy and the
ground nice and soft for the plough.
After a warm disagreement with my farmer master I determined
to leave his service and when I told MacDonald he immediately asked
his master for his discharge, which was given after a little humbugging,
the master being unwilling to part with him.
My master acted very honestly by me when he found that I would
not stay ; he not only paid me every farthing of wages, but he gave
me enough provisions for both of us for nearly a week, and would have
given us more if we could carry it.
We now made for the nearest town, Riversdale, which took us
two days to reach. As we hail plenty of money we intended to pay
our fare by the mail cart either to Port Elizabeth or to any other sea
port : but when we came to Riversdale we were a little alarmed by
hearing of the police being in search of some runaway sailors from the
flag-ship, and that they had taken two of them whom they kept until
they could get the remainder, but this they never achieved, for I was
shipmate with one of the men about three years ago and heard all
about it.
We now had to take our departure from this place for fear of
being picked up and carried to the flag ship. We wandered about
not knowing which way to go, and so afraid were we of being taken,
that when we heard a horseman coming we used to go into the Bush to
avoid being seen, for fear they should give intelligence to the police.


We wandered all that night and the next day, to make a good dis-
tance between ns and the police if they should come in chase of us.
We did not know which way we were travelling, when we came again
to poor Maxwell's grave. It was all level with sand, and if it were
not for the piece of wood that his name was cut out on, we should
have passed without ever knowing which way we were going.
There we sat down for a while and oh ! what bitter curses and impre-
cations did we lay on that Captain and second Lieutenant for causing
ns so much misery, and hunting us like wild bears or w r olves ! I real-
ly tllink that the Almighty permitted that vessel to be lost in order
to release the rest of the poor fellows that were in her from their
misery under so much petty tyranny.
We stopped for full four hours by Maxwell’s grave, not knowing
which way was the best to turn. I wish I could have prayed then, as
I can now, I think I should have been more comforted. But at that
time I never thought of prayer, altlio’ by the side of our dead ship-
mate and in the middle of a desert, a fit place for prayer indeed ! We
made his tombstone or tombboard fast to the nearest tree, all traces of
a grave or pit being gone.
CHAPTER XXI.
“ Thy bountiful care
What tongue can recite
Sir 11. Grant.
We next took the main road to Cape Town, hoping to fall in with
some employment before we stopped there, and then remain some
time until the police forgot to chase us any more : but there was al-
ways some fresh hand running away from one of the ships so that we
were liable to be taken anytime. We travelled on until our provisions
were out, and we were one day without eating anything, and could not
get a drink of water. There are no such things as springs or wells
anywhere by the road side, and the Dutch farmers would drive you
from their door, that is if you are not on horse back, and cannot talk
their country tongue. Indeed so much were the English disliked in
that part of the country that they would spit at them and set the dogs
to bite them : but if you happened to be on horse back and could talk
Dutch you might stop as long as you please, and they never wanted
anything in return.


We now went into a Hottentot’s hut by the road side ; the -wo-
man gave ns some goat’s milk and Indian corn boiled in it. Her hus-
band being away for a fortnight she gave us shelter from the scorching
sun and dew of the night. There was a store about five miles off so
we gave her money and made her go and buy some coffee and sugar,
wine and flour that we might have a good stock to travel with. She
returned with as much as a bullock could carry, and had never had
so much money to lay out at one time before ! She could talk very
good English, having been servant in an English family at Cape Town
before her marriage. We stopped with her until we were recruited,
and then buying two sheepskin blankets from her, we took our leave
not without giving her some money for her trouble, for which she was
very thankful. She came one day’s journey with us to put ns on our
right road to Saldanha Bay and we gave her a trifle more at parting.
Here there were a good many ships loading guano for England and a
most likely place to get a ship. We were four days going there, but
we could rough it out very well now that we had these blankets. They
are fine things and just fit for that country ; you roll yourself up in
one of them and lie down anywhere in the sand or on the ground.
When we came to Saldanha Bay we shipped with a man who kept a
store, to go fishing, there being great quantities of trout coming up in
tlie Bay and they sell very dear to the farmers, who always pay in
wool or tallow or wine or anything growing. We stopped there a
short time, when we were told by the women of the place that we
should not have any money for our work, but have to take out its
worth from the store in clothing or whatever we might want. We
did not like that part of the business, and being very successful we
thought of going over to the Island of Malagass where the ships were
loading, to try to get a ship for England or any other place. When we
asked the store-man for our share of the fish, he told ns we might have
anything we wanted out of the store, but he could give us no money
just then until he had returns from Holland where he used to send all
his wool, hides, and wine horns. We told him that was no use to us,
but only lumber, therefore he should pay us in money. After a little
bantering he said “ I’ll try to borrow money enough to pay you,” and
very soon he had it, however scarce.
He seemed stunned when we told him we were going to


leave for the Island, and he would have to break his fishing party
up for want of hands. Indeed if it were not for the women’s help he
could not carry it on at all, now that all the men were employed about
the shipping and getting good wages. He was so vexed that he would
sell us nothing atthe store so we had to have recourse to the women to
buy some little things that we wanted, which, when he heard of, he or-
dered us off the premises.
We now started for the shipping about thirty miles off, and when
we came, we found a man of war there lying, to pick up stragglers and
to keep order in the Island, so that it would not do for us to go there.
As we were sitting down on the beach thinking which way we should
turn next, a ship’s boat landed, and a man walked up to us, viewing
us from top to toe ; I thought he was some constable in disguise, so
conscious was I of having done wrong.
I do not know how some must feel who have committed
great crimes, when we felt so guilty merely for running from tyranny.
We were more afraid of being taken than anything else. But the man
who kept viewing us proved a friend instead of a foe. He was Cap-
tain of a large bark loading for England, and he came up and asked
me my name, which I did not think proper 'to give exactly. After
a little conversation I found he was no policeman hut an old shipmate
of mine; he was apprentice in the ship that we all went to gaol from in
Bombay. When he found out who we were he immediately wanted to
employ ns, but we would not go on the Island to work for fear of the
man of war ! he offered us to take his long boat and work her to and
from the Island to the ship until she was loaded, and he would give us
the long boat and £lO when we had finished, which was a very good
thing, and we accepted it, and went to work once more on our own
element; very comfortable we were, the Captain giving us the best of
usage.
We had only a very few trips more to complete the loading of
the bark, when an unforeseen circumstance caused us to leave again.
There was a strike for wages while we were working for the bark
and the consequence was that all work was suspended, the strikers not
allowing even those who were willing, to work, and driving all black
men off the Island. The man of war had to interfere but could not
quell the row. They sent for another to come to her assistance and
and that made them carry it on still further. As the man of war stop-


ped all communication with the ships, the men on the Island began
burning all the wheelbarrows and destroying tents and other property,
this made the ship-men retaliate and punish such as they could get of the
ring-leaders of the mutiny, and cause a very strict search for all run-
away men of war’s men, of whom they found a good many on the
Island. Thus we were compelled to take to the land again. Our
Captain was very sorry that such should be the case, but he had to let
us go ; for if he were found harbouring any of the deserters, he would
have been severely fined and not allowed to load there. We were very
sorry to leave such a good berth; the Captain acted like a gentleman and
as we could not fulfil our agreement he paid us at the rate of nine
shillings a day from the time of commencing, and then giving ns a
very good discharge we parted with mutual regret.
CHAPTER XXII.
"Salvation. Oh Salvation,
The joyful sound proclaim!
’Till earth’s remotest nation,
Has learned Messiah’s Name!
We now considered what we should next do, and we concluded
the closer we kept to the Admiral’s ship the less suspicion there would
be of us. We resolved to go to Cape Town and there to ship for Eng-
land if possible, having a very decent supply of money with us al-
ready.
When we came to Cape Town, there were nothing but a few
whalers whose crews had run away for the guano trade which was
making Cape Town very brisk. We found that they were not so much
in search of us here as in the smaller towns so we made ourselves
pretty comfortable for a while, and we could always get work when we
wanted it. We stopped until we had spent the little money we had
to take home, and then resorted to try what sort of a life a whaler’s
was. We accordingly shipped in one bound for the south seas and
soon found that the life on board was a most lazy profligate one,
pleasant at times and very exciting. We cruised along through the
Mozambique channel and along the Island of Madagascar and were
not very successful.


We next started for a group of Islands called King Mill’s group
and went into the easternmost one called Strong’s Island to refresh,
after having been seven months at sea living on salt provisions : our
Captain not liking to go into any civilised port for fear of losing
his crew again ! It is no wonder that the owners and captains of whal-
ers soon get rich, for the men who earn the money generally run away
and leave all behind them for the owners ! When we came to anchor
I thought no place in the world seemed half so pretty as this wild look-
ing place, with its beautiful sandy beach and the cocoa-nut and palm
trees growing close down to the water’s edge, and a very fine river
bordering the village. Nothing could look nicer than the neat little
natives houses under the lofty trees. The Captain warned us to he
very careful how we acted towards the natives; not long before they
had murdered the whole of the crew of the “Harriet” whaler of Lon-
don, and also an American whaler through some misunderstanding.
I fully believe it occurred through the white men first, as they generally
provoke the savage to commit acts which are against his nature. At
all events we were received with every demonstration of joy ; we were
scarcely in sight of the town when they came off both in canoes and
swimming, men and women, climbing up the sides of the ship like so
many monkeys, and every one of them choosing a friend ! Indeed you-
must stop with the one who chooses you or else you will give as much
offence as if you had committed a crime : you must eat and drink, and
be carried about and shown to their friends, and you can have anything
you wish for or see on the Island, hut you must not break your friend-
ship with them on any account.
After we had recruited and had a good stock of pigs and fowls of
every description, and as many yams as would load a small vessel, our
Captain proposed to stay near the Island for a season, there being
plenty of whales, and we were told by the natives that many came
right into the harbour. So we left two boats in the harbour, and the
ship cruised in the offing for three months. I belonged to the second
mates boat, and was very glad to stay in the harbour ; the chief or
king sent twenty of his men on board as a kind of hostage for our
safety ; but there was no occasion for it, I never received kinder or
better treatment in any civilized country. When we landed at night
they would come down to the beach and carry us, boat and all, up into
our place in the town. In truth we became so reconciled to the people


that we were sorry when the time of departure came.
One day we captured a very fine whale ; the natives all came out
in their canoes to help us to tow him in, which we did in a very short
time and then the feast begun of roasted hogs, fowls, fish, and fruit
and they have a sort of liquor among them which they only drink
when they are in a passion,* which is but seldom ; they are very fond
of our rum or brandy, and it is one of the greatest shames in the world
to give those people any liquor, for they make antics and gestures as
would beat a monkey all to pieces ! As for medicine there is none ever
used amongst them ; there are neither cripples nor infirm people in the
Island : the only disease, if it can be called one, is, that very old people
lose their teeth, otherwise they are as healthy and active as ever.
At their feasts they have a variety of dancing, the oldest women
sit down in the middle of a ring of dancers, about fifty or hundred,
and they begin to sing a song and beat time by clapping their hands,
while the dancers go all round them, the men having their spears so
close to the women’s heads that you would think they were going right
through them. But it is rarely that an accident happens ; they are
such good marksmen that they will kill a bird fiying, or a pig, at one
hundred yards distance. 1 do not know at what distance William Tell
shot the apple off his son’s head ; but our mate placed one of the
young ones against a tree about eighty five yards off with a pameloo
on his head, rather larger than an apple certainly, and the boy’s father
sent his spear whizzing through the pameloo into the tree, without the
least fear being shown by either father or son. Indeed Ido not think
that those people know what fear is. They have a great propensity
for stealing when on board a ship, taking anything that their eyes rest
upon ; not that it is of any value to them, but merely for the novelty of
the thing ; when they are detected they show no signs of shame at being
caught: they only laugh at you ; you may take anything you see in
their houses or places, for they never think that anything belongs to one
person more than another, but to any one who wishes to use it !
We had everything that we could wish for while we were among
these simple people : the women catching fish and having it ready
cooked for us when we came ashore of an evening, with fowls and a
kind of wooden bread made of cassava root; we gave all our biscuit
• Probably to quiet and compose them!


away, it was such a great treat among them. Indeed that was the
only provision we brought on shore except a little coffee and sugar :
they would not use the coffee but the sugar they would eat. It cost our
Captain very little to feed the twelve of us that were on shore for four
months.
When the ship came in, they gathered round us, each close to his
friend, and to see the distress those poor people were in at parting
would put to shame any civilized people ! They loaded their canoes
with all sorts of fruit, and as many pigs, fowls and dried fish as would
last us for six months, every one bringing something till we had to re-
fuse taking any more; all we gave them in return was a little sugar,
some rum, some cloth and old iron hoops, which last they prized most
of all. I gave my friend some old pictures which he saw pasted on
my chest and which pleased him best of all. They kept on board till
we were nearly out of sight of the Island ! then they took one flight
and all at once gave one loud shout, and immediately jumped over-
hoard, getting into their canoes afterwards and sitting down quite sul-
lenly, so unwilling were they to part with their friends. I never wit-
nessed such sympathy amongst my own country people even when
taking leave of near relations. There is often something very cold
about leave-taking in Europe, hut amongst those people you feel joy
and sadness at the same time for they show such a strong attachment
for you that you cannot help feeling with them. I wonder whether
any missionary has reached them yet! There were none when I left
in 1817, nor did they know any kind of religion.
CHAPTER XXIII.
“The horrible indifference of man to the sufferings of the lower
animals is one of the vilest of his vices.”
From the Spectator , on Walrus shooting. Nov. 1872.
The life of a whaler is the most exciting that can he followed ; it
is nothing but excitement from beginning to end. From the moment
that the whale is reported in sight from the mast head, it is all bustle
until you capture him, the moment he is reported every man runs to
man his boat, then the order for lowering is given; then begins a sort
of regatta if there are other ships in sight, for they are all trying who


shall strike the whale first, the first being the acknowledged owner of
the fish. There are sometimes very serious quarrels, often ending in
the loss of some lives, either by the whale or by other accident when
there are many ships. We now went to cruise in Timor Straits and
remained there for the season which was about four mouths. I was
not sorry when we left that ground, for there were about twenty sail
of whalers there, so that you had to he very sharp to get any fish,
they were all so much on the alert. Besides you dare not laud unless
there were a hundred or more together, for the natives are all savages
and cannibals, and there is the greatest danger of being taken by them
into the interior. We found a man there who was stolen and was
with them for twenty years ; he had almost forgotten how' to speak
English, but he very soon picked up his own country tongue again.
He was a great favourite with the king of Timor and had often before
been seen by Europeans when they went to visit the king ; but he
could get a good chance of escape before. Indeed I heard him
say afterwards that he was sorry he had come away with us, for he
was very comfortable with them and had everything that he could wish
for, but now he had to work for it. So much had he entered into
their habits that we often had to compel him to do any trifling thing;
but he got out of it all before we came home, except the tatooing
which was done very nicely. Having been so long with them he was
tatooed all over his body, even inside his eyelids and he could turn
them up in such a manner that he looked hideous. It is what the na
tives do when they go to war. He was always with the king and he
taught him to shoot with a gun, which he soon learnt to do as well as
with a bow and arrow. The gun was seldom used, but was always
taken to the wars more to frighten than for anything else. The sailor
was next to the king in everything, being the tax gatherer, and he had
control over all trade with the fishermen and natives of other Islands.
He was stolen when a very small boy, from a whaler that was cruising
there, and another was taken with him but he died some years before
we came.
The season being over we started for New Zealand. In going
round Cape Leuin we lost our chief mate, one of the finest and best
whalemen that 1 really think was in the south seas at that time. I
will tell you the sad story.
We had to right off Cape Leuin in a very heavy gale, and the


sea running so much that we could only show a close reefed main-top-
sail, and not another stitch of canvass. We had to take all our boats
in off the cradles for fear we should lose them altogether. Just then
wo very large sperm whales came in sight and lay rolling and tum-
bling about close to us; the Captain said “There are thousands of dol-
ars there and no one will go to pick them up ! ” The mate made
answer that it was not fit weather for any boat to live in. The Cap-
tain said he did not pay a man for shirking, that he never saw it blow
so hard but that a whale boat well managed would live in water and
carry her crew anywhere. . The mate anwswered you shall never say
that I was a coward, even if it should be the last whale that ever I
strike ! nor that I was afraid either of the whales or the elements. ”
He then ordered his boats crew to get ready ; certainly they murmured
but go they must, let what would be the consequence. When the
head man was willing to go, the second mate said he would go too,
tho’ it was not fit, the ship having as much as she could do to weather
it out. The two boats were now made ready, and the mate—fine fel-
low that he was—shook hands with all around him, as if foretelling
his death. He said “Either that monster is mine, or I die in the
attempt.” The boats were now lowered in a lull, but the second
mate’s boat got stove, by the ship rolling over her : nothing daunted
another boat was ready to follow the mate, when the Captain stopped
him until they could see how the mate’s boat acted. He handled it
manfully and with great skill; but in coming close to the whale and
just in the act of heaving his harpoon, a tremendous sea broke
right astern of them, and hove the boat overend upon top of the whale.
It did not capsize ; but what we call pich-poled. The Captain (I can-
not accuse him of cowardice) called out directly for his boats crew
and went himself to try to pick up the mate, for he was very much
attached to him; he cried bitterly when he found that he was too late:
the whale when he found the cold iron was in him (for the mate’s har-
poon had struck him hard and fatally) never ran away as is generally
the case hut took to floundering and beating the water with his fins and
flukes, and making match-wood of the poor mate’s boat. The Capt-
tain succeeded in getting hold of the mate’s line and coming close up
to the monster, and soon despatched him with a couple of good lances.-
but when the whale was dead and the Captain had all the mate’s crew
in his boat, he could not leave the whale to come to the ship, because


the sea was running so heavy : he hail to lay to under the lee of the
whale which formed a very good break-water for him.
We tried once to get the ship close to windward and let her drift
down to them : but as fast as we set a little canvass on the ship it
was blown to tatters. We succeeded however in getting her in a posi-
tion to drift over the whale, after two hours of the greatest anxiety as
to their safety, when we came right on the top of the whale, and the
Captain veered out line on purpose to keep clear of the ship, until a
chance offered to pull alongside. When we rvere a top of the fish the
ship gave a heavy lurch to windward, and not being able to rise to
the next sea, it came on board and swept our decks clean and drove
us away from where the Captain was moored. We had to leave them
there that night to their fate, and I heard the Captain say it was one
of the longest nights he ever spent. In the morning the gale abated
a little, so that we could get double reefed topsails on the ship : but
neither boat nor whale was in sight. However we bad their bearings
and beat up to try to see them which we did at about three o’clock in
the afternoon ; and as we thought there was less wind we shook out
one reef and set the gib to try and get the poor men before it was
dark. And this time we brought the ship close up to them and
brought them all on board—all but the chief mate which made every
one down-hearted, for he was a man well liked by every man and boy
in the ship. We made the whale fast until we had a chance to out
him, and a fine fellow he proved to be, making us one hundred and
twenty barrels of oil.
Ali our boats being gone, and the lines, and accoutrements, we
were forced to bear up for some place to repair damages ; so we went
to Hobart town and got what we wanted for a fresh cruise.
Of all the places in the world for infamy I think Hobart town
stands first; and if they were not under very strict laws I think there
would be murder there every day, for they are, or were the most de-
praved people I ever fell in with, they were a disgrace to the natives
around them, being composed mostly of convicts and other bad char-
acters ; however it is a place where a man can find employment at
anytime. We had a comfortable cruise to New Zealand and were
pretty lucky on that ground and filled our ship within a couple of
hundred barrels which we intended to pick up on the passage
home.


We went to the coast of Chili where we got a little-oil but not
enough ; so we went round Cape Horn to Valparaiso, and had fine
fare on shore with the Spaniards of that country. They are a very
good sort of people, but you must not offend them in the least, for if
you do, you will surely die. We were soon refreshed and started for
home, alas no home for me ; we picked up oil enough to fill us up
without staying out another cruise, for we fell in with whales in abun-
dance on the line and off the Cape de Verde Islands, and safely arriv-
ed at Stonington in America. The whole place came down to receive
us and they were as kind a set of people as I ever fell in with. Tire
owner took MacDonald and me in hand, we being strangers, and be-
haved very well to us : but we soon went on with some of our ship-
mates to spend our time in Boston while the ship was getting ready
for another cruise. As we liked whaling very well we returned in a
month to rejoin our ship but she was not nearly ready ; however the
owner set us to work on board and gave us a dollar and half a day,
besides the best of living. The poor people in England cannot live as
they do in America, for they have not the means : but the Yankees
believe in good living, and they expect you to work accordingly which
is all right enough.
CHAPTER XXIV.
“ Foot prints, that perhaps another
Sailing o’er life’s solemn main,
A forlorn and ship-wrecked brother
Seeing, shall take heart again.”
Longfellow.
The time now came for us to leave and we could not get a crew.
1 wonder the American Government allowed such a way to man the
whale ships : there were crimps, or fellows who went into the country
and told the young lads such tales of the whalers as to persuade a
great number to leave their comfortable homes to go a whaling. The
Captains or owners did not care who they were, so long as they were
strong able young fellows : and if they could not get a crew that way,
they get them out of the state-prisons—such as had but a short time
to serve—and then if all failed they would steal men or trap them off
the Cape de Verde Islands or any other place. We had a sort of


jubilee and then started and had ourselves greased as they call the
first face of oil, but we were not so lucky off the Cape deVerde Islands
as before, so we cruised off along the coast of Africa with very little
success which made things go badly, and we started off for a very cold
stormy ground called Desolation or Kirquils land, a more bitter coun-
try could not be for there is nothing growing, but frost and snow all
the year round. The shore in the season is full of sea-elephants and
seals, and very fine looking birds called the King Penguins, a few sea-
leopards and other sea-animals. We were getting on pretty well here
when the weather permitted ; but it is always blowing so hard that it
will blow your boat clean out of the water, indeed it is always blow-
ing a half dozen gales of wind lashed together.
We were soon obliged to leave, having sprung our mainmast,
though we were getting plenty of oil, as we could have a whale any-
time that we could lower a boat to go in chase of them ; and if we
succeeded in killing him before he got among the sea-weed we were
all right, but if once he was in there he generally died out of our reach
unless we took the trouble to lay an anchor outside the sea-weed and
then drag him out. It is a whole week’s work to get one outside the
kelp, so we almost alw T ays left them as the weather was so bad ;we
were forced to leave as much fish that we killed as would have loaded
another ship as large as our own.
We now started for Valparaiso to refresh and get a new main-
mast, and sailed for another cruise on the north west coast of America,
which was as bad as the place we had left, for there are nothing but
very heavy thick fogs, so thick that you might be nearly touching
another person and not able to see them ; and thus you often lose
your ship for days together and perhaps for ever. You certainly al-
ways cut away from the whale the moment you see the fog coming on,
but it travels like a railway engine and will soon overtake you, if you
have not the bearings of your vessel or are not near enough to hear
the sounds of the fog hom which is continually kept blowing by those
on board when there are stray boats away, and firing of guns occasion-
ally : the only thing you can do is to follow whatever sound you may
hear.
As it was we lost one boat’s crew, and two of our boats had to
moor by a dead whale for forty eight hours before w r e were picked up,
and if it were not for our lauthorn keg we should all have been


famished. This is a small water-tight keg used by whalers, with about
two dozen biscuits in it, a small lauthom, tcuder-box and matches
some old linen rags in case of bad cuts, some Friars Balsam and about
two pints of rum for the lanthorn, so that you can hoist a light at
night-time. Every boat is provided with one, and it often proves
a great friend in emergencies. The time when we left our ship we
drank one pint of the rum and kept the other for the lanthorn which
takes very little to keep it alight all night. We were cruising about
in this way in the dark falling in every day with ships deep loaded
from Bheriug’s Straits and the Arctic Ocean ; and they had found a
species of whale called the Boars Head which made our Captain re-
solve to have a season up there before he went home. We were near-
ly full when we went into Islay and there freighted another ship to
take our oil home to America. The ship’s crew had to pay all that
freight, the owners bearing no share in it nor in the price of the main-
mast ; such is the way some people grow rich ! Most of our crew not
liking the thought of a cruise in the Arctic Sea, ran away ; so the
Captain had to ship men for the month, and we started in company
with another ship from Bremen. We can only stay in those regions
for three months. The ship from Bremen had two crews, one for
whaling the other for working the ship which was a very good chance
for us as we were not very well manned.
When we were up the ocean there was a grand sight all round as
far as we could see, great whales were gamboling about like so many
herrings in a shoal. Our Captain would not take any that were close
to us, but only the largest for the sake of the bone, and he picked
them in such a manner that we delayed the time for coming down the
ocean, and when we tried we could not get on because of the blocking of
the ice in every direction ; consequently we had to remain up there
all the ensuing winter which was anything but pleasant. However we
had to make the best we could of it, and the two ships were as near
together as possible until the ice separated them about five miles
apart.
Our ship being a very flat bottomed vessel, the ice got under her
in the middle of winter, and lifted her clean out of the water, and
there she lay like a stranded hulk, completely on her beam ends so
that we could not stay in her. We therefore discharged her cargo on
the ice and secured all the provisions, and did everything that was


necessary, and left her until the weather should break up, for she was
not in the least damaged. We took ourselves on board the Bremen
ship there being plenty of room, and passed nine months of a dreary
winter as best we could. We had no daylight at all for about ten days.
Sometimes we whiled the time away by hunting bears, first marking
the place for miles around with pieces of wood or anything, in order
to find our ship at anytime if we strayed too far which we sometimes
did in our hunting exercise. The boars used to come close to our ship
and we would start after them armed with our lances and harpoons
until we took them; we never shot them unless they were likely to get
away from us or to take us too far from the ship. Sometimes we
chased the poor bear by moonlight which we considered very fine fun;
certainly it was very exciting at times when there was nothing else to
pass the time. Although it was very cold we were quite warm, for
we had seals’ and whales’ skins made into jackets and boots, and
plenty of good fires, so that it was tolerably comfortable altho’ in such
a miserable countiy.
The summer at last came, and we had the satisfaction to see the
ice break and open all around our ship ; we had nothing to do now
but to put her to rights and moor her to the ice and re-load her. She
was as sound as the day she came off the stocks after lying four
months on her beam ends.
We started again to come down the ocean and met several ships
on the same errand as we had been, that is picking their whales. But
we warned them against it, lest they should be caught as we were and
I heard that several of them were caught the next season. When we
came to Otaheite there were three more ships that had been up all the
winter. And the worst of all was that the scurvy broke out amongst
those five ships. I cannot tell how that sickness could come ; the
doctors always say that it comes through eating salt provisions ; but
I am certain this was not the case with us, for there was always plenty
of bears’ meat and ham, and a sort of duck or teal so that we seldom
wanted salt meat. It may have been the change of the climate that
made our men so bad : we leff several behind ns to find their way as
best they could when they were better.
The people in Stonington were very glad to see us ; and treated
us as kindly as if we were their own. The owners made MacDonald
and me stay by the ship this time instead of going to Boston or New


York as we had intended to do, and then come home ; wc having
made a double voyage and had a very good store of dollars. We
might have laid them out to advantage, for we had no occasion to
spend anything not even in drink, as the owners allowed plenty of
every thing and of the best, but wc had money and I never thought I
should be in want, so we spent it in coach-riding, and horse-riding,
and breaking the Sabbath ; every Sunday instead of going to Church
eve used to be horse-riding about the country, and otherwise profan-
ing the Sabbath day. I cannot but think it a just judgment from
the Almighty after delivering us from so many different deaths during
our last cruise, that He should lay me low, for I never returned Him
thanks ; not once but always trifling with Him as if there never was
an account to be given of our past deeds.
CHAPTER XXV.
“ Freeze, freeze, thou bitter sky.
Thou dost not bite so nigh
As benefits forgot ! ”
Thus we passed the time until our ship was ready to sail again,
and we found that whaling paid so well that we were quite willing to
go with her. This time we were for a different route. Our Capt. would
have no more of the Arctic Ocean, and we took the season as usual off
the Western Isles and got several whales there. Indeed we were going
no further, but the Captain thinking it too long to stop on one ground
from one season to the other, started for the Island Tristy na Cova,
where we stopped for a little oil and then went on to the Crozit
Islands. I must describe the natives of Tristy na Cova. They are all
sprung from one family. The Governor as they call him, Mr. Glass,
was an old St. Helena soldier, and when his time was out he used to
go sealing on this Island in the season. In a little while he had the
grant of the Island altogether and took his wife and family there, and
when I was there he was doing very comfortably. The mate of a
whaler married one of his daughters and they were prosperous having
everything that they require, and I have no doubt that in time
it will be a nice place, as it is in the track of East ludiamen. Still
it will never come to much for want of a harbour altho’ as it is a re-
gular whaling ground there are always some whalers there. It numbers


about eighty inhabitants all belonging to the one or two families.
There are five islands of the Crozet or desolate group, and it is always
blowing so hard there that you cannot make sure of one good day.
At Possession we found plenty of sea-elephants or sea-bears * so
many indeed, that the Captain resolved to knock off whaling and an-
chor at an island near. These elephants are easily killed with a
heavy club ; but the bulls have all to be shot for you cannot break
their skulls with the club. They are very fat, a middling size, and
make about a ton of oil.
We were now as busy as could be for about three months, when
we had made as much oil as our ship could carry and plenty left to load
twenty more if they were there, and we were preparing to start for
home the next day, but alas ! how soon are man’s designs frustrated !
That night we were all happy, singing and dancing and the can going
freely round, and we were all thinking of one another at home, little
dreaming of what was coming to pass. That night a heavy gale set
in on shore so that it was of no use to try to ship our anchors and go to
sea ; we were right dead on a lee shore. The wind went on increasing
and as the daylight broke it Mas blowing a mere hurricane ; such a
heavy sea running that we thought every moment our poor ship would
founder or go down at her anchors ; for she pitched so heavily that
our foremast and bowsprit w’ent right over the bows. Nor w r as that
our only misfortune; our hawser pipes were both broken and the chains
saM’ing the bare wood right down to the water’s edge. Our windlass
was broken and the pieces lying across the hawse pipes and we could
not cut the chains : we tried every means to free her from her anchors
and let her take her own chance upon the rocky beach.
Oh ! who can describe the anguish with which we watched every
jump she gave, thinking it would be the last ! The sea had risen so
high that it now broke clean over our poor ship, sweeping everything
off our decks. The boats were all gone and every hole and hatchway
blocked up and battened down so as to allow’ no water to go below,
for she was taking more in through where the chain was cutting her
down, than what wt could pump out of her with both pumps, the sea
breaking over us every time. At last we had to abandon her and take
to the rigging thinking to save our lives for a few’ minutes longer ; so
tenacious is a man of life, that.hope does not leave him until the
breath is leaving the body, f should have liked then to have known
* The seal-proboscis.


the calmness with which a Christian can die ; but there was no calm-
ness within, only the most intense and bitter forebodings as to the
future. The man who says he knows not fear is telling a lie, for I
have seen as brave men as ever lived who when they were placed in
such situations would own that they were afraid of something besides
death. Ido not know what makes a man cling so to this life, unless
it is that he is afraid of the grand secret which no man can unfold ; or
what makes so many afraid to die if it is not a consciousness of hav-
ing offended the Almighty by evil acts. But how is it that after so
many warnings a man will not refrain from his wickedness and do the
thing that is right ?
In the hour of danger that we were in when prayer would have
been a comfort, there was no such thing thought of amongst us ; we
suffered the greatest anguish in silence, as to what would become of
us, but keeping the greatest watchfulness as to our fate. Oh! if a per-
son would only watch with half the earnestness for the good of his soul
it would be well for him ! Seamen in general are not a thoughtless
race of people, thanks for the spreading of the Gospel among them of
late years : there is a great alteration since my time : sailors are not
the reckless beings they used to be when I was young, whether or no
that will diminish their lion spirit, time will show. One thing lam
certain of, that there is not half the superstition that used to prevail
amongst them from the Captain to the Cabin-boy ; they are more used
to the ways of the world or more civilized than they were. But to
return to my story.
Soon we found that the water gained on us so much that it was
dangerous to stop lashed any longer to the pumps, for the lashing kept
us under water, and half drowned us, every time that we shipped a
heavy sea, so we gave up the pumps when the water rose to our main-
deck and began to burst that deck up with the pressure of the oil casks
that kept us now afloat. We had not been long in the rigging though
it seemed like years, when the cry “She has parted her cables ! ” ran
through the rigging, and a very good job for us that she did so, for if
she had held on till she had opened out so as to allow the casks to float
out of her, she would soon have gone down and not one of us would
have been left to tell the tale.
We watched with the greatest interest imaginable to see what
would happen next ; she was clear from her anchors and the sea some-


what becalmed by the quantity of oil that was floating and that fairly
cut the fierce top off it, and made it like a heavy ground swell; so we
began to entertain some hopes of life. We could not breathe freely
until we saw how she took the beach or great rocks on the shore : and
just as she was taking the ground, a tremendous sea that would not be
becalmed with the oil, struck her right on her broadside and lifted her
clean up on the beach. The shock knocked the main-mast and mizen
top-mast clean over the side ; and some men that were in the main-
rigging were heaved high and dry ashore. Some were a little hurt, but
all recovered in a short time, except one man who had his ribs and
le<» broken. We had plenty of time to escape to the rigging, for we
could see the wave as good as half a mile off prowling and howling like
some monster for its prey, and from the moment it struck us, all con-
sciousness was lost: but we soon recovered and were at work again
about getting ashore. The main-mast partly acted as a bridge hang-
ing from the ship. The second mate was one of the men thrown
ashore with the mast unhurt, and he managed to get one of the
shrouds and another piece of rope fast to the inner part of the mast
and hauled it ashore as far as he could, securing it there to some
heavy rocks to keep it stationary.
It was now we were to act our part which we did manfully : we
cut the mizen-mast away, taking care that it should fall across the
outer end of the mainmast, securing the end that was inboard well to
the ship : and a south-sea Islander who was like a fish in the water,
jumped overboard with the end of a whale-line made fast to him, and
secured the main and mizen masts together, and thus a very good
bridge was formed. We then got a heavy hawser and carried it up
the beach, and two small spars which we found on shore and made a
pair of shears and hove it taut: anything that was likely to damage
with wet, we sent on shore upon the hawser having a large iron ring
on it, and a small rope made fast to it, to haul it to and from the
shore; we began by saving all the provisions, after about half the
hands had got ashore : indeed so well we worked, that before it was
dark we had six months provisions already ashore, and then we all
left her hoping that she would hold together until we should have
another chance of saving anything that might be useful. We soon mus-
tered up a good fire in a cave under a rock, and had some grog warm-
ed and served all round except to those who never drank any ; for


these there was a substitute for spirits which was to boil some water
and then put in dried chilies : I never tasted anything that would
make you so warm even if you were numbed, you could take this be-
verage with sugar just like tea, but not very strong or it will give you
a headache. You will find it much better than spirits for restoring
circulation.
For the next few days we were saving what we could from the
wreck so far as the storm would let us ; more provisions and some
clothing; but our chests being all smashed to pieces amongst the casks
what we picked up were mostly torn to bits. We were fortunate
enough to save a bale of blankets which the Captain had for trade,
and all the ship’s canvass, so that we were not so badly off. The whole
beach was lined with our oil casks floating out of the ship and very
few of them damaged, and as they floated out, the sea would lift her
further up on the beach, so that in three or four days she was left
high and dry, and we could get everything that we wanted. We
built a very good house to live in, and another for cooking, making
the sides and ends of stones, and the roof with boat planks, and then
hauling a sail over all and tarring it well. We had two good stoves
and were more comfortable than in many houses in England.
There were plenty of birds of all descriptions on the island, so we
soon had each a good feather bed. Indeed the birds were so thick
that when you went into their rookery you were obliged to carry a
heavy stick with you to knock them out of your way ; for they would
peck the leg off you if you did’nt. These are the King Penguins, they
look just like a regiment of soldiers all standing on their feet bolt up-
right : if it is laying time they keep their egg on their feet and man-
age to jump about without dropping it. I have known them to hatch
their egg standing in the water.
The only things that we wanted much were boots and shoes ; but
we soon found a substitute, as the penguins were so numerous that we
used to kill them to make moccassins,the skin of the back would make
one, and the skin of the belly would make the other moccassin : we
cut small holes all around the edges of the skins, putting the feathery
side next your feet, and a string through the holes ; we would then
draw it tight round the ancles, there never was such a comfortable
shoe and you needed no stockings ; only if you had much walking you
would have to get a new pair every day ! Some of our men made


shoemakers’ lasts, anil dried a lot of them to carry home if they
should get there. So easy were these moccassins that you could wear
them to advantage were your feet ever so tender.
There were plenty of the large albatross on the Island ; and
some of our men not content with feather beds and pillows, used to
kill the albatross for the sake of its down which is finer than any I
have seen in Europe. There were also some birds that burrowed in
the side of the hills just like rabbits : these we used for eating every
day in preference to our own salt meat; then there was another called
the mutton bird which was indeed excellent, so much so that we
smoke:! a cask of them to carry to America or any other place that we
might get to.
We became so much used to this kind of Robinson Crusoe life
that we did not care for any ships’ provisions except tea and sugar,
and flour, and biscuit of course. We had plenty of pickles and some
casks of preserved oranges which we hail preserved ourselves in the
passage from the Western Isles, so that we were not badly off: and
we had as many eggs as we liked to go for ; they were so numerous,
that as we emptied our flour or bread casks we filled them with eggs in
case our provisions should fail us, taking the precaution to turn them
every week : by this means you may keep eggs for twelve months,only
they are hard when boiled when they are very old. We had likewise a
sort of vegetable which we called a mountain cabbage : it grew in patch-
es on the sides of the hills just like our cabbages. We found that
after boiling the first time they tasted bitter, we therefore let them
cool and then boiled them again or else fried them in fresh oil that took
all bitterness away and made a very good substitute for cabbage.
The stumps were very large; we peeled and cut them about the
size of potatoes and when boiled we always fried them in oil, and
really when they were well cooked you could not tell the differ-
ence between them and potatoes.
Some hands were employed every day to provide the house
with birds and vegetables, the rest had to break up the old ship,
for we intended to build a small vessel out of the wreck, to carry
us to some inhabited country where we might freight another ship
to carry our cargo home, as we had saved nearly all except our
clothing.
We passed the time very comfortably, dancing and singing
every evening and going on as if nothing had ever happened.


CHAPTER XXVI.
“ She starts—she moves—she seems to teel
The thrill ot life along her keel!
And spurning with her foot the ground
With one exulting joyous bound
She leaps into the Ocean’s arms! ”
( Longfellow ) “ The Building of the Ship.’
In six months we had onr other vessel laid on the stocks :
our chief mate being a carpenter, everything in the building line
went on under his direction • the only thing that kept us hack was
the want of coal to do the little blacksmith’s work that we requir-
ed, hut we overcame that by now and then finding some knobs of
coal by the river side, for there are several small rivers running
down to the sea from the mountains, and we all thought there
must be a coal mine somewhere among the hills. We used to send
four hands every day to look for coal, and they always brought a
little home, and used to get most after heavy rains.
Thus the time passed until we had our little vessel ready for
sea, when we saw two large vessels pass by : we lit great fires to at-
tract their notice, but all in vain, they passed on without ever coining
to see if there were a fellow creature suffering or no ! At last we got
our little vessel into a cradle ; we had to build her a good way from
the water for fear of an accident from gales which are very common
in those high latitudes. We had a curious contrivance to launch her;
we hung her in ropes forward and aft, and then had some heavy
pieces of the beams to bear the weight of her, the lower end having a
notch cut, to admit of another piece being put right through some
large casks that we made solid to use as wheels : this answered ex-
ceedingly well, the axle running through two of them and then the
upright post resting in the centre, so that we had her hung on wheels
like the body of a carriage. The next thing was to make a good road
for the wheels to run on, and not allow it to incline too much, we had
to ease her down with the help of a large hawser, and lay an anchor
out, right in the line of the road so as to keep her straight: for if
she went off the roadway, all our trouble would go for nothing and
we should have had to remove great rocks that it took twenty of
ns just to remove the breadth of the vessel, besides the risk of
getting her damaged.


After three days of eager anxiety we managed to get her
afloat in safety and now we provisioned her for a month or better,
hoping in that time to reach some place and get another vessel.
We also ballasted her with fresh water.
We now passed the evening more jovially than ever in hopes
of a speedy deliverance. The Captain proposed that six hands
should stop on the Island, but as he could get no one to volun-
teer, he did not press it, and so we all left this desolate Island
together, hoping never to see it again.
A sea-man’s life is full of variations. We happened to catch
a fair breeze, a very fortunate thing for us in our little craft, so
we soon came into fine weather out of that stormy latitude. We
met several large vessels bound to India and Australia; they won-
dered when we were close to them to see so many hands on board
so small a vessel, and I have no doubt that they thought that we
were no good. She was not above twenty five tons and there were
thirty of us in her, so that we were stowed away pretty thickly.
But she managed to carry us all safe into St. Mary’s in Madagas-
car which was the nearest port, where we hoped to find some
whalers who might take our cargo home. There were several bul-
lock drivers belonging to the Isle of France : however our Captain
could not persuade them to go to that stormy country on any ac-
count ; so we started again for the Cape of Good Hope, where we
were sure of getting a vessel. Most of our crew being tired of that
voyage stayed behind in Madagascar and took their chance among
the natives who were well inclined towards them; indeed they
treated us with the greatest kindness, and helped us as well as they
could.
Several of our men having the scurvy went through a very cur-
ious method of being cured. Our first mate was the first who un-
derwent the punishment. I can call it nothing else ; it is either a
kill or cure with them. The plan was this. A live bullock was
brought down to the beach, and the sick man carried out and dip-
ped in the salt water two or three times and then brought to
where the bullock was killed ; his whole entrails torn out and then
the man pushed right in instead ; the bullock’s mouth being kept
wide open with a piece of. stick that the invalid might breathe some
fresh air ! The hide of the bullock was then sewed together again,


but you could hear the poor invalid roaring with pain whilst you kept
him there half or three quarters of an hour and then released him in
a mass of perspiration ; he was wrapped up warmly in a blanket for a
day or two, when there is either a cure effected or death follows; but
generally unless he has a very poor constitution he recovers after a
great deal of pain and such sensations as they said were quite inde-
scribable ; they are more dead than alive after the first half hour. The
scurvy is not at all only owing to salt provisions, but to wet and damp
and working amidst oil, and it is not easy to cure properly. At Cape
Town our Captain entered into a sort of bungling bargain with a mer-
chant who promised to find a vessel and men, and pay the Captain
about two or three pounds a ton for what oil he might land at Cape
Town. Our crew of course would derive no benefit apd most of them
shipped for home: but the merchant induced our second mate and
MacDonald and me to sign an agreement to go to the Island in his
schooner and haul the oil off the beach, and load her every time that
she came down, which was to be every three months ; he was to find
us in everything necessary for the purpose, and to give us plenty of
good and wholesome provisions during the term of twelve months : lie
also gave us the fortieth lay, that is, of every forty tons that we got
off, one was tp be our own ; and whoever did not fulfil his agreement
was to forfeit what he had done ; if he did not fulfil it, we were al-
lowed to sell the oil to any passing ship. So we agreed to go down on
these conditions, our second mate acting as chief headsman; whilst the
vessel was away on her voyages from the island, we were to boil the
oil over again to make it English oil, as it saved a heavy duty on
American manufactured oil in the English colonies. The Captain
would not wait for us to boil the oil for his first voyage, so went off
without any, and we were now left to ourselves once more on this
desolate rock. I had some misgivings in my own mind whether we
had done right in coming down to such a place again after we were
safe off from it. When the vessel arrived again to her time she brought
another party and landed them about one hundred miles to windward
of us, and only gave us two months’ provisions ; we however gave her
a cargo and sent a letter to the merchant to tell* him if he did not
attend to his agreement better, we would all leave the Island and not
allow him any more oil for he was breaking his contract at the first
outset. We made a quantity of oil during the absence of the vessel,


as there were plenty of sea-elephants lying on the beach ; we kept six
ninety-gallon pots going night and day, and we had six or seven hun-
dred tons of oil all ready for shipping.
CHAPTER XXVII.
“ It is a tine thing to see the light of the sun, and it is pleasant to see
the storm allayed and turned into a smooth sea; —hut all this is nothing to the
excellences of a new birthto see the old man carried forth to funeral with
the solemn tears of repentance and buried in the grave of Jesus, and in his
place a new creation rise.”
The time now arrived when the vessel ought to have come to us,
but there was no sign of her : our provisions had run out, and there
was nothing but dissatisfaction now going on and we would scarcely
speak to one another. What made everything bad was our having
nothing to eat but the birds, and mountain cabbage, and we all
began to be sickly. We had no eggs, the laying season being over
just before we landed : now and then we caught some fish, but we all
felt the want of either bread or flour. The birds were getting scarce
and we had to travel over some high hills covered with snow and ice
to secure a load of birds for the next day’s use. Sometimes we could
not leave the house for days together; and if we ventured out ih search
of birds we were apt to be caught in a snowstorm and had to stay
where we were, or we might lose our way. , One of our men walked
ri<dit over a precipice and it was two days before we could extricate
him from the place where he fell as he had bruised both arms in his
fall. We sent a man down with a rope and a small cask cut like a
chair to put him into and then hauled him up in the best manner we
could. We took him home and bathed him with warm water after
we had rubbed him well with snow, for he was frost bitten and numb-
ed all over. He must have been insensible the first night, for the man
who was with him called out loud as soon as he missed him, but re-
ceived no answer. After looking about a long while the weather clear-
ed and he returned home without his partner, though not without
marking the place with his walking stick. It was too late to go and
look for him then, but at daylight a party of us started with a blanket
to carry him home in.


The weather again disappointed us, we bawled and roared all
along the cliff but never had an answer; some times we fancied we
heard one, so we would roar altogether to give him confidence : then a
heavy snowstorm came on, and as we could not see any distance we
left for that day. Not so a dog that was a great favourite of his :
we missed it when we returned home, and the next day when we re-
newed our search, there was the dog half way down the precipice, and
the man at the bottom ! The poor thing had seen or smelt his master
and gone down so far that he could neither get up nor down : and
when we came to the place he set up a sort of mournful howl, in which
all the other dogs joined. We then knew that the man must be there
and with a good whale line we lowered one of our party over a cliff in
a blanket to look, and we had the pleasure of finding him. But the
blanket not being strong enough to carry more than one, and the man
too disabled to do anything for himself, we were obliged to leave
him there until we had fitted a cask to haul him up, which did not
take very long : then we sent one man down in a blanket again to get
him into the cask ; and when we got up the poor dog too, he was all
bruised with sliding down the cliff ; not a bit of his claws were left,
with scratching I suppose to get up again, or down to his master, and
he could not bark at all. The poor thing was laid up a long while
before he could regain the use of his feet so as to go to work with the
rest of our dogs digging for the birds. The dogs were very valuable
to us ; if it had not been for them we should have actually starved.
The schooner at last arrived after leaving us two months without
provisions, and we all determined to leave the Island and have nothing
more to do with a master who would allow us to starve. But we
found that she had a shipwrecked party on board which she had pick-
ed off from one of the Islands of the group, so there was no room for
any of us but our chief headsman. He went up with them to the
Cape after giving them a cargo of oil, and left me iu charge of the
party as I had been second: it was a charge I should like to have dis-
pensed with, for they were in a mutinous state, and I could not much
blame them for it after having been so served by their employers. So
we consented to remain on the island till the vessel came again on ac-
count of those poor men, and we gave them a good share of our pro-
visions ; they were in a wretched state, indeed no more than walking
skeletons. They had lived for thirty or forty days on bluhher and raw


birds alone, and they lived in holes in the rocks until they found out
an old house that we had built two years before for the purpose of
sealing. They had no means of getting a fire so they must have been
very badly off indeed. One of them told me that they used to hang
pieces of blubber in the place where they all slept, with a piece of string
to a nail, and then suck it, for some of them were too weak even to
sit up. They lost many lives ; it was almost incredible that any of
them should have survived so long amid such hardships. There was
a party of sealers on the other side of the island but they did not find
them out. Their vessel struck on the face of a perpendicular cliff and
then rebounded off and sunk in deep water, so that the few who were
saved had scarcely time to escape ; there was nothing more of the ves-
sel seen; she was the “Richard Dart” of Dartmouth. We had
thought our fate hard, .but when we heard these poor fellows relate
their story, we were quite satisfied that we had not been severely dealt
with, indeed not so hardly as we deserved for our neglect to the
Almighty and our unthankfulness. No people ought to be more
thoughtful than sailors or whalers, for they have more opportunities
than others of seeing God’s wonderful works : and yet often the more
they see, the more negligent they are to do Him homage ! Oh I wish
I had considered this long ago, it would have spared me the many
bitter pangs which I now experience ! Many, many deeds and words
of my ill-spent life, are only left for bitter repentance. But I think
that the Lord has not quite cast me off; in mercy He has afflicted me
and I hope to prove my sincere repentance by a new life full of thanks
for His goodness.


CHAPTER XXVIII.
In the destruction of the seal it would he well if Bewick’s remark were
mercifully remembered, viz., “all the seal kind will live a long time after
receiving the most dreadful blows; but the most trifling blow on the snout
or forehead instantly kills them,’’
Our headman being gone to the Cape and promising to put things
on a better footing, things went on a little more comfortably with us.
We made a great deal of oil and might have made as much more, but
our casks were full and we had to knock off. We had plenty of lei-
sure now if we only knew what to do with it: we made curiosities by
carving * elephant’s teeth, and dressing young elephant’s skins for
jackets, capes and caps. They are very black and glossy ; the mothers
go to sea and leave their young ou the beach to shed their coats ; they
remain on shore about two months during which time they get two
new coats, the one a beautiful glossy black and the other a silver grey:
they are worth then about nine or ten shillings a piece, but we never
kill them for the sake of their skins only, for it would not pay. Some
of them manage to get to sea before they have their silver grey coats ;
then the old ones return and are as fat as can be and remain on shore
in like manner to shed their coats : they get so very lean and helpless
that they can scarcely drag themselves down to the water when the
time comes for them to go to sea again. Two men had to go every
day, weather permitting, to supply the house with birds, and were
sometimes kept out all night taking shelter in some cave or hole in the
rock, and as we were always provided with a tinder box, we could al-
ways manage to get a good fire and warm and dry ourselves.
The time drew on for the schooner to arrive, and provisions fall-
ing short in spite of the greatest carefulness, we began to get down-
hearted and disagreeable again. We waited patiently from day to day
resolving that if the vessel came we would all leave and make our em-
ployer pay us for such bad neglect, for we had now been five months
without receiving any supplies ; the owner knowing that we had left the
rest for the use of the other poor men who were cast away.
Is it not wonderful that all this time we never thought of prayer,
nor of thanking the Almighty for the supplies we were receiving ?
Scanty as they sometimes were, they were enough to sustain our lives.
* or Seal Proboscis,


But we wore all blind to God’s mercy in preserving us at all. The
time went on for nearly nine months, and then some of our men began
to he laid up with a strange sort of sickness that the doctors could not
name ; they were all drawn up like cripples, some in a sitting posture
with their heads resting on their knees, but in no pain unless we tried
to move them, or when they made an effort to regain the use of their
limbs.
We were in a miserable plight when the Lord sent us some relief,
for on looking out one fine afternoon we espied a large ship standing
towards the Island. We made a large fire but there was no need, for
she was coming right towards the anchorage which showed she was no
stranger to the Island. We were full of conjectures who she could
be, and it proved as some thought, that the second mate knowing that
there was a good voyage to be made had engaged a ship and a Captain
and come down here.
As she drew near we launched two boats to go aboard. The sick
men were getting half well at the sight of a fine ship, some even be-
ginning to crawl about on all fours, and gathering up anything that
would burn, to keep the fires going. We healthy ones launched and
manned the boats and got them thro’ the surf after a great deal of
patience and were glad to see our mate in good health and better spirits
than when he left us. The Captain took us all into the cabin and or-
dered us plenty to eat and drink and we soon forgot that we had
starved so long. He sent his second mate with food and medicines to
the men on shore but he was in too great a hurry to get through the
surf, capsized the boat, and nearly lost his crew. No injury how-ever
was done in landing, any more than staving the boat to pieces, and
the loss of the provisions.
The Captain would not allow me to land again that evening, so I
had to sit down by the cabin fire with our mate; who recounted to me
all that had occurred since he had left the Island. He wrote to me
from the Cape to tell all particulars concerning himself and how our
employer had trifled with him, and how he wanted to get clear of all
of us that were cast away, so as to have all the oil composing the cargo
for himself. He made very light of our being out of provisions so long,
which I readily believed. Our mate finding that he was not a gentle-
man who could be depended on, resolved to go home and get some one
more dependable in America.


This Captain readily undertook to make the voyage : they drop-
ped anchor at the Cape to make inquiries if we were relieved and found
that nothing had been done, so they made for the Islands at once,
and went to see if there were any trace of the “ Richard Dart” left,
but not one atom of that ill-fated vessel was to be seen on South
Prince Edward’s Island which she had struck against.
The Captain said we were foolish in sticking to our contract with
a man who left us to starve, saying that the law of nature and every
other law would exonerate us from blame. The mate seconded his
speech hy producing a copy of our agreement where we were allowed to
sell oil to supply ourselves.
Tlie Captain now proposed not only to give us provisions for as
long as we liked, but to take any of my party who wished it oft the
Island to America, if we would give him the oil that belonged to our
old ship and any more that we could make now. I told him that I
should consult my party on shore ; the next day I called all hands to-
gether in presence of our old headman who came to bring his men oft
with me ; I stated to them the Captain’s proposal and that they were
to have a better lay of the oil than our present employer was to give
them, and he would take any with him who wished to go to America.
Most of them agreed to the proposals, but some from the Cape objected,
however as we were the strongest party we did not care for their disa-
greement ; but I went on board and told the Captain the result of the
business: then he said he would not allow any provision to those
men who preferred remaining, which I would not agree to on any ac-
count, so he altered his mind or certainly I would only have given
him the worth of what he had given us in oil or seal skins. However
he made up a good raft of provisions and we towed them into the surf
and then let them go. The only method we had of getting anything
on shore was to make a raft and have a long line to the boat, for
nothing can be taken in the boat because of the surf running so high ;
it is labour enough to get through it with a very good whale boat.
We then began to raft oft oil to the ship, and had her about half
loaded when the schooner arrived from the Cape, having suspected
that something of this sort would be going on, and so sent down an-
other party to heave off the oil.
When I went on board to hear all the news, I received a very fine
long letter from the merchant telling me how his vessel had been ashore


and had to undergo some heavy repairs, which in Cape Town is very
slow work, and all his other vessels were away on some voyage—and
that he could not avoid the neglect—at the same time he apologised
for it, saying it should not happen again ; he begged us to load the
vessel and quit that dangerous country as quickly as possible and
bring with us all the prime seal skins I could procure, for they were
in great demand at present, finally he urged us to have nothing to do
with the Yankee ship that was coming down. He little knew of her
arrival before the schooner !
He sent us now plenty of provisions ; to me a present of a new
pair of boots, a suit of pilot cloth, and a whole hogshead of liquor for
our little colony, so that we were well provided.
The party from the schooner landed and wanted to take possess-
ion of our house which I would not allow, as it did not belong to our
employer but to our old ship, so they had to build another.
And now there was nothing but dissension going on, the Captain
of the schooner wanting me to give up the charge of the Island to some
of his party and for me to remain on board the Yankee ship altogether
and let them forage for a cargo, which I would not do ; there were
two cargoes on the beach and I had the best right to them, and I
meant to keep them. But I allowed his men to take all his employer’s
casks away as I did not want anything of his ; the Captain would not
agree to that but wished to have any he saw fit, and to take some casks
of skins by force, so I had to employ as many men as he, and see that
he did not take what did not belong to him.
Indeed it so much irritated him to see us going on a couple of
rafts off to the ship every day, and he unable to load his (because his
people were unacquainted with rafting work,) that out of revenge he
was going to knock the heads of our casks in, when I placed three
men to see that he did no damage. At last he became so exasperated
that we used to find our surf lines cut in several places, thereby en-
dangering the lives of the boats’ crews employed in rafting off the oil.
Thus things went on until we were loaded. Most of our party
were going to America, and as we had to leave a good deal of oil be-
hind us, we determined to make a second voyage for the remainder.
But when we arrived in America, these owners also began to cheat
and would not give our men the lay the Captain had promised, which
caused a great deal of trouble and discomfort. However we had to


comply as there was no remedy but to go to law, and that in America
is very precarious and expensive.
I made a very good voyage after all, having very nearly a thou-
sand dollars to receive, and if I had put it to good use I need not be
poor now.
The mate proposed for me to speculate some of my money with
him, he being a shrewd fellow and a very off handed man, and like
most Yankees a great hand at speculating. So great is the spirit of enter-
prise in them that the Americans will never give in if they lose, but
try once more. I lent our two mates three hundred dollars, and we
three were going to buy an old ship and fit her out for the Crozets, and
if we had made as good a voyage as the last we should have been set
up for life. We kept the whole a secret from the last owners and had
as many of the old hands as we wanted, and began to fit out our old
vessel with all despatch. But the old Captain suspected what we were
about and strained every nerve to get his vessel ready too ; he sailed
away a fortnight before us.
Vv]t« Others’ had remarked our quick voyage fitted out for those Is-
lands, so that when we arrived we found about fifty sail of whalers
cruising about. We made for our old ground, and were much disap-
pointed to find two parties living there, making oil for the man who
employed us first. They were well supplied with provisions for I had
taught one of them a lesson by leaving him, so that his present
crew had everything they wanted, even beer and wine in abundance.
If I he had supplied us with more necessaries of life we should not
have deserted him and he would have been some thousands of pounds
in pocket by it.
Our old ship had been at the Island and was doing very well,
until she parted both anchors and received other damages and had to
go to the Cape for repairs, when the merchant sued the Captain for
taking away the oil from the Island which he stated was his property
tho’ not one gallon of it was really his. Our Captain gained the day
in consequence of having a copy of our agreement, stating that on the
arrival of every cask in Cape Town he would be responsible for it,
but what was on the Island the merchant had no claim to. So he
lost the case and was put to great expense for detaining the Captain
and ship so long, upwards of four months.
The party now on the Island being very strong disputed our


landing, but we would not consent to being off to another place, hav-
ing as good a right as they, and we landed accordingly. There were
elephants enough for all, but so inveterate were these traders against
us, that they used to get up during the night and drive the elephants
off the beach into the sea, so that is was not worth while for us to stay.
These men knew that the seals would come again when it was time
to have their young, but we could not wait so long endangering the
the ship, the had weather having already commenced and so we
took our departure from that inhospitable shore.
CHAPTER XXIX.
“ I told him he had better die poor than amass wealth by such means
as he was aiming at.”
Thomas Shillitoe to a slave-dealer 2 Yol. page 335.
We next started for Madagascar to try what we could pick up
on that Island. 0 if it could speak and tell some of the transac-
tions that have been committed there daily, it would make any per-
son shudder! and all by white men, for the natives would never
think of such work, were it not put into their heads by the white
people.
I do not wish to exonerate myself from blame in the tale I am
going to tell, though if I had had any alternative but to go and
live among a wild race of natives I should have accepted it. The
thought of losing my. three hundred dollars engrossed my mind,
though I had before spent double the quantity without giving it a
passing thought.
And now in reading this, if you cannot forgive me at least pity
me for breaking all laws both human and divine. I hope to be
forgiven by the Divine Judge as I did not enter willingly into so
base a traffic and have bitterly repented it. The man 1 was with
tried to quiet my fears by quoting scripture to prove that slavery
was lawful in the sight of the Lord ; but he never quieted my con
science on that score, w'hatever he did with his own : and the money
I received by that transcation did me no good.
The Captain now became acquainted with a couple of Brazilian


agents and they made a proposal to him to ran a cargo of slaves to
Rio Janeiro, one of them coming as supercargo. He accepted the pro-
posal as lie had failed in his former intention, and this was as lu-
crative as a whaling voyage. He named it to us as we were sitting
at our tea in the cabin, and depraved as I was, my very heart quail-
ed at the thought of being engaged in human traffic ; and certainly
if there bad been another ship there I should have gone aboard of
her and left my share of the transaction in the hands of Providence!
But the others only laughed at my scruples and I had to comply
though not at all cheerfully.
We had a number of coloured men of our own who all took their
discharge, and preferred to run the risk of stopping amongst the
natives rather than proceed in the ship. The Captain paid them
well and was glad to get them off his hands : but I really think if
they had accompanied us the whole voyage, the Captain would not
have scrupled to have sold them in the Brazils ; they could not have
helped themselves if he had been so inclined, for there is not much
security or law for a negro in that country.
Of all ships fitted out for slavery, a whaler is the best adapted:
their large pots mounted on the decks for boiling the oil causA no sus-
picion whatever, and they are all that is required to boil the negroes'
farina. We certainly had plenty of room for them. Everything was
so well managed that he must have been a very keen fellow to de-
tect that we had slaves.
We had one tin of very large casks full of fresh water stowed
quite level; then there was a false deck of deals laid on them and a
small piece cut out over each bung hole so as to admit a little pump
to be put into the cask. Then there were six compartments par-
titioned off on each side and a space left in the middle, so that a
man could go into any of the compartments without interfering with
the other. It looked like so many very large stalls for horses ;
indeed 1 have often had less room on board H. M. ships.
The manner in which we had them to come up and down with-
out confusion was a thing to be remarked ; we had two men continu-
ally pacing in the passage between the compartments, and they
learnt just enough of the negro language to call the number of their
compartment (for they were all numbered.) There were one hundred
in each place, and one hundred and eighty women who occupied four


compartments. The men who kept watch called out the number, and
after about a week’s drilling everyone of them knew which he belong-
ed to and would answer.
We used to get a certain number on deck at a time to feed them
and give them fresh air, for every master likes to show his slaves to
the best advantage. In fine weather we had to leave half of them on
deck until two o’clock in the afternoon and the other half until sun
down ;by that precaution there was very little sickness. But it took
all hands to keep them from falling overboard when they were on deck,
they were so stupid and thick-headed that they would walk overboard
as soon as not, if they were not watched. We had them so well train-
ed, that in one week we could get any number of them up and down
when wanted without difficulty.
We killed a very large whale two days after we left, and kept it
all the passage ; which was a very good decoy against suspicion from
the men of war’s boats that hoarded us twice, but they suspected
nothing, seeing that we were all equipped for whaling and all the
blubber in the main hatch ; they took no further trouble to search, so
well disguised was everthing about the ship.
An old shipmate of my own came on board in the last boat and
we had some conversation about slavery: and altho’ I freely con-
versed on the subject, my conscience was thundering against it. I trust
that the Judge of judges will forgive me for the base crime into which
I plunged involuntarily, though I can look to no earthly judge for
pardon.
We arrived safely at Eio with a very large cargo, having lost
about thirty during the passage, and we landed them all in one night
under the very nose of the guard boats, and no notice was taken of it.
Though I had made a very good voyage and had a little share in
the ship I determined not to go a second time ; and I verily believe I
was the occasion of the Captain refusing a second offer similar to the
one he had just finished.
We now went on a kind of exploring expedition, the Captain
being well acquainted with the coast and telling us of an Island he
knew on the coast of Patagonia where there was nothing but guano :
and I believe we should have made a very good thing of it, if we had
not been obstructed by a Brazilian man of war which drove us away
from the Island when we were about one third loaded. We tried to


return, hut she had left her tender to cruise and hinder us from taking
any more guano, altho’ it did not belong to that country. However
we used to send our boats to load and come on board, until they de-
tected us and made prisoners of two boats’ crews. Then we promised
to go away, if they would give us back our men and boats which they
did on condition that we would give them no further trouble. How-
ever we intended to return and get a cargo by hook or by crook; for
they were not the lawful owners, and our Captain did not scruple to
tell them so ; he could speak Portuguese as well as English having
been a Lieutenant in their navy during the war between Don Pedro
and Don Miguel. But all our efforts were lost; they sent for a re-in-
forcement and landed some soldiers to keep watch: so we had to leave
the island very reluctantly, and went to seek for another.
The Brazilian frigate tracked us everywhere, at one place we near-
ly lost all our lives as well as our ship through the indiscretion of the
Captain—but I cannot give all the particulars. Suffice it to tell you
that he had a chief’s daughter brought on board by her mother whilst
her father was away, he having gone to another Island to bring her a
husband to marry her; during his absence our Captain gave her, and
her mother all sorts of presents, and when her mother returned to her
home our Captain stowed the daughter away. When her father found
out where she was, (tire mother dared not tell a lie for fear of death)
he immediately came on board and demanded his daughter, but our
Captain denied having her. So the Chief forced his way into the cab-
in and called her loudly ; and soon burst the state room door open,
caught her by the hair and dragged her on deck, and just as a boy
would heave his ball, he threw her overboard. He was the' most
powerful man I ever saw, seven feet four inches high, and stout in pro-
portion—then he said to the Captain in good Spanish that he should
bear from him very soon again, and gave him such a look as none but
a savage can give ! I think I see him now while writing this.
Sure enough we did hear from him that same night; our mate
who well knew their characters was on the alert and had our two big
guns brought into the cuddy well loaded with rivets, a very destructiVe
shot, and pointed one out of each door.
The Captain made very light of the father’s threats, but the mate
so warned him to be cautions that he was allowed to have his own
way in every respect that night. And well for us that he did, for if


he had left the vessel moored as she was, not one of us would have been
saved that night.
We were moored by the stem to the shore, there being scarcely
room for us to swing at our anchor, and a very high cliff overhanging
us, when the natives came down and rolled a large stone, about a ton
weight, right on board. It came, down with such a crash that the
poor ship fairly shivered under it; it broke four beams and carried
most of the poop deck away, and smashed everything in its way to
pieces.
The mate immediately cut the cable where we were moored to the
shore, and the vessel then swung to her anchor. Altho’ we were now
out of reach of such heavy pieces, they still kept heaving smaller stones
but did no damage.
At daylight a good breeze sprung up, right off the land, so that
we were able to let go everything and drift out of the place, a circum-
stance that had not happened before, all the time that we lay there.
Thus it seemed the hand of Providence was stretched forth to save us
from those savages ; plainly I see all God’s mercies now.
In drifting out of the little basin where we were moored after cut-
ting away everything that hound us to that shore, the ship went safely,
and considering that we had no canvass set properly she made very
considerable way through the water. We could not show our heads
on deck without the risk of being stoned to death.
The chief manned his canoes, and with about two hundred others
boarded us as we were going out; but when they were coiping aft to
the cuddy to take possession we let drive our guns right amongst them.
With a hideous yell they all jumped overboard taking their dead with
them, and very glad we were to get rid of them so easily. Then we
made sail to get away altogether and soon were out of their reach.
The Captain meanwhile was sorry to lose his prize ; certainly
she would have been a fortune for anyone who.liked to exhibit her, for
she was taller than her father, and being very slight looked much tal-
ler : and she could knot the hair of her head under her feet.


CHAPTER XXX.
“ How often does the keeping of bad company harden the heart
against repentance.
To do as others do is more frequently our rule timn to do as we
onght to do.”
Isaac Taylor.
We now diil not know what course to steer, as we were baffled in
our guano scheme and had not hands enough to go whaling, at last we
determined to make what we could of our little cargo and trade with
the natives who had plenty of hides and skins. After we were clear
of our old ship and cargo we went to Bahia and landed. MacDonald and
I there shipped for California, and went up to the gold fields and were
very lucky. But what was the use of our getting money when we did
not know how to use it. We were soon decoyed, or what they call
shanghied like any poor slaves. On coming with our money to San
Francisco intending to go home, we fell in with our old Captain who
was a runner for all the American Captains, to procure hands for them.
When he saw us he made sure of his prize and invited us into one of
the principal hotels, where we were well warmed with brandy and then
he proposed a game at billiards. Here we were soon fleeced of all our
money, whilst people he introduced us to were full of inquiries about
persons we had known at the diggings, and during our games and con-
versations they managed to give us some deadly drug which deprived
us of our senses. When we came to, we were on board a large ship
out at sea bound for China and not a farthing of money was left us !
The mate came in with a large jar of spirits and told us to make our-
selves comfortable for we had shipped there two days ago.
Our old Captain saw us safe out of the harbour and received
twenty pounds advance for each of us !
It was no use to tell the Captain how we were kidnapped for
they all knew how sailors were procured in those times, and when
they wanted a crew they did not care by what means they had
them.
There were twelve more in our ship who were kept continually
intoxicated for a whole week before they found out where they were,
so we had not much room to grumble; our mate told us that there
were hundreds served in the same way. Indeed I have heard of
those runners bringing a dead sailor on board and telling the mate
he was only drunk and begging him to let him remain until he was


sober, but when he was wanted, he was found to be dead ! These
runners were of the lowest character you can imagine, and at the
head of one of these gangs was our old Captain.
As it was no use to repine, we had to make the best of it
while it lasted and try to get away and return to the diggings as
soon as we could: for we were resolved to try them again and be
a little more circumspect in our company next time. They must
have given us a very heavy dose of something for I felt the effects
of it for four months afterwards.
The gold fields beat all I ever saw in infamy and vice • when
at the gambling table you had your gold bag by you and your
hand upon a revolver loaded and capped while you were ready to
fire at your antagonist if you suspected any foul play; and no fur-
ther notice would be taken of it. It was all Lynch Law there ;
might was right.
Our passage was very pleasant; the Captain presented us with
a chest of clothes belonging to his old crew who had run away,
and wished us to take a great deal more than we wanted from his
slop chest, so as to have a claim on us when we arrived at Amoy.
We were resolved to go no further than this port, altho’ it was a
good ship and kind officers.
We found the cholera raging there among the shipping, so much
so that there were several vessels without a crew to take them
home. They had to send to Hong Kong to to get men; there
were only three white sailors ashore and they would not stir so
long as their money lasted which they were spending at the rate of
two pounds a day. When their money was done they were in debt
to their landlord and obliged to ship. I offered one of them
twelve pounds and my chest of clothes, if he would take my place,
but he went and shipped elsewhere for nine pounds a month that
he might go to England.
Our Captain kept a keen look out lest we should desert him,
his wife and daughter kept a strict watch also, and the officers watch-
ed armed to the teeth and ready to shoot any one who attempted
to leave the ship.
We told the Captain that our engagement was up if there was
any; but he produced articles that we had signed specifying that
jf he wanted us to proceed either to Europe or the United States


he could detain us. We could not submit to that and told him it was
all his own making out on purpose to keep us. The American Consul
came on board to settle the dispute, and tried to persuade us to stay,
and gave us a pint of rum every day promising the same allowance as
long as we were in the ship if it were twelve mouths. But when he
found we were firm, he and the English Consul declined having any-
thing more to do with us, the one because we were British subjects, the
other because we were under the American flag, so that we had to take
the law into our own hands and refused to work. Then the Captain
stopped our victuals not allowing us even prisoners’ fare of bread and
water. We bore this for one day ; the next day we broke open the
store room and helped ourselves : this he declared to be open mutiny
and wanted the Consul to put us all in gaol.
But the Consul acted like a gentleman ; though he refused us re-
dress, he would have no hand in punishing us wrongfully.
The Captain was in a fix, and after trying several schemes he at
last put us all into the long boat and landed us up to our middle in
water in a paddy rice field, and there left us !
As it was late, we were all night paddling about in the water,
and in the morning a Chinaman showed us the way to the only board-
ing house there was in the place. We thought we could now proceed
to the Diggings again, and as Australia was the fashion we determined
to try that place and see what we could do in that country.
There were only two vessels bound for Australia and we had the
chance of joining one of them on condition that we would go into con-
finement when we landed. There was no danger of those ships beiii"
in want of men, for the mates of some of the other ships offered to desert
and join these to go to Australia. The Captain had to refuse a great
many, indeed if he had given a passage to all who applied he would
have had to take half the men in port.
We started at last and had a pleasant passage, thinking of soon
making a fortune and fancying that money would purchase peace or
anything else we wanted. When we arrived at Melbourne the Captain
might have sent us to the hulks as refractory seamen but he was not
severe, and it was better for him in the long run : he hired a house
with a very large yard enclosed by a high wall and sent us there, giving
us everything we were likely to want and coming himself and mates to
see that we were comfortable; this so entirely won our confidence that
we resolved to go the voyage with him.


After a week’s confinement in this house he placed such trust in
us as to take us on hoard again, and not one of us ever abused that
confidence. Indeed he used afterwards to boast in the harbour how he
could keep his men while all the other masters had to confine their
crews for safety, or had no crews at all.
Our ship was more like an hotel than anything else, for there was
nothing that money could procure hut the Captain had it for us, and
we were required to do very little work. In a short while he let us go
and come as we liked, and the other Captains were very angry because
they could not place the same dependence on their crews.
If our Captain had sent us to the hulks he would not have kept
one of us. Some of us however never went to sea with him after all,
but we put men in our places much to his satisfaction. A Swedish
barque arrived when we were ready for sea, and one of our men, a
Swede had leave to go on board and see his countrymen ; he found that
they all wanted to run away and either go to the Diggings or to some
place where they could learn the English language, so we settled to take
them out of their ship and send them in our own, as our Captain
agreed to the change. We therefore took our boat at midnight to the
Swedish vessel and embarked the whole crew and their clothes on board
our ship.
We stopped with our old Captain until we saw him safe outside the
Heads of Melbourne, when .he called us all into the cabin and gave us
ten pounds each for our work from China, and for getting him another
crew to work his ship ; then we bid him good bye and gave him three
cheers at parting. We came ashore in a boat he had provided for us
and the poor Swedish Captain nearly went out of his mind through the
loss of his men.


CHAPTER XXXI.
“ Tis very vain for me to boast
How small a price my Bible cost,
The day of judgment will make clear
’ Twas very cheap or very dear.”
Michael Bruce.
MacDonald and I were once more on onr own hands. Melbourne
was not the place then that it is now for it was nothing but tents, and
they called it Canvass Town. There were some very curious sights to be
seen in those days ; whole famlies grouped together with no covering
even at night time ; there were mothers with their tender little babes
wandering about having no shelter, such was the rage after gold ! and
plenty of them after they had a sufficiency did not know how to take
care of it, but squandred it in that town of depravity and wickedness,
for such it was then. During the time that the gold rage lasted, I
cannot describe the enticements and means used to decoy the unwary
in that place : I really think he must have been a saint who could
have walked through the town of Melbourne and come out unscathed,
when there was every device that could be invented to allure a man
to ruin. In one of my rambles I fell in with my sister and brother-in-
law and very glad we were to meet again—Oh that I had heeded that
excellent sister’s counsel 1 but it fell on stony ground—l see things now
that I never could before and the Bible which was once a kind of con-
tradiction and mystification- to me now seems quite plain.
Having remained at the diggings until we had accumulated be-
tween three and four pounds of gold each, we thought we could do no
better than return to Melbourne ; we were getting tired of the life at
Ballarat and accordingly sold out. Very few at that time gave their
money to the Commissioners for we all thought that two shillings and
six pence an ounce was too much to give for safe conveyance to any
place where you wanted to send it, so off we went determined not to
be duped as we were in California. But we trusted too much to our-
selves, and accordingly fell into just as bad scrapes, except that we
were not trapped on board a ship this time.
We found Melbourne had wonderfully changed during our short
absence; instead of canvass tents there were now some very fine build-
ings, indeed we could scarcely credit our eyes that such a town had
arisen so rapidly. There was every kind of enticement for the miners
or diggers—allurements that would put London, Paris and New York


into the shade! Our money went fast enough,—slipping away in
idleness—l had then no real thought of bettering myself.
After wasting some time in Melbourne I shipped on hoard a
schooner hound for New Zealand on purpose to see my sister safe there
with her husband: he had made a good deal of money and had bought
a very fine piece of ground just outside New Plymouth : but he did
not remain there, and where lie went next I have never yet learned.
I wrote several letters but all in vain so at last I gave it up until I
could myself go and make proper enquiries.
When we arrived at New Zealand my sister’s husband and I went
on what we called a spree whilst the poor thing was giving thanks for
our deliverance from the fury of the Ocean.
We had soon to go on, as the Captain did not stop there and he
would not part with MacDonald and me ; we could have run easily,
but that would have been taking a mean advantage: if we had deserted
the Captain, he would have had to lay his vessel up for want of hands.
We went down the coast for a load of timber; there are beautiful
groves of trees in that country. The natives are a fine race and the
missionaries are doing great work amongst them.
One of their savage customs is to have at night time a great ado with
their Co-oberry as they call it: it is a kind of ball or feast, when they
have a dance amongst themselves, or else two tribes meet each other
and then there is a great stealing of wives among them ; if the thief
should happen to be caught he has to ran the gauntlet through a row
of spearsmen on each side of him, placed about thirty yards asunder.
It is surprising to see them run this race, sometimes pierced with about
twenty spears ; I do not know how they survive their wounds ! The
wife for whom the winner runs being always ready to catch him when
■he runs through and wash his wounds and apply remedies to them, and
will never leave him until he is cured or dies. Should he survive he is
counted a great man amongst them. Another mode of punishment they
have for the same offence is for the offender to stand bolt upright
against a large tree, and then three or four marksmen belonging to the
same tribe as the woman, walkfc within a certain distance marked out
for them. In a very short time they let fly their deadly spear at the
poor victim ; seldom missing their aim, and the one who pierces him
through the body and nails him to the tree, gets the woman without
any price ! But he rarely makes her his wife ; if he cannot get a price
for her he generally makes her a slave on his own place. If on the


contrary there is any hope of the man's recovery, which is seldom the
case, she walks off with him and he is always allowed to go and come
in both tribes.
Great feasting goes on among them at such times ; but really to
witness one of those trials is enough to make the flesh creep on ones
bones. Imagine a fine young man standing firm against a tree, know-
ing his fate and yet not so much as a nerve quivering, as he looks at
the spearsman with a still stern gaze, never allowing one muscle to be-
tray his feeling ; for if any cowardice should be shown, the chief or
some other of his tribe will run up to him and despatch him either with
a blow of their hatchets or with their club or waddy.
I have never seen a European meet death like a New Zealander ;
such heroism is worthy of better deeds : doubtless already the good
effect of missionary work is shown amongst them.
One virtue in a New Zealander is, that after receiving a favour he
never forgets it, and never thinks he has repaid it, always remaining
your friend. I have often had the chance of testing their friendship on
trying occasions and never found one act falsely. It is true that they
are given to dishonesty ; but as soon as they find out that it is wrong
they become ashamed of it. They will receive you into their huts and
give you the best they have, and if you stay long enough they will
teach you how to track the Kangaroo, and how to get honey, and their
mode of fishing ; in fact they will instruct you in all their ways and
means of getting food, which is what you want to know in that country
so formed by nature to support its own population. The rivers are
teeming with fish of every description, and there are kangaroos, and
opossums in abundance, so that you never need be in want in that
place.
We were not very long in completing our load of fine large tim-
ber much to our Captain’s satisfaction, for it was quite the setting up
of him. It cost him very little, only to feed a good many natives
sometimes and to make them a few presents, and when we lay too near
where they were assembled they w'ould always help us. But we could
not keep them long for they would soon be tired and off to the rvoods
again. Sometimes a score of them would stop with us for a day or two
and then go. Our Captain being well acquainted with their characters
always treated them with the greatest kindness and gave them anything
they took a fancy to if he could spare it; and he lost nothing by so
doing ; for they would go and get the sort of timber tljat the Captain


wanted most and which he would show them, he giving them some
mm and pipes, and tobacco the night before they started, and they
would make merry generally in a place a little clear of trees or bush.
This was the time to see them in their worst form. One or two
of us always went with them and perhaps we would be away for a
whole week together, but they always took care that we should be well
provided for during our stay with them. Indeed they would hunt or
fish for us even if they went without it themselves. But they always
returned with the best timber that they could find at a short distance
from the ship : never going far away because of the trouble of dragging
it down which is all the labour required. They will soon burn a road-
way, and destroy thousands of tons of fine timber in that manner V the
Captains who wanted a> cargo, only cared to have their own turn served
and allowed, and encouraged this wanton destruction.
We finished our loading of the timber and as it was in great de-
mand in Melbourne the Captain made a very good thing of it. We
were all very glad for him because he was a good man in every respect.
He now offered us the enormous wages of twenty five pounds a month
and excellent living if we would remain by the vessel. But no, though
I had promised my sister that I would not go up to the Diggings again,
the enticement of the place was too much for us, and MacDonald and I
shouldered our wallets and blankets once more and away for the Dig-
gings, but not before we had had a round of dissipation in Melbourne
spite of my poor sister’s warnings.
There were times even in the midst of our revels when my con-
science smote me and told me I was acting amiss ; however to the
Diggings we were determined to go. I wrote to tell my brother and
gister about it, but afterwards they moved to another place and I sent
them many letters which were never answered ; no unusual thing as
the post was then very imperfect.


CHAPTER XXXII.
“ The greatest deceit of all is the abuse of that glorious
truth, God is merciful. But He is just also, He is not all
mercy. His kindness which forgives does not destroy his
holiness which hates, his justice which condemns, or las
awful vengeance which punishes sin.”
Isaac Taylor,
A curious circumstance happened to us at that time as we were
bound up the country. You may have heard of the character I
am going to speak of as he was a noted ranger.
While we were packing up our blankets and kettle one afternoon,
on the road leading to the Black Forest, and just going to light our
pipes, we were surprised to see two horsemen right on the top of ns
before we perceived them : for we were talking and not thinking of
meeting anyone there, when they rode up to us with their pistols in
their hands; and pointing to us, sung out “if you offer to handle your
pistols you are dead men;” they saw that we had pistols in oui belts
which were the first things we bought at Melbourne before starting.
They dismounted, covering us all the time with their pistols and keep-
in,r a sharp look out on us. We however were nothing daunted for we
had no money of any amount to make us afraid of being robbed : we
stood stock still and began to banter them telling them that they had
missed their mark this time. They made us turn out every place
where it was likely that we should carry money, and all they found on
ns was about twelve pounds, which they said they would not dirt their
hands with. They had thought that we were coming from the Diggings
till they saw that all our things were new.
They asked us the news of Melbourne and if we had any drink to
•nvc them for they were mighty thirsty, we gave them all we had,
about a pint of wine : and they then asked us to go a little way with
them and they would give us some wine and meat. I did not like the
thought of accompanying them, but MacDonald consented and so we
went They had as beautiful horses as I ever saw, just like our Eng-
lish hunter's.
We had followed their lead for about two hours, when I remarked
to MacDonald that wo should not be able to find our way back again,
but one of them said we might make our minds easy on that score, as
he would see that we Were conducted safe out of his territory, as he
called it.


I assure you I felt anything but comfortable while in their com-
pany. At last we came to a very deep ravine ; it was frightful to
look down ; accustomed as we sailors are to great heights, yet it made
our heads dizzy. They had a passage through two solid rocks cut so
as to admit of only one man and a horse at a time ; and then we came
into a beautiful green valley where they let their horses run, and took
us along a very steep precipice; we had to clamber up sometimes on
all fours and sometimes helping one another.
Whether this was the proper road or no to their dwelling I never
found out, but it was a road that no one could surprise them in.
Here and there was a clear flat place where a dozen could stand and
almost hid defiance to a whole army.
When we were about three quarters of the way up the perpendicular
cliff for I can call it nothing else—there was a large overhanging rock
projecting far outside : I felt half afraid—l can fancy I see it now as
I write—and under that rock there was a long passage, whether form-
ed by nature or art I was rather too frightened to examine, and could
not shake off fear. I knew that we came there of our own accord and
I did not think they would be so bad as to murder us in cold blood,
never-the-less I could not at all feel easy until we were once more on
the open road, then man for man I did not care for any of them a
single straw.
After we went into the passage a little way it began to get very
small and still smaller, until at last it came to a solid rock ; then one
of them called out to some woman who came and opened a very small
place at the bottom of the rock and we could see a light shining through.
We had to get down on our hands and knees, and after our heads were
through the opening we had to fall down flat and crawl through. But
®hen we were inside, it paid for all the bad road ; there was a cavern
lit up by three very large chandeliers such as are used in theatres or
very large houses, which made it very warm ; and I could perceive
that there were very large pipes leading down from the roof of the cave
to give air. There were three women in there and two more men who
seemed to he laid up with sickness. There was a large store room full
of provisions and liquors.
After we were seated on some very rough sort of chairs—(for the
cave could not boast of much furniture except the chandeliers)—the
master or captain as he seemed to be, asked us what sort of liquor we


would like to drink ? We told him we were not particular; so he called
for wine and brandy, choosing to drink beer himself as he was very
thirsty : and when the spirits were put before us I could not drink
more than one wine glass of Sherry. I wished myself a thousand
miles away—for bad as I had been, I never yet could countenance a
thief of any description. Neither could I ever put up with a crimp
or anyone who gained their living by the sweat of another man’s brow.
But to continue—they all began to drink and presently there
came a fine dinner and supper together, for it was drawing late,
when they proposed to us to sleep there. I did not at all like the
proposal and nearly smashed MacDonald’s toe with the heel of my
boot, as a hint to him to decline ; he misunderstood me and con-
sented, so I had to stop too.
I never slept so badly in my life before or since ; for there
were men coming and going all that night, and the rattle of their
arms made me think that I was in some camp close to an enemy.
We lay, not on beds, for there were none, but on the Australian
moss strewn on the ground, covering ourselves with our own blan-
kets. When three more came in they struck up singing and made
such a miserable howl that I was glad when they fell off quite in-
toxicated and went to sleep.
Soon after we were aroused by the Captain of the gang as we
took him to be, and I have reason to believe that he was the fellow
they call Black Douglas, for I saw him twice afterwards at the
Diggings ; and this was the way in which he used to insinuate him-
self into the good graces of the miners by behaving kindly to them
when they had nothing for him to rob. But woe betide you it you
met him or any of his accomplices when you had your gold with
you ! He used to go about the gold fields, and was welcome in al-
most every tent, enquiring what they were doing, and so would
gain all the information he wanted, and lay his plans accordingly:
he always knew who was making the best of it, and set one or
other of his gang to watch all his actions ; thus they could pounce
down on any person who had plenty of gold at any time. The
police force was then very weak and these men carried on then-
nefarious trade with impunity.
After he had called us ( but he had no occasion to awake me
for I watched every transaction during the night) he ordered us
some coffee. The women had a large boiler ready with water both


night and day, and they soon made coffee for ns ; he then took us
to his store room and told us to supply ourselves with whatever
we wanted. We took a couple of legs of corned mutton and a small
piece of bacon, and filled our little bags with flour for there was no
bread, and took six bottles of wine from him. Indeed he pressed
ns to take more than we could rightly carry: “And now ” he said
“you will know me again when you happen to see me; and if I
should be in trouble you can assist me.” We promised that we
would if it should be in our power to do so, —* he added,
“are you ready to start and have you everything you want
for your journey?”—and he asked us which of the gold
fields we were going to ? We told him we did not know, but we
should strike for the one we were most likely to do anything at.
He told ns that the best diggings now was a place called Friar’s
Creek and that Jie would put us on the road for it. If we had a
mind to follow his directions we should go right and gain a good
distance by so doing; seeing no motive he could have for leading us
astray, we accepted his directions.
We took leave of the women, who were very inquisitive about
England, especially London ; they were botli Londoners, but they had
come out since we had,, so we could not tell them much.
Our host nqw took us quite a different direction from what we
came : this time it was all climbing and clambering over high rocks,
I do not know how they could find the road to that cave the second
time, for lam sure I never could. But probably we were taken
the most intricate way for fear we should ever afterwards want to
find the retreat.
At last we had sight of the clear sky after travelling for about
five hours through bush and forest and climbing great rocks ; some-
times the “captain” would mount the hush like a native, to get
into the right track, for he was very expert. Before he left he told
one of his men to bring his horse to some place that he did not
know : but he took us there for a halt. It was a regular natives’
place about fifteen miles from the cave and kept by a man and
woman in the lowest state of degradation. They were a disgrace to
white people; indeed I never saw a native of any country so
degraded.
* lie wan shortly afterwards taken I believe and suffered the penalty of
the law for his depredations.


The Captain’s horse being here, lie ordered something to eat
and drink, and we joined him.
Fifteen or twenty miles in England would he nothing, but in
that dense bush it was equal to fifty miles ; and as it was getting late
the Captain told us we might stop there for the night in safety:
this we refused and said we were not tired but would go a good
distance yet before night: and as he was going we thanked him for
showing us the right direction to the main road which we soon gained
after leaving that miserable pair.
In about two hours we came to a deserted farm house, but
there was smoke coming out of the chimney so we made for it in-
tending to stop for the night. Over the door was written in largo
letters
“ This house belongs unto James Sould
And I am gone to hunt for gold
And if none I can find
I’ll come and take the old house I left behind.’’
This made us smile and think the owner was a poet. We
went in and found there three more wanderers like ourselves. We
were all on the road again next morning by day-break and at last
arrived at Friar’s Creek, where we found not a fine town but a few
wooden sheds.
CHAPTER XXXIII.
“ But whatever the ship of the future may be,
What a ship that will be when ’tis seen 1
The ship of the past ( hear a voice from the sea 1)
Too often a coffin has been 1 ”
After wandering from place to place in the diggings we thought
the best thing we could do was to go to sea again—we shipped ac-
cordingly in a Yankee ship for Callao—from thence to Baltimore.
A private gentleman there had an iron vessel built in the shape of
a cigar and worked with a sort of a wheel in her stern.
By way of experiment he was going to bring her to England
and Prance and all over the continent to exhibit her, she was such
a curious model; I can liken her to nothing but the back of a dead
VI i ale floating, the middle being just above the water and the head
and tail below. When she was steaming there was nothing of her
to be seen but what they call the stump, something in the shape
of a proper steamboat’s funnel but not for the same use, this boat


burning her own smoke; there were steps to go up and down, for
it was the only place above water about twelve feet from the vessel.
In this funnel was the wheel to steer her by, and a little
above that was a cage for the look-out man. No vessel could ever
see her any distance, for there was nothing visible but this stump !
MacDonald and I shipped in her to go the rounds as helmsmen.
We only went one trial trip in the Bay for three days, when
we came back to get her lengthened, and so we were all discharg-
ed again with a month’s pay each. I was very glad of this, for
whilst we were in her we were half roasted ; when she came along-
side of the wharf we had planks and stanchions so contrived as to lay a
regular deck like any other vessel, and when not steaming she rose
considerably out of the water.
But we had quite enough of a vessel that would take a dive
at Baltimore and rise again when she got to Liverpool!
Whether she ever answered or not I cannot say, but I know
that the owner went to an enormous expense about her: what his
object could be in building such a craft is hard to tell unless it
was to elude the pursuit of meu of war. No sea could hurt her
for she went right under it, and if she was going sideways to the
sea, and a wave took her she could not roll over or capsize, for
her ballast was so put as never to shift, and so she always righted
herself again. She was called the Cigar, but we called her the
boiler; for anyone who went in her might put himself down for
both roasting and boiling : I never saw such an iron pot as she was
before or since.
After leaving her we shipped on board an Englishman bound
to Honduras for Mahogany, and a very hard time we had of it.


CHAPTER XXXIV.
“ Faint not then, God ever listeneth,
Answereth ’ere the cry is sent,
Whom He loveth those He chasteneth,
Taketh what He only lent;
For Himself our ripening hasteneth
By His sorest punishment.”
The Bay of Honduras is about as bad a place as an English
sailor can go to, for be has to swim his timber through a very
long surf, and should he be washed off from the log that he is on
if he cannot swim, he is in the greatest danger of being drowned.
Worst of all are the big sharks, in which the place abounds:
they will sometimes make a jump at you as you stand on your log
of mahogany, but you are generally aware of them, and if you
are always armed with a good boat hook, and keep a good look
out, you may avoid the danger.
We were at last loaded and were soon safe in Liverpool: I
felt a greater stranger now in the town that I belonged to than if
I had never been there, no one being left to welcome me home—and
surely I felt it. Oh that I had in my great sorrow proved the
power of prayer! If poor Jack when he is tempted to drown his
troubles in fiery draughts would ask the Saviour to stand by
him and deliver him, he would be comforted and he would not so
often be taken for a fool!
I shipped next on board a large ship bound for Kurehee at
the mouth of the river Indus, we were to carry out about a dozen
small steam boats and other large lighters expressly for that river
navigation. We had on board twelve engineers and thirty boiler-
makers. There was one young man on board this vessel who I
regret to say we persecuted because he was religious and said grace
at table ! he never joined in our revels and consequently was con-
sidered proud—it was proposed that we should give him a good
ducking to frighten him out of his religion—l am ashamed to say
that I joined in this disgraceful scene which might have ended much
worse even than it did, for happily the young man recovered from
the fever which followed his sudden immersion in the sea. Our Cap-
tain who was a God-fearing man was greatly displeased with us
when he heard of our conduct—and justly so indeed.
A better Captain or a better man I never saw on board ship:
indeed if anyone was taken sick he would not rest until he found
some remedy.


He used to have church regularly every Sunday and would
have no excuse for not attending : giving us every Saturday to wash
and clean everything so as to appear decent on the Sabbath; he ex-
pected no work to be done unless it was actually necessary. I
found that he always prospered more than those go-ahead people who
are continually driving. As an instance of this I will mention what
happened in the harbour.
A very fine ship called the Palmerston had a Captain who want-
ed to make a heavy bet with our Captain that he would beat him by
several days going home as his vessel was a superior sailor to our’s.
But our Captain said he would not make any bet, but if the Lord
would prosper him he would take every advantage in his power to get
to England as soon as possible. Now w r e started for home ten days
before the Palmerston, and off the Cape of Good Hope she overtook
us, and we kept company for several days together. But a gale of
wind coming on, the Palmerston lost her mainmast, whilst we never
lost a single rope yarn, and she had to put into the Cape to get a new
mast to carry her home, the accident happening not above two hun-
dred yards from us, and we proceeded on our voyage and beat her by
about a month. Was not the hand of God perceptible in this ?
On our arrival the Captain called us all aft, and asked us if we
would all meet him on board the Bethel the following Sunday, which
we all did, more out of respect to him than to the Almighty, Whom he
was going to thank for our deliverance and safe voyage. After church
was over the Captain advised us like a father, and tried to impress
on our minds the late accident, saying that we did not know the mo-
ment when we might be hurried into eternity, and the awfulness of
not being prepared. Some time after this I did the very thing I tried
to avoid, and entered the navy.


CHAPTER XXXV.
“ 0 Master, stay beside us,
Our hearts with wisdom store.
Be strength and grace supplied us
To grow for evermore.”
After we were paid off we all intended to wait for our old ship
and go in her once more to India, as the Captain had asked most of us
to sail with him again and we had agreed to wait while she was load-
ing. But meeting together at the rendezvous, eight of us in an un-
guarded moment entered our names for the bounty and then we were
hurried on board the guardship to pass the Doctor’s inspection ; to my
surprise MacDonald was refused by the Doctor. I now tried to retract
but it was too late, as I had passed before he went into the Doctor.
They gave ns the order for the bounty, and the contractor for the
clothing cashed all the bounty bills. I was given forty eight hours
leave and told to make an appearance either at the rendezvous or
on board the guard ship.
It was then I took leave of poor MacDonald—a painful parting,
for we were like brothers, neither of us had anything that we would
not part with for one another; our’s was a long companionship, so
many trials together and many hair breadth escapes. MacDonald
did not sail in our old ship, but married instead and took his wife
to Scotland; I stippose he has sailed out of that place for I have
written twice and had no answer. lam sure if he were to know
how I am situated he would strain every nerve to relieve me. But
I think something must have happened to him also ; a truer-hearted
poor fellow than MacDonald never breathed.
1 ivas now sent round to Plymouth there to await our draft
for the first ship fitting out.
We remained on board the guard ship nearly the whole winter
until about 300 of us were sent to join the “Princess Royal” then
fitting out for Admiral Smart to go in the Channel Fleet.
We were soon ready and came around to Plymouth where our
Admiral then was; he, I suppose did not like the ship or did not
think her smart enough, so we ran ashore in Plymouth Harbour
and then had the finest ship I believe in the British navy, the
“ Revenge.” I was in her until we came from the Baltic cruise with
the young Prince in the “St. George ” and until a heavy cold in my
eye obliged me to go to the Hospital in Portsmouth.


I came out quite cured as I thought, and was sent on board
“The Triton” where I caught afresh cold and had a relapse into
this deafness.
I was then invalided. I had a little money when I came home
from America and paid it to the Doctors until it was all gone. I
was pronounced incurable, but as I was getting better I was told that
Falmouth was the best place to get a ship. I travelled there having
no money and no place to go to and was soon ill again, after stopping
four days and nights in the boatman’s shed on the Quay, until a man
took me to Mr. Skinner who kindly sent me to a house that night,
and gave me supper : my eyes were beginning to glaze with hunger
and I could not beg. The next day Mr. Skinner gave me a ticket to
come into this Hospital.
And now ladies I wish to thank you for all your kindness—had
it not been for you I do not think I should have survived, and when
your visiting day came it was like balm to my soul—you may rest
assured that your good counsel shall never be forgotten by me.
Since this narrative has been written one of the ladies to whom
I am especially indebted, has been called away to Heaven—very
vividly near me does her kind presence often seem, urging me to
a more devoted faithfulness in the Master’s service; and with a
grateful thought of all her Christ-like ministries of mercy, the poor
sailors story finishes.
Written in pencil on sundry copy-looks during 1864 and 1865.




