

A SEEMON
PBEACHKU AT
ST. JAMES’ CHUKCH,
JANUARY 12th;
BEING THE DAY APPOINTED BY THE GOVERNMENT OP NEW
SOUTH WALES, FOR HUMILIATION AND PRAYER TO
ALMIGHTY GOD, FOR THE REMOVAL OF THE
CALAMITIES OCCASIONED BY THE LONG
CONTINUED DROUGHT.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
.Sgtoneg :
JOSEPH COOK AND CO., PRINTERS, 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OP NEW SOUTH WALES.
1866.




fei^jr(o(yls
THE
REV. CANON ALLWOOD, 8.A.,
Incumbent of St. James’ Chuboh,
And to those
Membees of his Congeeoation who eequested
The Publication of this Seemon,
Following Discouese is Dedicated,
By theie Sinceee Felend and Bishop, <
F. SYDNEY.




SERMON.
“ Humble yourselves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that
He may exalt you in due time." 1 Petee v. 6.
The consideration of Gron’s power and wisdom in ordering the
affairs of the world is one of the practical lessons forced upon
our attention at the present time. We owe it to Divine
revelation, that we are not now in as much ignorance of the
Being and Providence of Almighty Gron, as were the disciples of
the different schools of philosophy encountered by the Apostle
on Mars’ Hill. The declaration with which the sacred volume
opens, “In the beginning, GI-od created the heavens and the
earth,” contains a truth of which the wisest amongst the heathen
were ignorant, and it is to one of the natural deductions from
this truth that God now demands our prayerful consideration.
The language of the modern unbeliever is prophetically
recorded by St. Peter, “ all things continue as they were from
the beginning of the creation.” In the phraseology now current
“ a law was impressed upon them which they have ever since
retained ; the effects which we behold, follow from causes which
act uniformly:” and thus God is excluded from any interferfence
with the course of that world which He has created.
To this practical Atheism we are all prone. The faith which
acknowledges “ that God is, and is a rewarder of them that
diligently seek Him,” is a grace which requires the trials of adver-
sity and distress, to call it forth into full and lively exercise.
So long as all things prosper around us, and success crowns
the labours of the husbandman, and seed-time and harvest and
summer and winter follow in unbroken order, we receive these
temporal mercies as though they were ours by an unchangeable
law; the Giver is forgotten in His gifts, and it becomes neces-
sary to recall us to the consciousness of our dependence upon


Him, by the withdrawal of His bounty. The lesson He would
impress upon us by this treatment is, that if under the conscious-
ness of our transgressions and of our dependence upon Him, we
humble ourselves before Him, He will exalt us in due time. If,
like Nineveh at the preaching of Jonah, or Ahab, under the
rebuke of Elijah, we repent of our transgressions and turn to
Him that smiteth us. He will not bring the evil upon us, but will
turn away from His fierce anger, that we perish not.
In my text, by “ the mighty hand of God,” we understand
His judgments.
“ Thou hast a mighty arm, strong is Thy hand and high is
Thy right hand ” says the Psalmist, speaking of Him who brought
Israel out of Egypt “by His mighty power and by His out-
stretched arm.” The judgments which fell upon the Egyptians
are ascribed by the bafiled magicians to “ the finger of God.”
“ This,” said they to Pharaoh, “is the finger of God.” And
when the King and all his host “ sank as lead in the mighty
waters,” thus sang Moses and the children of Israel, “ Thy right
hand, 0 Lord, is become glorious in power; Thy right hand, 0
Lord, hath dashed in pieces the enemy.” This hand of the Lord
awakes to judgment when a sufficient came arises. It is thus
invoked by the Prophet Isaiah, “ Awake, awake, put on strength,
O arm of the Lord; awake as in the ancient days in the genera-
tions of old. Art Thou not it which hath cut Rahab, (Egypt) and
wounded the dragon,” (the crocodile of the Nile) ?
The Lord awoke to judgment upon the old world, when He
opened the windows of heaven, and caused the fountains of the
great deep to be broken up, and brought destruction upon all
mankind, save Noah and his family preserved in the ark. When
“ the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah was great, and their sin was
very grievous,” the Lord awoke to the judgment He had
commanded, and “ rained upon the cities of the plain brimstone
and fire from the Lord out of heaven, and overthrew those cities
and all the plain and all the inhabitants of the cities and that
which grew upon the ground.”
These judgments are directed against the sins of a nation.
“ When the land sins against Him by trespassing grievously, then
will He stretch out his hand upon it, and will send His four sore
judgments, the sword and the famine and the noisome beast and
the pestilence;” and again, of one of these He saith, “He


turnetli rivers into a wilderness and the watersprings into dry
ground, a fruitful land into barrenness for the of the
people that dwell therein''
This came to pass in Israel in the days of Ahab,' who did
more to provoke the Lord Gron of Israel to anger than all the
Kings of Israel that were before him. The mighty hand
of Gron stayed the course of nature. The prophet, acting
under the direction of Him whom he invokes, announces
that the heavens shall not give rain nor shall dew fall
upon the ground. “As the Lord God of Israel liveth, before
whom I stand, there shall not be dew nor rain these years but
according to my word.” Hath not My hand made all these
things, saith the Lord ? Eain and wind fulfil His word ; at His
command they come, at His bidding they depart. And thus
according to the word of Elijah it came to pass, the brooks and
all fountains of water dried up, because there was no rain in the
land ; and the perplexed monarch must needs divide the country
with the governor of his house, “ if peradventure they may find
grass to save the horses and mules alive.”
In this history we have the scheme of Divine providence
disclosed to us, —we see the movements of the hand which guides
the world. By faith Elijah, a man of like passions with our-
selves, having no other qualifications than such as any of us may
obtain, closed the heavens against sinful idolatrous Israel, and
only upon their repentance and recognition of the Lord as their
God, (“ the Lord He is the God, the Lord He is the God ”) did
the heavens give rain and the earth brought forth her fruit.
These judgments are occasionally directed against particular
transgressions.
“ I have withdrawn rain from you, saith the Lord, because
you have oppressed the poor and crushed the needy. And again,
“ The Lord hath a controversy with the inhabitants of the land,
because there is no truth nor mercy nor knowledge of God in
the land. By swearing and lying and killing and stealing and
committing adultery, they break out and blood toucheth blood.
Therefore shall the land mourn, and every one that dwelleth
therein shall languish with the beasts of the field, and with the fowls
of heaven; yea, the fishes of the sea also shall be taken away.
The.judgment follows the sin. There is a controversy with the
inhabitant.'’ of the land; they suffer from drought and famine by


reason of their many transgressions, their lying and swearing
and stealing and committing adultery.
Now let it be observed that the character of G-on and the
principles of Divine government remain the same. His holiness.
His truth, His righteousness are the same; “ from everlasting to
everlasting Thou art God.”
We also stand in the same relation to God as the Hebrews
did. We are a people to whom His will has been revealed, by
whom His laws are known, who enjoy the privileges of Divine
ordinances, and to whom He can say as to Israel of old, “ You
only (or chiefly) have I known of all the families of the earth,
therefore will I punish you for all your iniquities.”
There is nothing in the introduction of Christianity, which
makes the rule of God’s dealings with a nation that has the
knowledge of His laws, different from that which he adopted in
His treatment of Israel.
The individual is brought to his account at the day of
account, but nations are judged in this life. An individual may
be wicked, and yet prosper ; or may fear God, and be persecuted,
for righteousness sake. The day of j udgment will make these
crooked things straight. But a nation is not brought before that
tribunal. Its life is a collective one, belongs to the present time,
and is permanent. The life of a nation is like the river which
has been flowing for ages, and yet is still the same; it abides and
receives its good or evil in this present world. A nation can only
he punished or rewarded here. Temporal blessings, which may be
a temptation and a snare to individuals, are commonly the marks
of Divine favour to a community; while losses, sufferings,
and privations, which are frequently the means of conveying
blessings to the soul of the Christian, are tokens of the Almighty’s
displeasure against a nation that has forgotten Him.
Under this rule of the Divine government, we, as a people,
have much to apprehend. There is iniquity and transgression
sufficient to account for any temporal judgments which may
come upon this land. The indictment which God draws up
against Israel is to the letter true of us. Lot us read it again.
O O
“ There is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land.
By swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and committing
adultery, they break out, and blood toucheth blood.” The blood


was poured out so continuously, and in sucli torrents, that it
flowed on until stream met stream, and formed one wide inunda-
tion of blood.
The blood of the aboriginal has flowed and is flowing con-
tinuously. He is shot down with as little compunction as a
beast of prey. This stream is met by another. Deeds of
violence and bloodshed have made this country a bye-word and
reproach throughout the world.
I fear that the remainder of the description is equally
applicable to us.
The moral sense is blunted and the moral standard low.
“There is no truth” —by “ swearing, and lying” the land
mourneth. There is a grievous want of truthfulness in this
country; the mouth that speaketh blasphemous things, and the
lying lip, are too common. All who have had to do with our
courts of law, and the education of the young, know by painful
experience how little value is set upon veracity, and what license
is given to the tongue.
There is a great want of “ mercy ” in the relations of
employer and employed. In the principal occupations of this
Colony, selfishness is at the bottom of all engagements, and the
pleasant sight of mutual interests recognized and cared for is
rarely seen. Where is the “ knowledge of Gron ”in the interior
of this country ? Is it likely to be found amidst people destitute
of the ordinances of religion, in districts where no schools are
planted, or where the instruction supplies no training in religious
truth, and where provision is not made for the Sunday School ?
And whoever is to bo blamed for this state of things,—the
Legislature which does not recognise the obligation of Grovernment
to maintain religious ordinances, or the Church which neglects
her duty, or the people who will not support their ministers, —
the sin and the consequences of the sin remain, “ There is no
knowledge of GI-od in the land,” the “ people are destroyed for
lack of knowledge.”
“ Killing, and stealing ” are not peculiar to any country, but
our own has obtained an unhappy notoriety for these crimes.
And does not the “ adulterer ” too often pass through
society unrebuked and unabashed ? The offence which God has
specially marked out for vengeance, which He will judge, is


“whoremongers and adulterers Gron will judgethe scandal of
a few days is soon condoned, and the violator of a Divine law is
thus encouraged to repeat his crime.
What a mournful scene has been disclosed by the recent
proceedings in the case of an alleged murder!
It is not merely that unbridled passions have led to deeds of
violence, but that the moral sense of a portion of the community
appears to have been so blunted, that persons more than suspected
of adultery were not excluded from the society of their friends ;
and that a youth, brought up in one of our Sunday Schools, was
without difficulty converted into an accomplice, in what he could
hardly doubt was intended to be murder.
This is a fragment of our social history which it is terrible
to contemplate.
From what causes does it come to pass that the moral sense
of an apparently respectable portion of society should be so
thoroughly perverted ? Ido not think that we can be at any loss
for one of those causes. The great practical teacher of a con-
siderable portion of the population of Sydney is the stage, and
whatever may be said on its behalf by its defenders, as a school
of morality the theatre is the very last place to which an anxious
parent would send his child, or to which an employer would
desire that his servants should resort.
What are the lessons to be learned from such scandalous
exhibitions as “ Lucrezia Borgia,” the “ Traviata,” or that parody
upon religion,'which seems to be such a favourite with a portion
of the Sydney public, “ The Serious Family ? ”
The celebrated journal and letters, with which the columns
of our newspapers have been filled, are but the natural produc-
tions of such a soil, and he who, thoughtlessly perhaps, was ready
to assist in a projected murder, drew his inspiration from the
theatre in which he had occasionally performed.
Any one who knows the condition of the juvenile population,
and, I will add, of the female population, or who has read
the evidence taken upon those subjects, must tremble for the
future of a country in which such awful immoralities abound.
Account for it as we may, from the early foundation of the
Colony, from the accumulation of the vices of many nations,
from the neglect of the authorities in State or Church, thus it is ;


I have it on the testimony of one who has known the worst
parts of England’s great towns, that never has vice appeared in
more aggravated forms than in this City of Sydney.
It is no doubt dangerous to attempt to interpret the
judgments of God, to apply them to particular cases, or
to connect them with special forms of sin; but we cannot shut
our eyes to the fact that this country is sulFering, and suffering in
every direction; that in much of what constitutes the prosperity
of the country we are heavily afflicted; that the pictures drawn
by the Prophet Joel are easily paralelled here. “ The beasts of
the field cry unto Thee, O Lord.” “ The rivers of waters are
dried up, and the fire hath devoured the pastures of the wilder-
ness.” “ The herds of cattle are perplexed because they have no
pasture, yea the flocks of sheep are made desolate.”
The privations, losses, and sufferings are severe, life is sacri-
ficed, the resources of the country are crippled, confidence is
wanting, employment cannot be obtained, and persons heretofore
in independent circumstances are reduced to poverty and ruin.
This state of things is clearly traceable to causes over which we
have no control. Floods and drought, rust and disease, do not
recognize any human authority; they are from the hand of God ;
and it is our wisdom, and may be our deliverance, that we recognize
the hand which smites us, and humble ourselves under its
righteous and irresistible chastening.
Eegarded as the expression of the country’s mind, there is
much to commend in the action of the Government on this
occasion. The proclamation and other endeavours made to secure
the observance of the day, must command the sympathy aud
gratitude of all who believe that the Lord hears and answers
prayer.
We are assembled to acknowledge our offences, and bow
before the Almighty in confession and humiliation, and our
encouragement is this, that when we draw nigh to God with such
humiliation of ourselves before Him, He will draw nigh to us,
and will lift us up. “ When the heaven is shut up and there is
no rain, because they have sinned against Thee, yet if they pray
towards this place, and confess Thy name, and turn from their sin,
then hear, and forgive, and send rain upon the land.” Such is the
believing prayer of Solomon. “ And it shall come to pass in that
day, I will hear, saith the Lord, I will hear the heavens ; and they
11


shall hear the earth; aud the earth shall hear the corn and the
wine and the oil; and they shall hear Jezreel.” “ Nature is closed
and refuses her offices to those who rebel against G-on.” The
people suffer and pray. The parched ground with its gaping
clefts seems to join m the cry which is uttered by the corn, the
wine, and the oil. The earth can yield no increase until the
heavens pour down their blessing, and these were still fast closed
by the people’s sin ; but, moved themselves by the necessities of
the lower world, they offer their petitions to the Lord of heaven
and earth. When all parts of creation thus unite their suppli-
cations, the will of G-od touches the whole chain of secondary
causes, and accomplishes that for which Jezreel has prayed.
And so again, with reference to the memorable instance of Elias,
St. James teaches us that the effectual fervent prayer of a
righteous man availeth much. It shuts and opens heaven.
Here then is our encouragement and justification in the
services of this day. He who humbles us waits to be gracious,
“ that He may exalt us in due time,” not in our fancied time, but
in His wisely appointed time. When we have willingly accepted
the chastening, and have not only been humbled by Him, but
have humbled ourselves under His mighty hand, then the weight
is removed, and we are lifted up by His gracious care. The rod
falls quickly from the Father’s hand, when the child is subdued
to humble acceptance of the correction.
This subject may be applied to our spiritual condition. The
true remedy for a nation’s ills, and that which alone can reach to
the root of all our evils, is the increase of real godliness. The
wilderness will become a fruitful field, when the Spirit is poured
upon us from on high, when, in answer to fervent, heartfelt
prayer, the word of God becomes a divine seed sown in the
hearts of men, and bringing forth fruit unto eternal life. During
the present week, good men in every part of the world are seek-
ing spiritual blessings by fervent prayer, and our own day of
special humiliation is linked on to a chain of supplications
encompassing the globe.
My brethren, while thus engaged with others in seeking
blessings for this country, or for the world at large, let me remind
you that national reformation cannot be, without the increase of
personal religion.


Is theu the work of pleasing and serving a heavenly Master,
that which engages your first and best attention? Are you
humbling yourself, by putting away the evil passion, the sinful
temper, the worldly desire ? Are you mortifying the pride and
vanity of your heart ? Are you following the meekness and
gentleness and love of the Saviour? Have you forgiven the
offences which men have committed against you, and do you pray
for them who despitefully use you or reproach you ? Do you lay
yourself out to do good as you have time aud opportunity and
influence ? What place has pure and undefiled religion in your
life ? Do you visit the fatherless and the widow in their afflic-
tions, and keep yourself unspotted from the world ? In the great
day, will the Saviour be able to say to you, “ Inasmuch as ye have
done it unto one of the least of these my brethren ye have done
it unto me.”
Again, what is the source from which you seek strength to
do the will of Q-od ?
Have you found Christ, and is He made unto you wisdom,
righteousness, and strength ? and are you found in Him not
having your own righteousness but His ? Tour inner life, that
which you live in your thoughts, your prayers, your communion
with Hod, of what nature is it ? Is it a life of dependence upon
Christ, of trust in Him, of rest in Him, and joy in Him ?
By what means do you seek strength ? The food of the
soul is the word of GtOd, the breath of the soul is prayer, the
grace supplied to the soul is by the operation of the Holy Spirit,
and what place has this Divine person in your religious life ?
He is the Giver of life. Has He given life to you ? Do you
live in the Spirit, walk in the Spirit, and by the Spirit mortify
the deeds of the body, and seek Him as the Spirit of adoption
bearing witness that you are truly a child of God ?
My dear brethren, these are the great blessings which God
has to bestow. A nation’s outward life may consist in temporal
prosperity, but you, for yourselves, for your own souls, seek first
the kingdom of God and the righteousness thereof, and trust
that all needful temporal good will be added thereto. So it
follows after my text “ Humble yourselves, casting all your care
upon Him, for He careth for you.”
True happiness is not to be found in any thing less than in
delighting in the law of the Lord, and in the Lord whom the


law reveals, the blessed and only Bon of Goo. In Him you will
lind sources of enjoyment and peace, of which the world knows
nothing; your soul shall be like the “ tree that spreadeth out
her roots by the river, and shall not see when heat cometh, but
her leaf shall be green, and shall not be careful in the year of
drought, or cease from yielding fruit.”
Beloved brethren, search and try yourselves, and ask that
the Lord would try you, that you may know what manner of
persons you are, and may resolve to frame yonr lives according
to that royal law, “ Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself.”
Bring your own sins, as well as the sins of the people, before
God in the confession and humiliation of this day ; aim at the
reformation of your own life, while you ask that the spirit of true
repentance may be poured out upon the land. Let some special
acts of mercy towards the poor and afflicted mark this day,
remembering that the fast which the Lord hath chosen consists
in dealing “ thy bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the
poor that are cast out to thy house, when thou seest the naked
that thou cover him, and hide not thyself from thine own flesh.”
In these acts of humiliation, prayer, and mercy will the service
of this day be complete, and the desired relief be found. Let it
be our aim, that our whole life may be such a service of our
Divine Eedeemer, that in humble submission to His guiding and
correcting hand, we may follow the blessed steps of His most
holy life, and wait for that exaltation which He will give to all
who serve Him, and look for His appearing and kingdom.


1508
00074317


■ -JAFp
f ■' - •■ ■>-. F
f Iolo3
A-
*
