

A SERMON-
PREACHED IN ST. PETER’S, RICHMOND,
ON THE LIFE AND CHARACTER OF
JArs. JJ ILLIA/VL j3owy\A.AlS[
Upfcr XJiistt I|ouotn{ioii 2lst, 1885,
AGED 87 YEARS,
BY THE REV. DR. WOOLLS,
ALSO THE CONCLUDING REMARKS OF A SERMON PREACHED ON THE
SAME SUBJECT IN
THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH, RICHMOND,
THE REV. DR. CAMERON.
Sydney;
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 490, KENT STREET,
Close to St. Andrew's Cathedral.
1885.




fAWf fHi
SBBMON.
“ She was of a great age.”—Luke ii. part of 3(5 verse.
There is something 1 very venerable in an aged man or in an
aged woman, who is walking in the ways of righteousness.
“ The hoary head,” says the wise man, “ is a crown of glory, if it
be found in the way of righteousness; ” (Prov. xvi. 31) and he
adds, “ the glory of young men is their strength, but the beauty
of old men is the grey head.” (xx. 29.) Long before the days of
Solomon, however, Moses, the greatest of law-givers, had taught
the Israelites to pay due respect to old age. “Thou shalt rise
up before the hoary head, and honour the face of the old man.”
(Lev. xix 32). Nor was the habit of honouring the hoary head
foreign to the religion of the Patriarchs, for when Jacob was
poor, old, blind, and decrepit, Joseph bowed himself with his
face to the earth before his venerable father. (Gen. xlviii. 12).
He treated him with marks of profound respect. He introduced
him to the presence of royalty. Nay when his spirit had fled to
the regions of the blest, “he fell upon his father’s face and
wept upon him, and kissed his lifeless corpse.” (Gen. 1. 1). The
heathen world, too, ere yet it had reached that climax of iniquity
which is denounced by St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans,
was not unmindful of the respect due to age. For Herodotus,
the Father of History, in alluding to the customs of the ancient
Egyptians, says, “If a young person meet his senior, he
instantly turns aside to make way for him : if an aged person
enter an apartment, the youth always rise from their seats.”
(Euterp. c. 80.) The voice of nature, therefore, as well as the
words of inspiration, teaches us the same truth, and men, as they
behold the venerable relics of all that was once great, noble, or
refined —standing as it were, on the confines of the two worlds,
and longing for the realities of that which is as yet known to
them only by faith —cannot but reverence the hoary head of the
pious and devout. Now the person who is brought before us in
the text, was one of those who from such considerations demand
our respect. Many years have passed away and many earthly
dynasties have been scattered to the winds, since the venerable
woman, Anna a prophetess, tottering under the infirmities of age
and the accumulated sufferings of more than four-score years,


was seen bending her way through the Courts of God’s House in
Jerusalem ; and yet, in imagination, she still appears before the
mind’s eye. Whenever we read the brief record of her life, we
see, as it were in the vision of the past, the neat and simple dress,
the modest yet cheerful expression, and the attenuated form of
the aged woman. She is still in the world, but she is not of the
world. She moves amidst that which is material; but filled with
holy peace and joy, she seems already to anticipate the company
of saints and angels, and to realise the period when, being
released from the burden of the flesh, she may mingle in those
scenes for which she has been long preparing. The name of
this excellent woman is a Hebrew word signifying “Grace,”
and in her case most appropriate, for she was, indeed, highly
gifted with the grace of God, and in favour with God and man.
She was designated “ a prophetess.” We are not to understand
by this term that she had the gift of prophecy in the same sense
that the prophets of old possessed it. She was, indeed, endued
with the charisma or spiritual gift of uttering Divine Eevelations,
not probably for the purpose of foretelling future events, but for
that of filling her with such “an extensive knowledge and deep
experience of Divine things that rendered her capable of instruct-
ing others,” and of proclaiming, in the spirit of meekness and
lowliness, the Saviour of a lost world. In the New Testament
there is a marked difference been Teachers and Prophets: “ the
former speaking in a calm, collected, didactic discourse; whilst
the latter spoke more from the impulse of sudden inspiration, or
from the light of a sudden revelation at the moment.” The
prophet Joel, (ii. 28) had foretold, as one of the signs of the
Messiah’s coming, “Your daughters shall prophesy.” Anna,
therefore, as a highly gifted daughter in Israel, prophesied of
Christ, and long after she had been called to her rest, the four
daughters of Philip the Evangelist (Acts xxi. 9.) exercised a
similar gift. This distinction between prophesying and teaching
may serve to explain the words of St. Paul, “ I suffer not a
woman to teach.” (1 Tim. ii 12.) Those who had the gift of
prophecy might use it for the edification of the Church, but
women were not to take upon themselves the duties of ordinary
teachers and pastors. Anna, then, in the sense indicated, was
a prophetess, the daughter of Phanuel of the tribe of Asher.
The name Phanuel, which signifies “ the face or the presence of
God,” may perhaps be indicative of the piety which dwelt in him,
and,' by the grace of God, descended on a dear and only daughter.
We know nothing of this for certainty, but as the faith of Lois
and Eunice (2 Tim. i. 5) shone conspicuously in the heart of the
dearly beloved Timothy, so also Phanuel, as a pious and devoted
father, may have lived to see in the eminent piety of his daughter
Anna the effects of his prayers and training. It is a great and


glorious privilege to have virtuous and exemplary parents. They
may not, indeed, always see their own good qualities reproduced
in their children, but I believe, speaking generally, that if
children are trained by their parents in the way they should go,
they will not depart from it when they grow up. There is some-
thing indelible in youthful impressions. They follow us from
infancy to the grave, and when we pass through the valley of
the shadow of death, they comfort, or fill with horror, the
departing soul on the confines of eternity. The father of Anna
belonged to one of the lost tribes of the House of Israel, viz.,
that of Asher. It would appear from 2 Chron. xxx. 11, that
some of this tribe humbled themselves before God, repented of
their idolatry and revolt, and returned to Jerusalem in the days
of good Eezekiah. Whilst part of the Israelites laughed
kiah’s messengers to scorn, treated with contempt his invitation
to the Passover, and continued in wilful disobedience of Grod and
the King, some of the Asherites joined the people of Grod and
observed His laws. Anna’s family, therefore, was one of high
antiquity, probably a distinguished one in Jerusalem. But
proud as men are to be descended from the great and noble, it
was not her good family or the brilliant deeds of her ancestors,
but her very exemplary piety which entitled her to honourable
mention in the sacred records. At the time of our Lord’s birth,
Anna was a widow of great age. She had had sore troubles in
her day. Married in the bloom of youth and surrounded
probably by those easy circumstances which cause the wheels of
life to move cheerfully along, she passed her time as a loving
and devoted wife, secure of the affections of her husband and
longing to become a mother in Israel. This state of happiness,
however, was but of short duration. Seven years of connubial
felicity had scarcely passed away ere her husband was taken
from her. She became a lonely and desolate widow, and hence-
forth the endearments of love, the comforts of worldly ease, and
the prospect of social enjoyment became only “ green spots in
memory’s waste.” But she saw the hand of God in what had
befallen her. She recognised in the sad bereavement a call to
repentance, faith, and love, and as the impressions of early piety
revived within her, she devoted all her energies to promote the
glory of God, and the benefit of her fellow-creatures, and
henceforth to her 84th year (or, as some understand the
original, to a longer period, Pev. Vers ) she lived above the things
of time and sense. She lived not in pleasure or delicately
in a state of spiritual death. She was a widow indeed. She
trusted in God and continued in supplications and prayers night
and clay, doing such acts of charity and kindness as God placed
in her power. She departed not from the Temple, and she
served God with fastings and prayers. By the phrase departed


not from the Temple, we may understand that she regularly
attended divine service there at nine o’clock in the morning and
three in the afternoon. It is said that she served God with
fastings and prayers. There were certain days appointed amongst
the Jews for such exercises, and these she kept, not as the
Pharisees for idle ostentation, but from motives of piety. She
did not make a boast of her abstinence. It was a matter
between herself and her God. Some persons, perhaps, thought
that Anna was too strict in her conduct. Why did she not marry
again, as many others did ? Why did she give herself so nuich
trouble in attending the Temple service ? Or why did she deny
herself the innocent enjoyments of life? Those who said or
thought such things, knew very little of Anna’s spirit or of
Anna’s God. Being a prophetess, and knowing that the coming
of the long promised Messiah was nigh at hand, she b'ke good
old Simeon, desired to see Him, to point Him out to her country-
men, and then to depart in peace. And what she so earnestly
desired—nay what had been the object of her life—was granted
to her. The child Jesus had already been received into the
Jewish Church, and named in accordance with the divine com-
mand. All things had been accomplished as ordained by the
Law. And now that the forty days prescribed had passed
away, the Mother of Jesus brought Him to the Temple to present
Him to the Lord and to make the customary offerings. Good old
Simeon coming by the spirit into the Temple, recognised the
Lord’s Christ, took the sacred infant in his arms, and sang his
Nunc Dimittis. Whilst yet in the act of blessing the Eedeemer,
and singing his departing and triumphant song, the aged Anna,
moved no doubt by the spirit of God, came also into the Temple.
She devoutly gave thanks to the Lord that her life had been
spared to see the Saviour of the world, that God in His mercy
had devised a plan whereby sinners might be reconciled to Him,
and that that reign of peace and good will had been commenced
on earth which should have no end. Happy, venerable, highly
gifted woman ! She saw the consummation of her wishes. She
felt in a high degree the influences of the Divine Spirit. She
had seen the fulfilment of Prophecy. And what remained for
her to do during the few days or months she had to live ? Her
heart was too full for her to be silent; and therefore, she spoke
of Jesus to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem.
The curtain now falls on the history of Anna. But as she had
lived the life of the righteous, she died the death of the righteous ;
and after the lapse of eighteen centuries, she still speaks to
us from the land of spirits by the record of her faith and patience,
by the innocency of her life, and by her desire to glorify her Lord
and Saviour. The life of this excellent woman forms a suitable
introduction to the life and character of one who has recently


passed away from us; for although living in very different times
and under very different circumstances, she too as a widow of more
than four score years did what she could to serve Giod in her day and
generation, and by her deeds to perpetuate the preaching of the
Gospel in the town wherein she had resided so many years. Mrs.
William Bowman resembled in some respects the venerable
Anna. Though not endued with the gift of prophecy, nor able
to serve God with fastings and prayers night and day in the
Temple, she was, like Anna, a widow of great age, having
passed by many years the period usually allotted to humanity,
living a life of innocence and simplicity, and looking for redemp-
tion by the Messiah. Eeligion, true religion, is substantially
the same under every dispensation. Jesus Christ is the same
yesterday, to-day, and for ever, and as the saints of old looked
forward with pleasing anticipation to the first coming of Christ
and the forgiveness of sin through Him, so Christians now-a-
days, in proportion to the grace that is in them, realise by faith
the second coming of their Lord, and the extension of a spiritual
kingdom which is to have no end. They, too, in their day and
generation speak of His glorious work, and whilst they humbly
hope that for the sake of the stupendous sacrifice which He
offered on the Cross, their sins are pardoned, they desire by
their walk, and conversation to bring others within the same
sacred influence. Our departed friend had for many years
manifested the deepest interest in all that was lovely and of good
report. Brought up in England as a consistent member of the
Church wEich she loved, her arrival in this colony in 1838 may
be regarded as a blessing to the community amongst which she
•came to settle. During her late husband’s life, that is, until the
year 1874, the principles which she had imbibed in early life
characterised her conduct, and as the wife of one who took part
in the legislation of the colony, she sustained her position in life
with the good will of all, and contributed in every way to the
comfort and advantage of her husband. Her piety towards God
was marked by her devotion to all the ordinances of the Church.
In the days to which I refer, my worthy predecessor, the Eev.
John Elder, was incumbent of this parish and rural Dean of
Eichmond, and influenced no doubt by the example and pre-
cepts of that faithful minister of Christ, she was not only regular
in her attendance at the public worship of Almighty God and
the celebration of the Lord’s Supper, but she maintained, as an
example to her household and all around her, the due recogni-
tion of family prayer. Actions are more expressive than words,
and, therefore, whilst paying attention to the external acts of
worship, her conduct seemed to say with the psalmist, “I was
glad when they said unto me, ‘ Let us go into the house of the
Lord.’ ” (Ps. cxxii. 1) “I am a companion of all them that fear
7


Thee, and of them that keep Thy precepts.” (Ps. cxix. 63 v.)
“ Evening and morning * * will I pray and cry aloud, and
He shall hear my voice.” (Ps. Iv. 17 v. ) She spoke, then, by
her actions to those amongst whom she dwelt, and whilst induc-
ing others by her example to walk in the ordinances of the Lord
blameless, she felt in her own heart the comfort of doing what
she considered her duty and her privilege. When in 1873, State-
aid ceased to be given to this parish, she manifested a deep
interest in securing for St. Peter’s Church the due performance
of divine worship, and contributed from that date the sum
of £2O per annum towards the Clergymen’s Stipend,
the payment of which sum has been continued to the present
time. I had several conversations with her on the subject of
endowments, and in the parochial report of 1875, I requested the
Committee to adopt the following note : —“ Whilst referring to
the subject of endowunent, it may be well to mention that a few
years since the late Mrs. Parkinson left the sum of £SO to form
the nucleus of an Endowment Fund for this parish. That sum
is now lying at interest in the Bank of New South Wales, and
should other persons imitate the example of that excellent lady,
a sufficient capital may be gradually accumulated for the pur-
pose of yielding a small income to some future incumbent. Now
that State-aid has passed away, and no further assistance can be
expected from societies in England, it may be advisable to con-
sider the propriety of securing an increase of the present endow-
ment. In seasons of comparative plenty, there should be no
difficulty in collecting enough to liquidate the ordinary expenses
of the Church, the stipend of the minister, and any liabilities for
keeping in proper repair the Church, parsonage, and school-
master’s residence. If, however, unfavourable seasons should
occur, and property should be exposed to the influence of floods
or drought, circumstances may arise whereby the affairs of the
Church might be seriously affected. Hence arises the great
utility of raising an Endowment Fund to secure an unfailing
source of income. It may not be possible for years to come to
raise a large sum for Church purposes in this parish, but if only
£IOO, or even £SO per annum, came from such a source, it would
strengthen the hands of the minister and afford relief to the
parishioners. At all events, the subject is one of great import-
ance to the Church, and, therefore, worthy of consideration.”
Mrs. Bowman evidently entered into the project, and in the course
of the following year she gave me £2OO to add to the Endow-
ment Fund, and it was in reference to that gift that the Com-
mittee of the Parochial Association introduced the following
paragraph in the Eeport for 1876:—“Your Committee would
remark, in reference to the Endowment Fund of St. Peter’s, that
the amount is now £250, £2OO having been given by Mrs. William


Bowman, and £SO bequeathed by the late Mrs. Parkinson.
The interest arising from the Endowment has been placed to the
credit of the Church Funds for last year.” Since the publica-
tion of that Report, Miss Jane Bowman and the late Mr. Abra-
ham Cornwell have each given £SO to the Fund, so that the
amount now at interest is £350. By the will of Mrs. Bowman,
however, the Fund will be considerably augmented, for I am
informed that arrangements have been made by her whereby in
the course of a few years her contributions to the Endowment
Fund of this parish will amount to £IOOO. I need scarcely add
that this munificent act will realise the hopes which I expressed
in 1875, and tend materially to promote the interests of the
Church. It would be easy for me to refer to other acts of liber-
ality whereby the Church received assistance from our departed
friend, such for instance as her contributions towards paying off
the debt on the Church, the erection of the new schoolroom,
the renewal of the burial - ground fence, and other matters,
by which, in conjunction with some friends of the
Church, the parish was carried over the difficulties
of its transition state, and made a fair start under Voluntaryism.
Our friend’s liberality, however, was of an expansive character.
It was not limited simply to her own Church or to the imme-
diate neighbourhood in which she resided, for I know from
cheques which from time to time I forwarded for her to different
parts of the colony that her sympathies were very extensive;
that in the building of many a church and parsonage she kindly
participated ; and that, in her contributions to the Bible and
Church Societies, the Clergy Daughters’ School, and kindred
institutions, she failed not. Many persons may say, that, in
these matters, she did only what was the duty of one possessed
of means. I admit that it is the duty of the rich to support the
cause of religion by contribution and endowment. But when we
see so many of those who abound in worldly goods glorying in
the extension of their properties, in the building for themselvea
a great name for social or political results, or in the enjoyment
of the pomps and vanities of the world, shall we not appreciate
the conduct of one who denied herself many luxuries in order
that she might give of her substance to the Lord ? Of our
friend’s personal piety and goodness, I entertain no doubt.
Privileged as I was to minister to her in private, when from
increasing infirmities she was unable to attend the public
services of the Church, I had many opportunities of seeing the
faith that dwelt in her, the simple trust that she had in the
merits of her Saviour, her fervent love for the promises of Holy
Scripture, her readiness in referring to passages which had long
been impressed on her memory, and the well grounded hope she
had of glory, honour, and immortality. As the righteous have


hope in their death, so our aged friend had hope in hers ; and
as for many years she had lived in the fear of God, so her end
was calm and peaceful. Like Anna a Prophetess, she was
privileged by faith to see spiritually the Lord’s Christ, and to
rest humbly in the assurance of hope. Her faith was not of
that character which exercises but little influence on the life and
conversation. It manifested itself in the development of Chris-
tian graces, which St. Paul characterises as the fruits of the
Spirit, such as love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness and
goodness (Gal. v. 22.) In her ordinary intercourse with society,
these virtues showed themselves in a greater or less degree, and
it was evident from the whole scope of her life that she desired
to have a conscience void of offence towards God and man. She
was not disposed to think evil of her fellow-creatures, to publish
their faults to the world, or to look simply at the dark side of
human character. Her desire was to find out what was com-
mendable in any one, to delight in thinking of the good that
was done by individuals, and to discourage an uncharitable
judgment in others. I think I may add that she was eminently
a woman of peace. Like her Divine Master, she loved peace,
and like Him she was fond of doing good. The poor and the
afflicted never applied to herin vain. Her purse and resources were
open to their cries, whilst many in this neighbourhood, who were
in the habit of receiving periodical contributions from her, will long-
lament the removal of a kind and sympathising friend. Nor must
I omit to mention her patience under the trials of life. Though
in many ways favoured with the good things of this world, she
had long-continued and painful dispensations to pass through;
whilst the removal of friend after friend, the infirmities of age,
and the slow progress of disease—all combined to cast dark
shadows around her. You are aware that for several years
before her death, she had the misfortune to lose her sight. Her
language, therefore, might have been that of the poet, who
himself had experienced a similar calamity and knew full well
the privations of the blind :
“ not to me returns
Day, or the sweet approach of even or morn,
Or sight of vernal bloom, or Summer’s rose,
Or flocks or herds, or human face divine ;
But cloud instead, and ever-during dark
Surrounds me, from the cheerful ways of men
Cut off, and for the book of knowledge fair
Presented with a universal blank
Of nature’s works to me expunged and rased,
And wisdom at one entrance quite shut out.”
But whilst by the will of God, she lost her bodily sight, her
spiritual sight became strengthened. She seemed as it were, to
look into things unseen, to realise the sense of sin pardoned, and


to feel more and more the presence of Him who is invisible.
Having such feelings (though clouded sometimes by seasons of
depression), she manifested patience under the greatest of
afflictions, and submitted calmly to what had befallen her, saying
often from the depths of her soul “ not my will, but thine be
done.” In meditating on the usefulness and integrity of our
friend’s life, and of the many works of piety and mercy in which
she was engaged, her removal from us may be regarded as a
public calamity. But we may fondly hope, that as the works of
the righteous follow them to the regions of the blessed, so her
good deeds, (so far as they sprang from a desire to glorify her
God and Saviour) may work out for her a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory in heaven. There shall be no night there.
(Rev. xxi. 25.) The darkness has passed away for ever. The
light of day has again illumed her sightless eye-balls, and she
sees again in all their youthful brilliancy the forms of sainted
friends and relatives. Though, therefore, we may mourn over
departed worth, let us not grieve as those who have no hope.
Yea rather let us thank God that of His infinite mercy He has
taken our dear sister out of the miseries of this sinful world to
that region, where exposed no longer to the ills of humanity, the
sinful imaginations of the heart, or the machination of spiritual
foes, she will enjoy for ever the favour of God. Having these
expectations then, may we realise things unseen and say,
Sister, thou art gone before us,
And thy saintly soul is flown
Where tears are wiped from every eye
And sorrow is unknown.”
11


In the Presbyterian Church the Rev. Dr. Cameron had for his text:
“ And we desire that every one of you do show the same diligence to the
full assurance of hope to the end. That ye be not slothful but followers
of them who through faith and patience inherit the promises.”—
Heb. vi. 11, 12.
The text, he said, contained a call to diligence ; it indicated
the line in which this diligence was to proceed—the exercise of
faith and patience; it set forth the encouragement to this dili-
gence derivable from the example of those who have gone
before; and lastly, it pointed to the glorious reward—the full
assurance of hope, and the inheritance of the promises. After
expanding and illustrating these several heads, he concluded his
discourse as follows: —“ On Tuesday last we laid in the last
resting place the mortal remains of one whose name has long
been a household word throughout this district. No better index
could well be found of her character, and of the feeling enter-
tained towards her in the community, than the remark so gener-
ally made, when the fact of her death became known, “ She will
be greatly missed.” She attained the ripe age of eighty-seven
years, forty-seven of which were spent in the colony. She was
born on the 29th of November, 1798; married in the parish
church of Tynemouth, in the county of Northumberland, Eng-
land, on the 7th October, 1837, and arrived in the colony with
her husband in January, 1838. A great change has passed over
the colony since then, and a change there has also been in the
social life of this town, in which so many years of her life were
spent. Her life in the colony had its full share of light and
shadow—of joy and of sorrow.
The enterprize and energy which characterized her husband,
and the prominent position which he occupied, especially in the
earlier years of their married life, laid on his partner no small
measure of responsibility and strain, but she admirably dis-
charged the duties of her position, and proved a real helpmate
to her husband. In the journeyings, adventures and perils, as
well as the hospitalities, cordialities and amenities of that olden
time she heartily participated. The bent of her mind was
strongly conservative. She adhered to the old ways. But if she
clung to old customs and old fashions, she clung no less firmly to
old friends ; and the geniality of her disposition and her warm-
heartedness won for her many friends. The gratitude she
uniformly evinced for any service rendered, or any attention paid
to her, served to enhance the regard felt for her by those who


had the pleasure of her acquaintance. But that which, more
than aught besides, will cause her memory to be long and grate-
fully cherished, was the genuine benevolence of her heart, her
lively sympathy with those in trouble, and her great kindness to
the poor and to those in need of help. Seldom was any appli-
cant sent away empty-handed. Seldom was any favour asked
without being granted, and seldom was any appeal made to her
on behalf of a charitable or religious object without being cheer-
fully responded to. She continued to the end an attached
member of the Church in which she was brought up, the Church
of England : and not only was she a main supporter of the
Church while she lived, but in her will she has made provision
for the continuance of her support by contributing a thousand
pounds toward the Endowment Fund of St. Peter’s Church in
Richmond. Nor have the Presbyterian and Wesleyan Churches
been forgotten, fifty pounds having been left to each Besides
the sums above referred to, some six hundred pounds are given
to different charities. Old servants, and recent servants, are
handsomely rewarded, some five hundred pounds being dis-
tributed among them. Among the many personal friends
remembered in her will, are at least a dozen widows, showing
her sympathy with the class to which she herself belonged.
These things we mention to show the breadth of her sympathies,
and the thoughtful character of her kindness.
She had her own trials in life. After the death of her husband
came the loss of her sight. The closing years of her life were
spent in total darkness. Seldom, however, did she refer to her
loss, and never complained of it. In her ordinary health she
was wonderfully cheerful. She retained her faculties, especially
her memory, in a remarkable degree to the last.
If her life was pleasing in other aspects of it, it was especially
so in its religious aspect. David said: “I was glad when they
said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord.” This
feeling, we are sure, was also hers; and not only in the house of
God, but also in her own home, the worship of God was both
her habit and her delight. She relished much the counsels and
prayers of whatever Christian minister might visit her. Not
merely was she attentive to all religious duties, but the hearti-
ness with which she engaged in them, and the evident pleasure
she found in them, formed one of the most pleasing features of
her religious life. To do good and to communicate was the aim
of her life. When rallying from some threatening attack, and
when assured that the end was not yet, she would quietly remark,
“ Well, I would like to live a little longer, that I might do some
more good.” As the end, however, drew near, she longed for it.
She desired to depart and to be with Chidst and to enter the
bright realms above, leaving all darkness and pain for ever


behind. She said she was going- home—that she wanted to be
home, and hoped soon to be home. Peacefully she fell asleep,
and truly might it be said in regard to her, “ Blessed are the
dead that die in the Lord. . . They do rest from their labours-
and their works do follow them.”
But wherefore do we speak of these things from this place ?
Is it merely for the purpose of eulogising the dead ? Is it not
rather for admonition of the living ? Is it not for the purpose of
begetting in you a livelier sense of what it is that truly ennobles
life, and makes life worth living ? Is it not for the purpose of
stimulating you to copy in your own lives the virtues of those
who have gone before, and to animate you to greater diligence
in the works of the spiritual life, that you may thus become
followers of those who through faith and patience are now
inheriting the promises ? . f.
The righteous, the psalmist tells us, shall be in everlasting
remembrance. Kemembered they shall be in heaven, and remem-
bered also on earth remembered by what they have done. Let
this be your great aim and mine—so to live that when we are
gone we may be gratefully remembered by what we have done :
“Up and away like the dew of the morning,
Soaring from earth to its home in the sun,
So let me steal away gently and lovingly,
Only remembered by what I have done.
My name and my place and my tomb all forgotten,
The brief race of life well and patiently run,
So let me pass away peacefully, silently,
Only remembered by what I hare done."
Joseph Cook & Co., Printers, 490, Kent-street, Sydney.
14




Sn o
y-~]3>\ u
3 1508 002*7746 6
