

A SERMON
PREACHED IN ST. PHILIP’S NEW CHURCH,
BY THE
1M ii’islmp of fjttfo
ftirtrjc
On SUNDAY, the 22nd JUNE, 1856,
IN AID OF THE FUNDS
THE CHURCH SOCIETY,
FOR THE
DIOCESE OF SYDNEY.
SYDNEY":
PRINTED BY F. M. STOKES, 8, KIN T G STREET EAST.
1856.




~7-1- ~1~7
SERMON.
LUKE V. 4, 8.
4. He said unto Simon, Launch out into the deep and let down your nets for
draught.
8. When Simon Peter saw it, he fell down at Jesus’ knees, saying, Depart from me, for
I am a sinful man, 0 Lord.
I have placed these two verses side by side to point out the fulness
of power and authority in our Lord Jesus Christ; and by contrast,
the feebleness, even the helplessness, of man. It is true that our
blessed Lord when he sent forth his apostles, likened their com-
mission to his own, “As my Father hath sent me, even so send I
you:” but we can see at once how different in all respects their
commission was from His, except in the one point, that it was God
who sent them. When the Father sent his first begotten Son into
the world, saying, “ Let all the angels of God worship Him,” we
cannot believe that He in whom all the fulness of the Godhead
dwelt, was disturbed or alarmed at the sight of his own ministering
spirits, or of the works which followed upon his command. The
child Jesus would not have been frightened by the heavenly
messengers which heralded his birth, nor the man Jesus by the
angels that strengthened him at his temptation. He was not
moved with awe when Lazarus arose out of his grave, nor when
the angel came down to roll away the stone from his own tomb on
the morning of his own resurrection. When his disciples quaked
for fear upon the stormy waves of the sea of Galilee, he lay asleep
upon his pillow: when others wondered what manner of man this
could be whom even the wind and the seas obeyed, he did not
wonder at His own power over the elements, which he had himself
created. He was a prophet like unto Moses; but when Moses
drew near on Sinai to the thick darkness where God was, he said, “I
exceedingly fear and quake :” but Jesus stood in his glory between
Moses and Elias, when his disciples feared as they, entered into the
cloud. It was with wonder and thankfulness that the seventy
returned to tell their Lord, that even the devils were subject unto
them: but He, in whom the devils believed with trembling
received, as due only to himself, their unwilling homage, “ I know
thee who thou art, the Holy One of God.”
In undertaking therefore any work or office in the Church of
Christ, we are taught to bear in mind those two great and funda-
/VJ33SS JFTSS7O


mental truths—the plenary power of the grace of Jesus Christ and
our own unfitness for the work : and I desire, by God’s blessing, to
bring this home, not only to my brethren in the ministry who are
here present, but to every member of the congregation; to parents,
and masters, and teachers; and godfathers and godmothers:
to every person in short in any authority, who has received, as all
in authority have received, a commission from our Lord Jesus
Christ himself, to do their duty in that station of life to which God
has called them.
The character of St. Peter will afford us abundant matter for
illustration, and the Church Society will form the special subject
for applying all that we learn to our own practical benefit. And
with this view I shall endeavour to exhibit the character of St.
Peter, as it is represented in the text, as receiving a plenary com-
mission from his Lord : as promptly obeying his command, and as
carrying out his Master’s work under the abiding conviction of his
own personal unworthiness and sin.
And first, we shall all admit, that in undertaking to build up
such a great work as your Church Society proposes to carry out, we
must have a foundation, and the simple words of St. Paul, 1 Cor.
iii. IT, teach us, that “other foundation can no man lay, tlian that is
laid, which is Jesus Christ;'” and for many years, all Christian men
accepted these plain words in their simple meaning, and believed
the Church to be built upon the rock of Christ, and endeavoured
so to edify one another, that the household of God might be built
upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief corner stone.
And that this was the simple sense in which St. Peter understood
his own commission, may easily be proved, by comparing the
2nd chapter of his own first epistle with the 16th chapter of St.
Gospel. I would first draw your attention to the won-
derful illustration which the passage from St. Matthew affords, of
the contrast of the plenary power of the commission given by our
Lord Jesus Christ to his ministers, with the feebleness and sinful-
ness of those ministers themselves. In the 18th verse, we read that
well known and much disputed text, “ Thou art Peter, and upon this
rock I will build my Church : and the gates of hell shall not prevail
against it.'” And if you read on only five verses, in the 23rd verse
of the same chapter, you will find these most striking words, no less
true, though less frequently quoted by those who build the Church
upon the foundation of St. Peter. “Jesus turned, and said unto
Peter, Get thee behind me, Satan, thou art an offence unto me: for
thou savourest not the things that be of God, but those that be of
men.”
The word offence, as you probably know, is the same in the
New Testament as stumbling-block: and it is most remark-
able, that within five following verses of the same chapter, the
same Apostle is called by our Lord himself, the rock upon which
the Church is to be built, and also, a stone of stumbling, and rock
of offence.


Now I would ask, whether St. Peter, with that keen sense of his
own sinfulness, and that bitter remembrance of his Lord’s reproofs,
which we know that he always cherished, would have ever put forth
his claim to be distinguished from the rest of the apostles, as the
only rock upon which the Church was to be built, at the risk of
being told by his brethren, that if he had been declared to be the
only foundation rock of the Church, so by the same unerring word
he had been declared to be, alone of all his brethren, a stone of
stumbling, and rock of offence.
But on this point let St. Peter speak for himself. We have heard
St. Paul’s description of the Church in the Epistle to the Ephesians,
44 as the household of God, built upon the foundation of the apostles
and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone.”
Now compare St. Peter’s in the 2nd chapter of the Ist Epistle, and
no one, I am sure, can pretend that there is a shade of differ-
ence between the two definitions of a Church.
3. 44 If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious: to whom
coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but
chosen of-God, and precious; ye also, as lively stones, are built up
a spiritual house.”
6. 44 Wherefore also it is contained in Holy Scripture, behold I lay
in Sion a chief corner stone, elect, precious.”
Now mark the striking words in the 7th and Bth verses, which
seem to prove that the mention of the foundation upon which the
Church was to be built, brought up at once before St. Peter’s mind,
both his Master’s blessing and his reproof.
44 Unto you which believe he is precious: but to them which
be disobedient, the stone which the builders disallowed, the same
is made the head of the corner, and a stone of stumbling, and rock
of offence.”
I can conceive the Apostle, if called upon to explain his own
letter, thus opening his thoughts:—
44 On one occasion, when I was in the company of my blessed
Lord, a revelation was granted to me from on high, enabling me to
feel and to confess that he was the Christ, the Son of the living
God. Immediately my Lord answered : 4 Blessed art thou, Simon
Barjona;’ and added, in allusion to my name, ‘thou art Peter and
upon this rock I will build my Church ; and the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it.’ But shortly afterwards, when he spoke to
us of his death, my carnal nature shrunk from following him to his
cross: I had not the same willingness to suffer with the Son of
Man, as I had to reign in glory with the Son of God. I was ready,
as all his disciples were, to sit on his right hand or his left, in his
Father’s kingdom, but neither I nor any of us, were ready at that
time, nor even at the time of his death, to drink of the cup of
agony, which he drank of, and therefore my lack of faith was
punished by a reproof as severe as the blessing had been gracious,
which followed upon my confession. And again he alluded to my
name, to point his sharp but needful warning: ‘ Thou art Peter, a


stone of stumbling and rock of offence.’ And I have written this
epistle JA teach you how you also may be made, what his grace has
made me, lively stones built upon the one, chief, elect, and precious
corner stone—the one living stone disallowed of men, but chosen of
God ; and also to teach and warn you from my own example, that
in the very moment when most you think that you are lively stones,
built upon the foundation of Jesus Christ himself, you may then be
in the greatest danger of becoming stones of stumbling. While
you are admiring the goodly stones and buildings of your spiritual
house, the word may be going forth, 4 Seest thou these great
buildings ? there shall not be left one stone upon another that shall
not be thrown down.’ ”
We see now, my dear brethren, upon what foundation we must
edify—that is, build up one another—in such works and under-
takings as that of your Church Society. We must build upon
the foundation of Jesus Christ, and we must take care to be
ourselves lively stones: for there is no greater stumblingblock to
the unbeliever, than a man who puts himself prominently for-
ward in Church works, and does not live himself as a true Christian ;
and therefore, having laid our foundation, where only it can be laid,
let us inquire further how we are to build upon it, and what has
been already said is enough to show that we must build as the
Jews built the second temple, with the sword of the spirit girded by
our side. With one hand we must build, and with the other hand
hold a weapon. For this is the way in which the builders of God’s
temple on earth are taught to know that they could have no power
at all, except it were given them from above. It is thus that the
strength of God is made perfect, viz., by the weakness of man.
In undertaking, therefore, this great work, having for its object
the conversion of souls, and knowing that Satan will never cease to
try to hinder the work by destroying the builders, we take the
history of the same Apostle St. Peter, to teach us, what it is to
which we trust for the success of our work—Luke xxii. 32. And
here again we shall see, the plenary power of the grace of Jesus
Christ, side by side, with the weakness and sinfulness of man.
“ The Lord said, Simon, Simon, Satan hath desired to have you,
that he may sift you as wheat: but I have prayed for thee, that
thy faith fail not, and when thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren.” That very night St. Peter forsook and denied his Lord;
even after declaring, that he was ready to go with him, both into
prison, and unto death. And yet on the day of Pentecost, it was
evident that the prayers of his Lord and Master had not b?cn in
vain; the gift of the promised Comforter proved that the Son had,
prayed effectually to the Father; and in the power of that spirit,
St. Peter so preached the Gospel that on that one day three thou-
sand souls were added to the Church. He had been himself con-
verted, and thus he strengthened his brethren.
The object of your Church Society is the same ; it is to strengthen
your brethren. If the population of any parish should outgrow


the power of its clergyman, your object is “to strengthen the
hands of the overburdened Incumbent, by contributing towards
the erection of additional Churches.” If your sons, or daughters,
or friends, or neighbours, should go up into the distant wilds of
this vast continent, your object is to strengthen them to maintain
their religious feelings, “by building’’ the schoolroom in the
bush, where the itinerating missionary may statedly officiate. As
your children grow up, and as your poor neighbours multiply
around you, your object is to strengthen them against the tempta-
. tions of Satan, by placing in their hands the sword of the spirit,
which is the word: and for this purpose to have always ready in
your depository, a supply of Bibles for all that need them, for
the children in your schools, for the sick in your hospitals, for
prisoners in your gaols, for the seamen in your ships, and for the
settlers in the bush; and your object also is to strengthen those
who most lack strength; to seek the aboriginal in his native haunts,
that if possible he may be reclaimed: and in all these varied efforts,
to strengthen your brethren. You will feel how needful it is that you
should be yourselves first converted; and while you pray for the
grace of the Holy Spirit to make you lively stones of Christ’s
spiritual temple, and to guard you from the assaults of Satan, while
you are engaged in building, you will look up to heaven and see
Him making intercession for you at God’s right hand, you will feel
that he never ceases to pray for you that your strength may not fail.
But I must remark one striking feature in the constitution of
your Society, which entitles it to be truly called a Chuch Society.
It is stated, and 1 think, undeniably, that these beneficial results
can only be brought about by the general co-operation of the
members of the Church*, and the rule which commends itself as so
entirely in agreement with the apostolic practice, is that which
requires that all sums subscribed shall be paid into the general
fund. I rejoice in the sight of that rule, on the plainest grounds
of common sense; for no work can be effectual, no result can be
great, but by combination of effort. If flesh and blood could
speak, would it not say that it would rather form the little finger of
a giant, than the whole body of a dwarf ? If the wheel could
speak out of the midst of the engine, would it not say that it is a
nobler lot to be joined with other wheels in propelling ships or in
clothing millions, than to spin round its own axle in unconnected
and unproductive motion ? It is but a small weight that a single
arm can raise ; it is but a small work which can be accomplished
in one life. It would be better to be an insect, to be born in the
morning and die at sunset, than to be man endued with powers of
combination with his fellow creatures; and thereby taking part in
works that will have their issues in eternity, and yet to be content
to work out with his own feeble hand the puny plans of his own
narrow mind, till he falls into the grave and his works perish with
him.
But far more do I rejoice in that rule, because it is in tlj.e very


spirit of the apostolic age, when no man said that ought that
he had was his own, but all men cast their substance into a common
fund, out of which distribution was made to every one according
as he had need. The power of the Cross of Christ is to abolish self
in the heart. The power of the Church of Christ is to abolish self
in act. There is a self in families, and there is a self in parishes,
and there is a self in societies, but the Church of Christ is the great
annihilator of self. Its field is the world. All nations and lan-
guages, without respect of persons, are the objects of its care.
But you may well ask, how this can be carried out. Would you
abolish rights of property, that all things may be held in common ?
I would do nothing of the kind—but I would urge every one to
give up that common delusion, that the things which he possesses
are his own—to forbear to usurp those words which belong only to
God, “ Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own ? ”
to come in heart to lay his substance at the feet of the apostles,
keeping back for himself no more than the bare wants of his
family, or the duties of hospitality, or the requirements of his
station oblige him to retain ; and though there is no law which can
define what portion of each man’s income he may thus spend, and
how much is due to the treasury of God, yet, if in a true spirit of
abandonment of self he has pledged himself in heart to give up all
things for the sake of the Saviour, who gave up all for him, he
will take care so to live and so to spend his income, as if he knew
that he must render an account at the year’s end to the apostles them-
selves. He will feel that a balance sheet filled only with items of
luxurious or frivolous expenditure would never be approved by that
Apostle, at whose feet Ananias and Sapphira died for professing to
give up the whole, while they kept back a part. But most of all, he
will fear that strict account which he must one day give before the
judgment seat of Christ: one look from whom pierced St. Peter’s
heart, and imprinted upon it that bitter remembrance of his own
falsehood, in which no doubt he pronounced the sentence, “ Thou
hast not lied unto men, but unto God.” So God calls to every one
of us, “My son give me thy heartand we have promised to love
him with all our heart, with all our mind, with all our sold, and
with all our strength. And when we have promised the whole, will
God be satisfied with a part ? Will He who gave the ten talents,
be content to receive back the one ?
The last point in the character of St. Peter, to which I would
now draw your attention, is that suggested by the Gospel of the
day. We have seen that the foundation of our work must be laid
upon the rock of Christ; that we must build in a spirit of watch-
fulness and prayer, because Satan desires to sift us as wheat, that
he may scatter us as the chaff'; and we have seen how this work
may best be carried on in the united spirit of the Apostolic Church,
and how we must devote to it our whole hearts and all our sub-
stance : and now may God bless a few closing words of exhortation
on the objects to which our efforts must be directed.


And here again, as in every instance already mentioned, we shall
see the power of Christ’s commission contrasted with the sinfulness
and feebleness of man. When he bids us go forth into the wilder-
ness, to seek his lost sheep who are scattered abroad, how many
earnest pleadings and commandments of our blessed Lord are
necessary, before our selfish and carnal hearts will obey the calling?
What are all these sermons and meetings and other methods of
excitement, but confessions that the state of our hearts obliges our
Master thrice to repeat his commandment, “ Feed my sheep and
feed my lambs?”—and why it is that we are not grieved, as St.
Peter was, that we should be thought to need so much exhortation
to do our duty. We shall feel our own sinfulness brought home
to us even while we are counted worthy to receive our Lord’s com-
mendation. Why will we not look unto the rock from which we were
hewn, that spiritual rock which followed the Israelites in the wilder-
derness, which it was a sin in Moses to smite twice, as if it needed
more than a single word to draw forth its living water ? Why do
we allow our hearts to be so hard as to require to be smitten again
and again before we will give forth for the good of our fellow
creatures the blessings which God has so freely given to us ?
Surely, every one who has ever heard the gracious invitation of his
Lord in the Book of Revelation, “ Let him that is athirst come,
and whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely, ” will
never give grudgingly or of necessity, but will know that God
loveth a giver like himself, a cheerful giver.
Christian cheerfulness is that spirit in which we shall be content
to work on in faith and in hope, though the visible fruits of our
labour may be small, and though the fulfilment of God’s promises
may be long delayed. When we have let down our nets in the
midst of the darkness of heathenism, or in the still darker night of
sin, that (darkness which may be felt,) where children of Christian
parents waste in riotous living the precious treasure of their bap-
tismal covenant, and do despite to the spirit of grace ; when we
search as fishers of men into the deep unfathomed caves of human
misery and sin, we shall often be tempted—“ We have toiled all
the night and taken nothing.” Have I reclaimed a single drunkard ?
Have I reformed a single prodigal ? Have I brought to her
Saviour’s feet a single Magdalene ? Have I converted a single
heathen ? No, I have toiled all night and taken nothing. And
why ? Holy Scripture seems to answer: because thou thyself also
art a sinner; and it shows that the same God, who gives you his high
commission to go out into the highways and hedges and compel men
to come in, reserves to himself the glory of the success. He would
have all men know that it is not their work but his, and that they
could have no power at all except it were given them from on high.
And so when the day comes, appointed by his unerring wisdom,
when after a night of fruitless toil, the same net is let down again
by the same human hands, but instead of being drawn up empty,
will scarce contain the multitude of fishes: when the self-conceited


man who could do his own work, as long as it was his own, is
compelled to call for the aid of his fellowmen; when God brings
the fishes into his net in the midst of sign and results, which would
have made the carnal heart boast of its own power, and pride itself
upon its own success, there comes only an overwhelming sense of the
power and majesty of God, and of man’s unworthiness and sin—
“ Depart from me for I am a sinful man, O Lord.”
These are the thoughts which will not allow us to despair, even
in those portions of our work which seem most hopeless. Strange
though it may seem, our ground for hope in all cases, is the know-
ledge of our own sinfulness. If each man from his knowledge of
his own heart, believes himself to be the chief sinner, and in that
state to have found mercy through Christ, he cannot doubt of the
willingness of God to save others, without doubting of his own
salvation. Who can look into his own heart, and then despair of
the conversion of the Australian savage ? Let us bring before our
eyes St. Peter’s vision—that great sheet let down to the earth,
wherein were all manner of four-footed beasts of the earth, and wild
beasts and creeping things, and fowls of the air; and let us hear
the voice which speaks from heaven, “ What God hath cleansed, that
call not thou common: ” and though this was repeated to him who
had thrice denied his Lord, and who though he had thrice received
commandment to feed the sheep and lambs of Christ, was tempted
to confine his pastoral care to the lost sheep of the house of Israel,
and to forget that there were other sheep who were not of that fold,
and that them also he must bring to the Shepherd and Bishop of
their souls, that there might be one fold and one shepherd. Let us
strive, by the grace of God, so to frame our thoughts according to
the mind of Christ, that we may need no repeated exhortation, no
stirring arguments to move us to discharge our plain and bounden
duty. Let every one who has repeated from his childhood and
received into his heart those well known words, “ I believe in God
the Son, who redeemed me and all mankind,” acknowledge that
every human being, of every race and language, however different
from ourselves, in intellect or in manners, is a being for whose
cleansing the blood of the Son of God was shed; let him dwell
upon St. Paul’s words, “ Who made thee to differ from another ;
and what hast thou, that thou didst not receive ?” And so let us
work on in faith and hope, however dark be the night, however
hopeless be the toil: “always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as we know that our labour is not in vain in the Lord.”
F, M. STOKES, PRINTER, KINO-STREET EAST.


, .


JAff
&1&U0
F15%70
