

mmm




ADVANCE AUSTRALIA.
A SETTLER’S
35 YEARS’ EXPERIENCE
VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA,
Hub ibow €6 Bs. became £B,OOO.
WITH ADVICE TO SETTLERS, &c.
“ Men are agents for the future,
As they work so ages win,
Either harvest of advancement,
Or the product of their sin.”
Inscribed by the kind permission of the
HONOURABLE ALFRED DEAKIN,
Chief Secretary of Victoria.
Melbourne:
M. L. Hutchinson, 305 & 807 Little Collins Street,
Nearly Opposite Royal Arcade.
Rae Bros., Printers, 547 and 549 Elizabeth Street North.




“ Off fob 200 Miles’ Team?.’
See Page 10.




CONTENIS.
Sketch of Artist Life
farewell to Dear Old England
Melbourne at Last ...
Christian Socialism
Melbourne Experience
03 to the Diggings
Ten Years on the Diggings
Commence Farming
Increase of Holdings
The Consummation
A Dissertation on Temperance...
The Vine Industry
The Settlement of the Lands...
Irrigation
A Scheme of Settlement
A Glimpse at the Future of Australia
Conclusion
Poetry, “ All the Way ”




In giving this little “Life Sketch,” I am actuated by a desire
to assist many, not only hard-handed men in the “ Old
Country,” but many soft-handed ones also, as I was, and
especially those who have large families, as I had, and who
are struggling for a living, and see but little hope for the
future in the already over-crowded hive in the “ Old Land,”
and a still poorer prospect for the new swarms ; I, therefore,
think a little advice and encouragement to those desirous to
“ cast off,” from one who has been through it all, will be
welcomed by many.—E.H,




Sketch of flDp Hrtlst Xtfe.
living in the “ Old Land,” over 35 years
since, I belonged to a class of which there
are man 7 thousands —a struggling professor—
and of the class I have designated as
“ soft-handed.” I was an artist by profession ; studied from
a child ; never did anything else; and in 1850 and 1851 had
so far advanced in my profession to have the honor of having
my works hung in a creditable position on the walls of the
Royal Academy of Arts, of which I was also a student.
I married rather young (at 25), and soon had little ones
running round. I started fairly well in the neighborhood of
London, at Clapham, adding teaching. Just about this time
(1817) artists were invited by the Government to send in
specimens of their works for exhibition in Westminster Hall,
for competition for the decoration of the new Houses of
Parliament, then just finished. I was rather too young
and inexperienced an artist for so great and honored an
undertaking ; however, I thought I would venture. I got
my large picture finished, but from over-study, excitement,
and anxiety, my health gave way. I contracted nervous
typhus fever, and consequently could not finish the other one,
which was required by the Commissioners to enable me to
compete. But Sir Chas. Eastlake, the President, whose
letter I still have, said my painting—under the section of
“ Scriptural Allegory,” subject, “ The King of Kings and
Lord of Lords ” —though not entitled to compete, could, if I
liked, be hung in the vestibule of the hall ; which was an
honor I gladly consented to.


On getting up from my long and dangerous illness, my
medical advisers persuaded me to go to a milder climate for
perfect restoration, and to give up ray profession for a time ;
at least, to do but very little painting. South Devonshire was
recommended. We therefore left our home at Clapham, and
took up our residence about four miles from that lovely spot,
Torquay. To our residence was attached a small farm and a
splendid orchard. In this beautiful climate I soon regained
my strength. I did all sorts of labor on the farm, so that I
got a general insight into all sorts of farming work. This 1
have found exceedingly useful since taking to farming in
Australia.
I found many kind friends in Devonshire. (I cannot help
naming the Savile family. God bless them for their kind
patronage and introduction in my profession !) We resided
in Devonshire about four years. We then came again to
London, but found a difficulty in looking up a connection
again ; had to fill up my time in decorating in the various
courts of the Crystal Palace, at Sydenham, just then being
erected. I, however, saw but little prospect of advancing in
my profession, or even making a living, and less prospect for
a large and increasing family ; we having by this time seven
children, six boys and one baby girl ; besides, I had contracted
a great taste for a rural life while in Devonshire. We
determined, therefore, to depart for Australia—the land of
gold ! The goldfields being at that time in full swing. A
wide field indeed for enterprise, and anticipated prosperity,
with God’s blessing ; for, I am happy to say, I had long sought
His grace and guidance, and committed my ways unto Him,
and was sure He would guide our steps.
In the first place, I applied to the Commissioners of
Emigration for a situation as schoolmaster for the voyage, on


a Government emigration ship ; my wife to act as matron. I
presented letters of recommendation—one from the Bishop of
Londbn (Blomfield). I was well known to him, as Fulham,
near London, where he resided, was my native place. The
commissioners said my letters were more than enough, but
desired to know the number of children I had. On hearing
the number they informed me that they regretted to say that,
according to their regulations, this would be a bar to my
appointment. Three, I think, was the number allowed.
This was a great blow to us, as we should have saved our
passage money, and had a salary besides ; I think about £l5O
as schoolmaster, and wife as matron. Parties told me I
could have managed it if I had liked, by getting some of the
passengers to take the other four children ; but this I could
not do from principle. To pay our passage in a general
passage ship, therefore, exhausted all our little means.
farewell to Dear ®lt> Uoiuilanb.
We did intend taking our passage in the new ship
“ Schomberg,” just launched, and owned by “ The White Star
Company.” On enquiring at the London office, they informed
me that I could send our goods on to Liverpool, but they
would not be put on board any ship until our passage money
was paid, and that I should find them in the company’s
warehouse in Liverpool; consequently, I sent the goods on.
We could not, however, get ready to go by the “ Schomberg.”
On arriving at Liverpool, and enquiring for our luggage, I
found it had been sent on in that vessel.
Now, the fate of that fine new ship, I presume, is generally
known. The captain had a bet with the captain of the ship


“ Kent,” a well known clipper, and declared “ if he did not
beat the ‘ Kent,’ he would knock her (‘the SchombergV) bows
in.” On hearing that the “Kent” had made the passage
before him, the “ Schomberg” was wilfully run on shore, just
a little way from Cape Otway, Luckily, it was fair weather,
and the passengers and crew were taken safely off, but with
only the luggage they could carry in their hands ; there being
only just standing room on board the rescuing steamboat.
The “ Schomberg ” became a total wreck. This, I suppose, is
one of the most wicked and shameful incidents that ever
happened on the shores of Australia. We took our passage
in the next ship ; the good ship “ Sultana,” from Liverpool,
on the 21st October, 1855.
I remember, as we weighed anchor, being some distance
out in the stream, and out of hearing of any friendly cheer, a
serious calm appeared to pervade the ship ; all appeared
absorbed with their own thoughts, when we found the ship was
under way, more by the apparent moving of the receding
shore ; she being a sailing vessel. I don’t know the feelings
of the other passengers ; possibly many were like our own, at
departing from the good “Old Land.” Hitherto, we had
borne up well in parting from kindred and friends. We said
“ Good-bye ” in London ; but now, in those few calm moments,
seated upon the ship’s deck, with wife, six sons, and a baby
girl around us, we felt the necessity of faith in that good
Providence on Whom we had cast the future. Our feelings,
however, would have vent in a few hot tears, but these had to
be brushed quickly on one side.
I do not think it necessary in this little sketch to give a
long account of our voyage, or the various incidents that
happened. There was nothing very sensational ; our worst
experience was our first night out. The ship was so crowded


that there were not berths enough, and, as we came late on
board, ours had to be erected, so that we had to huddle down
between decks, the best we could. The children being our
great care, there was no rest for wife or self. We had fearful
weather in the Channel, and, everything being loose on board,
the din was fearful ; the heavy iron cable on deck rolling from
side to side, and the ship’s bell tolling at every roll of the
ship, and the carpenters working all night, fitting up berths,
and the state of the passengers—one can guess the confusion !
And what added to it more—just as we reached the most
dangerous part of the Channel, off the coast of Ireland, the
tug-hawser parted, but, when pulled on board, it evidently had
been cut adrift with an axe—a most shameful act. The con-
tract was to take us clear of the Channel. This, then, made
further trouble, as all hands had now to set to and work
the ship, and there was great danger in working her out of the
difficult position she was left in, and anxiously did all wait
for the morning. It may be imagined that the whole of the
voyage was no pleasure trip for wife or self, in a crowded ship,
and seven children (under 12 years of age) to look after.
Neither do I think the children liked it; they were too
young, and they did not thrive at all on the rough ship’s fare,
particularly the hard ship’s biscuits—they could not manage
them at all. After a time, though, we got on better ; I had
a carpenter’s plane with my goods, and we shaved the biscuits
down on that, and made it into puddings, and so managed to
get rid of them in this way. The plane went the round of
the ship after this, particularly among the old people. We
had, however, on arriving at Melbourne, an American cask
full, unconsumed ; these we took on shore with us, and they
went fine in soups, &c., with good Australian beef, at 3d. a
pound.


Melbourne, at Xaet
We were thankful to arrive safely, after a fine passage of
81 days. We arrived off Cape Otway in the night, and stood
“ off and on ” until daylight, when the pilot came on board?
and the first thing he told us was the loss of the “ Schomberg.”
Well, of course, we then knew also that all our goods were at
the bottom of the sea. We were thankful, though, that we
did not ship on board that ill-fated vessel ; but ought we to
attribute her loss to fate ? No ! It was wilful wickedness. I
regretted our loss the more as my Westminster Hall picture
was among the things lost, as it was the highest class work I
ever attempted.
It was with anxious eyes myself and several other heads of
families viewed the shore of the “ promised land.” It
certainly (from the deck of the vessel) did not look very
prepossessing; not even with a good glass, and more
particularly as we went up the bay nearer to Melbourne. It
being the dry season—January—nothing looked green, and
the dry grass looked more like sand, and the trees looked
stunted. It was a hot wind and dust storm on the day we
landed, and the place looked very dreary ; what few shops
there were, were nearly closed to keep out the dust. We were
brought up the Yarra River to Melbourne from the ship by
steam tugs. Of course, most of us had on our “ Old
Country ” clothes ; it was quite easy to know a “ New Chum.”
I don’t remember seeing a belltopfer hat, or a coat, being
worn in Melbourne at that time, and “ New Chums ” hated
to be conspicuous, as they were always “ Joed,” that they soon
dropped their “Old Country ” style, and took to jumpers and
straw, or slouched felt hats. The highest style, however, was
the cabbage-tree hat. I had carefully preserved a nearly new


belltopper hat through the voyage, but somehow had forgotten
it in the bustle of leaving. The last I saw of it, however, it
was being kicked about on the other lighter as a football,
which I did not after regret. There were several parties with
large families on board. The head of one, who had been on
shore to look round for a few hours, and had been a school-
master, took charge of the women and children (about 80
children), and conducted them to a place he had seen—“ the
Wesleyan Home”—about a mile and a quarter from the
landing place, leaving myself and the other males to look
after the luggage, and follow on with the drays. It was after
dark when we arrived at the “ home.” It was a pleasant
sight to see the dear children sitting round the table enjoying
their tea and nice “ soft tack ” (bread, &c.), after roughing it
so long on board ship.
“The Wesleyan Emigrants’ Home”—l believe it is still
in existence ; it was a few years since—was a fine institution,
and a great boon to emigrants. It was a peaceful, Christian
home, and the only one, I think, at that time. Hotels and
restaurants were the resort of the lowest characters, and hardly
safe for anyone to enter ; most people in them went armed,
and fearful scenes took place.
Christian Socialism.
The manager of the “ home” had a book, in which he entered
the names of all who lodged there. He also entered your
nationality and religion ; also denomination. When he put
the last question to me, I answered, “ A Christian Brother.”
“ Why,” said he, “ yours is the first entry I have made in my
book of such a sect.” “ Sect !” I replied, “ I did not know


it was a sect at all.” I hoped not, for I had adopted it in
opposition to sectarianism, of which I had seen so much evil
in the “ Old Country.” I therefore determined to drop
isms ” in the sea, and, on arriving at this new and good land,
hoped to be known simply as a Christian, and “ give the right
hand of fellowship to all who loved the Lord Jesus in sincerity
and truth,” irrespective of denominations. I regret, however,
that the old animosities have reached this new land. The old
bickerings and trifles, non-essentials, about “ Apostolic
Succession,” “Dipping or Sprinkling,” “Free-will,” “Election,”
“ Reprobation,” &c., &c. —neglecting the more paramount
matters, “ Belief,” and a “ consistent walk in life.” But now,
at this time (1891), I am glad to see a growing desire for unity
and Christian socialism in Victoria, and more particularly in
the country districts ; and I think they are setting an example
to the towns, where there is a sad want of unity among the
clergy, and Christian socialism among the people. The
congregations even are divided into “sets,” or, as the Yankee
would call them, “ grades,” who “ stand off ” from each other,
and think it quite condescending, in any way, to recognise the
lower “ set.” The visitations, also, of the clergy, are in very
many cases confined to the higher “ grades,” There are,
though, a few grand exceptions. Now, all this should be
broken down if the church is ever to take its true place in the
world. We should rather begin at the bottom—with men of
low estate—for, hath not God chosen such ? In my long life I
have found the best traits of character among the poor.
Verily, many that we think last shall stand first on that day.
In my humble opinion, nothing will tend to overthrow the
sceptical and atheistical tendencies of the age so much as
Christian fellowship and brotherhood ; in fact, it is the want
of this, with the dissensions and bickerings of professors,


which create this scepticism ; and this will continue until the
world can say of Christians of to-day, as it was said of old,
“ See how these Christians love each other.” “ Dearly beloved
brethren ” will then not only be upon the lip«, but in the
heart. I must, however, stop this homilistical strain, and
return to my narrative.
Melbourne lEypenence.
I stepped on shore in Melbourne, with my dear wife and
seven children, with the grand sum of ten shillings in my
pocket ; but, with a stout heart and willing hands, and a firm
reliance on God’s blessings, things did not appear so very
hard. We stayed two or three days at the “ Wesleyan home.”
On the second day after landing I got work, digging potatoes
at 14s. per day. We then rented a small two-roomed house
in Collingwood ; had our boxes, at first, for furniture ; but
the grand wages of fourteen shillings per day soon provided
what other little furniture we required. It appeared a poor
home, though, after the style of the “ Old Country but it is
astonishing how soon one gets over this feeling, where love
and happiness reign. I am not a believer in that foolish
saying, that “ when want comes in at the door, love flies out
of the window.” No ; true hearts cling the tighter.
On looking round Melbourne, I found some few parties I
knew in England. They were very old settlers long before
the discovery of gold ; they were in affluent circumstances.
They kindly gave me a commission to paint a few portraits in
oils, which led to one or two more. I also painted a few fancy
pictures. The colony, however, was too young to appreciate
the fine arts to any extent. The rougher arts were more in


vogue, and the gold fever was not abated. I also got a touch
of it, ray wife having two brothers on the Ovens diggings,
who had been in the colony about a year. I determined,
therefore, to join them.
®ff to the SMggings.
I started alone with swag, blankets, billy, pannikin, etc., in
orthodox style, for a 200 miles’ tramp through the bush.
(See frontispiece.) This, however, was not much of an
undertaking for me, as I was a great pedestrian, could
do my six miles an hour easy, and often over 50 miles per
day on my sketching tours in the “ Old Country being tall
(fully six feet), I had a good stride. At that time the Sydney
Road was only formed a few miles out of Melbourne, and from
the Rockey Waterholes to the foot of the Big Hill (commonly
then called Pretty Sally’s Hill) was swamp ground. I found
a difficulty in getting over this ; I had to tread the thistles
down for miles to prevent bogging, and it was raining fast.
The contractors were just forming the road, and on the first
rise on the other side of the swamp the camp was formed.
The men had knocked off on account of the rain. Just as I
was level with the camp, I heard my name called out in true
Irish accent, and out ran one of our shipmates to greet me.
He occupied the next berth to us on board ship, and was ill a
great part of the way. He had been a tradesman in Dublin.
He was lively enough now, as he grasped my hand and cut a
real Irish caper, with “ Hurrah ! for Australia and 14s. a day,
and wood and water !” He was driving one of the
contractor’s drays. He wanted me to stay, as it was far into
the afternoon, but no—my alloted mileage was not done, so I
marched on.


My first night’s “bushing” was a strange experience. Rolled
up in blankets, at the foot of a gum tree, I had not turned
down long (I cannot say turned in) when I was conscious of
something being upon my shoulder, and, cautiously turning
round, saw an animal perched quite innocently there. It was
an opossum. 1 presume he did not recognise me from a log.
He appeared quite content to sit there until I gave him a
cant, and sent him some distance off. This “ camping out ”
is not at all an unpleasant experience, as many might think,
and this was a splendid moonlight night. At that time it
was far more safe to keep clear of restaurants and shanties,
as they were the resort of the vilest characters, Neither was
it safe to camp out alone with a fire at night, as this was an
attraction, and you were pretty sure to get objectionable
company. The plan, therefore, generally adopted, was to boil
the billy for tea, then, after tea, leave, and go on a little
distance in the dark, and turn off the road or track into the
silent bush, and roll up in your blankets ; thus you avoided
unpleasant company. I got through in about seven days. I
passed through the famous “ Woolshed Diggings,” where the
rich claims were, and where the men had to wash the gold off
their boots when they left work. There was a “strike” on just
then. The claim-holders wanted to reduce the wages to £1
per day. I was interviewed, and offered work at that price,
but, of course, I refused, as I was on my way to join my
wife’s brothers. I then went on through Beechworth —Spring
Creek diggings. The scenes on the diggings were strange
and novel to me. Beechworth was the chief centre of the
mining district, and the other diggings around were named
by the distance from Beechworth, thus—“ The One Mile,”
“ The Three Mile,” and “The Nine Mile.” This last was
my destination. It was also called “Snake Yalley,” from the


winding course of the creek. It was late in the evening when
I arrived, quite dark and pouring rain, and there had been a
long rain before, so that the roads in the township were
wretched. At the crossings of the creek it was impassable,
and was only indicated by side logs, on which I had to crawl.
The worst of it was, I had to wander up and down the creek
to find my brothers’ hut. The storekeepers knew them by
sight, but could not say where they lived. I was directed to
a large restaurant, about a mile down the creek. There were
about 40 diggers, just at tea. I walked up and down between
the tables, and I think they were the finest, strongest, and
roughest set of men I ever saw, I did not see my brothers,
though. Came hack, enquired at the police camp, also to no
purpose. Over the creek again, when at last I found a
butcher who pointed out on the bank, on the other side of the
creek, the light shining through the calico top of their
He lent me a piece of candle to cross the creek with, and I
managed to work my way among the holes and sludge, etc., to
the other side. And glad I was to get there, and I was as
“ wet as a rat,” and pretty well tired out. I soon got “a
shift ” however, and such a fire as they had I never saw
before ; enough to roast a bullock ; at which also I got a
good roasting ; and after a good supper of beef, damper and
tea, soon felt all right. This for my first tramp in Australia.
£en JJ)ears on tbe BioQtnae.
I joined my brothers in their claim, and we had two other
mates, making a party of five. We were driving out wash-
dirt, and sluicing it in long boxes with the creek water. We
did fairly well—made from £6 to £7 per week for each man.


This year (1856) wag an exceedingly wet one, particularly in
the winter and early spring, This drove the miners out of
shallow sinking, and the great “ Woolshed Diggings ” (Read’s
Creek) were flooded out, and thousands rushed the shallow
sluicing ground of the Nine-mile Creek ; in consequence, there
was great trouble about water, and “ water rights,” which
caused endless litigation. The creek could not supply half
the water required ; therefore, all the hills for miles round were
tunneled for water, and an astonishing number of springs
were opened. These were recognised by the Mining Warden
as independent—independent of the creek—and a permit
given for the sole use of the same. Many of these cost
hundreds of pounds to cut. It was also called “created
water that is, water before locked up in the hills, and not
feeding the creek. The creek water was available to all, but
this would not command one-thousandth part of the mining
ground. Our party, therefore, looked about for indications of
springs, by sinking trial shafts, and then driving tunnels. We
were fortunate in tapping water. This we conducted to dams,
and used for sluicing purposes in shallow ground, from Bft. to
10ft. deep, washing away the whole of it.
I could not rest long with my family remaining in Mel-
bourne, as some of the children had colonial fever ; a very
distressing complaint, but not very fatal. Most “ new
chums ” had it at that time, but I don’t hear anything of it
now. Therefore, I tramped down to Melbourne and back
twice during the first year to see them ; the last time to bring
them up ; so that during my first year in Australia I walked
about 1000 miles. The last time I was over two months in
Melbourne, as our eighth child was near at hand, and I
thought it my duty to be with them. I filled up my time in
Melbourne decorating the new Legislative Chambers, just


then finished. My wages were just about the same as what I
was getting in the claim, yiz., £6 to £7 per week—good
wages too ; but not high for that class of work. Masons at
that time got oyer £1 per day. I then started with the wife
and family in the arduous duty of taking them 200 miles
through the bush in an American waggon. We were 20
days on the road. It is now done in about six hours per rail-
We had a fearful time on “Pretty Sally’s Hill” (before
mentioned) ; it blew a gale with heavy rain. It would have
blown our tent clean away had I not “ turned out ” and cut
saplings down and logged it all round. We pitched our tent
every night, and had a long picnicing all the way. We
could only procure milk at one place (Benalla) the whole 200
miles. We went per coach from Beechworth to the Nine
Mile ; had to place all the children in the bottom to prevent
them being pitched out, the roads being so rough, and hills
all the way. Glad, indeed, were we (dear wife, in particular,
with baby) to arrive at our digger’s home. I had previously
erected the sides and skeleton of our future residence, and
had only to put the calico top on, and stretch the fly roof.
The sides were made ot split slabs, the plates and rafters
trimmed saplings, so that it took us, with the assistance of
our mates, only a few hours to get it ready for occupying. It
was very cold up there in the winter. I think the altitude is
over 3000 feet. I often had to “ turn out ” in the night to
shake the snow off the fly roof. We managed to keep nice
and warm, though, with the huge logs on the fire—the fire-
place almost as wide as the hut. It took two men to roll
some of the back-logs in, and the fire was kept burning all
night. In a few years we put up a better residence. Sawn
timber for the frame, shingle top and a verandah ; and we
started a good garden from the very first, and were the first


to introduce fruit trees in the-district. Mine was the second
formed garden on the Creek, and out of which we made many
a pound in vegetables—sold cabbages at sixpence per pound.
Had splendid flowers also. I likewise introduced the water-
cress, and had a sale for them even in Beechworth. They
grew to perfection with our spring water running over the
beds. The boys carried them round among the miners, and
they were greatly appreciated. This was long before the
Chinamen thought of gardening (which they monopolize now),
and there were about 4000 of them then on the Nine Mile.
I will not dwell long on our life on the diggings. I was
not a “ lucky digger,” with the exception of one little patch
(which see particulars further on). We lived, however, a
comfortable, happy, healthy, and a very independent life, and
brought up a large family—they now had increased to eleven,
seven boys and four girls. This ten years on the diggings
was, by far, the longest rest down, up to then, of our married
life. For instance, of our seven children born in England,
not two were born in one house ; here, in our digger’s home,
we had three in addition, one being also born in Melbourne,
it will be imagined that by this time I had worn off all my
“ smooth-handedness.” Yes, indeed,! had become a “horny-
handed ” working man, and considered it no disgrace either.
“ Who will hang his head in blushes
For the stains to toiling due ?
There is dignity in labor,
If the laborer be true.”
I worked like a navvy for ten years, through many hard-
ships and danger. I had two narrow escapes in falling banks
of earth—had my pick caught each time, and buried as I was
dragging it in running out of the way of the fall. I had
also, during the first year, a very narrow escape of being


buried alive, working underground when the ground was
rotten and dangerous from the continued wet, mentioned
before. It happened thus : Just before knocking-off for
dinner, I had given up the washdirt to the man at the wind-
lass, and put a prop in. On resuming work after dinner,
I remarked that the prop had got “ as firm as a church,” and
that I did not like the appearance of things at all, as this was
a sign that the ground was giving. I also said that, as the
stuff would hardly pay for driving much further, I would
sweep it out and try in another direction from the shaft which
my brother had pointed out, where he had got a fair prospect.
I had just sent up the few buckets of sweepings, and was
pointing out to the windlass-man the direction I intended
driving, when, all of a sudden, without the least warning, the
sides of the shaft commenced cracking ; large masses also
from the lower part breaking off. Of course, the rope was
immediately let down, and I was hauled up, but not before a
large block of earth struck me on the knee, which lamed me
for about a week. Well, in about an hour afterwards, the
whole of the ground, for about half an acre, sunk bodily
down. The ground was completely honeycombed with drives.
I was thankful I put that prop in before dinner, as it gave the
indication of danger.
As the mines are not now very interesting or attractive to
intended emigrants, it is not necessary to enlarge further. It
will be sufficient to say that when we broke up our partner-
ship, my wife’s brothers, being single men, had saved, I think,
about £4OO each, but I only had my share of the water right,
which we also sold. My share was about £6O. The whole
of my earnings, therefore, had gone to bring up ray large
family. My money was invested in them, to be drawn upon
some day, by God’s blessing, with interest—and compound


interest, too. Neighbors used to think they could command
and use my boys as they liked. “ No,” I said, “ you cannot
draw upon my bank in this way ; you must remunerate them
for their services.”
About this time, the Government were beginning to sell the
country lands in the district. My brothers went with their
savings and purchased land some thirty miles from the
diggings, and started farming—an occupation they had been
used to in the “ Old Country,” I continued working on the
diggings with the boys for some time longer, sinking and
driving for “a patch” I thought should exist from the forma-
tion and dip of the ground—but failed. A short time after,
though, a party went down one of my shafts, and only drove
a few feet and struck what I had been looking for so long. I
believe it was about £9O worth. This is a very common fate
on the diggings. The largest nugget ever got in Australia
was found in an old drive only two or three inches under the
bottom. The original occupiers had actually driven over and
knelt over it, but the mass of gold, being so heavy, had sunk
into the pipe-clay, below the ordinary run of wash-dirt. I
could tell of many curious incidents of the sort. After this
I and the boys worked a puddling machine ; some of them
were able to do a fine day’s work now. We only just made a
living, though, and had to keep the horse ; feed, also, was
very expensive. I can remember hay being worth £5O per
ton, and that only bush hay ; of course, it was only then
used for the Government—for police and gold escort horses.
By this time (1865), these old diggings were nearly worn
out.
About this time (1865) the Government passed a new
Land Act, opening the lands of the colony for free selection,
and deferred payment at £1 per acre, payable in half-yearly


payments of one shilling per acre, without interest ; certain
improvements to be effected in residence, fencing, clearing,
cultivation, etc., enforced. Of this liberal Land Act I
thought I would avail myself. I could select up to
320 acres ; but that was beyond my means. At the
next sitting of the Land Board I selected 128 acres—
the most suitable to my capital. A river-side lot. Of
this, 30 acres were river flat, not suitable for cultivation,
being subject to floods ; 35 acres only were fit for cultivation,
the other portion being inferior, crab-holey, grass land. I said
above, this was most suitable to ray capital. Upon selecting,
I had only just cash sufficient to pay the first deposit, as the
first half-year’s rent, viz., £6 Bs, Little enough, it will be
said, after 10 years’ hard labor in the colony. But, remember,
labor is equivalent to capital, and I was backed with that
banking account named before, viz., my seven good boys.
Commencing jfarmina.
Now, striking out my digger’s experience, I will dwell a
little. It may be asked, Why did 1 put upon the title page of
tl is “ Life Sketch,” “ How £6 Bs. became £BOOO ?” Why
did I not start with the 10s. I landed with ? It is this. My
object in writing at all is to induce others, under similar
circumstances and conditions, to settle upon the land ;
therefore, I put down £6 Bs., the amount I started farming
with ; or it may be seen further on that I might have put
down £76 Bs., but, the other £7O was only prospective, or
hardly that at the time, as will be seen. Well, even this is
no great sum, as many a laborer can earn that, or rather,
can save that sum, in a little more than a year, at present


wages ; pick and shovel men getting 7s. to Bs. per day. Had
I a large sum of money saved from mining, it might have
been said—“ Oh ! with that amount of capital, anyone ought
to succeed.”
So myself and two eldest sons started to make a home on
the land. At this time 1 had one son, the third, aged about
16, living upon a station with squatters, not far from where
we selected. He was getting small wages, but at the same
time he was getting good experience with cattle, &c., and his
masters were gentlemen of high character, and for whom I
have the greatest respect. The two who joined me were now
able to do a good hard day’s work, and they had to do it, too.
So we started at once. I left the wife and the smallest of the
children (seven of them, one other son being at a dairy some
few miles off) for a time, at the home on the diggings, and
registered our claim for a few months to prevent anyone
“ jumping ” it.
We put up residence No. 1 on the farm, composed of
two side logs, and sheets of bark for top. We got a party to
plough about an acre ready for potatoes and vegetables, and
then started into the bush, about six miles off, to split fencing
stuff ; living under a few sheets of bark, for about two
months. Wbile there, I wrote a letter to my good mother in
dear old England, and just in fun, headed it, “ Splitters’
Hall.” This was taken in earnest, and I received a letter in
due course, addressed to “ Splitters’ Hall.” This gave us
much amusement. Having got our stuff split, a difficulty
arose. How to get it out of the bush ! We must either give
our labor to some farmer for a time for fetching it out for us,
or return to the claim, and try for a few pounds, as we only
had one old horse we used in the puddling machine, and no
dray. We determined, therefore, to go and wash a few


machines of stuff on the claim. 'I took one of the boys with
me, and, to our agreeable surprise and astonishment, we
washed out £7O worth of gold (alluded to before at page
18) in one week. The only “ patch” we ever got, and for
which I trust we were thankful enough ; and grand indeed
did it look as we washed it off, and it followed the sluicing
fork in the clean water in washing down the boxes. But it
was only just a “ patch,” and ran out the next day. We call it
our “ Providential patch.” On coming from the bank, where I
sold it, my pocket felt nicer than I ever recollected (except
upon one other occasion), and we all felt quite jubilant !
This other occasion I will insert here, although it should
have been in the sketch of my “ Artist Experience.” This is
an occasion which I shall always remember with pleasure
and gratitude to the individual who interested himself so kindly
in my interest. I went into Norfolk professionally, portrait
painting, drawn on this occasion in that direction by the
attractions of a certain individual whose acquaintance I had
formed in London, The Bishop of London, who was always
my friend, and always kindly gave me letters of introduction,
gave me one to the Bishop of Norwich (Bishop Stanley),
the father of the late honoured Dean Stanley, of West-
minster. He kindly introduced me to the Mayor of Norwich,
Mr. Freeman, as the best way to introduce my profession.
The first portrait I painted there was the Mayor’s, in his
robes of office. He also kindly took charge of some paintings of
fancy subjects I took with me, to show to his friends.
After painting for some time in various parts of the country,
in the meantime I got married, and this act, I suppose,
under the circumstances, would be considered (and
what is generally called) “ improvident ” and “ im-
prudent,” as I had no settled home of my own. It


then became imperative that I got one. My wife’s home
was about 22 miles from Norwich, and, as I always was a
great pedestrian, which I have mentioned before, I
started off one fine morning early to Norwich, to see
my good friend, the Mayor, and inform him of my position,
and see what could be done with the paintings he had
charge of. We were dining together when I broached the
subject. He said my pictures had been much admired, and
he thought several of his fellow citizens would like to pur-
chase them. He at once then, at the table, wrote a note
stating my intention of leaving for London, and would they
make me an offer for one or more of my pictures. An answer
was soon back, but the answer and offer was not satisfac-
tory to him. 11 No,” he said, “ he shan’t have it for that
sent a note to another, and thus this novel auction went
on until he got rid of several of my pictures, and, as the
term is, “ at satisfactory prices,” and before the evening Iliad
the money in ray pocket (between £66 and £7O), and, indeed,
it felt warm, as my heart also did, with gratitude. On starting
back the same evening , how I “ lift my feet!” Like Jacob of
old, after his dream and receiving the blessing. (Read from
Gen. 10th v. xxviii ch. to Ist v. xxix ch.). It says—“ He ivent
on his journey but the Heb. in the margin is far more
expressive to one who has gone through a somewhat similar
experience. It there says —“He lift up his feet.” Light of
heart, light of heel. I well remember the son of the Mayor,
a fine young fellow, about my own age, accompanying me
for a few miles on my journey back, conversing by the way (as
Christians love to do) of God’s good providence and love ;
and who knows but what there was a third person in spirit
with us, as He was in person with the “ two disciples on the
road that evening journeying to Emmaus ?” But it could not


be said of us that “we were sad,” as they were. They were
sad because the “ Comforter ” had not then come, but we were
in full enjoyment of that “Comforter.” And they, also, when
the Saviour revealed Himself, had “ burning hearts of
love and did not our hearts burn with love also ? On our
parting, with a good-bye and a hearty and friendly grip, I
shall never forget his kindly words. They were these—
“ Remember how sweet is the day of prosperity to those who
have tasted adversity's cup." And thus we parted on that
memorable day and evening on the Norwich high road.
I hardly felt the remainder of my long walk. It was
rather late in the evening (or rather night) when I reached
home, and, upon entering, threw the proceeds of my trip into
my young wife’s lap. Our feelings may be imagined.
We then went up to London and furnished our first home
at Clapham, as narrated in the sketch of “ My Artist’s Life.”
It will be seen that this transpired before my health broke down
from over study.
But to resume. With this £7O from the claim we pur-
chased a good draught horse, new dray, etc., so that we were
enabled to cart our fencing stuff, and felt quite like getting
on. After erecting the fence around a good part of the
allotment, we commenced clearing the land, as there was a
good bit of timber on. Grubbing trees, chopping up, and
burning off, occupied us during the winter. We found hut
No. 1 rather cold some nights, as our fire was outside. I
often took my blankets and slept outside by the large fires,
where the large logs were being burned off; these, also, required
“ rounding up” during the night. We got about 12 acres
cleared, ploughed, and sown with wheat and oats by the month
of June. We started then with the orchard and garden,


planted about 50 fruit trees of various sorts, and put in a few
vines. This should always be done as soon as possible, but
very few do it. We considered now we had got fairly started.
Thus : A good deal of the fencing done, 12 acres cleared
and under crop, orchard and garden dug and planted, one
good horse and dray, also old puddling horse, being light, was
useful for riding, etc. ; three cows, with calves, from the
station ; out of my son’s wages—2 pigs in the sty,
and a few dozen fowls. Therefore we began thinking of
shifting the family down. I sold our claim for a few pounds,
and as our house on the diggings was still good, we shifted
the materials down, and erected farm residence No. 2. This
put us up till nearly our first harvest time. Thus we
were all together again, except the son at the station, but be
was only a few miles off. Our youngest child at this time—a
boy—was 2 years old. We did not leave the digging’s home,
though, without some regrets. God having blessed us with
many peaceful years of comfort and independence, and,
although we had not saved much money, it did not interfere
with our happiness ; and the hills were very healthy, abound-
ing in crystal springs, as will be supposed, for during the 10
years’ residence I had no occasion to consult a medical man.
It was a great blessing with 11 young children. I had, how-
ever, made it a duty to study medicine to some extent, which
is necessary in a colony like this, and, particularly in those
early days. Up to this time all our furniture had bepn home-
made bush furniture, with the exception of one sofa-bedstead,
and one American rocking chair, but then it matched with
the bush residences. I now made a new set of furniture for
our farm-house.
I have now to record a great sorrow which befell us. We
had not all been together on the farm many weeks, when we


lost our fifth son, by drowning. He was a fine lad of 15
years. It happened in this way. He was out with the gun,
keeping the cockatoos off the crops, but seeing some ducks in
a lagoon near the river, he shot one of them, and stripped and
swam in to secure it. He was a fine swimmer. He, how-
ever, did not, in his hurry, take the precaution to keep his cap
on, as he always did when bathing, and, it being an exceed-
ingly hot day, I believe he got sunstruck, as his younger
brother, who was with him, said he laid upon the top of the
water some time. There were several parties sunstruck on
that day. He was a good boy, and had that morning, as
usual, with his brothers and sisters, said their prayers, and
sang together their little hymn—
“ Come to this happy land,
Why will you doubting stand ?”
There is one there awaiting us “ beyond the river.”
Myself and boys kept grubbing and clearing, and got in
four acres of maize by harvest time. Two of them then went
to assist their uncles at harvest ; they resided about six miles
from us. They coming, in return, to help us. So our first
harvest-home in Victoria was completed. “The wilderness
was, indeed, blossoming as the rose,” and we felt proud .at
being permitted to fulfil the Heavenly behest of “ subduing
and replenishing the earth.” What occupation on earth can
equal that of the husbandman, to raise man’s mind from
“ Nature to Nature’s God ” ; that is, to a properly-regulated
mind. To see the beautiful order of all Creation. The un-
erring instinct of animals. The song and wonderful plumage
of birds, so very beautiful in Australia, The sweet hum
of the busy bee fructifying the beautiful flowers, and modelling
their cells so wonderfully and as unerringly as in the garden of
Eden. Man, in his regenerate state, standing thus amid


these surroundings, and leaning upon the merits of his
Saviour alone, to atone for the sin of the first Adam, and
with his face and aspirations raised heavenward, must feel that
Paradise is, in a measure, restored even in this world. He
has, at least, a foretaste of the Paradise above.
Unregenerate man alone appears the only contradictory
element and anomaly in the universe.
JncreasinG our Ibolfcmge.
We selected 115 acres more land the next year, and 95
the year after. All spare time, the two eldest sons went out
fencing, etc., for other settlers, but, in a few years, we had
plenty of work at home, and our son from the station joined
us ; the other sons, a« well, growing up strong and useful.
My wife and daughters also busy attending to housework,
dairying, etc., which now had increased considerably by natural
increase and farther purchases. Horse stock also increased
inthe same way. Thuswehavegone on year alter year, all work-
ing for one common object and mutual welfare, and which we
have now continued to do for nearly 25 years on the farm up
to this time, 1891. Two of my sons have selected other
allotments, and we have purchased two “ drunk out ” farms
from the mortgagees. We also, in 1884, purchased a very
eligible block of land. We had to pay dearly for it, though.
It contained about 400 acres of good tillage land—good for
this district, where land is not first-class, like many parts of
Victoria. For this, we gave £8 per acre, and for 636 acres
of grass land adjoining, £4 per acre, costing altogether
over £6OOO. This we had to get partly upon loan. With
our own great strength, now of six grown-up sons, and plenty


of horse strength besides, we have reaped in produce and
stock from the same land, quite two-thirds of the amount, and
expect in a few more years’ crops to clear it, so that it was a
good investment, but there has been very heavy labor attached
to it.
Although we have a large quantity of the finest land in
the district suitable for Hop-growing, we have scrupulously
and conscientiously refrained from growing the same ;
considering it would be most inconsistent with our prin-
ciples to have anything whatever, directly or indirectly, to
do with any product that contributed to the production of
that substance that has been the greatest curse to the
world ; also puling some of the best land to a base use,
instead of using it for the benefit of mankind. The Hop
is different altogether from the Grape, or Barley, as they are
in themselves a blessing, and of eminent use to man, pro-
perly and rationally used.
Cbe Consummation.
About six years since we erected on the “ Home Farm ”
our first selection—Residence No. 3, a superior brick house,
which cost about £SOO, and very desirable now and
appreciated, as wife and I are growing old—self, 74 ; wife, a
few years younger. The bush furniture has given place to as
good a suite of furniture as anyone could wish for in sitting,
bedrooms, etc., also a superior organ, with which to praise
and glorify the good God who has blessed and prospered us.
I have, besides, taken the brush in hand again to adorn the
walls, and leave some of ray handiwork behind me for the
children. In fact, for the last eight years I have done a few


paintings, sold a few landscapes, and exhibited them at various
places in the colonies ; also sent a large one to the Colonial
and Indian Exhibition in London, for which I got a
certificate and medal. Heavy, laborious work, of course,
begins to tell upon me now if long continued, so that this
“ soft-handed ” work is a relaxation. My department now in
the firm is principally in the garden and orchard, of which
we have now a large one, both fancy and useful. We have also
an orangery recently planted, have also a good many old trees,
which bear wonderfully well. We irrigate with a horse-pump.
We are all still working together in partnership, as it has
always been my policy to give my sons a direct interest in all
our undertakings and property, and this is only right and
just, as to them mainly, under God’s blessing, I must attribute
our success; anyhow, the labor portion has largely devolved
upon them.
We stand now (1891), after 25 years on the farms, thus :
Amount of Land, 2,523 acres
At a fair valuation, free .. .. £6,150
Stock, cattle, horses, etc .. .. 1,500
Plants, Machinery, etc. .. .. 550
£8,200
Thus I have shown, as I promised, how £6 Bs., or, if you
like, £76 Bs., has increased to £B,OOO.
It must be remembered, although this looks a nice sura of
money, that if divided between six sons and four daughters,
the amount for each would not be large ; say among the six
sons, the amount to each would only be about £1,350. How-
ever, by still holding together in partnership, they can increase
it much more than if they divided; in fact, they are just doing
so by purchasing a property in New South Wales of 3,000


acres, mainly for sheep-farming. Besides, I have known
steady, single farm-men, as hired hands at £1 per week and
“ found,” and £1 10s. per week for harvest work, who have
banked at least £4O per year, for over 20 years, which, with
compound interest, I presume would total up to the above
sum. Not that lam an advocate for this style of saving, as,
when the money was about half that sum, they would have the
means to marry and settle down ; thus be better citizens, and
add more to the prosperity of the colony.
Now, doubtless, the question will be asked by many situated
as I was, and others, “ Can Ido the same ?” My answer is,
I really cannot see why they cannot. But they must have
seen that even upon the land, there is a very rough time to go
through, especially in new country, and many years of care-
ful labor, though, with all, a pleasant, healthful, and in-
dependent occupation, and, “ with a long pull, and a strong
pull, and a pull altogether,” and a firm reliance on God’s
blessing, a peaceful and restful end.
a IDiesertatkm on temperance.
It must be born in mind, however, that there was one great
and important, if not indispensable factor, which I have not
mentioned in the foregoing sketch, that has greatly contri-
buted to our success, viz. :—The curse of alcohol was never
permitted to enter or pollute our home. I was early in life
(1840) convinced of the advantages, physically and morally,
of abstaining from the narcotic poison—alcohol. My pledge
card, which I still have and keep with much pride, is dated
1841. I had abstained some time before, so that I can count
over half a century in this good cause. And lam happy to


gay the whole of my children have followed our example, and
it was only natural that they should do so, as I am a firm
believer in parental example. When this great cause was
first advocated, we all gladly joined it, as we, as a family, had
suffered from the curse—and what family has not, in some
measure ? My own father was a victim to the demon ; but
those were days of ignorance, and drunkenness was only
looked upon as a venial weakness, and almost as a virtue
among all classes —the clergy not even exempt ; and it was
considered a breach of hospitality if you did not make your
guests drunk. Thank God those bad old times are past !
My dear parent was more excused as he was a naval man—a
“ man-of-war’s-man,” and fought under the great Nelson, and
at that time it was thought necessary to make men half mad
with rum before they could fight. Now : how changed ! The
commanders call for the teetotalers when they want any
particular or dangerous duty performed. I said, as a family
we suffered, for he died early in life, and left his widow with
six very young children to battle alone in the world. But I
must draw the curtain ; we cannot claim ignorance now.
Now, do not let it be understood that I mean to say that
no one will succeed unless they are abstainers ; but from my
long experience and extensive observation, it is extremely rare
to find those who started with moderation in intoxicants, can
continue so, at least with the potations in the same quantity
or strength ; it is almost physically impossible to do so.
Alcohol is a substance that principally exerts its influence on
the nervous system, like opium—a kindred substance. It
creates an artificial appetite or craving, and nervous prostration
is the result, which can only be relieved, in thousands of cases,
by a continued increase in quantity or strength, and a diseased
state of the system is insensibly created. In very many cases


moderation is impossible, No man ever started in life with
the intention of being a drunkard, and if you suggested the
possibility of such, he would be most indignant. Never-
theless, they fall against their will. Neither do I think any
man leaves his home and family with the deliberate intention
of getting drunk, and coming home to abuse those who, in
his sober moments, he treats with affection. If he did so,
such a man has fallen far below the brute creation. Man is
simply deluding himself with this alluring and fascinating
“serpent.” In fact, “mocked,” and “he that is deceived thereby
is not wise.” And the true wisdom is to banish this “ curse of
the race ” from your home, as no one knows how soon they or
someone dear to them, may be drawn into this snare. I never
knew an abstainer but what prospered in this colony, and I
have known hundreds of drinkers “go to the wall.” I have
not known a single farmer in this district who planted a vine-
yard, and made wine, who has not been “ bitten by his own
dog,” and died prematurely ; except one, and he sold out, but
is still a confirmed drunkard. Alas ! what shocking tales I
could tell of wasted homes. I have already mentioned
two “ drunk out ” farms we purchased— premature deaths,
violent deaths. Children turned adrift on the world, sacred
and loving ties sundered, etc., etc., simply from indulgence in
this most insidious, useless, and dangerous habit. However,
a brighter day is dawning even for Australia, which, as yet,
is far behind in this glorious movement of true temperance
(temperance in all lawful things). Alcohol is unlawful, being
foreign and destructive to man’s physical nature, but the total
abstinence cause is destined also to be the moral salvation of
the world, and the hand-maid and stepping-stone to a religious
and Christian life. And I am happy to say many of our youth
are seeing the advantages and duty of abstinence from
intoxicants.


£be VDlne Jn&ustr?.
Oa the other hand, many of our politicians and others are
advocating the advantages of the vine-growing industry for
making wine, and have even dubbed Australia—“ John Bull’s
Vineyard.” Yes, vineyard, I will, if you like, endorse, but
“ Wine Shop,” which they mean, I will ignore. The grape,
rightly used, is one of God’s greatest gifts, and I would like
to see every hill-top clothed with the vine, but not quite so,
for we are, or should be, wise enough to know that the hill-
tops should never be denuded of their forest’s adornment. Say
every hill-side. The pure “ fruit of the vine,” the blood of the
grape unfermented, or grapes preserved as raisins, are wonder-
fully nutritious, and contain many of the elements of the
blood. By fermentation, which is a process of decay and
destruction, nearly the whole of the nutriment is destroyed.
Thus, the gluten and gum are entirely destroyed. Six-
sevenths of the albumen, and four-fifths of the sugar, and
most of the others, are also destroyed. And what do we get
in lieu. Why, a narcotic, sleeping, irritant (irritating) poison;
irritating, though, should have been placed first, as it excites
the passions to commit every evil deed, long before the drunken
or sleepy stage commences. Now, will any sane person have
the temerity to say that this poison alcohol, the substance
created by the destruction of all these life-sustaining con-
stituents, is “ the good gift of God ” as “ received from His
hand ?” There is hardly a substance on earth but what can be
and has, in like manner, been perverted. Grain of all sorts,
fruit, rice,potatoes, beet-root, starchy substances of all sorts, in
fact, anything that can be converted into saccharine (sugar :
the foundation of alcohol), milk also, and even meat. Were
all these good gifts ever intended to be worse than destroyed ?


In the United Kingdom, 80,000,000 bushels of bread food
are thus destroyed, when millions of people are in a state of
pauperism or semi-starvation. And all this waste, to do what ?
To feed men ? No. To give health ? No. Strength ?
No. To warm ? No. To allay this ? No. It is of no
earthly use whatever. But this it does. Debases men below
the beast, also producing crime, poverty, disease, and moral
degradation. This is the sum total that man reaps for
destroying the bountiful fruits of the Creator.
Is it then a wise policy on the part of a paternal Govern-
ment to unduly encourage the manufacture of wine in bonuses
and viticultural colleges ? Is it patriotic ? Is it philanthropic ?
Is it Christian ! With a climate that can produce wine by
natural fermentation up to 31 per cent, (this is disputed by
experts in Europe) of alcoholic strength/ two-thirds the
strength of brandy, and a very large quantity is being dis-
tilled into brandy, how can we expect a sober people ?
It may appear to some that I have dwelt unreasonably long
upon this question, but feeling strongly, I must write strongly.
Having, therefore, pointed out to the best of ray ability
what I consider the greatest drawback to the advancement of
this fair colony, viz., the wasteful expenditure of 6,000,000
of money annually for Victoria alone, I will return to con-
sider at greater length the object for which this sketch was
mainly written.
Gbe Settlement of tbe Xanbs.
Husbandry is the source of all true wealth, and the back-
bone of every country. I regret to say the farming interest
in Victoria has been heavily handicapped by the protective


duties, to sustain the interests of the manufacturers and
importers. The crisis came upon the farmers first, as soon as
they had to compete in the world’s market, and it will come
upon the manufacturers just in the same way, when they have
over-produced for the home market. It is just now upon the
turning point. Can they compete with the world with men’s
present wages, and eight hours’ labor ? I very much doubt
it. If not, what will they do with their surplus goods.
Farmers’ sons have had to rush the cities for employment,
and there is a vast population just growing into manhood
—sons of artisans, which our football matches testify. Can these
be absorbed into the various trades ? I don’t like taking a
gloomy view of things, but I think the subject should have
very serious thought. It is very easy to boast about the
eight hours’ movement, and wages to be fixed, and “ strikes ”
ordered by a Trades’ Hall Council. But will they provide
an outlet for the working man’s commodities at colonial
prices ? But to return to the land. In the first place, I may
say as regards Victoria, the open selection of Crown land has
ceased. Even the grazing blocks, under the new Act, 1884,
which nearly covers all the inferior or waste land, I think are
all pretty well taken up, and the only hope now is the break-
ing up or subdivision of the large estates, and they comprise,
luckily, the very finest runs of land, on 100 acres of which,
a family could live better than on 320 of ordinary land. Of
course, to get this good land requires some capital, but the
return lies surely in the soil, and it only requires labor—
the poor man’s capital—with strict economy, to recover the
first expenditure. The breaking up of these large estates will
be the making of Victoria. Or the cutting up into tenant
blocks would be even better for the owners, and better for men
of limited means. A ten years’ lease on prime land should


make him independent. I don’t mean make his fortune, but
should place him in a position to go ahead. This is the only
land that will bear a dense population, or bear intense cultiva-
tion, and is, in fact, the only hope for the colony. This want
of land for the rising generation is the cause of so many of
our young men—farmers’ sons—seeking employment in Mel-
bourne, their parents’ holdings not being sufficient to main-
tain the whole of the family, and many are marrying, and
desire to have homes of their own. I trust the large owners
of estates are patriotic, if not philanthropic enough to see
the necessity of this, which is also a duty to God and man,
for it is pitiable to see men willing to go upon the land, and
many with sufficient means, looking about in vain. Without
these are cultivated, how can the population increase as it
should ? And how can work be found for the artisans in the
cities? These and the farmers must go hand in hand,
and prosper together ; for if the 130,000 farmers have only
a surplus of an average of £lO each yearly, it throws into their
hands £1,300,000 —no insignificant sum. To a small extent,
there has been a disposition to sub-divide. I trust they will
increase a hundred-fold.
I think it will be seen from what I have written, that for
“ New Chums,” at least in Victoria, there is not much chance
for settling on the land, without they possess a few hundreds
in cash. Therefore they must be satisfied with patient, frugal
labor for a few years, to save sufficient capital. But there
are the other colonies of Australia—New South Wales,
South Australia, Queensland, and Western Australia, where
they have liberal land laws. Splendid countries, inviting
capital and labor, and upon which, in the various latitudes,
the products of the whole world can be grown to the greatest
perfection, and the area so vast, that the population of another


Europe could be set down; but a very great portion of it, from
its position, climate, etc., is not very inviting, or hardly
suitable for needy emigrants. There is, though, a vast out-
let for the profitable investment of capital in those outlying
districts. Capital and labor must go hand in hand like twin
brothers. Then the waste places of the earth would soon
“ blossom as the rose,” and we should soon find the over-
stocked hives of the old lands relieved of the burden of
humanity, for as yet it is idle to talk of the “ over-population
of the world why, we know in fact that as yet it is not
half populated, not only Australia. Look at the vast country
of South America, watered by that mighty river the Amazon,
also the Argentine Republic. Then the great north-west of
Canada, also the regions of the Congo and Central Africa,
and many other considerable and desirable places. Yes, there
is room enough yet in the ample and bountiful bosom of
“ Mother Earth,” and she is inviting, with open arms, her
children to partake of her bounties. We hear a great deal
about “over-population” and “over-production.” Why is
it ? Simply because the great masses of the working bees
are not placed in a position to gather the world’s honey, and
thus to become customers for the products of the manu-
facturing countries. The cry should be —Put the people on the
lands , at whatever cost! They will return interest an
hundred-fold.
irrigation.
At the present time the subject of irrigation is absorbing
the attention of the Government and the community in
general. The appointment of the Royal Commission on
Water Supply was a grand idea, and for which the colony


should be grateful, and particularly to the president, the
Honourable Alfred Deakin, M.P., for his arduous and inde-
fatigable labor to promote a general interest in the subject.
The visit also of the Commission to America, and the report
of the same, are highly interesting and useful, and which led
to the establishment of Messrs Chaflfey Bros.’ Irrigation
Colony at Mildura. This will do immense good. It will be
an open book, giving ocular and practical demonstration of
the advantages of water and intense cultivation, but above
all, to show how capital can be advantageously invested for the
mutual and common good, and I think it will lead to many
such in Victoria, and also extend right across the continent
to the Gulf of Carpentaria, and thus make a profitable outlet
for English capital, and at the same time relieve the old
lands of the plethora of humanity. What can be done in
arid countries without water ? What would India, Egypt,
Italy, &c., be without irrigation ? In fact, it is the life of all
nature. We can hardly estimate its value. It is the only
solvent and menstruum to set free the constituents of the
soil. Intense culture with water requires intense labo. and
intense manuring. It will also require cheap labor and
cheap mechanical appliances. At present our machinery is
nearly double the price it is in America. How then can
we compete with the world without we start fairly ? A 50-acre
irrigated farm will suffice to keep a family comfortably, as
crops are not only doubled, but you can double crop. That is,
take at least two crops, one grain and the other roots or
fodder plants, in one season, and you can cut fodder crops
three or four times, and lucerne five or six. I have experi-
mented for some years, and I have come to the conclusion that
“ soakage ” is the best ; that is, run the water in the furrows
between the lands or beds, not too wide, so that the water, by


capillary attraction, may soak quite through. There is a very
great deal to learn. The right time to put the water on, and
the time to leave off, otherwise it will do more harm than good.
For fruit, also, you must not keep watering too long, or the
fruit will never mature properly, and be of inferior flavor
and quality, and the young wood will not mature for the next
year’s crop. Independent of fruit growing, which is so much
advocated just now, I think irrigation is of as much advantage
to the general farmer, not so much for corn growing, as it is
difficult to catch the right time, and an excess is pretty sure
to create mildew and rust; but for roots and fodder crops,
and “catching crops” after harvests, for the dairy, etc., too
much cannot be said in favor of irrigation. Every stream, how-
ever small, running through a dry country, should be utilised,
if not, it is so much wealth running to waste, and its use to
the dairy industry, which has advanced with such strides
during the last few years, is not half enough appreciated.
The Government has aided this industry most liberally, and
it has been the making of thousands of families, but improved
methods of growing crops by irrigation and better feeding,
and an improved breed of dairy cattle, would quite double
the produce. I think I have said enough as to the advan-
tages and difficulties of irrigation, difficulties which experience
will overcome.
As this “ Life’s Sketch” was written mainly to induce the
settlement of the people on the land, my concluding division
will be an endeavour to propound
H Scheme of Settlement.
It appears strange that the wealth of Great Britain has not
gone in this direction long ago for the benefit of her own sons.


“ Charity should begin at home.” The poverty and the
drudgery of the masses is appalling in England, and this by
the side of enormous wealth. A burden of poverty and a
burden of wealth. Strange anomaly ! Not only the pro-
duce market, but the money market as well, is regulated by
Great Britain. The hands and eyes of the whole world are
lifted up to her ! What would be the state of most countries
without the markets and wealth of England ? Look at the
millions wasted in worthless Turkey. Then we see the
millions that have been spent in India and Egypt. Blessing
indeed, no doubt, to those countries. Then it appears so
passing strange that a portion of this British wealth has not
been diverted more to the lands of her colonies in a systematic
way, and there can be no safer investment. N.B.—The
Chaffey Brothers’ scheme.
We find, however, that the British Government are com-
mencing action in this direction, at least at home, in establish-
ing peasant proprietary, and millions of money is to be appro-
priated to this purpose in purchasing land, &c. This is a
step in the right direction, and I trust this sort of thing will
be extended to the colonies, where, as I said before, there is
room for another Europe. Britain’s sons and our colonies
should be thought of first. It would not be charity. Charity
in this sense is rather an unchristian term ; the benefits would
be reciprocal. When her sons are wanted for the defence of
the Empire, they are willing to lay down their lives by thou-
sands, and millions upon millions of money, for the purpose of
war, is forthcoming. Is it, then, too much to ask that a few
millions be spent in the cause of peace, to enable them to do
battle with rugged nature ?
As regards the extension of settlements in Victoria, I think
I have hinted enough respecting the necessity of sub-division


and irrigation. I think after a few years, when the advantages
of irrigation have been proved, many will be glad to sub-
divide their present holdings of 820 acres, and confine them-
selves to half the quantity, especially if the anticipations of
the fruit industry are realised, and I have considerable faith in
them, but not such glowing results as are held out; only one-
half of the profits stated would suffice. One thing we know:
this generation appears to have made the discovery that man
is more of a fruit and vegetable eater than was before
supposed, so that therein a good deal of our hope lies. By
the partaking of fruit, we require much less drink, as a pound
of most fruits contain more than three-quarters of a pound of
water; we may say three-quarters of a pint to one pound, so
that they are eminently meat and drink. As to the other
vast portions of Australia, I can see no hope for settlement,
particularly in the arid districts, without either the Govern-
ments at home or in the colonies, or syndicates, take the matter
up. With respect to individual settlements in these parts,
we cannot compare it with North America; the conditions are
so very different, there is such a very small portion of Aus-
tralia in the temperate zone, the climate of which is so suitable
for European constitutions, whereas, in North America and
Canada, there is an enormous territory congenial for the pro-
ducts and people of temperate climates. In Australia, wheat
appears to fail north of 30deg., at least, it does not pay to
grow it without it is on table-land, such as part of New
England district in New South Wales. It is strange that as
yet that great colony, four times as large as Victoria, does not
grow near corn enough to feed her own people, and Victoria
has already exported this year, 1891, millions of bushels.
Well, as regards that, Victoria cannot boast, and it is quite as
strange that they cannot, or do not grow half meat enough


for the insignificant population. The facilities and induce-
ments for settlement in America are grand. Many a sturdy
man has “gone west” into the wild woods, and made a home
with nothing more than his axe, and a bag of seeds, living well
in the meantime upon the indigenous products of that splendid
country, which are abundant. Wild animals, large and
small, birds, fish, native fruits and nuts, and sugar from the
maple tree, &c. Truly, that was a rich land ! But nothing of
this sort can be attempted in Australia.
If I were to draw up a plan of settlement, basing the costs
according to my own personal experience, but depending upon
a company for the capital to start with, I would advise, after
the company had agreed with the Government for the pur-
chase of the land, and the same was surveyed in blocks of 200
acres each, to settle down 200 families, which would amount to
40,000 acres, and a reserved right for 40,000 more at a some-
what higher figure. The cost to place each family of say
five individuals, would be about £2OO each family ; that is, to
pay passage, supply them with food, implements, stock, seeds,
&c,, for the first year, until some produce came to hand.
Residences, of course, would be rough, and should be erected
by themselves. Thus far the support and provision of the
200 families for one year would be £40,000, or for 1600
families—Booo souls—£soo,ooo. Say, for illustration, the
company got the land for two shillings per acre, and gave
each family a lease for 10 years at two shillings an acre per
annum, the payment to be for purchase money, so that at the
end of 10 years it would be his own, having paid the company
£1 per acre. The £2OO also, advanced in the first instance,
to be paid off by instalments with 6 per cent, interest per
annum added, so that at the end of ten years or a little more,
each family should be possessed of their own freehold, and a


considerable increase of stock, etc. The company should have
a depot, where everything necessary for the settlement could be
supplied at the lowest possible rate, and also undertake to
preserve and market the produce of the settlers to the best
advantage, to ensure them the highest possible price, like
Cbaffey Bros, propose doing. To go more into detail and
figures as to the first year’s expenses of a family of five, I
would put it down thus :
Cost of bringing out and placing
upon the land a family of five
individuals £5O 0 0
Provisions for one year 50 0 0
£loo 0 0
Stock—
2 horses at £lO 20 0 0
4 cows at £7 ... 28 0 0
4 pigs 3 0 0
Fowls ... 2 0 0
53 0 0
Implements—
Dray 10 0 0
Plough ... ... ... ... 6 0 0
Harrows... ... 5 0 0
Sundry tools 2 10 0
Dairy utensils ... 210 0
Harness 600
House utensils 5 0 0
37 0 0
Seeds—
For 20 acres of wheat 6 0 0
For 10 acres of oats 2 5 0
For 5 acres of maize 0 5 0
For garden seeds 10 0
50 fruit trees (various) ... 3 0 0
12 10 0
Total £202 10 0
If a family of five—husband, wife, one daughter, and two
strong lads of from 14 to 16 years of age—entered upon the
land in the month of January, and started at once putting up
a house and getting stuff ready, they should be able to do all
the work among themselves, and get the wheat and oats in


in June —orchard and garden in July. The maize ground
could be left until the fence was up round the crop. The
amounts put down for food may look small, but it would not
be more than that, as in six months (and before, with milk,
butter and eggs) they would have potatoes, &c., from the
garden, and one pig killed, which together would be half a
living. Such a scheme as this could be easily worked out in
detail, and thus I think millions of capital could be profitably
invested. In fact, without some such scheme I don’t know
how the vast territories under the British Crown, now lying
waste, can be utilised, A few such settlements would give an
immense impetus to trade and manufacture, and we should
soon cease to hear the cries of “ want of employment,” “ over-
population,” and “ over-producticn,” N.B.—Such a scheme
should commend itself to General Booth. It may further be
said as regards settling a large population upon the land with
intense culture—What is the amount of land a family can
comfortably live upon ? The sub-division of land has taken
place considerably in the original eastern States of America.
I see by the Government reports of the State of Massachusets,
71,000 persons live from the products of farms averaging only
56 acres, and the average size of farms over the whole State in
1850 was 99 acres; in 1875, 76 acres, so that they are
now being reduced. The income of these farmers average
about £125 per year, independent, I presume, of farm products
consumed by themselves. Any way, it shows a very thrifty,
frugal, and industrious people. The population also has
increased in the 13 original States from 15. per square mile in
1780, including towns, to 55 in 1880, or over 11 individuals to
the acre. This is amazing ! Then take Belgium, France, and
Ireland, where families live, or appear to do so, or are compelled
to do so, comfortably upon only five, eight, and ten acres of land.


Take France, as its position, various industries, and climate
much resemble Victoria. I find by the Government reports
that there is a population of nineteen millions (19,000,000)
existing on farms of about eight acres each. This is
wonderful! And, as our Governments are partial to commis-
sions, it would be very interesting and instructive if we had
one to go through France, as they did through California, to
see how these farmers manage their system of farming,
various products, prices, &c., also diet, beverages and social
standing. It would, I think, open the eyes of some of the
settlers in Victoria who say they cannot make a living on 320
acres. I can give a very good example of frugality,and also
details of a farm in Ireland under Earl Spencer’s prize system,
on his estates. A tenant named Hill was awarded the first
prize ; area, 11 acres.
Division of Land.
1 acre 1 rood, turnips and mangles,
1 acre 2 roods, potatoes.
4 acres, oats.
6 acres.
1 acre 2 roods, upland.
1 acre, lowland.
1 acre 3 roods, permanent pasture.
11 acres.
Half an acre of land seeded after potatoes, 1J after manured roots,
2 J under lea-oats.
Live stock consisted of 1 horse, 3 dairy cows, 2 heifers, 2 pigs, and
46 poultry.


Balance-sheet,
£ s. d.
Produce of cowa ... 35 0 0
Oats (exclusive of
horse feed) ... 21 0 0
Profit on beast sold ... 19 0 0
Potatoes (5J tons at
£3) 16 10 0
2 calves 9 0 0
Profit on pigs 6 0 0
Eggs .. 610 0
£ll3 0 0
£ s. d.
Bent and taxes ... 12 18 4
Wages and keep of
servant 22 0 0
Seeds 110
Labour (spring and
harvest) 5 0 0
Hand feed to cows ... 1 12 0
£42 11 4
Balance-.
£ll3 0 0
42 11 4
Profit £7O 8 8
I (the reporter) asked Hill what wages weekly would have
been equal to this. He seemed astonished at such a question,
and confessed that no reasonable wages could have placed him
in such a comfortable and independent position.
This is a modest affair, and yet the tenant was most
contented and happy.
In concluding this section, I must say I would very much
like to see in Victoria, a small model farm of say 25 acres of
tillage as a dairy farm ; everything to be consumed on the
farm ; that is, all the produce from the land—hay, straw,
fodder plants, roots, etc.—and the whole to be under the
direction and supervision of the Minister of Agriculture,
and the Government Agricultural Chemist, Martin,
Esq., and everything carried out under an intelligent tenant
and his family, and a strict balance-sheet kept.


H Glimpse at tbe jfuturc of Hustralia.
I am not so sanguine as many that Australia, in the near
future, will have such a very large population, and particularly
a European one. There is not temperate climate enough. I
have already stated that wheat cannot be profitably grown
beyond 30 degrees of latitude north, and we may say most of
the European products also, and the climate, beyond another
20 degrees, is not suitable for European constitutions to labor
in. If we, therefore, draw a line at 30 degrees across the map
of Australia, we shall see the insignificant portion there is
left in the temperate zone ; we shall find it not one-fourth of
the continent. Take it through Western Australia, and there
is just a little corner. What, then, is the future of the
enormous country north of 30 degrees, and which is only
suitable for tropical and semi-tropical products, all of which
will grow to the greatest perfection ? The question then is,
will Europeans grow these products ? I think not. At
least, not European labor. It must, and no doubt will be
done, by large companies, by employing Chinese, Coolie, or
Kanaka labor, under the superintendence of Europeans,
These hotter regions, otherwise, will never be utilized. There-
fore, it is my belief that instead of persecuting and expelling
these races as the fashion now is, we shall be glad to invite
them to assist in developing this vast territory. I think this
conclusion will strike everyone as correct, who calmly reflects
upon the subject. Besides, the products of these districts,
such as sugar, rice, tea, coffee, etc., require so much hand
labor, that to compete with these with other countries which
have cheap labor, will be impossible. Even at the present
day, neither Englishmen or Europeans will do the necessary
work in the northern districts, and even in Victoria our


tobacco, hops, and vine industries can hardly be carried on
without the despised Chinese. We have an example already
in the sugar industry in Queensland. Recently a plant was
up for sale that cost £26,000, and the highest offer was
£SOOO. What are we then to do without this cheap labor ?
Without it this vast territory must evidently remain in a state
of nature, or still be devoted to wandering herds of cattle,
and by their vast numbers cripple the farmers of the more
temperate parts by competition. Where, then, are the boasted
millions of population to come from, which so many calculate
upon ?
One great factor which will stay the progress of this great
country more than any other is the present jealousy and war
between Capital and Labor. Ko country can advance with-
out there is perfect security for life and property. If capital
cannot find security in one country, it can easily go to another.
Social order must be maintained at all costs. It appears
coming to this, whether the Elected Government is to rule
the country, or the Trades’ Hall Council. There is a class of
men in Melbourne who want to fix things according to their
own Utopian ideas, and upon such “ hard and fast ” lines that
would be totally unbearable and tyrannical even to their own
class. It would be well for them to ponder the wise words
recently uttered by President Harrison, viz., “ The safety of
the State, the good order of the community, all that is good,
the capacity, indeed, to produce material wealth, is dependent
upon the intelligence and social order. Wealth and commerce
are timid creatures, they must be assured that the rest will be
safe before they build. So it is always in those communities
where the most perfect order is maintained, where intelligence
is protected, where the Church of God, and the institutions of
religion are revered and respected, we find the largest develop-


ments of material xuealthf There is far too much “ dog in
the manger ” feeling among the well-to-do artisans in Mel-
bourne. They are jealous of others coming into this good
land. They were glad enough to come themselves. It is the
fear that a few shillings will come off their own wages. It
is strange that sensible men, with any idea in their own heads,
can listen to, or be guided by the strange contradictory logic
of the leaders of the labor party. Recently, one of them
said, speaking against the “ Bloated Capitalists,” “ those who
are living without working, you may depend upon it, are
living upon those who do work, and that all independent
people are ‘ loafers or parasites ’on the State.” Holding that
independence is a crime. Well, many of their own class, by
industry and frugality, are independent or approaching to
it. These, then, are graduating to this new species of crime.
Another said these “ loafers and parasites” should be com-
pelled to turn out and work, and in the next breath called
competition the work of the devil, and over-production the
curse of the colony. According to this logic, if all were
workers and all producers—what then ? The greatness of
Melbourne consists of the great number of independent non-
workers, who employ and consume the produce of the workers,
and this is also the secret of England’s greatness, and their
wealth is assisting the great national works of the whole
world. These wiseacres even dictate to the farmers in this
matter, thinking, I suppose, that they cannot see a yard from
the plough-tail. If we get an overplus, and the prices conse-
quently lower, and of which they reap the benefit, they tell us
it is over-production again, and say, “Why don’t you just
produce what the colony requires, and then you would be all
right ?” But should we do so, and their loaf be double the price,
which it would be, they would be the first to cry out that


“we were not utilising the land.’' Not considering that in
advocating this grand remedy, this colony, instead of exporting
millions of bushels of wheat to feed the hungry in Europe,
would simply revert to a sheep walk, or nearly so, and two-
thirds of the agricultural population would swell the present
too over-crowded cities, and increase their own ranks with
double the number of workers—and what then ? The railways
also might shut up, as sheep, &c., can travel to market on
their own legs. But enough of this. The farming and the
town interests are identical, the one cannot prosper without
the other, but the farmer can get over a pinch best. Farm-
ing also is paramount, and Governments should see to it as
soon as possible and establish farm colonies—see that the
large estates are put to the best use. Previous Governments
have frittered away the best of the land by special surveys, and
permitting dummyism. They should also see that the
remaining unalienated land is kept in the hands of the State,
and only leased to tenants. A 20 years’ lease, renewable, is
almost as good as a freehold, and suits thousands better.
Large estates in England have been let in this way, and have
remained in the hands of the same tenants for generations.
As I have previously said, I now emphasize again, viz.— Put
the People on the Land at all Costs !—without which it
is impossible, even in Victoria, to have a large population or
prosperity in town or country.
Conclusion*
In concluding, I trust this little “ Sketch from Life ” and
personal experience and advice therein contained, may cause
many in the “dear old land” who are situated as I was, and
others, to take heart and courage, and I doubt not the same


blessing will attend them. They may have a rough time for a
few years, and many ups and downs, but what of that ?
Labor with plenty, gives the best health, strength,
enjoyment and longevity. Thus, with a firm trust in the
“All-wise” to direct their path, their feet shall never slip, and
they shall cause the “ wilderness to blossom as the rose,” and,
“ by the good hand of God upon them,” build up a home, as
surely as Nehemiah built up Jerusalem, and to cheer their
hearts I will give them a song to sing all along their pilgrim
journey.
ALL THE WAY.
All the way my Saviour leads me,
What have I to ask beside?
Can I doubt His tender mercy,
Who through life has been my guide?
Heavenly peace, divinest comfort,
Here by faith in Him to dwell !
For I know whate’er befalls me,
Jesus doeth all things well.
All the way my Saviour leads me,
Cheers each winding path I tread,
Gives me grace for , every trial,
Feeds me with the living bread.
Though my weary steps may falter,
And my soul athirst may be,
Gushing from the rock before me,
Lo, a spring of joy I see !
All the way my Saviour leads me,
Oh, the fullness of His love!
Perfect rest to me is promised
In my Father’s house above.
When my spirit, clothed immortal,
Wings its flight to realms of day,
This my song, through endless ages,
Jesus Led Me all the Way.
N.B.—The profit, if any, from the sale of this little
sketch will be devoted to the furtherance of True Temperance.


Melbourne ;
rab Bros., Printers, 547 & 549 Elizabeth street




