

jk Sermon
READ AT
The Tempo vary urclj, Trulyong,
Sunday, the sth March, 1871,
ARTHUR HANNIBAL MACARTHUR, P.M
A few short hours before he was suddenly called from this world.
“ What I do thou knowest not now ; but thou shalt know hereafter.”
St. John \Tfh chapter, 7 th verse.
Sgfcneg :
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.




BLENCOWE’S THIRD SERIES.
(The words in brackets and italics are those specially marked, added, or
substituted by Mr. Macarthur.)
SERMON XL.
THE TIME IS SHORT.
“ The time is short.” —l Corinthians vii, 29.
St. Paul, in the verses from which the text comes, is
instructing us, what ought to be the disposition and temper
of our mind, in regard to all earthly possessions. He had
been consulted by the Christians at Corinth, whether in a
time of great trial, danger, and distress, it was right to marry;
and he tells them in reply, that they were free either to marry
or not, as they judged proper. He would lay no unnecessary
and burdensome restraint upon them. “But this I say,
brethren,” he continues, “ the time is short: it remainetb,
that both they that have wives be as though they had none;
and they that weep, as though they wept not; and they that
rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as
though they possessed not; and they that use this world, as
not abusing it; for the fashion of this world passeth away.”
In these words the Apostle teaches us, that, while we may
thankfully receive the blessings which God gives us hero, we
are yet to hold them, and enjoy them, under a feeling, that
“ the time is short.” We must ere long part from them all.
It is our wisdom, then, not to set our hearts upon them, so as
to place all our happiness in them; so as to be wrapped up


in them altogether; so as to look for, and think of, nothing
beyond and above them; but rather to regard all earthly
possessions, as lent us for a time by God, and soon to bo
recalled; and ourselves, as only sojourners here, travelling
to a better world.
In the text, then, we have a common truth, which belongs
to ns all, which deeply concerns us all: —“ The time is short.”
We know this, [my friends;] we allow it; but do we live
accordingly ? Men shake their heads, and say that life is
short; and go away to spend what remains in ungodliness,
in folly, or in sin. While the words are on their lips, they
contrive to shift the impression from their hearts. With their
eyes open they manage to keep out the light; and they act,
as if they were to be here for ever. May God give us grace,
not to deceive ourselves ! May His Spirit write upon our
hearts a truth, which ought to influence us always !
I, There needs little reasoning to prove, that “ the time is
short.” All things tell us so. The year tells it in its rapid
flight. Spring, summer, autumn, winter, how they come and
go ! It was but as yesterday, that spring was calling forth
on yonder trees their first green foliage; we saw them soon
bursting into fulness of leaf; and now they are stript and
bare again, and the stormy wind is sighing or howling
through their naked branches. Life tells it. Look back, at
what is past, you who can remember many years ! What
seem they now? As a moment; as a dream when one
awaketh. Events that occurred twenty, thirty, forty years
ago, appear but as yesterday. The grave tells it, opening
for one after another of our friends, relatives, and neighbours.
They pass away, and the place that knew them, knows them
no more. Sickness and weakness, the body’s gradual decay,
tell it plainly. Every day, stealing by us so quickly and
imperceptibly, gives us warning. We go forth in the morn-
insr; and in a few brief hours our work is done, and we lie
O s
down again to rest. When some more days have gone by.


when we have lain down and risen up not very many times
more, we shall sleep the sleep of death. Friends and relatives,
perhaps, will follow us to the grave. The sun will shine, and
the birds will sing, as before; but we shall not hear them.
A little while, and our very name will be forgotten. It was
in musing on thoughts such as these, that the Psalmist
spoke : —“ Lord, make me to know mine end, and the
measure of my days, what it is ; that I may know how frail
L;ara. Behold, Thou hast made my days as an handbreadth;
and mine age is as nothing before Thee : Yerily every man
at his best state is altogether vanity. Surely every man
walketh in a vain show : surely they are disquieted in vain :
he heapeth up riches, and knoweth not who shall gather them.
And now. Lord, what wait I for ? My hope is in Thee.”
(Psa. xxxix.) “Is there not,” said Job, an appointed time
to man upon earth ? are not his days also like the days of an
hireling.” (Job vii. 1.)
11. “ The time is short,” [my friends.] What gives to
this truth its vast importance ? Because time is the entrance
to eternity. If we were formed for this world only, if there
were no hereafter, we might as well join with those who say,
Let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we die ; let us have a
short time and a merry one. But this life has dread responsi-
bilities, when viewed in relation to a life which is to come.
Whatever is our situation in this world, whether high or low,
whether it be one of ease and affluence, or of labour, poverty,
and suffering, [and remember] it is the one assigned us by the
great Disposer of all ; and every rank, and every situation,
has its peculiar duties, and peculiar trusts, for which we must
render a strict account to God at the day, when the secrets of
all hearts shall be revealed, and every man be judged accord-
ing to his works. For there is within each one of us, my
brethren, an immortal spirit, a part that cannot die, which
must [hereafter] be eternally happy in the presence of God, or
eternally miserable under the weight of His righteous dis-


pleasure. To every one of us is committed the solemn trust,
to have this immortal being prepared for its appearance
before God.
And how may this be done ? The way is revealed to us in
the gospel. The Lord Jesus Christ came down from heaven,
and shed His blood to redeem us; and He promises to give
His Holy Spirit to them that ask Him. It is He, who must
indeed work in us both the will and the power. But,
[my friends,] there must be also a movement in our own minds.
We must set ourselves to seek this salvation, looking up
indeed to our God and Saviour for a strength that is not of
ourselves, but cometh from above. This is the great business
given us to do—to apply our thought, our care, our earnest
and continual endeavour, to foster the work of Divine grace
within us, to be training up for our high and everlasting
destinies.
Let us view in this light our present life, and then what a
mighty weight of importance attaches to those words of the
Apostle : —“ The time is short.” Short as it is, it is full of
consequences that will last for ever. Dream-like as it is, it is
no dream ; for eternal realities depend upon it. It is short;
but God has made it long enough for our appointed work,
long enough to prepare the children of His grace for an
everlasting inheritance. ,
111. What practical lessons, then, does the text enforce?
“ The time is short.” Hence the Apostle bids us ‘ f use
this world, as not abusing it.” Who is it that abuses the
things of this world ? Every one who turns them to other
purposes, than those for which God intends them.
To live in sin is an abuse of this life. Sin is the transgres-
sion of God’s law. It is a horrible disorder, brought into
the world which He made good. But sin is also directly
contrary to the end, for which God has placed us here. God
would have us made fit for heaven. If we indulge sin, we
are fitting ourselves for hell. The poor drunkard is abusing


this life. As if the time were not short enough, as if the
sands of his glass ran not fast enough, he shakes them by
intemperance; he hurries himself to the grave ; he hastens
onwards to the presence of God; but how can he think, or
care about an hereafter, who is day by day sinking himself
below the brutes, and putting out the light of God within
him ?
All who care only for the body, are abusing this life; who
work, and eat, and drink, and sleep, and do no more. Why !
the horse and the ass are as good as they nay, better; for
the brutes fulfil the purpose of God. But man, who forgets
he has a soul, affords the melancholy sight of a being, who
was meant for glorious things, content to have his dwelling
among swine, among the mud and the dirt of earth. Yea,
every lost sinner who must have company with devils, might
have been as the angels of God in light.
But not only the lover of bodily and sensual pleasure,
abuses this life. God warns us often in His holy word, that,
if we set our hearts and affections on the things of this world,
we are abusing them. He bids us beware of covetousness, of
that hankering after more and more of earthly goods, which
grows upon men in proportion as their goods increase.
Does God, then, forbid us to take pleasure in His bounties ?
No surely ; for He gives us all things richly to enjoy. But
we may do this without setting our hearts upon them;
without letting them draw us away from God. The rich man
in the parable, abused the things of this life ; yet we are nob
told that he was a drunkard, or a glutton, or, that he lived
in any gross sin. But he loved the world, and his heart
departed from the Lord. St. Paul teaches us how we should
hold ourselves in regard to earthly goods. Let those “ that
buy,” be “as though they possessed not.” Buy and sell we
may, but let not this be our very life ; let us not think we are
put here only to make money; let us not cling to our
possessions as our whole happiness. For “ the time is short.


We must leave them; we must 'part with all; they cannot
follow us. Wretched are we, then, if we have nothing better.
[My dear friends,] does not this truth—“the time is
short,” when we think that it is given us to prepare for
eternity—does it not stamp folly and madness on the pursuits
of most of us ? What are men doing ? Wholly taken up
with the business and cares of life, or occupied in its amuse-
ments and follies, year after year passes over them, and life
hastens to its close, and they are eagerly attending still to what
they must soon leave for ever. So perhaps old age creeps
on; and even then the mind, never accustomed to serious
thought, continues filled with the matters of the passing
hour. Or, it may be, sudden and sharp sickness arrests the
man in the vigour and activity of life ; and the truth bursts
upon him in a moment, that he is hurrying into an eternal
world —a world of which he has scarcely thought; to which
he has directed none of his desires; for which he is utterly
unprepared.
Is it so still with [us ?] I fear it is with many. 0 [beloved
friends,] “ the time is short ;” and the work —the great work
given [us,] is not begun. When will [we] awake out of sleep ?
When will [we] begin to live for heaven ?„ Is it so easy a
work? or, have we so much time, that we may afford to
squander days and years? Nay; think that, “the time is
shortthat even now in God’s book [our] days are numbered.
The past is gone for ever ; the future may never come; the
present only is [ours.]
You know, [my friends,] that you have a power to think.
You can direct your thoughts to a subject; you can turn
them to things that happened many years back. You can
place before your imagination persons who lived before you
were born, or who are now far away from you. You can look
forward to events that may occur after you are dead. And
if you have this wondrous power within you, why cannot you
think of God ? —of His holiness. His justice, and His love ?


of His law, written in your heart, and revealed in His word ?
Why cannot you calmly think of and realize the moment,
when death must call you away; when you must lie down in
the grave ? If the thought of eternity, of the uncertainty of
life, of the coming of Christ, were more present to our minds,
soberness and watchfulness would be the effect. The sentinel
on post, who expects the attack of the enemy, dare not
indulge sleep or excess; the pilot at the helm of a ship, amid
rocks and breakers, dare not yield to slumber. Nor, if we
realized the approach of the end of all things, should we be
thoughtless, worldly, swallowed up in present cares.
[Let us] be wise in time. [Let us] draw near to God, and
He will draw near to you. Be constant and earnest in private
prayer. God’s saints of old deemed not three times a day too
often for stated prayer. Early, and at noon tide, and at eve,
David poured out his soul to his God. Nay, more ; at mid-
night he resolved to rise to give thanks unto God : because
of His righteous judgments. (Psa. cxix. 62.) No fear of
death—death most terrible and revolting, prevented Daniel
from thrice a day bending his knees to God in prayer and
supplication. Strange ! that the Christian who believes the
power of prayer, should so seldom and so coldly try its
power. Yet how apt are we to think time lost rather than
redeemed, when given to prayer! how ready to prefer to
this occupation of it, any worldly business, any worldly
pleasure, as more seriously important! But is he, who
silently bends his knee in his secret closet to God, an idle, or
an useless being ? There he works for eternity; there he
communes with his God ; there he seeks pardon and likeness
to his Maker; there he lays up treasure for heaven ; there he
draws down blessings beyond count, on those who share his
prayers; there he obtains a portion which will endure, when
the world, and all its followers, and all its concerns, are
passed away for ever, like a dream.
“ The time is short.” Be not weary in well-doing; for in
due season ye shall reap, if ye faint not. Ever remember,


that this life is the sowing time for eternity; and that what
a man soweth, that shall he also reap. Remember that they
who sow to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.
Have you this world’s good ? Then to distribute and to com-
municate to the poor and needy, forget not; for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased. He that soweth plenteously in
works and labours of love, shall reap also plenteously. God
is not unrighteous that He should forget them.
" The time is short.” Whatever good, then, " thy hand
findeth to do, do it with thy might.” Put not off doing a
good action. “ Say not unto thy neighbour. Go, and come
again, and to-morrow I will give; when thou hast it by thee.
Be diligent in the Lord’s work, for He is at hand.
Take care that your affections are not bent to earth. Be
moderate even in lawful enjoyments. “ The time is short; it
remaineth, that they that have wives, be as though they had
none.” What means this ? It means, that, though we are
to love our wives, our children, our relatives, our friends
dearly and fondly love them, we are yet ever to keep in mind,
that we must soon part from them, soon be indeed as those
who have none. Is this a melancholy thought? Hot, if in
Christian faith, and hope, and obedience, we look forward to
meet them in glory. For “ the time is short. It remaineth,
therefore, “ that they that weep, be as though they wept not.”
" Our light affliction,” says St. Paul, “ which is but for a
moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory.” Is the Christian in pain and sickness ? A
little while, and God will wipe off all tears from his eyes.
Does he sorrow for the dead ? He may not sorrow, as one
without hope ; for he believes, that Christ is the resurrection
and the life; and that those who sleep in Jesus, God will
bring with Him.
[My friends,] the time to every one of us is short; the
world is passing away. Let me, then, solemnly and
affectionately ask you. Can you hope that you have any


treasure beyond the grave ? In the midst of the changes and
chances, the vanities and disappointments of this present
world, there is one thing that abides, and abides for ever.
It is the Christianas hope —a hope created in the soul by the
Spirit of God, cherished by the word and promises of God,
resting on Christ Jesus and His redemption. Blessed,
blessed hope ! the purchase of Christ’s death and sufferings,
the gift of His Spirit, how does it throw a light over this
earth ! how does it support the heart in trial and sorrow;
It grows brighter, when all things are darkening round.
Death, which strips the lover of this world of his all, only
adds vigour to the Christian’s hope; for that hope is beyond
the power of death, it has found a place in heaven. It is
centered in Him, who is “ the same yesterday, and to-day, and
for ever.” May [we] each, through His bounteous grace, know
this hope ! May it bless and animate [us] in life ; support and
cheer [us] in death; and only die, when it shall be lost in the
full enjoyment of heaven ! Amen.
And now to God, &c.
Let us pray —
Grant, O Lord, that the words we have heard this day with our
outward ears, so far as they are consistent with Thy holy will, may
he deeply grafted in our hearts to the relief of our soids, through
the advocacy of Thy Lear Son, our Saviour Jesus Christ.
Joseph Cook and Vo., Printers, Churchman Office, 370, George-street, Sydney.


fydUO
pr/l %S.O>
M CfH
* .
*u .<
■ '..
