

A SERMON,
DELIVERED BEFORE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY,
ON TUESDAY, NOV. 14th, 1876.
BY
REV. F. R. M. WILSON
Presbyterian Church of Dictoria.
THE RETIRING MODERATOR.
“The salt of the earth.” — Matt. v. 13.
MELBOURNE:
MASON, FIRTH & M'CUTCHEON, PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST.
1876.
PRICE SIXPENCE.




SERMON,
BY
REV. F. R. M. WILSON.
“ The salt of the earth.”—Mat. V. 13.
We often hear this word—“the salt of the earth” —used in mockery,
to ridicule the assumption of superior goodness ; and worldly men
often throw it in the face of Christians with a sneer, as though it
were extravagant presumption in any body of men to pretend to such
a character as the salt of the earth.
This ridicule is quite fair when it is turned against Pharisaism—
against those who boast of their virtue or their piety and look down
upon their fellow-sinners—“ I thank Thee, O God, that I am not as
some men are—extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or like this publican.
I fast twice in the week ; I give tithes of all I possess.” Such a
manifestation of spiritual pride by any Christian man is a fair mark
for the world’s sarcasm. Such a man has the Christian name with-
out the Christian nature. His Christianity is indeed salt without
savour, that is only fit to be cast out and trodden under foot of men ;
and let them tread it under foot.
But when the ridicule is directed, as it often is, against a Christian
profession at all—even against those who humbly attribute any Chris-
tian character and influence they may have, not to themselves, but to
the gospel truth and the gospel spirit—then the ridicule is utterly
misplaced. When a Christian man, without any boasting about
his morality or his religion, simply professes Christ, and seeks
to serve Him, and quietly exercises a Christian influence on society
around ; against such a spirit of Christian humility the arrows of
sarcasm are pointless. Such a man thinks little of his own Chris-
tianity, but much of Christ; and when his Christian attainments are
remarked by others, he attributes them, with humility, to the grace
of Christ, from which they have their origin.
It is told of Socrates, that when Zopyrus, the physiognomist, pro-
nounced him a passionate and ill-tempered man, and when those who
knew Socrates exclaimed that such an assertion was notoriously
untrue, and only proved that physiognomy was unreliable, Socrates
said—“ Zopyrus is quite right. lam naturally what he has called
me—passionate and ill-tempered ; but philosophy has cured me.”


In much the same spirit of humility, fathers and brethren, we take
the words of the text as applicable to us ; only we honour Christ
instead of philosophy. We acknowledge that we were naturally
alien from God ; but Christ has reconciled us to Him. We acknow-
ledge that we are naturally corrupt ; but, through Christ, we are
purified—we have within us, through Christ, the elements of purity,
and are made thereby a means of purifying others. It is not in a
spirit of vain-glory that we would take these words to ourselves, but
in a spirit of humility, giving the glory to Christ. It is not in the
way of boasting that we profess to have renounced worldliness and
carnality, and to have given ourselves to Christ’s service ; but with a
very present sense of our evil tendencies and of our dependence upon
divine grace. It is not to a position of dignity that we consider
these words of Jesus appoint us, but to a service of usefulness in the
world —a service which we can fulfil only through the continued
communication of the Spirit of Christ.
Fellow Christians 1 We are the salt of the earth as far as we
exhibit Christ and His grace ; and if we cease to exhibit Christ and
His grace, then the salt has lost its savour, and it is thenceforth good
for nothing but to be cast out and trodden under foot of men. The
figure under which our Lord speaks of our influence upon the
world as Christians is a very instructive one.
I. It suggests, in the first place, what kind of an influence He
expects us to exert. He expects us to exert a purifying and preserving
influence upon society.
This implies, of course, that society has in it the elements of cor-
ruption, that instead of there being an upward tendency in human
nature (as certain modern writers assure us), by which man natu-
rally rises from animal life to human, and from human to divine,
the reverse is the case. Our Lord’s words imply that there is a con-
stant tendency in human nature to moral deterioration and to social
decay—that an influence is needed from without, to stay the process
of corruption, to purify society and preserve it from destruction ;
and that Christianity supplies this influence. Christianity alone can
impart moral purity and strengthen the bonds of society.
Our blessed Lord, in implanting His Gospel in our hearts, expects it
to counteract the evils of human nature, not only in us, but also in
society around us. He expects us to resist the corrupt tendencies of
human nature wherever we meet them —in our social intercourse, in
our business, in our homes, in our public institutions, in our literature,
in our churches ; by our influence and example, by the truth spoken
in love, by purity of life and personal holiness, by a Christ-like
disposition. He expects us to diffuse through society a healthy moral
and religious feeling. He expects us to raise the tone of public
opinion on every question involving a moral obligation. He expects
us to permeate the world with Christian truth and a Christian spirit ;
and by these means to diminish superstition and ignorance, to restrain
vice, to dry up the sources of crime, to hold back the nations from
war, to foster brotherly feelings between class and class, to cast out


the spirit of selfishness from society, to imbue our commerce with
thorough honesty, our social habits with simplicity, our politics with
patriotism, our charities with genuine benevolence, and our homes
with love. This is the influence which our Lord and Master calls
upon us to exercise in the world. And it is in this view that He calls
us the salt of the earth.
We know that it is only by this power of Christianity that these
results can be effected. The gospel alone can purify human nature,
and strengthen the bonds of society. Now, our Lord teaches us in
this passage that the purifying and preserving power of Christianity
is exercised through us—His followers. He teaches us that, if the
gospel is to benefit the world, it must be the gospel as exhibited by
us. We are the salt of the earth. The Lord uses us as his agents in
this work ; and without us the work will not be accomplished.
We are told that when Carey, afterwards the well-known missionary
in India, was urging the Baptist Church in England to send
out missionaries to the heathen, old Ur. Hyland rebuked his urgency.
“ Young man—if God is to convert the heathen, He can do it with-
out your aid or mine.’’
It is very true that God can: the question is whether He will.
And the only answer to that question is—that He will not. Where
God appoints means by which to accomplish a result, if the means
are neglected the result is unaccomplished. If we fail in sowing
the seed, God will not send,us a harvest. If we do not lay out our
capital, it will not increase. This is true of spiritual things as of
worldly. Whatever a man sows, that shall he reap. And if Chris-
tians neglect that influence which God has given for the spread of
Christ’s cause through the earth, then Christ’s cause will not spread.
Doubtless, the power is of God, and not of us. “ Paul may plant,
and Apollos may water, but God gives the increase. ’ In order, how-
ever, that the increase be given, Paul must plant and Apollos must
water. And the more diligently, and, we may add, the more intelli-
gently, they plant and water, the greater the increase is likely to be.
We need to give all our powers to it. For God does not employ us as
mere instruments in this work, but as agents; not as blind and
passive tools, to be wielded by God’s providence, nor yet as uncon-
verted men are used, to carry out God’s designs even against their
own intentions, omniscient wisdom thwarting their wrong purposes
through their own actions, and bringing good out of evil. Not so
are we employed ; but as “ fellow-workers with God, as intelligent
and voluntary agents of a Master we love, and in a work which we
recognise to be worthy of all our energies. In speaking of the neces-
sity for our agency, therefore, we mean that if the work is to be done
at all, it must be done by us, with intelligence, with heart, and with
energy ; and if it is noj; so done, then, so far as we fail in intelligence,
or heart, or energy, so far the result is not attained.
(1.) What a stimulus it is to fervent diligence in this work, that
our agency is of importance, that our agency is necessary, that we
are the appointed means without which the work shall not be accom-


plished ! With what a feeling of responsibility ought we to employ
our Christian influence, as we realise that upon the way in which we
employ it —under God—depends the extension of Christ’s kingdom
through the earth, and the precious blessings which that kingdom
is to confer upon the world ! How anxiously should we watch, each
one his own individual influence upon others, that we may indeed
be the spiritual salt of the society in which we are placed ! The sal-
vation of souls and the glory of our Saviour depend upon our exer-
tions. Woe be to us if we slack our energies, and allow the great
work to stand still! Time is passing away, and we are passing with
it from the harvest field. We may well adopt our Lord’s own words
—“ I must do the will of Him that sent Me, while it is day ; the
night cometh, when no man can work.”
(2.) And what an honour it is that Jesus puts upon us to employ
us as His agents in the work of the world’s reformation. There is no
higher honour in this world. This is the great work to which the
Son of God Himself came down from heaven. He laid the founda-
tion of this work by His incarnation and life and death ; and when
He ascended to the right hand of God, He left us to act for Him—to
co-operate with Him in carrying on that glorious work for which He
thought it became Him to stoop so low and to do and suffer so much.
“We are workers together with Him.” Every Christian man who,
from a regard to Christ’s will, does what is right, resists temptation,
speaks a word of kindly interest in his neighbour’s eternal welfare,
or even gives a cup of water only to one of His people, because
one of His, takes a part in Christ’s work ; and a high honour it is to
be allowed to do this.
(3.) And what an encouragement it is to hopeful diligence in this
work that we are agents of Him who said, “ All power is given unto
Me in heaven and in earth : Go ye, therefore, and make disciples of
all nations ; and lo ! I am with you alway, even unto the end of the
world.” We are assisting in a work which is presided over by an
almighty and ever present Lord. And when He invites our assist-
ance, it is with the full understanding on both sides that the efficacy
is from Him, and that He will work with us. He is the Head of the
Church, the manager of the whole establishment, and we are the sub-
ordinates to whom He has entrusted each our own department. We do
not at present understand all the plans of the Master, nor do we see
the working of all the machinery ; but we trust to His resources and His
wisdom, and we know that He will employ us profitably and prudently.
He is the Captain of the Hosts of the Lord, and we are a part
of His great army. In His general orders, published in the Scriptures,
He makes us sufficiently acquainted with His plan and aims to
enable us to enter into them with spirit. And from what we do
know it is clear that we have only to obey His orders, and the final
result is certain. Indeed, when we look back on the past progress
of Christianity, and see what is being done at the present hour
through the world, we may say that Christ has now conquered the
World —in this sense, that the power of the earth is now in Christian


hands, and the complete subjugation of the nations is being
gradually but surely accomplished. It is true that we have yet to
spread the gospel through many heathen lands which still lie m
ignorance of Christ and of the true God. And we have to keep up
a constant skirmishing, even in Christian lands, with small com-
panies of sceptics, and secularists, and anti-Sabbatarians, who do
what they can to harass us and hinder the progress of Christ s
cause, and who make up for lack of power by activity and audacity.
We need to meet them on their own ground, but with spiritual
•weapons, and to meet them vigorously. Sometimes they may suc-
ceed, here and there, for a time ; but, after all, the field is ours,
and all their bluster cannot affect the grand result. Under Christ s
leadership we are sure to succeed.
We shall, without doubt, spread the name and power of Christ
through the whole world. We shall, without any doubt, bring into
subjection to Christ the laws of nations, the principles of com-
merce, the habits of society, the tone of literature—the whole com-
plex machinery of our social being, until the whole earth is salted
with the spirit of Christianity.
Such is the influence which Christ expects us to exert upon
society.
11. The figure under which our Lord speaks of our influence upon
the world as Christians suggests not only what kind of an influence
He expects us to exert, but also how we are to exert it. We are to
bring the truth and spirit of Christ into contact with men.
Salt exerts its power only when brought into close contact with
the tissues which it has to season and preserve. And Christianity, in
like manner, exerts its influence upon society only when it is brought
into close contact with men—with the minds which it is to enlighten,
with the consciences which it is to quicken, with the feelings which
it is to direct, with the motives which it is to elevate, with the habits
which it is to purify.
We bring Christ into contact with men’s minds and hearts by the
dissemination of Christian truth and the exhibition of a Christian
spirit ; and the more close the contact, the more thoroughly the
spiritual salt will season society. This is the only way in which we
can spread the influence of Christianity through the earth.
It is a mistake which Christians have often made to keep aloof
from the world and from general society, with the idea of preserving
their own piety undimmed, supposing that they have attained the
purpose of the gospel if they shall themselves escape the corruption
and ruin of the world. The spirit of asceticism which led Chris-
tians in the middle ages to retire from the world, and pursue the
devotional duties of religion to the neglect of ordinary work, is far
from the spirit of Christ. He Himself mingled with society, to influ-
ence it by His teaching and example. And He requires His follower
in like manner to go out into the world and influence it for Him.
Christianity is nothing if not aggressive. If it do not spread, it dies.
The Christian spirit, if pent up in secret and sheltered from the open


influences of society, like a plant in a close room, makes but an
unhealthy growth, and it does not attain the end for which it was
given.
It is a mistake also for ministers to put a distance between them-
selves and their people by assuming a sort of professional dignity—
stilted, official, clerical. A true minister needs no officialism to make
him respected. The dignity which naturally springs from a thought-
ful mind, from a Christian disposition, and from the consciousness of
an important work to be done for Christ, is all the dignity he needs.
There is no distinction of clergy and laity in Christ’s Church ; and
even though there were, it would be wisdom to press the distinction
as little as possible.
I remember, when the Queen first went to Manchester, some fac-
tory girls pressed forward eagerly to see her ; and when they saw a
lady sitting in a carriage, plainly and simply dressed, and bowing to
the people on each side of the way, and when they were assured
that that was the Queen —“ Why,” they said, “ she’s just like one o’
huz.” And they loved her all the more for it. Our Christian people
will love us ministers all the more if we mingle freely in their society,
and show we are just of themselves.
I am sure, however, that you will agree with me, fathers and
brethren, that this is not the great danger of the present day, or of this
country. Our danger is rather, when we do go out into the world,
lest we fail in carrying with us the Spirit of Christ.
The Christianity of the present day is perhaps too pliable to worldly
influences, too ready to make concessions on the ground of expedi-
ency, too much afraid of being thought peculiar or sanctimonious.
Whether this be the case or not, however, it is very evident that if
we are to benefit the world, it is not by allowing ourselves to be
dragged down to their level, but by carefully living up to the
Christian standard ; not by mingling in society as men merely, but as
Christians, filled at all times with the spirit of Christ, setting our
aims on higher than worldly objects, ruling our conduct by higher
considerations than worldly interests, carrying out our functions as
Christ’s agents without regard to what the world may think of us,
taking up the cross and following Christ. We are bound as Christ’s
followers to take up a position in the world, altogether independent
of public opinion —leading it, instead of allowing it to lead ns.
This will, of course, expose us, even in these days, to adverse criti-
cism by certain sections of society, and sometimes to even more
practical opposition ; and the more faithfully we follow our Lord’s
directions and spirit, the more opposition we are likely to excite.
This opposition, however, is a genuine source of encouragement to
us in the Christian course; for it shows that the spiritual salt is biting
into the corrupt tendencies of the world ; it shows that the probe
has got down below the dead surface to the living and sentient
flesh ; it shows that we have succeeded in making the presence of
Christianity felt: gnd, whether they like or dislike that presence, still
are bound to press it upon them, for our Lord’s sake and for theirs.


We must not allow the facts and spirit of Christianity to be hidden,
or ignored, or toned down into uselessness. We are bound to take
up a firm attitude in society, and act as the standard-bearers of the
cross. And the method prescribed by our Lord, through which alone
we can do this, is for us to be individually filled with Christ ; filled
with His life and death, and all that these imply ; filled with desires
after Him, and a grateful appreciation of His work as our Saviour ;
filled with His spirit of self-denying love, of watchful devotion to
God’s service, of lowliness and humility; filled with Himself,
received into loving union with us. We are to go out and meet
the world thus, doing our daily work, and bearing our daily trials
and temptations thus, mingling in society thus. O fathers and
brethren 1 Would we but do this, what a wonderful and blessed
influence we would exert upon society.
I have spoken hitherto of our individual influence as Christians ;
I come now to speak of our collective influence as Christ’s Church.
On this point we must acknowledge, what the facts of the case
very loudly proclaim, that the collective influence of Christianity is
much weakened by its divisions. Most of these divisions have,
doubtless, been unavoidable ; and they have even had their uses in
time past. In days of heated controversy upon speculative theology,
they served to open up a refuge for difference of opinion on points
which are not essential to Christianity, and yet were treated by both
parties in the controversy as though they were essential : they
served to keep still attached to the Christian name those who really
believed in Christ, but differed from the majority on some point of
more or less importance. And they served to test, by the touchstone
of practical results, the comparative value of the opinions which
divided Christendom. But, after all, these divisions are blots upon
the history of the Christian Church. And the more that Christians
devote themselves to Christ’s work, the more they find these divisions
to be a weakness and a hindrance. They prevent the Church of
Christ from united action in defending and spreading the gospel.
They fritter away her energies and resources. They embitter her
feelings. They take up her thoughts with the small controversies
within the family, rather than with the larger and more important
controversies outside.
It is clearly the duty of church rulers to seek and encourage any
wise scheme by which the evangelical churches can be brought to
co-operate in Christian work, with a view to future incorporation.
And, meanwhile, in prosecuting our work as a section of the Christian
Church, it is our duty to preserve a brotherly attitude and a kindly
feeling towards the others.
I am glad to say that no denomination, so far as I know, shows
less of a sectarian spirit than the Presbyterian denomination. And
if any scheme of co-operation among evangelical bodies be possible,
it is'likely that Presbyterianism shall form the rally ing-ground.
This advantage which, from various causes, we possess, carries with
it a corresponding duty, that me take the initiative in seeking Chris-


tian co-operation, that we should be the first to seek that the Church
of Christ may be unitea in its influence upon society.
The first point at which Christian co-operation can be most easily
secured is mission work —missions to the heathen, and missions to the
careless in Christian lands. All evangelical churches agree as to the
truth to be preached to the unconverted. And we find from the
accounts of the late evangelistic efforts in Great Britain, that men
of all evangelical denominations can co-operate in such work. What
we desire to see is the co-operation of the churches, by agreeing to a
joint plan of operations, and uniting their energies to bring the
gospel into contact with the heathen at home and abroad.
Mission work is the first duty of the Church of Christ. Not only
was it first in point of time, but it is first in point of importance.
The proclamation of the gospel to those who are ignorant of Christ
and of His salvation is the most necessary work of the church. It
is the most important work upon earth. And never is the Church of
Christ in a more healthy state than when fully engaged in this
glorious enterprise. It ought to be the first aim of the church to
bring the gospel into contact with every soul, that every person may
know the truth as it is in Jesus, and may feel its practical applica-
tion to himself. The church has not done its duty so long as one
man, woman, or child that can understand is left in ignorance of the
facts of Chi'istianity, and the bearing of these facts upon them. We
hear of missions to wrong people. The thing is impossible ; there
are no “ wrong people.” ‘‘Go ye into all the world, and preach the
gospel to every creature.”
With regard to home efforts, too, we hear small criticisms upon the
modes in which revival movements have been carried on in Great
Britain. No doubt there have been faults of various kinds in con-
nexion with these movements. But let us not be hypercritical. The
revival movement is just an attempt to bring the salt into close con-
tact with the carcase. Let us rejoice if, in any way, a closer contact
is effected between ignorance and the truth of Christ—between care-
lessness and an earnest Christian spirit—between the sinner and the
message of the Saviour. The means are in our hands—results are
God’s. Let us try every w»ay to get an entrance for the truth of
Christ into the minds of men, into their thoughts, into their conver-
sation, into their feelings. God will do the rest; and experience
will teach us which method God owns as the best. But we will
certainly make no progress by remaining content with stereotyped
methods and lukewarm efforts, which leave large portions of the
community untouched by the gospel salt.
One lesson which we learn from the revivals in Great Britain is
that for evangelistic work special gifts are needed—gifts differing
somewhat from those of the pastor and teacher of the church ; still
the best work is done through personal dealing by Christian men
who are specially characterised by a firm faith in God’s Word, by a
clear view of the main truths of the gospel, by an earnest feeling on
these truths, by a passionate desire to save souls, and by energy in


carrying this desire into action, and who have the gift of expressing
all this in a plain and telling way. Wherever God raises up such
men, it is the church’s duty to utilise them and to spread the benefit
of their gifts and graces as widely as possible. Would that all the
Lord’s people were prophets of this kind ! The church' could find
ample work for all of them in spreading the kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ.
I have spoken so far on the aggressive work of the church upon the
world outside. I have now to speak of its conservative work within its
own borders—the work, namely, of preserving the purity of the
Christian doctrine and worship, and government and discipline. In
these four departments the church is bound, for the sake of its
influence upon society and for the sake of its own members, to pre-
serve most zealously the purity of the gospel salt.
Fathers and brethren ! I would not be doing what I feel is my
duty were I not to raise my voice against certain tendencies of the
present day, which, if they be not met by us with firmness, will take
all the savour out of the salt, as far as we are concerned. lam bound
to say that there are worldly influences at work in every department
of the Christian Church. 1 hope Ido not need to say that in the
remarks which I am about to make I have no individual reference.
(1,) It is well known that there is a tendency in the churches at the
present day towards laxity in doctrine, especially on the cardinal
points of our Christian faith. And it is clearly the duty of the
church to oppose this tendency, diligently pressing upon the minds of
Christians the old truths which have strengthened and comforted
Christ’s people for so many centuries. Ido not mean that we should
proclaim these truths in the old phraseology. Indeed, it is absolutely
necessary to adapt our phraseology to the days in which we live. It
is not the old time-honoured expressions that we wish to make known
to men, but the truths which they express ; and these truths may
with advantage be expressed in new language. “ Every scribe that
is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven is like a man that is a
householder, who brings forth out of his treasures things new and
old.” The old expressions are apt to lose their power and significance
by constant repetition ; and, to say the truth, it is very wearisome to
have to listen Sabbath after Sabbath to a mere reproduction of doc-
trine in the old stereotyped phraseology, with no freshness of appli-
cation to our own needs, and trials, and modes of thought. It reminds
one of the bread which the Gibeonites gave to the princes of Israel,
in proof that they came from a distant land. It was fresh once—
when it was taken out of the oven; but “ now, behold! it is dry, and
it is mouldy.”
It is the first duty of the pastor of the church to think out the
Bible truths in their application to the present day, and to the
people of his charge. We are not afraid that Christian men, in
humbly studying God’s Word under the guidance of God’s Spirit for
practical ends, will diverge far from the path which has been trodden
so often before them, even when they do use new modes of expression.


But, while a constant freshness of thought and expression is neces-
sary for popular preaching, it would be very unwise to take the same
course with the theological language of our church standards. It
has become the fashion in certain quarters to decry the old creeds
and confessions of the church as antiquated. It would be an evil
day that should find these old confessions treated as antiquated by
the church ; containing as they do the carefully formulated results
of centuries of theological controversy upon the cardinal doctrines
of Christianity. They are heirlooms of priceless value, which we
should be very jealous of trusting to the irreverent fingers of these
would-be reformers. And there is no part of them which has been
more thoroughly controverted and more carefully formulated than
that which constitutes the kernel of Christian truth, the savour of the
gospel salt, the person and work of our Lord Jesus Christ. To slur
over this in our 'preaching is to undermine the foundations of our
people’s faith. To displace this from our creed would be to cease to
be a Christian church. If a revision of our standards is considered
advisable, about which I express no opinion, it ought certainly to be
entered upon with a grave sense of its importance, to be carefully
and long considered, and to be only carried out in conjunction with
the rest of the Presbyterian world, now so happily united for such
work as this.
The history of the English Presbyterian Church furnishes a warn-
ing which, I suppose, fathers and brethren, we are not too secure to
listen to and learn from. The eclipse of its faith for a whole century
by Arianism, and the almost utter extinction of the church by
Socinianism, was facilitated —as the historian of that church tells us
—by the lack of “ a fixed standard of doctrine as a test of minis-
terial soundness in the faith.” No doubt a fixed standard does not
necessarily secure ministerial soundness in the faith, but it is a great
help. Error may creep in under the guise of orthodoxy, as we very
well know. Traitors may enter the camp ; but it is none the less
our duty to raise over the tents of the church the banner of the
cross, if ,we cease to keep in the centre and forefront of our teach-
ing Christ’s atonement for sin—the New Testament in His blood—
then the strength of our position is gone ; the salt of Christian
truth has lost its savour.
O fathers and brethren 1 For Christ’s own sake let us preserve to
Him, in the teaching and testimony of our church, the full glory of
our salvation ; and, for the sake of immortal souls, let us set forth
constantly the blood of Christ shed for the remission of sins. We
shall then do what lies in our power to preserve in the teaching of
our church the vigour of the gospel salt.
(2.) Another tendency of the times, against which we need
jealously to guard our church, is an encroachment upon the sim-
plicity of its worship. In some quarters there has arisen a move-
ment'to attract to our churches those who are not drawn to them by
a love of religion or by a desire for spiritual good. It is suggested
also that the bald and unaesthetic worship generally associated with


Presbyterianism is a hindrance to the devotions of many; and in
order to offer to God our best worship, we should bring our church
service into fuller accord with the higher culture of the present day.
I suppose I must guard myself from misconstruction by saying that
when we plead for simplicity we do not mean rudeness. But yet it is
necessary to say that the increase of the aesthetic element in our wor-
ship is a weakness instead of a strength. It confuses the feelings of
the worshipper, and makes him think he is stirred by love of God
when he is only moved by love of art. He thinks his feelings are
devotional, when they are only sensuous. The only true service of
God is the service of the heart ; and experience unites with Scrip-
ture in teaching us that pleasing the senses is not the best help to
the service of the heart.
We ought certainly to improve our church architecture, and church
service, and church music, in the way of making them more conducive
to the essential principle of Christian worship ; that the audience
may hear better, that the praying worshippers may be less distracted
from their spiritual worship ; that the praise of the church may be
more hearty and more general, more joyful and more reverential.
Any change in this direction would certainly be an improvement.
Only we may question whether this is the direction taken by many
in the present day.
The gist of this matter is put by our Lord Himself into memorable
words :—“ The true worshippers worship the Father in spirit and in
truth.” The less there is of adventitious and unnecessary aid, the
more likely we are to retain this spirit and truth, which is the salt
of Christian worship.
(3.) In another department of the church there is a tendency to
encroachment by the spirit of the world. We need at the present
day to protect the purity of church government. At one time the
tendency of the world in matters of government was to the tyranny
of the fern; and the influence of this tendency upon the church
resulted in the prelatic and popish forms of government. Our fore-
fathers had to strive against this worldly influence, and our Presby-
terian Church is the result of their return to the Scripture rule. In
these later ages the tendency of the world is to the tyranny of the
many, and we, in our turn, have to guard our church government
against this worldly influence. We must insist upon it that the
voice of the world has no right to be heard in our church courts.
And even the voice of the Christian public has its proper mode of
being heard here.
The Church of Christ is not a drifios, but an e/c/cX^o-ta. Its rulers
are chosen, no doubt, by the vote of the people ; but they are chosen
to be servants of Christ, and not delegates of the people. The rulers
of the Christian Church meet in the name of Christ, not in the name
of the people. It is our duty jealously to preserve this position,
neither as being lords over the members of the church, nor yet being
lorded over by them ; acting as their brethren and fellow-servants of
the Lord Jesus Christ.


The essential principle according to which we must carry out the
government of the church is thus put by our Lord :—“ One is your
Master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren.” There must be in all
our arrangements and discussions a constant reference to His will
and a brotherly regard for each other. What a blessing it would be
to the church and the world to see our church courts animated by
this spirit of obedience to Christ and love to one another ! May God
grant us grace to preserve this savour of the salt, by which alone our
church government shall be beneficial to the church and to the
world. As Jesus says—“ Have salt in yourselves, and have peace
one with another.”
(4.) I come now to the department of church discipline, by which
Christ’s kingdom is kept pure in holiness. I need not say that there
is a tendency no.w-a-days to lack of discipline : the fact being that
in some of our Christian churches there is no such thing as disci-
pline over the members at all. I have been informed by those who
profess to know that even in many of our Presbyterian congregations
there is no discipline whatever ; that the door of church fellowship
is thrown open to all ; and that no means are taken by the rulers of
the congregation to remove scandal from the church, or to bring an
erring brother to a sense of his sin. I trust this is not the case ; for
it would argue a culpable weakness and worldly conformity in the
rulers of those congregations, and it would be a means of spreading
through the Christian community a laxity of moral principle, than
which there is nothing more symptomatic of decay in vital godli-
ness. Like dry-rot in the timbers of a ship, it would soon spread
a dangerous unsoundness through the church. “A little leaven
leavens the whole lump.” I have confidence that at least the
great majority of us agree as to the importance of preserving the
discipline of the church. Without discipline the church is like
an unfenced field ; all the labour of ploughing and harrowing and
sowing are thrown away. The preaching of evangelical truth is
doubtless the means of spreading abroad the knowledge of Christ ;
our public worship is the means of gathering together those who
fear God, and helping them to express in unison their faith in God
and love of Him ; and by good government the means of grace are
wisely distributed, and the machinery of the church is harmoniously
worked : but unless all this be backed up by purity of life and per-
sonal holiness in the members of the church, the whole work is
thrown away. It is of essential importance to the influence of the
church that it be preserved from scandal, and that the fence between
the church and world, which Christ has set up, be jealously guarded
by us, to whom He has entrusted this important work.
Allow me to say, fathers and brethren, that when I apply this sub-
ject to our Victorian Church, and see the growth of these worldly
tendencies among us—when I see the gospel toned down to please
men, our worship dressed up to attract the sensuous, our government
interfered with by public opinion, and our discipline relaxed—l feel
that we need to put forth a strenuous effort to stop the downward


tendency. I feel that the fervent prayers of God’s people are needed
for a larger supplv of the Spirit of Christ, that by that Spirit in ns
and assisting our efforts, the Christian influence of this church may
be maintained and increased, as I trust m God it shall be main-
tained and increased in the future ; that we may prove to the com-
munity in which we live “ the salt of the earth.
But if it be not so-and it is my duty to speak on the supposition
that it may not be so ; if the world shall lead vs, instead of oui
leading the world, then our Lord discloses to us a sad future It
the salt have lost its savour, it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to
be cast out and trodden under foot of men.
Some Christian people do not like to acknowledge that the salt can
ever lose its savour. It is unwise, however, to be afraid of conceding
the whole truth. If it be truth, we need not be afraid of it. And
history does teach us that the creed of a church can be so thoroughly
eviscerated as to leave in it no doctrine specially Christian. History
teaches us that the worship of a church can be so refined as to pass
out of the hands of the people and become a mere show, conducted
by hired performers. History teaches us that the government of the
church can become the mere ladder of ambition, and the pliant
instrument of spiritual tyranny. History teaches us * h at the chu
can so lose its discipline as to become undistinguishable from the
world. And in these cases the church which has so lost its savour
has become, not only a useless thing in the world, but a positive
encumbrance to society. A church with a dead creed,
mnninl worshiD a worldly government and a low morale, is indeed
"ocd for nSgfand is onfj at to be oast out and trodden under
f ° Fathers and brethren ! We are met here for the consideration of
those matters which concern the usefulness of our church. It is,
doubtless, our sincere desire to preserve the purity of the church s
influence, and to exert that influence faithfully and vigorously m the
community among which we are placed. Much depends, under God,
on the spirit and aim with which we do our work as an Assembly.
I trust that, through God’s grace, we may bear in mind in all ou
discussions that the Master is present and that we are brethren. I
trust that in all our arrangements for Christ s work—m heathen
missions, evangelistic work, and Sabbath-schoo s ~ we ee P
us the great duty lying on us : to Christianise all nations as far as
we are able, and with the agents that God gives us. I trust that in
all questions which come before us involving personal fee ing we
mav be preserved from unkindness or irritation. And I trust that He
who presides over us unseen—the Head of the Church—may gui e
all our deliberations for His glory and the increased usefulness of the
Presbyterian Church of Victoria.
Mason, Firth & M'Cutcheon, Printers , Flinders Lane IV, Melbourne


