





'S-S 7j
SERMON.
€i Blessed are the dead -which die in the Lord .”— Rev, xiv., IS.
Jn the words just read, we have presented to our minds a certain class
of characters, and the glorious state upon which they had entered.
They are represented as haying “ died in the Lord in other parts,
they are spoken of as “ saints of the Lord.” Those who, having
been redeemed by the blood of the Lamb, and sanctified and renewed
in the spirit of their minds by the Holy Ghost, had received “ thejmd
of their faith.”
The primary design of this declaration may have been to describe
the happy state of those who died for the Lord : witnesses to the truth
in Jesus. We are justified, however, in regarding the terms in a more
comprehensive sense, and as descriptive of all the members of God’s
spiritual family, John was instructed to record these words for the
encouragement and consolation of believers in all ages of the Christian
Church : though “ eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither hath it
entered into the heart of man to conceive, the things which God hath
prepared for them that love him;” and, “though it doth not yet
appear what we shall be,” yet, throughout the sacred Scriptures, allu-
sions are made, and language employed, designed, and adapted to
inspire in the minds of the believer sublime and lofty conceptions of
that heavenly country to which he is advancing. Not only has the
Redeemer given the assurance “ that in his father’s house there are
many mansions,” prepared by his own hands, for his disciples; but, in
the revelation to St. John he has drawn aside the veil which hides the
future from the present so far as to give his followers on earth a
glimpse of that glorious world : which may quicken their footsteps
thitherward —some description of their bliss who, through faith, are
now inheriting the promises. Through the medium of . this revelation,
he conducts his people in thought and imagination to the portals of the
skies, and bids them listen to the symphonies which ascend from the
myriads who surround the throne, that, though still in the flesh, the
vibrations, which cause the arches of Heaven to ring, may strike the
cord of love in their own hearts, and strengthen their holy resolution
to follow their Saviour and die in the Lord.
These thoughts were suggested to my mind after receiving from two
of our friends, in this congregation, the painful information that they


had sustained the loss, by death, of a father and brother. I refer to
Mr. J. J. Clarke, who, during the past week, received the mournful
intelligence that his beloved father was dead ; and to Mr. J, J, Rutter,
who has been informed of the decease of an affectionate brother.
Those two departed servants of God occupied very different relative
positions in the Church of Christ and the spiritual career of life. One
had been a faithful Minister of the Gospel for upwards of thirty years;
and was, therefore, naturally anticipating the period when he should
lay down the weapons of his spiritual warfare, and pass from the Church
militant to the one triumphant above. The other—about twenty years
of age —had not long been a professed soldier under the banner of
love, having been only about six months united to the visible Church of
Christ. His death was unexpected on his own part, and also on that
of his mourning friends. Both, however, have been removed. Both
■translated, by their Divine Master, to that region where they are
undoubtedly this day especially blessed, and serving Him in the full
fruition of his love.
We, as a congregation, knew them not. But, we know and respect
those whom they loved. We weep with those who weep ; “ for, if one
member suffer, every member suffers with it.” We regard it, therefore,
a duty, and deem it a privilege, to cherish in our own hearts a kindred
feeling to that which upheaves the breasts of our sorrowing friends, and
to shed the sympathising tear with them while they mourn the loss of
such a father and such a brother. We recognise in those dear departed
ones, members of the same great family of God, and co-heirs to an in-
heritance beyond the skies; and we doubt not that the words of our
text have been verified in their individual experience.
“Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord.”
In considering these words, we shall notice some circumstances from
which we may conclude that such are blessed. And may the Holy
Spirit so apply these words as to excite in the minds of all present
such desires as shall induce them to seek preparation for that blessed-
ness.
I. Those who die in the Lord may be pronounced blessed, because
they will be delivered from the afflictions and trials of the present
state.
“ They rest from their labors.” From the numerous calamities, per-
secutions, and oppressions of this world.
“ Man,” says the ancient Patriarch, “is born to trouble ;” and the
Redeemer instructed his disciples to expect “ that through much tribu-
lation they must enter the kingdom.” The Christian, therefore, must
not expect to pass through his probation—this land of enemies—exempt
from affliction and trial. His Master was a “ man of sorrows, and
acquainted with grief.” These trials arise from bodily sickness, dis-
appointed expectation, and other irritating circumstances of life.
Many, indeed, are the enemies of the spiritual traveller ; and all com-
bine to harass his mind, grieve his heart, and depress his spirits : and


not unfrequently is he ready to sink beneath their weight. But, while
the ungodly man—he who is a stranger to religious principle—rushes
into scenes of gaiety, intemperance, and licentiousness, to drown his con-
sciousness of sorrow, the Christian recognises in all his afflictions the
hand of his Father and Friend, and the arrangement of infinite wisdom
and love. He endures as seeing “ the recompense of reward : be-
lieving that all things shall work together for the future and eternal
good,” He lives under the conviction that though
“ The bud may have a bitter taste,
Yet sweet will be the flower.”
He, therefore, as an obedient sou and a devoted servant, bows with a
spirit of submission to the will of his father and Lord : cheered, con-
soled, and sustained while passing through the “ fiery 'trial o!
affliction,” with a prospect of an abode where no foe can enter, no
calamity befall, and where no pang shall ever be felt. However
feeble and sickly may be this frail body, it is enough for him to know
that, when it shall be dissolved, he will go to possess a “ building, a
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens.” However fre-
quently and freely his tears may flow on earth, his sorrows are soothed
by contemplation of that world where they shall all be wiped away by
the hand of his God r in that world where “ will be no more sorrow,
nor crying; neither shall there be any more pain :” for, the afflictions
and trials of the present state “ shall have passed away, and there
shall be no more death.”
That father and brother, whose departure we now mourn, have ended
their period of affliction and sorrow. They now have a “right to the
tree of life,” the “leaves of which are for the healing of the
nations.” They have ceased to suffer. They died in the Lord, and
are blessed.
11. Those who die in the Lord are blessed, because perfectly freed
from sin.
However numerous and potent the enemies from without to which
the Christian is exposed, and with which he carries on his spiritual
conflict, the one which most frequently disturbs his peace, and causes
him sorrow,, is—Sin.” His pains, wants, and griefs, from other
sources, may be transitory ; but from that, permanent.. Under this,
he “groans, being burdened.” It was that principle of evil which the
Apostle designates as “the law warring against that of the mind;”
and which constrained him to exclaim, “ 0, wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from this body of death?
In the same conflict with sin does the disciple of Christ now engage
from day to day. He may not have to endure physical suffering ;
poverty and distress may not overtake him; his heart may not have
been agonised by the loss of his dearest and most beloved friends ; but,
with grief, he has responded to Paul’s declaration—“ when I would do
good, evil is present with mef’ This terrible monster, Sin, intrudes
into his most secret and holy exercises of retirement; disturbs every


hour of desired tranquility ; and alloys every pleasure on earth. Wo
day can he enter upon, but some mist and cloud of sin intervenes
between his soul and the radiating beams from his father’s Face. How
delightful and exhilirating, then, while mourning over and contending'
with such an evil, is the persuasion—that there is a spot in God’s great
universe where sin is not. Where every shackle of spiritual thraldom
will be broken off; and the soul enjoy her native, unfettered freedom.
To think that there all is holiness. He who sits upon the throne, and
those who cast their crowns of adoration at His feet are perfect, pure,
and holy 1
Oh, could those, whose death has called forth these remarks, but speak
to us to day, what would they communicate even of a negative character.
They died in the Lord, and are freed from sin. Yes, what wonders
would they unfold to our astonished ears. Since that father and brother
entered the portals of that celestial city,—commenced that temple
worship above, —not one unjust action, not one impure desire, not one
unholy motive have they experienced.
“ 0, sacred hour 1 0, blest abode f”'
u Those souls of just men made perfect ” cannot sorrow, because they
cannot sin. No spot, no blemish, no imperfection characterises the
services which they render to their glorified Redeemer! They are
blessed, for they have washed their robes and made them white “in
the blood of the Lamb.”
“There they shall sit and see his face.
And never, never sin ;
There, from the rivers of his grace.
Drink endless pleasures in.”
Christian Brethren, —that which they now enjoy will one day be
yours. The same Saviour who loved them loves you ! The same
fountain which cleansed their souls will cleanse you from sin ! The
same eternal spirit which renewed and sanctified their natures will
make you meet to be partakers of that heavenly inheritance.
“ A hope so much divine
May trials well endure.”
Take courage, then, aud renew each successive day your conflict with
Sin. Looking to your Great Captain as your salvation, fighting man-
fully the battle on earth, till you die in the Lord, and enter that
blessedness.
111. Such are blessed, because the impediments of earth are un-
known.
While the Christian must rejoice at the prospect of being freed from
the trials and conflicts of the present state, there are higher considera-
tions than those, which inspire his mind and influence his conduct when
contemplating the blessedness of Heaven. One is, progression in the
acquisition of divine knowledge and holiness, exempt from the nume-
rous impediments which now attend his course.
Progress is the necessary result of existence. Each one of us is


either progressing towards Heaven and God, or “ filling up the mea-
sure of iniquity,” and becoming a fit companion of demons and lost
spirits.
The soul impregnated with heavenly truth—the “ twice-born
man ” —has adopted as his watchword —Progression in goodness, truth,
and holiness. He, like Paul, is desirous of “forgetting the things
which are behind and reaching forward to those which are before,”
Onward is the language of every truly earnest soul.
His mind, as the eagle’s eye, is directed high to the sunny mountain
peaks. The language of his heart is that of the poet —
“ Rise from transitory things,
Towards Heaven, thy native place.”
But, though such are his sentiments and holy aspirations, how dif-
ferent is the contemplation to his realization of them. The
impediments to progress are frequent and numerous. The dimness of
his own vision ; the influence of characters with whom he must hold
intercourse; and the attraction of secular objects, are things over which
he mourns. To him it would be a source of gratification if at the
close of each successive day he could conclude—l am wiser now than
I was yesterday ; I have to-day ascended another eminence by which
my mental and spiritual vision has been enlarged; I, as a soldier of
the Cross, have made fresh conquests over sin, the world, and the devil,
and added some territory to my Divine Master’s kingdom. The
traveller on Zion’s road—the pilgrim of the Heavenly Jerusalem—•
would feel his pleasure enhanced if, at every stage he possessed the
conviction that he had laid aside another weight, and disentangled his
affections from another “ easily besetting sin.” But, alas ! how fre-
quently is he constrained to conclusions the reverse of those. And the
inquiry rushes into his mind—has not the weight of worldly cares
increased and the cord which binds my soul to the earth been drawn
more tightly ? He does not, however, despond nor despair. He
ponders the inspired assurance—“ then shall ye know, if ye follow on
to know the Lord.” His mind is carried forward to the myriads who
have overcome every difficulty and are freed from every impediment.
Then, under the impulse of such a glimpse he exclaims—
“March to the gates of Heavenly joy,
Where thy great Captain Saviour’s gone.”
Persuaded that once this mortal shall have put on immortality—and he
shall have entered upon those bright plains of glory—the impediments
and obstructions to divine progress will for ever be unknown.
Dear weeping friends, —your beloved relatives, over whom you now
mourn, have reached that land of freedom. They are inhaling the
pure and vital atmosphere of that beautiful country ; they have eaten
at the banquet of the King; they have drank from the invigorating
River of Life ; and, by the strength of such, they are free from every
impediment and strangers to torpor and inactivity. They died in the
Lord; and, being now engaged in high and lofty exercises in those vast


bright fields of eternity, and the wide regions of their Redeemer’s uni-
verse, they are “ blessed.”
IV. The characters of our text are blessed, because they will be
for ever with their Lord.
That we may consider the consummation of their bliss, the full
fruition of their glory. “In Thy presence there is fulness of joy ; and,
at Thy right hand are pleasures for evermore.” To be present with
the Lord. To see Him as He is. Inspiring truth ! And we
cannot think of the blessedness of our text without including that.
“ Father, I will that these also which Thou hast given me be with me
where I am; that they may behold the glory which Thou hast
given me.”
We often conceive it will be a privilege to meet and converse with
the Saints above ; with Abraham respecting the transactions on Moriah;
with Jacob the wrestler ; to unite with the “ sweet singer of Israel” in
one of the symphonies on the mount of God ; to associate with the
“ innumerable cloud of witnesses.”
We also anticipate, with extacies of joy, the re-union with our own
beloved ones who die in the Lord. It will be a blessedness to unite
with them in reviewing all the way the Lord our God has led us on
earth. These are various elements of that blessedness ; but, they are
only as a drop to the ocean, the “ small dust of the balance,” compared
to that of enjoying the presence of the glorified Redeemer. To sit
within the circle of those enlivening rays which radiate from His
throne, and converse with our elder brother, the first-begotten among
many brethren, must be bliss. The prospect of such a reality, con-
strained the Apostle to exclaim, “ I have a desire to depart and be with
Christ.” To become the inhabitant of that world, where the Lamb
shall lead us to the fountains of living waters ; and to be receiving
from His fullness new light, which shall be perpetually radiating and
transforming our souls to His own likeness, is indeed beyond the power
of language to describe. It justifies the Apostle in saying “it doth not
yet appear what we shall be.” Oh yes ! As the eras of eternity roll
on, and as the purified intelligences ascend higher and higher, “from
glory to glory,” the vaults of Heaven will resound with their accla-
mations “ it doth not yet appear what we shall be.”
Such a prospect and such a hope, not only sustains and consoles
the believer’s mind and heart under the trials and impediments of the
present, but excites the holy desire, “ Oh, that I had the wings of a
dove,” that I might fly up thither.
Christian, have you not experienced such aspirations ? Have you
not, when contemplating that Heavenly state, —when the unspent
melodies of the upper Jerusalem have fallen upon your ears, —have you
not felt your soul struggling to burst from this tabernacle of clay,
and fly up at once to Jesus ? Yes, —


“When the opening Heavens around me shine,
With beams of heavenly bliss.
While Jesus shows his heart is mine,
And whispers I am His,
My soul would leave this heavy clay
At that transporting word ;
Run up with joy the shining way,
To embrace my dearest Lord.”
We believe the father and brother of our sorrowing freinds have seen
the Lord, They have conversed with Jesus. They are and will be for-
ever “ blessed.” J
Those, then, who survive : “ mourn not as those who are without
hope.” How consolatory such a conviction !
The beloved father of our respected friend, Mr. Clarke, had been a
faithful Minister of Christ, in the city of Bath, England, for many years.
He had directed many souls to Christ; instructed them in the principles
which His Divine Master has given ; and conducted them to the banks
of Jordan. He departed, therefore, to receive from the hands of the
Redeemer, “ the crown, and reward of the faithful servant.” He is
gone to shine as another “ star in the firmament of Heaven,” another
jewel in the Saviour’s diadem. One element in his blessedness is, that
he was welcomed into that world as the spiritual father of souls who
had preceded him.
What a privilege to be the son of such a father! His children
revered and loved their father. They love his memory still. Will they
not follow him ?
I imagine myself standing by the side of that servant of Cod as he was
gently breathing out his soul into the arms of the blessed Jesus, and
the question is proposed, “ Brother, what are your hopes, expectations,
and prospects ? ” He replies, “ Heaven, Jesus, Glory, Christ is all
my salvation, and my joy. I have fought the good fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the faith ; and, henceforth, there is laid up for
me a crown of righteousness.” Another question is asked, “ Have you
any anxious thoughts in your mind ? ” I see his dim eye kindle, his
arm, almost paralized in death, uplifted, and his mind evidently directed
to Australia, and he says, “My children. My sons and daughters in
that far distant land. God of Abraham, Angel of the Covenant, bless
my children. May they become the children of God and be united
with me in yonder world of glory.” Giving utterance to those desires,
and making that request, he ceases to breathe; his soul is released
and flies up to its eternal rest.
Weeping and sorrowing children, your father had offered many a
prayer before for you. Oh, how many are recorded in God’s great
book of rememberance ? Let me affectionately, and with earnest
solicitation for your eternal interests, reiuind you that the last prayer of
your beloved parent has been offered. You have now no father to
intercede with God for you. Have those prayers been in vain ?He
can pray no more. You perceive, then, the supreme importance of


being increasingly in earnest for yourselves. Think how many tears
that father shed, when he spent hours of agonizing prayer for each and
all of you.
Refrain not, then, from prayer. Confide in the same Saviour which
your father loved and served. Seek the Holy Spirit, by whose influences,
he was prepared for glory. Our sympathizing prayer is, that you may
be influenced by the same Divine principles as your father. That you
all may pursue the same course and follow his example. That when
you meet that beloved one before the great white throne, he may be
able to conduct you to that throne, and say to Him who sitteth thereon,
Lord, here am I and the children Thou hast given me.” He has spiritual
ones there: Shall any of his natural offspring be absent ? God
forbid!
The other event to which we referred, presents a different aspect.
Our friend, Mr. Rutter, mourns not over a father, but a brother beloved.
Charles Robinson Rutter, the deceased brother of our present weeping
friend, was about twenty years of age when he died. He had been a
member of Christ’s visible Church about six months. The scene and
circumstances of his death are described in a letter to our friend. We
picture him to our mind as prostrate in the agonies of death. Though
a stranger to a parent’s solicitude, he was not so to fraternal love.
Though the subject of excruciating pain, he, too, thought of Australia
and his dear kindred there. The letter to which I have referred, is one
of thrilling interest ; and, I am convinced, must be exceedingly precious
to our mourning friend. The writer states “he was twenty hours in
the agonies of death: it was heart-rending to i see him. But he ex-
perienced the supporting influence of Him -who has said, ‘ I am the
Resurrection and the life ’ ; and a more glorious assurance of faith in
the Redeemer could not have been given.” What a beabtiful sight in
that obedient son and affectionate brother. He sent, through the
medium of that letter, across the great broad ocean, “ his love to his
brothers and all his Australian friends.” Those weeping brothers
have received that message of fraternal love, deep into their hearts.
Beyond a doubt, there was something more. When those words were
uttered by that brother, to he transmitted to Australia, there was a
petition presented by himself to God for yon.
There is another sublime circumstance, Charles had received a
little “lamp” from his brother John; and, when he was dying,
before death perfectly paralized his powers, his hand grasped that lamp;
and, while his soul was making its escape, he stretched his arms to a
sister, and in her hand deposited that same lamp of eternal truth.
He gave her the source of light, life, and immortality, and expired. I
say that such an act is sublime, and causes one’s soul to thrill with joy.
It also illustrates another sentence in the same letter. “He was
anxious for his own salvation ; but had for a long time been earnestly
seeking the salvation of others. He had devised many plans for use-
fulness during the coming winter.” He too was a laborer in the Lord’s


vineyard but in a different department, and though he was not permitted
to carry his plans into execution, his Lord will say, “it was well that
it was in thy heart.” The voice which speaks from that young man is
—“live for Christ.” His death presents the sustaining power of the
Gospel. His agonies were intense, hut there was within peace, joy, and
happiness. To the bereaved parents there is more than consolation ;
there is joy in weeping. The brothers and sisters, while they sonw,
must rejoice that they ever had such a brother. May they regard his
death as an admonition to seek their own salvation, “ now' while it is
the accepted time, and to work while it is day.” Their brother is
blessed. Oh, be it theirs to consecrate themselves to the same Saviour;
to exert their powers and employ their time in the same high and holy
cause, that when their master calleth, they, as their brother was, may
be found ready. Though their brother has been taken, their parents
remain to pray for them. It was the desire of their brother, and it is
the anxiety of the beloved parents now , that they all may die in the
Lord, and be blessed with Him for ever. For this consummation may
each one live, and to it may each aspire.
To the Christian the subject is one of an inspiring nature. You arc
progressing on to God. Under all trials, privations and sorrows, let
the thought of dying in the Lord, and eventually entering upon that
blessedness, sustain and stimulate you.
To those who have not the prospect of dying in the Lord, I would
say : pause ere you proceed further on your present career ! Ponder ;
look before you. There is no blessedness at the end of such a course ;
no Heaven, no Saviour ; but weeping and wailing, lamentation and woe.
The same voice which pronounced our text, is now in His word
addressing the sinner—“come to Me and I will give you rest.” Un-
converted man, listen to those words of love. Give your soul to Jesus
and you will be blessed.


