

“ CHE TIL MA TUILLE.”
SERMON
E MIG RATIO N
FROM
THE HIGHLANDS
AND
ISLANDS OF SCOTLAND
AUSTRALIA
BY THE
BISHOP OF ARGYLE AND THE ISLES.
r~ S 3 / f
i yH*
The proceeds of the fale of this Sermon will be appropriated in
aid of the Fund.
LONDON:
FRANCIS & JOHN RIVINGTON,
st, Paul’s church yard, and Waterloo place,
1852.
Price, One Shilling.


Preached In St. Matthew’s Church, Spring Gardens, London,
June 13, 1852.


A SERMON,
Genesis xlii. i, 2.
“ Now when Jacob Jaw that there was corn in Egypt ,
Jacob Jaid unto his Jons , Why do ye look one upon
another? And he Jaid , Behold , I have heard that
there is corn in Egypt: get you down thither .”
/npHE main facts of hiftory are much the fame in
every clime and age.
In the paft we fee the prefent.
From the paft we gain a guide to the future.
In the words of our text we obferve a condition of
the paft not unlike that of the prefent, and, may
obtain a remedy for the neceftities of our time by
taking the courfe which appears to have been adopted
with advantage in the ages before us.
We behold Ifrael defcend into Egypt becaufe of
the fcarcity of food in Canaan. It is deemed ad-
vifable that the population of fome parts of this
country now in want fhould betake themfelves to
other lands for fimilar reafons.
We propofe, to-day, trufting in God’s help, to
confider this queftion; and to recommend the emi-
gration to more fertile regions in another portion of


the globe, of fuch part of Her Majefty’s fubjects, in
thefe iflands, as are now unhappily in a deftitute con-
dition from the poverty of the diftrids which they
inhabit; to fuggeft a means and advocate its employ-
ment for the removal of the diftrefs in the Highlands
and Iflands of Scotland, by enabling their fuffering
population to take advantage of the abundance and
the demand for labour in our colony of Auftralia.
Forgive me if I dwell more at length upon details
than may feem at firfl defirable. I truft I do no
wrong in bringing an account of temporal arrange-
ments into the fandity of this day and place. If it
is right on the Sabbath-day to lift out an ox fallen
into a pit, it cannot be wrong to contemplate the
means whereby we may affifi; fuch of our brethren of
mankind as are now fallen into great ftraits.
Some of you are aware that the population of the
Highlands and Iflands of Scotland, more efpecially of
the Weflern Highlands and Iflands of the Hebrides,
has been deprived of late years of its principal means
of fubfiftence by the failure of the potatoe crop. The
foil and climate are not favourable to the produc-
tion of other articles of fuflenance, and there is no pro-
dud of native induftry which the people can exchange
for fupplies from abroad; the confequence has been,
and is, an alarming and increafing deficiency in the
fupply of food. Its want has hitherto been prevented
from becoming fatal to the people by the charitable
aid afforded by more favoured diftrids—a charity
which has been mod liberally and continuoufly be-


flowed almofl up to the pretent time—a charity
unparalleled, but which has now ceafed. The deflitute
people have alfo been aflifled by their refident
landlords, their clergy, and the wealthier among them,
to the utmofl of their power, and in many cafes far
beyond what was confident with fafety to them-
felves.* They cannot, however, any longer be main-
tained by fuch means, and it would appear that any
amelioration of their condition from unafiifled native
refources is not to be expedled.
For the lafl forty years previoufiy to the late famine,
obferves a competent authority,f the population flea-
dily increafed, while the means of fubfiflence as fleadily
diminifhed. The kelp manufadlure was deflroyed,
but the numbers dependent on that manufacture in-
created. At one time many drew a confiderable
portion of their means from illicit distillation, but
fiscal changes and the efforts of the Government and
of the proprietors to put down fo demoralizing a
calling, broke up the fyflem; flill the numbers de-
pendent on it continued to increate. The herring
fifhery declined, but the number relying on it for a
portion of their fubfiflence, increafed at an equal rate
with its decline. The people continued to multiply,
whilfl all the refources which could have juflified
their multiplication were one by one cut from under
them, until the famine of 1846 found them dependent
for fubfiflence on the potatoe cultivation of their fmall
* Note A, Appendix,
f Note B, Appendix.


crofts, and the wages they could obtain in other and
richer portions of the kingdom during fix months in
the year.
The failure of the potatoe is not the only caufe of
the prefent diftrefs; it did but convert into abfolute
ftarvation a mode of life not far removed from it
before.
The teftimony of all the witneffes examined and
all the fads collected, proves that the entire native
refources of thefe diftricts do not now on an average
afford fubfiftence to the population for more than fix
months in the year, and have not done fo fince 1846.
In fuch a condition, to prevent actual ftarvation,
eleemofynary aid was called in, and was mofl liberally
afforded; an aid which has been the means of pre-
venting a very intenfe amount of fuffering to the
people, but an aid which cannot any longer be
obtained, and which, if it could, experience has
fhown it is highly undefirable to employ.
Experience has fhown that eleemofynary aid is
coupled with fuch grievous drawbacks as to render its
ufe, fave for the prevention of adual death, not to be
defired. <c On no point,” in the experience derived
from the late and prefent diftrefs, “is the teftimony
fo confentaneous and overwhelming” as on this, that
the “ inadequacy and evil refults flowing from the
application of eleemofynary aid,” are fuch as fhould pre-
vent it from being adopted, fave in the laft extremity,
“ Nearly impotent for good, it feems omnipotent for
evil.” It deftroys perfonal exertion, it faps the foun-


dations of truth and uprightnefs, it leads to habits of
reckleffnefs and immorality; and, in the cafe of the
diftridls before us, a dependence on its continued alfill-
ance (leading the inhabitants to negle6l the preparation
of the foil, and even to allow land to go out of culti-
vation) has left them in a worfe condition for the
future than it originally found them.
But what is to be done ?
The diftrefs remains. The fufferings of the people
are likely to be as fevere as ever; their condition is
now as before. Still we behold an increafing popu-
lation, in “a rocky, cold, and mifty territory,” en-
compafled by turbulent and dangerous feas, over-
Ihadowed by a lowering and inclement atmofphere,
which will not permit the railing of fufficient crops,
ftruggling with continuous want and mifery. Is there
no remedy ?
None, permanently fatisfadory, we believe, fave
that fuggelled by our text. “ Now when Jacob faw
that there was corn in Egypt, Jacob faid unto his
fons. Why do ye look one upon another ? And he
faid. Behold, I have heard that there is corn in Egypt:
get you down thither.”
The remedy mull be Emigration. A remedy
which has been refufed to the laft by thefe people, but
which is now defired, yea eagerly demanded by them.
Emigration, then—whither ?
Happily, in the Providence of God, we need not
be at a lofs. In another portion of the globe there
are fair and fertile regions, deficient in inhabitants.


At our antipodes lies a vaft ifland, owing allegiance
to the Crown and Parliament of Great Britain, nearly
equal in fize to Europe, poffefled, from its great
extent, of almoft every variety of foil and climate;
and the latter, upon the whole, eminently falubrious.
It abounds in natural products valuable to man; while
its freedom from difeafes, from hoftile tribes, and
noxious animals, renders it peculiarly defirable as a
place of refidence. Moreover, it is efpecially fuited
to the habits of the population of the Highlands and
Wands of Scotland. From its boundlefs fcope, and
the grafly character of its furface, it prefents unlimited
command of room and of occupation for a paftoral
and gregarious people, fuch as the Scotch High-
landers are; while from unforefeen and extraordinary
caufes, there is an increaflng demand for the very
fpecies of labour which the Weftern Highlands and
Wands of Scotland are peculiarly calculated to afford.
Auftralia has recently been found to contain mineral
treafures in great abundance, and the difcovery of
gold, in immenfe quantities, has drawn away a great
proportion of thofe previoufly engaged in agricultural
and paftoral purfuits, leaving abundant fcope and great
demand for labourers to fill up the vacant fpaces.
At this moment, we are told, the capital invefted in
fheep, whofe number is eftimated at 20,000,000, is
in imminent danger from want of fhepherds; “ the
flocks in great tracts of country have already been
doubled up in numbers beyond the power of one
man to attend to, and it will be impoflible to fave the


next clip of wool without a large fupply of labour.”
There is now, in fhort, in Auftralia as great famine
for labour, as there is in the Highlands and Iflands
for food.
Can we hefitate what to do? Our path is plain.
We have to make the wants of the one country bear
upon the wants of the other. We muft bring Scot-
land into connexion with food, and Auftralia into con-
nexion with labour. We muft make the different
requirements of the refpective countries correct each
other; and as Auftralia cannot be brought to them,
our deftitute people muft be taken to Auftralia.
And they are now moft anxioufly deftrous that this
fhould be accomplifhed. What then are the means
within our reach ? There is a large population to be
moved; they muft emigrate, to effect any permanent
good to themfelves or to the colony, together; in
fact, they will not go otherwife than in families.
Are there means at our difpofal fufffcient for fo large
an undertaking ?
In part, there are. The Colonial Land and Emi-
gration Commiffioners provide free paffages to Auf-
ralia for able-bodied men and women, of good cha-
racter, not exceeding a fpecified age, with a certain
proportion of children, and on certain conditions.
But this is all that is, at prefent, at our difpofal.
This, however, is not enough.
This is not a complete remedy for fo great a want.
The old parents, and remaining children, cannot be
abandoned—an outfit is required—able-bodied men


emigrating alone, or even with a wife and one or two
children, are not bound by thofe ties which tend to
render them ftationary and valuable colonifts. It is
not delirable that they fhould emigrate thus. Situated
as Australia now is, fuch emigrants would affuredly
not continue in paftoral or agricultural occupation;
but would follow their comrades to fearch for mineral
treafures. It is moft delirable to prevent this ; indeed,
unlefs this be prevented, the fupply of labour which
Auftralia requires (agricultural and paftoral labour),
will not be provided. Emigration by families , and,
as far as poftible, to a diftance from the fcene of mi-
neral temptation, is the only hope, at prefent, of
retaining labourers at fuch work—of providing Auf-
tralia with the labour it requires. Happily, the High-
lander defires the fort of labour Auftralia requires,
and he offers the beft fecurity for remaining at that
labour, by defiring to emigrate to paftoral tracts, and
to emigrate in families. This gives as great an aftur-
ance of a fuccefsful refult from his emigration as it
is poftible to obtain, both for himfelf and Auftralia.
Settled apart with his family and clan around him,
engaged in old and congenial purfuits, fevered by
language and by race from previous fettlers—there is
every hope of his fupplying fatisfactorily the need
under which Auftralia now labours, and his own
requirements at the fame time. But how is fuch
wholefale Emigration to be accomplifhed ?
A method has been devifed, a mean by which
it may be accompliftied, in behalf of which I am


here to plead to-day. A Society has been instituted
to Supplement that which is Supplied Srom other
Sources; that is, a Society in aid oS the Government
Commiffion, by the agency of which, in conjunction
with the Government aSTiStance, an emigration oS the
character required, may be carried through. The
Society is termed the Highland and Hand Emigration
Society; its operation is as Sollows:
i ft. The Commiftioners oS Emigration provide a
Sree pafiage Sor able-bodied men and women, and as
large a proportion oS children as can SaSely be put on
board each Ship, with reSerence to Sanatory confi-
derations.
2nd. The Emigrants will be required to Sell what-
ever property they pofteSs, and apply the proceeds,
as Sar as they will go, towards paying the expenSes oS
the outfit and pafiage.
At this point commence the operations oS the
Society.
i ft. Sums oS money are advanced to enable thoSe to
whom the Commiflioners have granted Sree or afiifted
pafiages to complete their depofits and outfits ; 2nd.
The whole coft oS the Emigration oS the remainder oS
the Samily is advanced by the Society; and 3rd. The
owners oS the eftates Srom which the Emigrants depart,
are required to contribute to the Fund oS the Society
one-third oS the outlay incurred Sor the per Sons re-
moving Srom their reSpedlive eftates.
The Sums advanced to the Emigrants will be
ftridlly on the Sooting oS loans , to be repaid by them


as foon as poffible after their arrival in the Colony.
The punctual repayment of thefe loans will be fecured
by every confideration of honour and gratitude; and
as, whatever charges may have been brought, with
more or lefs appearance of reafon, againft the Scottilh
Highlanders, they have never been accufed of want of
gratitude, honour, and fidelity to engagements, thefe
advances may be confidered to reft upon fufficient
fecurity. If there ffiould be any individual inftances
of diffionefty, the Committee know what is due to
public morality and to the interefts of the Highland
people, both in their native and in their newly-
adopted feats; and they will enforce payment of the
loans in fuch cafes, with the addition of the full
Colonial rate of intereft, even if the legal expenfes
should leave no balance in their favour.
Thefe are the means whereby it is propofed to
relieve the diftrefs now exifting in the Highlands
and Iflands of Scotland, and at the fame time to fupply
the great Colony of Australia with the inhabitants
and labour which it requires fo greatly ; and we may
not doubt of the fuccefs, under God, of thefe means,
if the contributions to the fund of the Society are ade-
quate to the occafion.
Succefs will entirely depend upon the extent
and promptitude of the operations. Large power
is required, and the immediate application of it.
If the power is not fufficient, the remedy will be
incomplete; if not immediately applied, it will be
too late to benefit either country.


Be it obferved, the affiftance given by the Society
is not eleemofynary. It bellows its aid on the Emi-
grant in the form of a loan, to be repaid by him after
haying been a fufficient time in the Colony; a loan
he will have no difficulty in repaying, from the large-
nefs of the return he will obtain for his induftry; or
the Society in recovering, by means of an organization
already in conflant operation for fuch purpofes.
By this procefs, moreover, as foon as the Society is
in full operation, and it has a fufficient Fund at its
command, it will be able, by the return of its advances,
to carry on continuoufly, with little additional aid, an
unceafing flow of Emigration.
As moft of the Proprietors, by their generality
during the diftrefs, ffiared the fufferings of their
people, fo they will now participate in the benefits
arifing from the Emigration. Their contribution to
the Fund of a fum equal to one-third of the advances
made by the Society to their dependents, while it will
add, in a much greater proportion, to the value of
their eflates, will reinforce the Society’s Fund, and
provide a local check againft improper applications
for affiftance.
The Society has obtained the patronage and affift-
ance of His Royal Highnefs Prince Albert, and a
munificent donation from Her Majefly the Queen.
It has been aided by a fubfcription from, and the
recommendation of the Biffiop of this Diocefe;* is
under the management of a highly diflinguifhed and
practical Committee and efficient office-bearers; and
* London.


therefore comes before the nation having as great
authority, and offering as great fecurity as it is
poffible for fuch an institution to poffefs.
I need not fay more regarding it, or urge its
claims upon your notice farther than by briefly dating
a few of the refults which may be expected to flow
from its fuccefsful exertions, to which refults you will
contribute in proportion to the aid you beftow upon
the fund.
i ft. You relieve a population differing from the
miferies and pangs of hopeleffnefs and ftarvation.
2nd. You help to fupply the exigencies of a great
country, the products of which are in danger from
want of human affiftance.
3rd. You fecure the continuance of an important
branch of the induftry of this country; for the woollen
manufactures of Yorkshire muft ftand ftill, and their
operatives be thrown out of employment, if the fupply
of their raw material (the wool of Auftralia) be inter-
rupted, or ceafe.
"I ou convert a population which of late has been
an unceafing drain and drag upon the induftry of this
country, into an element of ftrength and affiftance.
You prevent the neceflity of farther calls upon your
own generofity, by placing thofe fo long in diftrefs at
once in comfort and independence, and that •perma-
nently. You benefit Auftralia by transferring to it a
moral and induftrious people, whofe taftes are pecu-
liarly congenial to the paftoral life of that great
country. You improve the character of the whole of


the emigration from the United Kingdom by the
prominence you give to colonization by entire fami-
lies. You prepare the way to better days at home
for thofe who remain behind in the Scottilh High-
lands and Illands. But I believe from the nature of
the Celtic race and the character of the prefent move-
ment, that the Gaelic people will eventually all go
and fettle together. You bring joy and gladnefs to
certainly not lefs than 30,000 or 40,000 Highland
hearts ; people anxious and willing to help themfelves,
to rekindle their fires in a new home, to dart afrefh
in a new life, to tranfplant their worn and withering
tree to the flrength and fertility of a virgin world.
Let us confider that which we are called upon to
do. Let us contemplate that which is palling before
our eyes. This is not an every-day call, this is not
an every-day occurrence. It is not hidden from us.
Providence, fo often veiled and infcrutable, giving
commands and accomplilhing ends for reafons and in
ways dark and myllerious, here feems to lift the veil,
and permits us to behold the modes and meaning of
the Divine arrangements; yea, bids man come forth
and take his part in them. Here we are brought
face to face with the mighty machine of Supreme
Government, and can look upon, and are called to
affid; in the movements of its maffive powers.
God bids man replenilh the earth and fubdue it;
and when man, in whose heart is benevolently im-
planted, (to prevent an abufe of his natural love of
change,) a love of home and of his early alfociations


is averfe to go forth and commit himfelf to the dark
unknown, God obliges in fome way the fulfilment of
his own command, and by fome fpecial agent enforces
his Divine decree. Now he fends a fcarcity upon the
lands at home, and drives their inmates forth. Now
we are in the midft of a Providential impulfe. Ufing
the rod of famine, God is driving the Celtic races to
people other lands. They were the firft of the
nations here: it is they who muft go firft.
Pufhed from the regions of the far Eaft by more
powerful tribes behind them, they have now reached
the utmoft verge of Weftern Europe : they fringe its
fhores from Sutherland to Spain. Their flight muft
now be to other lands beyond the horizon of thefe
feas.
They have no abiding place where they are;
they cannot contend with the ftronger races behind
them. They muft go. Let us compaflionate, leLus
help them. Let us fee that they “go not empty.”
If they have not the ruder, they have the fofter
virtues. If they have not the Saxon ftrength, they
have the Celtic gentlenefs. From the higheft to
the loweft, this long-defcended people have, by
nature, what has been called the next thing to Chriftian
grace—the character of born-gentlemen, with the
virtues fignified by that word. If they have not the
ftern vigour of the oak, they have the elaftic qualities
of the afh. “ Let not the foot fay unto the hand, I
have no need of thee.” God hath made both for
various, but different ufes; without both, the world


would be imperfect. In leaving the Celt to linger
on a miferable exiftence in a diftrict which, under
prefent circumftances, is incapable of fupporting its
prefent population, we lofe a necefiary element in
our own welfare. For every reafon let us bear each
other’s burdens. Of mixed blood as we all, more or
lefs, are in this ifland, we cannot fever ourfelves from
one another : it is our brethren who now cry to us.
Let us look upon them, not as they are, but as they
were, and ftrive to bring back the Highland race to
its former ftrength and purity, if not here, at lead in
another, but yet our own land. They are an intereft-
ing and deferving people ; eminently loyal, obedient,
and devoted to their country. Throughout all their
hiftory, love for their conftituted heads has been their
diftinguifhing charad:eriftic. Not gifted with the
ftubbornefs of will and reafon which has made other
races, in their demand for civil rights and the liberty
of private judgment, more remarkable, they have
followed the patriarchal government inherited from
their fathers, the fruits of which have ever been devo-
tion to the Crown. The riling of the clans under
Montrofe and Dundee, and after that in 17 1 5
1745, was but the following out of this principle;
they rofe in defence of one whom they believed
to be their liege lord and their fovereign, a
principle which renders their devotion to the pre-
fent royal line as certain and as ftrong as it was
to that which preceded it. Now, in their diftrefs
they look alone to Britilh lands for refuge; they go


not, they will not go, but to the poffeflions of the
Brltifh Crown—a fact deserving of confideration.
They are an uncomplaining and a hardy people.
Throughout the late diftrefs no clamours aflailed
us, no cafes of crime or violence were brought
to public notice. Easily fatisfied, they com-
plain only of the want of the abfolute neces-
aries of life. The late vaft eleemosynary aid
has but temporarily changed their character, we be-
lieve, in this refpedt. It is high time, however, to
put an end to that ftate of things by having recourfe
to another fyftem; time to save the hardy and induf-
trious Highlanders (who fo nobly replenifhed our
country’s ranks as foldiers diflinguifhed by felf-denial
and gallantry throughout the late long war) from per-
ishing or from linking to the abyfs of confirmed
mendicancy. I pray you to help them to go to other
lands where they mufi depend on their own exertions,
where the foil will yield a fair return, and where the
Gael will once more lift his head, and our country’s
pine hand forth frefh rooted in the mountains.
Help him to go, and to go for ever ; “to return
no more.”
Alas! Shall we not mifs them from our fhores ?
That long-defcended race, —that loyal and patient
people. Without them, will the lone valleys be the
fame, the Hands where they dwelt ? Will not the
echoes mifs the Highland pipe, and their lands their
long familiar name ? Will not the ftranger mifs the
Highland welcome,- the Highland convoy through


the fllent hills ? Shall we not weep, as Rachel, for our
children when they are not ?
How unfpeakably hard it is for them to depart,
none but a mountaineer can tell, —none but a long-
defcended mountaineer can feel. But they perifli if
they remain. They had better go. Let us fee
that they go not empty. In a little while, the
unchriftened ftreams in the diftant land, the un-
familiar hills by the other feas, will bear their
names and return their melodies; and as he hears
the mountain-pipe, and dimly fees the Highland
garb, the patriarch feated by the torrent will dream
he hears the Cona, and that the light upon the purple
hills is the funfet upon Morven.
Lochaber indeed will fee their face no more; we
fhall look in vain for the men we loved: but they
will be at rest in the abundance of a new world, in the
dayfpring of new fortunes to the Celtic race. There
they will flourish. We pray you to aflifl; to prepare
their way, and in doing so to extend at the same time
our own empire; yea, to preferve our name, when
perhaps here it may be forgotten.
A time may come when the face of the world will
once more be changed as it has been changed before;
when this great nation will have gone the way of
all great nations before it; when the mighty heart
which now beats in this centre of the civilization of
the world will vibrate elfewhere ; when the fair Head
which now reigns ferenely o’er thefe isles, happy in
herfelf and in her fubjects, will have gone to a


better kingdom; when all the excellent, and ufeful,
and wonderful things by which we are now furrounded
will have difappeared. Is it too much to imagine
that the dominion will then be where our brethren
are now going ?—that there shall be handed down the
empire and traditions of this country, and we live
ages hence in the future of our children. Thefe men
who go are the patriarchs, probably, of a new world;
they go to preferve and carry down what otherwife
might perifh here.
Confider this, —the final and ftrongeft reafon for
your adiftance :—Thefe people are a religious, reve-
rential people; a people of deep natural piety, which
gives them and this fubject a peculiar fitnefs for
this time and place. In the regeneration of the
world, do we not recognize the benevolence of God
in ending forth this race to become, in common with
their Anglo-Saxon brethren, the parents of future
nations ? Is it not one ftep more in the afcending
fcale of the world’s future—a pledge of the future
righteoufnefs of the earth—when fuch men are thruft
as pioneers forth, with Chriftian grace as well as
natural gentlenefs ? Thefe men go forth trufting in
God, as Abraham trufted when he went forth, not
knowing whither he went, but not doubting that he
was fent by God for purpofes of good. They are the
patriarchs of a Chriftian Ifrael now defcending in dis-
trefs to an abundant Egypt; the St. Patricks and
Columbas of a new-found world, conveying the bleff-
ings of Chriftianity there to generations yet unborn.


as their fathers did to ours (for it is mainly to
Celtic miflionaries and bilhops we trace the Chriftianity
and apoftolic fucceftion of this country) ; their names
may be looked back upon, ages hence in Australia,
as we look upon their fathers’ names in Britain.
What we fend in them, to -that new world, will
more than repay what will be returned in material
wealth to us. See that we hold in due refpect thefe
fathers of our faith for other times and climes. Let
them go accompanied by evangelic men, in apoftolic
order. Let the word of God and the works of holy men
be taken with them, as fpiritual feed, to the Auftralian
valleys. Let the earlieft found there heard, be the
plaintive Gaelic pfalm; and if the firft notes tremble
as they meet the frefti Auftralian air, and “ by Babel’s
ftreams” arife fadly to the lips, and the emigrants
feel that they cannot at once “ ling the Lord’s fong
in a ftrange land,” ere long they will be able to fay:
<c He doeth all things well.”
And although for a time their fad chant muft
ftill found on, “We return no more,”* they will
soon look upon their old home, and on their fathers
there dead and gone, with reverence and holy awe,
indeed, but without bitter emotion; and they will fee
with gladnefs and thankfulnefs, in the abundance of
their new world, that their children’s fate will not be
theirs —that thefe will be the natives of a land which
they need not leave, of a home, too, which will ever
furround them with abundance, peace, and happinefs.
* Che til ma tuille.


But, as yet, they are not there. As yet, they are
in want and mifery. They crowd the beach of the
fhores of their native ifles, which have become their
prifons, crying, fC Come over and help us.” And,
brethren, their cry muft be heard, or foon it will be
too late. Obferve what it is they afk at your hands.
Hear the petition they offer up to you. Hear them
feeking to be taken away from what they have loved
fo well, from what they hold fo dear, —dear be-
yond all other people—the homes of their youth,
the graves of their fathers. They have fuffered, they
fuffer much ere they afk this at your hands. Let us
behold them and hear their petition. They wait
your anfwer. There they wait—the old and young,
the hufband and the wife, their little ones, and the
patriarchs of the clans, their fhepherd-dogs bearing
them company, all filently, anxioufly, eagerly, for-
rowfully, or frenzied with diftrefs, waiting your
anfwer and your aid. Shall we let them die or linger
on in difhonoured dependency ? May God the Holy
Spirit keep us from fuch degradation 1


APPENDIX.
Note A. —“ Mr. Rainy, of Rasay, expended,
between 1846 and 1850, in draining, trenching,
road-making, and other purpofes, for the benefit of
his people, the fum of 1,672/, in addition to his
entire revenue from his eftate.
“ In the parifhes of Kilfinchin and Kilvicheon, in
Mull, of which the ftipulated rental is 4,371/., the
Duke of Argyle has expended, fince 1846, the fum
of 1,790/., in addition to the whole revenue derived
from the property.
“ Mr. Clark, of Ulva, in the four years preceding
1846, expended, on wages of labour and gratuities,
not only the whole revenue drawn from this illand,
but alfo 367/. from other quarters.
“In 1849 Mr. Forsyth, of Some, had received 113/.
from his eftate, in place of 305/., the ftipulated
rental; and had expended in wages 496/., exclusive of
buildings which coft 800/.


“McLean, of Coll, received in four years 1,280*.
from his lands in Mull, and expended in labour,
relief, and public burdens, 1,273/.
“In Harris, the proprietor laid out 1171/, beyond
and befides the income derived from the ifland.
“ Colonel Gordon, the owner of South Uift and
Barra, has, in the laft four years, derived thence a
net revenue of 25,606/.; but the fum expended by
him. upon the eftate, has exceeded the revenue
derived from it, by 4,834/.
“In the year 1844, Sir James Matheson purchased
the island of Lewis, containing about 400,000 acres,
of which 10,000 are arable, and the population is
nearly 28,000. In 1845 commenced improve-
ments on a great fcale. In fix years, 1845 — S°>
expended, on work executed by the people, 101,875/.,
befides gratuities to the amount of 5,892/. for pur-
pofes of education and charity; or 67,980/., exclufive
of the coft of management, which was more than
the whole revenue derived from the property in
thofe years, deducting taxes and public burdens.”—
Quarterly Review.
It has been ftated that, in the gratuitous diftribu-
tion of meal only, to the deftitute, Sir James expended
upwards of 40,000/. This is upon the authority of
the clergy of the ifland.
Mr. Malcolm, of Poltalloch, has been engaged for
many years in an extenfive fyftem of operations.


requiring the affiftance of the bulk of the population
of the diftri£t.
The Duke of Sutherland’s princely outlay and
MacLeod of MacLeod’s painful facrifices, for the
benefit of their people, are well known.
Note B. —The authorities quoted in the foregoing
Sermon are, Sir John McNeil’s Report; Letters of
Sir Charles Trevelyan, Colonel Phipps, Mr. Bonamy
Price, Mr. Sheriff Frafer, fome private communica-
tions, and the Quarterly Review.
PRINTED BY HARRISON AND SON,
London Gazette Office, St. Martin’s Lane, & Orchard St. Weftminfter.




HIGHLAND AND ISLAND EMIGRATION
SOCIETY.
PATRON:
HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS PRINCE ALBERT.
COMMITTEE:
The Right Hon. the Lord Mayor.
The Governor op the Bank of England.
His Grace TheDuKEOP Buccleuch.
The Right Hon. The Earl of
Shaftesbury.
The Hon. Arthur Kinnaird, M.P
The Hon. F. Scott, M.P.
Sir Charles Forbes, Bt.
Sir Charles Trevelyan, K.C.B.
Col. Sir Duncan MacDougal,
T. Baring, Esq., M.P.
E. Cardwell, Esq., M.P.
Charles Cowan, Esq., M.P.
Baron L. de Rothschild, M.P.
Mr. Alderman Salomons, M.P.
W. Benson, Esq,
C. Buxton, Esq.
Mr. Sheriff Fraser, of Skye.
W. T. Haly, Esq.
Henry Kingscote, Esq.
MacLeod of MacLeod,
J. M. MacLeod, Esq., of St. Kilda.
The Rev. H, Mackenzie, Vicar of
St. Martin-in-the-Fields.
Cluny Mac Pherson, of Cluny.
Bona my Price, Esq.
W. G. Prescott, Esq.
J. Skey, Esq., M.D.
George Robert Smith, Esq.
Samuel George Smith, Jun., Esq.
TREASURER
The Hon. Arthur Kinnaird, M.P.
SECRETARY
J. B. Standish Haly, Esq.
OFFICE:
4, St. Martin’s Place, Trafalgar Square.
The attention of the benevolent British Public has long
been awakened to the lamentable destitution prevailing in the
Island of Skye and other overpopulated Highland and Island
districts. For five years past a great part of the people of
these districts has been supported out of that portion of the
munificent subscription raised in the winter of 1846-7, for the
relief of the Famine in Ireland and Scotland, which has been
administered by the Edinburgh and Glasgow Relief Com-
mittees.
This Fund is now exhausted, and the condition of the people
remains unimproved. They cannot support themselves in the
land of their fathers; and the hardy and loyal Highlander is in
danger of being converted into a professional mendicant.
There is need of a complete and final remedy.^
Happily there are in other parts of Queen Victoria s domi-


nlons, favoured climes, where the labour which at home has no
field for its employment will become highly productive and
remunerative. They who are a burden to the British commu-
nity in the mother-country, will become a support to it when
they have been transferred to the colonies. Instead of living
on our alms, they will give valuable equivalents for our manu-
factures ; and, above all, they will exchange a life of demoralis-
ing dependence for one which will abound with the rewards of
industry and enterprise.
It has been ascertained that a large proportion of this
redundant population, seeing no other prospect of escape from
misery, are desirous of emigrating to Australia; and it is pro-
posed to assist these poor people to proceed thither, or, as may
be hereafter determined, to other British Colonies, by means of
a Fund to be raised by subscription, and to be administered
according to the following Rules:
1. The emigration will be conducted, as much as possible,
by entire families, and in accordance with the rules of
the Colonial Land and Emigration Commissioners.
2. Passages to Australia are provided by the Commissioners,
from Colonial funds, for able-bodied men and women of
good character, and not exceeding a specified age, with
a certain proportion of children, on production of a stated
quantity and description of clothing, and on payment of
a deposit of from 1/. to 21. for adults, and 10s. for chil-
dren. For persons exceeding a specified age, a larger
amount of deposit is required.
The emigrants asking for aid will be required to apply
all their available means to defraying the expense of their
outfit and deposits.
3. The Society will advance the sum necessary to make
good whatever may be deficient for these purposes, as
far as its funds will admit, in the Districts to which it
may be determined to extend its operations.
4. The owners or trustees of the properties from which the
emigrants depart, will be expected to pay one-third of
the sum disbursed on account of the emigrants by the
Society. The emigrants will be required to repay to the
Society the whole of the sums advanced to them, which
will again be applied in the same manner as the original
fund.
The Committee cannot but urge the great benefits which
must accrue on every side from such a mode of relief.


The destitute portion of the population of the distressed
districts will be placed in a position of comfort and indepen-
dence ; the Colonies will be benefited by the immigration of a
moral and industrious population, whose tastes are peculiarly
congenial to the pastoral life of Australia; the general course
of emigration will be improved by the prominence given in the
plan to colonization by unbroken families, including at least an
equal proportion of females; and the industrial schemes con-
templated for the improvement of Agriculture in the Highlands
and Islands of Scotland, and of the Fisheries on their coasts,
may be carried out with far more freedom and better prospects
of success when the surplus population has been removed.
His Royal Highness Prince Albert has been pleased, after
a full consideration of the subject, to express his approval of
the object and plan of the Committee, and has given them
full authority to announce his willing acquiescence to become
Patron of the undertaking; and Her Majesty has graciously
expressed Her Royal approbation by a Donation of £3OO to
the Fund.
Subscriptions are received at the following Bankers: —
At the West End,
Messrs. Bouverie, Murdoch, and James, 11, Haymarket.
Messrs. Coutts and Co., Strand.
Messrs. Drummond, Charing Cross.
Messrs. Berries and Co., 1, St. James’s Street,
Messrs. Ransom and Co., 1, Pall Mall East.
In the City,
Messrs. Prescott, Grote, and Co., Threadneedle Street.
Messrs. Smith, Payne, and Co., Lombard Street.
Messrs. Williams, Deacon, and Co., Birchin Lane.
And at the Office of the Committee, 4, St. Martin’s Place,
Trafalgar Square, where every information as to the details
of the plan will be afforded.
May 1852.
The plan of the Society, which is based upon a just appor-
tionment of the burden among all the parties concerned—the
colony, the emigrant, and the landowner from whose estate he
departs —has now been organized in all its details; and two
companies of consisting one of 54 and tlie other of
194 souls, have left Skye for Australia.


The Emigration Commissioners have placed shipping at the
disposal of the Society, as underneath; and the agents of the
Society are actively engaged, in conjunction with an officer of
the Emigration Commissioners, in selecting emigrant families
from the estates of those Proprietors who have agreed to pay
their proportion of the expense.
Port of
Departure.
Number of Adult
Passages allotted
for Emigrants
from Skye.
Ships’ Names.
Destination.
Date to be
ready.
Miltiades..
Georgiana
John Gray
Candace ..
Chance
Flora
Ontario
Liverpool
Glasgow..
Liverpool
yy
yy
Melbourne .
Geelong
Sydney
yy
Melbourne ~
Geelong
June 30
July 3
„ 8
„ 12
« 14
„ 15
„ 22
The whole Ship.
75
The whole Ship,
100
The whole Ship.
100 Adult Passages accommodate at least 126 persons, including children.
And other arrangements are in progress, by which a much
larger number of passages will shortly become available for
emigrants from the Western Highlands and Islands of Scotland.
As, according to the plan of the Society, advances have to
be made, not only for the deposit and outfit of all the members
of each emigrant family, but also for paying the passages of
those members who are ineligible for free passages according to
the rules of the Emigration Commissioners, it is feared that
the amount already subscribed will not provide for the emigra-
tion of more than about one thousand persons; and the Com-
mittee therefore earnestly request that those who foresee in the
success of this undertaking, important benefits to the Highlands
and Islands of Scotland, to Australia, and to the entire British
community, will forthwith make such donations to the fund of
the Society as they are able.
June 1852.
