

A SELLER OF ‘SING-SONGS，
A Chapter in the Foreign Trade of China and Macao
J. M： BRAGA
The English East India Company
Obligatory Gifts to Mandarins
Trading in < Sing-Songs ,
Foreigners taking up Residence at Macao
The 'Country Merchants > at Macao
Presence of i lo.terlop€rs ,
i racimg m r urs
The Expulsion of the Dadahy
Private Merchants strongly entrenched
Unsoccessfal Spanish Interference
Prosperity of B & Beale
The Genesis of Jardine, C & Co»
For nearly two hundred years the Honourable East India Company of Lon-
don was privileged to exercise against the subjects of His Britannic Majesty
an exclusive trade monopoly in China, and it is interesting to observe that
the little Portuguese city of Macao witnessed the evolution of a new and
vital phase in the circumstances which led to the breaking up of that long
enjoyed ami profitable monopoly. In the change which developed there was
evidence of a gradual surge in the feeling which grew, late in the 18th century-
in business circles in England, against privilege and franchises in trade.
This idea gained momentum as the industries of Great Britain expanded
while the protagonists of the Free Trade movement made their voices heard.
At long last the English Company had to give up the business in China which
it had conducted for such a long time, when the British Parliament refused in
1833 to renew its monopoly, and the office in China was closed down.
Much bitterness sn China and Britain attended the disputes which
took place while some of the subsequent incidents between Britain and China
were most regrettable, but the modifications in the status of the trade began
as only a little movement, started by a few individuals, by none more unlikely
to succeed than the simple, apparently negligible business of a young English
seller of ‘Sing-Songs’.
It was only fifteen years after Vasco da Gama the sea route
to India that the Portuguese began trading regularly at the China coast and
it was a trade which was virtually unchallenged by other Europeans for almost
a century. The Japanese had already been proscribed from the China coast
because of piracies carried out by freebooters from that country and, to keep
the subjects of China from meeting them, the Chinese Government severely
restricted the movements of its nationals abroad. 1
1 C/KMgf-dbM/K cM (漳州 府志 （ch. 31: 7)， quoted in W. H. ， 張維華， A Commentary
on the Four Chapters on Portugal, Spain, Holland and Italy in the History of the Ming Dynasty


The coming of the Portuguese provided a convenient way out of the
difficulty of keeping goods flowing between China and Japan, and although
numbers of adventurous Chinese and Japanese smugglers flouted the regula-
tions and considerable illicit trade flourished, the presence of these Westerners
provided, for the Chinese mandarins, what seemed to be the logical, and for
them even profitable, means for overcoming the legal impediments. The
Westerners were suppressors of pirates; they were led to feel that they were
welcome, at first by those among the Chinese who were prepared to traffic
with these foreigners and then by Chinese officialdom, so that an arrangement
was made, in the middle of the 16th century, which led to the founding of
Macao. This tiny, but important, Portuguese outpost became the busy centre
of part of the commerce between China and Japan and to some extent
between China and places in Nan Yang the Southern Seas'. Macao
quickly grew in importance and its citizens prospered. 2
The first of the rivals from Europe to appear were from the Netherlands,
one of whose earliest incursions into the China seas, at the very beginning
of the 17th century, was to pounce upon and capture a richly laden, unarmed
and unmanned Portuguese trade ship lying at anchor in the port of Macao.
In the eyes of the Chinese, as with anybody else, this was a flagrant case of
piracy which branded them as corsairs, perpetrators of the most heinous
forms of crime. Similar seizures of Chinese trading junks by the Dutch
newcomers served to confirm this view. 3
The English East India Company
At this juncture a combine of English merchants obtained from their
sovereign a monopoly for trading to the East Indies, but attempts made by
them to do business in Japan proved unprofitable and the venture was given
¥sSÌTÌ 呂宋和蘭意大里亞四傳注釋， in 燕京學報專號之七： o/Cüm
Studies, Monograph Series No. 7, Peking (1934: 40); China Review, 19(1891): 50.
3 The subject of the establishment and rapid growth of Macao has merited the attention of
historians in recent years. Cf. C. A. Montato de Jesus, Historic Macao (Hong Kong 1902,
2nd ed. Macao 1926); H. Cordier. L'Arrivée des Portugais en Chine (Leide 1911); H. Bernard,
S.J., Aux Portes de la Chine (Tientsin 1933); Chang T'ien-tsé, Sino- Portuguese Trade from
1514 to 1644 (Leyden 1934); A. Corteslo, The Suma Oriental of Tomé Pires and the Book of
Francisco Rodrigues (London 1944); C. R. Boxer, Macau na Època da Restauraçào{hl3.cm 1942),
Fidalgos in the Far East, 1550-1770 (The Hague 1948) and South China in the Sixteenth Century
(London 1953); J. M. Braga, The Western Pimeers and their Discovery of Macao (Macao 1949)
and Hong Kong and Macao (Hong Kong 1960).
3 It is quite likely that some Chinese capital was lost in the Macao ship, as Canton traders
very possibly shipped goods on consignment apart from their outright sales to the Portuguese.
Very !ittk is known aboüt the details of the trade between Macao and Japan, but sa; the recent
book on the subject. Prof. C. R. Boxer's The Great Ship from Amacm : Annals of Macao and the
Old Japan Trade, Ì555-1640 (Lisbon 1959) and the documents and works qiioted therein.
See also E. Lavisse and A. Ramband, Histoire Générale (Paris 1895, Vol'. 5:904-9); N. D. Harris,
Europe and the East (Boston 1926: 377).


up. In India, however, the Company set about the building up of an empire
in no uncertain manner. 4 King Charles I granted a monopoly to another
English company, sometimes known as the Courteen Association, three of
whose ships appeared at Macao in 1637. Not a little trouble accrued to Macao
from these English vessels, for John Weddell, the commander, acted in
compiete disregard of the Chinese regulations，and the mandarins decided
that Macao should be held responsible for the conduct of all Europeans.
They imposed a fine of 80,000 taels (about upon the Portuguese,
as if the latter could have impeded the movements of these Englishmen! 5
The Chinese officials even felt that all dealings with Europeans should be
centred at Macao but this idea was found to be impracticable.
In due course a merger of the rival English companies took place; the
subjugation of India was put in hand, in the face of French and Dutch rivalry;
and the monopoly was maintained in China against British nationals who
tried to infringe the privileges of its franchise. The Company, seeking to
extend its trade, despatched ships from India to China, and the Chinese
determined that all non-Portuguese foreign trade should be concentrated at
浦 黃浦 .In this connection a Chinese official was stationed at Taipa
氹仔， the pair of little.islands just soutli of the city of IVlacao. At this anchorage
the mandarins would measure foreign ships for dues and provide Chinese
pilots to take non-Portuguese ships to Whampoa, the port of Canton. 6
At Canton residences were built by Chinese merchants to
trade with the foreigners and to these premises the foreign, merchants were
4 Queen Elizabeth I incorporated the first English company by royal charter in 1600,
conferriog on The Governor and Company of Merchants of London, to the East Indies
'the sole right of trading with the East Indies, beyond the Cape of Good Hope", King James
I renewed the charter 'for ever 1 in 1609, and Cromwell confirrned it in 1657, while bans to the
Crown in later times—uuch as in 1698, in 1708, £1,000,000 in 17+2 and
other occasions ~ served to strengthen the position. It came to rule India and be-
came a veritable imperium in imperio, being known as Honourable East India Company*.
!i NevertJieless the English were convinced that the Portuguese had been responsible for the
Chinese opposition and blamed them; the Englishmen were determined to carry on trade.
As regards the activities of the English traders in Macao and South China in 1637 see The Travels
of Peter Mundy (London 1919) edited by Sir Richard Temple for the Hakluyt Society, Voi, 111
(Part I: 158-275). The English vessels were under Capt. John Weddell, while Peter Mundy
was the Purser. This English account of Macao and its people is a very interesting one. When,
after forcing their way up tlje Pearl River, the English squadron left, the Portuguese suffered
considerably from exactions demanded by the mandarins, Macao being penalized, as we have
seen, for the misconduct of the English traders with a fine of 80,000 taels, an enormous sum by
the standards of the time. (C. A. Montalto de Jesus, Historic Macao, Macao 1926: 111-115.
Many documents bearing on this may be seen in the archives at Lisbon, some of which are
quoted by Sir Richard Temple.)
* Subsequently the measuring took place at Whampoa, but the ships going up the river
continued to pick up their pilots at Taipa, until the middle of the I9th century. Early in the
20th century the little islands of Taipa were joined together by reclamations and now form the
single Portuguese island of Taipa, no longer used as the depot for pilots.


assigned during the trading season, approximately from September to March,
to quarters in the commodious buildings provided for them.
These were called the Factories. The property on which the buildings
to accommodate the foreigners at Canton were erected was situated by the
river, between the western suburbs of Canton city, lying about 600 feet from
the south-west corner of the city wall and the north bank of the river. The
front extended aiong the river bank for a thousand feet by about, at first,
some three hundred feet in depth. Within this area thirteen sites were marked
out, averaging about 100 feet in width (some of the sites were only 50 feet
wide, severa! over 100 and one nearly 150 feet in width). On the land side
Chinese shops and dwellings crowded upon the Factory area, and it was only
by a succession of reclamations that the area was enlarged. In this way each
plot was deepened to five hundred feet or more but the width remained
unchanged. On each plot a succession of four, five or more buildings was
erected, of brick and granite, tM-o storeys high, 'very spacious and air\ î； .
Probably of Eastern design, adapted to Western requirements, the premises
were used for business on the ground floor with dwellings on the upper.
In course of time further reclamations enabled the gardens in front of the
Factories, at the river side, to be extended, but the frontage, facing the river,
was always limited to the width of the site. 7
The Chinese name for the Factories was 'Thirteen Hongs*, Shih-san Hmg
十三行， 8 for there .were thirteen Factories, whose sites and their respective
buildings were owned by the Chinese Hong merchants individually but rented
to the foreigners. The Factories bore distinctive Chinese names but in course
of time the foreigners gave them English names as weîl, and this explains
how the Factory premises came to be known as: Danish, (黃旗
(Yellow Flag); 宋 发呂宋 （Luzon); (
(High Public); 評m «評 和 中和 （later 與/ «與 《a), Füâ «萬源 （丁 en
~ The English adopted the term 'factory* from the Portuguese feiiorm, a term first used by
the Venetians and other Italians. Its use in the Far East to mean place where factors or com-
mercial agents transact business" can be traced to India when the Portuguese introduced this
term as early as 1500, after which it was always used by them when referring to their trading
stations as distinct from their cities. ..
Several interesting descriptions of the factories at Canton and Ae life enjoyed by the foreign
traders have come down to us. See P. Osbeck, A Voyage to China and the East Indies (London
1771); W. Hickey, Memoirs of William Hickey (London 1919); W. H. Medhurst, China：
Its State and Prospects (London 1838); W. C, Hunter, The Fan-kwae at Canton before the Irmty
Days (London 1882) and Bits of Old China (London 1885); K. Hillard, My Mother s Jourmi：
A Young Lady's TXary from 1829-1834 (Boston 1900); H. B. Morse, The Trade and Administra-
tion of China (London 1908); H. B. Morse, The Chronicles of the East India Company trading ta
China, 1635-18 M (Oxford 1926-29).
B ln Chinese /w 叹行 means a row of business premises, being applied b的找产
building. The term was also us«d to designate the Chinese merchants who traded with the
foreigners at Canton. Later the name became the appellation for any business firm-
(S. Couling, The Encyclopaedia Sinica, Shanghai 1917: 235).


thousand Springs); Kuang ： 廣源： (Wide Springs), later American;
Imperial (/. 象 Austrian)，Mu ff 臟 （Twin Eagles); (寶順
(Precious and Prosperous); Swedish, Sui M (the Chinese name for Sweden);
Old * 叹* S7m «隆順 （Glorious Prosperity); （/.e.
mixed)， 豐太 （Great and Affluent); Aew Eng 丨 ish， jPìsw (保和
(Ensures Harmony); Dutch, 築 築 —（Assembled Righteousness); the
Creek Factory, 和 義和 （Justice ami Peace) (in. 腳 •腳 ).The
largest Hong was the New English Factory, with a total built-over area of
about 75,000 sq.ft., but the Danish, Chungqua and Old English Factory were
each, over 50,000 sq.ft, in area. 9
When, in later years, the foreign merchants increased in number accom-
modation was found for each firm in separate houses on each Factory site.
All the buildings were rebuilt more than once, because of alterations and loss
by fire. One fire gutted the Factories in 1822 when a conflagration which
started in a part of Canton city spread to and destroyed the Factories. In 1843
the buildings were burned down by an anti-foreign mob and once more in
1856, when a mob again expressed its disapproval of the presence of foreigners
in China, after Admiral Sejnmour had bombarded the city of Canton. In the.
later stages the designs of the buildings were decidedly Western, and after the
fire of 1843 three-storied structures were erected on the old sites. 10
At the end of each season the foreign supercargoes, 11 in common with
all foreigners—excepting the Portuguese at Macao—had to embark in their
ships and leave China until the next season, the times for the voyages being
determined by the regular monsoon trade winds. 12
* In 1780 the English Company paid a rent of a vear; thirty years later it was £2,!00
and by 1823, £lO,OOO.
10 Quite a number of pictures of the Factories were painted from time to time by several
artists, foreigners as wdl as Chinese using the Western medium. They give us a good idea of
what the buildings looked like. The s Ho Tung Colkction , , bequeathed to the Hong Kong
Government by Sir Robert Ho Tung, contains several very fine paintings, including three show-
ing the fire of 1822 (?). The Government managed to buy quite a few more from other
sources. s The Chater Collecton , , also bequeathed to the Government before the War and lost
during the Japanese occupation, was likewise rich in pictures of the Factories. Numerous
re|>r〇ductions of these may be seen in James Orange's The Chater Collection: Pictures relating to
China, Macao, 1655-1860 (London 1924); Catalogue of Pictures relating to the China
Cotut kmmm as the Law and Saver Collections (Hong Kong Govermnent 1953); The Ho Tung
Collection of Pictures (Hong Kong 1959). A picture from the Ho Tung Collection, greatly
enlarged, is on display in the City Hall, Hong Kong.
. 11 This word comes from the Portuguese sobrecarga, an officer in a merchant ship, whose duty
it was to manage the cargo and superintend the commercial affairs of a ship. (C. de Figueiredo,
Sovo Diccionario da Lingua Portuguesa (Lisboa [n.d.]. Vol. II; 720). Many other words having
to do with trade in the Far East come from the Portuguese interpreters.
. u Fhe Portuguese pioneers had, in earlier times, followed the advice of the native mariners
m the matter of sailing seasons.


The English Company would have liked to prevent other European
ships from trading to China, but no action could be taken against Dutch,
French and other European vessels, save during a state of war. The Company
did manage to exercise its prerogatives, however, against all British subjects,
and 4 the insatiate desire of English merchants outside the ring
was checked in 1693 when the charter had been renewed*. The
Company justified itself in this policy because of the sums expended annually,
among other things, on the purchase of costly presents for Chinese ranking
officials. 13
The volume of the trade at Canton grew and the Chinese mandarins,
by setting up a sort of a guild which came to be known as c0-胁《发，
compelled all foreign trade there to be channelled through a few Chinese
who had the privilege to be members of this organization. By means of the
Co-Hong the Chinese officials created a virtual monopoly in Canton, especially
in the important items of trade, whereby the mandarins collected substantial
perquisites from the Chinese merchants, also known as Hong merchants, who
had bought their way into it, besides the sums they levied on the trade itself.
Only the really important items of merchandise were restricted to the mem-
bers of the Co-Hong, however, and there was an active though modest
traffic in quite a number of articles with Chinese traders who were not among
those privileged to join the Co-Hmg. u
Through this system the foreigners paid more for Chinese merchandise
than if they had been permitted to trade freely and received less for their
imports than if there had been an unrestricted market. As the volume of
the trade grew so also grew the rapacity of Chinese officialdom, for the
13 IL B. Morse, The Chronicles of the Emt India Company trading to China, 1635-1834
(Oxford 1926, Vol I: 161, 177, 181, 182p<w«w); M. Greenberg, British Trade and the Opening
of China, 1800-42 (Cambridge University Press, 1951: 22-23); J. Braga, Hong Kong and
Macao (Hong Kong 1960:41-2), to mention three among many b<x>ks touching upon the subjea.
14 Yule and Bumeii, Hobson-jfobson, London, 1903, p. 422, believe, though speaking with
diffidence, that the word Co-Hong was 'an exogamous union between the Latin Co- and the
Chinese Hong\ First formally established in 1720 it was an association of Chinese merchants
given the excltisive right to trade with the foreign merchants in Canton. It was dissolved in. 1 / i
but reconstituted soon afterwards with twelve members, later increased to thi;rtee〇 v lhey had
many prmleges, but obligations rendered thmi particiilarly vulnerable to the merciless extor-
tions of the mandarins. It was not until the Treaty of Nanking (1842) was signed that the
Co-Hoog system was atolished and free trade iiiaugurated. The Chinese name far this associa-
tion 访 治访 行 挪爹公行 （in Mandarin, but in K 肋笔 c咖
corruption o(Co-Hong, See also E. H, Pritchard, Crucial Years of Early A ngla-Chinese RelaUom
(Washington Ì9ìl)mé Angh-Chinese Relaiiom liL, 1929); H, B. Morse ? Internahom.
Relations of the Chinese Empire, Vol. I (London 1910); S. Wells Williams, The Middle Kingdom
(New York 1883); J. B. Eames, The English in China, 1600-1843 (London
Histoire générale de la Chine et de ses relations avec les pays étrangers, Vol I.I.! (Pans } V j
W, C. Hunter, The Tan Kwai at Canton (London 1882); 1\ R. ]tmigm r Chma in Lm and
Commerce (New York 1905). For a recent Chinese view see Li Chkn-ming, The Political History
of China, 1840-1928 (Princeton, NJ., 1956: 13 #).


bureaucratic system of China's administration gave ampie scope for the
mandarins to exploit their positions. An appointment to Canton had become
one of the most prized plums in the administrative service of the Chinese
Empire. 15
Obligatory Gifts to Mandarins
Besides the sums extorted from the Chinese members of the Co~Hong,
and even small traders, the mandarins saw to it that the practice became
firmly established whereby obligator}- presents had to be given, principally
at Chinese New Year but also on other occasions. Furthermore the officials
at Canton, who owed their appointments to the senior officials in Peking,
were expected not only to purchase, which they did from the Chinese mer-
chants at prices ruinously low to the sellers, valuable clocks and watches for
the Emperor and the principal ministers, but were compelled to give presents
as well. These articles became, thus, *a means of corruption between the
Canton officials and their superiors in the capital*.
Among these gifts the most favoured were costly curiosities ia gold or
silver, made in Europe, generally artistically enamelled and set with precious
stones, like clocks and watches of the most intricate kind (the watches often
in pairs), and artfully fashioned articles such as gem-studded snuff-boxes
and automata in the form of music boxes, as well as 'jewelled birds which
sang when the lid opened*, among other things. These articles made by
skilled craftsmen, in Switzerland, Paris and elsewhere and to some extent in
Birmingham, were often expensive objects, said to 'amuse the Mandarins in
Canton and Peking, and were given by the Chinese Hong merchants as
obligatory New Year presents to the Government officiais*. 18
The idea of making these gifts of watches or clocks was started by the
Portuguese early in the 16th centurv% and Father Ruggieri, the first missionary
from Macao permitted to reside in China, showed some of these articles to
lâ The Portuguese archives abound in documents dealing with the exactions and extortions
of the mandarins over the years. See A. F. Marques Pereira, As Alfandegas Chinesas de Macau
(Macau 1870); Bento da França, Subndios para a Historia de Macau (Lisboa 1888); Eudore de
Colombari, Histoire Abrégée de Marno (Pékin 1928); C. A. Mantalto de Jesus, Historic Macao
(Macau 1926)-, Ar/fuivos de Macau (Macau 3 vols, 1929™1930), etc. Other Foreign writers have
also touched upon this, among them : E. H, Parker, CVbVta, Aer /fùforj，«m/ Commère
{London 1917: 207-9); A. Krausse, China in Decay (London 1900: 57-69); É. H. Pritchard,
Angh-Chinese Relations {Urhmn, 111., 1929; 19, 118-19, 220); S. Wells Williams, The Middle
Kingdom {New York 1883, Vol. 1:294-95); R. Montgomerv , Martin, China: Political, Commercial
and Social (London 1847, Vol. I: 129-30).
14 Lord Macartney, in his diary, refers to 'the numerous and magnificent presents which the
Hong merchants make to the superior Mandarins at Canton who, in their turn, send a part of
these presents to the Emperor and his ministers and favourites at Peking'. See J. L. Cranmer-
%ng» Embassy to China: Being the Journal kept by Lord Macartney during his embassy to the
I'mperor Ch'ien-lmg, 1793-1794 (London 1962: 26i). See also M. Greenberg, British Trade and
the Opening of China 180Ù-42 (Cambridge University Press, 1951: 22); J. Cox, A descriptive
Inventory of Several Exquisite and Magnificent Pieces of Mechanism and Jewellery (London 1773).


the mandarins at ， 肇慶， then the seat of the Viceroyalty of
Kvvangtung 'M M. and Kwangsi M@. A few years later Father Ricci gave some
of these as presents to the Emperor himself at Peking. 17 1'hey set the pattern
for presents to the Emperor and Chinese officials by the envoys of various
nations to China. In a few cases they were purchased by merchants or mission-
aries from the Portuguese dealers at Macao, to present to officials at Canton
and elsewhere in China.
Besides importing these articles the priests took to making ciocks, also
smaller time-pieces and various automata and other contrivances—mechanical
figures of persons and animals, even a lion and a tiger. Among the men who
constructed these in China were the Portuguese Fathers Gabriel de Magalhâes
(t 1677) and Tomas Pereira (11708), the Swiss Brother Coadjutor Jacques
Brocard (tl/18), the French Fathers Gilles Thébault (t 1766), Michel Benoist
(t 1774), Nicolas-Marie Roy (t!769), Hubert de Méricourt (t 1774), Jean-
Matthieu de Ventavon (tÌ7B7), the Moravian Father Charles Slaviczek
(t 1735) and the Austrian Brother Coadjutor François-Louis Stadlin (tl/90),
to mention the most important. All these were Jesuits, members of the
Portuguese and French M issions in China. 18 .
At Macao and Canton, too, the manufacture of watches and clocks on
a restricted scale came to be carried on, Chinese artisans being trained for
the purpose. These timepieces, inferior in quality to the originals imported
from Europe, served as presents for the less important mandarins and con-
tributed to reduce the profits made on the imported articles. 19
Describing these wares, two Chinese mandarins Cheung 霖張汝霖
and Yan ， 印光任， in the middle of the 18th century gave a short
description of clocks and watches which they had seen in Macao.- 1 * It has
been stated that by the end of the 18th docks in China numbered
several thousands, many of them from Europe, including quite a few extremely
17 Pasquale D'Elia, S.J., Fonti Ricnane. Documenti originali concernenti Maltea Ricci ela storia
delle prime relazioni tra V Europa eia Cina, 1579-1615 (Roma I; 166;\oI. 11:91,
99-100, 123-126).
18 Louis Pfìster, 5.1., Notices Biographiques et Bibliographiques sur les Jésuites de / ancienne
Mission de Chine (Chang-hai 1932:'251-256, 381-386, 592-593, 793, 813-820, 872-877, 9/4,
913-920, 655-657 and 619-620 passim).
i» J. Needham, Wang Ling and D. J. S. Price, Heavenly Clockwork (Cambridge 1W).
where it is stated that *the foil histon ? of this iaterestiag alliance of technology and religion
never been written, but Pélliot, L'Horlogerie en Chine (essay-review of A. Chapuis, S&
Saussure, La Mmtre Chimise% started a sketch of it\{Toung Pao, 20, 192Ü: 61)
The same authors mention that *in 1809 a Shanghai man, Hsü Ch'ao-chim, in
the preface to Tzû Ming Chung Piao Tu Fa W/£ (an iUustrated treatise) that he came
of a family which had been making *'Europeanclocks for five generations' {Heavenly Clocktvorti.
153-154). 纷一
纷 （)u-mun M 讓條* Mmografia de 任银死霖，^
細印光任 • TTraduçâo de chinés por Luis G. òomes (Macau 19S0: 206 w).


valuable pieces, set with precioiis stones and richly enamdled; faut large
numbers, of comparatively inferior quality, were made in China. 21
Trading in 'Sing-Songs'
This traffic in clocks and watches was eocouraged by Emperor K'ang-hsi
who ordered a regular purchase of these articles for distribution among
those of his Court whom he wished to honour. His grandson, Emperor Ch'ien-
lung, proved to be an even more enthusiastic patron, for he gave instmetipns
for the anmml purchase of clocks and watches of the best kinds to the value
of 30,000 to 60,000 taels (^12,000 Thus by the middle of the
18th century the English East India Company was buying these articles, in
London, for the value of and more each year, to send to CmtonP
In the pidgin-English jargon used in Canton between the foreign traders and
their Chinese counterparts, these objects were generally called 'sing-songs'
because so many of them were fitted with musical boxes which played pleasant
times, 3
The leading London suppliers of were the watchmakers
Francis Magniac and Charles Cabrier (both of Swiss descent), the former
established at Clerkenwel! (England), as well as James Cox f of Shoe Lane,
London, who bought from Geneva, and Edward' Ellicott, who carried on
business 'under the Royal London. 24 The European craftsmen
who created these articles—some of which were extremely valuable —showed
considerable skill in their work, vying with one another in turning out the
most ingenious and intricate objects*
21 This subject of the introduction and the popularization of clocks and watches in China has
also been very ably discussed in an excellent and carefully documented article by Dr Georges
Bommt, 'The Introduction of Western Horology in China% in La Suisse Horlogère (International
Edition, La Chaux-de-Fonds, l%0: 28-38),
n Georges Bonnant, op, cit, (in note 21): 9-10. By the beginning of the 19th century, after a
slackening for a few years late in the 18th century, the volume grew to well over £4O,CKX> a year,
a fabulously large sum to be spent on these articles (see p. 80 infra). When Lord Macartney
visited China, as H.B.M. Ambassador in 1793-94, he commented; *By what I saw at Jehoi and
Yiian-ming Yüan t and by the reports concerning the things I did not see (particularly in the
ladies' apartments, and the European palace, which latter is entirely furnished and enriched
with articles from Europe) I am led to believe what I have been assured o£ t that the Emperor
possesses to the value 〇£ two niillioos sterling at the least in various toys, jewellery, glass, musical
automatons， and other figures, instmißents of different kinds， inkrocosms， docks， watches,
etc., etc,, all made ìxt London , (J, L. Cranmer-Byng, An Embassy to China, 1962: 261),
鐘 卿 自鳴鐘 ( 釵茗笊 _ in Camcmese), litemMy, ‘Self-singing clock'* This
peculiar term was the nomenclature at the Chinese coast for the trade in docks, watches and
mechanical toys such m snuff-boxes contamiog jewelled birds which sang when the lid was
opened, Needham, Wang and Price, Hemenly Chckwotk (1960: ISO)*
u This is the only reference to Charles Cabrier known to the present writer. A short reference
to the articles of this trade is to be found in J. Cox, A Descriptive Inventory of several Exquinte
Munificent Pieces of Mechanism andjewellery (London 1773). See also S. Harcourt* Smith,
A Catalogue of Variom Clmks f Automata and other miscellmeous objects of European


The most costly 'sing-songs 5 were shipped from London by the English
East India Company to their office at Canton; but besides the Company some
of the business in these articles, obviously the less expensive ones, was in
the hands of the officers and supercargoes of the English ships; even the
sailors did well in this trade. 2 各 "These valuable articks were small and did
not interfere with the cargo space of the ships* In China the men exchanged
their wares for Chinese goods like articles of porcelain, screens, lacquered
products and fans, chests and paintings, embroidered shawls and tapestries,
ivories and carved jades and other stones, for most of which buyers could be
found in Europe* Tfhe greater part of this private trade was. carried ûü at
Canton but some restricted business was done at Whampoa and Macao, In
many cases the purveyors of the articles were acting on behalf of European
principals but some must have done business for their own account. 26
The English engaged in this trade often complained that the Chinese
got the better of the bargaining, but it continued without interruption* When
the business by the officers and men interfered with the trade
in the the Directors ordered its suspension, but these orders
reroained a dead letter. 27
'We realise , , Dr Georges Bonnant explains, 'that the Far East ? ever
since the 16th century, has been an interesting market for western horology.
workmanship, dating from the 18th and early 19th in the Palace Museum and Wu Ymg
Peking (Palace Museum, Peiping 1933); M. Planchon, U Horloge: son histoire
pittoresque et artistique (Paris 1899); H, Michel, A propos des premieres montres: over de erscU
Horloges ('Technica\ Bruxelles 1956); G, H. Baillie, Clocks and Watches; an historical bihlio-
graphy (London 1951) and other books and articles apud Needham, Wang and Price, Heavenly
Clockwork. See also H. Alan Lloyd, English Clocks for the Chinese Market, The Antique Collector
(January-February, 1951) and R. K, Foulkes, The Ellicotts, a Family of Clockmakers, Anti-
quarian Horology (3[4 September], 1960) apud J. L. Cranmer-Byng, An Embassy to Chm y
(1962: 355).
25 It does not appear that other Europeans did a great deal of the business in t si：ng-sorjgs , .
u Nothing seems to have been recorded in the Portuguese archives about this branch of the
private trade in China, md there are only casual references to it in H. B. Morse's The Chronicles
of the East India Company trading to Chma y Î635-1834 (Oxford 1926-1929: 5 volumes). An
interesting reference to the trade is mentioned by George Thomas Staunton, then 12 years old,
who accompanied Lord Macartney to Peking as a page. In ajournai kept by him he
visit made to the business premises, in the Factories at Canton, of Captain William Mackintosh,
who, as the skipper of the East Indiaman Hindostaii was permitted to enjoy the Company's
*pr：Ì¥Ìiege trade'. He recorded: 'This evening we went to see some curious machines in clock-
work at Captain Mackintosh's factory. One among the others was particularly curious being a
beautiful pyramid with golden serpente continually twirling up it and four dragons at its base
spitting pearls and round it continually walking an elephant who at the same time moves both
his trunk and taiF (J. L. Cranmer-Byng, An Embassy to China, 1962: 312, quoting Stauntons
MS. Journal in the Library of Duke Umversitj% North Carolina)*
27 Morse, The Chronicles of the East India Company (Oxford 1929 ? Vol. V: 71 and 154)
Considering that the Chinese merchants at Canton were compelled to sell < sing-songs , to tm
mandarins at prices far below thdf real worth it is not surprising that they tried to acquire
at bargain prices.


Until the 19th century, watches and clocks were, above all, intended as gifts
brought by the missionaries and European ambassadors or sold on the spot
by merchants, in order to enrich the collections of sovereigns, princes or
local high dignitaries. Clocks and watches performed no practical service yet,
for the Orientals had not the same horary system as we had and, moreover,
the reliability of the western timekeepers suffered from the climate and the
lack of qualified repairers. This being the case, the demand was rather for
luxury articles intended to dazzle, amaze and divert\ 28
In an interesting passage, Needham, Wang and Price give us an idea of
one of the more elaborate of the pieces of 'sing-song* sent to China:
Certain descriptive catalogues and inventories give us a glimpse of the kindfof apparatus
which was then being made for the Chinese market. James Cox was a dock-maker and
jeweller who was deeply engaged in the trade and his catalogues described a remarkabie
, €hranoscope , , the fellow piece of one which had been sent in the l Triton , Indiaman to
Canton in 1769, and which *now adorns the palace of the Emperor of China*. The appa-
ratus, 16ft. in height, was of course made in gold studded with gems, but its interest lies
in the extent to which it embodied features characteristic of the medieval docks of China
and Islam. Besides a mechanised armiliary sphere and celestial globe, there were jack
figures which struck bells at the hours and quarters, flying dragons which dropped (real)
pearls into the mouths of other creatures waiting to receive them, and an elephant which
paraded on a horizontal wheel waving its trunk and tali. Some of the clock casing was of
'crystal 1 , permitting a view of the works, and one dial registered quarter-seconds. 29
Residence at Macao
By the middle of the 18th century Chinese officialdom had set the pattern,
after a number of modifications, whereby trade should be carried on at
Canton. With its growth—it had more than doubled from 1720 to 1756 30 —
the exactions and demands of the mandarins also increased. The English
had made efforts to find openings for their ships in other Chinese ports, but
the authorities at Canton countered this by obtaining from the Emperor, in
1757, an edict which tightened the conditions governing the trade with the
Europeans. This was followed by another edict, in 1760, which forbade trade
at any Chinese port except Canton, and which imposed even stricter controls
over the foreigners in China. 31 H. B. Morse has summarized the terms of
this edict and the restrictions enforced at the time:
* Georges Bonnant, op. cit. (Note 21) 1962 reprint, p. 7. Most of the , sing-songs , in the Peking
Palaces have disappeared; pilfered by eunuchs or smashed and lost in the looting of Peking
during the Boxer troubles in 1900.
29 Heavenly Clockwork (1960; 152).
™ See the tables in Morse, Chronicks, Vol. V; J. Macgregor, Commercial Statistics (London
1850, Vol, V： 404-6). Imports, including coin and bullion had increased, with fluctuations,
from £222,476 to £531,939.
31 These regulations were printed in full in The Canton Register of July 15, IS3L See J. B.
Eames, The Englùh in China, 1600-1843 (London 1909 : 89-90); Morse, Chronicles, Vol. II:
56-57; Vol. V； 89-90; 94-98.


1. Foreigners were to trade and lodge with Hong merchants, at Canton,
only.
2. When the trading was ended and the ships despatched for Europe the
foreigners must go to Macao.
3. Hong merchants were to settle all their accounts justly by the time of
the departure of the ships, arid were under all circumstances to finish
their accounts and affairs before the return of the ships.
4. Hong merchants were to be held responsible for the wrong doings of
foreigners to whom they had rented quarters in the Hoogs to serve as
factories, while other Chinese were not to build houses for rent to the
Europeans.
5. In the future foreigners were not to have Chinese servants except the
'established，linguists and compradores.
6. Chinese were forbidden to borrow money from foreigners on pain of
severe punishment and confiscation of property.
7. Foreigners were not to employ couriers to carry letters into the interior
or to ascertain prices of commodities except with the advice and consent
of the officials.
8. Additional troops under a mandarin of war were to be charged with
the special duty of looking after the European ships and maintaining
order. 32
This was an important development in the arrangements for the residence
of foreign merchants in China when Chinese officialdom suddenly determined
that Macao could be used by non-Portuguese foreigners, as a 'convenient
place of Residence from whence you may pass and repass > . Before this, when
the loading of the ships had been completed the supercargoes were not
permitted to remain at Canton, but had to leave in their ships and return to
their own countries. The new instructions observed that 'as there is a regular
time for the ships，depending on the monsoon，there will be a feed time
for the supercargoes, if any business is unfinished or accounts unsettled,
they may go to Macao and remain there, and not suffer the inconvenience
of having to go to Europe’. 33
The change in the old arrangements now mooted by the Chinese officials
represented a complete volte-face from the earlier attitude. As recently as
1750, reiterating previous orders, the Canton authorities had sent a note to
Macao reminding the Portuguese not to permit any foreigner to live at Macao,
32 As a matter of fact articles 3, 5 and 6 were not strictly enforced ; they were practically a dead
letter. H. B. Morse, The Trade and Admmistration of China (New York 1921； 183-4).
33 11. B. Morse, The Chronicles of the East India Company, Vol. V; 77.


in accordance with earlier injunctions to this For a long time, the
foreigners at Canton had eyed Macao with much longing and now, at last, it
seems that they would have their wish. 35
But however keen the Chinese at Canton might have been to oblige the
foreign merchants this was more easily said than done, for the laws of Portugal
expressly forbade the residence of foreigners in any Portuguese possession
without a licence issued by the government in Lisbon.
As recently as March 9, 1746, a Royal Order had been sent from Goa
to the Governor of Macao reminding him that, contrary to earlier standing
prohibitions, ships belonging to foreigners had been trading at Macao and
foreigners had been living in the City of Macao. The document stressed
that the laws should be kept, as failure of their observance meant that 'serious
losses would be suffered by His Portuguese vassals not to mention
other incoòYeniences of dangerous consequence to public order\
To guard against such a state of affairs His Majesty 'ordered the exact
observance of the aforementioned prohibitions, excepting only missioriaries
who had obtained the Kiog J s permission to ezrry on missionary work in the
Portuguese Empire , . No other foreigner, the order went on to state, is
permitted to establish himself in this City on any pretext whatsoever:
Proceedings should be taken against any person who tries to infringe the royal orders and
if, after due notification, he does not leave within a reasonable period he shall be expelled.
In the same way no foreign ship may enter the port, excepting in case of emergency which
must be properly verified. If good cause is shown such ship may enjoy the privileges of
hospitality and, after obtaining all that which may be needed within a reasonable limit of
time, the said ship must then leave the port. While in port, the vessel shall be placed
rnider surveillance so as to prevent trading with persons residiag in the city of Macao,
failing which the penalty incurred shall be not otûy the impounding and confiscation of
the merchandise md goods to be found on board, but all other penalties that may be
necessary so as to prevent all contraband trade»
Only ships from Manila would be excepted from this regulation and
would be permitted the use of the port to trade, unless orders to the contrary
should be issued by the King/ 16 The document concluded by ordering the
u See document, dated April 2, 1750 (not yet indexed when examined in 1952 by the present
writer)» in the Arquivo Historico Ultramarino, Lisbon,
One wonders if the change had not been accomplished.by some sort of payment to the
corrupt mandarmate.
Regular trade between Macao and Manila began almost immediately after the establishment
of Manila (1571), the Spaniards buying silk and offering South American silver in payment.
During the Spanish domination of Portugal (1580-1640), this trade was prohibited by the Spanish
Crown but it flourished none the less. After the Portuguese threw off Spanish rule (1640-1668)
trade stopped but when peace was restored commercial relations were soon reestablished and
were Either authorised or tolerated by both Crowns 5 . Macao found Manila a useful source for
silver when Japan was closed to the Portuguese in 1639. The Spaniards bought silk, porcelain and
other Chinese products from Macao, although a brisk trade was carried on by Chinese merchants
between Fukien and Manila. (This subject has not received serious study yet, but see C. R.
Boxer, Portuguese and Spanish Rivalry in the Far East during the 17th century% Journal of
the Royal Asiatic London, December 1946 and April 1947: 150-164 and 91-105.)


Governor *to register this order in the Secretariat of the Government and
to transmit a copy to the Senate of the City for the same to be registered in
its records’. 37
A change such as the Chinese proposed must have been due to some
modification in the Portuguese attitude. As a matter of fact this did happen
to be the case, but it was not as easy as the mandarins seemed to think. The
modification took place when the Council of Goa decided on April 22, 1757
to inform the Governor of Macao s not to admit any foreigner without express
permission from the Portuguese viceroy 5 . Although it was not exactly a
reversal of earlier orders this was a new approach to the subject, and it did
show that the viceregal court at Goa might be prepared to consider special
cases. 38
The principal effect of the new ruling issued by the Viceroy of Portuguese
India was interpreted to mean that Portuguese merchants at Macao might,
with the approval of the Portuguese authorities, < engage , foreigners, ostensibly
as their employees. Every foreigner seeking to reside at Macao had thus to
find a Portuguese sponsor. This enabled Macao houseowners, at a time when
the little settlement had been feeling for a long time the pinch of a trade slump,
to rent their houses, some of which were fine edifices, survivals of Macao's
earlier, more prosperous days.
Among the first to make arrangements to live at Macao under the new
conditions were Capt. Robert Jackson, Mr George Smith and Mr John
Spencer, who had been able in 1761 to remain in China and Macao the year
round，without the English East India Company’s licence. 1. he Company's
Resident Select Committee at Canton however sent an identical letter to
these three gentlemen:
Agreeable to our instructions from the Hon bl * the East India Company, we hereby inform
you that it is their positive orders that no subject of great Britain shall remain in die
Year round without their leave or orders for so doing but that they proceed by the first
conveyance to the parts of India from whence they came and also that they have given the
Regia ao e Cap* m Cerai desta Cidade sobre a admissâo, commercio, e domicilio
dos Extrangeiros em Macau*, in Litro das Ordens Regias do Leal Senado, ff. 48-49. Ibis order
had been preceded by two royal orders issued in 1742, prohibiting the admission ot foreign
businessmen md foreign ships (cf. Register'No, of the Macao Senate, ft
by other instructions subsequently issued in the same strain: Ordeni Regia dated May 9, l/4o
and yet another on May 18, 1747 (see Macao Senate Register No, 52, ft 18-18^,).
m See document dated April 22,1757, Code% 1803-06, in the Arquivo Historico bltramarino,
Lisbon. It is clear from this that foreigners were not permitted to set up homes in Macao iintr
the middle of the 18th century, but Macao had never closed its doors to refugees, hospitality
being extended to them in spite of the laws which forbade this. The first British
early in the 17th century after the shipwreck of the Unicorn off the coast of South China m
The first Briton to might have been William Carmichael, some twenty earlier.
(J. B. Eames, The English in China, London 1909: 14; Sir William Foster, The English Mmes
in India, 1618-21, London 1906: 266 n; The Travels of Peter Mundyin Europe and Asta, ÌWà-
-1667, Vol. 111, Part 1, London 1919: 142.)


necessary orders to their several Presidencies not to suffer any Persons to proceed to
Canton with a view of staying any longer than the departure of the Shipping from thence.
If however any Person who is now resident at Canton shall make it appear to tis that it is
detrimental to his Affairs in going so soon in such case You are allowed to stay till the
next season and no longer on pain of their resentment as the Law shall empower them. 39
Capt. Jackson and John Spencer decided to leave but George Smith
managed to find excuses to remain and by so doing he continued to be a
thorn in the English side for a quarter of a century. 40
Capt. Jackson proceeded to India and then to Goa where he managed to
make arrangements for himself to be naturalized as a Portuguese subject.
He turned up at Macao, sponsored by Mr Joâo de Carvalho, who had arrived
from Calcutta not long before, and was able to set up a home. Mr Carvalho,
in common with several Portuguese and Goans at the time, had engaged in
business in Bengal and elsewhere on the eastern coast of India during the
trade expansion which took place during the middle of the 18th century.
When conditions for trade with China showed some promise a few of these
gentlemen made their way to Macao, one or two at a time, and when, in later
years, business grew to substantial proportions, a number of them prospered. 41
The records of the Macao Senate shed further light on the new situation
for a 4 Letter written by the Governor and Captain General [of Macao], José
Placido de Matos Saraiva 1 , sent to the Senate, may be seen. It states that 'the
Englishman Roberto Jacson [i.e., Jackson] now residing at Macao has been
naturalized in the City by special permission given by the Viceroy of India ! .
Dated November 16, 1764 the letter from Goa went on to remind the authori-
ties at Macao that it did not include 'permission given for the unloading of
H. B. Morse, Chronicles, Vol V: 102-103.
40 GœrgeSrnith completely ignored the Company’s repeated demands for him to leave, daim-
ing that he was a representative of English merchants in India trying to collect money owed to
them by Chißese Hierchants. He did so well in China and Macao that it suited his purpose to
remain, although he did go to India frequently only to make his way back to China in a private
ship in the following year. It was only when he was mvolved in a brush with Chinese officialdom
in Î784, over the accidental killing of a Chinese when the Lady Hughes, of which he
was supercargo, fired a salute, which led to his detentioa and subsequent release only when the
gtinner was handed over and executed, that he decided to retire from the coast of Chiaa.
(H, B. Morse, Chronicles, VoL II: 99-1%; H* B, Morse, The International Relations of the
Chinese Vol I, chap. V: E. H. Pritchard, The Crucial Years of Early Anglo-
Chinese Relati<m\ 1730-18(M)\ Washington 1937.)
41 Prominent among those who did well at Macao, at the end of the 18th and the beginning
of the 19th century, were Bartholomeu Barretto, Januârio Agostinho de Almeida, Domingos
José Gomes, António dos Remedios, Antonio Goularte k Silveira, Manuel Pereira, Domingos
Pio Marques, José Gomes Brandao, Francisco José de Paiva, Justiniano Vieira Ribciro, Inacio
Baptista Cortela t etc., and, a couple of generations later, men like Joaquim José Veiga, Mamiel
Gonçalves da Silva, Manuel de Figueiredo, Bernardo Estevio Cameiro, Cktidio Inacio da Silva
and others. *
I'he subject of the trade between Bengal and Macao has yet to be studied. Casual references
are to be found in J, J. Canipos, The Portuguese in Bengal (Calcutta 1919).


Opium from foreign ships at Macao\ The Senate replied to the Governor
on November 24, 1764, pointing out that 'the said Englishman should have
presented the Portuguese order to the Senate for registration,
inasmuch as this special concession has not been granted to any one up to
the present, by reason of the fact that in these Archives there are standing
instructions to the contrary, which have not been revoked , . 42
The surviving archives at Macao do not seem to make any mention of
George Smith. 43 •
Among the next to take advantage of the concession granted by the
Viceroy of Portuguese India was M. François Yauquelin, the Agent in China
of the French East India Company; he succeeded in getting permission in
1765. 44 The members of the Select Committee at Canton of the English
East India Company also tried to get the same permission but they succeeded
only seven years later (in 1772). They then rented the stately mansion of
Mr Antonio José da Costa, at the Praia Grande, together with a fine residence
within a very spacious garden at Rua de San Lourenço, for which they paid
a rental of four hundred and fifty patacas a year, a handsome rental by the
standards of the time. 45 Later, the East India Companies of other countries:
the Netherlands, Prussia, Sweden and the Austrian Netherlands did the same
thing. In course of time the representatives of these companies assumed some
of the trappings of what came to be somewhat like those of a consular service, 46
The Merchants' at Macao
A new line of business thus came to be built up. At Canton the foreign
merchants were limited to trading during six months each year; at Macao
they could transact business, if they so desired, throughout the year. The ships
42 Register No. 68 of the Macao Senate, fF. 340~340«. The present writer expresses his
indebtedness to Father Benjamin Videira Pires, s.j., for searching the Macao archives for this
information and several other transcriptions in the present article.
43 The Macao records are far from complete; quite a number of the old codices and papers
have disappeared, having succumbed to the action of bookworms and the effects of the humid
dimate.
44 The French East India Company (La Compagnie des Indes Orientales) was a semi-govern-
mental organization and the Agent had the status therefore almost of that of a consular represen-
tative. Once other foreigners were allowed residence at Macao permission couîd not be easily
withheld in his case.
15 H. B. Morse, Chronicles, Vol. V; 172, 173, etc. The present-day equivalent might be well
over $12,000. The surviving Macao archives do not contain any mention of the authorization
granted to the English Company, but the fact that correspondence was exchanged with them in
subsequent years shows that an arrangement had been entered into, and the mere fact that they
lived in Macao is proof of acquiescence by the Portuguese. António José da Costa was a promi-
nent citizen who was appointed Governor of Macao in 1780. He died a year later before complet-
ing his term of office.
18 The Macao archives seem to be silent about the permission given to the representatives of
the various Western governments and their East India Companies to install themselves at
Macao. •


carrying the goods were confined to the sailings dependent on the monsoons,
but with the merchandise stored in godowns at Macao the volume of this busi-
ness could be spread out over twelve months, and it expanded gradually. The
senior members of the English East India Company would probably have
scorned to trade at Macao; not so the East India Companies of other nations,
the private merchants and even some of the English juniors.
A working arrangement was established whereby Portuguese merchants
at Macao, by co-operating with their foreign friends and acting as their
sureties with the Portuguese authorities, helped to build up business at
Macao whereby both sides benefited, although it is generally believed at
Macao that the share allotted to the Portuguese was always relatively small.
In the course of this business transactions followed in which links were
established between Macao merchants and British, Indian, Parsi, Armenian
and Goan merchants in Eastern India, at such places as Calcutta, Madras,
Chandanagore, Pondicherry, etc. The English E. I. Company called these
traders in India ‘Country merchants’，and their ships ‘Country ships’. 47
By making use of Macao and Portuguese sponsors in this little place,
the < interlopers , , as the Company also called them, met with considerable
success, for quite a number of people in India were able thus to carry on a
brisk private trade, and an arrangement resulted which proved profitable in a
three-cornered way. The Macao authorities also collected benefits from the
import taxœ levied on the goods. This was not the first occasion when this
had been done; there had been previous, short-lived transactions, and George
Smith had managed to evade the Company*» expulsion orders since 1761.
But this was the first sustained and successful effort which came to plague
the English Company’s monopoly by rea 丨 and determined opposition, while
the newcomers were not burdened with the heavy overhead expenses which
the Company incurred with its expensive staff living in lavish style.
The advantages accruing to Macao and its citizens were not readily
evident at the time when the idea was first mooted, but in later years it was
found that besides the proportions of the profits paid to the Portuguese
merchants at Macao and revenues for the public exchequer, the opportunity
arose for clerks and others to find employment. As the number of foreign
traders increased and as the volume of trade grew so also did the number of
jobs increase for clerical occupations and interpreters at Macao as well as
Canton, besides the variety of jobs involved in the supervision of the unload-
11 Used originally in a disparaging sense to identify native merchants and their ships in India,
the term was employed by the English East India Company to include merchants and their ships
not in the service of the Company. Yule and Burnell feel that the idiom in English may have
been taken from the Portuguese 4 da tern'—of the country, hence 'native*. See Yule and Burnell
H<àsan-Jobson: 266-67; W. C. Hunter, The Fan-kwae at Canton: 33; W. H, Coates, The Old
Country Trade (London: 1911).


ing and loading and storage of goods, and as intermediaries between the
foreigners and the Chinese. All this paved the way for similar occupations in
Hong Kong when the British colony was established two or three generations
later. 48 Several Portuguese went into business on their own, too, and some of
them did very well; there were several stevedores and a couple of Portuguese
shipbuilders and repairers. Two or three dockyards were set up on Lappa
Island across Macao ! s Inner Harbour.
There were persons in Macao who opposed the entry of the foreigners;
among these were some of the clerics. Several bishops in succession to each
other were particularly hostile to the idea and one of them expressed the
fear that the foreigners * would corrupt the morals of the citizens ? , 49
This was not the first time that there had been objections, for when, in
1732, Emperor p 雍正 proposed, repeating an earlier suggestion
made by his father, Emperor ， 康熙， that China’s trade with Western
countries should be concentrated at and limited to Macao, ( with the object
of keeping the ''barbarians* * out of China', the bishops of Macao, Peking and
Nanking, supported by Antonio do Amaral Meneses, Governor of Macao,
had succeeded in persuading the Viceroy at Goa to veto the Macao Senate's
acceptance of the idea. The Senate sent a protest to the Governor, to no
purpose. 50 One of the bishops was with horror at the thought of men,
worse than brutes and without fearing God's or human laws, who hired their
own wives to foreigners living at Macao 5 . 51
It should be mentioned that the newcomers who came to apply for
residence at Macao were mainly Britons, Parsis and Armenians but there was
a sprinkling of Dutchmen, Frenchmen and others, and a number of women
did take to living as mistresses (or 'pensioners*) with the foreign men, very
few of whom were married, while even the Benedicks, with very few excep-
dons，did not bring their wives with them on the uncomfortable journeys
from Europe and America to China. The English Company J s rules prohibited
marriage with local women in India and in the establishments in
the Far East, but the rules did not forbid the liaisons which became quite a
18 J. P. Braga, The Portuguese in Hong Kong and China (Macao 1944). The subject of the work
done by the interpreters from Macao, at Canton and Hong Kong merits study.
49 M. Teixeira, Macau e a sm Diocese (Macau 1940, Vol. II; 261-2,^).
M Arqunm de Macau, 1929, Vol. I: 253—269.
S 1 Subsequently when, in 1777, Dom Frey Alexandre da Siiva Pedrosa Guimaraes, Bishop
of Macao, took olfice as acting governor, pending the arrival of the new Governor designate,
one of his first acts was to send a recommendation to the \ iceroy of Portuguese India proposing
that foreigners should be forbidden the use of Macao. The Viceroy referred the matter to the
Senate, and there was exchange of correspondence, from which on this occasion the Senate
emerged victorious. Arquivos de Macau, 1929, Vol. I: 323-333. See various letters in codex
Estado da India, Correspmdenda Official, 1792 in the Biblioteca Nacional de Lisboa. See a «>
Casimiro Christovâo de Nazareth, Mitras Lusitanas no Oriente (Nova Goa 1924, Voi. II； 31 ,
329-331 passim).


common practice. In fact some of the foreigners traded in the names of their
local 52
Be that as it may, several British interlopers' had appeared at Canton and
settled at Macao, as representatives of private traders in India, alleging often
that it was their intention to try and collect debts due by the Hong merchants
and other Chinese traders to them or their constituents in India. For a number
of years the Chinese merchants had been experiencing difficulties and, offering
high rates of interest, in contravention of the Chinese government's express
instructions, had induced the 'Country merchants' in India to let them have
cash loans or goods running into considerable sums of money, on extended terms.
These loans were unsecured and the borrowers kept getting more and more
deeply involved for, with the high interest compoundings the debts owed by
Chinese and other merchants amounted eyentuaily to over 4,300,000
dollars, 53 By 1777 only four of the Hong merchants were said to be solvent 夕 4
m Although the majority of the foreigners liTing in Macao probably mv€t gave a thought to
marriage a few of them did marry their 'pensioners", generally in secret* One of-the women who
did marry a foreigner was Martha da Sika, who a foreign merchant [Thomas van
Mierop, of the East India Company's staff and presumably son of one of Londoo's leading
insurance men, according to information obtained by Mr Austin Coates] under romantic cir-
cumstances' (C. A. Montalto de Jesus, Historic Macao, Macao 1926: 134-135). She was not
well educated and seems to have experienced difficulty aboyt the spelling of her husband's
name, for when, later in life, she built a ship she called it the Martha Mer&pe. Her husband had
left her a considerable fortune which she employed in business and did well, and at death she
bequeathed to the Santa Casa da Misericordia (the Holy House of MerCT) a large sum of money
to be devoted to charitable purposes. Her portrait, with her surname mispelt t Merop , l may still
be seeû hanging in the committee room of this eleemosyoary institution. (See the archives of the
Loyal Senate and the records of the Santa Casa da IVlisericordia, Father Videira informs the
present writer that the papers of the ecclesiastical authorities at Macao also contain several
references to this subject.)
in later years, European concerns, especially British, set up successful businesses in
the Far East they followed the old ruling, first established by the English East India Company,
forbidding marriage to local women,
m The term is derived from the Dutch daaler y derived from an abbreviation of Joachims-
thalery first coined in 1518 in the valley (German thaï or dale) of St Joachiim in Bohemia* The
earliest English reference to t dolkr , in the Far East seems to be in the records of the E.l. Co/s
ship Surat in 1664, when the ship's factors offered to deposit with the Chinese authorities *l,OOO
dollars, deposita for **our Shipps measure >~ y n !2CK); and after came a thousand five hundred
Ryas , . Morse explains that this was the 4 real-of*eight J and after 1675 also < pÌ€ce-of*eight , ,
the dura of eight reals. *The coin was the same as that known through the eighteenth and
mneteenth centuries as the Spanish (or Mexican) dollar, constituting the medium of international
exchange in China until 1857. It contained 416 grains of silver 900 fine, with an intrinsic value
of 45.2 d. The Company invoiced it at 45.6 d. until 1619, and thereafter at ss/ The term 'dollar'
appeared for the first time in the records in 168 L The spillar ' dollars came from the
mints of Spain, having the 'Pillars of Her〇iles , in the design, and were referred to as such in
1700 t coming via Mexico and Manila. The sign *s' for the Mexican dollar does not seem to have
been used in the records in China until 1828, after which it became current in the
Far East (C. F. Rerner, The Foreign Trade of China, Shanghai 1926 : 23-25; E, Kann, The
C 阶薇 Shmghai 1926: 295-298; 310-312; Morse, Omtór/b， Vd. I: 47
and 96; Vol. IV： 111 and 174).
u In terms of modem currency the debts would amount to an enormous sum. (Michael
Greenberg, British Trade and the Opening ofChtmi f Cambridge 1951: 21 ;H. B* Morse,


In. consequence of this state of affairs the Chinese officials demanded
the setting up of a fund, which was a *voluntary , levy on the foreign trade, in
the form of % 3% ad valorem contribution collected by the Hong merchants
themselves on all imported goods, excepting woollens, calicoes and iron, and
was paid into the treasury of their association. The foreigners called this the
Comm î
în actual practice the tax was often increased and at o 6% of the
value of the imports had to be paid into the fund, very little of which was
applied, however, to the payment of debts. The Peking and Canton authorities
saw to it that the money was used to defray all sorts 〇£ expenses, as the figures
for 1793, given as an example, serve to show:
Cong Ka, u a sum annually presented to the Emperor originally
estabîished instead of docks, watches, etc., but continued akhough , ___
similar articles were again demanded .. Th 55,000
Quart Sute, 57 a contribution to defray the expenses of the Army,
demanded whenever revolt increased the expenses in this Depart-
ment:
for Fukien • • 50,000
for Setchuen [Szechwan] .. .. 25,000
To discharge debts of Sinqua to Europeans 42,500
Clocks, watches, and pieces of mechanism for the Emperor by order
of the Hoppo .. .. * - 100,000
Th aT^SOO 88
Any excuse seems to have provided the opportunity for the mandarins
to raid the Fund : floods in the north, drought, expenses of embassies, like
Macartney*s, and even for the personal use of the officials.
The Chinese name for the building used as the Consoo House was
洋行會館） 厶 M2’- 知 ww. The edifice, in its spacious grounds，was owned
by the Hong merchants and was used by them as their meeting place.
It seems that among those who were creditors of the Canton merchants
were London sellers of 'sing-songs 5 who, being anxious to do business,
appear to have sold to the Canton merchants on credit. In great part the
bankruptcy of the Chinese merchants was due, as has been shown, to the
heavy exactions by the mandarins, and this resulted in the business in 'sing-
songs' dropping off; the Canton merchants were no longer in a position to
make gifts of valuable jewellery and costly mechanical toys purchased by the
Voi. Il: 43 -47： P. Auber, China, an Outline of its Gmernment, Laws and Policy,
London 1834: 179-80; J. B. Eames, The English in China, London 1909.)
The name Com 扣 〇 is derived from ， 公所， or guild, and seems to be an appel!ati:on
given by the foreigners when the Fund was set up (S. Couling, The Encyclopaedia Sinica,
Shanghai 1917: 132).
5
55
58 Morse, Chronicles, VoL III: 62. •


mandarins at ridiculously low prices. The officials in Peking continued to
demand, however, what they had come to consider theirs by right; and the
Hong merchants had still to send to the mandarins at the Imperial
Court regardless of the sacrifices that this represented or the hardshipsentailed
and borne by the merchants at Canton. In hopes of an improvement in
conditions the London suppliers seem to have been prepared to allow their
old customers in China extended terms, but this only aggravated the situation.
Presence of 'lnterlopers'
James Cox, the merchant of Shoe Lane, London, being owed a great deal
of money by some of the Canton merchants, went bankrupt. The goods
stocked by him were extremely valuable and he had to resort to strenuous
efforts to meet his obligations. He even attempted, owing 'to the great scarcity
of money in the East Indies , , to sell his stock in a lottery in London, for which
special permission was given by Parliament in 1774. 59 His son, John Henry
Cos, then only 23 years of age, was persuaded by his father's creditors to apply
to the Court of Directors of the East India Company in London for permission
to proceed to China and stay there *for a period of three years to sell his 4tsing-
songs n >ao and, we may presume, to try to collect money owed by the Chinese
to his firm. Permission was granted by the Directors and John Henry
Cox appeared at Canton on January 27, 1781, as an independent merchant. 61
As we have seen, he was not the first such trader to enter the market,
others had appeared and some of them had remained but most of these men
had been summarily ousted. In his case, however, the Directors in London
had taken a lenient, not to say sympathetic, attitude and it was with their
authorization that he was allowed to set up in business in China. Young Cox
reached Canton to learn that a Scotsman named John Reid had arrived in
1779 \vith a Commission from His Imperial Austrian Majesty as Consul at
Canton and Chief of the Austrian Factory*. Reid had previously seen service
in the marine establishment at Bengal and in that capacity had
noticed the advantages of trading in China, The stratagem he had managed
aB Needham, Wang and Price, Hearmly Clockwork, 1960: 152 and 207, in which reference
is made to catalogues ;
A Desaiptive Catalogue of the Several Superb and Munificent Pieces of Mechanism and
?7"2^ V i n r - Cox's Museum at Spring Gardens, Charing Cross. — Cox, London
A Descriptive Inventory of the Several Exquisite and Magnificent Pieces of Mechanism and
Jetvelkry comprised in thi Schedule annexed to an Act of Parliament made in the thirteenth year
of //. M. King George HI, for enabling Mr. James Cox of the City of London, Jeweller, to dispose
of his Museum by way of Lottery—Cox, London 1774,
Georges Bonnant, The Introduction of Western Horology, quoting letter from J. 11. Cox to
J- H. Bradshaw in the India Office Library, Voi. 77: 95-6.
61 M. Greenberg, British Trade, 1951: 22.


to contrive would enable him to proceed to Canton and reside at Macao.
The supercargoes at Canton presented with this peculiar situation
decided that they could not ver> ? well refuse his credentials and he was per-
mitted to try his hand as a merchant, at a juncture when trade was extremely
difficult. 62
When Cox arrived he found that most of the Chinese merchants having
dealings with foreigners were insolvent and that it would be only with the
greatest difficulty that he might be able to sell some of his wares. He even
decided to try and exchange some of his goods for Chinese produce and in
this he was successful This enabled him to go into other business as well,
and at the end of the season he turned up at Macao and applied for permission
to reside there during the summer months, with Mr Jqlo de Carvalho as
his sponsor.
At Macao, Cox joined Reid in business but it was not until a year later
that a firm which went by the name of Cox and Reid evolved. The partners
were joined, subsequently, by Daniel Beale, formerly a purser in the
English Company ! s service who, following the example set by Reid, obtained
for himself the representation in China of the Kingdom of Prussia. Through
these three merchants a number of people in India, among them several
prosperous Parsi merchants and even some of the officers, were
able to ship Indian goods to China. This led the East India Company to
think of the expedient of setting up its own House of Agency, with members
of its stafF as representatives at Canton, to handle the business and accounts
〇£ private merchants in India desirous of trading in China, to compete with
the ‘interlopers’. The E, I. Company’s experiment did not prove successful，
for business men and the own personnel in India did not care to
entrust their trade to an organization sponsored by the Company. 63
The business of Cox and Reid grew and before long the partners felt that
they should have their own ships in which to carry their own or their clients ,
goods besides using the vessels of their Portuguese sponsors at Macao or
their business associates at Calcutta. They bought two small Indian-built
ships, the Supply and the Enterprisey were soon engaged in earning
principally cotton piecegoods, raw cotton and opium but also a variety of
Indian products from India to China. 64 From the very beginning this business
Morse, C7ww«V/«.， Vol. il: 85.
63 Morse, Chronicles, Vol. II: 191, 206, 285, passim. Subsequently, the Company dedded
to make another attempt and reopened its House of Agency in ISIS but, as with the earlict
attempt, little business could be obtained from private traders in India, whether Parsis or Indians,
or British members of the Company's staff, who preferred to deal with the 'Country merchants
(Morse, Vol II: 196--197, 206, 264, 285, 302, 327; Voi. IH: 231 passim).
M The earliest printed quotations seem to be thœe which appeared from time to time m
Gazeta de Macao y a weekly published from 1824 to 1826.


was of appreciable volume, and as numbers of the East India Company's
junior employees in India were involved in it it had considerable unofficial
sympathy as well as support.
Being of an enterprising turn of mind, Cox and his associates were not
content merely to do business in established lines or to enter into competition
with the East India Company; they began looking for other forms of activity.
Among the ventures upon which they embarked with considerable enthusiasm
was a new trade, that of buying turs on the Pacific coast of North America
for sale at Canton and Macao. 85
Trading in Furs
The first to realize the possibilities of this trade were the officers and
crew of Captain ships. In his last voyage into the Pacific, Captain
James Cook, the explorer 〇£ the Pacific, had visited the west coast of Canada
and there his men had acquired from the Red Indians a quantity of sea-otter
and other furs, 'finer and softer than any others we know of, in exchange for
things like blankets, knives, iron nails, glass beads and other trifles. Captain
Cook died during the voyage but his ships, the Resolution and the Discovery,
put in at Macao and Whampoa on their way home in 1779. Here the officers
and men found that these skins acquired so cheaply could be sold in South
China at good prices, the best for $l2O per piece, a phenomenally profitable
business. 66 The Chinese were happy to get these fine furs, highly esteemed
not only for coats and surcoats to be worn by men as well as women in
Northern China and for caps and boots for winter wear, but for lining or
trimming the state robes of the mandarins.
This is not surprising when one considers that the skins from the
Canadian coast were among the 'richest, rarest and most durable known*,
but had not yet appeared in Canton; the Russians had, however, supplied
pelts like these previously in Peking, obtained from the Bering Strait. The
English sailors were not content with the prices which the Chinese merchants
were prepared to pay, for they expected more and complained that the
bargaining for the furs .was ‘unusually sharp’! 67
43 For a study of sources: M. E. Wilbur, The East India Company and the British Empire in
the Far East (Stanford 1945).
m To arrive at present-day values the Dollar should be multiplied at least twenty-five to
thirty times. In other words each pelt would be worth over S3,(X)O today.
m Capt. James Cook and Capt. James King, A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean (London 1784,
〇i III: 419 ff). Among the members of the expedition was John Webber, draughtsman, who
published in 1792, among other fine pictures, two coloured stipple engravings of places in
Macao.


Captain King referred to the business:
One of our seamen sold his stock, alone, for eight hundred dollars, and a few prime skins
which were clean and had been well preserved were sold for one hundred and twenty each.
The whole amount of the value, in specie and goods, that was got for the furs in both
ships, I am confident, did not fall far short of two thousand pounds sterling; and it was
generally supposed that at least two-îhirds of the quantity we had originally got from the
Americans [Red Indians] were spoiled and worn out, or had been given away and other-
wise disposed of, in Kamchatka. When, in addition to thèse facts, it is remembered that
the furs were, at first, coliected without our having any idea of their real value; that the
greatest part had been worn by the Indians, from whom we had purchased them; that
they were afterward preserved with little care, and frequently used for bed-dothes, and
other purposes, during our cruise to the North ; and that, probably, we had never got the
full value of them in China; the advantages that might be derived from a voyage to that
part of the American coast, xmdertaken with commercial views, appears to me of a degree
of importance sufficient to call for the attention of the public.
Captain King went on to explain that the seamen were so 'possessed to
return and buy another cargo of skins to make their fortunes, that it was not
far short of mutiny^.
Among the other furs available, as pointed out by Capt. King, were
beaver, marten, sable, ermine, fox, wolf, wolverine and bear. These furs were
Superior to those found anywhere* and the writer believed that, in the Canton
market, they would fetch top prices. 6B
Sensing a good thing, the firm of Cox and Reid bought a small brig of
60 tons, under the command of Captain James Hanna, and despatched the
little vessel with a smail cargo of woollens, blankets, iron bars, knives, nails,
etc. and a supply of ornaments and baubles to the north-west coast of America,
to barter with the Red Indians in Canada for furs. The area was supposed
to be a preserve of the South Sea Company, of London, but this did not seem
to worry Cox and his friends in the least. Five hundred and sixty sea-otter
skins were obtained and landed and sold at Canton for over 69
Other voyages followed and the ventures proving so profitable Cox and
his partners felt that there was scope for a bigger capital investment. I hey
decided to give an opportunity to some of their constituents and friends in
Calcutta to join them in the business, with Cox and Reid handling the business
with the Chinese, for which they would earn a commission. The Bengal Fur
Society was thereupon established at Calcutta and ships were despatched,
beginning in 1785, to Nootka Sound, off Vancouver Island, and other places
in that region to obtain furs. The early voyages were very lucrative and the
firm of t interlopers , was able to turn over large sums of silver to the East
India Company at Canton, in exchange for the bills on London.
Among the ships despatched were, in 1786, the Nootka, 200 tons (Captain
m Cook and King, A Voyage to the Pacific Ocean (London 1784, Voi. III).
m An interesting exercise would be an attempt to work out comparative figures in terns of
modern values. The total might be as much as to


Meares)'from Calcutta and, in 1788, the Iphigenia, 150 tons (Captain Meares)
from Macao. 70
In London, two brothers, John and Richard Cadman Etches formed,
with a number of friends, the King George's Sound Company to promote the
fur trade between the Canadian coast and South China. Their ships, the
King George and the Queen Charlotte, were entrusted to the management of
the East India Company at Canton. Other London merchants followed suit
and the East India Company realised that they were missing a good business.
We find them sending, in 1787, *ships to the north-west coast of America , ,
to load furs, while the Company sent shipments of furs from London. 71
They were not the only ones vvho went after this business, for Calcutta
merchants, co-operating with various Europeans, despatched vessels to the
Pacific coast of Canada, while citizens of the new Republic of the United
States of /America also got to hear of the opportunity and vessels flying the
Stars and Stripes began making their way to Nootka Sound and adjacent
waters to get furs for sale in Canton. Eventually ships engaging in this trade
between Canada and China were sporting a variety of standards: those of the
United States, France, Great Britain, the Netherlands, Genoa, Tuscany,
Sardinia, Naples, Denmark, Prussia and Hanover. Returning to China they
did not enter the port of Macao but, after obtaining their pilots at Taipa,
proceeded up the river to Whampoa. The Select Committee of the East
India Company did what they could to discourage the trade but in this they
were not successful. 72 Among the Americans who did very well in this business
was John Jacob Astor, whose great fortune of later years was built up from
the profits first made from the sale of Canadian furs in China. By 1810 he
was doing so well that he formed the American Fur Company. 73
The Expulsion of the 'Dadaloy'
The scramble for the use of Macao by all sorts of people was on, for
the majority of those in the fur traffic were private traders who were keen on
being able to co-operate with colleagues established at Macao. This led the
Portuguese Crown to repeat the injunctions, reminding the authorities at
Voyages made in 1788 mid 11 from China to the North West Comi of America.
To which are prefixed, an Introductory Narrative of a Voyage performed in 1 786 f from Bengal y in
the Ship Nootka; and Smne Account of the Trade between the North West Coast of A merica and
thim； mid the Latter Country and Great Britain (London 1790). The subject was of interest and
editions appeared in French (1794), Italian and Swedish translations md again in English in
I/%. See also J. W. Caughey, History of the Pacific Comi of North America (Los Angeles 1933:
187-194).
n In 1793, the East India Co. bought the Iphigenia from Messrs. Cox and Reid at Macao
for $10,500.
72 H. B. Morse, Chronicles, Vol. II; 135, 150, 173-4, 180, 185, 193, 202,
7J K. \V. Porter, John Jacob Astor Business Man (Cambridge, Mass. 1931, Vol. I. ch. 7-9
and \〇|. 11, ch. 13-16); H. B. Morse, Chronicles, Vol. II: 135. .


Macao, by a Law published on May 6, 1785, that foreign ships, with the
exception of Spanish vessels, were prohibited from using the port of Macao
for purposes of trade. A year later a letter from the Viceroy at Goa, dated
May 8, 1786, stressed the necessity of respecting the law. 74
An exception was made in the case of vessels of war. For instance, on
t 3，1787, two ships of the French navy put in at Macao, under the
command of Comte de La Pérouse, Jean-François de Galâup. They were
La Boussole, commanded by La Pérouse himself, and VAstrolabe, under
Captain de Langle. They were made welcome by the Portuguese authorities
and permission was given for the carrying out of astronomical and other
observations, in terrestrial magnetism, one of the scientific studies the French
navigator was making in the course of his voyage. Among La Pérouse's other
tasks was to attempt to discover the North-west Passage to the Far East,
north of Canada. 75
The French officers spent several pleasant weeks at Macao, and in
Camoens* Gardens they set up a small pavilion to carry out their observations.
Before leaving Macao, the French took on several Portuguese sailors to
replenish their crews, and the vessels sailed for the Philippines and other
places, carrying out a great deal of useful exploration in the northern as well
as southern parts of the Pacific. In the course of his voyage La Pérouse
reached Botany Bay on January 26th, 1788. Here he buried Père Receveur,
the chaplain, and a couple of his men, Portuguese sailors who had been signed
on in Macao, 78 A fortnight later the French ships left Australia, after which
no more was heard of them. In 1826 Capt. F. Dillon discovered what he
believed to be the wreckage of La Boussole and UAstrolabe, on a reef to the
north of the New Hebrides Islands. 77
While Count La Pérouse and his expedition were at Macao, two French
men-of-war, La 5O guns, under Commander
Senior Officer of the French Naval Forces in India, and the Subtile, 28 guns,
appeared at the Taipa anchorage on February 16 of the same year, asking for
pilots to take them to the Bocca Tigris higher up the river. This seems to
have given 'cause for dismay* to the Select Committee of the English East
India Company at Canton, and was duly reported to the Court of Directors,
74 Macao Senate Archives, Register No. 71, ff. 256-262.
78 M. L. A. Milet-Mureau, Voyage de La Pérouse autour du Monde pendant les années 1
1788 (Paris 1797); J-J de La BÜlardtère, Relation du voyage à la recherche de La Périme (Park
1797); Laharpe, Relation abrégée du voyage de La Pérouse, pendant années 1783, 1786, 1787 fi
1788 (Leipsick 1799).
i»
77 See La Biliardière, op. at； in Note 75; P. Dillon, Narrative of -a Voyage in the. South Sea：>
for the Discovery of the fate of La Pérouse (London 1829); Dumont d'Urville, Voyage, de w
corvette 'U Astrolabe' (Paris 1833).


for it was inconceivable to the Committee that vessels of war should want to
visit Whampoa which was essentially a harbour for merchant craft. The
French had no intention, however, of engaging in trade and after ships*
supplies had been taken on board and without loading any Chinese cargo they
left these waters. The Committee heaved a sigh of relief and reported
accordingly to the Court of Directors at London, so jealous were they of
anything that savoured of competition to their trade at Canton, 78
For merchant vessels the Portuguese laws were explicit and the fiißt ship
to fall under the expulsion orders, in 1787, was the Calhariz, bettér known
by its earlier name, Dadaloy\ which had been known, for a couple of years, as
the Hamot. She was now under the command of a Portuguese skipper,
Ricardo José Bello. This vessel, as the Dadaloy, had been involved, not long
before, in a succession of disagreeable incidents, at Macao, Whampoa and off
the South China coast. 79 In 1780 she was commanded by Capt. John McClary
and visited the Taipa anchorage, where a Spanish sloop among other vessels
was also anchored. On May 20, 1781 when the Spanish vessel set sail for
Manila, Capt. McClary went off in pursuit. Soon afterwards he returned to
Macao with the Spanish ship and declared tliat he had captured the vessel
as his prize, claiming that he had a commission in the form of betters of
marque and reprisal’.
The Portuguese authorities ordered the immediate release of the Spanish
sloop but this order McClary refused to obey. Then a storm arose and the
Spanish vessel v¥as wrecked, upon which was detained and ordered
to pay compensation to the extent of 70,000 Spanish dollars. He was only
released, two months later, when he paid this money, not until he had been
threatened with delivery to the Chinese for trial as a pirate. 80
McClary then left in the Dadaloy for Whampoa where, three months later,
in August 1781, he was involved in another incident, for he seized a Country
ship from Surat, the Felix, which was under Dutch colours. Claiming that a
state of war existed between England and Holland, and, in complete disregard
of the general understanding that the neutrality of the ports of China should
be respected by every nation, he took the Felix as his prize. He made prepara-
tions to leave Whampoa and to take the Felix with him, to which the mandarins
objected, threatening reprisals, and they despatched reinforcements to the
Chinese forts. Eventualîy a compromise was reached between the mandarins
3 Morse, Chronicles, Vol II: 134.
79 In Portuguese and English documents the spelling used for thb name was ver>-
capricious and it appears as Dadalov, Dodalov, Dadoloy, Dadeloy, Dadelay, Dedelay and other
variants. "
C. A. Montalto de Jesus, Historic Macao (1926; 193). See Register of Proceedings of the
General Councils of the Marno 6 Sept. 1752 to 27 October. 1786,#. 107
109-10%.；


and McClary, the latter being 'permitted to withhold an iron chest containing
pearls and gold freighted by Armenians*. The contents of the chest were
stated to be invoiced at 89,128 rupees (over ? 000). 81
The Governor of Kwangtuog wrote ordering the English East India
Company to make restitution, compel McClary to pay compensation and to
keep the peace for the future. In the course of a rather bitter admonition the
Chinese Governor pointed out :
You English l % lying and troublesome people, for other Nations that come to Canton
are peaceful and do aot hurt any one, but you English are always in trouble, . . , Your
Chief and Second Supra Cargoes 81 are sent here by your King to superintend the Business
of the Company —and private Persons are permitted to trade here by the same Power—why
did you therefore say that you had not the Power to prevent the Misdeeds of these People,
and refused to obey when I ordered to come to the Boca Tigris to oblige this McClary
to restore what hé had taken? 84
The Select Committee reported the matter to the Court of Directors in
London and informed them that 'McClary had made a compromise with the
Chinese Mandareens, who were very apprehensive of being disgraced in their
Contest with him, which we think was dishonourable to both o & of a
pernicious tendency to our Affairs'. 85
On the one hand the * Country merchants , demanded the right to trade
freely in China znd f on the other, the Select Committee were anxious to
retain their monopoly, but, posing as consular representatives of various
European states, these independent merchants 'every day commit some
irregularity * . , for which the Company are held responsible, for the
Mandarins will not allow themselves to believe, that every Englishman, who
comes here, is not under the Controul of the Chief [Superintendent]'.
S 1 Morse, Vol II: 79, The equlTalent of this sum in modern times might
amount to a quarter of a million pounds sterling.
This was the form in which the term Supercargo was often written in the 18th centurv
(See Note 11 supra).
m Boca de the name given by the Portuguese, based on the Chinese original Hu-mên
虎門， which the British rendered as iS 沉 a and w 紐 adop 纪 d subsequently by
in the Pearl River estuary.
84 Morse, CkronideSy VoL II: 65.
m Some years later, in 1831, summarizing the views of the Select Committee at Canton., 〇〇
the conduct of the mandarins, a despatch was sent to the Governor-General of India, in the
course of which the McClary incident was mentioned. An extract of the relevant portion of
this document reads:
In the ， 1781， a Captain MâdLarycommamkr of theCmmtry ship ‘Dodaby’ from Bengal,
tOTk vblerit possession of a Dutch ship with much vaîmbîe property, at anchor, in the Port
of Whampoa, defied the Chinese Government and was proceeding to Sea with his prize—W
threats towards him were found unavailing the following ingenious arrangement took place
through the mediation of the Hong Merchants. The Dutch Prize being near the Bogue t ort
(Bocca Tigris Fort), Captain MacLary ordered his people out of her, when she was boarded
by a Chinese Mandarin, and in a shouting triumphant manner, as if recaptured by
force. In reward of his condescention Captain MacLary was secretly permitted to retaio an
iron chest, containing pearls and gold to a large value. . . (Morse, Chronides y Vol, IV : 31S).


McClary was neither a Company employee nor a representative of a European
state; even by the standards of his days he was nothing but a pirate. 86
A few weeks later the Select Committee had to report that Capt. McClary%
in the Dadaloy, with another ship, the Death and Glory t which also claimed
to be a privateer, *had captured two ships from Macao ... to reimburse the
loss sustained by him last year*. They also
likewise beg leave to prefer another complaint against this Gentleman for going forcibly
on board a Chinese Junk near Banca belonging to a principal Merchant [Chowqua], a
Hong merchant of this place [Canton] which he plundered for 4 t & took out goods
to a very considerable amount on pretence of their being Dutch. 87
These piracies led to complaints being lodged, by the Governor of Macao
and the Netherlands , Superior Council at Batavia with the Governor-General
of India, Mr Warren Hastings. To them Mr Hastings replied stating that the
Council in India had caused McClary to be apprehended, and charged at
Fort William, only to release him l because there were no proofs, or valid
grounds for a criminal indictment , , adding that if some person would come
forward to prosecute and produce evidence to support the charges* for
prosecution at Fort St George, *where Competent Admiralty Jurisdiction
exists by the Old Charter , , the Council * would grant him all the Assistance
and Support in our power to obtain a legal decision’. 88
With such unsavoury antecedents it is not surprising that the Leal
Senado should have considered the vessel suspect. The Aldermen decided
that the ship still belonged to its English owners in Bombay and that it
had been surreptitiously renamed the Calhariz\ As for the document of its
purported sale to a Portuguese from Calcutta living at Macao, Joâo de
Carvalho, the Macao Senate declared that this was probably 'irregular and
false and therefore null and void\ 8 *
The mandarins at Canton had also had enough of this vessel. She had
arrived, furthermore, at a most inopportune time for the Portuguese because
M Morse, Chronicles,Voi. Il: 64-65; J. F. Davis, China： A General Description of that Empire
and its Inhabitants (London 1857, Vol, I； 50-51, 54-56); €. A. Montait© de Jesus, Historic
Mac.ao: 193-4; Charles Gutzlaff, A Sketch of Chinese History (London 1834, Vol. II: 335).
8, Morse, Chronicles, Vol. II: 79-80. The Macao archives contain references to the second
incident involving this ship. See Register of Various Orders and Letters, 17 April 1783 to 21
May 5v.; Register of Instructions from the Government of Goa,6 Aprill7B3 to 8 May 1786,
ff- 18-19, 24-25.
Morse, Chronicles, Vol. II : 86-87. These niceties about legal technicalities, that McClary
should have been charged at Fort St George and not Fort William, could not have been very
satisfactory to the Portuguese, as the Complaints were lodged with the English Governor-
General, and the question of jurisdiction should have been worked out by the British authorities
themselves. " _
89 In the Macao Archives may be seen no less than «seven documents dealing with this strange
Register No. 7! ，尽 ‘ 256-ÌS7 ;ff. 251 'ff. 257v.-258;：ff. 258v.;ff. 259v.~260;ff. 26ÙV.-26U
-262. Transcripts of these documents were very kindly made available to the present
writer by Father Videira Pires, sj.


the Chinese officials had concocted a new ruse for making money by threaten-
ing to establish a Co-Hong to control Macao's trade. It seems that the Chinese
officials had accused the Portuguese of allowing Dutch consignees to make
use of Portuguese ships to carry Dutch goods to Macao, to get the benefit of
more advantageous taxation than if these articles of merchandise had been
landed at Whampoa. 90 The Chinese merchants at Macao were now negotiating,
by offering a big bribe, to persuade the Canton o 伍 cials to give up the idea.
One of the conditions seems to have been that the Macao trade vwuld be
limited to Portuguese and Manila ships, leaving the far richer trade of the
English and other Western countries to be concentrated at Whampoa, under
the direct surveillance of the mandarins. The appearance of a foreign ship
believed to be masquerading as Portuguese, and one, furthermore, which had
already given a great deal of trouble, might upset the delicate negotiations.
The Senate seems to have been greatly concerned about the feelings of
the mandarins with regard to the new Co-Hong and the control of Macao
trade from Canton. 91 r Fhey deliberated on the matter and sent a letter to the
Juiz de Alfandega (Controller of the Customs Office), Antonio José da Costa,
instructing him 4 not to agree to the admission of merchandise in the Customs
Office from a Ship which was believed to be Engüsh\ The document tran-
scribes a Senatorial Resolution of June 15, 1787 and goes on to state:
This Senate has beein informed that a Foreign Ship, allegedly Portuguese, expects to enter
the port of Macao and unload its mercliaiidise into the Macao Customs* To justify the
use of the [Portuguese] flag there is a Portuguese mdividual, but all the rest of the crew
are Indians and Britons, This is a serious matter, for this port has always been forbidden
to Foreign Vessels, as has been repeatedly pointed out in Royal Laws» Orders, and Instmc-
for the preservation of this Place, md to foster friendly relations with the Chinese^**
The letter went on to remind the Juiz de Alfandega that the Chinese had lately
made arrangements to set up a (Co-Hong) for goods at Macao and if
the Portuguese started to allow foreign ships to unload at Macao the Chinese
v¥〇uld resent it and surely create difficulties for Macao. The letter concluded
by drawing the attention of the Costoms ? officials to the Ordens Regim
(Royal Orders) from Lisbon* 93
m The Chinese documents referred to cajmot be found in the Macao Archives , b«t may possibly
be included among some four hundred original documents in the Portuguese National Archives
seen by the present writer in Lisbon.
91 See Note 14 supra. .
n Archives of the Macao Senate, Register No. 256-2S6v. Translated from the Portu-
guese.
93 The Senatorial Resolution was signed by the aldermen: Raimundo Nicolao Vieira»
de Miranda e Souza» José Joaquim Barros, Simâo de Araujo Rosa and Felipe Lourenço
Mattos, and endorsed by the Secretary and other officials. This reference to the proposed attempt
to set up a Co-Hong to control the trade of the Portuguese port does not seem to have been
mentioned elsewhere.


Four days later a meeting 〇£ the Senate was convened to receive a report
that the ship had been permitted by the Macao Customs to enter the port.
This kd to another Resolution being passed and addressed to the Juiz da
Alfandega, Protesting against Your Honour's acts and holding you respon-
sible for losses of this privileges by your disregard of the instructions
not to admit Foreign Ships in this Port, And if from this cause the Co-Hong
established at Canton should exercise its powers in Macao as well as other
harmful consequences that may result in the future, you shall bear the respon-
sibility thereof 5 . 94
The Senate also sent a letter on June 19th to Senhor Bernardo Aleixo
de Lemos Faria, the Governor of Macao, setting forth the Senate's point
of view :
Your Excellency has inopportußeîy consented to the ship Dadelay passing the Fortress
of Barra and anchoring in the port of this City without first obtaining the approval of this
Senate in the usual manner. Your Excellency does not ignore the fact that a Co-Hong
has been ordered to be set up in the City of Canton for merchandise from the Ships of this
City, delivered to a monopoly of the Chinese Officials, on which heavy taxes would certainly
have to be paid. Your Excellency took cognisance of the despatch of a petition sent by the
Chinese merchants of this City penate of Macao], in which they asked for a loan of fom
thousand patacas, 95 added to the sum of ten thousand they had already borrowed, which
they had spent with the object of bringing about the reversal of the arrangements for the
setting up of the Co-Hong* This money was lent for the aforesaid purpose with Your
Excdleiicy's approval, by vont despatch. The intempestive admittance of the said Ship
will not serve surely but to delay and make more difficult the reversal of the order for the
setting up of the Co-Hong, and completely prejudice the citkeos of Macao, with the loss
of this City's privileges* We send you a copy of information forwarded to ns by the Judge
of this from'which you wiil observe that tbe ship Dadelay belongs, without any
doubt, to the English of Bombay and that the passport carried by the ship bears all the
signs of being false, because it is incredible that this two monsoons out of Bombay
shodd P 議 Portuguese} Captain and the [Portß 評獄] flag Ais ye 狨 ktW
The said Passport carmot be genuine. , ♦
We also send you an Order we have received from the Governor-General of India» from
which Your Excellency will observe how insistentiy he recommends this Senate to endea-
vour to use influence to bring about the closure of the proposed Co-Hong.
By reason of which this Senate craves that Your Excellency will give due comidemtion
to what we allege, in the service of His Majesty aad for the welfare of the City, and will
n Register No. 71, ff. 256-257, Like the other documents in the archives of the Macao
Senate quoted in this article» impublished so far, this has been translated here from the Portu-
guese.
u Pataca, the unit of oirrency at Macao. Circulating origiiially in India the equivalent in the
16th century of the or the ducat, it came into use in Macao only in the 18th century.
It had already decreased greatìy in value and was then equal to the Mexican silver peso, which
contained approximately one oz, of silver. This remained the value unti! 1938, when the Hong
Koag dollar was divorced from silver and linked with sterling at l/3d. Since then the pataca
has been established as the equivalent of the Hong Kong dollar. (This subject has yet to receive
the attention of historians of Far Eastern currency. See Note 53.)
It is not recorded what the sum eventually paid by the Chinese Macao merchants to the
Riandarins might have been. Whatever it was, the sum must have been a big one and to arrive
at the equivaient present-day value it would be necessary to multiply it some twenty to thirty
times. Thus the |I4,CKX) alone borrowed from the Senate would be equal to to |400»000,
and probably vtry much more today.


cause the departure of the said Ship from this Port, for this is the only way in which we
can give satisfaction to the Chinese Government and presene this City's pnvileges.»«
The Governor of Macao did not delay a reply, for he wrote on the same
day to point out that he had been informed that
the ship Calhariz has been bought by J〇a〇 a Portuguese merchant, proof of
which has been given to me in a Letter received from the said merchant and the Indenture
which he has shown me regarding the purchase mentioned. Because of this and in the
face of the Passport which the said ship carries, issued by the Illustrious and Excellent
Governor and Captain-General of India, I have granted Permission for the said ship to
enter this port, in accordance with the usual practice observed 'during aii the four years
I have governed this City, regardless of any of Your Honours' resolutions and indepen-
dently of anv Despatch of the Senate, principally since the monsoon of 1784, when steps
were taken to put into execution and establish the Customs Service here, by Order of
Her Majesty.
He went on to observe that the Senate seemed to believe that this matter
concerned the Chinese, whereas *the inspection of ships was the duty
of Macao’s Procurator*. The Governor added:
I cannot understand the omissions, delays and doubts which usually trouble Your Honours
on a number of similar occasions as being the possible case for conflict with the Chinese.
The Chinese may establish in.their Port ç>f Cantçm as many Co-Honp as they please;
but under no circumstances in this possession, which we are happy to hold as a domain
of our most August Sovereign, and where, in consequence whereof, instructions have
been given to adopt the necessary steps to avoid, once and for all, the indecorous and
humiliating satisfactions so frequently given to the Chinese Government. By reason whereof
I am greatly surprised that Your Honours even think of referring to the said Ship Calhanz,
which only vesterdav entered the anchorage of this City, and which has been done wth
the object of preserving the ancient privileges, the greatest and the principal of the said
privileges having been, unfortunately, lost an infinite number of years ago, by reason of
the same doubts and the same humiliations to which submission has been given in the past.
The Governor concluded by
Finally assuring Your Honours of the impossibility to give heed to your request made for
the departure of the Ship abovementioned, as it is neither just nor dignified in ray position
to fail to sustain the validity of a passport issued by the Supreme Government of India,
of which I and Your Honours are subjects, and very much more st) after I have verged
it to be genuine, in spite of the appearance of falsity which Your Honours seem to have
Therefore, and for all that this represents and may come, Your Honours are to be held
responsible to his said Excellency, the Captain-General of India. 9,
The Senate followed this up by taking the matter to Court and the Juiz
Ordinario [Magistrate], Simâo de Araujo Rosa, 'based on the proofs laid
before the Court*, decided against the ruling, and held that the
ship and its cargo were in reality English. He denied to the ship the right to
be registered at Macao and ordered its expulsion from Portuguese waters.
Certified copies were thereupon sent to the C ustoms Office ordering the
Courts decision to be carried out. The Portuguese decided, however, not to
Macao Senate Register No. 257t?.~258.
97 Register No. 71 of the Macao Senate archives, ff> 25%.-260t %


order the sequestration of the Dadaloy and its cargo. The vessel had to leave
the port of Macao. 98
No difficulties with the Chinese arose and the negotiations at Canton
were successfully concluded, for the suggested Co-Hong at Macao did not
materialize, as the result of the efforts made in Canton by the Chinese mer-
chants of Macao. The mandarins continued to tax, however, all goods destined
for transhipment to China, at the Chinese Customs Station whidi had been
flourishing at Macao for many years.
For the Macao Senate there was a surprise in store when, a year later,
a letter of censure arrived from the Viceroy at Goa. He wrote infonning the
Portuguese authorities at Macao that the registration of the Calhariz, ex-
Hamot, tx-Dadaloy, had in fact been properly carried out at Goa and that the
ship had actually been given Portuguese status.
In his rebuke the Viceroy pointed out that the Senate had shown very
clearly 'the very spirit of partiality, lack of harmony and even poor patriotism
which dominates a great part of the inhabitants of Macao 5 , for the Senate has
set up obvious discrimination in its treatment of Portuguese merchants
established in the city, and had gone so far as 4 to deny, unjustly, the right to
passports applied for by Joâo de Carvalho, who wished to the money
of some Englishmen*. This being so *it is something which is contrary to the
Law, for it is clear that the Law permits any citizen of Macao to utilize the
money of foreigners to add to the volume of his business, which will result in
greater income for the Customs, the product of which will revert to the Royal
Exchequer*. Such being the case, the funds could be applied to useful pur-
poses with *a number of conveniences and advantages 5 to Macao.
The letter went on to emphasize that *it is very well known that much of
the unrest in Macao has been caused and incited by some of the citizens of
Macao, who have been filled with envy at the prosperity of others\ The
Viceroy added that the merchants of Macao instead of being involved in
affairs in which the authorities could not help them should think more of the
commonweal, while 'abstaining from living in excessive and also by
‘avoiding domestic dissensions’ thereby to acquire the good reputation enjoyed
by responsible businessmen, which would lead to foreigners being prepared
to entrust them with their 'funds and goods 1 , for had not several merchants
done well during the recent War, with money associated with the interests
of foreign individuals?’ 99
m There seems to be nothing in the Macao archives to indicate who was found to be the real
owner of the Calhariz, late Dadaloy. Joào de Carvalho who was shown as the registered owner
of the ship happened to be also the sponsor in Macao of John Henry Cox as well as other
'Cauntr> f, merchants, but nothing shows if there was any connection between the two persons
in the case of this vessel.
n The War of American Independence (1775-1783), when France and Spain joined (1779)
on the side of the American colonists. To protect their goods against seizure by French warships,


The Viceroy ended by the Senate not to impede the entr) r and
unloading of the ships registered in the name of the said Joao Carvalho, nor
to refuse any more the issuance of passports, nor make the ts reprehensible
differences’’ above referred to’. 100
To this admonition the Senate does not seem to have replied. At least,
the surviving records at Macao do not appear to show that any letter was
sent to the Governor-General at Goa, •
The port of Macao was closed to foreign ships that sought to engage in
trade for a few more years, but times were changing and eventually these
restrictions were not always strictly enforced. Spanish ships from Manila
were free, however, to use the port of Macao. But foreigners desiring to
reside at Macao had to obtain a Portuguese sponsor and permission from the
authorities before being allowed to set up domicile. Early in the 19th century,
in the last ten to twenty years or so before Hong Kong was established even
this regulation was not very stringently put into effect.
Private Merchants Strongly Entrenched
The tempo of the China trade intensified, and Lord Cornwallis, Mr
Warren Hastings* successor as Governor-General at Fort William, Bengal,
wrote to the Select Committee at Canton stating that leading
private merchants in India had complained of the obstructions that they have
met with in their mercantile adventures at Canton . . . they have ventured
to assert that some of the Supercargoes have engaged in private trade, which
they partly carry on under the name of Mr Cox, a free merchant, and in many
instances make use of their influence to force private traders to buy and seli
their opium and other commodities upon disadvantageous terms'. 101
Strict orders were thereupon issued to the Select Committee
at Canton to exercise their powers of expulsion. In consequence of this a
public inquiry was held and Mr Daniel Beale was taxed with being an unlicen-
sed British subject and was ordered to leave China, upon which, with a great
show of ceremony, he produced an official document from 'Count Lm,
Envoyé Extraordinaire de sa Majesté le Roi de Prusse auprès du Roi de la Grande
Bretagne' appointing Mr Daniel Beale, Consul for Prassia at Canton and
several British merchants registered these in the name of Portuguese sponsors at Macao or
Calaitta, which led, as has been shown, to these foreigners being permitted to reside at Macao.
100 Macao Senate Register No. 59—Ordens de Goa desde 11-4-1787 ate 16-5-1793% ff. 1-2,
the letter being dated at Goa, April 28,1788. The text in Portuguese has been published
in Reltgiâo e Patria (Macau 1962; 5()6-509).
101 East India Co. Factory Records: China (82), quoted by M. Greenberg, British Trade and
the Opening of China, 1800-42, 1951: 24.


Macao. The Company's Committee in China must have been chagrined at
this rebuff. 102
I'he "interlopers*, in their turn, received a rude shock when they learned
that John Reid had gone bankrupt. Not content with the truly splendid profits
made by the firm of which he was a partner, he had been engaging in some
speculations on his own account in Canton, probably selling on extended
terms to Chinese merchants goods obtained on credit from his constituents
in India or lending money borrowed in India to Chinese merchants in Canton
for the sake of the higher rate of interest promised by the Chinese. He
overestimated the probity of his Chinese clients and when these debtors
absconded he sustained such heavy losses that he had to declare himself
insolvent. The Imperial Austrian Company closed its doors and John Reid
left China, a victim of his own gullibility and covetousness. 103
The East India Company now brought pressure to bear on Mr Cox,
and he was required to leave China *by one of the ships of the current season\
The young man had no alternative but to bow before the authority of the
Company and tie left early N 1788. 104 Not so the firm of Cox and Beale which
was founded to take over the business of Cox and Reid. It was a flourishing
concern at Macao, and Cox was well off, for the young man who had gone out
to China in 1781 merely to dispose of 'an assortment of sing-songs* had been
able within seven years, by a series of lucky operations, to amass a considerable
fortune.
John Henry Cox returned to Europe with the self-confidence born of
the success which had attended his efforts in China. One of his first steps
was to obtain a commission in the Swedish navy, and he also secured an
appointment as a member of the Prussian Consular Representation in China.
He bought a brig and in it he sailed to Nootka Sound to buy seal-skins.
Under the management of Daniel Beale the firm carried on business
very- successfully at Macao and Canton, with his younger brother Thomas,
who arrived in 1796, as 'Secretary to the Prussian Consulate , . los The ships
of Cox and Beale and their associated Bengal Fur Society continued to acquire
furs on the Canadian coast but the prices paid in China were no longer as
high as in early days ; nevertheless the demand for skins was maintained for a
number of years, with handsome profits for those dealing in them.
102 Morse, Chronicles, Vol. 11, p. 150.
Greenberg, British Trade and the Opening of China, 1951 : 25.
104 lUorse, Chronicles, II: 142.
1&> I'homas Beale was only seventeen years old when he arrived. He had a checkered career
at Macao and died there in 1841 {Chinese Repository, 11: 59; Morse, Chronicks,\'o\. ll: 285).


Unsuccessful Spanish Interference
A temporary set-back took place in 1791 when the Chinese authorities,
believing the sea-otter skins to be of Russian origin, prohibited their importa-
tion as the of China has been at variance with that Nation for some
years past 5 . This restriction was removed in the following year, when the
Chinese authorities had been satisfied as to the place of origin not being
Russian. 106
Spanish officers, 4 in the Princeza (Captain Don Estevan Martinez) and
the San Carlos*, also entered the scene. Claiming that their sovereign owned
the entire coast of North America as far as the Bering Sea, they had seized,
in 1789, five ships, two of them Portuguese (the Princesa Real and the
Argonaut) both managed by Cox and Beale. The vessels were taken to San
Bias, Mexico, but the owners, through the Portuguese Government, entered
protests to Spain and the ships were ordered to be returned with some
compensation. 107
In the records of the East India Company may be seen several references
to the ships from Macao which had been seized by the officious Spaniards:
May, 30 [1791], The Argonaut brig. Captain James Colnett, arrived [at Macao] from St.
Bias and the North West Coast of America, this Vessel was fitted out from Macao the
25th April 1789 for the North West Coast of America and was one of those which were
captured by the Spaniards in Nootca Sound, and was restored the 4th of June 1790.
We are informed tfxey have received the sum of Forty Thousand Dollars from the Vice
Roy of Mexico as a fxill compensation for the losses they may have sustained. There are
on board many Sea Otter Skins, but in consequence of the late prohibition they cannot be
disposed of, they have received the [Portuguese] Governor's permission to lay in the
Typa to refit. 108 "
As the prohibition against the sale of those furs in China was then in
force, and being unable to sell at Canton, Cox and Beale thought of sending
their ship to Korea or even Japan, if the latter could be persuaded to lift the
centuries-old ban against Western ships and traders, and if markets could
be found there. The weather happened to be bad and the Argonaut returned
to Macao. Eventually the skins were shipped to Europe on board the Hon.
E. I. Governor Coote, for dispovsal there.
The Spanish government having ordered that the Princesa Real and the
Argonaut be returned to their rightful owners, the latter ship, as we have
106 Morse, Chronicles, Vol. Il: 183.
107 Registered and fitted out at Macao, the firm's vessels sailed under the Portuguese flag.
This was not only because Cox found it necessary to comply with the Portuguese laws; but he
found that by doing so he could save S2,(KX) per ship on each occasion that the vessel made port
at Macao ~ one of the several advantages which foreign merchants trading at Macao couid
enjoy.
108 Morse, Chmkles, II: 185-186. Capt. Colnett had been an officer in Capt. Cooled
expedition of 1776-1779. .


seen, was'duly sent back to Macao while the Princesa Real, under the Spanish
flag, actually arrived but had the misfortune to be wrecked at Taipa during
a typhoon, before the Spanish were able to turn her over to the owners.
The records of the East India Company contain references to the
incident :
Aug. 11. Arrived at this Port [Macao] a Sloop under Spanish Colors from Manilla, this
Vessel was formerly the Princess Royal fitted out from England in & & after her return
from China to the North West Coast of America in 1789 was captured by the Spaniards
at Nootka Sound.
Aug. 18. This day we experienced a very severe Gale of Wind. . . . The Spanish Sloop
lost her mast and anchors and was driven on shore in the Typa.
Aug. 27. Received a letter from the Spanish Council of Supra Cargoes. Gentiemert—-We
have an Order from His Excellency the C & Captain-General of the Philippines
to deliver here to Messrs. James T & Thomas Hudson [the skipper of the Princess
Royal] the Vessel Princess Royal in the same state as she was when she was detained by
an officer of our Royal Navy in the Port of St. Laurence in Nootka situated in the Septen-
trional Coast of California. 109
The Spaniards were obviously trying to palm off the wrecked ship
hoping that the Select Committee of the East India Company would be naïve
enough to accept delivery of the vessel. But the Company’s officials declined
to be inveigled into such a compromising position. Not only was the ship a
wreck on shore but the Chinese officials would not permit the furs to be sold
at Canton and, in their reply to the Spanish proffer, the Company*» Select
Committee stated that 4 as the above mentioned Vessel is not the property of
the English East India Company, and the owners having as we understand
submitted an account of the Losses they had sustained to be adjusted in
Europe, we must thereupon decline acceding to your proposal 1 . 110 Eventually
the British Government brought pressure to bear upon the Spanish Govern-
ment and an agreement was signed at London, in 1793, when Spain agreed
to pay a compensation of $210,000, which must have resulted in a very
satisfactory showing in Cox and Beale's books, 111
Prosperity of Cox and Beale
Meanwhile another ship belonging to Cox and Beale reached Macao,
direct from the Pacific coast of Canada. She was the Nootka, and the English
East India Company’s Select Committee in South China, then in Macao,
recorded the vessers arrival at the Portuguese port in 1791 :
July 19. Anchored in the Typa a brig belonging to Mr. John Henry Cox with about Eight
thousand Seal Skins procured at the Islands of St. Paul or Amsterdam. This vessel was
199 Morse, Chronicles, Vol. H: 186.
118 Vol. II; 186-7.
111 Morse, Chronicles, Vol. II : 186-7; M. E. Wilbur, The E.L Company ami the British Empite,
1945 : 345.


formerîy the Nootka ilitted out from Bengal for the North West Coast of America, after-
wards disposed of at Macao to a naturaSized Portuguese Merchant residing there, from
whom she was purchased last year by Mr. Cox and recalled the Nootka.
July 22« The Nootka anchored in the Macao Roads under Eoglish Colors intending to
proceed to Whampoa; having reason to suppose she had not a proper pass, or permission
to navigate under English Colors, we sent a Chop 112 to the Merchants [the Chinese Hong
Merchants], requesting they would acquaint the Hoppo 113 with the Circumstances, that
in case they committed any irregularitks or transgressed against the rules of the Port we
might not be considered as accountabk. 114 ■.
Although the Company*» Select Committee did not view the arrival of
the vessel with very good grace they could not do more than show displeasure
by writing as they did. The owners decided to transfer the vessel to the Prus-
sian flag, and in this status the ship put into South China waters on at least
two other occasions in subsequent years.
In spite of the competition from these independent merchants the E. L
Company benefited to a considerable extent by their business in China. For
instance, after disposing of their furs and other goods Cox and Beale delivered
to the East India Company large sums in silver bullion and sycee 115 received
from the Chinese buyers and obtained the Company's bills on London in
sterling for payment to this concern in England. The silver thus received at
Canton was utilized by the E. L Company, in its turn, to pay for the tea
shipped to London. This was acceptable to the Company for the problem of
finding sufficient silver to take to China in order that their purchases of tea
might be paid for in cash had been giving the Company a great deal to worry
about, and the 5 trade thus proved to be very convenient, although
the Company was so much against the presence of the t interiopers , .
in Cìmp y from the Portuguese word chapa, meaning official document with a sealed impre：
with the specific seme of passport or licence, but also for commuimcations of an official character
on which had been made the impression of a seal of office (S. B, Dalgado, Glossario Luso-
Asiatico, Coimbra 1919, YoL I: 259-60; H* Yule and A, C, Bumell, Hobson-Jobsmi, London
1903 : 207-9).
IX3 The Superintendent of Customs at Caetoii, who was the represeritative of the Hu-pu
(戶部， the Board of Rew 腿 e at Ae capital)* The tem used by the fordgners was confo
to Canton. S. Wells Williams believed that *the term is a corruption of (Chinese
Commercml Guide, p. 221), It was first used by the Portuguese in the 16th century at a time when
this officer held the post of Chief Treasurer of Canton. By the 18th century the rapacity of the
Hoppo md hts staff knew few bounds (Dalgado, pp. 4SB-9; B & Burnell, Hobson-
Jabson y p. 426).
114 Mooe, Vol. II: 187.
115 Sycee, ingots of pure silver in the commercialese among the merchants at Canton, derived
from the Cantonese pro_nciation of 絲 笏裔細絲 （literal!y s
silver was melted down markings like fine threads appeared on the surface of the metal» and also
the silver could be drawn out into silk-Sike threads. The purer the silver the finer the filaments
of metai. The 玄 玄 erm w 祕少如《声伽元實， usually fifty
sizes were also made, stamped with the seal of the smelter. Silver in small ingots (called shoes,
corrupted from the Dutch sckuyi [geldschuyt, 'boat of gold*] in China) and particles of
la trade this stiver was weighed, not counted as coins B & Burnell, ilohson-Jobson :
S. Couling, The Encyclopaedia Sinica, 1917: 512 and 537; E. Kann, The Currencies of China.
1926: 178-9; H. A. Giles, Glossary of Reference, Shanghai 1900: 159).


In fact the trade by the private merchants in India with China can be
said to have become complementary to that of the E, I. Company, especially
when the Company decided not to use its ships to transport opium to China.
In 1787, as a case in o 53% of the silver needed for the Company's
investment at Canton, for teas, silk, etc., came from silver turned into the
Company's treasury from the Country* trade. In a confidential report to the
Court of Directors in London, the Select Committee at Canton even, reported
on John Henry Cox that he
had always conducted himself with great propriety, and becoming respect and deference
to tiie Hon'ble authority; more especially as he has been of signal utility to
us upon several occasions which our absence from Canton would have othemise rendered
very embarrassing. 116
Nevertheless, when late in September, 1791, John Henry Cox turned
up at Whampoa in the Mercury, the Company's Select Committee stormed
and threatened, refusing to give him, as a subject of the British sovereign,
permission to land at Canton. They contended that he was infringing their
monopoly. But Cox proceeded to hoist Prussian colours and nonchalantly
stepped ashore. 117
It is interesting to note that in the same year the Nootka brought 9,619
seal skins from Western Canada, while the ships brought from
England, presumably from Eastern Canada and the Hudson Bay areas, via
London, 8,608 otter skins, 36,983 beaver, 7,537 martin, 1,350 fox and 115,510
rabbit skins. In the next year a single ship flying the Genoese flag imported
8,420 fine furs and 164,620 rabbit skins. Two years later American ships
brought 43,770 fine furs while Ènglish ships carried 62,790 with 262,095
rabbit skins. 118 With imports on this scale profits from the sale of skins and
furs dropped gradually, but it took some years before profits disappeared
altogether. The Chinese demand seemed to be almost insatiable.
The ships belonging to John Henry Cox and his associates gave up the
fur trade before long and concentrated on the carrying of goods, mainly
opium and cotton in increasing quantities, between India and China. Their
shipments made heavy inroads even upon the business in raw
cotton and yarn and cotton goods, for they loaded 149,430 picuis of these
114 Morse, Chronicles, II; 85.
117 G. Mortimer, Observations and remarks made during a voyage to the Islands of Teneriffe,
Amsterdam, Maria's Islands near Van Diemen's Land; Otaheite, Sandwich Islands; Owhykee,
the Fox Islands on the North West Coast of America, Tinian, and from thence to Canton. In the
bfig Mercury commanded by John Henry Cox (London 1790); H. 11. Bancroft, History of the
Northwest Coast (San Francisco, 2 vols., 1884); Greenberg, British Trade, 1951: 25. The
Mercury continued to ply in and out of the Canton River for several years.
113 Morse, Chronicles, Vol. II: 185, 193, 256 passim.


commodities in 1793 to the 30,780 piculs. 119 To a great extent
they acted on behalf of principals in India, little of their own capital being
tied up. We may presume that they also imported small quantities of pepper
and other spices, sandalwood, ivory, metals such as copper, lead and steel,
and other goods like rice, beans, nuts, ebony wood and saltpetre. 120
The one-time seller of was now, within the space of ten
active years, a successful, wealthy merchant and shipownerj with business
connections in three continents, and he had a residence at Great Ormond
Street, a fashionable part of London. Furthermore, he and his associates had
been able to show how the powerful and profitable monopoly, which the
great East India Company had exercised against British subjects for such a
long time, couJd be neutralized. And the firm which young Cox had helped
to establish went on to grow until in course of time, under other men and
the name of Jardine, C & C0., it came to wield tremendous influence
in British trade in Hong Kong and China.
John Henry Cox did not live long to enjoy his good fortune, for he died,
of natural causes, on October 8,1791, before the season was out. He was only
34 years of age at the time of his death, and he left a flourishing business to
his friend and partner, Daniel Beale, who was joined soon after by his brother
Thomas Beale. His remains were interred on Danes Island, at Whampoa,
where the foreigners in South China had a cemetery, 'eastward of the
No record is available to give us an assessment of the extent of John
Henry Cox's property, but the figure must have been considerable for he was
able to offer not less than to each of the two executors of his estate:
Daniel Beale, his partner in China, and Thomas Pirkinson, a friend in England.
He had not married and in the provisions 〇£ his will he provided that his
estate should be invested and the revenue should be paid exclusively in three
equal shares to his father, James Cox, Senior ; his brother, James Cox, Junior;
and his sister, Elizabeth Cox. His will was executed at London, on February
25,1789，
The extraordinary success achieved by Cox and those who were in
business with him soon induced others to follow in their footsteps. I he thin
edge of the wedge, by means of which John Reid had, in 1779, devised a way
to find a chink in the armour of the Honourable Company in China was
118 That is, 9,000 tons to the Company*» 2,000 tons. Cox and his associates must have employed
from 20 to 30 ships to handle this volume of merchandise.
120 These were the regular commodities of trade between India and Macao {Gazeta de MactiOi
12, 20 March, 1824: 60)-
m H.S.S, (H. Staple Smith), Diary of Events in Shameen (Canton, privately printed, n.d.,
1938:59). '
m See Appendix. The present-day equivalent in Far Eastern values of the paid to
each of the executors might be as much as $lOO,OOO to SI2O,(XH).


pushed in more firmly and t 1791 there were several honorary representatives
of European sovereign governments, claiming, to act on behalf of the mon-
archs of these states, small though some of them might have been.
Thus Mr Charles Schneider turned up in China and, when ordered to
leave, showed the Company that he Resided here in the capacity of Vice
Consul for the Supreme Republic of Genoa to transact the affairs of Merchants
of that State*. Mr David Reid was able to demonstrate that he held a commis-
sion *in the service of his Danish Majesty, and', so he went on to state,
*it is in consequence of Orders from that Court that I am now here*. A Mr
Dickerson, who had succeeded in arranging for naturalization as a Portuguese
subject, also announced that he enjoyed *the protection of the Court of
Poland'. 123
These men traded at Canton during the winter months and spent each
summer at Macao, where they were able to combine what would otherwise
have been a period of enforced idleness with profitable interludes at Macao
by engaging in trade. Their number was added to when Mr Samuel Shaw
turned up in the Empress of China, as the representative of the newly establish-
ed United States of America. He reached Macao, proceeding at once to
Canton, in 1786, as the first U.S. Consul and, at the end of the trading season
at Canton he applied, in April, 1787, for permission to stay at Macao during
the summer months. 124
The Genesis of Jardine, C & Co.
The story of the subsequent development of the firm, first organized by
John Henry Cox and his associates, has been very competently sketched by
M. Greenberg in his British Trade and the Opening of China, 1800-1842,
frequently quoted here. Written after a careful study of the old records of
Jardine, C & C0., now kept in the Cambridge University Library,
it is one of the very few on the subject yet published. 125 Maurice Collis*
Foreign Mud is another excellent work dealing principally with the opium
123 Morse, Chronicles, Vol. II: 206-7. These three men did not have the good fortune which
John Henry Cox, for their names do not figure prominently in the accounts of trade in
CWna during the period. The subject of consuls of foreign powers in Macao has still to be
studied, and as there is some materia! in the archives of Lisbon and Macao this should not prove
a difficult matter.
121 Morse, Chronicles, Vol. II: 150; S. Wells Williams, The Middle York 1883);
F. R. Dulles, China and America {Princeton 1946); J. K. Fairbank, The United States and China
(Harvard 1948), etc.
*The scope of this study is determined by the character of the sources of information
available. The main source used is the Jardine, Matheson Collection of manuscripts. I'hey shed
an intimate light, from the inside as it were, on the operations of the foreign merchants in China*
(M. Greenberg, British Trade and the Opening of China, 1951: xi~xii). The oldest file in this
collection seems to be Cox's Invoice Book of 1782, in the J. M. Archives, op. at., p. 22.


trade but also about the various phases and personages connected with the
commercial operations of the period. It also contains some background
material on the subject of the 4 Country trade* between India and China at
the time. 126
In 1797, Daniel Beale decided to retire and return to England. He had
spent, in his youth, several years in the E.L Company 31 » employ in India and
he had then done business on his own in China for a number of years and,
after 1787, in partnership with John Henry Cox. He was now a man of
considerable means, thoroughly experienced, and one of the earliest of that
class of men known as *Old China Hands*. In London he joined Francis
Magniac, in the concern doing business as jewellery and general merchants,
and watchmakers and exporters of 4 sirig-songs ? . He left the business in
China to his younger brother Thomas.
Two years later (in 1799) the firm in China was reorganized. Young
Thomas Beale, only 20 years old, seems to have lacked the flair for business
and felt the need for associates. He took Robert Hamilton, David Reid and
Alexander Shank as his partners and a new concern was thus set up ; it did
business under the name of Hamilton and Reid and Beale. 127 The death of
Hamilton in the same year led to further changes and in 1800 B & Beale
emerged. Its partners were David Reid, Fhomas Beale and Alexander Shank,
with a working capital of $120,000, in three equal shares. 128
A more active demand for 'sing-songs* having set in, Charles Magniac,
son of Francis Magniac of the old shop in Cierkenwell, very probably at the
suggestion of Daniel Beale, was sent from London in 1801 to join the firm of
Reid, C & Co, at Canton. Reid withdrew later in the same year and returned
to England, A further change was then made and it was as M & Magniac
that the firm came to be known, in 1803, with Beale, Shank and Magniac
m Other books which touch upon the subject are: W. Miîburn, Oriental Commerce (London
1813); C. Toogood Downing, The Fan-Qui or Foreigner in China (London 1838); \\ S. Lindsay,
History of British Shipping (London 1876)： W. H. Carey, The Good Old Days of Honourable
John Company (London 1906-07); J. B. Eames, The English in China 1909); H-
Coates, The OÙ 'Country Trade' of the East Indies {London 1911); F. P. Robinson. The Trade
of the East India Company (1700-1813) (London 1912); Bai Krishna, Commercial Relations
between India and England (1601-1757) (London 1924); V. Anstey, The 1 rade of the
Ocean (London 1929); A. Redford, Manchester Merchants and Foreign Trade (1794~15〇5)
(London 1934); C. N. Parkinson, Trade in the Eastern Seas (Cambridge 1937).
127 There is nothing to show if David Reid, who arrived at Macao in 1793, was ct>nnected
with the John Reid who had been an earlier partner but who went bankrupt in 1787. Robert
Hamilton had come from Calcutta but not having secured an appointment as the representative
of any European Court was not able to reside at Macao; he had to return to India in one ot
ships that sailed in March or April each year. Alexander Shank was * **a free mariner' * who, being
without papers from a European state, was obliged to make the best way out . - . by short
absences from China, mostly in Malacca*. He remained with the concern until his deatli in l»i *•
iss Greenberg, British Trade, 1951; 27, 83 and 222.


as partners, doing business as general traders but not forgetting < sing-songs ,
and clocks and watches.
Business in China continued to improve and the new company did so
well that in 1811 it was decided to take on a new partner. He was Francis
Hollingworth Magniac, younger brother of Charles. The increase in trade,
which had been in evidence for several years, showed no signs of abating, and
the records of the East India Company give some particulars of its growth,
mainly in opium and raw cotton from India but also in other products from
that country, including indigo. 129 True to their old line, however, the partners
of Beale & Magniac went on doing business in clocks, watches and ‘sing-songs’,
since several of the partners and their assistants, at one time or another, were
watch-makers and lapidaries. Under efficient management the firm’s business
between India and China kept expanding and the keen competition with
which the ‘Country merchants’，as the Committee continued to call them,
had already plagued the East India Company for several years, soon intensified.
Opium figured to an ever greater extent in the trade carried on, with
correspondingly large profits for those selling it. Since the East India Com-
pany did not carry opium in its own ships but sold the drug in India to
merchants who sent it to China, the ‘Country merchants’ obtained large
sums of silver, from its sale to Chinese dealers, depositing the same in the
Company’s treasury at Canton in exchange for the Company’s bills on
London. The Company continued to finance its purchases of tea and other
Chinese merchandise to a great extent from this silver. 130
Thomas Beale was not cut out to be a merchant. It seems that he had
been engaging, on the side, for several years, in business between Calcutta
and Macao in conjunction with the prominent Macao merchant, Senhor
Januârio Agostinho de Almeida, Baron San José do Porto Alegre, and his
son-in-law, the Chief Justice, Senhor Miguel de Arriaga Brum da Silveira,
who failed to the extent of nearly two million dollars. Thomas Beale’s
dealings with these gentlemen were not connected with the business of
M & Magniac but were his own private affair. His personal commitments
had become so involved that he had to declare bankruptcy ; in their insolvency
Arriaga and Almeida had dragged Beale down with them.
The Select Committee of the English E. I. Company had been very
accommodating to Thomas Beale, which serves to explain how he had got
so deeply involved, but when they found out the true position their reports
to the Directors in London were very critical of Senhor Arriaga, who as the
Judge had no right to engage in trade and whose incursion into business had
129 H. B. Morse, Chronicles of the E. I. Company, Vol.
iso ]V[ orS e refers frequently, in the to instances of silver imported in private trade
and turned over to the Company (cf. Vol. II: 313, 322, 388, to give three cases).


proved so disastrous to Thomas Beale. According to them the total owed by
Arriaga exceeded 1,780,000 dollars, not counting the interest. 131 Part of this
money was represented by cargoes of opium, at inflated prices, as collateral,
and after all the stocks had been sold the balance owing was still considerable.
Beale made attempts to pay off his indebtedness and entertained hopfô of
recovering substantial sums from the Baron and the Judge, but the deaths of
these two within a few months of each other in 1825 and 1824, respectively,
led to the Company's decision to close the account with the sum of over two
hundred thousand dollars unpaid. 132
The firm of M & Magniac was wound up and a new concern known as
M & Magniac emerged but, owing to the death of Alexander Shank two
years later the firm was reorganized in 1819 as Charles Magniac Sc Co., with
Charles Magniac and his brother Francis as the sole partners.
They were joined by their younger brother Daniel who arrived from London
in 1823. 133
About this time two very interesting figures came on the stage: William
Jardine and James Matheson. They were exceptionally able, shrewd and
far-sighted men, pursuing their trade with the greatest sagacity and judgment.
The successful results of their activities produced a clearly defined impact
on the trade in this part of the world and, after a decade or so, on even the
policy adopted by the British Government in its dealings with China.
131 Montait» de Jesus sets the figure at between three and four million dollars! He tries to
find some justification for the judge, but he is not on good ground for the equivalent of the
debts mentioned, in present-day terms, would amount to a very large sum, possibly as much as
$50,000,000! Quite inexperienced in business he must have plunged recklessly into speculation
while living a life of fantastic extravagance. This phase of the private trade does not seem to
have merited the attention of historians. According to Montato, Francisco José de Paiva,
a Portuguese contemporary and merchant at Macao, wrote a scathing attack on Senhor Arriap,
publishing it in the Macao newspaper (A Abelha da China) on November 14th, 1822. The
present writer has not seen a copy of this number of the old jouma!. (See C. A. Montalto de
Jesus, Historic Macao, 1926: 274-5; Morse, Chronicles, Voi. Ill: 248-50, 326-7, 340; Voi. I\ :
97 passim.)
132 In spite of this set-back Thomas Beale continued doing business on his own, hoping to be
able to pay off his indebtedness to the E. I, Company and other creditors. He seems to have
managed to keep on his feet and in course of time he was able to engage in the interesting pastime
of keeping an aviar>" and flower garden. Eventually the cage grw to be an enormous affair,
50 feet high, with a wide variety of birds from many places. The plants colîected by him were
set out in "upwards of 2,5(X) pots, probably the richest collection of Chinese flowers ever made
by any foreigner — serving in fact as the nurseiy in which some of the rarest productions ot
China" have been prepared for transmisston to the west*. Several botanists in Europe drew upon
this gentleman for their specimens, and even Kew Gardens received quite a number of cuttings
from Thomas Beale's garden. His interest extended to the recording of rain at Macao, ana
*a table giving the average of rain in the mean of its fall at Macao during 16 years, furnished bv
Mr Beale* was published {Chinese Repository, Vol. I: 49!; Bennett's Wanderings, Vol. II： - >
J. F. Davis, The Chinese, Vol. II: 318).
Thomas Beale died at Macao in tragic circumstances in December, 1841 {Chinese Refosiun},
Vol. XI: 59).
133 Greenberg, British Trade, 1951: 222.


We first hear of Jardine as a surgeon in an East Indiaman (1802).
Fourteen years later he gave up the practice of oiedicine to adopt the calling
of a merchant in London. In 1819 he sailed for the representing a
London friend and a Parsi merchant of Bombay named Framjee
while co-operating with Charles C & Co. io Macao aod South Chim,
in the opium trade. He was not content to follow the pattern which had be-
come stereotyped among the 'County merchants' but, io collaboration with
his Chinese connections, principally the great Hong merchant Howqua
(Wu Hao-koan)^ 1341 he began looking for new trades and ways of improving
the old. His successes helped to bring about, with the help of his London
connections, great changes in the China trade.
James Matheson, or Nicholas James Sotherlaod Matheson to give him
his full name, joined the firm of C & Co M at Calcutta, when only
seventeen years of age, in 1813. Three years later he decided to go into business
with Robert Taylor. The latter died however in 1820 and he joined the
Spanish firm of C & Co n of as a partner, while securing the
representation of Denmark in China, He soon displayed the qualities of the
goed business man that he was, pursuing his busin 纖 with energy and
remarkable foresight. At a time when there was no competition to speak of,
àe was one of the pioneers in exploiting trade along the China Coast, and in
this he was extraordinarily successful. 135
m Hmvqua or Houqua S'*B, was the name given by the foreign merchants in Canton» in
pidgin English, to the firm first established at Canteo by Wu Kuo-ying {ES：#, about 1777,
His third son, Wu Ping-chüîi succeeded to the firm, which had been styled in Chinese
m Ewo lé®» and built it up into an astonishingly profitable business. He retired from active
participation in the concern (1.826), being succeeded by his son Wu Yuan»hua In spite
of h 響 y eMcrions by the 紐 紐 d co 哪 ulsory comriW
meat and Court, Wu Ping*-chun*s fortune was estimated in 1834 at ? W3o* The flame
浩宫 was dso useJ by Ae foreigners to identify \Vii Ping-chüe himself and，later, his
soii Wu Yüan-hua.
Messrs Jardine, C & Co. adopted the name Ewo as the Chinese appellation of their
firm.
See Eminent Chinese of the Ching Period, edited by A- W. Hummel (Washington 1944 : 877,
867-868) and the sources quoted. See also the Cfnnese Repository where it is stated that 4 the
original name’ was Wu How 官 伍浩官 ，
The suffix qua, in pidgin English, in this and other well known examples is honorific. It stands
ior kmn W (an official), the Fukienese pronunciation 〇£ which would sound sornetliing like qm.
This form was first used by the Portuguese when speaking of Chinese gentlemen already in the
17th century, and it is very likely that Portuguese interpreters introduced it to the early English
traders, who retained it until the middle of the 19th century. Bee S. Couling, The Encydapuedia
1917: 240 and Register of the Proceedings of Cmmcih of the Mmm Register No.
1)5 A succinct account of the careers of these two gentlemen has been given by Maurice
Collis, Foreign Mud (London 1946), and Michael Greenberg, British Trade and the Opening of
China, 1800-42.
Of the many British merchants who did well at Macao only one seems to have given a thought
to the hospitaiity received. This one was James Mathesoo, and when 'about to leave China alter
wideoce of many years gave Governor Pinto of Macao |5,000, to be pot to sooie permanent


In 1824 Charles Magniac retired from the firm of Charles Magniac k
Co., going home to England, and a year later William Jardine, who was
41 years old at the time, joined the Magniacs as a partner. In 1827, Matheson
decided to dissolve his partnership with Yrissari, being joined by his brother
Alexander in his own firm of C & Co. Later in the same year, Francis
Hollingworth Magniac decided to return to England but before doing so he
admitted James Matheson as a partner. 136 Although withdrawing from active
participation in the activities he remained a silent partner, and
he set himself up as a merchant banker in London, where he came to wield
considerable influence in financial circles in the City. His remarkable collection
of Chinese curios was believed to be one of the finest in Britain, 137 The
partners continued to trade under the name of C & Co.
Daniel Magniac was asked to leave the firm in 1826, as he had committed
the unpardonable sin of marrying a local girl. 138 He died at Macao soon
afterwards and was buried in the English Cemetery. 139
The two senior partners in China, William Jardine and James Matheson,
embarked upon new policies as their business expanded. Not the least
important of these were the building of faster vessels for the trade between
India and China and the setting up of strongly armed depot ships for opium
on Lintin Island, from which cargoes could be sent to places along the China
Coast all through the year. They decided, also, in 1832 to rename the firm,
calling it Jardine, C & Co. T a name which has survived to the present
day. Under the efficient management and progressive policies of these
competent, resourceful businessmen and their equally able successors, the
firm went on to build itself up into a remarkably succeæful concern, which
took its place as one of the leaders of British enterprise and initiative in the
Far East, a place it has held to the present day.
Before many years, the firm was able to take an active and notable part
in thé development of Hong Kong, when the British colony was established,
and likewise at Shanghai and other places in China. Its contributions to the
early phases of the spread of Western ideas, principally in trade and industr> r ,
at a time when the energies of the Chinese people were slowly introduced to
Western commercial and manufacturing activities were considerable.
purpose of public benevolence, as a testimony of his grateful sense of the protection afforded
him and others by the Macao government*. This sum formed the nucleus of a public subscription
which was applied to the setting up of a school, which, under another name, still survives at
Macao Repository, 11, 181;Leoncio A, Ferreira, Um brado pela ver dade, Macao 1872: 6;
J. M. Braga, Hong Kong and Macao, Hong Kong 1960 : 58).
IS6 Greenberg, British Trade, p. 223.
137 See the catalogue issued at the time of the auction of some of these curios, in 1892.
188 See Note 52 supra. •
139 Daniel Magniac died on January 4, 1827, aged 29 years (See J. M. Braga, Tombstones i»
the English Cemeteries at Macao, Macao 1940 : 23).


In the summing up of what the Western peoples have done for China,
principally in the material sense, the firm stands high among Western
entrepreneurs, as a pioneer in trade, while it has been actively connected with
shipping, insurance, industrial undertakings and other commercial activities.
The firm had its roots in the enterprise first inaugurated nearly two
hundred years ago, when John Henry Cox first essayed to trade as an indepen-
dent merchant at Macao and Canton in the year 1781.
The reference to the activities of John Henry Cox and his successors,
and the great change they brought about in the sphere of commerce in this
part of the world has been outlined very sketchily above but who will say
that it is not a fascinating story of how a humble seller of t sing-songs , helped
to give impetus to a new movement and contributed not a little to the spread
of those notions of free trade which took hold of the consciousness of an
industrialized Britain and, in course of time, to an awakening East? It is not
in the least likely that young Cox ever gave a thought to the fact that he was
an important pioneer in a new phase in British and Western commerciai
enterprise, but great developed from that small beginning and his
name deserves well of those who are interested in an important phase of
business expansion in China.
Histories of this period have given little space to the importance and
value of the help rendered to so many foreigners by Macao, for writers on
this subject have gone exclusively to accounts by writers using British source
material. In the present study, however, several Portuguese documents have
been quoted, helping to shed a little light on some obscure points. Further
search for source material will probably reveal more information of the same,
or even more interesting, nature, from Portuguese or other sources, to add to
the little that has already been written on a subject about which there is still
much to learn.
A Portuguese would like to feel that it might not be forgotten that if
there had been no Macao or that if the community there had been less accom-
modating, although admittedly the Portuguese received benefits from the
presence of the foreigners, neither John Henry Cox nor any other of the
‘interlopers’ who contributed to break the E. I. Company’s monopoly，on
behalf of the free-trade movement in Britain, would ever have had the
opportunity of accomplishing what they did.
Institute of Oriental Studies,
University of Hong Kong


APPENDIX
Last Will and Testament of John Henry Cox
I, John Henrj Cox, now of Great Ormond Street, Queen Square, do make
my last will and testament to the effect following and do appoint Mr. Thomas
Pirkinson of Bodworth Clou Mills and Mr. Daniel Beale of Canton in China
to be my Executors and I do give them One Thousand Pounds each, all the
rest and residue of my property of what nature soever I do give to my Execu-
tors in Trust that they do after of all my lawful debts invest tlie sole
remainder of the funds and apply the whole Annual [indecipherable] of such
property as follows, viz., one-third thereof to Mr. James Cox Senior of Shoe
Lane, one-third to Mr. James Cox JunV of Shoe Lane, and one-third to Miss
Elizabeth Cox my sister, and after the death of the said Mr. James Cox SenV
I do give and bequeath his one-third of the produce of my property to my
god son Thomas Gustavus Pirkinson for ever and in case of the death of either
Mr. James Cox JunV or Miss Elizabeth Cox without issue the survivor to
have and hold the otjbe/s third, biït in tèse of such first dying leaving Issue
then the said Issue tè continue to enjoy the (1/3| of his parent and in case of
the last survivor dying without portion io go to the Issue of the other
But in case of such lait survivor having Issue therj his or her portion to devolve
to such Issue and tijtat the Executors if they Judge proper may deliver over
their Charge of this property to thè rightful Heirs and in the case of the death
of all three of the above mentioned parties, vis,, Mr. James Cox Sen 5 r Mr.
James Cox Jun*r and Miss Elizabeth Cox without Issue then the two remain-
ing thirds to go to as follows one-third to Mr. Daniel Beale and one-third to
Mr. Thomas Cox of Winchester Street or the Heirs of his Body in equal
shares and as the distance between England and China makes it inconvenient
and almost impossible for the Executors to consult each other it is necessary
and I do hereby authorize them to act separately and independently of each
other as long as they may be so separated, John Henry Cox. Signed sealed
and published and delivered by the above named Testator to be his last \\ ill
and Testanient in the presence of Us who in his presence and in the presence
of each other and at his request have hereunto subscribed our Names as
Witnesses. Thos. Lodington Lambs Condt St. Robert Barnby Clk to Mr.
Lodington. London, 1 25, 1789.
Proved in London sth April 1792 by the oath of Thomas Pirkinson.
Proved in London, 9th June 1798 by the oath of Daniel Beale.
