

- - v ' '' ”*■' I*«
A SERMON
PREACHED ON OCCASION OF CELEBRATING THE
jubilee
OF THE
aaj steax A.SI ajst
WESLEYAN METHODIST CHUECH.
WILLIAM A. QUICK.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
TASMANIA:
J. WALCH AND SONS, HOBART TOWN AND LAUNCESTON.
1864.




« The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand times so many
more as ye are , and bless you, as he hath promised you !”—Deui'. i. 11.
This Jubilee year of our Church removes us a century and
a quarter from the time when the Rev. John Wesley, then
a Fellow of Lincoln College, Oxford, and a Presbyter of the
Church of England, formed those bands of earnest Christian
men and women which he correctly styled “ The United
Societies/’ He had entered the holy Ministry some years
before, while as yet his religion consisted of a conscientious
formalism, and a sincere regard for the laws and ceremonies
of his church. But it pleased God to honor the sincerity
with which divine truth was sought, by providing for his
servant’s enlightenment. The means and manner of a sin-
ner’s justification were therefore clearly apprehended, and
the Saviour, —not self-imposed inflictions, not rigidly ob-
served forms, —but the Saviour, became the sole object of
the trust of his contrite heart. Then was received the end
of his faith, a “ knowledge of salvation by the remission of
sins and then commenced that wonderful career which, —
for fervent piety, open-handed charity, renunciation of all
ease, honor and profit, with a patient endurance of persecu-
tion, and a steady, yea, an eager perseverance in the work
of an Evangelist, and in the learned labors of the press, com-
bined with a practical wisdom and foresight which would
have given him eminence as a legislator,—has never been
surpassed. It was a career of charity, of toil, of suffering,
which knew no cessation, no, not for a single hour, until, at
the age of eighty-eight, the Lord took him to his eternal rest
What wonder that the preaching of such a man was “ in
demonstration of the Spirit and of power ?” Crowds hung
anxiously upon his lips; sinners of all classes were brought
in submission to the feet of Jesus, and in the hearts of many
arose a strong desire for such counsel, in affairs of the soul,


as could be given only by one who was familiar with the
way of salvation and the work of the Holy Spirit.
It was to meet such a desire that Mr. Wesley formed the
first class. That act proved to be the founding of a Church: the
eight or ten whom he joined in fellowship were its nucleus.
Many of God’s most illustrious servants have failed to see
the remote consequences of those special labors which he
has given them to perform : they have humbly set them-
selves to the tasks which his providence has assigned them,
consecrating to those tasks all their energies, not antici-
pating the extent of influence which they would exert, nor
the honor which would attach to their names, but leaving
their work and their reward with him. So Mr. Wesley.
Neither he nor his friends had any quarrel with their Church:
to her doctrines and her liturgy they were warmly attached :
exclusion from her pale would have been regarded as a
heavy calamity, and faction as a great sin. There was
therefore not only no premeditated plan of weakening the
old Church by the forming of a new one, but every step
taken had a reference to the reviving and strengthening of
the old and venerable. It was not foreseen that the class
would result in a Society, and the Society in the large Con-
nexion, which had, even before Mr. Wesley’s death, over-
spread a great portion of the United Kingdom, and of the
States of America.
Now was the opportunity given to the Church of England
of cherishing a genuine work of God, and of absorbing its
vitality. But the Masters of Israel thought they saw in its
great instrument an innovator; for, said he, u The World is
my parish,” and so saying, he set at nought all parochial
boundaries, and went everywhere preaching the Gospel.
Moreover, they repelled from the Lord’s table the souls he
had gathered for them, and thus repudiated such a revival
of spiritual religion as had not been witnessed since the


Reformation. An advantage was therefore lost which many
would even now recover to their Communion if it were
possible.
The Methodist Societies did not receive the form of a
Church until the Clergy had made it a necessity, by exclud-
ing all hope of finding rest and refreshment under their
pastoral care. Then the Sacraments were demanded of the
pastors who had gathered the flocks, and the demand was,
after much debate and earnest prayer, conceded. Thus the
United Societies became the Methodist Church, and she
possessed at once a form of sound words, and a scriptural
system of discipline, which has preserved the purity both of
her doctrines and of her morals.
From this Church Organization arose, as a portion of
itself, a development of its own vitality, the Missionary
Society, whose Jubilee our fathers and brethren in England
have lately celebrated. One of the earliest acts of that So-
ciety was the sending a Missionary to Sydney. By him our
Australasian Church was founded. Since then, what great
things the Lord hath done for us ! How appropriate, that
•we also, in these ends of the earth, celebrate a Jubilee!
The labors of his Ministers, and the co-operation of a noble
band of lay brethren, have resulted in the gradual increase
of his people, until, in the Colonies alone, they have risen in
number from fourteen Communicants to sixteen thousand
two hundred and eighty-four. u The Lord God of your
fathers make you a thousand times so many more as ye are,
and bless you, as he hath promised you!”
The text is a parenthesis occurring in a discourse which
Moses delivered to Israel during their last encampment in
the wilderness, and when they had in prospect a speedy
conquest of the land of Canaan. I have chosen this text
because the words are a greeting most suitable to the present
joyous occasion, and because they are suggestive of the


Author, Nature, Pledge, and Conditions of that pros-
perity which we ardently desire.
We will consider,
I. The Author of a Church’s Prosperity, —“The
Lord God of your fathers.” An interesting title this, and
one which was frequently and appropriately given in the
Old Testament to the God of Israel. Yet, let me not be
understood as using it in the exclusive sense in which it was
used by Moses. He addressed a people who were the only
people of God. We are but one tribe of spiritual Israel. It
would be arrogance in us to assume the exclusive, as though
we and we only were the “ temple of the Lord : it would
be folly to do so, since the act by which any one sect would
exclude others from the pale of the Church will most infallibly
seclude themselves from the companionship and sympathy of
many who are “ the excellent of the earth, in whom we
ought to delight.
The author of our existence and progress as a Church is
the “ Lord God of our fathers.”
1. Their Vocation was from Him. The divine superinten-
dence of the affairs of this world is evidenced in nothing
more than in those revivals of the pure religion and worship
which have secured their perpetuation when the encroach-
ments of error and sin have threatened their extinction.
The choice of an opportune time for interference, and of
suitable instruments for effecting his purposes, has shewn
that God, who ruleth over all, has vigilantly watched over
the interests of his Church, and wisely controlled and em-
ployed in its service the agencies fitted for its revival and
extension. How manifest was the divine interference when
the world which had been once overwhelmed for its apostacy,
and only a single family spared, was again threatened with an
extinction of religion by the encroachments of idolatry. Then


Abraham and the fathers of the Jewish nation were called
forth to be faithful witnesses for the truth, and to hand it
down to remote ages. And, to pass by other examples con-
tained in the Bible, how plainly did God interpose at the
time of the Reformation ! How adapted to the work which
had to be done were the men whom he raised up ! So, when
vital piety had decayed in Britain, —when the leading doc-
trine of the Reformers, namely, Justification by faith, had
almost become obsolete, when good men were deploring a
wide-spread infidelity and its attendant immorality,—our
fathers received their vocation and went forth, some of them
with as fiery a zeal and as calm a daring as Luther dis-
played ; others of them with stores of learning and tender-
ness of soul like Melancthon, and others profound in the
reach of their thought like Arminius and Calvin. Wesley,
Fletcher, Watson, Clarke, are names which would illustrate
any period of Church History. Nor must I omit the names
of other worthies who, though less eminent, stand honorably
connected with the rise and progress of our Communion in
Tasmania. Carvosso was a man of great religious fervor,
and how holy in life, how mighty in prayer! Orton was an
able preacher, and a vigorous administrator of the Church’s
discipline. Waterhouse is a name revered in England as
well as here. Ability, piety, zeal, are all represented in that
name, and the good man’s last w r ords shall never cease to
echo while there is a pagan in these seas, — u More Mission-
aries.” Turner is still with us, and preserves in age the
ardor of that manhood whose prime was devoted to you “in
labors more abundant.” Manton, who is gone to his rest,
and his fellow-laborers, Butters and Eggleston, are men
who have left their impress on this land, and who shall not
be forgotten by us. These beloved ministers pretended not
to any lineal descent from the apostles: they were above all
such idle ambition. The genealogical line is of little conse-


quence to men whom God has made eminent; they have a
lustre which sufficiently illustrates as well the past as the
present. It was sufficient to them to know that their voca-
tion from God was attested by the Holy Spirit’s presence in
their ministrations—that sinners were converted and be-
lievers edified.
2. To Him , u the Lord God of your fathers ” did they 'pre-
sent the offering of their ivories. Obadiah’s profession might
have been theirs, — u I thy servant fear the Lord from my
youth,”—as from their youth he was the object of their wor-
ship and devotion. Themselves his by covenant consecra-
tion, to him did they yield the best energies of life. The
good men who were your fathers gave themselves, at the
very commencement of their career, to the work of Christian
Missions, and held themselves in readiness for any amount
of suffering and labor anywhere in God’s redeemed world.
To labor, they were all called; to suffering, some, and one,* ere
his arrival here, in a common jail, for preaching to the negroes
of the West Indies. But labors, and sufferings, and suc-
cesses were all offered to the Lord. His glory was the ob-
ject and end of life, and now “ they rest from their labors
and their works do follow them.”
3. From Him came all their success. They labored in a
goodly field as husbandmen sent to till the soil. To break
up the fallow ground, to scatter the seed, to irrigate the
plant was theirs, and was honor sufficient. Beyond this,
even Paul the learned, and Apollos the eloquent, could not
go; no, not with miraculous powers to back their preaching.
“ So then neither is he that planteth anything, neither he
that watereth; but God that giveth the increase.” He is
the source of all prosperity. Let us gratefully acknowledge
this when we review the past, and when we anticipate the
future. So totally overrun with sin as with a deluge, is
* The Eev. J. Orton.


imman nature; so hardened is the heart by familiarity with
and love of evil, and so surrounded are men with seductive
influences, that no power less than divine can renew and
sanctify mankind. If sunshine and shower, heaven’s gifts,
are necessary to the productiveness of even the best soils,
how requisite are heavenly influences when the ground is
stony and overrun with thorns! Such is the ground of
man’s heart; and his case would be utterly hopeless were
there not a power above him, the power of the Holy Ghost.
It was this which enabled our fathers to convert souls, and
found Churches, and build sanctuaries for the pure worship
of God. And the same power is available now : their God
is our God, the eternal, self-existent, independent Jehovah,
in might, and knowledge, and goodness, ever the same.
With them we have one object of worship, and one manner
of approach—for u through Him (Christ) we both have access
by one Spirit unto the Father.” Then, have we not firm
ground for the confidence that the future shall be as the
past, that the full source of all good will continue to pour forth
upon us plentiful supplies of his grace ? May we not expect
that, as according to his promise, lt instead of the fathers
shall be the children,” so the fathers’ God, he whom they
loved and served, and whose presence guided, comforted,
sustained and prospered them, will be their children’s God
to do all this for them ? 0 yes : the labors and tears and
prayers of the good men who are gone, are all with their
God, and cannot be lost: His glory shall appear unto their
children : the work of their hands shall be established! But
what is the prosperity which we desire ? We have con-
sidered its source: we will now consider—
11. Its Natuee.
u The Lord God of your fathers make you a thousand
times so many more as ye are and bless you.” Increase of


number is desired. There is one distinction which this
Church may claim. It is peculiar in its origin and con-
stitution. It does not owe its existence to political strife,
or ecclesiastical debate. Our fathers were not agitators
either in Church or State : they did not even pretend to the
office of reformers: their work began by finding fault with
themselves. It was therefore a work purely spiritual, and it
demanded for its development such an organization as would
best harmonize with its character. Our discipline is the growth
of our doctrine, and of its saving effects : it was not the pet
theory of any Church legislator, or of any clerical assembly.
It has hitherto spurned all mere theories and speculations,
and has maintained its ground as a thing of practical utility.
Moreover, it can boast as providential an origin, and as
scriptual a character, as can the discipline of any Church.
And the object of our Church existence is the salvation of
souls : our whole doctrine and discipline contemplate this
as the end to be gained.
1. Not the increase of our numbers hy the association with
us of unconverted men do we wish. A scientific society might
better enrol a number of illiterates, than a Church receive
into her communion the unrenewed. They might be men
of good position, of wealth, and influence; but what sym-
pathy could they have with earnest Christian people in
their desires after God, in their devotion to his service, in
their self-denying labors ? And, to identify with yourselves,
by external ties, mere men of the world, would be to efface
the distinction which God has decreed shall exist between
the righteous and the wicked, and to expose the Church,
and especially the young and the feeble, those who require
to be vigilantly protected, to influences for evil in the
Church, of which they will have quite enough in their outer
life. Never invite to your communion unawakened men.
They may be men of correct morals, they may manifest an


interest in your secular affairs, and be ready with their
purse when solicited for help, but they do not know their
own hearts, or feel the plague that is there; they have no
sense of their need of Christ, and no humble penitent
reliance upon him. What good can you have of such men ?
They will not be content with the privacy of mere member-
ship, and if entrusted with office, they would be proud and
overbearing.
2. Nor do we wish an increase of our number by proselytism.
Mere doctrinal opinion qualifies no man for Church member-
ship; how then can a change of opinion justify his reception
from another communion ? And if he be a discontented
man, unhappy with his former friends, or restless under
their discipline, avoid him. Indeed, it may be questioned
whether the cause of Christ would be gainer by an accession
of even good men to our communion from another Church.
The strengthening of one army corps by transfers from
another can add nothing, except in some rare cases, to the
power of a nation. Convert men, but do not proselyte them.
Gain them from the enemy, not from those who are your
allies.
3. There is then a possibility of increasing our number
without adding to our strength. So, in some circumstances
a diminution is real gain. Therefore the accession wished
and prayed for , is of truly awakened and regenerated souls .
This will be genuine prosperity: these will be real and
valuable gain.
(1.) They ivill increase the aggregate of our Church’s piety.
And piety is influence. Let them bring poverty, let them
be fetched up from the lowest stratum of society, let them
be, when found, but specimens of its crime and misery,
yet the transforming power of the Holy Ghost shall show
in them the beauty of religion, and their consistent piety
shall win for it the approval of mankind. It is piety which


gives influence with man for God, and with God for man.
He who has it is a powerful intercessor with either. Piety !
Let it be more esteemed and cherished, let it have its rio-ht
* O
place among you, a place above money, and above worldly
position.
(2.) An accession to your numbers of truly converted 'persons
will increase men’s faith in the power of the Gospel. It has
not pleased God to continue in the Church a series of phy-
sical miracles: yet has he not left us without signs and
wonders. The divine mission of the Son of God is not now
attested by the healing of disease, and the raising of the
dead, but the power of the Holy Ghost, and of the truth
which he inspired, is, as ever, testified to by conversions from
sin to holiness. These are the signs and wonders; and for
these men have a right to look. And see you not how the
faith of the Church is sustained and increased by these ? A
few genuine conversions will often do more to excite confi-
dence in God’s ordinances, and to call out a spirit of prayer,
than will the most elaborate and eloquent preaching. And,
0 how cheered and animated are the Lord’s people when
they see his work revive, and men’s hearts yielded to the
Saviour ! In conversions is your safe-guard from the
current forms of unbelief. When the Word of God is the
means of saving men’s souls, there can be no questioning of
its inspiration, or of its divine authority. The Church which
is blessed with revivals of religion, will not be cursed with
unbelief. Let prayer meetings, and class those
exponents of experimental piety, be crowded with the sin-
cere and earnest minded, and scepticism cannot live among
you.
(3.) An increase of the Church by additional converts will
augment her power of doing good. The aggregate of her zeal
will be increased. The introduction of even a few who,
recently brought to Jesus, are now in their u first love,” will


be an infusion of additional vital energy, which to any
Church is valuable, and most valuable to the staid and
settled Church in which quiet and decorum have been more
precious than the power which awakens the sleeper.
The aggregate of her working strength will be increased.
For what does she exist ? To secure for herself a happy
and luxurious life ? Verily, some of you imagine to your-
selves a religion most placid, most enjoyable ; but I tell you
that “pure religion and undefiled before God and the
Father is this, To visit the fatherless and widows in their
affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from the world ” :
it is “ to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy
burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break
every yoke.” When therefore converted men and women
join your ranks regard them as so many recruits, put them
to their exercises, and let them fully understand that they
will have to join the forces which dig their way to the
enemies’ ramparts, or that enter by the breach. And go you
with them where the sin-enslaved are, the drunkards, the
obscene, that you may lead them to Christ your great Cap-
tain. Eeiuforcements are not sent to an invading force that
its own responsibilities may be lessened or its courage and
effort diminished, but to hasten the victory and the conquest.
If the Lord bless you with a larger membership, he intends
that a consecration to his service of increased power shall
the sooner bring about the evangelization of your town.
And further, the aggregate of a Church’s money means
will be increased with such an increase of members. There
are works which cannot be carried on without material as
well as spiritual prosperity. I may instance the work of
our Benevolent Societies, of our Missionary and Bible Soci-
ties, and of our Church Extension, and Chapel-building
Funds. And the larger the number of persons who can be
identified with such works, as contributors to them, the


greater the advantage, since it is more blessed to give than
to receive, and since the gifts of the many will be more likely
to flow steadily than the larger gifts of the few. The financial
arrangements of our Church have numbers for their basis,
for it is wisely assumed that, as these increase, the funds
available for her enterprizes will likewise increase. It is
not on endowments that we depend, nor altogether on the
large donations of the wealthy, but on the gifts of all our
people, presented with regularity in their means of grace,
and as offerings of gratitude to God. When, therefore, the
Lord adds to his Church, he devolves on her the obligation
of undertaking new tasks and such as demand a consecration
of his people’s substance.
Accessions then are ardently to be wished and prayed for.
And I confess, it i$ beyond my comprehension, how any
Church can enjoy a comfortable existence, while year after
year she remains in one unvarying condition of respectable
quietude, no enterprise being manifested, no souls being
brought to Jcsus. A Church comfortable, yet doing nothing
towards the world’s salvation ! Comfortable while no ade-
quate effort is made to rescue the fallen and the perishing !
The comfort enjoyed by such a Church is not “ the comfort
of the Holy Ghost” : it is its counterfeit, made and imposed
upon you by your adversary the devil I Would that many
of our Churches were made miserable,"perfectly miserable,
in the contemplation of the miseries and the wants of man-
kind. Then would “ the Lord God of your fathers make
you a thousand times so many more as ye are.”
We will now consider,
111. The Pledge of that prosperity which we wish—“ as
he hath promised you.” Moses refers to the promise of a
numerous posterity, which God had given to the great
father of the Jewish nation, and renewed at divers times to his


people. When Abraham complained that he had no heir
save Eliezer, the Lord u brought him forth abroad and said
look now toward heaven, and tell the stars if thou be able
to number them ; and he said unto him so shall thy seed be.”
Again, when the Patriarch had, in intention, offered up his
son Isaac, and by that act manifested his faith in God, the
promise was renewed to him in terms more explicit, and it
was added, In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth
be blessed.” Here is a promise in which God’s whole
Church is interested, inasmuch as it includes a pledge given
through Abraham of a Messiah for all mankind. Indeed, a
promise given primarily to him, and intended to relate to his
posterity belongs to us. The doctrine of St. Paul, in the
4th chapter of his Epistle to the Romans, is, that the Patri-
arch was a representative and federal character. We are
told that Abraham, justified by his faith, became “ the
father of all them that believe, though they be not circum-
cised —of all who walk in the steps of that faith of our father
Abraham, which he had being yet uncircumcised. For
the promise, that he should be the heir of the world, was
not to Abraham, or to his seed, through the law, but
through the righteousness of faith.” So then, all that the
original promise includes of spiritual good, all that was to
come to Abraham’s seed by the Messiah, is pledged to us
if we (l being justified hy faith have peace with God through
our Lord Jesus Christ; ” and that, irrespectively of circum-
cision or uncircumcision.
1. Now a promise of large spiritual increase must he inter-
preted as including a pledge of the Holy Spirit s presence , and
almighty agency in the Church. As a posterity comes by
natural birth, so a spiritual seed comes by regeneration or
the new birth. And the power that effects this is divine ;
hence the expressions 11 born of God —of the Holy Ghost.”
This is the power which on the day of Pentecost added three


thousand to the Church, and which afterwards cc added
daily such as should be saved.” This is the power by which
all evangelical Churches have been founded and extended,
and it is upon this we must depend for the conversion of
sinners, and the sanctification of believers. 11 And it shall
come to pass in the last days, saith God, I will pour out of
my Spirit upon all flesh,” a promise this which is as appli-
cable, quoted to you, as it was when uttered on the day of
Pentecost. Said Peter “ the promise is unto you, and to
your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as
the Lord our God shall call.” Brethren, this is the promise
which is all-inclusive: let us wait for its accomplishment,
wait in earnest, believing prayer, and in a diligent attention
to duty; then shall men be convinced of sin and brought to
the cross of Jesus; themselves and their possessions shall be
consecrated to his service; then shall peace and harmony
pervade his Church, and it shall be the quiet dwelling of an
ever-increasing, united and happy family.
2. The promise of increase also pledges to us the perpetu-
ation of our Christian Ordinances. For while a divine power
is the efficient cause in man’s salvation, human instrumen-
tality is employed in the work, and means of grace are ap-
pointed to be used in its accomplishment. When God’s tem-
ple had to be rebuilt, and the pure religion re-established, after
the captivity in Babylon, God taught the prophet a lesson
of dependance on divine aid, saying, “ Not by might, nor by
power, but by my spirit.” Yet the vision which conveyed
this important lesson was a vision of olive trees with their
branches, and of pipes which conducted oil to the seven
lamps of the golden candlestick which the prophet saw; all
these representing the human element employed in kindling
the light of divine worship. The olive oil is essential: the
branching candlestick, all of gold, is also necessary. God
giveth both. u As he hath promised you.” Blessed pro-


mlse I What more than this can we desire or ask ? What
is there that we can think of in addition to this ?—all of the
divine—all of the human, that can he needed for increasing
and establishing our posterity!
Our attention must now be given to
IY. The Conditions of the desired Prosperity.—•
Is the promise of God secure to us irrespective of our
Church character and conduct ? Will it be fulfilled, what-
ever we may be and whatever we may do ? If we think so,
we have read in .vain the history of Churches and of indivi-
duals. All the promises are conditional, and it becomes us
to inquire most thoughtfully and prayerfully, what are the
conditions upon which this promise will be fulfilled, what
means must be employed for securing this blessing ?
1. The maintenance hy us of Christian Purity.
(1.) Purity of doctrine. The tenets of our Church are
so simple that the most illiterate can understand them, so
clearly defined, that our standards do not admit of a double
or non-natural sense, so practical that they are all embodied
in the inner and outer life of our people, and so settled and
recognizable that the law of the land secures to us, for their
perpetuation, the sanctuaries which we have built. It may
be affirmed that there has never yet been an attempt to
introduce false doctrine among us, which has not been
instantly dealt with by the vigorous discipline which we
have received from our fathers. If, therefore, there be
danger to us on the side of doctrine, it is danger of declen-
sion rather than of apostacy. We must be on our guard
against softening down the word of God to gratify the spirit
of the times, and as a concession to philosophy, “falsely so-
called.” We must expound and apply the mighty old doc-
trine, —Salvation provided for all men by the Father’s free


grace through the mediation of the Son, and assured to the
conscience of the penitent believer by the Holy Ghost; and
we must do so with that clearness and vehemence which
our fathers gave examples of.
(2.) Purity of discipline. And I now refer not only to
that discipline which we have in common with other
Churches, but to that which we have been providentially
led to adopt. If you consider our class-meetings, as they
stand related to the doctrines which are preached by us,
and to the Christian experience of our people, if you regard
them as inducing attention to various duties, as self-exami-
nation, mutual exhortation, and the expression of care and
sympathy one for another, if you view them as means of
grace in which Christians may have close fellowship, may
compare their religious state, and severally declare what the
Lord hath done for their souls, you will see and admit that
their value is incalculable, and that their influence runs
through our whole Church system. The class-meeting
must be preserved intact; and so it will be if you maintain
a clear and lively experience of divine things.
(3.) Purity of Morals. The mere absence of the grosser
sins is not enough. i( Fornication and all uncleanness, or
covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as be-
cometh saints: neither filthiness, nor foolish talking, nor
jesting, which are not convenient ” But, “ whatsoever
things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever
things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if
there be any virtue, and if there be any praise, think on
these things.” Christian morality is far above the average
morality which obtains praise among men, far above, both
in principle and practice. Shame upon those professors
who rise no higher than the world’s standard! Shame


upon those who are no more scrupulous and conscientious
in their words and actions than are irreligious men I
“ What do ye more than others ! ”
2. The maintenance hy us of the Christian lav) of peace.
As with a nation, so with a church. Faction will destroy
the one, schism the other. There needs no external assault
by powerful foes to effect this havoc. IVhat is more
devastating than civil war, in which brother meets brother
in deadly combat ? What impedes advancement more :
what works a surer destruction of all church interests, than
divisions and party strife ? They produce an atmosphere
in which the peace-loving and holy cannot live: they at
once drive away the most valuable of a Church’s members,
and effectually keep aloof the most promising enquirers.
Yea, they exclude the Holy Spirit of God from his own
ordinances, so that they become as breasts without milk to
the feeble children of God ; as wells without water to the
thirsty wayfarer. “If ye have bitter envying and strife
in your hearts, glory not, and lie not against the truth.
This wisdom descendeth not from above, but is earthly,
sensual, devilish. For where envying and strife is, there is
confusion and every evil work. But the wisdom that is
from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy
to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without par-
tiality, and without hypocrisy.”
3. The maintenance of personal and family religion. Of
the former I need say nothing; so obvious must it be to all,
that the Church, in the aggregate, cannot prosper unless
the individuals composing it attend each to his own soul’s
affairs. Of family religion, alas, how little is thought!
How few see its necessity and its influence !
When Moses spake the words of our text, there were two
sources whence the u thousand times so many more ” might


come to swell the already large number of God’s people.
Strangers might be added to them, that is, men of Gentile
birth, who, seeing the glorious privileges enjoyed by Israel,
said, “ This people shall be my people, and thy God my
God.” But did Moses contemplate the anticipated increase
of the thousands of his people by means of proselytes from
the Gentiles? Certainly not. The source to which he
looked was the family relation as it had hitherto been sanc-
tified and blest by God. lam aware'that every child born
of a Jew was a Jew, whereas the children of Christians are
not born Christians. Christianity is throughout a spiritual
system: Judaism was to some extent outward and nationah
Moses could therefore look more confidently to the family
relation than we can for the “ thousand times so many
more.” The natural increase of his people, favored as they
were by divine providence, would be sure to give large
accessions. But has the Christian Church nothing to
O
expect from her families? Shall her joy not be increased
when the Lord increaseth the nation ? Verily, in our pro-
tests, never too strong, against a mere hereditary and bap-
tismal religion, we are in danger of undervaluing the family
institution in its relations to the Church of God. We do
not look, with the expectancy which the Scriptures justify,
that “ instead of the fathers shall be the children.” Let
there be a more solemn recognition of your infant chidren’s
relation to Christ as his redeemed and saved ones; let holy
baptism be employed as a public acknowledgment and
ratification of the relation already existing ; let their minds
be early made familiar with divine truth; let them ever
have before them the spectacle of a well-ordered Christian
household, in which the morning and evening worship is
daily offered, and in which “the beauty of holiness” is
apparent in every temper and word; let prayer be made
for them unceasingly, such prayer as pleads God’s promise


“ unto your children;” and you may confidently expect that
the gracious Spirit will draw their hearts to Jesus, and lead
them to seek, until they find, his regenerating grace. O
believe it, the proper training of your children will, except
in rare instances, result in the surrender of themselves to
God. Indeed, for my part, I cannot see why there should
be any exceptions to the rule—“ Train up a child in the
way he should go, and when he is old he shall not depart
from it.”
Lastly,— The maintenance , in full vigor , of your various
Church Institutions , is a condition of prosperity. Grudge no
money, no time, no energy to the children, to the sick, to
Church extension, as well in town as in country, to Chris-
tian Missions; but let the young be your chief care : meet
them at the very entrance of their path, give them the hand
of guidance and help, and leave them not, until you see
them resting beneath the cross of Jesus. There was a time
in Israel’s history when vice was rampant, when drunken-
ness had filled u all tables with vomit and filthiness, so that
there was no place clean,” and the inquiry was put by the
prophet “ whom shall he teach knowledge ? and whom shall
he make to understand doctrine?” Was there none—was
the case utterly hopeless ? No. “ Them that are weaned
from the milk, and drawn from the breasts,” is his reply.
They were the hope of Israel: they are our hope. Where
the children are is sunshine: the cheerfulness of trust and
expectancy may settle on any Church which has the chil-
dren, and knows well how to deal with its charge.
Brethren, I have now placed before you the conditions
upon which God will 11 make you a thousand times so many
more as ye are.” Fulfil them, I beseech you. Be faithful to
your God, and he will keep his covenant with you. Be faith-
ful also to the memory of your sainted fathers, whose labors


22
ye have entered into, and to the traditions of this favored
Church. If unfaithful, their labors and prayers will con-
demn you, the very prosperity of the past will condemn you;
all these, rising up, will convict you before God, and his
judgment will be the removal of “ the candlestick out of its
place.” Then will your light be quenched in darkness, and
your very name will perish. The Lord save you from such
an end: yea, “ the Lord bless you, and keep you : the Lord
make his face shine upon you, and be gracious unto you;
the Lord lift up his countenance upon you, and give you
peace.”
PEATT & SON, PEINTEES, ELIZABETH STEEET, HOBAET TOWN.
