





A SERMON,
PREACHED
AT BOORAL AND STROUD,
Itlort £>tep!)eng t
ON SUNDAY, FEBRUARY 10th, 1856;
BY THE
REY. W. M. COWPER, M.A.,
ON THE OCCASION OF
HIS RESIGNING THE MINISTERIAL CHARGE
OF THAT DISTRICT.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK,
BRIDGE STREET.




TO ALL
THE MEMBERS OF MY LATE FLOCK
IN THE
IBfsJtrict of port
My Dear Friends,
fr&rs>
/£. JJ
On the day when this sermon was preached, the in-
clemency of the weather prevented many of you from coming to
church as usual ; and others who intended to have been present
were hindered by the same cause.
I regretted this much at the time, and it afterwards occurred to
me that it might be well to print the sermon and circulate it among
you as a parting token of my earnest desire for your spiritual wel-
fare. There would be, I felt, these further advantages in so doing :
first, that it would thus reach many who, from their dispersed state
and distant residences, could not have come together to hear it: and
secondly, that its after-perusal might awaken those thoughts and feel-
ings, and stir you up to that practice, which it was originally designed
to produce. May God grant His Blessing upon this feeble attempt
to do good to your souls ! May He pour out His enlightening and
quickening Spirit upon you. And let me request of you, that
before you begin to read it, you will each pray for yourselves that
He will give you grace to understand, and hearts to obey that
truth which may be found in the following pages.
It was a source of much regret to me that there were several
families and individuals on whom I was unable to call before taking
my departure from amongst you. This, I can assure you, was not
my intention.


But various circumstances prevented me from doing all that
I wished : and I found at last that engagements which I had made in
Sydney would not allow of my remaining among you another day,
lest I should put those to serious inconvenience who were relying
upon me for the performance of important duties. Let me, however,
assure you all, that I shall ever feel a deep and abiding interest in
your welfare, and that of your respective families: and I pray that
it may be permitted us, through the infinite mercy of God, and the
merits of His dear Son to meet at last in that happy world, where
His people shall be for ever united in one blessed Communion, per-
fect, glorious and immortal in soul and body, like unto their
Saviour, and with Him for evermore !
Sydney, 25th February, 1856.
'/jp£
' ('S' ' X


A SERMON.
“We then, as workers together with Him, beseech you also that ye
receive not the grace of God in vain.”—2 Cor. vi. 1.
This portion of Holy Scripture has been twice brought
before us in the services of the church to day —first in the
Epistle for this morning’s service, and again in the second
lesson for this afternoon. And I have not been able to think
of any more appropriate text upon which to endeavour to
fix your thoughts and attention in closing my ministerial
labours among you; and in addressing you, it may be, for the
last time until we shall meet in the presence of our Great
Eternal Judge. It is a passage so comprehensive in its
nature, so solemn in the warning it contains, so impressive as
an exhortation, and so affectionate in its tone and spirit, that
I could find no other which fell in more exactly with the
views I wished to express on this occasion. And I pray that
in considering it together, we may be led by the Holy
Spirit to understand and feel more than we have yet felt
our vast responsibility as partakers of gospel privileges, and
be constrained, like the Apostle himself, by the love of Christ
to live henceforth unto Him —“ who redeemed us unto God
by His blood.”
The apostle, you will observe, has been led in the latter
part of the former chapter to set before the Corinthians the
nature of the Christian ministry, and the great object which
it has in view. It is “the ministry ,” he says, li of reconciliation .”
Its design is to bring back fallen and rebellious man to a state
of peace and fellowship with God—to restore him to such a
state of favour as he enjoyed before he fell; but of favour
more abundant, more free, and more lasting in its nature. The
grand subject of the ministry with this view is, that “ God


was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not
imputing their trespasses unto them. 5 ' “ Him who knew no
sin He made to be sin for us, that we might be made the
righteousness of God in Him.” This was the theme upon
which the Apostles continually dwelt, the matter of which
they discoursed wherever they taught, the message they
delivered to sinful men, the ground on which they sought,
and the argument by which they strove, to win them back
to the love and fear of God. And it is in continuation of the
same topic, and with a view to the same end that the
Apostle adds the exhortation in my text —“We then, as
workers together with Him, beseech you also that ye receive
not the grace of God in vain !”
The state of the church at Corinth was by no means
satisfactory. It was in some respects far from what it should
have been. There were amongst them errors in doctrine,
and sins in practice; there was party spirit and division j
there was pride and vain glory; and far too little of the pure
and holy temper of the gospel. Some of them were inflated
with self-sufficiency, and sought either to overthrow or un-
dermine the Apostle’s authority : and when these evils existed,
and were indeed rife in that church, he might well stand in
doubt of them, as he did of the Galatians, and fear that
while they received the gospel in theory, and professed to be
under its influence, they might receive it to no saving
purpose.
It was under such circumstances that the exhortation
before us was addressed to them. But it is of so general a
nature that it may be addressed to every church, and every
congregation, and to every individual to whom the gospel
has been declared.
I propose (1) To inquire what the Apostle meant by “ the
grace of God y”
2. When it is “ received in vain y” and having thus
explained the text, to apply the exhortation to yourselves.
I. We are to enquire, what the Apostle meant when he
spoke of “ the grace of God.”


The word grace in its primary and literal sense signifies
favour. In this sense it is used constantly both in the Old
Testament and in the New. Thus, “ Noah found grace in
the eyes of the Lord.” (Gen. vi. 8.) Thus Ziba said unto
David—“ I humbly beseech thee that I may find grace in thy
sight, my Lord, O King!” (2 Sam. xvi. 4.) Gideon also
said unto the Lord when he sent him to smite the Midianites:
“If now I have found grace in Thy sight.” (Judges
vi. 17.) St. Paul also declared—“By the grace of God, I
am what I am.” (1 Cor. xv. 10.) And again—“ The grace
of God which bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men.”
(Titus ii. 11.) In all these places, as in many more, it is
simply favour , or mercy, or undeserved kindness. And in
the text, it is evident from what has gone before, that the
meaning attached to it by St. Paul is similar. “ The
grace of God,” is His favour, or mercy towards sinful
man in our Lord Jesus Christ, as testified in the Gospel;
and the provision which God has made for the pardon
and salvation of sinners, by His only-begotten Son
Christ Jesus. And most truly, and most fitly is this
designated “the grace of God.” For it originated en-
tirely in His mercy. The plan was carried out in pure
mercy. The message is sent forth in pure mercy. And
when it is applied with power and efficacy to any individual
soul, it is entirely an act of mercy, sovereign, free and
unconstrained by any condition, and independent of any cause
but the will of an Infinite God. “ Pie hath mercy upon
whom He will.”
When man sinned, he forfeited all claim to anything at
the hands of his Maker but justice. And the perfect law of
God demanded that he should die ; according to the decree
that had gone forth at the beginning, “ In the day that thou
eatest thereof thou shalt surely die.” What indeed can the
criminal look for who has broken the laws of his country ?
Or the rebel who has been guilty of treason against his King?
All that they can expect is, that they shall be tried with
fairness, and that the sentence shall be carried out with rigor.


Tf pardon is extended to them, it is an act of sovereign mercy
and pure grace on the part of him who has the high pre-
rogative of mercy in his possession. And in like manner,
when God determined to provide for the salvation of a rebel-
lious and apostate world, it was not because he saw, or fore-
saw, any virtue or goodness in any of the human family to move
Him to do this ; but because he was a God of love, and He
resolved to magnify the riches of His goodness, and to increase
the happiness of the Universe, by saving and glorifying a
vast multitude from among the fallen race of man. Justice
cried aloud with a stern and unyielding voice —“ Condemn
—punish—destroy them”! But Mercy pleaded in the
gentlest and most moving accents ; —“ O spare them—pardon
them—save them!” And she prevailed. “ For God so loved
the world, that He gave His only-begotten Son” to die in the
place of the guilty—to endure the penalty of transgression
in its most awful and terrible form—to undergo the unknown
and inconceivable agonies of the Cross, the intense horror of
being forsaken by his Father, though but for a short time, “that
whosoever believeth on Him should not perish, but have
eternal life.” O think of this, my Brethren, and say whether
it was not indeed grace, most stupendous, and amazing!
What should we think if, in some petty province of a
vast empire the inhabitants were to rise in rebellion against
their Sovereign, set themselves to frame all sorts of treasonable
designs, and pursue their wicked course without relenting;
and the Sovereign instead of sending a troop of officers to
apprehend them, and bring them to justice, should send his
heralds to win them back to allegiance, promising them the
fullest forgiveness, and even an increase of his favour; if
moreover, he should invite them to become his children, and
to share in the highest privileges of his Kingdom and his
Court ? Why, the world would be filled with the sound of
such matchless kindness, and men would never cease talking
of his philanthropy and benevolence. But what is this com-
pared with the grace of God towards us in Christ Jesus?
The whole world had rebelled against Him, and were guilty


of the direst treason. But the whole world and all its in-
habitants are to Him (in the language of the prophet,) “as
the small dust of the balance,” and yet, he sent —not a herald,
but His co-equal Son; not merely to proclaim pardon, but to
procure it by dying ; not only to invite us to lay aside our
enmity and be reconciled unto Him, but to take all our sins
upon Himself, and to endure all that we deserved, to suffer
for our unspeakable innumerable iniquities ! O wonder of
wonders! Mystery of mysteries ! Unfathomable ocean of
love and mercy!—that God should become man, the
Substitute of sinners, the atoning Sacrifice, the bleeding
Lamb which taketh away the sin of the world ! Here sinners,
stand and gaze, behold and ponder. And when you have
learnt what this means, you will understand what is meant
by that grace which we have to beseech you that you receive
not in vain.
11. We now proceed, secondly, to enquire, when this
grace of God in the Gospel is received in vain.
By saying “ in vain,” the Apostle evidently meant, with-
out producing the effect intended. Thus he spoke of the
Galatians as having believed in vain , and as having his
labour in teaching them the truth bestowed upon them in
vain, when they allowed themselves to rest their hope of sal-
vation upon an observance of the law of Moses, and did not
cleave to Christ only, as set forth in the gospel:—“ I am
afraid of you,” he says, “ lest I have bestowed upon you
labour in vain.” (Galat. iv. 11.)
1. “The grace of God,” then, is “received in vain” by
a people, and by individuals, when Christ, as the all-sufficient
Saviour is not received into the heart with faith and love.
There is a speculative knowledge of the gospel, and an
embracing of it with the understanding very common among
Christians, which produces no saving or salutary effect upon
the soul. It is taken up by many as a doctrinal theory, and
held as the Christian scheme which is laid down in the New
Testament, instead of being embraced heartily and feelingly
as the Remedy provided by Infinite Mercy for the recovery


of their sin-diseased souls. They do not apply it to their
own hearts, nor regard it with affectionate interest and thank-
fulness as God’s provision for their own individual salvation
from sin and death everlasting. But this, my brethren, is to
derive no benefit from the gospel. It was not thus with the
three thousand souls which were converted on the day of
Pentecost. “They were pricked in their hearts,” and cried
out in earnest as those who felt they were in great danger—
“ Men and brethren, what shall we do ?” It was not thus
with the Ethiopian Eunuch, when Philip, by divine direction,
went down and met him on the road to Gaza. The Evangelist
opened his mouth and preached unto him Jesus, —showed
him how He had borne our sins, and atoned for them by
His death. And he was net satisfied without a personal faith
and personal reception of Jesus with all his heart. And
being baptized he went on his way rejoicing.
The Philippian Jailor also: how deep and earnest was
his anxiety when he asked that memorable question —“ Sirs,
what must Idoto be saved f” And when the answer was
given—“ Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be
saved ’’—Did he not embrace him with his whole heart, as
one who felt he wanted a Saviour, and that Christ was the
very Saviour he required ?
And so will it ever be. There must be a sense of sin in
the soul, a conviction of guilt, creating an uneasiness within ;
a desire of deliverance from it, an earnest wish to be brought
out of darkness into God’s marvellous light; a feeling that we
are undone, ruined, and helpless, or our knowledge of the
gospel will profit us nothing, our most enlarged acquaintance
and familiarity with its truths will never deliver us from the
bondage of sin, nor save us from eternal death. “ The full
soul,” says the inspired proverb, “loatheth the honey comb;”
and, “ they that are whole need not a physician.” And thus in
Divine things, there must be a sense of our spiritual malady,
an experience of the misery of sin, or we shall, and do receive
the grace of God in vain. Let us ask ourselves, then, these
simple questions : Have I been convinced in my own heart


that I am a sinner before God, deserving his wrath, and ex-
posed to Ids heaviest displeasure ? Does this conviction dwell
in my mind from day to day, and lay me low in the dust of
humiliation before Him ? Do I repent and mourn over my
sins, and lay them by faith upon the head of my great atoning
sacrifice as the only sure relief? Do I find that it is a
relief to do this ? Does my heart acknowledge that God is
just in condemning, and would be most just if he were to
punish me with everlasting death ? And do I cling to the
cross of Christ as my only hope and refuge, and consolation
as a sinner ? Alas ! how few bosoms are there which seem
to respond to such inquiries as these! Do not too many
content themselves with the name of believing, without
having any lively sense of faith and dependence upon Christ
for themselves ?
And what is this, but to receive the grace of God in vain ?
2. But if we consider yet further the design of the
gospel, we find that it is received in vain if it does not
produce sanctification of heart and life. “ This is a faithful
saying and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners.” (1 Tim. i. 16.) But we should
ever remember that it was to save them from their sins.
“ He gave Himself for us,” the apostle to Titus declares,
“ that He might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
Himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works.” And
in accordance with this view we find Him in the latter
part of this chapter, and the beginning of the next, ex-
horting the Corinthians thus:—“ Be ye not unequally
yoked together with unbelievers. For what fellowship hath
righteousness with unrighteousness ? and what communion
hath light with darkness ? and what concord hath Christ with
Belial ? or what part hath he that helieveth with an infidel f
And what agreement hath the temple of God ivith idols f for
ye are the temple of the living God; as God hath said :
I will dwell in them : and I vhll be their God and they
shall be my people. Wherefore come out from among them
and be ye separate , and touch not the unclean thing , and I


will receive you, and will he a Father unto you, and ye shall
he my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty. Having
therefore these 'promises, dearly beloved, let us cleanse ourselves
from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in
the fear of God. (Cor. vi. 14,18 —vii, 1.) Sin must be entirely-
renounced and forsaken. The heart must be purified
from every evil intention. Christ as our king must be
seated on His throne within us; every profane buyer and
seller must be driven by Him out of our inner man, and the
soul, which is God’s temple, must be reserved for His own
worship and service. To act otherwise is nothing short of
treason against Him—treason of the deepest dye—treason
mingled with the basest ingratitude. For if we believe that
He died for our sins, and shed His precious blood to save us
from them, how can we continue therein ? No, the true
believer will not, cannot live in sin, for this would be to
“ crucify the Son of God afresh, and to put Him to open
shame.”
But we must not stop here; the gospel is meant not only
to purify but also to sanctify us. And there is herein a
great difference. Purification is the cleansing away of sin;
but sanctification is the infusion of holy principles and the
acquisition of holy ways of living and acting. And the new
man must be put on, as well as the old man put off. The
thoughts should have a holy bias; the desires a spiritual and
heavenly cast; the feelings should be in unison with them;
the words and actions should be formed in the mould of the
gospel, and regulated by the example of Christ; and the
tenor of the whole life should be influenced by the principles
laid down in the Word of God, or the grace of God in the
gospel is to a great extent embraced in vain. And let me
remind you, my dear brethren, that all this applies to our
relative and social conduct, as well as to our personal and
private habits. No man liveth to himself. No man is an
unconnected unit or cypher among his fellow creatures. He
lives either for good or for evil. He either benefits or does
harm to those with whom he mixes from day to day.


These things the gospel teaches us: for this is to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, applying
gospel principles to every relationship we bear:—as husbands
and wives, parents and children, brothers and sisters, masters
and servants, rulers and ruled, as members of society and
united in our respective families. And you must often have
observed in reading and even hearing the Bible, how these
duties are grafted by the Apostle on to the Christian charac-
ter, and shown to be the true and legitimate effects of a
sound and enlightened reception of Christ as our Saviour.
Having thus ascertained what we proposed for the
subject of our inquiries, viz:—the signification of the grace
of God in the text, and when it may be said to be received
in vain ; we may proceed to apply the exhortation, and
beseech you to take heed that it is not received thus by
yourselves. But let me first call your attention to an
important point—the name here given to the Ministers of
Christ, “workers together with God” What a solemn
thought is contained in this expression ! And how weighty
the instruction to be derived from it, both by ministers and
people. “ Workers together with God!” When therefore
we come to you preaching the gospel, we come not in our
own name, but as the servants of the Most High. We come
with the Bible in our hands and the gospel on our lips, and
in the name of the Lord our Heavenly Master we claim your
attention to the truth which may be spoken. We ask not,
like the philosopher*, that our peculiar opinions may be
received and our theories embraced; but, that the truth
xohich God has revealed for the enlightenment and salvation
of fallen man may penetrate your souls, and bring forth in
you the fruits of faith and holy obedience.
And you, my brethren, should look upon those who thus
minister to you as ambassadors from God. Men, it is true,
of like passions and infirmities with yourselves, men who
may be in many respects inferior to those unto whom they
are called to minister, but who are nevertheless charged with
the high mission of bringing back an alienated world into


the blessed state of acceptance and salvation through Jesus
Christ.
O how strong is the claim, then, which we have on
your attention, not upon any personal grounds, but by virtue
of our office ! In Christ’s stead we pray you ; — in Christ’s
name we call upon you; —in the name of the living God,
the Author of your being, the Preserver of your lives, the
Giver of all the blessings you enjoy, the Redeemer of your
souls, the Fountain of all your hopes for eternity, “we
beseech you that ye receive not the grace of God in vain,”
Think of the love wherewith He loved you when you were
fallen and lost. No such love had ever been known before-
Angels fell; but they were left in their fallen state, and are
reserved in chains under darkness until the judgment of the
great day.” You sinned and fell, and the Eternal stooped
from his throne, and descended to earth, and came to seek
and to save you, and to raise you to a state more glorious
than that from which you fell. Yes , far more glorious. For
instead of being servants, He makes believers His Sons;
instead of a state of trial and temptation, exposed to the
assaults of evil and the evil one, he will exalt them to a state
of changeless purity and glory, into which nothing defiling
can ever enter. They shall be ever with Himself, and shall
behold His glory, and see Him as He is. Their communion
with Him shall be permanent and uninterrupted ; and His
love shall ever be their joy and consolation.
Surely, my brethren, such love is irresistible. How can
we meditate thereon, and yet receive this grace in vain ?
Yield yourselves, then, unto God this day. Let His love
constrain you to this. He has, remember, an indefeasible
right to you, and claims you for His own ; and in His name
I claim your hearts this day. I claim every heart in this
assembly, that it may henceforth be sacred unto the Lord.
He made it; He redeemed it; He has preserved it up to this
moment. And now let Him enter in and dwell there, and
reign there for evermore.
Is there any among you who will refuse this claim ?If


such an one can be found, let him stand forth and say so;
that we may know who he is, that is so hardened in heart, so
ungrateful in soul, so unjust in his principles and conduct.
Let me hope, then, that none will resist this claim, nor
refuse to listen to the exhortation which I have addressed to
you this day, in the name of Him who has permitted me for
so many years to minister the gospel in this place, and to set
before you “ the unsearchable riches of Christ.” It is a very
solemn thought, my beloved brethren, now pressing on my
mind that my ministry, as far as you are concerned, is
now terminated. The providence of God, I believe, has
called me to occupy another sphere, and to exercise my
ministry for the benefit of others: and though I have not
sought to be removed from you, I am prepared to go
wherever it may be shown to be probable that I may be more
useful than among you. But I cannot bring my ministry
in this district to a close, without making the acknowledg-
ment with much humiliation before God, that I have been far
from acting up to my own convictions of what one who is
called to the high office of a minister of the gospel ought to
be and to do. I observe manifold sins and infirmities in all
that I have done, and in having left much undone; and I
am well aware with what coldness and deadness I have
laboured, though not, I trust, without a sincere desire for your
salvation. My only hope for myself is placed in that upon
which I have ever taught you to rely,—the atoning Sacrifice
and perfect righteousness of Christ my Saviour, and His ever-
prevailing intercession before the throne of mercy. The
fountain opened for sin and uncleanness, is that in which I
would wash and be clean ; and were it not for that fountain I
know not how or where any of us could find peace for our
guilty souls. With the great apostle, I would say, “ God
forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord
Jesus Christ—by whom the world is crucified unto me, and
I unto the world ! Wliat an unspeakable mercy it is that
we may repair to Him for pardon and salvation, as well at
the close, as at the beginning of our course, and find in Him


deliverance from every sin ! whether committed in youth or
in riper years; whether in days of unbelief and unconversion,
or in the more privileged and responsible period which has
followed our turning to God ! 0 what a sheet-anchor to the
guilty and sin-burdened heart is that great though simple
promise, “ The blood of Jesus Christ cleanseth us from all
sin !” May you, my brethren, know its value, feel its power,
and experience the full consolation it is designed to afford!
There are many other topics on which I should have
been glad to dwell this day, had our time been sufficient for
the purpose. But I must now endeavour to bring my
observations to a close. I will do so by addressing a few
words of earnest exhortation to all, according to the various
states in which they may be living at this time.
Are you, my brethren, unconverted ? Alienated still from
God, and therefore unpardoned ? O rest not in that un-
happy, that perishing condition : but seek Him while He
may be found. Repent, and be converted unto Him, while
yet He waits to be gracious !
Are you in a state of backsliding ? Fallen from your
first love ? less zealous, less diligent in the use of the means
of grace, less anxious about living in the favour of God
and in His fear, than you were in days that are past ? Take
heed that you do not find those words of inspiration verified
in your own case ; —“ The backslider in heart shall be
filled with His own ways” Take heed lest, continuing in
this state, you draw back finally unto perdition. “ Return, ye
backsliding children,” saith the Lord, “ and I will heal your
backsliding “ but if any man draw back, my soul shall
have no pleasure in him.”
Are you satisfied with your present religious state,
saying like the Laodicean Church, “ Behold, I am rich and
increased in goods, and have need of nothing ?” Hearken
unto what Christ says to such. “ I know thy works that
thou art neither cold nor hot. Thou knowest not that thou
art wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.
I counsel thee to buy of me gold tried in the fire, that thou


mayest be rich, and white raiment that thou mayest be
clothed, and that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear,
and anoint thine eyes with eye-salve that thou mayest see.
As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten ; be zealous there-
fore, and repent.” fßev. iii. 15—17—19.)
But have you reason to think that the Spirit of God has
quickened your souls, and made you alive unto God I Your
responsibility is great. See that you maintain that life
which has been so mercifully given you in health and vigor.
Labour to grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ. Attend to the injunction of St.
Peter. u Add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge,
and to knowledge temperance, and to temperance godliness,
and to godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kind-
ness charity; for if these things be in you and abound, they
shall make you that ye be neither barren nor unfruitful in
the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ.”
(2 Pet. i. 5—8.)
Are you walking with God ? Take special heed to your
ways, and keep up your fellowship with Him by prayer, by
reading and meditating on the word of truth, and by a care-
ful avoidance of whatsoever might produce a strangeness
between God and your souls. “ Let the word of Christ dwell
in you richly in all wisdom,” and be “ a lamp unto your feet,
and a light to your path” continually.
Some of you are children. But children, be it re-
membered can serve God; —Samuel, and Obadiah, and
Elijah, and John the Baptist, and Timothy, are examples of
this. Do you take them for your patterns ; and learn from
them how to fear and serve the Lord.
Others are grown up to maturer years. O, then, let the
prime of your days be given unto God; that if you should be
spared to old age, you may look back with joy and gratitude
upon the past, and forward with joy and exultation upon
the prospect before you when your pilgrimage shall be ended.
And if you are aged : bear in mind the striking
maxim, —“ The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found


in the way of righteousness.” Aim you at securing that
crown. Be ambitious of it. Strive for it. And leave
nothing unattempted which is necessary to make you its
possessors.
It is, my brethren, let me assure you, no small satisfaction
to me to know that these things will continue to be pressed
upon your attention by him whom it has pleased God in
His providence to send here my successor. I was, I con-
fess, not without anxiety when my own removal was de-
termined on, whether you would have one to guide you, who
would fully 'preach the gospel , and set forth Christ in
all His offices and grace, and beseech you to be reconciled
unto God. I trust you have now such a Pastor provided for
you, and that for this you as well as myself are thankful.
Receive him, then, as one who comes bearing the office of an
ambassador for Christ, to win you back by love to Him.
And let me request you to be diligent in your attendance on
His ministry: to be devout in your use of the ordinances
and sacraments, and to avail yourselves of every means of
good with which you are favoured in the church, seeking with
all earnestness to save your immortal souls.
I trust, my brethren, and pray that I may hear all this of
you. Let there be a larger and more constant attendance on
the means of grace, both on the Lord’s day, which He has
cornmanded you to (l keep holy,” and at the week day service,
which has been established for your religious benefit. Let
the Sunday School be more highly valued, and more fre-
quented by your children.
Let the word of God be read, and prayer offered daily in
your families. And let it be your desire and endeavour that
every house may become a Christian home. In short, “be
followers of Christ as dear children.”
And in all your intercourse one with another, in all your
dealings and practices, let that mind be in you which was in
Him, “ Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and
clamour, and evil-speaking be put away from you, with all
malice, and be ye kind one to another, tender-hearted, for-


giving one another, as God for Christ’s sake forgiveth you.”
(Ephes. iv. 31, 3£.) “ Work out your own salvation with
fear and trembling,” and, as far as in you lies, help your
neighbours to work out theirs. Be ready to every good work,
and bold and decided in resisting every thing that is evil.
‘‘Be not conformed to this world, but be ye transformed by
the renewing of your minds, that ye may prove what is that
good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God.” (Rom. xii. £,)
And then, when the time for your departure shall arrive,
you will be able to adopt the language of St. Paul, and say—
“ I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course ; I
have kept the faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a
crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but to all them
also who love His appearing.” (2 Tim. iv. 7,8.)
Finally, I have one thing to desire of you, and I trust
you will not deny it me. The kindnesses I have received
from you have been many, and I have felt, and do feel them
deeply. I thank you for them all, and for all the consider-
ation and regard you have ever shown for myself and
those most dear to me, while we have lived among you.
I can never forget that kindness, and your sympathy
with us in one of the heaviest of domestic trials, which it was
the pleasure of the Lord, in his wisdom and love, that we
should bear. I ask you to add to your past kindnesses one
more, and to continue it as long as it may be needed; it
is, to pray fervently for me. , Pray that I may be
faithful, wise, and holy, as a Minister of Christ ought
ever to be. Pray that I may be enlightened and guided
by the Holy Spirit, to understand more fully the things
of God, and to unfold them to others with ability and success.
And entreat that I may have a single eye to the glory of
God ; that with me, wherever I may be, “ to live may be
Christ, and to die, gain ;” that I may find that in living for
Christ, and in fellowship with Him there is the truest happi-
ness ; and that I may not, after having preached to others
such momentous truths, be myself a cast-away.


And now, in the words of the Apostle to the Hebrews,
“ may the God of peace, that brought again from the dead
our Lord Jesus Christ, that Great Shepherd of the sheep,
through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you
perfect in every good work to do His will, working in you
that which is well-pleasing in His sight, through Jesus
Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen.”
—Heb. xiii. 20, 21.


NOTE
The following paragraph appeared in the “ Sydney Morning
Herald" of the 13th February last, which I append to this Sermon
as a pleasing record of our past associations ; and that all my late
flock may have an opportunity of reading my reply to their kind
address, accompanying the Testimonial then presented to me.
W. M. C.
Stroud, February, 9. —On Tuesday afternoon the residents of
Stroud and neighbourhood met together to present a Testimonial
to the Rev. William Macquarie Cowper, M.A., who has officiated
as minister of the Church of England for upwards of twenty years,
and is about to leave the district.
The meeting was held in the school-house contiguous to the
church, and a committee of the subscribers waited upon Mr. Cowper
at the Parsonage, and requested his attendance. The school-room
was crowded with parties of every persuasion, some labouring under
the feeling that they were about to lose a faithful pastor ; others a
sincere and intimate friend; all, that one was about to leave us
who had for so long a period taken a deep interest in the present
and eternal welfare of every member of the community.
The Testimonial consisted of a handsome silver inkstand, and a
purse beautifully worked, containing one hundred guineas.
The inscription on the inkstand was as follows:
“ Presented, with a purse containing one hundred guineas, to the Reverend
William Macquarie Cowper, M.A., by the community of Stroud and residents


of Port Stephens, as a sincere mark of esteem, on his relinquishing the pastoral
charge of the district, after a service of twenty years.
“ Stroud, Port Stephens, January, 1856.”
The following address, which was engrossed on parchment, was
read by Captain Brownrigg, R.N., on behalf of the subscribers,
whose names were w r ritten on the back, amounting to 128 persons.
To the Reverend William Macquarie Cowper, M.A.,
Stroud, Port Stephens.
Reverend and Dear Sir, —With feelings of deep regret we observe the time
approaching which severs the tie that has hound you to this district for a period
of twenty years ; and we cannot allow you to depart from among us without
offering a small token of our esteem, with a desire, on the part of* those over
whom you have presided as pastor, to record our appreciation of your
ministerial labours.
We are aware that you look not for the praise of man as a reward, hut rather
to that God who has already sustained you through a long trial and a sad be-
reavement, in which we all deeply sympathised. We pray that He will
graciously continue your career of usefulness in whatsoever part of the world
you may be placed, and preserve you and your family, who will he long re-
membered with feelings of kindness and respect.
Signed on behalf of the subscribers,
Marcus F. Brownrigg Francis McNally
Thomas Laman Daniel Lonergan
James Me Intyre John J. Banks
Christopher McCrea J. C, White.
Stroud, January, 1856.
The address and Testimonial having been presented, Mr.
Cowper read the following reply :
To Captain M. F. Brownrigg, R.N., J. C. White, Esq., and others signing the
address accompanying the Testimonial:
Stroud, Port Stephens, February 6th, 1856.
My Dear Friends—To reply in a becoming manner to your kind and affec-
tionate address, and to acknowledge in suitable terms the very handsome Testi-
monial with which you have presented me, is a task to which I fear 1 am quite
unequal. But let me assure you thnt lam most deeply sensible of your kind-
ness, and shall ever firmly retain it in grateful remembrance.
I observe that this Testimonial and address emanate from not only those
towards whom I have acted as their pastor, but from the residents in the Port
Stephens district; and that while the former intend hereby to record their


appreciation of my ministerial labours among them, the latter also desire to join
in offering me a parting token of their esteem. I find also that the subscribers
are of all the religions denominations into which our community is divided.
In accepting this munificent gift, then, at your hands, let me say that I
rejoice to have this proof that the feelings which dwell in my own breast
towards you are reciprocal. It has ever been my desire and study to cherish in
my intercourse with you, those principles of charity and benevolence which should
adorn the character of every Christian, hut especially of a minister of Christ ;
and to live among you in the fear of God, governing my family and house-
hold in uprightness, and doing that which I believed He would approve. lam
now thankful to hear from you—what, indeed, I have long had reason to believe
—that your sentiments towards me are such as I could wish my general
conduct to have inspired. And I regard your Testimonial as one among many
other proofs that a Christian Minister who endeavours faithfully to discharge
his duties towards his people, will not fail to he regarded with respect and
esteem, both by those who are the subjects, and those who are merely the wit-
nesses of his labours.
I cannot, my dear friends, for one moment think of taking any merit to
myself for those services of which you have been pleased to speak with appro-
bation. Young and inexperienced as I was in the ministry when I first came
among you, I am painfully sensible of many faults and great imperfections in
the discharge of my ministerial duties ; and when I look back upon the past, I
really know not what I should have done had it not been for the constant aid, the
prudent counsel, and the sympathising love of one whose removal you have so
touchingly alluded in your address—who was a pattern to us all while she lived
and whose memory is still blessed. Had she been spared to witness your kind-
ness to me this day, she would have joined with me in returning you, as I now
do for myself and family, my most cordial thanks.
But imperfect and unworthy, in the sight of God, as all my performances
have been, I may say with truth, that from the first day of my ministry in this
district, I have sought (though, alas! with how much coldness at the best of
times) to guide and direct those whose Pastor I have been, in the only sure way
of peace—the way of faith, love, and holiness ; and my desire and anxiety for
them has been that they should be examples, both in social and domestic life, of
the blessings and comforts which attend true religion in every rank and
condition in which man may be placed. Such may they become ; and may you
all vie with each other in striving to attain the highest measures of those cardinal
virtues of the Christian character—faith, hope, and charity !
I cannot allow the opportunity to pass without thanking you for the very
great sympathy which was so generally manifested towards myself and family
in our affliction. Though I daily feel that nothing earthly can ever compensate
the loss I have sustained, your sympathy has been soothing and alleviating, and
I acknowledge it as one among the many mercies from the hand of God, who,
throughout my whole life, has dealt most graciously with me.
And now, not to detain you longer. Let me, in conclusion, assure you that,
after having spent so large a portion of my life in this district, and being bound
to it by so many associations and ties of interest and affection: having received


invariable and almost universal kindness from its inhabitants, and such an
deuce of their esteem as has been placed in my hands this day, it is quite it
possible that I should part from you but with feelings of regret and sorrow, or th
I should ever forget you when lam absent. My thoughts and feelings, and tho
of my beloved children, will often revert from other scenes to Port Stephens ar
Stroud, and I shall ever continue to pray for you, that God in his infinite men
may bless you with all spiritual blessings in Christ Jesus, may guide you in t'
path of life, and when your earthly pilgrimage is ended, may grant you
a place among his redeemed in glory! There may He re-unite us and
those who have gone before us, and grant us to partake of those unspeakat
joys which He has prepared for them that unfeignedly love him !
I remain, my dear friends,
Yours gratefully and affectionately,
WILLIAM M. COWPER.
Reading and Wellbank, Printers, Sydney.




