

A SERMON.
Price One Shilling and Sixpence.




A SERMON
ON THE
NECESSITY OF DISCIPLINE,
THE
DUTY OF SUBORDINATION,
AND
THE FATAL EFFECTS OF DISOBEDIENCE, AND REBELLION,
DELIVERED ON BOARD
HIS MAJESTY’S SHIP, BRITANNIA,
THE DAY, PRECEEDING THE EXECUTION OF TWO MUTINEERS,
OF HIS MAJESTY’S SHIP MONTAGUE,
WHICH TOOK PLACE IN VIEW OF THE WHOLE OF THE GRAND FLEET AT SEA„
ON MONDAY, JULY 9, 1804.
BY LAURENCE HALLORAN, D. D.
CHAPLAIN.
LONDON.
PRINTED FOR W. N. GARDINER, PALL-MALL;
BY W. BULMER AND CO. CLEVELAND-ROW,
st. james’s
1804.




TO
THE RIGHT HONOURABLE
JOHN, EARL OF ST. VINCENT, K. B.
ADMIRAL OF THE WHITE,
LIEUTENANT-GENERAL OF MARINES,
&c. &c.
THE TRUE FRIEND, THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS ORNAMENT, OF THE
NAVAL PROFESSION, AND OF HIS COUNTRY;
THE FIRM AND INTREPID SUPPORTER OF THE
DISCIPLINE OE THE BRITISH NAVY;
TO WHOSE UNEQUALLED EXERTIONS FOR THAT PURPOSE, AT A MOST CRITICAL PERIOD;
NOT LESS THAN TO THE MEMORABLE VICTORY, WHICH WILL IMMORTALIZE
HIS NAME, HIS COUNTRY OWES HER SECURITY, AND HER GLORY ;
THIS HUMBLE ATTEMPT
TO ENFORCE THE DUTIES OF SOBRIETY, OF VIGILANCE, AND
SUBORDINATION AMONG SEAMEN,
AND TO DEMONSTRATE
THE GUILT, AND THE DANGER OF THE OPPOSITE PRACTICES,
IS INSCRIBED,
WITH THE WARMEST SENTIMENTS OF RESPECT AND GRATITUDE,
BY HIS FAITHFUL AND DEVOTED SERVANT,
THE AUTHOR.


In apology for commuting to the Press so unfinished a composition >
the Author hegs to observe, “ that this Discourse was hastily written,
“ on the spur of the occasion, in less than two hours;” and is published
in its original state, by desire of those, to whose wishes he feels it equally
his pleasure and his duty to show implicit attention .


A SERMON.
“ And all Israel , that were round about them, fled at the
<c cry of them; —-for they said , Lest the earth swallow
“ us up also!” — Numbers, c. xvi. v. 54.
The Chapter, from which these words are selected,
contains a narrative of the rebellion of the people of
Israel against Moses, and Aaron, —the rulers, whom
God had appointed over them, —and of the terrible
effects, which resulted from their disobedient, and
refractory conduct.
Misled and deceived by discontented, and factious
leaders, the majority of this peculiarly favoured
people was seduced, “ to murmur against God their
“ deliverer, and against the governors, expressly ap-
“ pointed by Him! ” —Forgetful of his mercies, and
despising his just laws, they complained of imaginary
grievances, and revolted against necessary restrictions!
They rose in insolent rebellion against his sacred ordi-
nances, and against the magistrates, whom he had insti-
tuted for enforcing their observance; and infatuated with


false, and chimerical ideas of equality , they presumed to
set up themselves in opposition to the constituted au-
thorities ; —to attempt to level all distinction of ranks;
and to subvert the institutions of reason, of religion,
and of God ! From the contagion of this destructive
example, few, very few escaped uncontaminated; for
“ opinions, however absurd, or erroneous, which fa-
“ vour the prejudices, or passions of men, will always
“ have more numerous, and sanguine abettors, than
“ the dictates of prudence, of justice, and right reason
“ must be expected to attach.” Almost the whole
congregation of Israel therefore united in rebellion
against their chiefs, and in intemperate murmurings,
and complaints against the necessary, nay salutary re-
straints, imposed by the laws !
But, to demonstrate, “ that the many may err,
“ while the smaller number has right, and justice, and
" Heaven on their side,” the Almighty himself was
pleased in this instance to interpose miraculously in
favour of the authorities, Himself had established ;
and by a signal exertion of his avenging power, to in-
flict on the rebels to his laws, and to their governors,
the most exemplary, and tremendous punishment, of
which history, sacred or profane, furnishes an example.
—For the inspired historian of the book of Numbers,


(which is attributed to the great Hebrew lawgiver
himself,) informs us, “ how dreadful a catastrophe,
evidently inflicted by the especial judgment of God,
befell the leader and adherents of this daring rebel-
lion!” “ The earth opened her mouth,” (says he,)
“ and swallowed them up, and their houses, and
“ all the men, that appertained unto Korah, and all
“ their goods.”
“ They, and all that appertained to them, went
“ down alive into the pit, and the earth closed upon
f * them, and they perished from among the congre-
<c gation.”
“ And, all Israel, that were round about them, fled
at the cry of them ; for they said, Lest the earth
“ swallow us up also!”
This is a brief sketch of the historical account,
which the Scriptures have handed down to us, for
our warning, and instruction, of a great popular in-
surrection among the children of Israel, against their
“ lawful rulers of the terrible effects, which ensued
from it; and of the awful impressions, produced by
those effects, upon the minds of the survivors of that
dreadful infliction ! For, “ all Israel, that were round
“ about them, fled at the cry of them ; for they said,
“ lest the earth swallow us up also!”
B


From this narrative, and the feelings impressed by
the judgment it records, I shall endeavour, for your
instruction, and edification, to deduce some reflec-
tions, suitable to the general temper of the times ,
“ which have come upon us” and more particularly
applicable to recent occurrences, and to the existing
circumstances of this fleet, in which we serve! May
the Almighty grant, “ that you receive them with
“ right dispositions,” and, “ that they produce the
“ intended, salutary effect upon your minds, and
conduct’”
“ That man is a being formed for society ,” is a posi-
tion so evident from his nature, and from experience,
“ that it needs little argument to prove its truth.”
That society cannot possibly exist without laws, and
without the distinctions, which laws necessarily im-
ply, of “ governors and governed,” is an axiom equally
incontestable I These principles admitted, (which
folly, nor prejudice can be so blind to deny,) it fol-
lows as a natural consequence, “ that in all regular
societies, some must he invested with power, and au-
thority, while the greater number must be subser-
vient to laws, and to governors, appointed for the
general good! Th e few must govern, the many must
obey! From nature , not less than from political


institutions, this order of things is derived: for it flows
from that first principle of parental authority, which
the laws of nature establish ; —which is indispen-
sible to the well government of a private family, and
which is thence extended to the regulation of that
larger family, “a civilized community!” For, the
latter can no more exist without laws, and some supe-
rior power to enforce their observance, than a family
can be well regulated without an head ; or, a ship be
correctly steered without pilot or rudder !
What should we say of the son, who, in private life,
spurns the reasonable commands of his parent, defies
his just authority, disturbs the peace, and good order
of his family, and introduces confusion and misery,
into scenes of former harmony, and happiness? If
any of you, my present hearers, are parents; —if any
among you have witnessed, or enjoyed the comforts,
the blessings, the delightful sensibilities of domestic
intercourse, and tranquillity, and content, —to you 1
appeal, to fix an adequate punishment for the undu-
tiful, and unnatural disturber of such blissful scenes !
That they ever should be disturbed by disorderly, and
intemperate passions, is indeed a deplorable evil j
but yet its effects are limited to a sphere, extremely
circumscribed, comparatively with the larger circle


of our social connexions! If then rigorous punish-
ment be due (as it most assuredly is) to him , whose
headstrong folly, or phrenzied passion, blasts the
valuable, yet solitary happiness of a single family ;
who can justly appreciate the guilt, or adequately pro-
portion the severity, due to that monster , who madly
assails the peace, and social comfort of a whole com-
munity ; —who endeavours to introduce disorder,
anarchy, rapine, and murder among scenes, where
good government, peace, content, religion, and virtue
have long taken up their abode? I dare aver, “ that
“ in the sight of the great Arbiter of human events,
“ and weighed in the unerring balance of the sanc-
“ tuary,”—the murderer, who sacrifices the life of an
individual to avarice, or revenge, is really less guilty
than the sower of sedition, the mover of rebellion,”
through whose malignant influence, <c thousands , nay
“ ten thousands of weak, deluded victims, may pos-
“ sibly fall sacrifices, to the phrenzied excesses of
“ brutal turbulence, or wild ambition !”
Iflknowat all the genuine character of “ British
“ Seamen ,” (a character I have long learned to esteem,
and regard,) if I can at all enter into the principles,
and generous feelings, they are known to possess; I
should judge, “ that many among my present hearers


** will silently question, with honest indignation,
“ Are there such monsters, as you describe, really in
“existence? can there indeed be who, to gra-
“ tify private pique, or avarice, or ambition, or their
“ own turbulent, and unruly passions, will not hesi-
“ tate to hazard the happiness, the lives of thousands
“ of their fellows; and to introduce into scenes of
“ peace, and tranquil felicity, the horrors you repre-
“ sent?”
The heart of every honest man, unvitiated by the
pernicious principles of the day, uncorrupted by the
dreadful practice of a neighbouring hostile country,
may well question with surprise, and abhorrence, the
existence of such monsters! Yet, my brethren ! such
monsters have existed, and do exist; and notwith-
standing the wickedness of their principles, and the
frequent punishment of their criminal practice, it is
to be feared, human folly and perversity will perpe-
tuate their sect, though I trust, in daily decreasing
numbers: and never, —no, never, I confidently
hope, will they find adherents, among those brave,
and valuable men, —their country’s best unconquer-
ed defenders, —of whom you, my friends! form no
inconsiderable part! No ! your generous feelings, and
enthusiastic love of your country, will ever indig-


nantly scorn to listen to (much less to abet) any of the
levelling opinions of your often vanquished z nemies;—
opinions, false as they are destructive , which would
tend to weaken in you, your sense of your duty to
God, —your obedience to the laws of your country,
to our excellent Sovereign, and to your officers, and
superiors, constituted by his authority ! You will ever
honourably support the just reputation of British
Seamen , equally for good order, and discipline, as for
undaunted courage; and will render your ship , not less
the credit, example, and pride of our navy, than the
country, whose honoured name she bears, and from
which you proudly claim your birth, —is the glory,
the envy, and the ornament of the civilized world !
From all the inhabitants of the British dominions,
you , seamen 1 are selected, as their best security,—as
the advanced guard against a powerful, a vigilant, and
a treacherous enemy ! And, do you fully appreciate
the immense importance of the trust, your country re-
poses in you ? do you duly estimate the superior post
of honour and confidence, with which you are spe-
cially invested among her defenders ?— Ton do , I am
convinced, you do , my brave friends I and never will
the sacred trust, so honourably acquired by you, be
dishonourably betrayed! No! Victory with her


wonted favour, will still hover over the British Stand-
ard ; and your courage and fidelity will at once confirm
the security and glory of your country, and the defeat
and disgrace of her inveterate foes!
Let me propose to you another question Had
any one of you a messmate, a friend, to whom he had
unbosomed his cares, his hopes, and fears, —in whom
he had been accustomed to place unbounded confi-
dence : should that friend abuse his trust, and basely
deceive his credulity ; <c With what eyes would you
“ view such an infamous betrayer?”—Or, “ what
<c punishment would you consider adequate to such
“ ungrateful, such nefarious conduct?” Alas! inca-
pable yourselves of such insidious baseness, I know,
the open, manly, unsuspecting nature of British Sea-
men revolts from the supposition, “ that such villains
“ exist, to disgrace humanity.” But, yes! my bre-
thren, they do, unfortunately, exist, —and, to the
shame and humiliation of our nature, “ monsters of a
“ much deeper criminality J" For, if the deception of
one friend by another be so atrocious, though involv-
ing an evil so very limited, —what must be the heinous-
ness, the foul deformity of their guilt, who study to
betray (though fortunately intercepted by divine
interposition) the prosperity, the safety, the dearest


interests of their native country? the welfare of exist-
ing and of unborn myriads, confided to their care and
protection ?—Such is, decidedly, and beyond dispute,
the crime of every man of your profession, who, by
revolting against the authority of his lawful superiors,
infringes the discipline of the service, hazards the
safety of the country he is delegated to defend, and
strengthens the hands of those inveterate enemies,
whom he is employed to subdue ! That wherever such
practices obtain, nay, wherever such designs are medi-
tated, they are generally defeated by the interposition
of an over-ruling Providence ; and that shame and just
punishment invariably recoil on the heads of the guilty
perpetrators or contrivers, —is a fact,which daily expe-
rience tends to demonstrate. And, as the punishment
of Korah and his rebellious associates has usually at-
tended all succeeding rebels against the laws of God
and their country, the dreadful consequences, which
result from such guilty practices, should effectually
deter every considerate and reflecting man, from abett-
ing or engaging in them.
As the children of Israel were selected by God from
the nations of the earth to be his favoured and peculiar
people, and to execute his judgments on his enemies,
the idolatrous nations around them, so are you, my


friends, from among millions of your fellow Britons,
sent out as the chosen defenders of your country’s
safety, of her Sovereign, Religion, and Laws, against
enemies, equally dangerous from their perfidy, their in-
veteracy, and their numbers! Among countless thou-
sands of her gallant and patriotic sons, you occupy the
foremost and most honourable station! The people
of Israel, though thus highly favoured above other
nations, were most unfortunately seduced, by artful
and wicked leaders, to break out into open rebellion
against their God, and the laws and rulers of their
country ! but, by a just and visible judgment of their
Creator, the earth opened and swallowed up alive the
promoters of this rebellious outrage ! For, “ they, and
“ all that appertained to them, went down alive into
“ the pit, and the earth closed upon them ; and they
“ perished from among the congregation.” —“ And all
“ Israel, that were round about them, fled at the cry
of them ; for they said, Lest the earth swallow us up
4 4 also!”
Thus you learn, “ that even among God’s chosen
c< people, more than three thousand years ago, there
“ existed refractory, mutinous, and rebellious spirits
and thus, you learn too, were their crimes severely pu*
jaished by the just, though terrible judgments of God,
c


Alas ! the lapse of so many centuries, and the num-
berless instances, they have afforded of the exemplary
punishment of such offences, have not yet corrected
the perversity of the human mind, or eradicated the
principles and practices of such unruly spirits! Even
among you, the chosen favourites, the honoured de-
fenders of your King and Country, “ traitors have
“arisen,” who, armed for the defence, have basely
aimed to betray the interests of both , and wantonly to
sacrifice all, that is justly dear to you, as men, and as
Britons. Yes! with shame and horror I repeat, that
Seamen —no! Villains, assuming that honourable cha-
racter, and intruding among that generous, unsuspect-
ing race, —have endeavoured to subvert their allegi-
ance from their lawful superiors, and to disseminate
discontent, confusion, mutiny, and anarchy, in place of
the good order, discipline, and subordination, which
characterize the British Fleet!—Unhappy degraded
men! though I must condemn, abhor, and execrate
your detestable principles, and intended treason, I
may be allowed to commiserate , while I acknowledge the
justice of —your approaching fate. Yes! as man, I
must pity, —as a Christian, I must pray, “ that your-
“ selves may sincerely repent, and your God merci-
“ fully forgive, these attempted crimes, for which the


“ violated laws of your country justly demand the
“ sacrifice of your existence !”
To-morrow, you, my friends, must witness the
awful, the melancholy spectacle of the death of two of
your fellow beings, for offences, from which may the
goodness of God, and your own right dispositions,
ever preserve you ! These wretched men, with others
equally misled and abandoned, have assumed the ho-
nourable badge of your profession, for the wicked, the
disloyal purpose of “ seducing British Seamen” from
their duty, and of subverting the discipline of the
naval service , on which the security, the very exist-
ence of your native country, so essentially depends !
Of this they have been fully convicted by a court-
martial, after a fair, open, and impartial trial, on the
clearest and most incontrovertible testimony ! While
you hear their crime—when, with the next rising
sun, you witness the catastrophe, that crime has brought
after it, —Oh I let the contemplation of their offence
and fate, serve to confirm, (if they need confirmation,)
your zeal for your country’s service, loyalty to your
King, and submission to your officers, who are placed
in authority under him! And, as the children of
Israel, on viewing the terrible fate of Korah and hig
C 2


rebellious followers, were terrified, and fled at the cry
of them, saying, 44 Lest the earth swallow us up also
so Aoyou, my brethren! seriously considering the just,
but affecting punishment of these men, and the causes
which have led to it, indulge a salutary terror at their
fate, and carefully avoid every temptation, and even
the remotest tendency, to an imitation of their crime !
Especially, my brethren ! let me repeat to you my
earnest admonition, and solemn warning, against two
grand offences most prevalent among seamen, and
which, though slow, are gradual provocatives to dis-
orderly and rebellious conduct.
And first, I must (as I have often too ineffectually
done) reprobate your general use of profane oaths, and
blasphemous execrations I For, if you thus accustom
yourselves to treat the Great God , and his holy name,
with disrespect or contempt, how can you be expected
to behave with more reverence towards those, who are
men only, like yourselves,—though invested by God’s
laws, and the laws of your country, with authority
over you ? And, how can you, who are invested with
this authority, exact submission, and respect for your-
selves, while you omit to enforce them to the Almighty
and his laws ? Be assured, I pray you, “ that if moral


<f and religious observances be neglected in any so-
“ ciety, social laws and political regulations can never
“ long retain their influence in it I”
Another disgraceful habit (and to which I lament
to see you, my friends, at least many among you, so
devotedly attached, notwithstanding the frequent ex-
amples of punishment for its commission) is the un-
manly, the degrading vice of drunkenness . To sum up
in a few words the dreadful effects produced by this
scandalous vice, (whose infuriate daemon is your most
dangerous enemy, your most subtle seducer,) “ it un-
“ dermines the constitution, impairs the understand-
“ ing, perverts the reason, reduces the rational man,
“ the noblest of the Creator’s works, below the level
“ of the brute creation ; defaces God’s image in him;
“ and prepares the disordered mind for the worst of
“ crimes,—for the admission of ‘ seven devils,’ more
“ wicked than itself!” Perhaps I should not err very
widely, were I to Infer, “ that intemperance in to-
“ morrow’s destined victims may have, in some de-
“ gree, instigated to the more atrocious offence, for
“ which they are doomed to suffer.” Avoid then, I
conjure you, seamen I the indulgence of these odious
habits or blasphemy and drunkenness; which may, and
top frequently do lead to consequences, so dreadfully


fatal! As the brave defenders of your native land against
a crafty and insidious foe, the precept of the Apostle,
“be sober , he vigilant” is peculiarly appropriate to
your situation, and cannot too frequently be impressed
on your minds! In short, my brethren ! if my feeble
exhortations avail not to persuade, and to confirm you
in practices of decency and sobriety,—in perfect obe-
dience to the laws of your country, loyalty to your
King ; —and dutiful subordination to your Superiors;
—prepare to-morrow to receive a silent, but striking
illustration of the fatal consequences of a contrary
conduct! And, while you view, with mingled terror
and pity, the awful fate of these unhappy men, let
their punishment be a salutary beacon, to warn you
from the commission of similar offences ; and an in-
citement to perseverance in your present respectful
and loyal behaviour, and in a contented and faithful
discharge of the duties of that station in society, in
which Divine Providence has been pleased to place
you ! For, by these means alone, be assured, can you
maintain the honourable character of “ British Seamen”
—preserve internal peace, and self-approbation,—
or merit either the favour of your country in this
life, or the rewards of your God, in that future and
better existence, which he has destined to succeed it {


To his divine guidance and protection I fervently
commend you all; —to whom, with the Son and Holy
Spirit, be ascribed (as is most justly due) all honour,
power, might, majesty, and dominion, now and for
evermore. Amen.
FINIS.
Printed by W. Bulmer and Co.
Cleveland-row, St. James’s.


