

[?]


A SERMON
PREACHED
IN THE
ROMAN CATHOLIC CHAPEL,
AT
STONYHURST,
ON SUNDAY 14TH OF AUGUST, 1803.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
Preston:
PRINTED BY WILLIAM ADDISON, CHURCH-STREET.


W > ’~> *f V
- * ^> /~
s Cf .^,'.<~
/ y - ' i 2./z r '£*7 / 7'TtlJL' » C /?. /C "' ’
y C<f~rt EC a {f't'j • &*'**%*? y / ——j, /
VO
/
y - •-—r-"


AUDITURI ESTIS PRÆEIA ET OPINIONES PRÆLIORUM. VIDETE NE
TURBEMINI. Mat. 24. 6.
Ye shall hear of Wars and Rumours of Wars. See that Ye he not troubled.
MY BRETHREN,
v
J- OU were told last Sunday, that the just man
lives by faith : that is, in all his actions he is guided by supernatural motives,
he always keeps God in view, he considers every thing, that befalls him, as
happening by God’s pleasure or permission, he humbly submits to the divine
will in confidence, that all the trials of this life are designed to forward him
to the attainment of that blessed eternity, which is the object of his
constant hope. “Omnia cooper antur” Rom. 8. 28. The just as well as
sinners are engaged in the concerns of human life, they equally experience
disappointments, and equally bear the pressure of public and private calamities.
Nay they are frequently indulged with a more ample share of sufferings; but
then they possess the art of improving their misfortunes to the sanctification
of their souls, and the increase of their future crown ; while wilful sinners on the
contrary sustain their unavoidable share of human calamities without merit,
because, not living by faith, they never consider these things as dispensations
of the hand of God.
I know that faith alone in the future rewards and punishments de-
nounced by religion ought to keep us all within the bounds of duty, and re-
call us to them, whenever we have had the misfortune to transgress: but still
it


it is clear in the principles of faith, that Almighty God in his justice tempered
with mercy, makes use of temporal chastisements to obtain this same end ; and
this order of Providence was perhaps never more manifest than in our own
evil days. If God does not design our conversion and amendment by the
calamities, which he inflicts ; alas, why does he increase and multiply them
upon this degenerate age ? An age of bitterness and grief, an age of disorder,
confusion and terror, no doubt because it is an age of avarice and hard-heart-
edness and profanation, and drunkenness and lust, and absolute forgetfulness
of Almighty God. Ido not mean to waste words in reckoning up at length
the distresses of the late years. Other nations, I allow it, have smarted under
them more sorely than our own ; but still each one of you may recollect the
uneasinesses, which we endured during the late bitter war, aggravated by
continual dread of conspiracies and seditions at home, by actual rebellion in
the neighbouring kingdom, by decay of trade, by the increased price of neces-
saries, by years of scarcity and continual sickness. If these visitations of God
had produced the effect of bringing us back to true repentance, humility and
fear of our Creator; we should not at present rue the still greater evils, which
are gathering around us, which are now in every man’s mouth, and on which
I mean presently to deliver my thoughts.
I wish first to convince you all, that these public distresses are re-
ally direct effects of a chastising, but still merciful Providence; because I
know, that only the few, who study and practise religion, are accustomed
to view them in this light. Others, who seldom reflect on revealed truths,
or who live at their case in the state of sin, of repeated sin, and utter forget-
fulness of God, attribute the public misfortunes to natural causes, to the
plans and passions of men, to their ambition, cruelty and lust of power; as
if the justice of an offended, God had no cause to be angry with us, or could
not use the passions of men as instruments of merited vengeance. They are
-Scourged by God, and they will not acknowledge it; or if they own it, they
will not amend the trespasses, which provoke the scourge; they even increase
them, as if it were their purpose to make the last trial of the forbearance or
of the severity of heaven. Such is the conduct of those, who have no religion,
or, what is nearly the same thing, who live without practising the duties of
religion.


religion. But we, My Brethren, know from undoubted authority of holy
scripture, (and S. Paul assures us, that all the inspired books are written for
our instruction), we know that temporal calamities arc inflicted by the sove-
reign ruler for the sins of men; and Ido not find that the ancient people of
God, even in their worst times, ever presumed to deny this truth, and thus,
in their calamities, to elude the reprehensions of their prophets. They might,
with as much reason as modern Christians, have ascribed public and private
disasters to necessary causes, to the weather, to rainy seasons, or else to blind
chance or accident; they might have imputed the hardships of slavery, the
defeats of their armies, the plundering of their cities and country, the
chains which they wore, to the cruelty of Pharaoh, to the jealousy of the
Philistines, to the pride of Holofernes, to the ferocity of Nebuchadnezzar,
to the avarice and impiety of Antiochus. But in fact, the Jews, the stiff-
necked Jews never used this language ; never was the sword of pestilence,
famine or war unsheathed against them, but they immediately called it the
sword of God, whose weighty hand they recognised in the inclemency of the
heavens, in the fierceness of their enemies, and in their own banishments from
their native soil.
And surely no rational man, who believes a supreme ruler, can
imagine, that in creating second causes, he would so disjoin them from his
own dominion, as not to be able to use them for the great purposes of mercy
and ofjustice. If the order of nature and the passions of men are not to be em-
ployed for the correction of the guilty ; what can be the meaning of the gos-
pel in representing the servants of the great Master, offering themselves to
pluck up all the weeds from his field and to cast them into the fire ? <c Vis imus
et colligimus ea ?” Mat. 13. 28. What can be the meaning of the sacred text,
which affirms, that the whole globe and every creature in it is ready to arm itself
and to fight in the cause of God against the wicked ? “ Pugnahit cum illo orhis
terrarum.” Sap. 5. 21. Surely, My Brethren, these texts import, that Al-
mighty God, without working clear and decided miracles, is well able to re-
ward the virtues and to chastise the crimes of men in this world, only by let-
ting loose upon them the creatures which surround them, and which were
originally made for their benefit and use. He is not an indolent a sense-
less


less God. He is attended by an immense host of creatures, which he has de-
clared that he will arm for the punishment of his enemies, “ armabil creaturam
adultionem inimicorum ; ibid. 18. that is, he rules and guides them all, whether
they be free or necessary agents, with ineffable wisdom and unerring cer-
tainty; and they, without deviating from their regular and natural course,
become infallible executioners of his vengeance.
You often hear this earth termed a region of sorrows, a vale of tears. It
is so, I grant it, principally because it is, in our regard, a seat of banishment
from our heavenly country ; and again, because it is subject to the influence
of human passions, and of course misfortunes cannot be rare. But I must
not grant, that these misfortunes are to be estimated and measured only by
the common course of nature, and not at all by the quality and multitude of
our jins. Though the earth.be a vale of tears, yet our heavenly Father, who
sees his children wandering in this vale, most assuredly means to afford them
such temporal enjoyments, as are requisite to support and comfort them in
their banishment: and therefore when he speaks of the scat of our exile, he
gives us to understand, that he alone is absolute master and lord of air and
earth, and seas and seasons, and crops and plenty and commerce ; that he is
the great disposer of peace and of war, and that he directs all these things to
our comfort or our punishment, with a just regard to our virtues and our
crimes. The study of the sacred books. My Brethren, would convince you,
that Almighty God desires to give you the good things, even of this world,
more earnestly, than you yourselves wish to receive them. If you will hear
my voice, he says, you shall eat the good things of the earth ; and if you will
not, then the sword shall devour you. (C Si audieritis me , bona terrce come-
detis; quod si nolueritis,..gladius devorabit vos .” Isaiah 1. v. IQ, 20. This
text alone demonstrates my assertion independently of many other similar as-
surances, which I might collect from the holy books; and they would all prove,
that though from Adam downwards the earth has always been a region of sor-
rows, yet the obedient sons of God in all ages, have seen their vale of tears
flowing with streams of milk and honey; and no doubt we should now enjoy
the same blessings of plenty and peace, if we were only as obedient to the laws
of Jesus Christ, as the Israelites were to the law of Moses, when they were
introduced into the land of promise. But


But God has pronounced, that if we provoke him to wrath, the
sword shall devour us. My Brethren, all histories, divine and human, con-
cur to attest, that the merciless sword, war, exterminating war, has in all
times been the instrument, with which divine vengeance, wound up to its
highest pitch, has chastised prevaricating nations. It was thus that God des-
tioyed the sinful nations of Canaan ; thus he preserved a remnant of them, to
punish the frequent apostacies of the Jews their first conquerors; thus he
wasted Judea by the sword of Nebuchadnezzar, thus he chastised it by the
armies of Antiochus and the Syrian Kings, and finally overwhelmed it with
utter .ruin by the legions of Imperial Rome, when the series of its crimes was
consummated by the rejection and condemnation of Jesus Christ. What
might I not say of the destruction of the mighty empire of Persia, of the fall
Oi all-conquering Rome itself, her eastern and western empires sinking be-
neath the sword of unrelenting barbarians—why need Igo back so far into
past ages, while Euiope through all its provinces, is yet smoaking from the
flames of the most cruel war, kindled by the most insolent and unsparing
miscreants, whom God in his anger has ever yet armed with his vengeance
igainst sinful kingdoms? If you can look back to the events of the last ten
years, and then calmly attribute them to the unavoidable course of nature or
of politics, without any special intervention of an angry providence; you may
cease at once to pray with the church, £f from plague, famine and war,
O Lord deliver us ;” you may believe that God expects no repentance fiom
you, and you may secretly resolve to persevere in your sins. I know that
Pharaoh, when he was scourged by God, did take this desperate resolution ;
but still he had the conscience to acknowledge, that God was the author of
his punishment, t£ Digitus Dei est hie;” Exodus 8. v. 10. the finger of God,
he said, is here. We cannot deny that we have sinned; the miseries, that
threaten us, are directly before our eyes; why should we deny that they are a
threatened punishment ? Why should we even flatter ourselves that it is
threatened for the sins of others, and not for our own ? Who, my Brother,
appoints you to be the discerner of guilt ? Every other man might reason in
the same manner; and if they all reasoned right, it would follow, that God is
punishing mankind, and yet that no man deserves it. The sins of a single
man have often been visited upon a whole family, even a whole nation. Read
the


the histories of Saul and David, who were monarchs, read those of Sichem
and Achan, who were private men. (see 1. Kings , 1. Chron . 21. Gen. 34,
Jos. 7.) Let us not harbour such proud thoughts, while the scourge is lifted
against us ; let us acknowledge that it is in the hand of our great God; and
now let us consider what conduct it becomes us to pursue.
If you agree with me, that temporal calamities .are inflictions of di-
vine justice for the sins of mankind ; you cannot cast your eyes towards the
opposite coast of France, without clearly discerning the scourge, which God
brandishes against this sinful country. It were idle to seek the cause of it in
the malice of the enemy, or in the supposed mistakes of our politicians : you
have agreed to look for it in your own sins and in those of the nation ; and
what punishment does the great avenger of sin at present hold forth ? Look to
the French coast. You there behold collected, by his high permission, an
immense host of blood-thirsty foes, already gorged with the spoils, glutted
with the blood of all surrounding nations, and now screaming vengeance
against ours, because it is the only one, that has dared to withstand their
haughty pretensions to enslave mankind, the only one that has checked*thcir
mad career of sacrilege, rapine and outrage. For more than ten years we
have seen them headed by a rapid succession of daring ruffians, who in their
turns have waded to sovereign pov/cr through the blood of all, who stood be-
tween them and absolute dominion. Almighty God, who permits them to
fatten like victims for the sacrifice, has employed them, in the mean time, to
chastise the sins of other countries; they have hushed the continent into si-
lence, and they now denounce against us a war, which is not to be softened
by any of those lenient measures of compassion, with which humanity has
always tempered the severity of conquest. All is doomed to plunder, fire,
slaughter, or slavery; universal desolation, they say, shall overspread this
now flourishing island. To be defeated by them would be misery beyond
compare; to defeat them will be the pinnacle of glory. I exaggerate no-
thing when I say that their fixed design is, to destroy or carry away every
thing that is precious, ornamental, or useful in this land ; to strip it, if pos-
sible, of its last guinea, to break up all paper credit, to burn or to transport
to France all our shipping and naval stores, all arms, all raw materials; to
ruin


ruin every kind of national commerce, to cut up and burn all looms, all ma-
nufactures, especially in this industrious and thriving County; to throw down
the dwelling houses of landlords, to seize the stock and cattle and waste the
farms of their tenants; to burn down our cities and towns, to transport their
inhabitants, as slaves, into foreign climes; to abuse by the worst of outrages,
their harmless sisters and daughters;—alas, they have done these things—
in a word, they mean to fill the nation with blood, and to leave the few sur-
vivors of the sword to feed, if they like it, on the carcases of the slain.
Such arc the foes, whom we may expect to encounter; and their
threats and their strength might seem sufficient to strike every human heart
with fear. Fear, did I say, fear ?—My Brethren, fear God, but know no
other fear. If the contest were to be decided merely by the arm of flesh, lam
sure you would not doubt of the success; you know that our people are able
to strike harder blows, than they. But if to such a host of foes you add God
himself for your enemy ; if you delay to appease his anger by repentance and
penance for those sins, which have provoked him to shew you the scourge;
from that instant you are feeble and unnerved, you are in the situation de-
scribed by Moses, who foretold to the Israelites on the part of God, that if they
did prevaricate from his law, a single enemy would pursue a thousand, and
two enemies would suffice to put ten thousand of them to flight. (See Deut.
32.) But as much as lam convinced on religious principles, that the present
threatening evils are held forth by God as a terror to sinners ; so much on the
other hand I am sure that sincere repentance will restore us to his friendship,
and will enable you to display British valour to the confusion of your enemies
and the delivery of mankind. Would to God, the whole British nation were
convinced of this truth ! But as far as my feeble voice can reach, I wish it
to be understood, that our God is always “ prceslahilis super malitia ,” that is,
willing to be appeased by the repentance of the most malicious sinners; that
when he wields the scourge, he his ever ready to withdraw it, if repentance
ensues; —repentance saved Ninive from destruction which had been uncon-
ditionally denounced ; ten penitents, if they could have been found in Sodom,
would have protected five cities from the flames of heaven; the Caldeans
were not permitted to ravage Jerusalem, until Jeremy had sought in vain for
a


a single virtuous man within its devoted walls, whose merit would have moved
God to compassion for the whole city. (See Jon. 3. Gen. is. Jer. 5. l.)
What an encouragement is this, my brethren, to return in the spirit of hu-
mility and repentance to our best friend, fo our father, who is in heaven !
As a single sinner has sometimes entailed punishment upon a multitude, so a
single saint more frequently has averted the most grievous curses from a nation.
The solitary virtue of Judith thus saved Bethulia, the sequestered sanctity of
Esther delivered a whole people from slaughter, the royal piety of Ezechias
drew down the guardian spirit, who in one night destroyed eighty thousand
feiocious conquerors, who frantic, like the modern French, with unmerited
success, were whetting their swords for the morrow against Jerusalem.
Thespiiitot God is always one and the same. The saints, who
have been most replenished with it in the ancient and the new covenant, have
never known any other secure resource in public danger, than humiliation,
contrition of heart, penance and humble supplication to Heaven ; and these
previous means, pointed out by God himself, have never failed of crowning
consequent exertions with success. They have most commonly averted the
dreaded evils from the whole community, to which those saints belonged ; or
at least they wrought the delivery, the comfort, the sanctification, the glory
and tae salvation of those, who employed them. The greatest saints of the
old lav\, Daniel, Tobias, Jeiemy, Ezechiel, &c. were formed to prophecy and
miracles in the midst of the greatest national distresses; and their illustrious
the great father of the Maccabees and his heroic son Judas, who
lived in times very similar to our own, have given us lessons of piety,
courage and perseverance, which well deserve our attention, because they
are written for our instruction, and are confirmed by the saint of saints, who
foretold the events of our days, and charged us not to be dismayed. “Ne
turheminir Fear and dismay, in the sentiment of saints, belong only to
sinners. The venerable father of the IVlaccabees saw his country ravaged
and its glorious temple profaned by a cruel and impious invader; he began
his generous warfare by clothing himself and his sons with sackcloth in humble
penance, and then with unvaried confidence he reminded them, that these
were indeed days, in which pride and chastisement had gotten power, but
that


that they, who trust in God, cannot fail in strength. He charged them to
recollect the deliverance of their ancestors from similar perils, and then to
stand forth, prodigal of their lives, against the impious foe, “ whose glory,
“ he said, shall terminate in vermin and ordure; he is exalted to-day, to-
ff morrow he shall not be found ; because, (mark, well his piophctic words,)
ff because he shall he turned hack into his orvn land, and his thoughts and
“ his plans shall perish. Be ye only men of resolution, gather unto your-
“ selves all who observe God’s law, and avenge the wrongs of your people.
(See 1. Mac. c. 2. throughout.)
I should tire you, my brethren, it I pursued this ample mattci to its full
extent; and enough has been said to authorise the advice, witn which I finish.
When some of our blessed Saviours hearers related to him the slaughter
of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mixed with their sacrifices, (Luke 13.)
and again the death of eighteen men crushed by a falling tower, ibid, our
blessed master gave the same answer to both relations. Think not, he said,
that these men were sinners beyond others; but, except you do penance,
you will all likewise perish. What other advice can be offered from the chair
of truth, at a time, when you are going to hear of w r ars and rumours of wars,
when you yourselves will be perhaps engaged in the front of war, and aie
specially cautioned by Jesus Christ, not to yield to the impression of fear ?
Your sins may not outweigh the sins of others in the balance of divine just it e ;
but unless you do penance, you will all perish together. My Brethren, tue
church opens her sacred treasures during this w r eck, under the protection of
the glorious mother of Jesus Christ; and you know 7 tnat her \cnciablc name
has in all ages been specially invoked in seasons of danger and distress, her ,
patronage has been felt with joy and acknowledged witn gratitude. 1 trust
that you will eagerly avail yourselves of this holy time to regulate your con-
cerns of conscience, by a worthy participation of the tw 7 o holy sacraments,
one of which effaces sin, the other gives improvement and perseverance in
virtue. When these duties are performed, you may stand forth wdth confi-
dence in your country’s cause; and here your civil duties to your king and
his officers will become uncommonly pressing. In other wars, our military
force


force often defeated the enemy, always kept him at a distance; private fami-
lies, like yours, were never exposed to risk. At present the case is altered.
The religion, the fortune, the wives and children* the domestic comforts, the
bread, the life of every individual, from the king to the cottager, is equally
threatened, equally concerned; and of course it becomes the duty, the inter-
est of every one of us without exception, to stand forth in the common cause.
His majesty and his ministers have taken, they are now taking the wisest and
most active measures to frustrate the enemies plans; and in such circumstan-
ces, they would be exceedingly blameable, if they left any thing to the issue
of chance. They know, that if the enemy should elude or escape our fleets,
the activity of the whole nation will be wanted ; and hence, to forward the ser-
vice, two points are particularly recommended to your attention. The first
is, that every man in his own neighbourhood, discourage all complaints, all
murmuring against administration and public measures; and if he should
know any person so wicked, as to be disposed to favour the enemy, that he de-
nounce him to the magistrates. The second is, that every man, whether he
serve in the ranks, or in any other capacity, when summoned in the hour of
alarm, repair immediately to his post and be particularly careful to occasion
no disorder by slackness in duty or disobedience of orders. Innocence of
conscience, unanimity of mind and courage of heart will always command
success. A thousand motives will press this advice to your hearts. I men-
tion one, because it is closely connected with my ministry. If the French
should become masters of this country, you would never more experience the
comfort, which you this day enjoy, of gathering around this venerable altar,
in the spirit of charity, meekness and devotion, to adore the son of God, and
to venerate the great mother of God. That this happiness may be perpetual
is my earnest wish, hi the name &c.
FINIS.,


