

A SERMON
PREACHED BY
THE REV. J. P. SUNDERLAND,
(Agent for the London Missionary Society ,)
AT THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, NEWTOWN,
ON SUNDAY EVENING, SEPTEMBER 3, 1876,
Being a Sketch of the Life , Labours, and Death of
THE REV. WILLIAM MILLS,
OF NEWTOWN,
Who died on the 25 th August, 1876.
The memory of the just is blessed.— Prov. x. 7.
S ydney:
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, 370, GEORGE STREET.




A SERMON
PREACHED BY
THE REV. J. P. SUNDERLAND,
(Agent for the London Missionary Society,)
AT THE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH, NEWTOWN,
ON SUNDAY EVENING, SEPTEMBER 3, 1876,
Being a Sketch of the Life, Labours , and Death of
THE REV. WILLIAM MILLS,
01' NEWTOWN,
Who died on the 25 th August , 187 G.
The memory of the just is blessed.— Prov. x. 7.
iSgtineg:
Joseph Cook & Co., Printers, 370, George Street.




SERMON.
“ Tlie memory of the just is blessed.”— Proverbs x. 7.
Death is constantly at work, making tlie number
of cut friends on earth fewer, and we hope adding to
the number of the redeemed in heaven. It is painful
to us to bear the separation. There is a blank made
that cannot be easily filled up, and this is especially
the case with those who are advanced in the journey
*ofiife. In the time of youth life opens before us
with all its promises of hope and success. We
gradually draw towards those of kindred tastes and
pursuits. We select our companions, and in the
active duties of our callings we help and stimulate
each other. After a period of twenty, thirty, or
forty years has elapsed, wo begin to feel that we are
getting more lonely, and we cling with greater
ardour to those of our beloved friends who are still
spared to us, to cheer us along life’s weary pilgrimage,
I feel as I stand before you to-night to discharge the
duty which has been assigned to me, that I have lost
a dear, beloved friend. The suddenness of his
removal makes us feel as if it could not be true.'
The mind retains the image of the departed so fresh
upon its tablet of memory that it really seems like a
drpam when we speak of the bright, kind, joyous
countenance of our friend as now laid in the cold
regions of the dead, and his spirit for ever with the
Lord.


It is, however, a fact. The Lord called, the Messen-
ger Death came; he struck down our brother, and
in a few days his spirit, free from the body of humili-
ation, passed on to the regions of the blessed. He is
happy. The widow, the children, need comfort and
sympathy. We, his friends, feel the separation, and
it is well for us to seek those consolations, and
learn those lessons which are to be found in the
Word of God, “ The memory of the just is blessed.”
God has given to us the power of reflection, observa-
tion, and self-examination. We have the faculty of
storing up in our minds the names, the virtues, and
the deeds of men. We are linked to our fellows in
life by various connections and associations. The
mind is continually adding to its stores of knowledge
and wisdom. We are to be stimulated by the good,
we are to be warned by the bad. The Scriptures
convey many important lessons through the records
of the lives of men of the past —both good and bad.
The Old Testament is rich in biographical lore. The
names of the patriarchs and the lives of men who
have lived generations ngo are as household words to
us, and by their lives we seek to shew to the men
and women of the present age, how human nature in
all ages partakes of the same general characteristics.
The mind, as a rule, likes to dwell upon what is
pleasing; we do not wish to keep before us dark and
distressing images. Hence, men are always disposed
to speak well of the dead. Whatever failings or de-
fects of character may have existed, the veil is thrown
over them, and the spirit of charity, if it caunot
applaud or approve, is silent; but it is nevertheless


true that it behoves us to form proper estimates of
our friends, and when there are any special excel-
lencies of character,. to set them forth as the best
treasures which can be left behind, for “ the memory
of the just is blessed.” The Bible evidently lays
great stress upon character. Men may strive after
this world’s reputation, honour, or wealth. A man
may make himself notorious whilst he lives. His
name may be in many mouths as rich, proud, learned ;
but he may be selfish, mean, and unsympathetic. He
may make himself a tyrant —those who are under
him may dread and fear him, and when he is dead a
sigh of relief may be heaved, and a silent prayer
escape the heart, “ thank Gfod the world is rid of a
tyrant.” The memory of the wicked shall rot. It is
a verification of the truths of Scriptures that the
memory of bad men is so soon forgotten; but how
different is it with those who have tried to do good,
faithfully striven to discharge their daily duties —
cheerfully served God —felt the preciousness of a
Saviour’s love and example, and have striven hard to
do what was right in Ilis sight. Of such an one the
language of Job may be used —“ When the ear heard
me, then it blessed me, and when the eye saw me it
gave witness to me. Because I delivered the poor
that cried, and the fatherless, and him that had none
to help him. The blessing of him that was ready to
perish came upon me; and I caused the widow’s
heart to sing for joy. I was eyes to the blind, and
feet to the lame. I was a father to the poor, and the
cause which I knew not 1 searched out.” “ The
memory of the just is blessed.” It brings to the


mind sweet consolation, when we dwell upon those
virtues which have adorned the characters of those
we loved. The memory of their faith and hope and
trust in God and the Saviour is better than the
possession of those elements of character which go
to make a rich or a learned man—without piety.
It is proper that I should dwell upon some things
which will shew you that our late departed brother
deserves your remembrance—that he was a man to
be loved, and that he was a just man, having been
justified by his firm, strong faith in his Divine
Master, the Lord Jesus Christ.
Mr. Mills was early brought to Christ. He was,
I believe, a native of Glasgow, and there he served
an apprenticeship to a whitesmith. He became a
member of a Congregational Church, under the care
of the Rev. Greville Ewing. Ilis spirit caught the
flame of missionary enterprise. He devoted himself
to study, and was for a time in the Theological Hall,
conducted by Rev. G. Ewing and Rev. Dr. Wardlaw,
havingbeen accepted by the London Missionary Society,
as a candidate for Missionary work. He also devoted
as much time as possible to medical and surgical
studies, believing these would aid him in his great
desire to save men. He felt that one way by which
he might fiud his way to the heart of a heathen
might be through doing good to his body. He had
an active and enquiring mind. He was fond of
chemistry, and I have heard him speak with great
respect of the eminent men under whom he was
educated in this branch of science.
The time came when he was to go forth to the


South Sea Islands, in company with a band of
faithful Missionaries. He was ordained in Glasgow.
He found a most valuable helper in Miss M‘Clymont,
■of Stranraer, to whom he was married. She was a
woman of great self-possession, well educated, and
■destined to exert a powerful influence over the female
portion of the natives. They sailed from Gravesend
on the 7th November, 1835—nearly 41 years ago.
They had a trying passage in a small vessel to the
Islands. They called at several places on their way
to the Navigator’s, and after about eight months
from the time they left England, they were glad to
leave the ship and take up their abode at Apia—on
Upolu.
For eleven years he and his wife laboured at
Apia. It was the principal harbour in the group.
Ships began to call. The Missionary work com-
menced by Williams and the native teachers pros-
pered. The hands of the Missionary and his wife
were full of work. It was a scene of great activity.
The native population was augmented by the fre-
quent arrivals of foreign ships, and their crews went
freely ashore. Some took up their abode making
Apia their residence. These white settlers were not
always of the best antecedents. It required great
judgment so to act as not to offend, at the same time
it was required that the Missionary should set his face
against all evil. Mr. Mills was able to maintain his
position with remarkable success. The natives got
much attached to him. His kind, patient manner,
his cheerful disposition-his readiness to help all in
need, made him much beloved. He had much


work to do of all kinds. Ilis knowledge of the
mechanical arts enabled him to give useful hints to
the natives, who became expert workmen. Mrs.
Mi lls had great influence at Apia, and she had a
large class of young women, who grew up to be well
educated, and as teachers’ wives and chiefs’ wives,
exerted considerable influence for good. Mr. Mills
had most of his time taken up with his medical
duties and the services on the Lord’s Bay. He
exerted himself, in conjunction with others, to get a
Bethel Church erected for the use of the English
population, and he conducted worship in it once a
day for the spiritual benefit of those who chose to
attend.
I first knew Mr. Mills in 1845. We had the
most brotherly fellowship with each other all the time
I was iu the Navigators’ Islands. He was the friend
of all. His house was freely open to all who came.
It was at times a lively scene. You might have met
there the Captain of a Man-of-war —a traveller,
making the tour of the world—Missionaries from
their different stations—and amidst all this influx, no
persons appeared more delighted than Mr. and Mrs.
Mills, Their friends felt at home. They were left
to enjoy themselves, whilst the Missionary and his
wife were busy in the various departments of labour.
They had their trials and discomforts, but they
were cheerfully borne. I call to mind a scene of
desolation. The island had been visited by a hurri-
cane of great force. Mr. Mills feared for his house,
a large wooden structure. He removed his wife and
family to a small two-roomed stone store, there were


many human beings crammed in a small space, the
wind, the rain, the roaring of the sea were terrific.
Mr. Mills ventured outside, got to the door of his
house, when an awful gust of wind came, and the
whole structure was laid with the ground, and our
brother escaped unhurt. I saw the wreck —a sad
sight. Books, beds, lamps, and all the household
goods in one mass of ruins. Thankful for his
escape, he was up and doing, and without a murmur,
sought to recover what he could from the wreck, and
restore to its former state his house, and provide
shelter for his family.
During the war in Samoa, his medical and surgical
skill was greatly taxed. His powers were over-
wrought, and in the course of time it was evident he
must have a change. In 1816 he and his wife with
their children, and the children of the South Sea
Mission, left Samoa in the John Williams for Eng-
land. Once in four years, in those days, the ship
went home, and all children of suitable ages were
sent in the Missionary ship, under the care of some
brother going home. Mr. and Mrs. Mills had about
twenty-two under their charge, and I have heard him
describe the astonishment of the Directors when he
appeared before them with twenty-two children to
provide for. One gentleman greatly grieved him by
asking, “ who was to be grandfather to all these
children ? ” It was, perhaps, a thoughtless remark,
but it cut our brother to the quick, and he said,
“ Could any one have seen the heartfelt sorrow of
those parents, who had sent their children home for
-education, it would have melted the most stoney heart.”


After a residence of nearly two years in England,
they returned to Samoa in 1818. The work was re-
sumed. The people were delighted to see their
Missionary and his wife back again. He was per-
mitted to labour for about six years, when the
influence of the climate began to affect his health,
and he had most reluctantly to leave the scene of so
much labour and love. He had the confidence and
esteem of his brethren. He had for years rendered
valuable aid to the Mission families in time of
affliction and domestic anxiety. His presence was
hailed by old and young with delight. There was no
gloom in his religion.
He came up to New South Wales with his family,
and no opening presenting itself in the colony for his
ministerial services, he nobly resolved that he would
not be dependent upon the Society, in whose service
he had spent his best years ; but seek to support his
family by commencing business as a chemist and
druggist, for which his long and extensive practice in
the Islands and his previous studies in England
qualified him.
He had the discipline of sorrow to chasten his
spirit. He lost a child, his son James, when in
England. He lost his wife after he had been a short
time a resident here. He lost his beloved son John,
who had gone as a Missionary to Samoa, to take as
it were the place of his father. This death was a
great blow to his fondest hopes which gathered
around the prospects of a promising young man. No
one can tell how deeply he felt the death of his son.
The friends of this Church and congregation have


known his manner of life. His face was a familiar
object in this Church. He delighted in all that he
thought would secure its prosperity. He was always
ready to preach when opportunity presented. His
services at the Refuge and other places will be re-
membered. He was greatly helped in all his benevo-
lent designs by her who became his second wife, and
is now his sorrowing widow.
It was evident for some time past that he needed
rest, but it is much easier to prescribe rest than to
shew and convince how it is to be secured. He was
conscientious in the discharge of his duties. He was
afraid to call in others, lest something should not be
properly done. The incessant wear and tear of life
began to be felt. The bow had been strained too
much—the strings of life gave w r ay —the pitcher was
broken at the well, and suddenly he was seized with
illness. The brain was affected, and with but one or
two shades of consciousness, he was laid on the
dying pillow. Gentle hands and loving hearts
administered to his wants. From Monday to Friday the
tide of life was unconsciously ebbing away, and at last
he calmly fell asleep in Jesus. No last words—no
dreadful struggle with death. If there were no rap-
tures, there were no fears. He w T as ready—his work
was done. He had stood at his post of duty. Had
he sought rest he might have been spared in our
human judgment a little longer; but is it not a thing
to be commended, when a Christian feels it his
duty to work as long as he can. We w r ere all taken
by surprise when the news of his illness reached us.
The week before his death he had called upon me.
No one anticipated so speedy a removal.


The death of the Rev. Dr. Nisbet, a beloved
fellow-labourer in the Mission field, he felt very
much. The last note written to me by my brother
was on this subject. It was as follows: —
“ Dear Bro. Sunderland, —It occurred to me after
leaving you yesterday that it would be a pity to lot
the occurrence of dear JSiisbet’s death pass without
some brief notice of his useful Missionai’y career.
His early connection with the Samoan Mission —his
efforts, quiet as they were, to extend the Gospel to
other groups —his assistance in the translation of the
Samoan Bible, and especially his connection with the
training of native pastors might well be made
interesting to those at home, and also to his Mis-
sionary friends in the colonies,” and he concludes by
urging me to write the notice.
Mr. Mills was a man who kept himself abreast of
the age in regard to his knowledge of the progress of
science and literature. He was a keen observer of
natural phenomena. He took a deep interest in the
material laws of the universe. Astronomy was a
science in which he was interested, and some of his
contributions to the papers on Earthquakes shewed
that with the limited time at his command, he had a
mind which took a delight in the grand laws which
regulate this lower world.
But it is as a Christian —as a husband —as a
father —as a friend —we say his memory is very
precious and blessed.- We do not unveil the
sacred domain of home further than to say—
as a husband he was kind, loving, thoughtful,


and very tender hearted; as a father , he was
devoted to the best interests of his children,
and delighted in all that tended to their wel-
fare ; as a friend, he was constant, true, and con-
fiding. Is not such a memory blessed. Is it not a
source of untold consolation to the survivors to have
such a memory to cherish. Is it not well that, in a
world of imperfection and sin, there are examples, if
not perfect, yet of such a character as to shew the
Divine power of the Holy Spirit to sanctify to His
service. Better is such a memory than all the gold
and worldly glory of the ungodly. He has left that
which time will not destroy, but it will shine brighter
and brighter unto the perfect day.
His smiling face we shall see no more. His warm
welcome will not on earth greet our ear, but let us
be amongst those who follow Christ, and then we
shall all meet together in the regions of eternal life
and love.
My friendship with Mr. Mills extended over a
period of thirty-one years, and I say in all sincerity
I have never met a man of a more loving spirit—so
unselfish —so anxious to help and to please. In
giving this testimony I would magnify the grace of
God in him. The beautiful spirit of the Gospel had
so far gained a hold of his nature that it shone forth
in deeds of love, faith, and hope.
What are the lessons which are taught us by this
unexpected death ? “Be ye also ready, for in such
an hour as ye think not the Son of Man cometh.”
Oh! do not put off the momentous affairs of the soul
to a more convenient season. Now let your hope


and confidence rest in Christ, and it wiJl then be said
of you, “The memory of the just is blessed.”
Rest from thy labours, rest,
Soul of the just set free!
Blest be thy memory, and blest
Thy bright example be.
Row, toil and conflict o’er,
Go, take with saints thy place ;
But go as each has gone before,
A sinner saved by grace.






AM I PREPARED FOR
IT?
POST persons hope they shall go to heaven when they die. Yet
we find only here and there one who is earnestly asking the
question at the head of this leaflet “ Am 1 prepared for
it ?” Strange inconsistency this: Who would think or expect to occupy
some high post or position under Her Majesty, unless he had some fit-
ness or qualification for the same ? Plow ill at ease a person at Court
would be unless acquainted with Court etiquette. If therefore my reader
is one who hopes to go to heaven when he dies, let him ask himself
the solemn question, “ Am I prepared for it ?” It is certain that none
will ever enter there unless previously prepared by the power of the
Holy Spirit. Therefore Jesus said to Nicodemus, “Except a man be
born again he cannot see the kingdom of God”—either in its spiritual
meaning now, or in eternal glory hereafter. Heaven is a prepared
place, for a prepared people. Hence Paul said, “ Giving thanks unto
the Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance
of the saints in light” (Col. i. 12). While Jesus again said, “ It is
written in the prophets, and they shall be all taught of God” (John
vi. 45, and Isaiah, liv, 13.) : That is, all God’s children are taught by
God himself, and so fitted and qualified for the society of heaven, as to
feel perfectly at home, and happy, when they arrive there, having been
made partakers of the Divine nature, through the word of God being
blessed to their souls (2 Peter, i. 3, 4). Pause, my dear Reader, and
ask “ Has this change taken place in me ?” Do I love God, and his
word now ? Do I love the people of God, now ? Are they as the excel-
lent of the earth to me now ? If not, how can you hope to go to heaven?
or how could you be happy if you were to go there ? If you have no
delight in these things now, how could you delight in them in glory ?
Impossible. It is only those who can from their heart say, “ Gather
not my soul with sinners,” that will ever go to heaven. “ Be not
deceived, God is not mocked : for whatsoever a man soweth that shall
he reap. For he that soweth to his flesh, shall of the flesh reap corrup-
tion, but he that soweth to the Spirit, shall of the Spirit reap life ever-
lasting.”
No. 6.
To be obtained of the Free Grace Tract Society, Chichester or of
F. L. Marshall, Jun., 16, Elm Road, Camden New Town London
N.W. Price 4d. per ioo. Post free ’ *


