

Second Edition] [Price Threepence
the
CHPQUY LECTURES
AS DELIVERED
IN THE PROTESTANT HALL,
CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY,
THE KEV. CHARLES CHINIQUY, (> X-I’RIEST.)
(T WEN TIET.H THO USAND.)
£gimc]j:
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY LEE & ROSS,
EXCELSIOR PRINTING WORKS, 49 MARKET STREET,
'bbtwbbn ouokoh and pitt mtkkmts.)




CRYSTAL PALACE TAILORING ESTABLISHMENT
58 MARKET STREET.
Has much pleasure in inviting his Customers and all Friends in general to
his immense
Stock of Choice Woollens
GERMAN, FRENCH, CANADIAN,
WEST OF ENGLAND, SCOTCH, GEELONG,
SYDNEY and PARRAMATTA TWEEDS,
And from all the leading manufacturers of the world.
M.G. has provided all these Goods for the season for Gentlemen’s Suits.
Any gentleman favouring him with their order will meet with
every satisfaction. Any garments disapproved of
Customers need not take.
All Garments Warranted Well Shrunk.
PRtGiS STPJCTUY lyiOiiPATi.
NOTICE!
M.G. wishes to intimate to his Friends that he wishes to clear out his
£3OOO Ready-made Clothing with Gieat Reduction of 30 per cent.
All Garments Marked in Plain Figures—Men’s, Youths’, Boys’
and Children’s Clothing, Hats, Hosiery, &c.
MOURNINC.SUITS CAN BE MADE IN SIX HOURS NOTICE IF REQUIRED


In 1876 alone
The Singer Company sold
262,316 machines
Exceeding its old rival by
153,319 machines
And in twenty-seven years they sold the immense
Total of 2,000,000 machines
The Singer Co. returns for 1877 amount to
282.812 machines
Being an increase for the year of
20,496 machines
e. ixacs T
GENERAL ERAEER,
149 OXFORD STREET, SYDNEY,
(OPPOSITE palmer street.)
BEAUMONT & SONS,;
f mnto[s, |lapitapi% gtomttors,
AND CONTRACTORS,
51 MARKET STREET,
SYDNEY
SING-ER’S
NEW IMPROVED TRIPLE-ACTION BALANCE WHEEL.
LATEST IMPROVED ATTACHMENT.
Self-adjusting, and, for the future'SO EXTRA CHARGE will he made for this most
valuable improvement.
THE CASH PRICE OF THE TRIPLE-ACTION WILL BE
£7 IQs,
Knowing that the Triple Action Wheel possesses all the merits we claim for it, we confidently
recommend it to intending purchasers. A little experience will satisfy them how amply they are
compensated by the wear to the machine, and of labour to the machinist.
Beware of Imitations of the Singer’s Sewing Machines.
THE SINGER MANUFACTURING COMPANY’S NEW FAMILY SEWING MACHINE
its* THE BEST IN THE WORLD
While their principal rival significantly refuses to supply any returns.
REDUCED PRICE, £7 10s.
TIME PAYMENT DEPARTMENT.-The old original and
only “Genuine” System of Time Payments offered to meet the terms
and demands of the Public, at a deposit of 10s, and 2s. 6d. per
week. Storekeepers and Trade liberally dealt with. Beware of Base
Counterfeits and Imitations. Price Lists and all information on appli-
cation.
NOTE THE ADDRESS,
G, J. WELLS, late Stanford S Co., Sols Authorized Agency for I S. Wales,
No. 1 HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY.


JAMES STEDMAIM,
ytfmQTL'BSHLJLm. ykIANUFACTURING j3ONPBCTIONBR|
436 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
(Two Doors from the Royal Hotel.)
Counti']' and Shipping Orders promptly nflcndn
BEAUMONT & SONS,
Painty faprltmtpiH, gMrptors,
AND CONTRACTORS,
51 MARKET STREET,
SYDNEY,
D. D. ROSS
(Of the Late firm of Davies <£• Ross,)
77 LIVERPOOL STREET, SYDNEY.
(THREE DOORS WEST OF GEORGE-ST.)
Moimments, Headstones, Kerbing, Iron Railings, Steps, Sills, Hearthstones, &c.
always on hand.
COUNTRY ORDERS PUNCTUALLY ATTENDED TO.
A. IXI. MOMSEN,
MERCHANT TAILOR. OUTFITTER.
AND GENTLEMEN’S MERCER,
576 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
(opposite cathedral.)
w a 1111,
MANUFACTURING JEWELLER, WATCH & CLOCK MAKER
574 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
(Opposite the Cathedral.)
Orangemen’s, Scotchmen’s, and Medals of every description. Masonic Jewels and Presentation Trowels
Designed and Manufactured on the shortest notice. Diamond Setter.


THE AUSTRALIAN RELISH
Possessing the most Delicious Flavour for Fish, Game,
Wild Fowls, Curries, Gravies, Cutlets, Steaks,
Chops, and Roast Meats.
Patronized by His Excellency the Governor
and Lady Robinson.
price: o mm
The following extracts have been selected from letters received to this date, and the
manufacturer respectfully solicits the patronage of the Public of the Australasian.
Colonies :
From His Excellency the Governor and Lady Robinson.
“I am directed by his Excellency the Governor and Lady Robinson, to return
you many thanks for your kind present of six bottles of the Australian Relish, and I
am further directed to say that they consider it most excellent. They intend to use
it regularly at Government House, and to recommend it to others.”
From T. S. Mort, Esq.
“I like your Australian Relish much, for whilst it is a gentle spur to the
appetite, it does not appear to have anything in it likely to do harm to the stomach.”
From a -well-known Clergyman in Sydney.
“ I think I am well acquainted with all the sauces, but your Australian Relish
is, in my judgment, the very best yet produced, and is quite distinctive in character.”
Sold retail by all grocers and storekeepers throughout the Australasian Colonies, and
wholesale by all wholesale houses ami the manufacturer,
WASHINGTON H. SOUL, 221 Pitt-st., Sydney.
PATENT MEDICINE AND PERFUMERY DEPOT.
EVERY ARTICLE GUARANTEED GENUINE.
Pills, Ointments, Embrocations, Lotions, Cod Liver Oils,
Food for Infants ; Plasters, &c., for the Cure of all Diseases of
the Liver, Lungs, Stomach, Bowels, Blood, Eyes, &c., includ-
ing Colds, Burns, Rheumatics, Lumbago, Swellings, &c.
SEITD ZFOZR. IsT DEW PRICE LIST
Goods forwarded ito any part of this or the neighbouring 1 Colonies at
LONDON and NEW YORE PRICES.
W&SHIIINI©TQ)!St H. §OUL„ ggt Pitt-st.., Sydney.
ALL USE IT. IT IS AT EVERY PIC-NIC. IT IS IN EVERY KITCHEN.
It gives the finish to every dish, for gravies, soups, game, fish, or cold meats. It
assists digestion, and increases the appetite. It has a place at Government House,
and is seen at every respectable artizan’s. The Protectionists use it because it is
colonial ; the Freetraders because it is cheap. It is the especial favourite with all
classes, because, as one of the Sydney clergymen wrote —“ It is the best yet made.”
It is the Australian Relish, made by Washington H. Soul, of 221 Pitt-street, and
sold by every storekeeper. Price, One Shilling.


A SERIES OF
LECTURES
DELIVERED BY THE
REV. CHAS. CHINIQUY
IN THE
PROTESTANT HALL,
CASTLEREAGH STREET, SYDNEY.
CONTENTS.
PAGE
Public RocepVion ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... i
Why I with 25,000 of my Countrymen left the Church of Rome ... ... 4.
Is the Church of Rome a branch of the Church of Christ; or, is it Heathenism
under a Christian name ? ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... IZ
Rome and Liberty of Conscience ... ... ... ... ... ... ... 17
Auricular Confession addressed to men only ... ... ... ... ... ... 22
Auricular Confession addressed to men and women ... ... ... ... 25
The Education of Protestant boys and girls in the Colleges and Nunneries of Rome 30
SZECOZSTD ZEIDTTIOTsr.
snt>m :
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY LEE & ROSS,
Excelsior Works, 49 Market Street.
1878.


In hurrying these first sixteen pages through the press, it was impossible to let
the Rev. Mr. Chiniquy read the proof sheets. He having sinoe read them, we hope
the following Errata will prove of use to our readers.
ERRATA.
Page 4, second column, eighth line from the end, for “a poor simple man,” read “the
poor sinful man.”
Page G, first column, thirty-fourth line, for “differ in everything,” read “differ in
almost everything.”
Page G, first column, fifty-eighth line, for “ and a young,” read “ and his young.
Page 6, second column, twelfth line, for “remains where it was,” read “remains a
mere show book.”
Page 7, tenth line, after the word “brethren,” add “ want to see thee.”
Page 9, thirty-fourth line, for “I felt,” read “ I fell.”
Page 9, second column, forty-fourth line, for “ esdares” read “ esclaves."
Page 10, second column, twenty-ninth line, after the word “up,” add “ and I will
Page 12, first column, eighth line, for “first day 1 went to the city of Kentucky,
read “ next day I went to the city of Kankakee.”
Page 13, first column, first line, after the word “ put,” add “ to-day.”
Page 13, second column, forty-ninth line, for “how the Church,’ read “how the
Christ*of the Church.”
Page IG, first column, twenty-seventh line, for “fatuer,” read “ father.


5-577
THE CHINIQUY LECTURES
DELIVERED IN THE PROTESTANT HALL, SYDNEY.
PUBLIC RECEPTION.
The public reception of the Eev. C. Chiniquy,
who was for twenty-five years a priest of
the Church of Rome, but who left her com-
munion about twenty years ago N and joined
the Presbyterian Church, took place in the
Protestant Hall, on Tuesday evening, the
Ist October. Long before seven o’clock, a
tremendous crowd had collected round the
iron entrance gates ; and when these were
at last thrown open the great multitude
surged into the building, filling the body of
the Hall and the galleries in a moment.
'There were over two thousand in the hall;
but thousands more went away, as they
could not obtain either sitting or standing
room.
Uu the platform were Messrs. William
Kippax, W.G.M. (in the chair) ; H. Hicks,
D.G.M.; W. Henson, G.S.; Rev. G. Suther-
land, G.C. ; Rev. Drs. Barry, M‘Gibbon,
Steel; J. Davies, M.L.A. ; J. Roseby,
M.L.A. ; Drs, Marshall and Hogg; Revs.
D. Galloway, H. Macready, P. H. Cornford,
W. Allworth, M'Kinnon, W. Beg, D. Allen,
T. J. Curtis, T. S. Forsaith, G. C. Howden,
and R. Donald; and Messrs. N. J. Mackenzie,
S. E. Lees, F. Abigail, R. McCoy, I. J.
Josephson, and T. Lutton. The Rev. G.
Sutherland gave out for singing the Hun-
dredth Psalm, after which the Rev. W. Beg
•engaged in prayer. Alderman Kippax,
W.G.M., then, in the name of the meeting
and of all the Orange lodges in the colony,
gave to Father Chiniquy the right hand of
fellowship, welcoming him to New South
■Wales. He then said, that, although the
meeting was open to the public, arrange-
ments had been made for the removal of any
person who might be disorderly, or in any
way attempt to interrupt the proceedings.
The Rev. G. Sutherland, after a few appro-
priate introductory remarks, then read the
address, as follows “ The Rev, Pastor
Chiniquy, French Canadian Reformer, Rev.
sir and brother, —We cordially welcome you
to Australia, and to this city (the metropolis
of all the Australias). Your valiant contests
with the gigantic power of Papal Rome have
long evoked our deepest sympathy; and
the glorious Gospel liberty which God
has given you, and through you to thousands
■of your fellow-countrymen, has called forth
our fervent gratitude In your efforts in
these great colonies to arouse Protestants to
a- sense of their psavvleges and danger, and to
liberate from the bonds of superstition the many
thousands of your former co-religionists who
have settled in these lands, you may reckon
upon our presence, protection, and earnest
co-operation. (Cheers.) May the wisdom,
power, and grace of the Eternal Spirit attend
you wherever you go, and render your
addresses the power of God unto salvation to
tens of thousands, and a blessing to unborn
generations in this southern hemisphere, —
W. Kippax, R.W.G.M. ; Henry Hicks,
D.G.M. ; George Sutherland, G.C.”
The Rev. C. Chiniquy, who was received
with great cheering, said —“ Dear and kind
friends, I really find myself unequal for the
task which the providence of God has put
upon me to-day. This is a blessed day for
me, but as a Christian I must tell you I am
pained, because, when I hear these com-
pliments of yours, there is another voice
which says to me, you are nothing but an
unprofital de servant. Our great and merciful
God has done a mighty work before my eyes,
and I am the living instrument of His
mercies. Ido not come here to be praised,
nor to receive your applause. No, my
friends, I come here as a witness of the
mercies of God. It is good for me to tell
you what the Lord has done for my soul,
and I ask you to bless Him for me. I have
a debt of gratitude to pay to you, my friends.
In very dark hours, when the thick clouds
were coming over me, and when the storm
raised by the enemy of God and man
threatened to overwhelm me, many times
cheering words came to me from Australia,
which strengthened my heart; and help of
money came (often from men who did not
give their names) to aid me in my work.
Now, I thought it was my duty to come and
thank you and bless you ; but I had no idea
that you would give me such a reception,
because my heart and my soul, and every-
thing in me tells me I do not deserve it.
This dear brother (the Rev. Mr. Sutherland)
has told you he has known me many years;
I will tell you how I became acquainted
with him. It will be twenty years in
January since I was surrounded by so many
difficulties, that one evening, on my knees, I
was weeping, and asking God for His light
and His strength, because I was powerless
to continue the struggle. When I under,
stood that it was my duty to bring my
people out of the darkness of the Church of


I
Rome, because my dear Saviour had enrolled Thy battle ; Thou hast promised that those'
me under His banner, 1 met the Bishop of who trust in Thee cannot perish, but here I
Chicago one day, and I told him “So long
as God will give me strength, I will show to
the world the inside secrets of your church,
and I will do my best to bring your church
down to the dvst.” (Applause.) Well, he
told me these very words—“ If you do, you
are a doomed man.” Perhaps some of you
may think I have bad feelings in my heart
against my friends of the Church of Rome.
If so, you are mistaken. (Applause.) If
you come here with the idea that you will
hear any abuse from my lips against the
Roman Catholics you will surely be disap-
pointed. (Hear, hear.) I tell you, in the
presence of God and man, I love the Roman
Catholics. I admire them. I know their
errors, and I hope, by the mercy of God, we
will see many of them leaving their errors.
But to come to my story of how I became
acquainted with this friend. When the
Bishops of the United States saw that I was
not only leaving their chnrch, but that I was
determined to bring the whole people of
Canada out of their church if I could, what
did they do ? They said, “ We must destroy
that man.” Then they brought all their
power against me, and I stood alone, fighting
against the giant power of Rome. They
tried to kill me with pistols, and daggers,
and stones. Many times they stoned me ;
several times the bullet of the assassin whistled
near my ears, but my life was in the hand of
my God. (Applause.) Then they brought
suits against me. Thirty-four times 1 have
been dragged before the Criminal Courts by
the Sheriff of Kentucky. I engaged the
best lawyers to defend my honour and my
life, and it was a very costly affair. Among
the lawyers was Abraham Lincoln, who was
afterwards murdered. Well, one day came
when I had to sell everything, and then
could not meet my expenses. I had heavy
debts to meet; the priest bought all my
notes of hand and the bill, and sent the
Sheriff to my house, who took everything
from me. My fine library, which cost 3000dol.
sold for sixty dollars. My bed was sold. I
was then a poor bachelor. (Laughter.) I
went to the lawyer and asked why my bed
was sold, when the law prevented such a
proceeding. He said this law only applied
to a man with a wife. Well then said I, I
will get a wife. (Laughter.) I had to sleep
on the floor. I had not a chair in my house.
I was almost friendless. The Protestants
had no faith in my conversion. They thought
Chiniquy was a humbug, and a Jesuit in
disguise. The priests and the journals
spread the report that I was a very bad man.
1 had spent my last cent, and was completely
penniless, and nobody was coming to help
me. I passed the night on my knees, and I
said, “My God Thou knowest I am fighting
am fighting hard, and I must perish. Wilt
Thou not come to help me ?” The next day
I received a letter with 500 dollars from a
friend 1500 miles away, whom I had never
seen, to whom I had never written, and who
had never written to me. That letter was
signed “ George Sutherland.” (Great ap-
plause), and I ask you to bless him. He
told me to take courage that the Lord was
on my side and I would gain the day. If
there are Roman Catholics here, I hope they
will go back from this place with the
perfect knowledge that I am their friend. I
came not here to abuse them. They were
very kind to me when I was in their midst.
Their Pope was my great friend, and sent me
magnificent presents and kind words. Almost
everyone of their bishops came to my feet
to make their confession, and the whole
people of Canada and America were so kind
to me, that when I went from one place to-
another, they came by tens of thousands, five
or six miles with bands of music to receive
me. After such undeserved kindness I
would be an infamous man were I to come
into your midst and slander them. (Hear,
hear.) I was their best friend, I am still
their best friend, God knows it. I know
they are cruelly deceived, and that they
would receive the light if it came to them.'
The greatest part of the Roman Catholics are
sincere in their belief. They believe things
which are contrary to the Word of God,
because they do not know the Word of God.
We must go to the Roman Catholic with
kind words ; we must love them as Jesus *
Christ has loved us. You must remember
that your ancestors were just as the Roman
Catholics to-day. Only a few centuries ago
your ancestors were going to the feet of
Mary instead of to the feet of Jesus. They
had no gospel, no Bible to read, they were
in the dark. You must not forget that,
Protestants. In those days there was a
terrible darkness over England and the rest
of Europe. Few were worshipping Christ
as He wants to be worshipped. The great
majority were just following the religion of
the Pope. But a blessed day came when
God in His mercy looked down upon England
and Germany and France, and a voice from
on high spoke to those nations, and told them
to take God’s Word for the only lamp to-
their feet, to read it and to follow it; and
your ancestors took the Word of God and
found it was precious. , They found that
Christ had paid their debts, that He had
been sent by God the Father to poor
sinners as a gift, that He had brought
forgiveness of sins as a gift, that
He had promised eternal life as a gift. In
the Gospel they saw they had nothing to do-
but look to the gift and be saved, to see its-
2


beauty, its magnitude, its preciousness. Great Britain has a mighty mission in the
They saw that in the religion brought by world. And I hope God will give her grace
Christ they had nothing to do but to accept to be true to her mission, and that every-
the gift and love the Giver. In those days where she goes she will bring the Bible.
there was joy in your country —on the
beautiful hills of England, in the beautiful
valleys of Scotland; but while your ancestors
were taking Christ as a gift, another voice
catae from Koine —a voice of death, the voice ;
of the Pope. He wrote to his bishops and
priests, don’t you see those heretics who are
reading the Bible ? Take away that book
fnorn them, and force them to go back to
their early Church ! But the bishops said
they prefer to die rather than to give it up.
(Applause.) Then the Pope said, “they
prefer to die, let them die !” And sentences
of deatli was passed on all who would read
the Bible ; and the Pope wrote to the
kings and emperors of Europe, and told
them to go and search everywhere with their
sword in their hand, and wherever they
found heretics with a Bible, to take it from
them ; and if they refused to give it up, to
kill them —the old and the young, the
father and the mother, and the children.
Destroy, said he, the cities and villages, and
put everyone to the sword. And in those
days there wmre tears and blood-shed, because
the kings and the emperors obeyed the Pope.
The blood of martyrs flowed like a river. In
France, 75,000 Protestants were slaughtered
in a single night. In the mountains of
Piedmont, I have seen the rocks from the
top of which thousands and thousands of
Christian men and women were thrown
down by the order of the Pope; and the
blood flowed everywhere, and there was ruin
and desolation and death ; but your ances-
tors said,. “ Shall we let the Pope kill the
last one of us ? Have we not the right to
fight for our wives and our children ?
Britishmen ! let us go and meet the soldiers
of the Pope, and let us fight for the liberty
to serve God according to our consciences.”
(Cheers.) They fought, and the Lord was
on their side. Many of them died on the
battle-fields, but the bloody sword of the
Pope was for ever broken ; and now every-
where the British flag floats in the breeze.
(Loud applause.) From the day that Great
Britain took the Bible in her arms, and put
it on her breast, ready to fight and die rather
than lose it, God has taken her by the
hand (cheers), and has fought her battles,
and has brought her glorious flag in triumph
over all the world ; and to-day the sun never
sets on the empire of the Queen. (Loud
cheers.) I bless God that I was born under
that glorious flag of Great Britain, for your
nation has evidently a great mission in the
world. I have travelled a great deal, I am
an old man, nearly 70 years of age. I have
seen many things, and the more 1 study men
And books, the more I am persuaded that
where she goes she will bring the Bible.
When I first went to visit England, about
twenty years ago, I was astonished to see
that little country. England is not much
larger than a county of Canada. Canada ia
twenty times larger than England.
(Laughter.) In one day you may go
from one end to the other of England.
And I said to myself, “Is it possible
that such a small people is so great ?”
Let me tell you of an incident I wit-
nessed four weeks ago I was going from
San Francisco to visit some families among
our converts in the territory of Oregon, and
just when the small steame • was crossing the
Golden Gates, we had a head wind, and the
waves were terrible. The sea roared round
the rocks and beat over the vessel. Just at
that moment a thrill of terror passed over
everyone on boaiO, as the cry arose “ a man
overboard !” We saw the poor fellow
struggling to save his life, and shouting,
“ Oh, for God’s sake, save me.” The steamer
was going a$ full speed, and had left the man
a long distance astern. The captain shouted
to lower the life-boat, but before this could
be done, a pale young man, for whom I
would not have given five cents, he seemed
to be so weak, threw off his coat and
plunged overboard. (Cheers.) My friends,
I have never seen anything so sublime as the
spectacle of that young man struggling
against the great waves, which dashed
over him and threatened every moment
to engulph him, and trying to save
a fellowman. He fought for half-an-hour
against the sea before the boat could reach
him. Unfortunately the first man was
drowned. But the young fellow who had
risked his life was, we learned, an English-
man. (Loud cheers.) He was a noble boy
of Great Britain, a millionaire, lately
married. But when he saw a fellow-creature’s
life in peril, he forgot himself, his dear wife,
his fortune, everything, to save him. I
understand why England is so great, when
she can train her children to such deeds of
heroism. (Cheers.) The British flag, sur-
rounded by such men must be the flag of
the world. (Applause.) Now, my friends,
there is in our midst a whole people fallen
into the deep sea of perdition. They are
perishing around us, and what will you do,
Protestants ? Will you insult them ? Will
you give them bad names ? You are safe on
the ship of which Christ is the pilot. I ask
you, friends, to help me to save them.
Many times I have exposed my life to save
them. Many times my blood has flowed in
my efforts to save my perishing countrymen.
And I come here to ask your help. There
is not a soul among them which is not as
3


precious to our dear Saviour as any of yours, with prayer. Go to the mercy seat and pray
Ajy Saviour wants me to do all in my power for the poor deluded people whose souls are'
fn corn +l-iom XTn „ J ! *1 • n r i r A
to save them. He asked me to give my
money. I gave the last cent I had ; I gave
my land ; I exposed my life. And I ask
everyone of you to go to the help of the
Roman Catholics. Fight the battle against
the Church of Rome, not with insulting
words, not with sticks and stones, but with
the sword which Christ has put in your
hands, ‘ ‘ the sword of the Spirit, which is
W ordof God. Forthe last three hundred yeasr
there has been a battle between Protestant-
ism and One of them must con-
quer ; and, Protestants, if you do not
destroy the Church of Rome, the Church of
Rome will shortly destroy you. I know the
power of England ; I have read her history.
I know that when she wishes to conquer a
nation she lets nothing hinder her. She tells
her sons to go and conquer it; the blood’
flows, the money goes, but the nation is
conquered. (Applause.) I tell you, British
men, here in Australia and in England, if
you would say, “Let us conquer the Church
of Rome, the Church of Rome would fall at
once.” Yvur politicians speak of peace, but
there {is n<_ peace posisble with her. Fight
her, not with bitterness and insults, but
perishing. My days are fast drawing to a
close, and it seems already I hear the foot-
steps of the Angel of Death approaching ;
but I must still fight the battle. Before long
I will tell you of my conversion and the
conversion of about 25,000 French Canadians.
(Cheers.) When Dr, Guthrie, in Scotland,,
heard the facts, he said it was the
most remarkable thing he had ever heard of.
The story will be interesting, because God
has brought me out of Rome in spite of
myself. I did not come out as a brave man.
I struggled against my God, but he was the
stronger I thank and bless you for your
kindness in listening to my poor broken
English address, and I hope you wall ask
God to guide me, and that you wall pray for
my dear countrymen who are still bowing to
idols. May God bring you to the ways of
salvation, and may He make this country
great, happy, and free. (Loud and continued
cheering.)
A doxology was sung, and Dr. M‘Gibbon
pronounced the benediction ; a stanza of the
National Anthem was sung, and the assembly
dispersed.
WHY I WITH 25,000 OF MY
CHURCH
The Rev, Charles Chiniquy, on Wednes-
day night, lectured in the Protestant Hall,
his subject being “Why I, with twenty-
five thousand of my countrymen, left the
Church of Rome.” An immense number
of people were awaiting the opening of
the doors; and, although the lecture was
not to commence until 8 o’clock, the
building was sufficiently filled, for comfort,.
shortly after 7 o’clock, and was soon cram-
med in every corner in the galleries as well
as below stairs, the aisles as well as the
seats. There must have been over three-
thousand present. Among the gentlemen.
occupying seats on the platform were the
Hon. Sir John Robertson, M.L.A. ; Mr.
John Davies, M.L.A. ; Mr. John Hurley,
M.L.A {Hartley); Mr. R. Barbour, M.L.A.p
Alderman Kippax, Mr, W. Carey, J.P. ;
Mr. R. Wynne, J.P. ; Mr. R. Gtiy, J.P.';
the Revs. Dr. Barry, Dr. Fullerton, Dr.
M‘Gibbon, W. Beg, G. Sutherland, J.
Barnier, W. Allworth, R. Donald, D. Allen,
J. Curtis, J. M‘Kenzie, R. Auld, and P. H.
Cornford; Messrs. J. Josephson, H. Hicks,
F. Abigail, R'jM'Coy, S. E. Lees, H.
Masters, J. H. Goodlet, A. Cane, W. Halley,
E. Hordern, T. Button and Dr, Marshal.
Dr. M‘Gibbon called upon the audience to
I COUNTRYMEN LEFT THE
OF ROME.
sing “Rock of Ages,” after which the Rev.
G. Sutherland engaged in prayer.
The Rev. C. Chiniquy, said, —In the
66th Psalm, David says, “Come and hear
all ye that fear God, and I will declare what
He has done for my soul!” It is the same
witk me. When I consider what God has
done for me, I wish I could go over the
. whole world, and tell the children of God the
great things He has done for me and so many
of my dear countrymen. Now, my friends,
I do not come here this evening to satisfy
your curiosity—l have a higher object in
view. In a few days I will be in my grave,
and everything I say or do wears a very
solemn aspect, when I consider that I shall
soon have to give an account to my God. I
come here this evening to ask you to bless
the Lord, and I know when you'go home
you will say, “Oh, God of our salvation,
may Thy name be for ever Messed, for Thy
mercies towards a poor simple man, who has
spoken to us to-night. ” You all know that
I was born in Canada, and that I was raised
to the priesthood of the Church of Rome in
the year 1833, and continued a priest for
twenty-five years.*#All that time I believed
sincerely that the Ohurch of Rome was the
Church of Christ; and it was my ambition


to extend her power over all the continent of to give the chapter which I had read the
America. And, probably, there is not a previous Sabbath in my father’s house. And
Driest who has worked with more zeal and I recited them the story of the Prodigal
r . , , . , T f , .1 TT. Cl J.T. - 1 PiL .1 i. C T,,
success than I have done. In fact, the Pope
so much appreciated my zeal, that he sent
me presents and honours and dignities much
more than I deserved ; and the bishops, and
the priests of Rome praised me above my
merit, also. Now, my friends, it was my
object to conquer the Protestants, for my
Church had told me what she tells everyone
—that there is no salvation without her; and
my heart was sad when I considered the
multitudes of Protestants that were going to
perdition. Therefore, I did all in my power
to throw what I considered the light into
their midst. I studied the Holy Scriptures
and the holy Fathers, for it was my desire to
make myself a very learned man, so that I
might have a public discussion with the
most learned Protestant ministers, and prove
to the world that they were nothing but a
band of ignorant and deceitful men (Laughter.)
You will excuse me, gentlemen, but that
was my belief. To this end I studied the
Scriptures and the Fathers, with incredible
attention, passing whole nights in
comparing the Word of God with the
Holy Fathers, and with the teachings
of my church. Now, before I go any further,
I must tell you something which will be the
key to many things which I have not time
to speak about this evening. My father had
studied for a priest in the seminary of
Quebec. But before his reception, he saw
something in the high quarters of the Church
of Rome which made him change his mind,
and he became a notary, and settled at
Murray Bay, a new settlement. As
there was no school there, my mother
was my teacher. In consequence of
my father having studied for a priest, he
had received from the superior of the senfi-
nary a beautiful Bible, *in which was the
permission to read it. This Bible was the
first book that, my mother taught me to
read. When I v waa seven or eight years
old, instead of playing with the other chil-
dren, I used to sit by my mother’s knee, and
read some of the -most sublime passages in
the book which she had selected. Being
blessed with a very retentive memory, I was
able, ■when about nine years old, to recite a
great part of the Old and the New Testa-
ments. In bad weather when the roads
were impassable, the farmers used to come to
my father’s house on the Sabbath Day, and
my father would put me on the table, and I
would recite to them the most beautiful
chapters of the Bible. One Subbath Day, 1
had gQpe with my mother to church, and
was waiting at the door of the church, before
Son, from the 15th chapter of Luke. These
poor people had never heard of it before ; it
was quite new to them. I remember how
the tears trickled down their cheeks, and
how sorry they were when the hour of
service came. Well, the next day, one of
those who listened to me went to confession,
and told the priest what had happened at
the church door the day before.O The priest
demanded to know who read the Bible in
his parish. The man told him it was at
Chiniquy’s house. The next day the curate
came to my father’s house, and was welcomed
as usual. After some ordinary conversation
the priest said, ‘ ‘ Monsieur Chiniquy, is it
true that you and your boy read the Bible ?”
My father said, “Yes, not only does he
read, but he learns it by heart; and if you
like, he will give you some chapters of it.”
The priest replied, “I don’t come here for
that. Don’t you know it is forbidden in the
Church of Rome to read the Bible in the ver-
nacular tongue, and you must not do it. ” My
father said he did not see any sin in it, and that
the Bible was given to him by the superior of
the Seminary, who surely knew what he did.
The priest said, “You know better, Mon-
sieur Chiniquy; you know it is forbidden,
and it is my painful duty to take the book
from you. ” My father was a quiek-tempered
Frenchman, and when he heard that, he
began to pace the room on the double quick.
(Laughter.) The priest began to tremble;
for he knew my father’s temper ; and 1 was
trembling beside my mother, because I was
afraid my father would give up the Bible,
and my mother was crying. After some
silence, my father turned to the priest and
said, “Is that all you have to say , The
priest trembling, said, “Yes; that is all.”
Then my father said, “You know the door
by which you came ? Go. ’ And the priest
thought it was advisable to follow that
advice, and went at the double quick also.
(Cheers.) I was*so glad that my Bible was
not taken away, that I ran to my father
.to pay him in my childish way. I jumped on
{lie table and I kissed him, and I recited to
him the beautiful story of the fight between
David and Goliath. Of course, in my mind,
my father was David, and the poor priest
was Goliath, and the Bible was the little
stone of the brook, (Cheers.) €•' About a
year after my father’s death, the Bible disap-
peared from the house. • We believed the
priest, through some of his friends, carried
it off. But, thank Ged, I knew it mostly by
heart, and the rays of light were never
extinguished. 1 ' While a priest of the Church
of Rome, I was always in favour of the Bible
the service began. An old farmer seeing, of Rome, I was always m favour of the Bible
me, his buggy, and called to the being read by the people. But we ijmst be
people to come and hear me, and asked me- fair to the Roman Catholics. In this counu.yj
5


as well as in England and America, the I that their pastor should accompany them.
Roman Catholics are now allowed to read They were to shut their eyes and their ears,
the Bible. But to whom do they owe this
privilege? Is it to their Church? Not at
all. Because, if their Church could act
to-day as in past times, they would be sent
to gaol, and put to death for reading the
Bible. I was in England in the year 1860,
when twelve noble young men of Spain were
condemned to death for reading the Bible.
They were not put to death, because the
Queen of England interfered, but they were
sent into exile. It is to the glorious British dag
that the Roman Catholics in this country owe
the privilege of reading the Bible. (Cheers.)
But when a Roman Catholic priest or layman
reads the Bible, a diabolical condition is
put on his doing so. When I was on my knees
before the Bishop to be received as a priest,
he requested me to make two solemn oaths.
One was very good. I swore that I would
read the whole Word of God, and the Bible
was put into my hands. The second oath
which I made, and which every priest of
Rome makes, was that I would not interpret
a single word of that book according to my
intelligence, but only accprding to the
unanimous consent of the Holy Fathers.
This oath comes from hell, and I challenge
the Roman Catholic Bishop here to prove
that he does not make every priest whom he
ordains take it. Now, my friends, the Holy
Fathers are unanimous in only one thing,
and that is, that they differ in everything.
The Church says to the people, “You may
read it, but it is better not to read it, be-
cause it is a dangerous book. Look at
those poor Protestants; they read it, and
see how divided they are, and how they
fight against each other. ” The Church of
Rome exaggerates the divisions among Pro-
testants. She forgets that when Christ
gave His solemn views about His Church, He
said, “ I am the vine, ye are the branches.”
You will not find two branches alike on the
vine. Every branch is different from
another. One is very big, another is very
small; one goes up, another goes down ;
one is straight, going north, another is
crooked, going south; but so long as the
branches are united to the vine, they bear
good fruit. (Applause..) The Roman Catho-
lic, then, is told that more souls are lost by
reading the Bible than by not reading it.
How, then, can he read it with pleasure ?
The Roman Catholic priest and layman have
the book, but it is only as a show-book.
Suppose a young gentleman and a young
lady asked their father’s permission to travel
through the many countries they had heard
about. After much reluctance the father
gives his permission; but just when they
are about to start, he tells them that as they
might see and hear many things which
would be bad for them, he had arranged
and when they returned, their pastor would
tell them everything they had heard and
seen. (Laughter.) So it is with my friends
jof the Church of Rome. They may travel
through this glorious book, but they must
not use the eyes and ears of their intelligence,
{ nor interpret a single word according to their
own understanding. They have to obey the
Church ; the Church says what she pleases,
and the Bible remains where it was. But it
was not so with me. I had drunk of the
water of life, and it was precious to my
soul. How many times, when in college,
J have I wept when my superior refused me
the Bible. From my twelfth year, when I
entered the college, to my twenty-second, I
was not allowed to open the Bible a single
time. But when I became a priest of Rome
they could not refuse me the Bible, and I
read it with the intention of strengthening
my faith, and of making myself a powerful
man, out of zeal for my Church.r I wanted
to extend her power over all America. But
the ways of God are not the ways of man.
Many a time I have read from eight o’clock
at night till dawn the next day, and many
a time I have heard a mysterious voice say-
ing to me, “Don’t you see that in your
Church you do not follow the Word of God,
but you follow the lying traditions of men?
Don’t you see you are preaching lies and
forgeries which are not countenanced by the
Scriptures ? Don’t you see that in your
Church you invite poor sinners to invoke
the name of Mary when the Scriptures say,
‘ There is only one name by which you can
be saved —Jesus Christ ?’ ” How many
times have I read in the book my own con-
demnation. One day I preached in the
great cathedral of Montreal. It is an
immense church, and I generally preached
there to a multitude of at least 15,000
people. That day I spoke on the Blessed
Virgin Mary. I told the people it was not
fit for the sinner to go to Jesus, because
Jesus being God, and the sinner being a
rebel, a rebel has nothing to do with the
king against whom he is in rebellion.
I said to these poor sinners, “We are rebels
against God, He will not listen to our
prayers or hear our requests ; He is angry
against us. Now, when a man wants some
favour from a king, he goes to the friends of
the king, he addresses himself to the officers
of the king, and they present his petition,
and the rebel gets his pardon. ” Then I
said to these poor sinners “Come with me
to f the feet of Mary, Jesus has never refused
any favour to His mother, He has always
granted her request; come with me and we
will put our petition into the bands of Mary,
and she will go to Jesus and pray for us, and
what Christ would refuse to you and to me.
6


because we are sinners, he cannot refuse to said to my servant girl, “ Marguerite, 1
His dear mother.” And I invited them to have no more good gods in my tabernacle ; I
come to Mary, with such zeal that the whole
congregation was in tears ; and the Bishop
of Montreal complimented me on the address.
That evening, as I was reading my Bible,
my eye fell on this passage, which was one
of the first rays that entered my soul—“ And
they said unto Him, Thy mother and Thy
brethren, &c., &c.and a voice like thunder
said to me, “ Don’t you see you preached a
lie this morning. You deceived the poor
people when you said Jesus has always
granted the petitions of Mary !” When I
turned to St. Mark and I saw the same
passage —When Mary saw that Christ paid
no attention to her she felt hurt, and asked
the people to speak to Him for her; and when
they said to Him that His mother wished to
speak to Him, hedidnotrecogniseher, but said,
“ Who is My mother ?” and turning to His
disciples he said, “ Everyone who does the
work of My Father in Heaven, the same is
my mother.” Well, I passed the night in tears,
and I said “ My God, is it possible I have
preached a lie ?” I saw that Christ had come
to the world as its Saviour, and that He
would not permit even His mother to come
between Him and humanity. His words
were “ Come unto me all ye that are weary
and heavy laden, and I will give you rest.”
The next morning the Bishop saw by my
eyes that I had been crying, and he asked
the reason. I replied it was because
I had preached a diabolical lie to the people
the day before. He looked amazed and
said, “ What do you mean ?” I said, “Well,
my Lord, I have searched from chapter to
chapter and I do not find a single instance
of Jesus granting the request of His mother;
and yesterday I told those poor people to
get her to intercede with Christ, and I do
not mean to preach that any more. ” (Cheers.)
He said, “Well, will you become a Protest-
ant?” I felt insulted at this question. I
would rather have been called a dog than a
Protestant. Poor Protestants! (Laughter.)
I replied, “No my lord, not at all.” My
friends, the light was coming to my eyes but
I shut them to it. I could not be brought
to believe that that glorious Church of Home,
which was so magnificent, so powerful, the
Church of “La Belle France,” which has
given to the world so many learned men,
which has given to heaven so many saints,
the church of my dear mother, the church
which loved me so much, and which 1 loved
so much, was not the Church of Christ.
And there was a constant straggle within
me. But my God, with His merciful hand,
was breaking the fetters that bound me, and
in the end He conquered, and brought me to
the feet of Jesus, where I have found peace
and joy. I will tell you of another terrible
battle I fought against the light. One day I
have given the last one to a sick man ; please
make me some more.” And she mixed a
little flour and water together, and put the
dough between two warm irons, and turned
it into wafers. In the morning I took them
to the altar, and I had to believe that when
I had pronounced five magical words over
them, they were no more bread, but my God,
Jesus Christ Himself. Well, one day, at
mass, I had called on my congregation to
adore with me the God which 1 had made
out of a little dough. And they and I bowed
our faces to the dust, and adored that piece
of dough as our God. Well, that very same
day, when reading my Bible, I came across
the passage in the 20th chapter of Exodus,
and the words came to me as a thunderbolt,
“And God spoke all these words saying,
I am the Lord Thy God which have brought
thee out of the land of Egypt, and out of
the house of bondage. Thou shalt have no
other gods before me. Thou shalt not make
unto thyself any graven image, or any like-
ness of anything that is in heaven above, or
that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the
water under the earth. Thou shalt
not bow thyself to them nor serve them.”
And the voice again said to me, ‘ ‘ Don’t you
see that this morning, and all your life since
you have been a priest, you have adored a
god made with your own hands. Don’t you
see that on Mount Sinai I proclaimed that
no man should make a god with his own
hands and worship it.” Then God spoke to
me in a voice of thunder ‘ ‘ Come out of that
Church ! You are an idolator ; you worship
a god made out of a piece of dough.” I
passed the night in prayer. I struggled
against the light. It seemed impossible that
my dear Roman Catholic Church could be
an idolatrous Church. I thought that I had
not intelligence enough to interpret the
Scriptures, and I wept and was distressed
beyond measure. But my God was conquer-
ing me. Let every tongue here bless Him,
and every heart love Him for His kindness
to His unprofitable servant. I will now tell
you of the great day when I could not resist
the Lord any longer. I must tell you, first,
that the Bishops of Canada and America
had the intention to take possession of the
United States. I was selected to go from
Canada to Illinois, which was considered the
richest part of the United States. It has a
vast magnificent prairie. Chicago, which
now has 400,000 inhabitants, had then only
40,000. The bishops seeing this fine country,
said, “If we can take possession of that
part, we will rale the United States from
them.” And they said, “Chiniquy, you
must go there, and direct the tide of emigra-
tion to the prairies, and then we will form
such a great and mighty people that we will


outnumber the Protestants, and finally rule mission, because it contains a condition. I
the whole country from them.” I settled say I submit myself to the Bishop according
there in 1851, and in a few years persuaded
75,000 French Canadians to go there. And
I was so glad to see my dear Church of Rome
taking possession of that magnificent
country. About that time, the Bishop of
Chicago did a thing which the Frenchmen
could not tolerate. It was a great iniquity,
and my countrymen and I, after long con-
sideration, decided that it was our duty, out
of respect for ourselves, to protest publicly
against the conduct of the Bishop. Accord-
ingly, we published a letter in the Press
against his action. The Bishop was angry,
and he wrote letters condemning us, and all
the bishops took his side. During the whole
year, a burning discussion was going on in
the Press between him and us, and at the
year’s end I took all the documents written
by him and us, and I sent a copy to the
Pope, and a copy to the Emperor of France.
I asked the Emperor to read the facts, and
if he found them correct, to help us at the
Court of Rome, that such a wicked man
might be removed from our midst. And I
asked the Pope if he would appoint some of
Ms archbishops to make an inquiry into the
facts, and if he found them correct, I asked
him to take away from us a bishop who was
a scandal to our church, and destroying all
religion. v And an inquiry was made by the
Emperor of France, through his ambassador,
and by a Cardinal sent by the Pope;
and the Bishop, being found guilty, was
taken from our midst and sent to Ire-
land, where he had the good sense to die in a
couple of years. (Laughter.) Another bishop
was sent in his place—a very good man. He
said to me, “ Chiniquy, we are very glad
you have beaten that bishop, it is a glorious
victory, and we are thankful to you ; but
as you have handled him rather roughly, it
is believed now in England and France that
you are a Protestant. We know better, but
would you give us a document by which we-
may prove to the world that you still are a
good Roman Catholic priest. ” I said I had no
objection; but it seemed to me it was the
golden opportunity for me to know whether
the voice which was troubling my rest for so
many years, which was saying to me,
f ‘ Don’t you see in your Church of Rome you
do not follow the Word of God, but the
lying traditions of men," was from God or
from Satan, j I wrote these very words,
“ My lord, we want to live and die in the
holy Catholic Church, and to prove this to
your lordship, we promise solemnly we will
obey your authority according to the Word
of God as we find it in the Gospel of Christ.”
I showed that to the Grand Vicar, and
asked him what he thought of it. He said
it was just what was wanted- I said “I
fear the Bishop will not accept this sub-
io the Word of God as ice find it in the Gospel
of Christ.’' The Grand Vicar said, “ Well,
is not that good ?” I said, “ I think it is too
good for the Pope. ” (Laughter.) He said,
“ what do you mean ?” I answered, “My
dear friend, you know there is not a
Roman Catholic priest to-day who has
studied the Scriptures and the Holy Fathers
more than I have done, but I must tell you
the more I compare the Scriptures and the
Holy Fathers the more I see that in our
Church of Rome we have no other god but
the Pope, and no Gospel but the lying
traditions of men; and if it be so, the
Bishop cannot accept this submission, based
on the Word of God.” “Well,” said he,
“you are wrong, Chiniquy. Go to the
Bishop, and you will see he will accept your
submission, and will be pleased with it.” I
went to him, and to my great surprise he was
beside Mmself with joy. He threw his arms
around my neck, and with tears of joy, he
said, “The bishops and the Pope will be
most happy to hear you have submitted
yourself to us.” Well, now, to show my
blindness, and the great mercy of God, I
must confess, to my shame, that I was glad
I had made peace with man when I
was not at peace with God. My Bishop gave
me a letter to say I was a good priest, and
that everything was right between him and
me. I went back rejoicing among my
countrymen ; but my God had looked down
upon me, and was going to break that false
peace and give me saving light. Ten days
after this I received a letter from the Bishop,
telling me to go to him. When I went, he
asked me to show him the letter he had
given me a few days before, I handed it
to him, and after making sure it was the one,
he threw it into the fire. Well, I was so
astonished at this proceeding, that I was
almost paralysed. After a moment I ran to
the fire to save the letter, but it was
destroyed. I turned to him and said, “My
lord, how dare you take from my hands a
document which is my property, and burn it
without my permission.” He said, “I am
your superior, and do not chose to give you
any account of what Ido.” I replied, “Yes,
you are my superior. You are a great bishop
in the Church of Rome, and I am nothing
but a poor priest; but there is a God who is
as much above you as He is above me, and
in the presence of that God and in the
presence of the Superior of the Jesuits, I
protest against your iniquity.” He said,
“ Don’t lecture me. I have brought you
here because you are an impostor. You
me the other day, in giving me a
note of submission, which is not one. I
made a fool of myself in taking it. I now
rqject it.*’ Then the voice said to me.
8


“Don’t you see you do not follow the Word I saw that the priests would attack me in
of God but the lying traditions of men.” their press, in their pulpits, in their con-
And I sent a prayer to the throne of mercy,
asking for guidance. Turning to the Bishop,
I said, “ What do you mean by saying I
have deceived you ? You read the docu-
ment. You have deceived yourself.” He
said, “ What do you mean by this ? We
submit ourselves to your authority, accord-
ing to the Word of God in the Gospel of
Christ.” I said, “We mean what is there.
We cannot submit ourselves to your authority
except according to the eternal law of truth,
justice, and holiness of God, as we find them
in the Holy Scriptures.” “That is just what
we don’t want. You are a good priest, I
hope, and if so, you must know that a good
priest has only to submit.” I said, “If I
take away from my submission ‘ the Word
of God,’ and * the Gospel of Christ,’ please
tell me, on what comer stone my submission
will stand ?” He said, “You must take
away those words, and submit wholly
to my authority, without any condition.”
Then I rose to my feet, and said, ‘‘ My lord,
what you require of me is not submission, it
is adoration. I refuse it, I will never adore
you.” He replied, “If so, you cannot be
any longer a Roman Catholic priest.” I
said, “May the Almighty God be for ever
praised.” Now, my friends, I left the Bishop,
who was trembling and surprised at my
determination > I engaged a room in a hotel,
and locked the door. I felt in the presence
of God ; and I reflected on what I had done.
It was clear to my mind that the Church of
Home could not be the Church of Christ. I
had learned the terrible truth—not from the
lips of Protestants, not from the enemies of
my Church, but from my Bishop, who had
told me I could not remain a Roman Catholic
except by giving up the Word of God. I saw
I had done well to break the ties which
united me to that Church. But a dark
cloud came over my poor guilty soul, and I
began to weep. I said, “My God, my God,
the Church of Rome is not Thy Church, but
where is Thy Church ? Where must Igo to
be saved ! I have given up my country, my
friends, the Church of my father and mother,
I have given up the Church which has made
me so great in the world, but where is Thy
Church ? Oh, God, speak to me !” But no
answer came to my prayer, and I saw that
by giving up the Church of Rome, I had
given up everything that was dear to me. I
hope you will never understand what that
means. Yes ! I pray God he will never ask
from you such a sacrifice. I did not regret
what I had done, I only wanted to know the
will of God ; but it seemed as if He would
not hear my prayers, nor see my tears.
After crying for more than an hour, I saw
that a battle to the death would begin that
day between the Church of Rome and me.
fessioual, where they strike a man and you
cannot see where the blow comes from. I
saw a struggle would begin, which would
end only with my life ; and I looked around
to see if I had any friends left. Not one
remained. In the Church of Rome my dear
brothers were bound to curse me, to look
upon me as an infamous impostor. Among
the Protestants there were none, as I had
spoken against them all my life, and I saw I
was left alone to fight the battle against the
giant power of Rome. The thought was too
much for me, and if God had not stopped
this guilty hand, I would have cut my throat
in that dark hour. Oh, my friends, I was
on my knees crying for light, asking God to
come to my help, for life had grown such a
burden that I could not carry it any longer.
To go from that room into the world where I
would not find a single hand to press my
hand, where I would be an outcast, was
more than I could bear, I preferred a
thousand times to die, but thanks be to God,
He stopped my hand when I was about to
commit the horrible crime of self-murder.
Great drops 5f sweat fell from me, my heart
was fainting, and every moment I expected
to fall a corpse. I cried, “ Oh, my God, I
die ; I am lost; oh, have mercy upon me.
Tell me where I must go to be saved.” And
then the thought flashed througli my mind
that I had my dear New Testament, which I
used then, as now, to carry everywhere with
me. And the voice said to me, “ Read and
you will find the lightand with a tremb-
ling hand but a praying heart, I opened the
book, and my eyes fell on these words : “Ye
are bought with a price ; be not ye the ser-
vants of men.” The English is good, but
oh, the French is beautiful—“ Vout-: avtz, M
achetds d Grand Frix ; ne devenez point les
esclares des hommes.” And with them words
a light came to me so beautiful, that the rays
of the sun are nothing but dark clouds com-
pared to it. And then I saw for the first
time the way of salvation. I said to myself,
“Jesus has bought me Well, if He has
bought me, I am His; body, soul, intelligence,
all belongs to Christ. If I buy a thing, it
belongs to me. Jesus has bought me, there-
fore, I belong to Him. And if He has bought
me, I am saved. Saved ! Yes, saved ! And
if Jesus has saved me, I am perfectly saved.
The work of salvation is perfect, and if I
am saved, I am perfectly saved, not half-
saved. And what is the price He has paid for
me ? It is His blood shed on Calvary. Oh !
Jesus has saved me by dying.” Thenlsaid, “if
He has saved me by His death, I am not saved
as I have preached, I have been saved, not
by going to Mary, not by going to confession,
not by indulgences, but by Jesus, and Jesus
alone,” 14 was so beautiful, I felt sohapw;
9


but it was the will of God my joy should be
short. A moment after, another dark cloud
surrounded me. I saw a huge mountain
coining towards me ; it was composed of all
the sins I had committed in my life. The
mountain seemed to roll towards me, and it
came so near that I could not breathe under
its burden, and I cried, ‘‘ My God ! lam
lost, my sins are destroying me !'* It seemed
as if God could not hear my voice, because
of the mountain between Him and me, and
that he had nothing to do with me, but open
the gates of hell, and send me to that prison
I so richly deserved. I thought my God
was far away, but He was very near ; for in
that moment, before the eyes of my soul a
very strange thing was seen. Often when
crossing the ocean in a thunderstorm, I have
seen the sun break through a bank of dark
clouds, and everyone was saying, how
beautiful it is. It was the same in the midst
of that dark night. I saw a beautiful light,
I could not he mistaken. My dear Jesus was
in the midst of the light. I saw His bleeding
wounds, His heavy cross, His crown of
thorns, and He came very near to me and
said, “My dear friend, I have seen thy
tears, I have heard thy cries, and I come to
take away thy sins ; salvation is a gift, take
My word for a lamp to thy feet; give Me
thy heart, I will take away your sins.” And
for the first time I fell at the feet of Jesus ;
and more with my tears than my lips, I said,
“ dear Jesus, speak again to me. Thy words
are so sweet to my soul. Oh ! my dear
Saviour, cannot you take away that moun-
tain, it is crushing me down.” Then my
Saviour stretched forth His mighty hand,
and the mountain was removed, and thrown
into the deep waters of the sea. I felt the
blood of the Lamb
soul, and I felt a peace so great that the
angels of God could not be happier than 1
was, and I cried out, “My dear Jesus, Thou
hast saved me. The mountain is gone. Oh !
what joy and peace ! Oh ! dear Saviour of
of my soul, Thou hast paid my debts. I give
Thee my heart, make me strong and pure.”
Yes, friends, for the first time I knew I was
saved, for the first time I was drinking the
pure waters of life, and they were so sweet.
I took my dear Gospel and pressed it to my
lips, and swore then never to preach any-
thing but what I would find there; and I said,
“ dear Jesus, I have my feet on the rock of
Thy salvation. Grant me to go to my
countrymen, that I may bring them to thee. ”
I then rose and washed my face to conceal
my tears. On the Sabbath morning there
was a large multitude of people, and they
said, “Father Chiniquy, what news?” I
told them to come to the church and I would
tell them. * When I gathered them there I
said, “Frenchmen, I must tell you that
Jesus said before He died, that He would be
And all in
was cleansing my guilty I been
to the disciples the cause of great scandal. I
will be the same to you; but as the scandal
which Christ gave to His disciples has saved
the world, so my scandal will save you. I
bring you strange news. lam no longer a
priest; but, Frenchmen, don’t follow me.
I have not bought you with a price ; look to
Christ alone. He paid your debts, shed His
blood for you, and is preparing a place for
those of you who will believe in His name,
and serve Him.” I then gave them the
reasons why I left the Church of Home. I
spoke for two hours; and after I had finished
I said, “ The hour of sacrifice has come, I
must go away. I respect you too much to
impose myself on you ; but I will not go
before you tell me to go. You will cut with
your own hands the ties so sweet which
have attached me to you. Frenchmen, these
are my last words.” There wei’e tears and
sobs. I asked them to be calm. I said,
‘ * here are my parting words ; if you think
it is better to follow the Pope than Christ,
and better to invoke the name of Mary than
Jesus, and better to put your trust after
death in the fabulous Purgatory of Rome,
rather than in the blood of Christ, and it is
better to have a priest of Home to preach to
you than me, stand up !” And to my sur-
prise not a single one moved ; and they were
all in tears. The church was as crammed as
this hall is this evening, and not one moved
to tell me he was sorry I was leaving the
Church of Rome. After five minutes silence
I said, weeping, ‘•Frenchmen, you are acting
foolishly. Why don’t you tell me to go ?”
A young man said, with a strong voice,
“Jesns died for me on Calvary. I will
never invoke any but His name.” Another
said, ‘ ‘ Pull down the images ! We have
been at their feet long enough.” Another
said, “ My shoulders are bleeding with the
yoke of man ; why don’t we go with our
pastor to Jesus ?” And then with a cry I
said, ‘ ‘ My countrymen, oh, dear Frenchmen,
the mighty God has taken me out of the
land of Egypt; with me you will cross the
Red Sea. With me you will go to the feet
of Jesus. I will put to you the same question
in another shape. “ If you think it is better
to follow Christ rather than the Pope, better
to invoke the name of Jesus than Mary,
better to put your trust after death in the
blood of Christ rather than in the fabulous
purgatory of Rome, and better to have me
preach to you rather than a priest of Rome,
stand up !” And they all, as a single man,
rose up, and we sang for the first time the
hymns of Zion. They were all filled with
the Spirit of the Lord, and I saw what has
probably not been seen since Pentecost. They
were beside themselves with joy; The old
men went to the young men and said, “ Bless
the Lord ! Jesus has made you free with
His blood.” And the women pressed their
10


daughters to their bosom, saying, “ Dear
child, bless the Lamb of God who was slain
on Calvary. We will not go any more to
the feet of a man to be defiled in that in-
famous confessional. Jesus has paid you,
debts !” I thought I would die with joy. A
thousand names were written in the Lamb’s
Book of Life that day. The news went to
England and France that Chiniquy had gone
out at the head of a noble band of men from
Egypt to the Promised Land, and everywhere
this news spread the name of Jesus was
blessed. That day we had one thousand
converts; six months after, we had two
thousand ; twelve months after, we had four
thousand; and to-day we have twenty-five
thousand converts. (Loud applause.)
my conversion, 1 knew I was condemned to
death, but I thought it was my duty to go
to Canada, where I had preached for twenty-
five years as a priest of Rome. On my way
there the Governor of Canada kindly
wrote me a letter, when 1 passed through
Toronto, telling me it was dangerous to go to
Quebec, that Gavazzi had been nearly killed,
and I would surely be killed. I thanked
him for his kindness, but said I must go at
any cost. When I arrived in Quebec, my
countrymen were exceedingly pleased, and
in spite of priests, they rented a magnificent
hall for me to speak in. The priests tried to
prevent them from going to hear me, but they
said they must hear me. And every day for
five days that large hall was crammed. On
the fifth day I told them that the next day
would be my last day amongst them, and I
promised to give them a Bible. I said,
“ keep your Bible, and do not let the priests
take it from you. As the sun shines on the
!>oorest man as much as on the rich, so the
ight of the Gospel is for you, as much as for
the Pope or any one else.” But when the
Bishop heard of this, he said, “We must
get rid of him and he went to the lowest
dregs of society and engaged men to take
my life. At ten o’clock forty converted
young men who had heard of the pl"t, told
me that I was to be killed that night, that |
these men were to come at one o’clock to set
the house on fire and kill me, and they
implored me to leave the place. I said, “My
friends, I came here in the name of Christ,
a soldier of the cross. I came to fight, and
I will fight to the end. If it is the will of
God that I should die to-night, it is just as
easy to die to-night as to-morrow.” They
said, “You cannot prevent us from putting
a guard round the house.” I said, “Do as
you please about that, bpt my business
to-night is to pray, and to get some rest for
to-morrow’s work. Well, those forty young
men, well armed, remained outside and
inside the house, and when the murderers
came at one o’clock they were prevented
from approaching the house. They went
away, and a little before dawn, the young
; men supposing that there was no danger, left
in order to obtain a few hour’s rest. The
murderers then came back to the house. I
was on my knees praying to God, when I heard
I a terrible noise, the door was broken open,
and many people were coming up-stairs. I
went to the parlourtoseewhatwas the matter,
when I was at once surrounded by about fifty
men. Some had daggers and others sticks.
Another put a butcher’s knife to my breast,
and said, “ damned apostate, you are in our
hands, arid if you don’t swear you will
preach the Bible, you are a dead man and
the dagger was pressed hard on my breast,
and every moment I expected it to go through.
I Then I prayed to my Saviour, “ dear Jesus,
for my sake on the cross Thou hast given
Thy Hf« ; if it is Thy will to have my blood
shed to-day, may Thy will be done. ” The
murderers said, “We do not come here to
hear prayers ; swear you will not preach the
Bible.” And then the dagger had pressed
through to the bone, and every moment I
thought I would fall a corpse. I raised my
hands and said, “Oh, my God, they want
an oath from me. I will give them an oath.
So long as my tongue can speak I will
preach the Holy Word as I find it in the
Bible. ” And I said to them ‘ ‘ Strike the
blow.” But the Captain of my salvation was
there to protect His poor soldier. The
murderer, trembling, let the dagger fall at
my feet, and, with a trembling voice, he
said, “if you go away we will not kill you.”
It seems he meant me to go from the city,
but I thought he wished me to go from the
house. Well, I left the house, and went to
the mayor (a Scotchman, who is still living
—may God bless him) and told him of the
murderous attack upon me, and that I would
preach that day at any cost. I put myself
under the protection of the British flag, and
said that if I was killed he would have to
answer for my death He said, “I will
protect you and he ordered out the two
thousand soldiers who were in the garrison
at Quebec, and they came well-armed and
surrounded the house. The mayor took me
to the hall, and to about ten thousand of my
countrymen who had come to hear my last
address. I spoke for two hours, and gave
away six hundred Bibles. They received
them as thirsty men receive pure water, as
starving men receive bread. After that I
left the city of Quebec, and returned to
Illinois, to my countrymen whom I had
brought to Christ. I thought I would be at
peace for some time, but the Bishop sent five
priests, who swore in court that I had
burned a church. They tried to get me
sent to the Penitentiary for life. I was
taken prisoner and had to get bail. The
terrible battle began again. During two
years they brought seventy-five false wit-
11


nesses, who swore that I had set fire to the
church ; but God came to my help. We
proved that they had been told by the
priests in the confessional to swear falsely ;
but instead of Chiniquy being condemned
for life, the court sent the priest to gaol for
fifteen years for perjury. (Loud applause.) The j
first day I went to the city of Kentucky, I met |
a lady who had been a great friend of mine j
when I was a priest. She was enraged, and
said to me in the street, that it was a great
shame that I should be the cause of that
holy priest being kept in gaol; “ but,” said
she, “he is happy, he is such a holy priest
he is glad to be there. I have just been
taking some sweet cakes to him in his cell.”
Well, when she told me he was happy there,
I went to a merchant’s office and wrote to
the priest, “My dear sir, I have just heard
you are glad to be in gaol. If that be so,
there are two happy men in the world. You
are happy in gaol, and I am happy that you
are there instead of me.” (Laughter and
applause.) But the priest was not to be
happy long. The immense number of rats
that infested the prison troubled him, and
after six months, finding it was a bad invest-
ment, some of his friends cut the bars of the
prison, and the bird flew away. He went
from Illinois by crooked ways to Canada,
where he told the people he had been rescued
by the Virgin Mary, who came one night
and opened the door of the gaol. The
Boman Catholics in Montreal believed the
story. Like the Bishop of Chicago, he
had the good sense to die soon after. 1 have
been brought before the Criminal Court
thirty-four times. It has cost me 14,000
dollars to save my life and my honour. But
I have no bad feeling against the Boman
Catholics. I know it is the duty of the
Church of Borne to kill me. If ther do not
do it, it is because they fear to be punished.
The only thing we can do is to pity them
to pray for them, to give them good example.
The Church of Borne is shaken in Canada.
As I have told you, 25,000 French Canadians
the 1 times they could not refrain
have sent their names to the Bishop to say
that they have given up the Church of Borne.
Among these are twelve priests who are
helping me. We must fight the battle, and
you must come to my help with your prayers
and with material help. Though your dis-
tance from them appears great, yet these
people are your neighbours, your sisters, and
your brothers. You must do something for
them. Ido not come here to beg for myself.
I have been a rich man, and, thanks be to
God, my hands can still plant the corn on
the plains of Illinois for my own sustenance.
But I am at the head of a great work, and I
must have help. The Church of Rome will
never cease to persecute me. It is only four
months since the last suit against me was
stopped. I must build churches for those
converts who have been ruined by the priests.
Many of them have lost their lands, and had
their inheritance taken from them by their
| parents. They are outcasts; and for that
I reason 1 want you to help me with your
1 money. Ido not want anything for myself,
jlf you do not think the work is worth
support, or the address not worth anything,
do not give anything. But if you think the
lecturer, who has come so far to give you
these details, is worth support, give, not to
Chiniquy, but for the work. When I left I
had a dozen young men weeping and sayings
“Chiniquy, will you forget us? We are
preparing ourselves for the ministry, but we
| have not a cent.” No, my friends, I said, I
i will not forget you, and I will send you
I what you want. Do help me, friends, and
may the Lord bless yon for your noble gifts,
j (Loud applause.)
During the lecture Mr. Chiniquy requested
the audience not to applaud, but several
from expressing
their approval in a very demonstrative
manner.
The pronouncing of the benediction and
the singing of the National Anthem brought
the meeting to a close.
IS THE CHURCH OF ROME A BRANCH OF THE CHURCH
OF CHRIST; OR, IS IT OLD HEATHENISM
UNDER A
The subject of this evening’s lecture was
“Is the Church of Borne a branch of the
Church of Christ; or is it Old Heathenism
under a Christian name ?” The Chair was
occupied by Mr. Goodlet, and there were
on the platform the Bevs. C. Stead, T. S.
Forsyth, G. Sutherland, D. Galloway, W.
Beg, D. Allen, T. Elder, W. Allworth, Lewis
Scott, and several prominent lay gentlemen.
The Bishop of Goulburn was also present in
CHRISTIAN NAME 1
was 1 the audience. The Bev. Canon Allworth
the gave out a hymn which was sung by the
lism audience, and Pastor Allen offered up
prayer.
The Bev. Mr. Chiniquy said, —Dear
Christian friends, I have to speak on a very
solemn subject to-night. Some time ago the
Boman Catholic Archbishop of this city
asked the question, “ Are the Protestant
Churches a branch of the Church of Christ V*
12


-•an'd he replied, “No!” I will put the
question, ‘ ‘ Is the Church of Rome a branch
of the Church of Christ, or is it only old
Heathenism under a Christian name ?” and
with the help of God I will prove to you
■that she is an idolatrous Church ; that long
ago she threw away the true worship of
'Christ; that the Pope is nothing else but a
man who has gone to Rome and stolen there
from the temples of the Pagans their Jupiter
Tonans, and written on the forehead of that
false God the sacred name of Jesus Christ;
and that he has presented that idol to the
world, under the name of the Saviour of the
world. I do not come here to abuse the
Roman Catholics, I would prefer to have my
tongue cut out and eaten by the dogs, than to
speak against the Roman Catholics. No ! I
come here to tell them the sacred truth, the
saving truth ; and not only to give them the
truth, but to prove it. In the Church of
Rome there are many good things which I
admire. In many things the Roman Catholics
are your superiors, Protestants ! I have
travelled a great deal, in England, Scotland,
Ireland, France, all over Europe, and the
■continent of America, and I am sure that
■everywhere I have been, the Roman Catholics
are more in earnest for their faith, though it
is a false faith, than you are for the true
religion. consider it as not theirs, but
as belonging to God. Everything they have
they will put at the feet of the priest. The
■only thing they have in their mind is that
their Church should rule the world. And it
is because they are true to their principles,
and you are not true to yours that God permits
them to have so much power. It is only by
miraculous operation of the grace of God
that the Church of Rome will be conquered.
In the United States they are gaining ground
rapidly, because they are more in earnest for
their Church. In England, and in old Scot-
land too, they are gaining ground, I do not
know how they stand here, but I leave it to
you to see if they are your superiors in zeal
and devotedness to their principles. I fear
at the last day that when the Roman Catho-
lics are compared with you Protestants, it
will be found, as a general thing, that they
have been more in earnest, more zealous,
and have made more sacrifices for their
Church than you have for yours. Now
my friends, the Church of Rome speaks of
■Christ. His name is always on her lips.
Beautiful hymns in His honour are sung in
her temples. No doubt some of you when
you heard I was going to speak of the Church
•of Rome as an idolatrous church, thought I
was going too far, and that I exaggerated,
and was uncharitable. /My friends, at my
age, when I expect every day that God will
call me to give an account of my administra-
tion, I do not exaggerate. Every word is
.solemn under such circumstances, and I
speak to you in the presence of God the
words of truth. And I hope, if there be
any Roman Catholics here to-night, that
they will, with the grace and mercy of God,
understand me. In the Church of Rome
they worship a Christ, but it is a false
Christ. They pray to a Christ, they kneel
down before a Christ, they adore him as the
Son of God; but he is a false Christ, an
idol. You remember that our Saviour said,
“ If any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is
Christ, or there ; believe it not. For there
shall arise false Christs and false Prophets,
and shall show great signs and wonders;
insomuch that, if it were possible, they shall
say unto you, Behold He is in the desert, go
not forth ; behold He is in the secretjcham-
bers, believe it not. ” Matthew, chap. xxiv.
verses 23 to 26. Christ comes to warn us
that in these latter days there would be false
Christs who would establish such a beautiful
religion, and do such wonderful things, that
even the elect would be in danger of being
deceived. Now, my friends, where is the
church which constantly speaks of miracles
and her marvellous deeds ? It is the Church
of Rome. I have seen in that church
wonderful things, things which I considered
miraculous. And I even had the reputation
of having performed several miracles, And
at the time I was so completely deceived,
that I believed them to be miracles. It is
easy to know that grand, marvellous,
powerful establishment, which is so wise, so
full of common sense, that she deceives
almost the elect. Our Saviour says these
false Christs will have three characters, and
the Christ adored by the Church of Rome
possesses these three characters. The first
character is that, generally speaking, the
false Christs will live in a deserted place, in
a desert; the second is that, they will some-
times be here, sometimes be there ; and the
third character is, that they will dwell in
secret chambers. Now,jl will show you as
clearly as that two and two make four, that
these Christs are nothing else but the Christs
of the Church of Rome. I will now tell
you how the Church of Rome is made every
day by every priest. When I was a priest,
I have made it thousands of times. How
many times I have told my servant girl that
I had no more good gods in my tabernacle,
and requested her to make me some wafers.
She used to first mix some flour and water
into dough, which she would then place
between two warm irons, and cut into wafers
of different sizes. These I would take, per-
haps two hundred at a time, and laying them
on what is called the altar, I would pro-
nounce over them these five magic words —
* Hoe est enim corpus meum. ” And I had
to believe that as soon as the last words were
uttered, each wafer was Jesus Christ, this
God who had created me, my God who had.
13


shed His, blood to pay my debts, my God
who between heaven and earth on Calvary
had difid to save the world. And I believed
it. I was an honest man in my belief, and
the priests of Rome are honest in their
fnghtful blindness. After I had knelt down
and adored the God whom I had made, I
raised it above my head, and said to the
people, “ Come and adore your God, made
man for you, who died on Calvary to save
you.” And the poor blind people fell
down on their knees, brought their faces to
the ground, and worshipped the god I had
made. I used to put five or six of these
little gods into a small silver box, which I
carried everywhere when I was leaving the
city. These were to be given to the sick and
the dying whom I might visit. When Mi.
Donohoe fell sick at one end of the village, I
had to go and give him one of my Christs,
and the next day when Bridget O’Brien fell
sick at the other end of the village, I had to
carry her one of these Christs. So this
Christ of Rome was here to-day and there
to-morrow ; to-day he was at one end of the
village, and now he was in my pocket. So
you see the first part of the prophecy was
complete. Christ said, ‘ ‘ When they tell
you Christ is here or there, do not believe it.”
But the Pope says, “Believe it.” When
the Pope says Christ is at the northern end
of Sydney, the poor Roman Catholics run
there and adore Him ; and when he says He
is at the southern end, they rush there and
give Him worship ; and they fly to the west
and the east to worship their Christ. Now
mind, I do not say this to turn the Roman
Catholics into ridicule. I say, in the presence
of Almighty God, those who have eyes to
see let them see, those who have ears to ear
let them ear, let them use their intelli-
gence, let them search their Bible and see
what it says The second character of the
false Christs of Rome is, that they will
remain in a deserted place. Now, there is
not a more deserted place in the world than
a church. People go there to pray, but
nobody remains there, nobody makes their
home there. As soon as service is over, the
church is deserted. The third character of
the false Christ is, that he will dwell in a
secret chamber. Here is the great test by
which we know the false character of the
Christ of Rome. When I had finished say-
ing my mass and had put a few wafers in my
little silver box, I put the rest, sometimes a
hundred, into a secret chamber, which is
called the tabernacle, and of which I had
the key. Perhaps some of you will not
believe what I tell you, but I will force you
to believe. Let any one of you go to the
Bishop of Sydney, to-morrow morning, and
say to him, “ Chiniquy has come to give us
a lecture, but we fear he is crazy. He has
told us things about your religion, but we
cannot believe them. Will you please come
into your church and answer us some ques-
tions we will put ?” As a gentleman he will
go with you to his cathedral, and when you
arrive before the altar, look up, and you will
see a beautiful little door, which is a master-
piece in its way. All that is rich, and
precious, and beautiful, is put on that door.
Ask the Bishop if there is a scret chamber
behind that door, and he will answer, yes.
Then ask him if there is anybody in that
chamber, or what is the name of the person-
age who is in it. He will tell you that Jesus
Christ is there. You will say, “We pre-
sume, sir, that you mean that it is something
to represent Christ, some memorial of Him.
You do not wish us to believe that it Is Jesus
Christ Himself, who is therein person.” The
Bishop will answer, “Yes, sir, it is Jesus
Christ, the Son of God, the liviug Christ,
the Son of God who died on Calvary for you.”'
If the Bishop does not say this, I consent to
be hung in your city to-morrow. Thus you
will hear, not from the lips of Chiniquy, but
from a Romish bishop, that the terrible
prophecy of Christ is accomplished. You
will hear from the lips of that bishop, against,
whom I have not a word to say, except that
he is terribly in the wrong, as I was, that
the false Christs foretold by the Saviour of
the World are 'worshipped at your door, that
they reign over multitudes, and are dragging
them to perdition. Now, my friends, not a
priest will dare to come before me and discuss
this matter. I have challenged them every-
where, but not one has dared to show his
head. They are mute. They know I have
the right end of the stick. My friends, you
are laying the foundation of a mighty
country here, nearly as large as Europe, richer
than Europe, with a climate more beautiful
than that of Europe. Sooner or later the
overflow of Europe will come here, the work-
ing man as well as the man of culture and
wealth. And my missi m here is to help you
to lay a good foundation for this future gieat
country. And out of regard for you and
your country, I will have done that which I
have never done before. I have brought
here the machine with which the gods of
Rome are made. [The rev. gentleman here
showed to the audience the apparatus which,,
in ignorance of the technical term, we will
call the heating iron.] He explained again
the whole process of the manufacture of the-
gods of Rome. The apparatus consists of
two small slabs of steel, about six inches
long, four inches broad, and half an inch
thick. On the inner side of one are engraved
two circles, about three inches in diameter,
and two about one-and-a-quarter inches in.
diameter. Each circle surrounds a figure of
Christ on a cross. To each of the slabs is
affixed an iron handle, about thirty inches
long, and these cross each other, and are
14


united about four inches from the slabs. In
short, the whole apparatus has the appear-
ance of a huge ungainly looking pair of
pincers, with the nipping part flattened. This
heating iron having been warmed in the fire,
the dough is placed on it, the handles are
■compressed, and what went in as a bit of
sticky dough, emerges as an orthodox wafer,
bearing an impression of Christ on a cross,
and only requiring the five magic words of
the priest to transform it into the body and
blood, bones and divinity of Jesus Christ.
The scraps of dough not used in the manu-
fac'uring process, the rev. gentleman ex-
plained, were generally eaten by his servant
girl, who was very fond of them. He also
showed some wafers which he had made, and
informed the audience that the larger ones
were for the priest, and the smaller ones for
the people. He then said—What I am doing
is more serious than you may think, as by
the laws of the Church of Rome I am liable
to be burned to death for my action. In
Montreal they tried to kill me. Calvin and
Knox did not dare to do this, but I think it
is a splendid argument to bring against the
Church of Rome. I have made these gods
publicly, as a priest of Rome. I have
received from the Pope the power to change
these wafers into the Christ of Rome, When
in Montreal, a little more than a year ago,
I published in the Press that I would publicly
make the gods of Rome, and unmake them,
that there would be a hand-to-hand battle
between Chiniquy and the Christs of Rome,
and that I would show to the poor deluded
Roman Catholics that their Christ is nothing
but a contemptible idol. When this was
published, the greater part of the Protestants
■of Montreal trembled, because the news
went round like lightning that the Roman
■Catholics would kill me; and of course,
many others who would come to defend my
life would be killed. And the Press, even
the religious Protestant Press, too, said I
was going too far, that there would be a riot
and blood shed, and that I would be killed.
I said, “ Let riots come. Let the blood run
i;o the knees in your streets. Let the City of
Montreal be razed to the ground. Let
'Chiniquy be slaughtered, but let the Gospel
be preached.” (Cheers.) “My life is
nothing,” said I, “but three hundred years
have passed since the days of the Reforma-
tion, and this argument has never been used.
Nobody has dared to use it, because there is
the penalty of death attached to it; but I
■do not care about dying.” Well, you have
never seen such an uproar as there was in the
■city. More than ten times they attempted
to kill me. In the middle of the week I
met a tall gentleman in the street, a stranger
to me, and evidently a French
He stopped me and asked “Are you
"Chiniquy the priest who has left his re-
ligion ?” I said, “Yes, sir, lam Chiniquy,
but I have not left my religion, I have left
the religion of the Pope. My religion is the
religion which Christ brought to me.” He
was enraged, and said, “You have only
eight days to live.” “Ah !” I said, my
friend, “ I am very happy to know that.
You are not sure you have eight days to live.
I thought this morning I might die to-day,
but I am glad I have seven more days to
live.” (Laughter.) He saw the joke, and
went away ashamed. Then the Roman
Catholic young men of Montreal went to
their priest and asked if they had permission
to kill me. The priest said “Yes, we have
admonished Chiniquy twice, but as he has
refused to come back to the Church of Rome
you may kill him.” Well, they put at their
head a young man, nobly born, who had just
finished his studies with immense success.
He had won all the gold medals of the
college, was a fine singer, and was the pet of
the priests. He used to go to confession,
and to mass and was a really honest young
man. These young men got him to go at
their head, and they said, “ Jean, if that
infamons Chiniquy dares to make the wafers
and to destroy them, we will kill him, and
you must go with us.” And he went
willingly. The next Sabbath, when I went
to the church, I found it crammed, and
thousands outside who could not enter.
With difficulty I passed through their ranks
to the pulpit. Then, taking my Bible, I
pointed out the abominable idolatry of the
Church of Rome, and that the second com-
mandment had forbidden man to make his
God ; and I showed them that their Church
was the false Church mentioned in the
prophecy. I said, “ Your priests have told
you that if such a wicked man as I dare to
show any disrespect to your Christ, the
wafer ; if I dare to profane it, and if I dare
to pronounce the holy words of consecration,
there will be great wonders, and thunder
and lightning, and God will punish me with
instant death.” The Bishop was almost sure
of that, as he had engaged a hundred men to
kill me. I said, “My friends, attention!
In the books of the Church of Rome, it says
a priest has always the power to change the
wafer into your Christ, and that no pope
can take that power from him, even suppose
he should leave the Church. I now use that
power, and you will not hear any thunder
coming to crush me.” Directly I pronounced
these words over the wafers, of which I had
two or three thousand before me, forty or
fifty Roman Catholics cried out, thinking
the church would fall on them, and rushed
out; when they saw the thunder did not
come, they came back to hear the rest, I
said, “ Now, this wafer is your God, is your
Christ, but I will show you your Christ is a
very feeble personage in the presence of the
15


big Chiniquy ; and taking my knife I cut it
into a thousand pieces. And I said, “ Your
Church tells you that if the wafer breaks,
there are as many Christs as pieces ; so you
see I have made you about a thousand false
Christs.” I was not killed, no thunder or
lightning came, and during the rest of the
service I spoke kindly to the Roman
Catholics, without any bitterness. They
were silent and respectful. I went through
the crowd, and nobody touched me, and I
saw tears trickling on many faces. What
was the result of the evening’s service ? The
next morning, when the church-bell rang for
mass, Jean’s father, who was a rich man,
called him to accompany him to church ; but
Jean said, “I will not go any more, father,
as I do not believe a man c*n make Christ
with a wafer.” “Oh! my God!” said the
father, “ you have been to hear that impos-
tor Chiniquy, he has destroyed yon, “Oh!
my son, you are lost!” The son said,
“ Don’t trouble yourself, father, Chiniquy is
not an impostor. He has shewn that we
are a lot of fools in the Church of Rome to
believe a man can make his God out of a
wafer. I am not lost, fatner; Jesus Christ
is my salvation, I will follow him.” jThe
father said, “I will go and hear Chiniquy,
and take his address, word for word ; and I
will show you he is an impostor, that he is
against the Scriptures, and the Holy Fathers,”
The son pressed the father to come to hear
me the next Sabbath, and he promised, if his
father could show him Chiniquy was wrong,
he would go back to the Church of Rome.
Next Sabbath, the father, a man of about
sixty, was there ; he was a fine-looking old
man, well educated, and a real gentleman.
I gave out a very touching hymn, and before
it was finished, I could see tears in his eyes.
He had never heard our beautiful hymns.
Already the grace of God was coming upon
that honest man. During my prayer, the
tears still trickled down his cheeks, and when
I spoke, his heart was completely melted.
At the conclusion, he came to me, and with
tears of joy, he said, ‘‘ Mr. Chiniquy, may
God bless you, you have opened my eyes. I
see'we are miserable idolaters.” More than
100 young men were converted by those two
addresses. The Protestants who had con-
demned me, came and said that it was the
best argument I could use. The Jesuits
went to the judge the next day, and said
that, as the law of the land was the Fx-ench
law, I was liable to be hung and burned for
having profaned the host; and they wished
that law put into effect. The judge said,
“Yes, that is the law; but I would advise
you not to hang Chiniquy yet; there are too
many Orangemen in the city.” (Cheers.) And
they have not hung me yet. (Laughter and
cheers.) Now, friends, I will make a pro-
position to you. You know I want to build
a church for a congregation of converts, in.
the place of the one which the Roman
Catholics burned down. lam no beggar, I
have been a rich man ; but I do not want a
cent for myself. Now, to everyone who will
give me, say half-a-crown for my Church, I
will give one of the large wafers, and to
every one who gives a shilling, I will give
one of the smaller ones Ido not wish to
turn the affair into ridicule ; but it is that
you may see with > our eyes, and touch with
your hands, an idol of Rome, and that you
may put an end to the boasting, priestly
arrogance, which says that out of the Church
of Rome there is no salvation, and put an
end to the insulting name of heretic,by which
they call you. Put one of these wafers in a
public place, and your children will leam
what the Church of Rome is. Thousands of
Roman Catholics have been converted by
this argument. It is an argument which is-
seen. It is not a metaphysical argument, it
is a tangible one; it is what is called one of the
brutal arguments of facts. Now, my friends,,
in conclusion : Go to the Roman Catholics,
speak to them kindly, and with words of
charity. Don’t put to them the question
which has often been put to me, “ How is it
that you and so many others of intelligence
could believe such foolishness ?” It was
because I was blind You know that Christ,
opened the eyes of a young man once. The
priests of Jerusalem asked him how it waa
done. He said, “ I don’t know. All that I
know is that a man called Jesus passed by
me and touched my eyes, and now I see. I
know I was blind, and that now my eyes are
opened.” Well, I was born blind, I waa
raised in the dark region of death ; but one
day Jesus passed by me and opened the eyes
of my soul, and I saw; and I ask you to
bless Him for ever for His kindness to His
unprofitable servant.
The proceedings were concluded with
praise and prayer by the Rev. Mr. Suther-
land. and the singing of the National.
Anthem,
16


ROME AND LIBERTY
The hall was well filled on Saturday evening,
and, as usual, the platform was occupied by
clergymen and lay gentlemen. Mr. R.
McCoy took the chair. The rev. lecturer
took for his subject, “Rome and liberty of
conscience.” He said, —My Christian friends
—the subject of my address is very painful
to me. It is with a sad heart that I look
back upon the rivers of blood and the
torrents of tears, of Avhich the Church of
Rome has been the cause. lam sad when I
look back three hundred years, and see those
Eriests of Rome lighting with their own
ands the fires Avhich consumed father,
mother, and children alike ; and going all
over Europe, dagger and sword in hand,
Siercing the bosoms of the multitudes who
iffered from them in religion. The reason
of my sadness is that 1 love the Roman
Catholics, and the more you love a person
the more you are sad when you know his
hand is reddened with blood. If you have
a dear friend in whom there is something
exceedingly Avrong, you are sad. The Roman
Catholics are walking in the wrong track,
their Church has put them out of the pale of
civilization. I need not say they are out of the
pale of Christianity, as that is too evident.
But they are outside civilization, and many of
them do not suspect it. Ido not come here
to abuse my friends of the Church of Rome ;
but I come, with the help of God, to open
their eyes. Ido not ask them to believe
my mere word ; I want them to open their
OAvn books, the records of their own Church,
and judge whether I say a word which is
not recorded in their own history. The
Church of Rome is the deadly enemy of
liberty She is ever plotting against all the
Lavs of God, and the liberties of men. And
if to-day she could take away from herself
her natural hatred of liberty of conscience,
to-morrow she would fall. She lives by
persecution ; hatred of liberty is her life,
her fundamental principle. I have read
their Councils for ten centuries back, and I
challenge the Bishop of the Church of Rome
here and his priests, publicly to deny that
there is a single Council that does not say
that heretics must be burned. All proclaim
that it is not only the right, it is the duty of
the Church of Rome to kill heretics, and to
press Governments to put to death everyone
who does not submit himself to the Pope.
I need not speak of the Council of Con-
stance, where they not only declared that
every heretic must be killed, but where
the bishops in that Council forced the Em-
Eeroi gto put to death one of the brightest
ghtsof past ages. And what did Pope Leo say
when writing to the Emperor about Luther ?
OF CONSCIENCE.
He said, “Why do you not go and burn that
heretic?” And it is so muchinthe natureof the-
Church of Rome to live by the death of her
enemies, that when the King of France com-
mitted the most horrible crime which the
world has ever seen, when he did a thing
which no nation the most savage and
degraded would do, a crime which has left
an eternal blot on the face of France, when
he ordered all the Protestants to be slaugh-
tered, and then expressed the hope that not
one had escaped, when 76,000 Protestants
were slain in cold blood in one night, the
Pope, when he received the news and heard
that the blood ran in the streets to the
horses’ knees, and that the river was choked
with dead bodies, when he heard with his
imagination the cries of the dyng and the
lamentations of mothers who were forced to
witness the slaughter of their children, felt
incredible joy. He raised his hands to God
and said, “May our mighty God be praised.”
He sent a letter of congratulation to the
King of France ; he gave a large sum of
money to the man who had brought him the
news ; he ordered all the bells of the city of
Rome to be rung, and all the cannons to be
fired. Now, my friends, search from the
beginning of the world in the histories of the
most infamous nations, and tell me if you
can find anv deed of cruelty to be compared
with that, if you can find any such want of
humanity ? I say “humanity,” not “Chris-
tianity,” for there was no Christianity
possible in the heart of such a man as that
Pope. Now, Avas that Pope not a man that
he should do such things? He was a
man, and his heart would have oeen as kind
as that of the kindest man here, had he not
been Pope of Rome. But he was at the
head of the Church of Rome, and there was
something in him which came from hell and
destroyed every' sentiment of humanity.
When I Avas a priest, I had the reputation of
being a learned man. I must confess I never
Avas learned. I have studied exceedingly.
I have read as many books I dare say as any
man can read, but the more I read the more
I find I am desperately ignorant. I see,
every day, things which I knew nothing
about. But here is something which I do
know, and when I know a thing I know it.
(Laughter). And if the Romish bishop is
brave enough to come forward and defend
his church, I Avill bring him to confess that
he has made a terrible mistake in so coming.
Now, when I was a priest I studied their
books, and here is one which I learned almost
by heart. It is their best book on
theology, their standard work. It is the
book Aviiich every priest who wishes to raise
17


'himself must study. This book is written
by their greatest theologian, a theologian
who has been put among the fathers of the
‘Church—Saint Thomas Aquinas ; and it is
called “ Summa Theolot/ica .” This book is
not put into the hands of everyon-'. If you
want to get it from the bishop I think you
will lose your time. (Laughter.) It is
■ approved by the Councils of the Church of
Rome, and once a year each priest of Rome
goes down on his knees and with his
Breviarum thanks God that it was written,
. and says it is so good that it is evident that
the Spirit of God inspired Saint Thomas
Aquinas to write it. As the book is in
Latin, I wish, to avoid suspicion, that some
person would come forward and read a pas-
sage and translate it? [As no one else
offered, the rev. lecturer handed the book to
the Rev. George Sutherland who read the
"following passage and translated it.—
<4 Though heretics must not be tolerated
ibecause they deserve it, we must bear with
them till, by a second admonition, they may
be brought back to the faith of the Church.
But those who, after a second admonition,
remain obstinate in their errors, must not
•only be excommunicated, but they must be
delivered to the secular power to be extermi-
nated.” Now Mr. Chairman do you under-
stand what the word “extermination” means.
(Laughter.) It is not said, We must try to
convert them, to give them more light;
no, it says “they must be exterminated.”
"When a priest of Rome, I had the reputation
•-of being a gentleman, but it was a gentle-
man in the manner of the Church of Rome,
. and in the presence of God I confess to you
that there was nothing I found so good, so
according to the laws of my Church, as
this sentence of condemnation to death of all
Protestants. And I have been raised in
their colleges in the belief that when the
■Church of Rome has killed, not thousands
but millions, she did well. When I read that
in France four millions of Protestants had
been killed, that in Piedmont more than half
. a million had been destroyed, that in Ger-
many they had been slaughtered by hundreds
■of thousands, that in the Netherlands the
blood of more than one hundred thousand
Protestants had been shed, that in France
75,000 had been slain in one night, I felt so
glad, and I only regretted that they had not
all been killed, and if it had been in my
power to put a million barrels of gunpowder
under the feet of the whole Protestant world,
I would willingly have applied the match to
blow them up, even though I knew I should
lose my life in the attempt. God knows I
say the truth. I would have done this with
pleasure, because my church told me (and I
believed her) that you Protestants are the
• enemies of God, that you are condemned to
hell, and that you are the only cause why
the Church of Rome is not mistress of the
world. And I hated the Protestants beyond
all expression. And there is not a single
Roman Catholic priest who, if he is honest,
would not make the same confession. It
seems incredible to say this of these gentle-
men, who always meet you with such fine
manners and smiling faces. But it is true.
Now, Protestants, is it necessary for me to
bring you back to the days of the Reforma-
tion, the days when the voice of God spoke
to your ancestors, and told them to take His
Word for a lamp to their path, and when the
Pope told the rulers to kill those heretics
who read the Bible ? Oh ! how interesting
it is to read of the noble young Hamilton, a
young man connected with the noblest
families of Scotland, who was condemned
to death for reading the Bible. Oh, it is
touching to see that young man preferring to
die rather than to kneel down before the
idols of Rome. How beautiful it must have
been to hear that noble young Scotchman at
the stake when the fire was coming to
consume his body, repeating these words—
“ How long, 0 Lord, shall darkness cover this
realm ? How long wilt thou suffer this tyranny
of men? Lord Jesus receive my spirit.”
And then he died, without any bad feeling
towards his persecutors, and asking Jesus
to receive his soul. Not long after,
Russell of Glasgow was martyred. He and
another young man were condemned to
die because they would not give up
their Bible. He said to his young friend
“Take courage! The sufferings through
which we pass will be short, and an eternity
of glory is there in store for us. Let us try
with our Master, Jesus, to enter by the same
strait gate through which He has entered. Be
sure death cannot destroy us, for it is already-
destroyed by Him for whose sake we suffer.”
And then He died, blessing the Lord. And
there was that woman whom Scotchmen
should never forget, Mrs. Robert Lamb, of
Perth. When she was asked by the Bishop
of Glasgow if she would pray to the
Virgin Mary, she said “No. I will pray
only to Jesus my Saviour, who died for me.
He told all sinners to come to Him He did
not tell them to go to Mary. I go to Him
because He shed His blood on Calvary for
me. Mary is a holy woman, but Jesus alone
saved me. ” She was condemned to death.
She asked the favour to die with her hus-
band, which was granted. As she walked
by his side she encouraged him to be firm.
‘ ‘ We have lived together here, and before
long we will be together in the Kingdom of
Christ for ever. Jesus calls thee, and I
follow thee.” And when her husband was
on the scaffold, with supernatural courage
she bade him adieu. He died, commending
his soul into the hands of Jesus. She was
taken to the river to be drowned. She had
18


in her arms her little child, which was only
a few months old. She pressed it to her
bosom, and as the waters were on the point
of drowning her, she kissed it for the last
time, and handed it to another woman to
take care of. And with a courage which
may be called divine, she accepted death,
she sang a hymn, and then passed from this
land of misery to take the crown of glory
which Jesus had prepared for her. Then
there was Wishart, who was confined in a
dungeon by the Cardinal of Sc. Andrew’s,
the Cardinal of all Scotland, and condemned
to death, because he would not give up his Bible,
because he would not invoke the name of
Mary instead of the name of Jesus, because
he would not bow down to the wafer-god of
Rome. I have been in that dungeon. I
have touched the walls where the Angels of
God were the witnesses of his prayers, when
that man knelt down and blessed his God,
because he had been chosen to suffer death
for Jesus Christ; and I have seen the place
where Wishart was burned. Perhaps some
of you will say, “These things are of the
past; why does Chiniquy come here to bring
trouble between Roman Catholics and Pro-
testants ; we are good friends.” I know
some will say that, because though I have
not been long here, I know there are
some weak-kneed Protestants among you.
And that class of men is the most con-
temptible in the world I will tell you
why I allude to these things. It is not to
induce you to have bad feelings towards the
Roman Catholics, but it is because you are on
a volcano, and you do not suspect it. My
friends you are condemned to death. This
evening I have read your condemnation. Every
priest here thinks he has the right, when
he will have the power, to put you to death.
Every bishop believes he has the right, not
only to your property, but to your life. In
the Church of Rome it is believed that no
Protestant has a right which a Roman
Catholic must respect. It is the law of the
Church of Rome. I will tell you of a very
strange thing which occurred in my expe-
rience You know that the bishops of the
United States determined to destroy me
when I had given up the Church of Rome.
At every session of the court my name was
called by the sheriff, among the criminals.
At every session of the court I had to stand
there on the bench among the greatest
criminals and the most infamous men. The
lawyers of the Pope were paid to heap upon
my head the most horrible abuse. Sometimes
they spoke for two hours at a time trying
to overwhelm me with insults and calling me
by every bad name. They called me ‘ ‘ a
murderer,” “a thief,’ and they accused me
of crimes so horrible that I cannot name
them here. (Sensation.) Well, after enduring
this for fifteen years, I went to one of the best
lawyers of Illinois, and asked if I had not:
the right to bring the bishop before the
court, and make him swear that it was his
duty to destroy me, make him prove from
his own books that it was his duty to take
away my life. He said I had the right, and
he expressed surprise when I told him I could
prove that. The bishop was summoned to •
appear before the judge. He said to the '
sheriff “I have no business at the court.
I have no case against Chiniquy. I refuse
to go.’’ The sheriff said, “If you do not
come I will put you in gaol.” (Cheers.)'
Then he came. The court was crowded,
many Roman Catholics being there. Then
before the Court of Kankakee I took this copy
of .Aquinas, and I said to the bishop, “Do
you know this book ?” He turned the book
over and •ver for a long thne, but he would
not answer. The sheriff told him if he did not
answer he would send him to gaol. (Cheers.) •
He then said, “Yes, I know it.” I then
said to the judge, “ Please askthatgentleman
if that book is a book of the laws of his
church.” The judge put the question, but the
bishop did not answer. When he had again to
choose between answering the question and
going to gaol, he said “ Yes, it is a book of
the church. ” I then said to the court, ‘ ‘Please ■
ask that gentleman to translate this into good
English.” And the poor bishop, under oath,
was forced to say to the judge and to thn
Protestant lawyers there, and to the Protes-
tant public that heretics must only be
tolerated when the Church of Rome can-
not help it; but, that directly she has
the power, they must be exterminated.
The judge said “Is it possible you will ex-
terminate me, sir. It is very strange ; is it
correct?” (Laughter.) The bishop said
“ Yes.” That was not all. I had several other
books. The bishop had, under oath, to
swear to the correctness of this. “Though
heretics who repent must always be, accepted
to penance, as often as they have fallen,
they must in consequence of that,
always be permitted to enjoy the bene-
fits of this life. When they fall again
they are admitted to repent, but the
sentence of death must not be removed.”
Suppose Chiniquy were to repent, he w'ould
go to the bishop and receive his pardon and
absolution, and he would then invite some
one to cut his (Chiniquy’s) throat. (Laughter.)
They reason that though my sins would be for-
given, I would not have the right to live any
more, and that I could not complain, because,.
my sins being forgiven and I being killed, I
would go to heaven straight. (Laughter. >
Here is another oath to which the Bishop had
to swear—“We excommunicate and anathe-
matise every heresy that exalts itself against
the holy, orthodox, and Catholic faith, con-
demning all heretics, by whatever name they
may be known—for though their faces differ,.
19


"they are tied together by their tails. Such these laws. And the bishops are bound by
as are condemned are to be delivered over to oath to believe that these laws of extermi-
the existing secular powers, to receive due
Sunishment. If laymen, their goods must
e confiscated. If priests, they shall be first
degraded from their respective orders, and
their property applied to the use of the
Ghurch in which they have officiated.
Secular powers of all ranks and degrees are
to be warned, induced, and, if necessary,
compelled by ecclesiastical censures, to
swear that they will exert themselves to the
utmost in the defence of the faith, and extir-
pate all heretics denounced by the Church,
who shall be found in their territories. And
whenever any person shall assume govern-
ment, whether it be spiritual or temporal,
he shall be bound to abide by this decree.
If any temporal lord, after having been
admonished and required by the Church,
shall neglect to clear his territory of
heretical depravity, the metropolitan and
the bishops of the provinces shall unite in
•excommunicating him. Should he remain
contumacious a whole year, the fact shall be
signified to the Supreme Pontiff, who will
declare his vassals released from their alle-
gience from that time, and will bestow his
territory on Catholics, to be occupied by them,
on the condition of exterminating the heretics
and preserving the said territory in the faith.
Catholics who shall assume the cross for the
extermination of heretics shall enjoy the same
indulgences, and be protected by the same
privileges as are granted to those who go to
the help of the holy land. We decree further,
that idl who may have dealings with heretics,
and especially such as receive, defend, or
-encourage them, shall be excommunicated.
He shall not be eligible to any public office.
He shall not be admitted as a witness. He
shall neither have the power to bequeath his
property by will, nor to succeed to any
inheritance He shall not bring any action
against any person, but any one can bring
an action against him. Should he be a judge,
his decision shall have no force, nor shall
any cause be brought before him. Should
he be an advocate, he shall not be allowed to
plead. Should he be a lawyer, no instru-
ments made by him shall be held valid, but
shall be condemned with their author ”
So Protestants you see you have no right to
your property, nor to your lives. They
belong to his Holiness the Pope. (Laughter.)
And this bishop had to swear that before
the Court of Kankakee. Some will perhaps
say that these laws are past and gone long
ago. But I tell you they are still the laws of
the Church of Rome. She has not repealed
these laws. In her last Council, held eight
years ago, she declared that those who do not
•believe in the practice of these laws are
g oing to hell, and that it is a crime unpar-
donable to condemn the church for passing
nation come from God, and should be put in
force directly they have the power. I will
read you a few extracts which I have made
from Roman Catholic journals in the States,
because I want to make things clear to you.
“ The Church is of necessity intolerant.
Heresy she endures when and where she
must. But she hates it, and she directs
all her energies to its destruction. If Catho-
lics ever gain an immense numerical
majority in this country (the United States),
religious freedom is at an end.” You see
they boast of it. “The Catholic world is
the medium and channel through which the
will of God is expressed. While the State
has rights, she has them only in virtue, and
by permission, of the superior authoxity, and
that authority can only be expressed through
the Church of Rome.” “Protestantism
of every form has not and never can have
any right where Catholicity has
triumphed, and therefore we lose the
breath we expend in declaiming against
bigotry and intolerance, and talking about
religious liberty, or the right of any man
to be of any religion as best pleases him.”
“The Church is instituted, as every Catho-
lic who understands his religion believes, to
guard and defend the right of God against
any and every enemy at all times, in all
places. She therefore does not and cannot
accept or in any degree favour liberty in the
Protestant sense of liberty.” “No man has
a right to choose his religion. Catholicism
is the most intolerant of creeds. It is
intolerance itself, for it is truth itself. We
might as rationally maintain that a sane
man has a right to believe that two and two
do not make four as this theory of religious
libert v. Its impiety is only equalled by its
absurdity.” “The American Catholic is to
wield his vote for the purpose of securing
Catholic ascendancy in this country. All
legislation must be governed by the will of
God unerringly indicated by the Pope.
Education must be controlled by Catholic
authorities, and under education the opinions
of the individual and the utterances of the
press are included, and many opinions are to
be punished by the secular arm under the
authority of the Church, even to war and
bloodshed.” I could keep you all nightreading
extracts of this kind. It is certain that before
long you will hear that the Church of Rome is
triumphing there, that she rules that great
magnificent country, but you will hear
at the same time of a terrible conflict—
the Protestants will not bear that
tyranny. (Loud applause.) f Perhaps the
Roman Catholics here will tell you in conver-
sation and in their press, that the Protestants
have killed the Roman Catholics. I know it. I
acknowledge that the Protestants have killed
20


-the Roman Catholics; but why? Because
the Protestants were forced to defend them-
■sdoes and punish their murderers. If the
Roman Catholics put these murderous laws
into execution, the Protestants must defend
themselves. Many times when I have been
speaking in places where the Protestants
were in a minority, the Roman Catholics
have come round the building, and the
stones have fallen round me like hail, and
wounded me so that I thought every moment
would be my last. I have been surrounded
many times by more than a thousand men,
but by the Providence of God my life has
been saved. But the Orangemen were
always ready to protect me, and received
many times the blows that were aimed at me.
Several, in protecting me, have been killed.
Now, after six months of such persecu-
tion, four Orangemen went to Bishop
Bourget of Montreal, and said to him,
■“We conquered Canada about 100 years
ago. When we conquered it we gave
you liberty of conscience ; but it was on
condition that we should have that liberty
also. At present we have not that liberty.
Yon think that you have the right to pre-
vent us from worshipping God as we wish,
and from speaking to each other publicly,
and here is a man whom you have wounded,
and whom we have invited here. We are
•come here to tell you something. If
■Ghiniquy is killed, we are 300,000 men
sworn to ©ome to Montreal, and the next
week after his death, not a priest or nun
-will be seen. All your Churches
will be swept away as if by a hurricane.
Now, good-bye.” (Great cheering.) And
the four men left. Well, the very same day
the Bishop sent his priest to tell the people
.not to kill Chiuiquy, or those infamous
■Orangemen would kill them. It was so in
•Scotland and in England. After the Protest-
.ante had been burned at the stake, after
their blood had run like rivers, they began to
defend themselves. And the argument
which the Roman Catholics deemed so good,
they could surely not object to. Here is a
question which I would like to put to
Bishop Vaughan of this city. What
assembly of priests and bishops have declared
that it is bad to slaughter Protestants ? In
what year did the Romish Church declare
that she was in error in putting Protestants
"to death ? I want him to tell me when the
Church of Rome repealed the bloody laws
which she passed in the days of old. You
will see that he cannot answer. The blood
of all the martyrs is still on her hands ; she
has never washed it away ; she has never
regretted it. Their priests come before you
and make fine speeches in favour of liberty
of conscience; and when you hear these
beautiful words, you think they understand
them in the same sense as you. But you are
deceived. When a priest of Rome speaks
of liberty of conscience, it means that you
must let him do with you as he pleases, and
cut your throat when he can do it without
any danger. Now, my friends, what must
we conclude ? Must we go to the Romaa
Catholics and hate them, and slander them,
and punish them ? No. Among the Roman
Catholics there are two kinds —good and
bad. You have nothing to fear from the
bad Roman Catholics. If the priests of
Rome told them to molest you, they would
not do it. But a good Roman Catholic
would cut your throat as soon as he would
cut the throat of a rat The good Roman
Catholic will obey his priest in everything.
But by chance there are many Roman
Catholics who have more sense than that.
They have mixed with you Protestants, and
the light of the Gospel, the spirit of the
Gospel, the principles of the Gospel, the
principles of humanity and charity which
are your life, the atmosphere which you
Christian nations breathe, the atmosphere of
liberty, of fair play, these things-have had a
powerful influence on them. They breathe in
this atmosphere of liberty ; and though they
retain the name of Roman Catholics, they
see that it is Protestant liberty which makes
a nation great, and they will not obey their
priests in these things. And that is your
security. But pray God the time will never
come when the Church of Rome will have
the upper hand. I can prove to you by
their own writings, which are in ray hands,
that Manning’s intention is to do all in his
power to bring a general war of extermina-
tion against the Protestants, and against all
those who are opposed to his Government.
Manning you know was an Episcopalian, and
turned to the Romish Church, as many
of his school have done, and as many
more will do, and the sooner the better.
(Hear, hear.) These Ritualists are only
Roman Catholics in disguise. These are the
bloody words pronounced by Manning not
long ago. “ Now, when the nations of
Europe have revolted and when they have
dethroned, as far as men can dethrone, the
Vicar of Jesus Christ, and when they have
made the usurpation of the Holy City a part
of international law when all this has been
done there is only one solution of the diffi-
I culty—a solution 1 fear impending, and that
is the terrible scourge of continental war, A
WAR WHICH WILL EXCEED THE HORRORS OTf
ANV OF THE WARS OF THE FIRST EMPIRE.
I do not see how this can be averted, and it
is my firm conviction that in spite of all
obstacles the Vicar of Jesus Christ will
be put again in his own rightful place.”
Every word here smells of human blood.
That man wants the Roman Catholics to
take sword in hand and cover Europe with
blood. He wants to implicate the Italians
21


in a war till they be nearly all killed, and
when that beautiful country is bereft of men
he will put the Pope on his throne, though
that throne be raised on the dead bodies of a
million men, and though he will have swum
through rivers of blood to reach it. And
the Roman Catholics will be happy to look
at Europe in ruins, if the Pope can only be
put on his throne. I know it is the intention
of the Church of Rome to bring on a general
war of religion, and that war will „ come
before long. I pray my God that you will
not see those days, but I do not fear for the
issue, because I know God will be, as He
always has been, at the head of His soldiers
of liberty. And all those plots of the
priests .and bishops of Rome against human
liberty will bring on them the wrath of God.
But this result will come only after the whole
world will have been plunged in a terrible
war. Now, my friends, it is not Chiniquy
who says these things ; it is the Church of
Rome herself. You remember that when
our dear Saviour was approaching a certain
city, the people would not receive Him, and
they told Him to go to another place: and the
disciples wished Him to allow them to bring
down fire from Heaven on these people ;
Jesus told them that they did not know
what they asked, that the Son of Man had
not come to destroy men, but to save them.
And when Peter at the last hour, when our
dear Saviour was taken by His murderers,
took his sword and cut off an ear of one of
them, Jesus told him to return the j
and sword to its scabbard, for he who used the
men j sword would perish by the sword. And in
mgh : this particular, the Church of Rome differs
of a from the Church of Christ, and proves that
funi she is the Church of the Devil. Jesus says,
And j “ I do not want men to be killed for not
look accepting my Gospel; Ido not want them
be |to be killed for injuring Me.” But the
tion Pope says, “I want all those who do not
era! obey, to be slaughtered, to be exterminated.”
ome j Here are the two religions. The reason the
will Pope and his bishops do not want their
the j people to read the Bible is, because they
He want to teach them that it is their right to
liers exterminate you, and because they will see by
the reading the Bible that those who make use of
man the sword to protect theirreligion, shall perish
lod. bythesword. May the great God of Heaven be
hole blessed for the great privileges which your
■ible ancestors have transmitted to you ; but
quy remember that those privileges of a free
i of Gospel and of liberty of conscience, arc sur-
hen rounded with perils ; that the Pope and his
tain bishops are determined to destroy them,
and When the day af conflict comes, I hope you
the will be true sons of the martyrs of old. I
ring hope, when the colours of liberty shall float
lie ; to the breeze, and God shall call all the
now soldiers of liberty to rally round His banners
had to support the great institutions for which
em. your ancestors bled, that everyone of the
our citizens of Australia will respond to the call,
ers, and that all the enemies of liberty will
i of disappear. (Applause.)
AURICULAE CONFESSION
The subject of the Rev. C. Chiniquy’s
lecture on Monday evening was “Auricular
Confession,” and only males were allowed
admission. The hall was crammed in every
part with an audience of about 2000 persons.
Long before eight o’clock the committee
were compelled to shut the iron gates to
keep at bay the immense crowd outside. Mr.
J. Roseby, M.L.A. occupied the chair, and
the platform was filled by clergymen and
prominent laymen. The rev. lecturer said :
My Christian friends, the mere mention of
the subject of my lecture brings up a dark
cloud in my mind. The simple fact of a
bachelor priest being allowed to pry to
the very bottom of a young girl’s heart is
revolting in the greatest degree. Unfortu-
I was a confessor for 25 years,
and have he ard the confessions of, I suppose,
about 100,000 men and women. I have
heard the confessions of bishops, priests and
nuns, of rich and poor, of old and young, and
I can truly say, in the presence of God, that
auricular confesion is one of the greatest im-
postures the world has ever seen. How
many times I have gone into the confessional-
ADDRESSED TO MEN ONLY.
box with a heavy heart, and wept bitter tears
because I was forced by the Church of Rome
to ask such questions as no gentleman
would ask. Words cannot tell you of the
horror which seized me every time I entered
that detestable place. I heard two voices
speaking to me. One of these was saying
‘ ‘ Are you not ashamed to hear such polluted
things ? Why do you not blush when you put
such questions to a timid girl or a respectable
lady ? If the husband could know what you
ask his wife, or if the father could know
what you ask his daughter, or if the brother
could know what you ask his sister, your
brains would have been blown out long ago.
Shame on you ! Come out from that pit of
iniquity. ” I had to believe that this
was the voice of Satan, and I shut my ears
to it and struggled against it. And there is
not a single Roman Catholic priest, if he is
honest, who will not tell you he has passed
through the same experience, but he has to-
believe that that voice which is coming from
heaven comes from hell The other voice I
heard was the voice ot the Pope saying
“ Remain in that box, you do well to hear
22


"the confessions of those men and women.
Remain there from morning till night, let
your heart be corrupted, let your soul be
■damned, it is your duty to be there.” One
■day I went to my father confessor, the
Bishop of Quebec, and told him that it
was my earnest belief that a priest
•could not hear confessions and not be
•corrupted. He said, “ 1 know well that
priests cannot hear these things without
being polluted.” “But,” said I, “if they
fall, they are lost.” “Oh, when they com-
mit sin in that way, they have only to go to
their father confessor and be forgiven,”
he said. A bishop who was first cousin to the
King of France, Charles X., and also his
secretary, came to Canada. His name was
Forbin Jan son, and he had been Bishop of
Be Nancy, Loraine, France. After confessing
to me one day, he told me that there
was a book I should have which would
guide me in putting questions to priests in
the confessional; it related to the sins of
priests. He gave me a copy which I have
to-day, and which anyone is at liberty to
read at my home This book confirms what
Pere Hyacinthe says, that ninety-nine priests
•out of a hundred fall and are polluted. And
Bear in mind that Hyacinthe’s statement
was publicly made in France and has never
been denied. I said to the Bishop of
Montreal that I was persuaded that auricular
■confession did not come from Christ, nor
from the apostles, but that it was an
addition. He said, “You are mistaken.
You read the Bible too much, and if you do
■so you will become a Protestant. You in-
terpret the Bible according to your owm
little intelligence instead of seeking the
unanimous consent of the fathers.” I said,
"“Neither Matthew, Mark, Luke nor John
mentions auricular confession. Paul wrote
fourteen epistles, Peter wrote two, and
-John wrote three, and there is not a word
in any of them about it.” He said, “I
acknowledge there is no direct mention
in Scripture about it, but it is in the
Holy Fathers.” “And where can I get
them,” I asked. He laughed at me and told
me it was a work of 200 volumes, and that
he had it not. I then went to a bookseller,
the father of the present Bishop of Montreal,
and asked him for the work. He said he
had not got it, as it was a work of such
magnitude that nobody would buy it. I
told him to get it for me, and he sent to
France for it. It cost me three hundred
■dollars. Well, I read the Holy Fathers
right through. I read the life of Paul the
Hermit of the third century. In his life
there is not a single mention of auricular
confession. It is evident, then, that hejived
without confessing his sin to man. I read
the life of Saint Mary of Egypt, who was a
woman of great beauty and a great criminal.
She was converted, and her name is in the
Saints’ Calendar, and every year the priests*
of Rome have to make a memorial of her.
Her history, written by one of the first of
the Hbly Fathers, goes into every detail of
her life, hut there is not a single word about
auricular confession in it. I then read the
life of Saint Cyprian, written by Pontius, in
the third century. This is the Saint who
had the great fight with Pope Stephen. The
Pope excommunicated him and he excom-
municated the Pope, and, despite this, the
Church of Rome has put him in her Calendar.
In his life there is not a single word about
auricular confession. So it is with Gregory,
Ambrose, Martyr, Chrysostom. I have all
the letters of Jerome; I think there are about
five hundred. They are addressed to every
kind of people, many of them to ladies who
had written to him about the best means of
salvation. In all his answers there is not a
single mention of auricular confession ; and
if it had been in vogue in the fifth century,
Jerome, who spoke on every particular of
Christian life, would have alluded to it.
Then there are the “Confessions of St.
Augustine,” a book with which, after the
Bible, I do not know any to be compared.
It is a most precious book and gives the
whole of his life. He tells us even his sina
and everything he had done. But he does
not say a word about auricular confession,
it is evident he never confessed to any man
although he had been a Bishop of Rome.
When 1 read the fathers, I wept, and passed
many a sleepless night. I said, “My God,
is it possible that our Church preaches what
is contrary to the truth ?” I had preached
that the holy fathers were favourable
to confession, because I had read so in
books. I took the holy fathers to the
Bishop, and asked him, for the sake of my
immortal soul, to show me a single one who
had advised people to make confession of
their sins to a man. But he could not, and
he only insulted me. The idea of auricular
confession was invented by the Pagans long
before Christ. They had festivities in
honour of their gods to prepare the young
people to know what they called the
mysteries. Some of these mysteries were
communicated in auricular confession to the
young men and women who wanted to be
initiated. I speak to you of the evils of the
confessional that you may thank God for
His mercies towards you, for having taught
you that it is not at the feet of any man that
poor sinners can find pardon, but that God
alone can forgive sins. In the Church of
Rome they bring two texts to prove that
auricular confession is Scriptural. The first
is Matthew xviii. 18. There Jesus says,
“ Verily I say unto you that whatsoever ye
shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven,
and whatsoever ye shall loose on earth shall be
23


loosed in heaven.” The priest tells the people been won without the blood of the Irish,
that Christ has here given the priest power The Irishman is intelligent, and it is for that
to forgive their sins, and that they can only do
so after they have heard the confession of their
sins. Now they conceal the truth when they
speak thus. When the priests say that these
•words of our Saviour were spoken to the
Apostles in particular, they speak falely; they
do not know the Gospel. Our Saviour had been
speaking to the people around Him, and tel-
ling them that if any one of them had a
brother who had offended him, he was to go
to him and try to make friends with him.
If the brother would not consent to live in
peace with him, he was to take two wit-
nesses with him and renew his efforts at re-
conciliation ; but if he still persisted in not
making friends, he was to be reported to the
Church ; and if he even refused to hear the
Church, he was to be considered as a pagan.
And then our Saviour added these words,
“ What you will bind on earth shall be
bound in heaven, and what you will loose
on earth shall be loosed in heaven. ” For
instance, if Peter offended John, and they
agreed to make friends, Jesus says to them,
“ I give you power to forgive each other the
sins you have committed against each other,
and as it is on earth it shall be in hoaven.”
Our Saviour speaks of sins committed by
people against each other; and if Homan
Catholics read their Bible, they would see
the imposture of the Church. Head a few
verses on in the same chapter, and you will
see that Peter understood our Saviour to
mean the sins committed by people against
each other, for he asked Christ how many
times he should forgive an offending brother,
and Christ told him “as many times as he
offends against you. The other text by
which the Roman Catholic people are de-
ceived is—“ What sins ye retain on earth
shall be retained in heaven, and what sins
ye remit on earth shall be remitted in heaven.”
And the Church of Home tells her people
that these words were spoken to the
Apostles, This is another imposture ; for,
if you will read Luke on the same subject,
you will see that there were women and
children present when Christ spoke these
words. He meant that the sins committed
against each other they forgave would be for-
given, In the Lord’s Prayer we pray that
our sins may be forgiven as we forgive those
sins committed against us. And when a
man forgives the brother who has sinned
against him. he can go boldly to Jesus Christ
and ask for his own sins to be pardoned.
After a few similar remarks, the rev.
gentleman said, “ I have great confidence in
the character of Irishmen, I have been twice
to Ireland, and I know all that is good and
noble in the character of the Irish. I know
their bravery on the battle-field. Yes, Eng-
lishmen, your greatest victories have not!
reason that the priest forbids him to hear
with his own ears. If the priests had been
honest they would have said to their people,
“ Chiniquy the apostate is coming to preach
against our Church, and the more you will hear
him the more you will see he is in the wrong ;
go and hear him.” But they know well if
the Irish came to hear me, not one of them
would remain in the Church of Home. On
Saturday I proved that the hands of the
Church of Rome are red with the blood of
forty millions of martyrs. There was an
Irishman, a Homan Catholic, present, and he
listened with intelligence. He saw that his
Church of Home which he had loved so much
was the great enemy of God and man, the
greatest enemy of liberty of conscience.
And when he returned home he told his
wife that he had heard a speech which
convinced him that the Church of Rome was
not the Church of Christ, and he forbade her
to go to it any more. And yesterday that
Irishman and his wife were blessing God in
one of your Protestant churches. (Applause.)
On one occasion the bishops and priests
thought to convince one of my congregations
who had left the Church of Home that I was
an impostor, and there was no salvation out
of the Church of Rome. I told my people to
go s and hear the priest. I told them to take
the sick in their beds, and let even them
hear and judge if the name of Mary should
be invoked, and if we should read the Bible
or not. But my friends, the bishop failed
miserably. Why do not the priests do that
with me ? Because they know if the Irish
came they would see I speak the truth.
Auricular confession was invented about the
year 1450, at the fourth Council of (Lateran.
It was invented in order to destroy liberty
of conscience and all the rights of man.
When a man has his wife and children going
to confess, he is not the husband and father of
his house. It is the priest who rules the
house through the Confessional ''When the
Church of Rome wants to kill a man who is
in her way she choses the murderer in the
confessional-box. I have no doubt that the
man who shot the Queen’s son here in your
midst was told in the confessional box
to do so. When the murderer of Henry
IV., Ravaillac, pierced the bosom of
the best King of France, the poor
guilty man acknowledged he had been
induced in the confessional-box to perpetrate
the deed, because the king had given liberty
of conscience to the Protestants. It is in
the confessional that all the plots made
against you are prepared. When you have
an election, immediately there is a secret
order from the bishop to elect such a man,
to elect a Roman Catholic, or, what is better,,
a Protestant Judas, There are some excep-
24


iaons, but this is the rule. I can prove to some ladies of distinction in England to
.anyone of you who likes to come to the house correct, and requested them to strike out
of my dear friend, Mr. Sutherland, that a anything they might consider imfit for a lady
of my dear friend, Mr. Sutherland, that a
Roman Catholic has not the right to vote
for whom he pleases, and that if he disobeys
the bishop in the matter, he commits a mortal
sin. If legislators were honest they would
inquire into the confessional and its workings.
i(Cheers.) Five years ago a gentleman in
England published in English the questions
which priests put in the confessional. These
questions are of the most infamous character.
Only a blackguard and a priest of Rome could
put them. Well, this gentleman was prose-
cuted and sent to prison for publishing the
very words which are put to women in
the confessional every day by the priests of
Rome. In the world to-day there are
100,000 priests paid by different Governments
to put to women those infamous questions
for publishing which a man was con-
demned to gaol When I was in England,
four years ago, several ministers came to me
and asked me to publish a book about the
confessional. They said, “ There is a party-
in our Church, headed by Pusey, which is
bringing our noble Episcopalian Church over
to Rome, and we want you to give us a book
to show what the confessional is.” I said,
“It is impossible. If I published what I
know about the confessional, no lady or gen-
tleman would read it.” They said I was
mistaken, and that they must have the book.
As they pressed me exceedingly, I said,
“Let us pray for guidance in the matter,”
and they offered up a beautiful prayer. At
eight o’clock that evening I went on my
knees, and began to write ; and at six in the
morning I had written tire first chapter of
the book. The ministers came during the
morning. I showed them the first chapter.
They were pleased with it, and I finished the
book. I sent a copy of it to a gentleman
in England who had been a great friend to
me ; but he returned it with the message
that I was a most infamous man to write such
a book. I wrote back, “ Sir, if I had known
you were such an ass I would not have
troubled you with the book.” To show you
there is nothing in the book to which the
most delicate-minded lady can object, I
-might mention that I gave the proofs to
to read. They returned the proofs with the
remark that there was nothing whatever that
any lady might not read. Well, on the
first of January of this year I received a let-
ter from the same gentleman, enclosing me
£25, and saying that he had read the book
again, and he thought it was the best book to
put in the hands of anyone on the subject.
The scaffold on which your liberties and
rights will perish is the confessional-box ;
and where is the dagger which will pierce
the bosom of liberty of conscience ? We call
it auricular confession. And what can you do
against the plots hatched in the confessional ?
Nothing. The Church of Rome is a vast
secret society, well united, which plots day
and night to destroy all the rights of man,
and all the laws of God. Her great object is
to take possession of the world, and to put
the Pope again on his throne, reddened with
the blood of nations But, my friends, I
hope you will, with the help of God, go to
the Roman Catholics, and speak to them
earnestly and kindly ;.and if you do so they
will listen to you. You ought to be well
posted in all that relates to your religion.
Study your Bible and your books of discus-
sion as Christian soldiers of the great captain
of salvation. You are enrolled under his
banner —not to fight bloody battles with the
weapons of the flesh, but with the weapons
which Christ has given his soldiers, the
Word of God. Figlat the Church of Rome
with your prayers and with good example.
What makes the Church of Rome so confident
of beating you is your indifference, your vices.
If every Protestant would take Jesus Christ
as the gift of God, and show to the world
what real Christians are the Roman
Catholics would say. Let us go into the
midst of these men. Let us rally with them
around the banners of liberty ; and they
would come with .you to the feet of Jesus and
help you to bless him. (Applause.)
The singing of a hymn, the pronouncing
of the benediction, and the singing of the
National Anthem brought the lecture to a
close.
AURICULAR CONFESSION
By a mistake the advertisement in the
Heratd announced that the lecture for Tues-
day evening was for ladies only. It should
have read, “ladies and gentlemen only
admitted; children excluded.” The com-
mittee did their best to rectify the error
by putting posters about the city during
the day explaining the matter. The hall
was crowded by ladies and gentlemen,
ADDRESSED TO MEN AND WOMEN.
the former, however, greatly preponderat-
ing. Mr. I. J. Josephson occupied the
chair. The subject of the lecture was
“ Auricular Confession.” The rev. gentleman
said :—Have you ever remarked in the epistle
to the Romans how Paul begins his salutations?
In specifying some names which were dear to
h m and to the whole church, he begins by
giving expression of his gratitude to the
25


women he had known. The more you read
the Gospel of Christ, the more you will be
struck by this strange thing that woman
always appears in everything to have a higher
place in the heart of Christ. It is evident that
one of the objects of our dear Saviour was to
raise woman from the degraded position
brought upon her by the first sin. As
Eve was the first to fall, the daughters of Eve
were the first to be raised up. It was of a
woman that our Saviour said he had not found
such faith in Israel as hers. It was not to a
man that he paid such a compliment. And
after his resurrection who was chosen to be
the first to see Christ ? A woman. When
the apostles were in tears and desolate, and
in doubt whether the Saviour would rise
again, whose heart was filled with joy because
she had seen the Saviour? A woman’s. When
men had banded together to crucify the Son
of God, the Saviour of the the world, do you
find a single man among that multitude who
felt for the victim, do you find one man whose
heart was touched by his sufferings ? Not one
But you see women weeping there. They
understood the great sacrifices of the
Saviour of the world. It is evident that as
Satan had begun the destruction of man-
kind through a woman, so Christ came to
raise the daughters of Eve before the sons of
Adam, and to pour upon them His greatest
blessings It must have appeared strange
to the Romans to hear Paul blessing the
women first, because before Christ’s time
woman was degraded everywhere. She had
come down below the level of the beasts ;
everywhere she was the slave of man. Even
in the great Republic of Rome, which
raised herself so high in sciences and in the
arts, where philosophers spoke with such
eloquence, where a Cicero filled the world
with his beautiful language, where Virgil
wrote poems which are still the object of
our admiration, where there were so many
wise, so many learned, what was the rank
of woman ? It was that of a brute beast;
woman had no rank at all in society. A
man had the right to kill his wife without
being brought before the law. The child
was not obliged to obey his mother. In
Greece woman’s position was still worse.
Now Christ came to save you, woman. He
came to raise you up from your former
degradation. See how the women of that
time understood Christ and felt that he
had come to raise them. See Mary who
had lost her name and had become the
scandal of Jerusalem, at her dear Saviour’s
feet, bathing them with her tears and
pressing her lips to them ; and what does
the Saviour say to her ? “ Woman thy sins
are forgiven because you have loved much.”
And He said that wherever the Gospel
would be preached, the action of that
woman would be proclaimed. In the temple |
when Christ was at the door looking at the;
people, giving for the public service of
God, who attracted his attention ? A
woman. Now my dear sisters, bless the
Lord for having come to save you, not only
from the yoke of man, but from the yoke of
Satan. Bless Christ for having come to raise
you up, to tell you that you are the
daughters of God, the equal of man, that
you are one with your husband. It is only in
Christian nations that woman ison alevel with
j man. For that reason, woman, keep near
Ito Christ; let Christ reign in your heart.
Christ was constantly helped in his work by
woman, and he owed a great deal of his suc-
cess to the help coming from women He
went constantly to the house of Martha and
Mary, and the goqjel says positively that he
loved them. Fio ,1 the time of Christ, woman
has understood b a natural instinct that it is
for her interest to keep the reign of Christ
over the world—that it is an affair of life and
death to keep Christianity in the bosom of
humanity. Woman, you are honoured when
you look upon that holy virgin who was
chosen by God himself to be the mother of
Him who on the cross was to save the world.
You are almost divinized by that woman
whose name will be honoured to the end of
the world. But just as Christ has begun the
work of regenerating the world by raising
woman, so Satan strove to destroy the work
of Christ by degrading woman When Satan
framed in the bosom of hell that great, mar-
vellous diabolical institution which we call
the Church of Rome, he was cunning enough
to understand that the best way to destroy
the work of Christ was by degrading woman,
aud to that end he invented a theory which;
is called a sacrament—auricular confession.
Evidently, auricular confession was intended
more for the destruction of of women than of
men. I have been in France, and studied
the question ; and I have learned from tha
lips of the pries s themselves that there is.
not a man in ten thousand In that country,
which is called Roman Catholic, who goes to.
confession. In Canada, it is very seldom that
a man who has intelligence or education goes
to confession. When I was a young man in
Canada, I was the friend of the leading men of
the country, and related to some of them; and
many a time I have tried to persuade them
to come to confession, but they only laughed
at me ; but their wives and daughters came
most regularly. And even among the Irish,
that people whom I love so much, and who
are so devoted to their Church, there am
twenty confessions of women to one of men.
Now, you see that the deleterious effects, the
polluting, diabolical, aud irresistibly damning
influences of the confessional, fall twenty
times more on the women than on the men.
And when woman falls, she brings her hus-
band with her to her ruin. There is an irresis-
26


tible power in you, woman: and when ame into great temptation and sin. The priests
woman goes down she never goes down alone in general do not pay sufficient attention to the
Look in the Garden of Eden. Satan wants bad effect which is produced by hearing the
to destroy Eden, but he does not dare to
attack Adam. He feels he is not strong
enough to bring down that giant fresh from
the hands of God. He knows Adam will
resist. But he knows there is a being in the
Garden who has all power over Adam, and
that if he can gain her she will bring down
that giant. And when he has deceived her
with his lies, she brings Adam down with
her. Auricular confession is an institution
by which the Church of Rome says that
■every man and woman who have attained the
age of reason, generally about eight or nine
years of age, are bound to go to the feet of
their confessor to tell him all their bad
thoughts, desires, and actions. And what is
the consequence of a woman telling a bachelor
priest all her most secret thoughts ? The
consequence is that a young girl in the
•Church of Rome has not arrived at the age
of twelve years before she is taught every-
thing that is criminal, shameful, and pol-
luting in human nature. The most infamous
mysteries and iniquities are poured into the
ears of that little girl by her father confessor.
There are, certainly, women who, though in
a bad Church, are yet the daughters of God,
the redeemed souls of Christ. And God,
with his merciful hand, tries to take away
from their hearts all the iniquity which the
priest pours into it. By God speaking to
them in their conscience, many women in
the Church of Rome are kept in the ways of
purity and honour. I do not come here to
tell you that all the women in that Church
are destroyed or polluted in the sense that
they have lost every sentiment of honour.
No : but though they are still honourable,
yet, through the abominable impressions
made upon them in the confessional, there
is always a tempest in their heart, and they
have to fight terrible battles to overcome the
■enemy. I spoke, yesterday, of a book which I
received from Bishop Janson, it is called “An
Examination of the Sins of Priests. ” Almost
every year the priests are invited to make
what they call a retreat, that is, to pass
eight or ten days in a house of prayer, and
it is then that they make a confession of all
the sins of the past year There are con-
fessors chosen for the occasion, and as I was
■one of them, the Bishop gave me this book,
which is approved by Cardinal De Bonald. I
have the book here, and I wish some gentle-
man who understands French to come forward
and read and translate some parts. [Nobody
offering to come forward, the Rev. gentle-
man read the following extract: —“ When
hearing the confession of females, have I put
to them questions about their sins, which
brought answers by which my imagination
has been filled with thoughts which have led
confession of females. By these confessions
they are constantly tempted, and these
temptations weaken the soul of the priest to
such a degree that his purity is entirely des-
troyer!.” That is pretty clear. You see it says
the priests are constantly tempted ; they are
constantly induced to fall into sin, and very
often they commit great sins. When the
priests of Rome speak before the public they
deny this, and speak of themselves as
honourable men ; and the Protestants are
fools enough to believe that a priest, who is
nothing but a man, or rather a poor miser-
able bachelor, which is less than a man, can
hear the confessions of females and not be
tempted. My friends, this is a great mis-
take. Pere Hyacinthe says that there is not
more than one in a hundred who does not
fall by hearing auricular confession Only
one in a hundred, says he publicly ; and no
man in France has dared to deny the fact.
Here it is the same thing ; and when you
meet the'priests, you may be sure that in one
hundred cases ninety-nine are brought down
into the filth of the most infamous actions
through hearing confessions. Women are
more shrewd than men in these affairs. There
is not a lady among the Roman Catholics
who would allow her husband to go and con
fess to a beautiful young lady. If a Roman
Catholic lady saw her son going once a
month, or once a fortnight, to the feet of a
young lady, to speak to her for hours about
all that is going on in his poor heart, and to
tell her all his thoughts and desires, she
would go and take him away, and tell him
it was not proper for him to be there She
would not permit her husband to go to the
feet of the most respectable woman and tell
her all his thoughts ; and, if the husband
urged that there was no danger, that the
lady was as pure as an angel, and that he
was highly respectable, she would only laugh
at him, and bring- him out of the confes-
sional-box. But it is strange that the hus-
band is not so shrewd. He is a stupid beast
compared with his wife. He sees his pretty
wife going to the feet of that handsome
bachelor, and remaining alone with him for
hours, telling him all her secret thoughts,
but he says to himself there is no danger, as
his wife is honest ! And where is the dif-
ference between a man confessing all his
sins to a woman, and a woman telling all
her bad thonghts and actions to a man ? You
would not tolerate the former It would be
consideredon offence against society—a public
immorality. And in the latter case it is also a
public immorality. It is an offence against
the laws of God, and it ought to bean offence
against the laws of man. (Hear, hear). But
I do not say the priests of Rome are to be the
27


objects of your contempt or hatred. You different life. But another priest came, li®.'
must pity them, and pray for them. They led me astray, and for five years I lived a
arp men who are blind, who are in fetters, most abominable life with him. He was
are men who are blind, who are in fetters,
who are raised in a diabolical system. Many
of them are miserable, and weep at their
position. When I was in their midst, many
a time I heard the voice of God saying to
me, 44 Are you not ashamed to hear the
recital of those infamous things in the con-
fessional, are you not ashamed to speak with
thatwoman of things so defiling ? Come out!”
And I heard another voice coming from
Borne telling me I was bound to put those
questions. And then a battle took place in
my heart. Christ and Satan met there to
fight hand to hand ; and in the end Christ
was to conquer. My dear sisters you do not
pray enough for the Roman Catholics. It
seems to me there is a lack of zeal in you
Protestants. /ou read the Gospel and
make your prayers, but do you go to the
mercy seat, and raising your hands to the
Lord, ask Him to grant His light to the poor
deluded Roman Catholics ? One day when I
was a very young priest, I had been invited
to preach a retreat in a large parish. I was
frequently chosen to speak to large multi-
tudes, and I always invited a dozen or two
priests to come with me to help me to hear
the_confessions. Well, we had been preach-
ing* all day, and hearing confessions. We
returned to the parsonage at about ten
o’clock at night to supper, but we were all
so ashamed at what we had heard in the con.
fessional, that we could not raise our eyes be-
fore each other. I could not eat; and although
we were all great talkers not a word was
spoken. The curate saw our embarrassment
and said, “ Well, gentlemen, I suspect you
are disgusted at the things you have heard
from the females of my parish in the confes-
sional, You have heard of abominable
doings, which are all the work of a certain
Eriest, and you think I am that priest who
as destroyed the females of this parish, and
you are so disgusted with such a wretch that
you do not dare to look me in the face. Now
I am not the man. It was the priest who
preceded me here. The fact of his infamy is
well known in the parish. He has destroyed
ninety-nine out of every hundred in the
parish, and has done things which cannot be
mentioned.” We told him he had lifted a
burden off our shoulders, and we were more
at ease. The next morning, a fine, tall,
queenly looking woman came to confess to
me. She was bathed in tears, and she knelt
at my side. I tell you her confessions to
give you an idea of the abominations of
auricular confession. She said, “When I was
nine years old my father confessor destroyed
my purity, and induced me to commit in-
famous things, 1 He died suddenly, and I
was glad of it because I was ashamed of
what he had done, and I wanted to lead a
removed and I went to another place, where
I was to be married. I went to confess, and
the priest was again the cause of my fall. I
married and had a child, but it was not the-
child of my husband, it was the cnild of the
priest. When she was sixteen years old I
sent her to confess. I thought she was very
pious such was my hope, and I thought
that the priest who was her father would
never attempt to destroy her. But one day
she returned home from the church bathed in
tears. I asked her the reason of her tears, and
she said 44 Oh dear mother don’t ask me. I will
never go to confession any more. The priest
has destroyed me. ” When I heard that I was
beside myself with rage. I sprang to my
feet, took a butcher’s knife and ran to the-
parsonage determined to plunge the knife in
the priest’s breast. I said to him, you in-
famous wretch, it is not enough that you
should destroy me, you also destroy my
daughter, your child. You shall live no
longer ! He fell on his knees and cried and
implored me to spare his life. > I considered
a moment, and I said, I spare your life, for
it is better that your crime should be known
that you may be shunned by every
respectable person. If you do not leave this ■
parish at once, I will tell the bishop all, and
if he does not turn you out from the parisk,
I will tell my husband everything and he
will take your life ! The priest, trembling,
swore he would get the bishop’s permission
to leave, and he left for another parish.”
Now, my friends, this is one instance
among thousands which I know of, and
which are public in Canada. Dear sisters,
you see now why your ancestors preferred to
be burned at the stake, to die on the scaf-
fold, to be drowned in the sea rather than
remain in the Church of Rome, They
understood the dignity of woman. And
what will you do, now ? I am trying to
help my countrywomen to break the yoke
which binds them. I will tell you another
episode about the confessional. I was
dragged before the court of Kankakee and-
accused of a crime of which I had never
thought. After two years of conflict I
proved my innocence, but the priests seeing
they were going to lose their case, had
the venue changed to Urbana, and again
brought false witnesses (among whom were
two priests), and did their best to get me
sent to the Penitentiary for life. These two
priests swore positively that they saw me
committ the horrible crime, q It was
night. The court- adjourned till next
day. My lawyers came to me and
said, 44 Chiniquy, you are lost. It is evident
the priests havq made a false* oath, but tne
, jury is not’intelligent enough to see through.


the ways of the priests, and believe you are
guilty.” One of the lawyers said, “there is
only one way to be saved. Go to God, and
He will save you.” 1 went to my room and
I prayed and I wept. I hope none of
you will ever know what it is to pass a night
before the day when you expect to be sent to
prison for life for a crime you never com-
mitted. I have known such a night. Oh,
how dark and long were the hours of that
terrible night ! I could not see how salva-
tion could come, as the evidence appeared so
much against me. During the night I heard
knocks at my door. It was Abraham Lin-
coln, who afterwards became President of
the United States. He said, “ Chiniquy, cheer
up ; I have the priests in my hands, and if
they do not leave the city to morrow morn-
ing, they will be lynched. ” That very night
the priests heard that their plot had beeu
discovered, and they left the city by the five
o’clock morning train, as they knew what
to expect At nine o’clock the Public
Accuser entered the Court, which was
crammed with Protestants and Roman
Catholics—the former hoping I would prove
my innocence, although the oath of the
priests confounded them ; the latter hoping
I would be found guilty. The Public Ac-
cuser stood up and asked that the charge might
be withdrawn, as they had found I was inno-
cent. (Cheers). And in the books of the Court
of Urbana is recorded my innocence. I
will tell you how this plot was formed, and
how God destroyed it. One of these priests
had gone to his own sister and said, “You
see that Chiniquy is destroying our holy re-
ligion on this Continent. He has been
chosen for the work by Satan. We must
put him down, and you are the woman I
bave selected to do this great work, just
as Judith cut off the head of Holofernes ; I
waait you to swear that Chiniquy has forced
you to do certain things, and then he will be
sent to the Penetenftary.” She refusing to
become a party to such wickedness, her
brother refused to support her. She told
him she would rather starve than do such
iniquity. Then he pressed her again, and
said, “Consider the thousands of souls
which Chiniquy will send to hell. Now, I
don’t want you to be damned for telling a
lie ; but you can come and confess to me
afterwards, and I will give you absolution
and forgive your sin.” On his assuring her
of his power to clear her soul q£ the guilt,
she consented to make the oath. The suit
created great excitement in Illinois, and the
press was reproducing every day the evi-
dence The very same day that the two
priests made the false oath against me, the
telegraph operator sent word to the Tribune*
of Chicago -that it was evident I was guilty,
because two good priests had sworp they had
detected me in the act, aud I would surely
be sent to gaol, And the newsboys were run*
ning about the streets, crying out, “Chini-
quy will be hung; Chiniquy will be
hungand they sold ten thousand
extra copies of the Tribune that day,
because every Roman Coman Catholic was
jubilant. Among the Roman Catholics who
bought the paper was a man named Narcisse
Terrien, who told his wife the good news
that I was to be imprisoned for life, or hung.
She said, “He is not guilty; I know it.” He
was surprised, and asked how she knew that.
She said, “ I and another young lady, Mary
Moffit, were paying a visit to the niece of
the priest, who was with his sister in the
parlour. The door of the room was ajar,
and we could hear all the conversation that
took place between the priest and his sister,
but they could not see us. And we heard
the poor woman saying that Chiniquy was
innocent, and had always been honourable
in all his dealings with her. And we heard
the whole plot of the priest, “Well,” said
the husband, “Ido not like Chiniquy, but
it would be a crime for you and me to let
him go to the Penitentiary when we know
he is innocent.” Then they ran down to
the railway station, got into the cars, and
came to the city where I was being tried, a.
distance of 100 miles. They arrived late at
night, and went to Abraham Lincoln, and
told him all, and he then came to me and
rescued me. You see how the priests make
the poor people believe they can commit any
crime provided they go to confession and get
absolution. That is the reason why your
gaols are filled with Roman Catholics ; that
is the reason why Roman Catholics who are
naturally honest, are made dishonest. Now
you must pray for them and help me in my
work; help me to throw light into the
midst of this abominable darkness. Ido not
come to beg. It would be infamous if X
were to change this great mission into a
begging affair : but it is my duty to tell
you my position. 4> I have sixteen young
men ministers, and I want fifty more, I
want to build a college for them, to be per*
petuated after my death. When a priest
comes out of the Church of Rome, he is in
danger of starving to death. He is an out-
cast from the Church of Rome, and the
Protestants have no confidence in him.
These priests come to me, and I have some-
times to support them for five or six months.
They have cost me a thousand. And
I know priests who would immediately
come out if I could keep them for a short
time. That is the reason I ask your prayers,
and your material help. This is a great work,
my friends, and the Lord will bless your
efforts.
The benediction was pronounced, and the
audience sang the doxology and the National
Anthem.
29


THE EDUCATION OF PROTESTANT BOYS AND GIRLS IN THE
COLLEGES AND NUNNERIES OF ROME.
On Wednesday evening Mr. Joseph Paxton,
-J.P., occupied the chair, and the hall was
filled as usual. The subject of the rev. gentle-
man’s lecture was, ‘ ‘ The Education of
Protestant boys and girls in the Colleges and
Nunneries of Rome.’ He said—My friends,
the subject on which I have been requested
to speak this evening is one of vital import-
ance, and one of those I wish Protestants
could understand. Everywhere the Church
of Rome builds beautiful houses of educa-
tion, whose surroundings wear such a bright
colouring that Protestants are deceived.
We read in the history of Pagan nations
that the parents used often to offer their
children on the altars of the idols to appease
the wrath of their god when he was angry.
The fathers and the mothers brought the
•children decorated with garlands of flowers
and laid them on the altars, and the priests
of the idols cut the throat or pierced the
bosom of the poor victim. This was a
horrible crime, and it is hardly creditable
that parents could have consented to the
slaughter of their child and rejoice at it.
But there is a crime committed every day
among Protestant nations which is more
heinous in the sight of God than that of the
old Pagans..* It is when Protestant parents
immolate their children on the altars of
Rome, hand their dear children over to the
care of the priests of the idols of Rome.
Your children do not lose their temporal life
but they lose their eternal life, and as the
soul is more precious than the body, so the
iniquity of modern Protestants is greater
than the iniquity of the Pagans. Oh ! if
my God would grant me here what He has
granted me in several places in the United
States and in Canada, that the day after I
had spoken on this subject, the children of
Protestants were taken out of the nunneries.
Protestants, you are terribly mistaken about
■education in the Church of Rome. The
word education is understood in a
very different sense among the Roman
'Catholics from that in which you under-
stand it. When you send your child to be
educated, you desire that he should be raised
in the sphere of knowledge : that his mind
■and heart should be enlarged: that his intel-
ligence should be cultivated. The word
*‘ education ”is a beautiful word, Educare,
in the Latin, means “to take from low places
to high regions. ” Elever, in the French, is
also a beautiful word ; it means that you
take the child, and, from the lowest degree
•of intelligence, you raise it as much as
possible. And when the little pupil in your
Brutes tan t schools begins to rise, he hears
around him voices of encouragement, and he
takes up his wings like a young eagle, and
rises again ; and as they rise, they hear their
pastors and parents saying to them, “ Rise !
rise again ! rise in intelligence, in science, in
all knowledge, till you lose yourself in that
ocean of light, and love, and knowledge,
which is called God.” (Applause.) No
fetters are put on that young eagle who
wishes to raise himself. Thus, the Protest-
ant nations march as giants at the head of
civilization ; they are the advance guard in
the ranks of Science, They go from one
invention to another; the whole world is
conquered by them ; they rule the winds ;
they take possession of the elements This
in how Protestants understand education,
and this is how Christ understood education,
when He told His disciples to teach all
nations the saving truth ; but the word has
a very different meaning in the Church of
Rome. The poor little boy and girl in the
college and nunneries of Rome are allowed
to rise. Yes! but it is only till they reach the
Pope’s big toe, and then a shout comes to
them from every side, Stop! do not rise any
higher : kiss the Pope’s toe, for the Pope is
the fountain of all knowledge, science, and
light. (Laughter.) It is forbidden to know
a thing which the Pope does not know. It
is forbidden to understand a thing in the
way the Pope does not understand it.
(Laughter.) ' How many times, when I was
in the college of Rome, have I and my
fellow students tried to raise ourselves ? But
when we attempted to soar up as young
eagles, our poor little wings were cut, and
we fell down. Often have my fellow-students
and I bewailed our lot at not being permitted
to raise ourselves, and at being forbidden to
discuss such and such questions. We felt
severely the heavy chains which galled our
shoulders. One day one of my fellow-
students, who was afterwards one of the first
men in Canada, Mr. Joseph Turcot, said to
me, “It is evident they want to make asses of
us here. ” If you want your children to believe
that a man can make his God with a little
wafer, send them to the nunneries. If you
want your children to believe that it is by
going to the feet of a mute idol, or statue of
Mary, that they must be saved, send them
to a nunnery -9 But, if you want your chil-
dren to learn that they are created in the
image of God, that they are created with an
intelligence and a soul, that it is their privi-
lege to rise in all knowledge, do not send
them to the nunneries. In the nunneries they
will learn that man is not created to be
free, to follow the dictates of his conscience.


but simply [to obey his superiors, to serve
under masters who have the right to think
for him. Christ denoted the corner-stone
of your emancipation, the foundation of your
power, when He said, * 1 If your son ask
bread will you give him a stone, or if he ask
an egg will you give him a scorpion ? If
your earthly father will give you what you
ask, much more will your heavenly Father
give the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him.”
Jesus here promised that everyone of His
followers would have the right to look up
and see with his own eyes that light which is
so bright, so magnificent, that light ..which
comes from the Gospel. Christ said that light is
for everyone, great and small, rich and poor,
old and young, 4 You have only to go to
your Father in heaven and ask from Him
the light in Christ’s name and it will be
granted to you. In the schools of Protestants
there is nobody put between God and man.
No dark cloud obscures the light which
comes from God. Man has the privilege to
go and swim every day in the regions of
light and truth and life which is called God,
and the more he goes there the more he feels
like his God. And that is the reason why
you Protestants advance as giants in the
ways of progress, while the Homan Catholics
are just like a stone round your neck.
Who has made the great inventions in the
world? invented the railroad ? Was
it a man who was educated in the colleges of
Rome ? No, It was a man who read his
Bible every day. And who invented that
latest wonder, the electric telegraph, by
which I can sit at a table here and speak to
my friends in London, and three minutes
after receive their answer ? Who discovered
that great secret which was hid in the
bosom of God, since the beginning? Who
has gone high enough in the regions of light
to take that spark of light from the Spirit
of the Lord ? It was a man who never set
his foot in the college of the Jesuit, who
read his Bible every day. Where are the
great inventions of the Roman Catholics ? I
will be told that there are great men in the
Church of Rome.. I acknowledge that.
There are giant men Tn her. She has had
in her bosom men of an extraordinary in-
telligence. I have read their books, and every
page indicated that these men were as much
above the common people as the sun is above
the earth. Burt these men have been great
in spite of the Church of Rome. (Hear,
hear.) Galileo was a great man in the
Church of Rome. He discovered the motion
of the earth round the sun—a marvellous dis-
covery. But what happened to him ? Why,
as he knew more than the Pope, as he found
out a truth which the Pope knew nothing
about, and proclaimed it to the world, the
Pope took his scissors and clipped the wings
of flip eagle. (Laughter and applause.) He
was put into a dark dungeon, fetters were
put on his hands and feet, he was flogged
till the blood flowed, and all because he said
the earth went round the sun ! And he had
to swear that he would not say so any more.
“The earth moves though,” he said to'
himself. I learn that the Jesuits are going
to establish a school here. Well, here is a
fact which may remove some of the dust
which the Roman Catholics will throw in
your eyes about these gentlemen. I know
their schools pretty well, as I have been very
near them. When I was in London, four
years ago, I went to a Public Library and I
found there a book of which I had heard
very much, but I had never been
able to study it before. The name of the
book was “Newton’s Principa.” Well, in
the year 1742 two Jesuits, Le Seur and.
Jacquier, wrote this about the famous
Newton. They were speaking about
the moon, and the stars, and the sun,
on which matters they were pretty well
posted up. They wrote a book on Newton,
who, you know was a great astronomer, and
calculated the motions of the heavenly
bodies with marvellous precision. These two
gentlemen say—“ Newton assumes in his
third book the hypothesis of the earth’s
motion. The propositions of that author could
not be explained except through the same
hypothesis. We have, therefore, been forced
to act a character not our own. That we
declare our submission to the decrees of the
Roman Pontiffs against the motion of the
earth.” You see that these two celebrated
Human Catholic priests, having written on
these questions, declared that they do not
believe, and that they do not dare to proclaim,
that the earth moves round the sun, because
the Pope had forbidden that. (Laughter.) You
will see by this that the Jesuits are the best
persons to send your children to, if you
wish them to become asses. Yes! there have
been learned men in the Church of Rome,
but nine-tenths of them have been excom-
municated and punished for their learning,
(Hear, hear.) Copernicus was a priest of
Rome, and agreatmathematician, philosopher,.
and astronomer. He discovered many great
truths, but, because he proclaimed them
without the consent of the Pope, he was ex-
communicated. The Church of Rome has
had great orators. There was, for instance,
Bossuet, who was really a man of great
genius, a matchless man in eloquence, but
what does the editor of the Univers, a great
Roman Catholic organ, say about him after
having studied his writings ? He says
“Bossuet was a disguised Protestant.” It
would take three or four hours to go fully
through the subject of my lecture and show
you that the colleges of the nuns and Jesuits
are the very places where the intelligence is
killed. They are places of fine exterior and 1
31


colouring, but nothing better. I know what an infamous action. But, it is said, the nuns
I say for I have been a teacher in their have such fine manners, such a sweet smile;
midst. Every step ahead I made was always
in spite of my professors. It was always at
the risk of my position that I made any
advance. But if we turn to the moral aspect
of nunneries, what do we find ? We find that
it is there that morality perishes. A friend
tells me that a priest in Sydney said a nun had
had a child to me. Of course the statement is
a libel, and no one will dare to make it pub-
licly, but I am rather pleased at this lie,
because it shows to the world that the priests
have not much confidence in the nuns.
(Laughter.) It was not Chiniquy who said
it was easy to conquer a nun, it is a priest
of Sydney, and if Chiniquy is so powerful I
do not doubt other priests in Australia
are just as strong. (Laughter.) When
a Protestant parent takes his child to a
nunnery to be educated he finds everything
about the place pleasant. The nun has a
fine appearance, she has the face of an angel,
she is excessively polite, everything seems to
breathe an atmosphere of purity and honesty.
The flowers are so fragrant, the trees so
beautiful, the gardens so well laid out, the
situation of the house so well chosen. You
think you could have no better place for
your child to be educated in, and as you
hand her over to the care of the nuns you
stipulate that as you are a Protestant your
child’s religion shall not be interfered with.
The nuns say “Oh, certainly; we will not
interfere with your child’s religion.” And
you go away and have no fear. But you have
not walked ten paces away before the nuns
have a hearty fit of laughter at your expense,
they say ‘ ‘ That poor fool has got a promise
from us not to interfere with his religion, but
he ignores what we know, that a Protes-
tant has no religion at all. ” Among Roman
Catholics Protestantism means negation,
and it is very easy to promise not to inter-
fere with a religion which does not exist.
And the very next day the nuns will begin
to entice your child, and endeavour to win
her over. She will be surrounded by such
an atmosphere and by such influences that
before long she will be taken in the traps of
Popery. The Priests boast that seven out
of ten of the Protestant girls who go to a
nunnery become Roman Catholics. And I
think the priests are right in saying that the
Protestant who sends his daughter to be
• educatedin a nunnery has no religion. (Cheers)
Such a Protestant, at all events, has no self-
respec£, no respect for the Bible, no respect
for Jesus Christ, nor for His nation, nor for
his ancestors, o Oh, if he would only remem-
ber that these same priests shed the blood
of hie ancestors ; that these same priests say
to-day, that it is the duty of the Church of
Rome to kill every Protestant; he would
-surely think twice before he committed such
they are so modest that they will not raise
their eyes before a man. Ah, my friends,
you are too easily taken by these fine ap-
pearances. You do not know that the nun
is a comedienne. She plays a comedy. The
object of the nunnery is not to give educa-
tion, to entice your daughters into their
traps. Certainly they teach there a little
music, a little French, a little painting, and
such little things which are taught in your
own schools; but there is no education of
the mind or heart, the real object of the
institution is to entrap your daughters. Do
not be deceived by beautiful appearances. I
remember when Mwent to the broad praries
of Illinois, to fou % that great colony, in
1851-52, of which I told you the other
evening. The vast magnificent prairies
stretched away like the ocean, and I passed
two or three weeks in roaming over them to
select a suitable place to settle on. As the
heat of the day was so unbearable, I used to
travel at night; and I will never forget some
beautiful lakes we came across, about the
size of this hall. They were magnificent to
look at; so cool, so bright and clear, and
the moon and the stars seemed to sleep in
their depths. I used often to get down from
my buggy to gaze with admiration on these
lovely little lakes Well, I went south
pretty far, and on returning about two
weeks after, I told the driver of my buggy
to drive near the lakes, so that I might see
them again; but as we approached the
places where they had been, I saw that the
terrible heat of the sun had dried them up,
and, tomy sorrow and disgust, I found in their
places jan incredible number of little vermin
and crapeaux, frogs, black mud, that gave out
a bad smell. So my friends, when yousee the
deceitful surface of the nun’s face, remember
that when the bright rays of the sun of truth
penetrates the mask, you will find little
crapeaux vermin of every kind and black bad
smelling mud. (Cheers.) To prove to you the
immorality of nunneries I will read an extract
from a book which I have here. It is pub-
lished by the Church of Rome, and is in the
hands of the nuns and the priests It is
written by Saint Liguori, and is called “The
Glories of Mary,” and is approved by the
Pope. The title page bears this inscription,
“ This new and improved translation of the
Glories of Mary is hereby approved by John,
Archbishop of New York, January 21, 1852.”
The extract is —“ Our advocate has shown
how great is her kindness towards sinners
by her mercy to Beatrice, a nun in the
Monastery of Fontebraldo, as related by
Cesarius and by Father Rho. .'This unhappy
nun having contracted a passion for a certain
youth agreed to fly with him from the
convent. And in fact, she went one day
32


oefore a statue of the Blessed Virgin, there into your daughters. I will now read you
deposited the keys of the monastery, for something from a French book which I
which she was porteress, and boldly de-
parted. Arrived in another country, she led
the miserable life of a prostitute for fifteen
years. It happened that she met one day
the agent of the monastery in the city where
she was living, and a-ked of him, thinking
he would recognize her again, if he knew
Sister Beatrice. ‘ I know her well, ’ he
said, ‘ she is a holy nun, and at present is
mistress of novices.’ At this intelligence, she
was confounded and amazed, not knowing
how to understand it. In order to ascertain
the truth, she put on another dress and went
to the monastery. She asked for Sister
Beatrice, and, behold, the Most Holy Virgin
appeared before her in the form of that
same image to which, at parting, she had
■committed her keys and her dress, and the i
Divine Mother thus spoke to her, ‘ Beatrice, I
be it known to thee that in order to prevent
thy disgrace, I assumed thy form and have
filled thy office for the fifteen years that
thou hast lived far from the monastery and j
from God. My child, return and do penance, i
for my Son is still waiting for thee; and !
strive by thy holy life to preserve the good j
name I have gained thee.’ She spoke thus |
-and disappeared. Beatrice re-entered the j
monastery and resumed the habit of a reli- j
gious, and grateful for the mercy of Mary, j
led the life of a saint. At her death she i
made known the foregoing incident i
to the glory of this great queen. ”
Now, Protestants of Australia, if you
want your daughters to believe that, pro-
vided they say some prayers to Mary, they
can live the life of prostitutes if they go to
confession, send them to a nunnery. Mind, I
it is not Chiniquy who tells this story, it is
their own books. This is the morality of
the nuns. Perhaps you would like to hear
a little more about the teachings of the nuns.
In the same hook, “The Glories of Mary,”
page 701, we read : “A servant
of Marv went one day to visit the
church of our Blessed Lady without the
knowledge of her husband, and she was pre-
vented by a severe storm from returning j
that night to her own house. She felt a j
great fear lest her husband should be very j
angry with her. But she recommended j
herself to Mary, and when she returned j
home, her husband was very kind and
gracious to her. Upon questioning him, she
found that the evening before the Divine
Mother had taken her form, and attended to
all the little affairs of the household. She
then related the occurrence to her husband,
and they both afterwards practised
great devotion to the Blessed Virgin.”
Now, this is the education which your
children will receive in a nunnery, these are
the moral principles which will be instilled
bought from the Jesuits in Montreal a few
daysafter it was issued, about half-a-year ago.
It was first shown to me by one of my con-
verts, and I could not believe my eyes when
I read it, so I went to the College of the
Jesuits myself, and not being known by the
porter be sold me a copy. The title is,
“ Almanac of the souls in Purgatory.”
[Tire rev. gentleman here invited anybody
in the audience to read a portion of the book
and translate it into English. As nobody
came forward he read a passage in French
which was to the effect that, some years
ago there was a castle in Spain which was so
haunted with strange noises at night, that
the inmates had to desert it. A poor lawyer
vho liad no means to rent a house, went to
the owner of the castle and asked permission
to hike a room in it. He was told alxnit the
dreadful noises, but expressed his unconcern
at these things. Armed with a blessed
candle with whicn to frighten the Devil
should he appear, he went to the castle and
during the night, as he sat at his table
poring over his papers, (for he had a difficult
case to plead the next dav), he heard
mysterious noises and chains rattling. But he
was not frightened, for he had his holy candle
with him. (Laughter.) Suddenly he heard
a voice asking what he was doing. He
explained to the voice that he was seeking
an argument, in order to gain his case. The
voice told him he would not find the argu-
ment in the book he was reading, but he
would get it in a certain book in the library;
and he, she, or it, very correctly indi-
cated the page, to save trouble, we suppose.
He found the required argument in this
book, and of course, was much pleased and
grateful to the nocturnal visitor. The
noises increased for a moment or two, and
then gradually died away. The next morn-
ing the lawyer told the priest what had
occurred, and they_ went and looked down
a cellar beneath the castle, and found, a few
feet below the ground, a corpse. And it
was evident that it was the soul of this dead
body who had come during the night to ask
the people to have masses said for the repose
of his soul. Thereupon, the young lawyer
paid a great deal of money to the priest to
have the necessary masses said, and there
were no more noises in the castle. (Laughter.)
The rev. gentleman then proceeded ;—Now
this story is not made by Chiniquy. 11 is
written by the Jesuits in Montreal, the
same kind of men as those who have just
come into your midst, to educate your
children. To what height, I ask, will they
raise them ? What kind of pupils can come
from the hands of such men, who teach such
trash, and whose religion is founded on such
lying rubbish ? Friends, your foundation is
33


Christ- if you want to be blessed by God, you of the idols of Rome : nothing but what will
have nothing to do but to keep your children weaken m them the virtues -which make a
in that atmosnhere of truth, and light, and woman virtuous and great, and a people noble,
science whicl/christhas brought from heaven WhenGodlaidthe foundations of this Austra-
Yournation issogreat, because the Bibleisthe | lia he evidently had in his mind to make it the
corner-stone of Great Britain ; and for this leader of civilization in the future. Now, if
reason she has been chosen by God to march ! you want to be great; if you want to be
at the head of civilization. Now, friends, ; happy and free oh, take Jesus Christ and His
remain where your ancestors have brought j Gospel for the only light, the 1
Ion; remain in the light and truth of God. the only truth of your nation (Applause.)
Honour Jesus Christ by inducing your The evening s proceedings were concluded,
children to follow Him, and to love Him. as usual by the pronouncing of
Never trust your children into those houses tion, and the audience singing the doxology
of deceit and iniquity, where they will see and the ISational Anthem,
nothing but what will bring them to the feet
.Reported Verhathn by JOHN RAMS A Y, Phonographic Shorthand Writer.
WHAT WILL THIS COST TO PRINT?
Is a question often occurring to literary Men, Public
Characters, Secretaries of various Societies, and
persons of benevolent intentions. An immediate
answer to the enquiry may be obtained by applying to
LEE & ROSS, Excelsior Steam Printing
Works, 49 Market Street (between George and
Pitt Streets), Sydney, where every description of
Printing is executed on moderate terms, with a
choice assortment of Types, Printing Machinery, &c.
Cards, Circulars, Billheads, Prospectuses, Reports,
By-Laws, Programmes, Posters, &c., neatly executed.


orahTm. rm TMtop,
GEORGE 531 STREET.
Vest, Sac. Paget,.
No. i Table —Trousers to order, 12s. 6d. 10s. 6d. 275. 6d. 375. 6d.
No. 2 Table —Trousers to order, 15s. 6d. ns. 6d. 30s. 40s. 6d..
No. 3 Table —Trousers to order, 17s. 6d. 12s. 6d. 325. 6d. 425. 6d-
No. 4 Table —Trousers to order, 21s. 13s, 6d. 375. 6d. 475. 6d.
Over Thirty Patterns; on each table to choose from.
White Colonial Cricketing Tvreed Trousers, to order 17s. 6d..
JOHN GRAHAM,
GEORGE STREET, 531 Near LIVERPOOL-ST.
READERS OF THIS PAMPHLET
YOU WILL FIND
Fuller’s jrall
THE BEST AND CHEAPEST SHOP IN SYDNEY TO BUY
BOOBS,
Presentation Articles, Birthday Cards and OHEISTMAS OAEDS,
MAKE NO MISTAKE.
O. E. FULLER,
imm, mum, printer & pm importer,
387 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY. 387.


First Prizes Sydney Intercolonial Exhibition, and Queensland Exhibition 1870, awarded to
O. JEEREMB,
iiwkWttkr, pikr & Iprlrint
-iaa csso&aE
D. PETERS,
488 GEORGE STREET (opp. the Markets),
And 646 BRICKFIELD HILL, SYDNEY.
FRASFmS ABIGAII.,
WAUUf ACTUftEH Of BOOT A TIB StfOE OffEfg,
Wholesale & Retail Dealer in Leather & Grindery. Importer of Elastic Webb, Silk Twist, Etc.
[lmporter of Howe’s “ C * Machines,
577 & 579 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
Between Liverpool and Goulburn Streets.
GEORGE BARR,
Wholesale Manufacturer of all kinds of
Also sit; plunge, sponge a event description op baths,
611 & 613 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
And WOLFE STREET, NEWCASTLE.
Orders executed on the shortest notice. Storekeepers liberally dealt with.
A. R. PULLIW,
SIGN WiDTiB ANB GJL&II QN GLASS*
9 PARK STREET, SYDNEY.
Banners and Signs Painted and forwarded to all parts of the Colony.
)K IM. J. MACKENZIE, )i(
He CLOTHIER, TAILOR, MEN’S MERCER AND GENERAL OUTFITTER,
25G GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY.
Orange Regalia Supplied.


IT CLEANSES AND BEAUTIFIES
J. FENTON,
W. STEWABT,
FAMILY GROCEB,
practical 2300 t falter
59 LIVERPOOL STREET WEST,
100 MAEKET-ST. EAST,
(Between George and Sus'sex-sts.)
(Near Castlereagh Street)
SYDNEY.
SYDNEY.
A. 0. CHURCH WOOD,
Importer and Manufacturer of
AND SpICES.
AND GENERAL DRYSALTER,
3921 GEORGE STREET, SYDNEY,
SANDS’ PASSAGE, (FOUR DOORS FROM G.P.0.)
Has always on hand, in and out of Pond—Coffees, Chicory, Pepper, in Bags and Tins,
of all sizes ; Gingers, Pimento, Nutmegs, Cloves, Carraways, Cinnamon,
Salt, Whole and Ground Saltpetre, Rice, and Rice Flour.
All Country Orders punctually attended to.


blbLtO
F 8133
PROTESTANT |
DO YOU SUBSCRIBE TO
<Thc |litotKt;mt
Everyone who values Political and Religious Freedom should support this
•Journal. It exists only to expose error, and to diffuse Christian Truth.
The good it has accomplished must be so well known, that the Proprietors
consider an exposition of the paper’s principles and aim, as superfluous.
They simply put the question to each Protestant—
Do you support Standard ? ??
THE SUBSCRIPTION IS
16s. per year, in advance, 17s. 4d. on credit,
or 4s. per quarter ~ 4s. 4d. ~
FOtJ SPENCE WSSK T
Subscriptions may he sent in Postage Stamps or Money Order.
To Advertisers this paper offers excellent advantages, as its circulation is
only surpassed by that of two or three of all the weeklies published in the
Colony, and is daily increasing. The paper may be had from all News-agents,
and at the office—
33 HUNTER STREET, SYDNEY,
BETWEEN PITT AND CASTLEREAGH STREETS.
PRINTED BY LEE & ROSS, 49 MARKET STREET, SYDNEY.
W* M* US,
IMPORTER OF
TIOSET’S AUSTRIAN BEST-WOOD WILLOW FURNITURE,
PIANOS,
Ladies' Kid Gloves, 2, o, 4,3, 8, 10, 12, 14 and 16 Buttons, Laces, Fans ,
Silks, Austrian Blinds, the., Ac.,
33 KUNTEB STREET,


LKK & ROSS,
Ex
eeMor Bteam Printing Worts,
(BETWEEN GEORGE -A-HSTID PITT STREETS),
SYDITEY.
Messrs. L. & I*, in returning thanks to their friends and the public generally for past favours, beg to
intimate that they have Removed to those centrally situated Premises 49 Market Street, and
having a splendid assortment of the newest Types and Machinery which are manipulated by none
hut thoroughly competent workmen, they are prepared to execute all Orders entrusted to their care
with the greatest promptitude, and on the most reasonable terms. '
WORTH NOTICE.—Orders by POST will meet with, the same attention, as a PERSONAL call.


OXFORD HQUSEJ established 1854. IOXFORD STREET.
Si* WtCZEXX,
LADIES’ AND GENTLEMEN’S HAIR-DRESSER. PRIZE ORNAMENTAL HAIR-WORKER,
IMPORTER OJ 1 HTTTVL_A-Isr ZBAA-HSTC-Sr GOODS, ETC.
Awarded Two Special Prizes, Sydney Exhibition, 1S*S.
The Plaits, Curls, Twists, Tails, or Coils, are made larger if required ; price according to the length and quantity of hair used. All pale, very light, red,
golden, or grey shades, are extra in price. Any description of Ornamental Hair Work made to order. Waste Combings or Cuttings of Ladies’ Hair worked as required.
PERFUMER T.— Jockey Club, Frangipanni, White Rose, Kiss-me-now-and-then, Wood Violet, Pop Kiss, Rondcletia, Musk, Patchouli, Kiss-me-quick,
Rose, Mignonette, KiSs-me-quictly, Tonquin Musk, Love-me-little, Love-me-Long, Magnolia, and a very large assortment of all choice names, received direct from
the Makers, at Is., Is. 6d., 12s., 2s. (id., and 3s. 6d. per bottle.
A large assortment of Brushware, Combs of all sorts, Hair Washes, Hair Dyes, Golden Hair Wash, Pomades, Oils, Soaps, and all goods for the Toilet to
select from. Prices on application.
Note the Address— OXFORD HOUSE, 143 & 145 OXFORD STREET, SYDNEY.
