

“THE EARTH SHALL BE FULL OF THE KNOWLEDGE
OF THE LORD, AS THE WATERS COVER THE SEA.”
A SERMON
ON THE
DEATH OF THE LORD BISHOP OF SYDNEY
filctvopoHtan of
THE RIGHT REVEREND
WILLIAM GRANT BROUGHTON, H.D.
PREACHED BY THE
REVEREND Wm. WEST SIMPSON, M.A.,
In St, Luke's Church, Dapto, sth June, 1853.
PRINTED BY DESIRE OF THE CONGREGATION.
SYDNEY:
PUBLISHED BY W. FORD, STATIONER, GEORGE STREET.
1853.




THIS DISCOURSE,
PUBLISHED AT THEIR REQUEST,
IS FAITHFULLY AND AFFECTIONATELY INSCRIBED TO
ALICE OSBORNE, ESQ., R.N., M.L.C. J AND HENRY OSBORNE,
ESQ., M.L.C. : TRUSTEES ;
ROBERT MARTIN COLE, ESQ., R.N. AND J.P. ; AND WILLIAM
SHEAFFE, ESQ., J.P.: TRUSTEES AND CHURCHWARDENS;
AND TO
MR. EVAN EVANS, CHURCHWARDEN,
OF THE PARISH OF DAPTO;
BY THE AUTHOR.


• ♦
■
• (
n


I have preferred the more easy and obvious method of
committing this Sermon to the press, in the form in which
it was first produced, to any attempt to qualify it for deli-
berate criticism. No ingenuity would avail to reduce it to
the proportions of a finished composition; but lam en-
couraged to think there is sufficient adaptation to the wants
of my parishioners, to make me not unwilling that it should
be seen in the light of a specimen of ordinary instruction,
such as, from week to week, the other duties of a clergyman
permit him to prepare for the pulpit. As it was originally
drawn up, therefore, and without any thought of wider pub-
lication, I have determined to comply with the wishes of an
affectionate and too-partial congregation; and so to print
my sincere but humble tribute to the memory of my late
Father in God, the venerated Bishop Metropolitan of
Australasia, who
vigilando, agendo, benl consulendo
has laid the foundations of our SION in the imperishable
security of the Blessing OP Almighty GOD IN JESUS
Christ.
w. w. s.




SERMON.
The earth shall he full of the knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters cover the sea. xi Isaiah,
part of verse 9.
When the sublime Isaiah, whose name signifies
the Salvation of Jehovah, and whose evangelical
office it was to proclaim the coming of the
Messiah, through whom all the ends of the earth
should see the salvation of God,* pronounced the
words of promise contained in my text, he was
filled with the spirit of prophecy, and foresaw the
Rod out of the stem of Jesse, and the Branch who
should grow out of his roots.f He, like David,
foresaw the Lord always before his face.J He
exulted in the manifestation of the Messiah ; his
heart burned to declare the transcendent dignity
of his character; and his lips were fain to cele-
brate the universality of his Gospel —kingdom,
and the eternal duration of his power. Labour-
ing with this unbounded view of Gospel triumphs,
he gave utterance to the solemn anticipation that
the earth should be full of the knowledge of the
* Isaiah Hi, 10. t Isaiah x b
| 3 Acts, ii, 25, and ps. xvi, 8.


Lord, as the waters cover the sea; or, as the
prophet Habakkuk enlarges it—the earth shall be
full of the knowledge of the glory of the Lord,
as the waters cover the sea.* More than two
thousand and five hundred years have rolled into
eternity since Isaiah and Habakkuk were occupied
with this glorious vision; and now at the end of
this time we are informed that they became the
constant adoption and the dying words of the
Bishop of Sydney —a man raised by the provi-
dence of God to carry the Ensign of the Root
of Jessef to the remotest people of the world,
even to the islands of the sea.J
I will show you how, and how far, the late
Father of the Australasian Church has fulfilled
this wonderful mission; in the completion of
which he has twice put a girdle upon the deep—
twice circumnavigated the waters of the globe.
William Grant Broughton was born in April,
in the year of our Lord 1788, not in the city of
Canterbury, as is commonly reported, and will be
frequently re-asserted ; but, as I have heard him
affirm, claiming the distinction of a Citizen of no
Mean City,§ it happened to him to be born in
Westminster, where his mother, then on a journey,
was unexpectedly confined ; and thus it has come
to pass that where he was born, there he came to
Hab., ii, 14.
| Isaiah xl, 10, 12.
§ Acts xxi, 39.
| Isaiah xi, 11.


die j and being committed to the grave within
the walls of the Cathedral of Canterbury, he
rests gloriously* after all his toils, where he spent
his youth, and received his early education.
Here, too, was the late Governor Sir George
Gipps educated with the late Bishop. I have
seen them fulfilling the duties of their high sta-
tion together, and interchanging the courtesies
of private life; and now they lie extended,
side by side, in the solemn, silent grave, with the
diameter of the earth interposed between them
and the spiritual and temporal government once
committed to their trust. Within the same city of
Canterbury there stands the College of St.
Augustine’s, which, within the last ten years, was
the site of the ruins of an ancient monastery, but
is now a prospering institution for the training
of Missionaries for the Church in the colonies,
the work of A. B. Hope, Esq., of Maidstone,
the Rev. Edward Coleridge, of Eton, and the
late Bishop, whose venerated remains the Go-
vernors of that establishment were most solicitous
to receive within their holy precincts. In distant
times, and in the remotest lands, this labour of
love will be heard of, to the extending of the
blessings of the Gospel, and the praise of the
venerable man who laid the foundations of its
usefulness for Protestant times, and the Pro-
Isaiah xi, 10.


testant Church of England. It was not granted
to the Missionary College of St. Augustine’s to
find a resting place for its second Founder and
Restorer, hut they took a large part in the
solemnity of committing his body to the tomb
within the bosom of the Mother Church of
England.
Having received the rudiments of his education
in the King’s School, at Canterbury— which he
loved to remember with the more affection
because it had for its founder the great and holy
martyr Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury—
about the thirtieth year of his age he graduated
with distinguished honour at Cambridge, at Pem-
broke College, which he delighted to reverence
lor having had among its masters that other victim
of the Reformation, Nicholas Ridley, (with John
Whitgift and Lancelot Andrewes) and soon after
entered upon the ministerial office, in a neigh-
bourhood where he fell under the observation of
the Duke of Wellington, who at once pronounced
him “ a superior man.” The Duke, whose faculty
it was to discriminate, at a glance, with singleness,
and truth, and distinctness, the characters of
men, was looking about for one to whom he
could intrust the rising destinies of the Church
of England in New South Wales; and he recog-
nised in Mr. Broughton those administrative
powers which adapting themselves to small be-
ginnings might expand with the requirements of


the spreading Church, and suit with equal apti-
tude the pious and untiring diligence of the
parish clergyman, and the comprehensive wisdom
and vigilance of the Colonial Bishop. And thus,
therefore, was committed to the fidelity of the
Archdeacon, in the year 1829, by the great Duke,
under divine Providence, the United Church of
England and Ireland in this colony, in the days of
its non-age, when neither the colony itself, nor
the Church planted within it, gave any signs of
the vigour, energy, enterprise, and prosperity,
which elevate the one, nor the pervading and
life-ennobling Spirit which sanctifies the other.
But he who had gone thus far in his great work
was persuaded that there could be no complete
church here without a bishop—that an institution
unprovided with the means of confirming its
young members, of ordaining ministers, and con-
secrating its places of public worship, and the
burial places of its dead, had within itself all the
elements of weakness and decay : and, therefore,
in 1835, the whole circuit of Australia was con-
stituted a Bishop s and its government
confided to him who had been its Archdeacon.
However wide the duties, and however inadequate
the means of providing for them all—how nume-
rous soever the wants —how perplexing soever
the difficulties—and petulant the opposition—the
Bishop was the man whose zeal, and energy, and
undaunted temperament, were equal to the duties,


and he never spared himself to do them: he
found time and .strength, and a blessing on their
exertion to sustain him from effort to effort. The
wants of the diocese were contemplated in a
spirit of untiring faith : districts were organized,
churches Avere consecrated, ministers ordained
and settled. The difficulties arising from a state
of things in which all was to be originated, even
from the foundations, and all provided at once for
a distant posterity by a generation dismayed by
reverses and haunted by insecurity, the Bishop
overcame in an abundant well-spring of Patience,
Hope, and Charity: and in the worst of times,
his was an example for. brave men to follow, of
unyielding, resolute persistency, which leaves
nothing unattempted which may be done righte-
ously, and which abandons nothing that is worth
a struggle. Of an opposition organized against
him I will now say nothing, because I trust that
it has died in his death : he had that beatitude
which our Saviour promised to his faithful ser-
vants: “Blessed are ye when men shall revile
you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner
of evil against you falsely, for my sake.*” Men
reviled him, and said all manner of evil against
him falsely, for Christ’s sake. But he is blessed.
They called him tyrant, but he persecuted no
man : he was kind even to the unthankful and
* Mat. v., 11.


evil*. They questioned his faith—they called
him Romanizer : yet he died a good Protestant,
and with his last breath he celebrated the glories
of the Gospel, and dwelt upon the wondrous
promises of the word, and enjoyed the vision ol
the Almighty worshipped in all lands, and the
earth full of the knowledge of the glory of the
Lord, as the waters cover the sea.
But lam anticipating. For eleven years the
Bishop conducted the affairs of the wide-spread
diocese of Australia, down to 1847, when at his
earnest representation, and on the surrender of
one-fourth part of his income (he had even
offered one half) the diocese was subdivided, and
the three newly appointed Bishops declared to be
his suffragans, and subject to his authority, toge-
ther with the Bishops of New Zealand and
Tasmania, respectively. Now, this was not only
a great step in the several parts of
the colony, which were thus placed under more
immediate superintendence and control—it was
not only a great relief to him who had hitherto
borne the responsibility and labour of the undi-
vided province—but it was to the whole Church
in these south-eastern regions of the world, the
gift OF a DISTINCT existence, and independ-
ence for ever of this portion of the Church of
Christ. For if, at any crisis, either by the con-
* Luke vi., 45.


vulsion of political strife, or even by the revolu-
tions of nature, the old intercourse with the
mother country should cease ; in fact, whenever
such a course could be looked upon as desirable,
or necessary, we have the means among us of
maintaining and perpetuating the order of
Bishops, and through them of ordaining deacons
and priests to be the ministers of the Church in
all coming time. The case of the Episcopal
Church in America will best serve to show you
what has been gained to the Church in Australia
by this arrangement.
When the separation of the United States from
Great Britain had been established, and the con-
flicting elements had been allowed to subside, as
their various opinions in politics and religion
directed them, some few persons were found who
adhered to the Protestant and Episcopal Church
of England; and they, forming themselves into
a body, slowly but gradually acquired numbers,
respectability, and consideration. Among their
first efforts to organize themselves into a Church,
application was made to the Anglican Bishops to
consecrate so many among their clergy as might
fulfil the requirements of the law in the matter of
continuing the succession within their own limits;
and the English prelates were ready to give all
they asked for, and encourage their righteous
design. But an obstacle was discovered in the
fact, that an Act of Parliament was found declar-


ing that none should be admitted to the Episcopal
dignity, and that no Bishop should consecrate
any man to the same, without giving and taking
the oath of allegiance to the Sovereign, which
allegiance the Americans had then disclaimed.
The delay produced by this discovery was so
vexatious, and the urgency of the case so im-
portunate, that while the means of getting over
the difficulty were discussed, it occurred to some
of the more earnest spirits engaged in the cause
to seek that consecration from the humble but
persecuted Episcopal Church of Scotland, which
they seemed to ask in vain of her ascendant sister.
From the Scotch, therefore, the first American
Bishop, Dr. Seabury, obtained consecration in the
year 1784 ; and three years afterwards the Ame-
rican Episcopate was established, by the full
admission into that order of Dr. White and Dr.
Provoost, in the Chapel of Lambeth Palace, by
both Archbishops of England, and the Bishops of
Bath and Wells, and Peterborough.* And in this
way the Church in America is lineally descended.
* Chart of American Episcopacy down to 1800.
1784. S. Seabury, D.D., Connecticut. Consecrated by
Bps. Kilgour, Petrie, and Skinner, at Aberdeen;
died, 1796.
1787. W. White, D.D., Pennsylvania. Consecrated by
Abps. Moore of Canterbury, and Markham of York,
and Moss and Hinchcliffe at Lambeth; died, 1836.


lii this brief account you will see that we have
obtained among ourselves the perfect model of
an establishment which it will be our wisdom to
perpetuate: and that we have it, in its integrity,
is owing, under Providence, to the late Lord
Bishop of Sydney.
The growth of this Church in America is one
among the most wonderful of the startling events
of modern times, and may be almost included
within the life-time of the late Bishop; but the
planting of the Church in Australasia, its vigorous
increase and hopeful condition, the results of
seventeen years only, counting from the conse-
1787. S, Provoost, D.D., New York. Consecrated with Dr.
White, by the same ; died, 1815.
1790. J. Madison, D.D., Virginia. Consecrated by Abp.
Moore, of Canterbury; and Porteus and Thomas, at
Lambeth ; died, 1812.
1792. T. J. Claggett. D,D., Maryland. Consecrated by
Bps. Provoost, Seabury, White, and Madison, at New
York; died, 1816.
1795. R, Smith, D.D., South Carolina. Consecrated by
Bps. White, Provoost, Madison, and Claggett, at
Philadelphia; died, 1801.
1797. E. Bass, D.D., Massachusetts. Consecrated by Bps.
White, Provoost, and Claggett, at Philadelphia;
died, 1803.
1797. A. Jarvis, D.D., Connecticut. Consecrated by Bps.
White, Provoost, and Bass, at New Haven; died, 1813.
Bishop White held the Episcopal dignity for nearly fifty
years, and consecrated twenty-six Bishops.


cration of its first prelate, is still more extraordi-
nary : and if the mere worldly observer contents
himself with remarking that all other things have
sprung forward with equal energy and prompti-
tude, let him at the very least confess, that the
Church found no impediment to her growth and
influence among her Governors, who were never
supine and indolent in the midst of general
advancement. No! the fact is undeniable, and
full of evidence; and may be expressed in this
brief sentence, that one man conducted the progress
of the Church of England from a mere Arch-
deaconry in a penal colony, to become a Bishop's
See, and finally a Province, and the Metropolis of
Australasia —and that man was Dr. Broughton.
Such is the brief and hurried outline of the
career of one who was to us, although we hardly
honoured him enough, our Spiritual Father ; and
having thus glanced at his life, I must now men-
tion a few particulars of his death, in which we
shall, doubtless, find something worthy of our regard.
The Bishop died in London, on the 20th
February, 1850, thus completing seventeen years
of his Episcopate, for on the 21st February, 1836,
he was consecrated to the See of Australia in
Lambeth Palace, by four prelates, of whom two,
their Lordships of London and Winchester, have
survived him. Though he died in London, far,
far away from his family and home, let it not be
thought the last necessities of nature were minis-


tered by strangers. He was faithfully waited
on by his own attached servant, and he
died in the house of Lady Gipps, whose pri-
vilege it has been to render the last offices of
Christian duty and affection to her venerated
friend: and thus, at one o’clock in the morning of
Sunday, the Bishop Metropolitan of Sydney was
taken to his reward, passing from death to life, 1
will not say from life to death, without a struggle
—without a sigh. Among his holy aspirations
and prayers, and the meditations ol his passing
hour, the last words that fell from his lips were
t h ese —“the earth shall be full of the knowledge of
the glory of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea.
And now, my brethren, let us see what good
and useful thing we may learn from the life and
character of the late Bishop : and there is one
quality which shone forth powerfully in him, and
which I may safely recommend to your admiration
and adoption, and that is—Earnestness of pur-
pose in all you undertake. Our calling in this
world, be it what it may, is a great part of our
duty as Christians. Whatsoever our hand findeth
to do, let us do it with our might, for there is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in
the grave, whither thou goest ;* remembering
Ecclesiastes ix, 10.


that diligence in business is one way of serving
the Lord.* In this way, at least, we have an
example almost unequalled in the Dishop, whose
goodness was not limited to words and pious
phrases, but was observable in the same unwearied
attention to the whole range of duties that lay
upon him, and the same sagacious foresight in
providing for every exigency and complicated
need: in him it was not a succession of Scripture
quotation and holy phrases, but an unmistakable
purpose of doing well whatever he had to do.'}'
While he executed one work he prepared
for another, and was always more hopeful,
more ready, and better furnished with neces-
sary information than those who consulted
him could previously have imagined. And this
was one great secret of his success, well worth
our emulation; for no extraordinary genius is
required to enable a man to strive, from day to
Romans xii, 11.
t “Without any approach to fanaticism or presumption, or
the slightest tendency to superstition, or to any novel con-
ceits, her endeavour was to walk in the way of Good men,
and to keep the paths of the righteous, hearing always in
her remembrance the admonition of one of them (Bishop
Wilson) that ‘ Christians must not content themselves with
shadows of religion, but endeavour after that holiness with-
out which no man shall see the Lord.’ ” —Bishop Broughton
on his deceased wife.


day, to do the work before him well. And it is
only by so doing that he will attain the goal which
Providence has appointed him. There is nothing
to hinder every man upon the earth, from the
greatest to the least, from being successful in
life, and trusted, and respected, and valued by
his fellow-men. This earnestness of purpose will
make them so ; and, without it, what are they but
weak, unsteady, good-for-nothing beings, unhappy
themselves, and a nuisance to all around them.
If this be so in worldly concerns, a still greater
religious use may be made of earnestness of pur-
pose in our endeavours after the Kingdom of God.
The application of thought and determination
which in the world distinguishes the great, and
good, and excellent, applied to the service of
God in his Church, converts men into his most
acknowledged saints and honoured servants.
Whether in the shop, or in the field—in the
market, or in the manufactory—as master, or as
servant—every one—man, woman, and child—
has a great work to carry on for God—every one
has labours to go through—duties to do for the
present—-provision to make for the future.
Now, this is the rule. Do all that you can,
and leave the result to God. Give yourselves
wholly to his service. Let nothing divide, and
dissipate, and scatter your energy; but use your
utmost endeavours, with unflinching resolution, on
the work that is before you, and this must be the


issue. You will attain the best possible result, and
oftentimes more than you ever dreamed of attain-
ing. A divided heart, a wavering will, a doubtful
service, will not recommend you to any master;
but least of all to Him with W horn we have to do;*
Who has the highest claim to all you have, all you
are, and all you can do ; and who is a discerner of
the thoughts and intents of the heartf before they
go forth into action.
It was given to the late Bishop of Sydney to be
faithful in many things—let us be faithful over a
few; J for whether they be few, or many, 1 know
that the Lord will commend his good and faithful
servant wheresoever He can find him; and he
shall enter into the joy of his Lord§: and it shall
be his privilege to know, and to understand, and
to exclaim, when all worldly things have lost their
interest in his soul:
The earth shall be full of the knowledge
of the Glory of the Lord, as the waters
cover the sea.
Heb. iv, 13.
f Ileb. iv, 12.
§ Mat. xxv, 23.
| Mat. xxv, 21.
THE END.


