

p. yVLON
Preached on the 29TH October, 1872,
AT THE OPENING OF THE
nf % | | Ijurth
NEW SOUTH WALES,
BY THE
Rev. A. C. GEEKIE, D.D.,
Retiring Moderator.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
£jtowg :
JOHN MAILER, 256, GEORGE STREET.




SERMON.
“ Christ sent me not to baptize, hut to preach the Gospel:
not with wisdom of words, lest the Cross of Christ should he
made of none effect .” —1 Cor. I. 17.
As is always the case when a Church is in a low spiritual
condition, there were paltry parties, and equally paltry
strifes, among the Christians of Corinth. The battle in
that Church sprang from the meanest causes. The Christ-
ians of Corinth fought not about principles, but about men;
not about truth, but about names. The mere existence of
a party is inevitable when a Church is large, and where its
members are at liberty to think. In such bodies great
principles necessarily fall to be debated, and as men
differ about them, legitimate and useful parties are formed.
Their existence in such instances is a proof of earnestness,
and a tribute to the power of conviction. Principle, how-
ever, had nothing to do with the wars of Corinthian
believers. Such did battle about the several merits and
claims of Paul, or of Apollos, or of Cephas. With such
strifes Paul had no patience; and for such strifes he rebukes
the combatants in this epistle : —“ Now I beseech you,
brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among
you, but that ye be perfectly joined together in the same
mind, and in the same judgment. ** * Now this I
say, that every one of you saith, lam of Paul, and I


of Apollos, and lof Cephas, and lof Christ. Is Christ
divided? ”
Having thus delivered himself very forcibly, regarding
the squabbles of these people, he proceeds to indicate that
he wished none of their homage, and that Christ being the
Head, all who are His should think only of Him. “ Were
ye baptized in the name of Paul ? ” he asks ; and he pre-
sently adds, “ Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach
the Gospel: not with wisdom of words, lest the Cross of
Christ should be made of none effect.”
In considering these words, I purpose, hoping for God’s
blessing, to consider in the first place,
I. What Christian ministers are not sent to do: not to
Baptize.
Such, if they are of the same mind with Paul,
are not sent to baptize. Undoubtedly, we are autho-
rized and commanded to dispense the sacrament of
Baptism. The Redeemer’s commission to His minis-
tering servants is, “Go ye, therefore, and teach all
nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” So it is re-
corded by Matthew, and Mark gives a somewhat similar
commission in the same connection : “ Go ye into all the
world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that
believeth and is baptized shall be saved ; he that believeth
not shall be damned.” Luke, however, in his Gospel, says
nothing of Baptism, but gives merely this command : “ That
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in
His name, among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.”
Nor does John, in the close of his Gospel, say one word
about Baptism. And when, in the Acts, Luke again refers
to the final commands of our Lord, he tells us that these
were, in addition to what he had elsewhere repeated, “ Wait


for the promise of the Father, which ye have heard of me ;
for John truly baptized with water, but ye shall be bap-
tized with the Holy Ghost, not many days hence.” Kow,
to me, there is something very significant in this silence of
Luke and John about water baptism, and something
still more significant in the fact that, in the face of this
silence, Christ, as reported by Luke, discriminates between
this Baptism and the vastly more important Baptism with
the Holy Ghost. It may be noted too, that while Christ,
as reported by Mark, declares that he who bclieveth and is
baptized shall be saved, He also says that he who refuses to
believe —simply to believe —shall be condemned. Care is
needed in dealing with omissions and in concluding from
them ; this, however, is a mere matter of fact, that while
two writers of Gospels include Baptism as an item in the
ministerial commission, two others say nothing about it,
and that one of the latter two, in again referring to the
winding up of our Lord’s earthly ministry, informs us that,
the great Teacher himself, indicates that ordinary Baptism —
John's —or any other man’s, is vastly inferior to that with
which His Apostles were blessed, and that which blessed
ordinary thousands on the Day of Pentecost.
But this is not all. We are informed that “Jesus
Himself baptized not, but His disciples.” He left
the least important offices in the least important hands.
And we find that others followed His example. Thus the
Apostle Peter, when he visited Cornelius, preached to him
and his, “ peace by Jesus Christ;” and when, after they had
believed, it was proper to receive them into the Church by
Baptism, “ he commanded them to be baptized,” evidently
devolving this work on some one or other of the brethren
who had accompanied him from Joppa. So also, in the
first chapter of the First Epistle to the Corinthians, Paul


vehemently thanks God that he had only baptized three
families, having, like Peter, left humbler men to baptize all
the other members of that large Christian society. Beyond
controversy, Baptism, as it is still understood and observed,
had not the first place, either in the mind of our Kedeemer
or of his inspired Apostles and earliest followers.
As has been well observed in connection with our text, by
Dr. Charles Hodge, one of the first of living theologians:
l - During the Apostolic age, and in the Apostolic form of
religion, truth stood immeasurably above external rites.
The apostaey of the Church consisted in making rites more
important than truth. The Apostle’s manner of speaking of
Baptism in this connection is, therefore, a wonder to those who
are disposed unduly to exalt the sacraments.” Surely then*
those who, whether they baptize adults or infants, it matters
not, unduly exalt this sacrament, do exactly the opposite
thing to that which Christ and His Apostles did. To neg-
lect Baptism would be to disobey a positive law of our
Master; but if it would be wrong to neglect the ordinance,
it is in my judgment, a far more dangerous thing, as all
history has proved, to give it a foremost place in the work
of the Church.
Principal Cunningham says:—“ Protestants have been
accustomed to maintain this great principle, that the only
thing on which the possession by men individually, of the
fundamental spiritual blessings of justification and sancti-
fication, is, by God’s arrangements, made necessarily and
invariably dependent — is union to Jesus Christ , and that the
only thing on which union to Christ may he said to be depen-
dent is faith ih Him ; so that it holds true, absolutely
and universally, that wherever there is faith in Christ, or
union to Him by faith, there pardon and holiness —all neces-
sary spiritual blessings —are communicated by God, and


received by men, even though they have never actually par-
taken in any outward ordinance whatever.
Every man who is justified and regenerated is certainly
admitted into heaven, whether he have been baptized or not;
and there is no ground in Scripture for maintaining either
that every one who has been baptized has been forgiven
and regenerated, or that those who have not been baptized
have not received these great blessings.”
The text teaches, in the second place,
11. What Christian ministers are sent to do :“ to preach
the Gospel .”
Christ sent the Twelve to preach the Gospel, adding only
one other instruction, that they should also heal-the sick ;
in other words, act a Gospel to the body also. The Seventy
were sent out to preach the coming kingdom. Christ him-
self went about, “ teaching in their synagogues and preach-
ing the Gospel of the kingdom.” When the early Christ-
ians were scattered abroad, they “ went everywhere preach-
ing the word.” Paul said, “ from Jerusalem and round
about unto Illycrum—a great sweep —I ha \qfully preached
the Gospel of Christ.” When he solicits the prayers of the
Ephesians, it is that “ utterance may be given unto him,
that he may open his mouth boldly, to make known the
mystery of the Gospel.” Ho gloried in being a minister of
the Gospel, which, he tells the Colossians, had even then
been preached to every creature under heaven. Because a
preacher, he was Christ’s ambassador. As a preacher, he
felt that necessity was laid upon him; “ Yea,” he adds,
“ woe is me if I preach not the Gospel.”
Enough has, I hope, been said respecting the opinion,
that the principal business of the Christian minister is to
dispense sacraments ; the passages of Scripture now quoted
will leave no doubt upon the mind of every Protestant that,


while the two sacraments of the New Testament are to he
constantly observed, the mind of our Lord and his early
followers and Apostles was, that the full proclamation of all
saving truth, the “ ministry of the word,” was the special
business to which Christian Pastors were in all ages to give
themselves. But we have not to resist hierarchical claims
merely; claims of a very opposite character are often set
forth to distract the minister from his proper work. Thus,
there are some who do not hesitate to say, that there is as
much good done by visiting from house to house as there is
by preaching. Perhaps some will even say, that visiting a
congregation often does more good than preaching. To
this claim there is a reply, which might render any other
unnecessary were we disposed to rest on it alone, namely,
that the whole Bible, both in the Old and in the New
Testaments, is in direct opposition to any such fancy,
and that the men who indulge it, and the ministers who
yield to it, are following a poor device, and acting without
due regard to the will of Grod. Were the demand now
under consideration simply this, that a certain amount of
truly pastoral visitation should be paid annually, no rational
Christian minister would refuse compliance ; but truly
pastoral visitation is not that which many of the most
clamorous wish. In too many instances, their wish springs,
not from an excess of spirituality, but from the want of it.
In too many instances, their demand means, not prayer>
not holy converse about sin, Christ, the Sanctifier and
coming glory, but that the minister shall pay the compli-
ment of making frequent calls upon their households. I
am not arguing against pastoral visitation ; my own prac-
tice is to visit pastorally, as far as possible, every member
of my congregation twice a year; my conviction is that
such, and so many visits, are of great value ; but the thing
I argue against is a mere system of calling upon people,


time after time, with no higher result than gratifying the
vanity of one, or keeping down the complaints of another.
Were the demand I now refer to allowed, the effect
would he ruinous to our congregations and our ministers
alike. Not to speak of the utter fruitlessness of such a
system, the result must be, either that the ministerial visit
shall sink into a frequent gossip, or a perfunctory form, or
that the study shall be forsaken, and the services of the
Sabbath shall become vapid, or if not vapid, shall possess
life because the sermons are not the minister’s own. No
man can serve two masters ; no man can both be a student
and a constant peripatetic; and no man can successfully
preach the Gospel, if he fails to be a student. If„the sanc-
tuary can be honored apart from the study, then the
minister may spend most of his time going from house to
house; but it cannot be honoured if he so spend his days.
To the utmost of his power let him be regular in truly pas-
toral visitation; but let him never, as he values his own
intelligence, his own usefulness, his own final responsibility,
permit this work so to engross his time, that he must cease
to labour in his library, and to preach carefully prepared
sermons in his pulpit. The moment the pulpit fails to
edify, ministerial power is gone, and the people decline at
once in holiness and stability; but a deserted study means
a powerless pulpit, and no human device can supply such a
defect. God has commanded us to preach the Gospel; and
if we be wiser than God, and prefer other ways of saving
souls to this, let us not wonder if His blessing be withheld,
and our years be spent in vain.
The cant, beginning now to die out, has for some years
been, that the pulpit was effete; at all events, that the
exercises of most of its occupants were contemptible, and
that the intelligence of this remarkable age could do with-


out it. Now, to some extent, the bare intelligence of a
generation may do without preaching ; as, however, mere
intelligence can neither make a man nor a nation, the
preaching of the Gospel can never be put aside with impu-
nity. The minister should preach his best, intellectually ;
but let him remember that his work is with men’s hearts, as
well as with intellectualities. If he can quicken con-
science, incite to present duty, and draw men up to God r
hie work is done, and he has done a noble work. Other
men can teach science, or philosophy, or letters; it is his
more glorious office to teach that Christ was once offered
to bear the sins of many, and that He will appear the
second time, without sin unto salvation, to all them that
look for Him, The pulpit is to deal with men’s present
living, and with their relations to God and eternity ; and
those who are ever clamouring for pulpit performances
which shall resemble newspaper articles, or sensational
literature, have evidently no knowledge of what the minis-
ter’s duty is, and no interest in the Gospel he is bound
for ever to proclaim. Three classes have raised the cry
against the value of the pulpit: first, the class who are
wholly ignorant of true, New Testament religion ; second ,
the class who are wholly indifferent to all New Testament
religion: and third, the class of pretentious sciolists, whose
vanity is so great, and whose capacity is so small, that they
are convinced they know better than the Bible, their
fathers, and the holiest and wisest in all generations.
Happily for the [present and the future of sinning men r
such people carry comparatively little weight at any time,
although a passing fashion may give their notions a
notoriety which they mistake for solid reputation.
Preaching is emphatically our business, brethren; and if
we give ourselves heartily to this, we shall surely reap if


we faint not. On the full, faithful, affectionate, laborious
preaching of the Gospel, the future of every congregation
and every Church depends. G-od has promised to bless His
Word, so that they who sow weeping may know, that the
day draws on, when they shall come back bearing their
sheaves with them. Nothing can be a substitute for the
faithful preaching of a crucified Saviour. This theme may
not immediately attract a floating crowd, to whom the
church on the Sabbath is not more than the theatre on the
week-day, but it will hold the children of God ; it will set-
tle down in the hearts of the sober; it will train the young;
and it will reclaim the erring; and will increase and build
up that Church which is the body of Christ. It may still
be a stumbling-block to some, and a folly to more, but it
is, and ever shall be, the “ power of God, and the wisdom
of God,” a savour of life unto life, wherever it is received
by a living and loving faith. Christ sent us to preach the
Gospel.
The text teaches negatively, yet clearly,
111. How men should preach the Gospel: “ not with
wisdom of words."
In preaching, we are not to strive after mere pulpit effect.
An eloquent man will be what he is—and he cannot fail to
be eloquent; but one who has no such gift, errs if he seeks
what is not his. And it is wonderful how evanescent the
fruit of mere eloquence has ever been in the pulpit. The
highest style of eloquence has, for the hour, enchained a
multitude; its echoes, like music on the waters in the stilly
night, have lingered in the memories of a few; and yet the
good done by the preacher in the conversion of his hearers
seems no greater, if so great, as that achieved by one who,
with less passion and poetry, may have in greater simplicity
set forth the cross of Christ. Murray McCheyne was not


eloquent, but he preached Christ with rare unction. The
Scottish revivals of last century were the result of a full
proclamation, by vigorous men, of the Cross. And so it
is now. Mere wisdom of words, however attractive, is no
substitute for the great doctrines of grace; but the doc-
trines of grace have ever lived and fructified apart from,
and in despite of, the absence of external advantages in
him who energetically, fully, and honestly has proclaimed
them.
In preaching, we must neither strive after philosophies,
nor science, nor letters. The preacher must know philosophy
and science and letters, if he would fit himself for instruct-
ing men who do ; but he is not to preach them. It may
interest a few, if metaphysical points are selected for discus-
sion ; if curious theories, old or new, of the past, the present
or the future, are discussed; if abstract speculation on things
in heaven above or on the earth beneath, are discussed ; but
such things are not the Gospel. It might interest others
if debateable points about evolution, natural selection, or
the antiquity of man were made the subjects of discourse ;
but, intensely interesting and important as all such topics
are, they are not the Gospel. Many are delighted, when
an essay, adorned with all the graces of style and fancy,
which culture and genius can supply, is read on the Sabbath
day ; the subject being some appeal to the tenderer senti-
ments, to the philanthropic sympathies, or a discussion of
the moralities of life ; delightiul and profitable, however, as
such performances often are, they are not the Gospel. Such
essays could have been written by Seneca or Cicero, as
well as by any minister of the Lord Jesus.
Such then, should not be the staple of any man’s preaching,
however the proper work of the Sabbath may derive assist-
ance for such accessories. No man can be too eloquent,


or learned, or philosophic, if he preach Christ; but if he
fail in doing so, all the rest, in the room of Christ, is a
snare. And the temptation to harp upon such strings is,
to some, very great. They are popular ; they give one the
repute of being thoughtful and original; they are less
hackneyed subjects, and, therefore, more easily spoken about
than a Divine Mediator; they do not, however, satisfy an
anxious sinner, nor sanctify a wanderer, nor calm a dying
hour. They do not open the gates of heaven to those who
would go in, and they do not tell what all some day crave
to know —how God can be just and yet the justifier of the
ungodly.
The Gospel of the Cross of Christ is all and in all to us.
The old, the unchangeable, the simple and the humiliating
doctrine of Christ crucified, that is the Gospel. In the
centre of all preaching, we must plant the Cross, and round
this, the old facts of original sin, of God’s justice, of man’s
helplessness, of Christ’s divinity, suretiship, death, resur-
rection and ascension, of faith and repentance, of the Holy
Ghost and sanctification, of heaven and of hell, must gather,
each in its own position —but none left out. Either we
preach these things, or we fail to do that for the especial
doing of which Christ has sent us.
IY. The text teaches that Oospel preaching is necessary,
lest the Cross of Christ should he made of no effect.
The Gospel is nothing apart from its specialities. Its
moralities may be higher than other moralities ; if, however,
there be no dying Eedeemer, these only render the position
of the sinner more desperate than it was before. Such
moralities tell him more clearly than ever, what he
ought to be; but they also tell him more clearly
than ever, that he has utterly come short, and that
he never can attain to the holiness of God. If there


be nothing more in Christ’s teaching than a lofty
morality, we who are dead in sin, and prone in feebleness,
are only thereby more evidently undone. We all need
“ the shedding of blood, without which there is no remis-
sion.” And with this need, supplied by God’s own Son
when He said, “Itis finished,” and gave up the ghost, we
have all we require. In Him we have all things, for in
Him dwelleth the fulness of the Godhead bodily.
Our preaching is powerless, then, in proportion as we
hide the sharply cut facts of Christ’s atonement, and potent
in proportion as we set them forth. Let it be ours therefore,
ever to preach these, and may no man beguile us with en-
ticing words. Let no one of us, for fear of others, or from
dreams of a momentary popularity, attempt anything, or
care for anything in our preaching, but the Gospel of
Christ. “ Take heed to thyself and to thy doctrine : con-
tinue in them, for in so doing, thou shalt both save thyself,
and them that hear thee.”
But before we can preach Christ to others, we must find
Him ourselves. We cannot preach what we never knew;
hence the thought ever presses itself ,ou one, as he dis-
courses of the ministerial work, am I myself a renewed
man ? Have I understood the plan of salvation ? Have
I repented of sin and found peace in believing on the
Lamb P Am I daily living as becometh the Gospel ?
Am I seeking daily to be ready? Is it my aim to
honour God in Christ, and do I live for this end?
No doubt, our safety lies in self-examination and
profound humility. Let us, therefore, examine ourselves,
lest having preached the Gospel to others, we should iu
the end be castaway. To perish eternally, is an apalling
thing; to perish in comparative ignorance, is an apalling
thing ; to perish in the midst of light, is still more terrible.


What, however, must be the condemnation of the man who,
telling sinners to flee to Christ, has never fled to him
himself! who, telling men to believe, has himself never truly
believed! who, telling men that they must be born again,
has himself never been regenerated! who, telling others of
the glory of heaven and of Christ, shall himself never enter
the one, nor see the other! From this Iscariot-like fate,
may God defend us ! Let each examine himself, and let him
that thinketh he standeth take heed lest he fall.
Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy
Ghost, as it was in the begining, is now and ever shall be,
world without end. Amen.


TAf e
B/6i(o
JOSKI’II COOK AM) CO.,
PRINTERS,
GKOKCE STREET, SYDNEY.
