

IA Shepherd Boy I
H^ustmNd-


y pTx v x 1
/I (jtfustvafict I ujjy ' I
/ Wt MK we^tchjI
/ ///b/AT^fi
' sJS AU £TJ2A\JL IA
.kalgoorlie
_* j '' -- -- '.'^-^-7'
r '
S/DNEY HARBOR


k \r ' I)
tfOBJ-HEC-lNf I U^^CTD&Al.
TEB.BJTO&Y" |
I '
I BRISBANE^!
AUSTRALIA i 1(1
NULLARBOR ** Q \ /)) J
PLAIN V J/l j
<? j 'Hew {///
A*ftv /\ ' SIDNEY
a\ yg9l kORSAv* /^/
<*CANBERRA
iviCTOwS^
BOURNE
(^|^^HOBART
ts
o
£
s
3:


m '


SHEPHERD BOY
OF AUSTRALIA


* ~y < i\~ “ ’' - — - m
■ ■ ’
a . •
. ' - - v § ■ ■ ‘^' V - - J ■' :• . ;•.
■■feit-Alf 1 !>-->- ■ - *~..v 1 • < „>** ■iSHff’^
' '* *> ■’■
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
THE DROVER


SHEPHERD BOY
OF AUSTRALIA
MARGARET BUTTON
Photographic Illustrations
GROSSET & DUNLAP
Publishers New A ork


COPYRIGHT, 1941, BY GROSSET & DUNLAP, INC.
PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OP AMERICA


Dedicated to
MY AUSTRALIAN
FRIENDS IN
AMERICA
and also to
VICTOR AND STELLA MAY
who are really very much
like Little Australian Billee
and Little American Nancy
and who were glad to pose for
the pictures in this book.




CONTENTS
Chapter I
The New Owner H
The Promise 26
The Journey • 47
The Arrival 69
Two Wishes 83
Chapter VI
Two Schoolmates . 9<
Telling Stories 144
Shearing Time . 128
The Platypus * 144
The Picture 161
When Christmas Came 178




SHEPHERD BOY
OF AUSTRALIA


BILLEE WITH HIS SHEEP


P2OSM
I e 194f
A SHEPHERD BOY OF
AUSTRALIA
CHAPTER I
THE NEW OWNER
“Billee! Billee!” called Billee’s mother.
“Eeee! Eeee! Eeeek!” echoed a saucy
green parakeet from somewhere in the bush
not far away.
A thousand chirping and drumming in-
sects seemed to take up the call as Billee hur-
ried home.
William Ellis, or Billee as he was called,
lived in Victoria. Ever since he could re-
member he and his faithful dog, Jet, had
helped look after the sheep.
Victoria is not a country in itself, but one
of the six states which form the Common-
wealth of Australia. Queensland, New


South Wales, Western Australia, South Aus-
tralia and the island state of Tasmania are
the others. But Billee lived in Victoria be-
cause his father managed a sheep ranch
there.
In Australia a sheep ranch is called a sheep
station. Each station is like a village in it-
self. There is a large home for the owner, a
somewhat smaller home for the manager, and
a group of houses for the station hands and
their families. Beyond these are the long
corrugated iron wool sheds and pens for
yarding the sheep at shearing time.
The smaller stations keep other things be-
sides sheep. At Koala Station, where Billee
lived, there were cattle, pigs and a large
flock of hens. The motherless lambs were
kept near the house and Billee was feeding
them when he heard his mother calling.
“The post must have come. I say, what
luck!” And he gave his dog an affectionate


pat. “It must be that letter from America.
Fancy me, Jet old fellow, being an owner’s
son! Now I can tell that city slicker of a Joe
Jeffry what I think of him.”
Jet gave a little whine as Billee mentioned
Joe’s name. He was the only one of the
young jackaroos who ever teased or tor-
mented Billee’s dog. He acted “smart-
alecky” as Billee called it, because he still
lived at the homestead even though Uncle
John was dead.
Uncle John had been the owner of Koala
Station. But for years he had been too weak
to do any of the hard work. Billee’s father
took care of everything so that Uncle John
could simply sit back and say, “That is fine.”
And, from the wide porch of his comfortable
homestead, he could look out across the coun-
try for miles and see no property but his own.
This was a great satisfaction to Uncle
John. But often, during his lifetime, he


used to sigh for a son or a grandson who
would love Australia as he did.
Once there had been such a son, but the
World War had taken him. Over three hun-
dred thousand of the brave Anzacs, as the
soldiers of Australia and New Zealand are
called, were killed or wounded. The Aus-
tralian and New Zealand soldiers are still
among the world’s most daring fighters and,
although Billee did not know this, they were
again to help England’s cause. He did know
they had helped the last time, for Uncle John
never drove into the beautiful city of Mel-
bourne without stopping at the Shrine of Re-
membrance.
Here Uncle John would stand, his hat in
his hands, and say, “God bless my son.”
Then he and Billee and Billee’s grown-up
sister Edith would walk through the paths in
silence. They would stand beside the foun-
tain with the child above it and think how sad


mm | Jk
Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner
THE SHRINE OF REMEMBRANCE
it was that Uncle John should have no one
but his ungrateful nephew in America.
This nephew, young John Snaith, was the
only relative Uncle John had, for he was not
really the uncle of Billee and Edith. They
only called him Uncle because they loved him.
He was also called Uncle by the young jacka-
roos —the men who work on a sheep station


in order to learn the business. Joe was one
of these.
Joe liked to boast about the homestead
with its wide, latticed porches and spacious
gardens. But to Billee the smaller man-
ager’s house seemed more homelike. It was
low-built, like most Australian homes, with
a corrugated iron roof and porches nearly all
the way around it. Now, as Billee came
nearer, he saw his whole family waiting on
the porch.
“I say, what is wrong?” he asked at once.
He could see from their serious faces that the
news from America was not good news.
“Our plans are all spoiled, Billee boy,” his
mother told him. “Uncle John’s nephew has
refused to sell.”
Still Billee did not understand. Edith tried
to explain.
“You see, Billee, when people die they leave
their property to someone. Well, Uncle John


Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner
BILLEE’S HOME AT KOALA STATION
has left Koala Station to his nephew in Amer-
ica. We thought the nephew would be will-
ing to sell. But we were wrong. Instead, he
and his daughter are coming here to live.”
Edith sighed and added, “I suppose they will
still want a manager. We have that much to
be thankful for. The nephew doesn’t know
a thing about raising sheep. 1 1


“Then why does he want to live on a sheep
station?” asked the bewildered boy.
“That is just what I should like to know,”
put in Aunt Harriet who was cook at the
homestead. “They say he left Australia in
the first place because he didn’t like looking
after the sheep, and I’m sure he is only com-
ing back to cause trouble. Otherwise he
would sell.”
“Perhaps he thinks of selling the sheep for
mutton and raising race horses. I know he is
interested in racing,” Edith began.
“He wouldn’t dare!” burst out Billee,
clenching his fists with rage. “If anyone
dares kill one of our sheep, I’ll . . .”
“They are his sheep now, Son,” Billee’s
father reminded him gently.
“I don’t care whose sheep they are! I
won’t let him touch them. The ungrateful
The ungrateful
But Billee only ground his heel into the


wv Aw // r S
\V ■ y
wF&sSSi&l **y / I
’ im 111 _ ' /.^.^ K
' 4, lw v - - J ‘ • - Vh
JET LOOKED AT HIM MOURNFULLY
gravel path and clenched his fists harder than
ever. He could not find words to express his
feelings toward Uncle John’s nephew.
The others went in, but Billee still sat on
the edge of the porch, thinking. Jet, seeing
that his master was troubled, put his head on
the boy’s knee and looked at him so mourn-
fully that a big tear rolled down Billee’s cheek


and splashed on the dog’s shaggy back.
At this Billee got quickly to his feet. An
Australian boy couldn’t sit on the front step
and cry. Even with Uncle John gone and a
new owner coming to take possession of
Koala Station, Billee knew he had less to cry
about than most boys. For wasn’t he an Aus-
tralian ? And didn’t everyone say, “Australia
carries her wealth on the backs of her
sheep?” And wasn’t part of that wealth his,
since he helped look after them? It was part
Jet’s, too, and another part belonged to Red
Prince.
Red Prince was Billee’s own horse, the one
he mounted so proudly when he rode out into
the paddocks. He now realized that if he
wished to meet Joe along the boundaries he
must be off at once.
The bush noises seemed loud and disturb-
ing as he rode along. Perhaps that was be-
cause a great many disturbing thoughts were


tumbling about in his head. He was still
thinking about Uncle John and the nephew
who would soon come to take over his sheep
station. Of course, he might not sell the
sheep. But even if he kept them Billee knew
very well that his father would not be happy
working for such a man. And Edith had said
he had a daughter!
Billee could imagine her too —proud, impu-
dent little thing! He had not forgotten the
American boy at the guest house that day
they drove in to Sydney. Uncle John often
talked about the history of Australia and he
thought it was only right that Billee and
Edith should visit its oldest and largest city.
But when they told the American boy they
had come to Sydney because they wanted to
know more about their country, he had
laughed and said,
“So you want to know more about your
country, do you? Well, I can tell you one


thing. It’s nothing to boast about. Who
settled it anyway but prisoners from Eng-
land?”
For a moment Billee had glared at the boy,
unable to say anything. Then he had burst
forth in stormy defense of the country that
was to him the finest and best in the world.
“Suppose Australia was settled by prison-
ers! We should be proud of them all the
same. I suppose you’ve walked about Syd-
ney. I suppose you’ve seen the new harbor
bridge. You know, it was a prisoner named
Greenway who first thought of building it.
He built St. James’s church and many other
fine buildings. Everyone has forgotten why
he was sent here, but the buildings are still
here. Besides,” Billee had added before com-
pleting his long speech, “they say some of
America’s first settlers were prisoners, too.
It was only after the states were free and
England could no longer dump her prisoners


• **£*•*£ Jl
* **" - ''^tftjBP*^
-r' - '«■ - ' -V“ .* ***f ■
■‘ „'■*.. _ ■ •'■' £. / v ’ ji^-i. *»
-4^&I, - •
|L fc, 1 1 • -y N ‘-isJbSL * iry
*t,. - : ,
ig^-flf , - :,J^ f,ff: ji H .'v' ’e *.? i->. . »y *$♦ M&*£* ’
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
SYDNEY HARBOR FROM THE AIR


on American shores that she began settling
them here.”
The boy’s answer had been a sneer. It was
no wonder Billee hated Americans. Anyone
who could sneer at his country wasn’t fit to
breathe the air.
He was riding slowly and, as he rode, his
anger mounted. Having known only one
American in his life, he judged them all by
the one he had known. He felt certain that
the nephew and his daughter would be like
that boy in Sydney.
Speaking half to himself and half to Red
Prince, he kept repeating, “that ungrateful
that ungrateful . .
But still he was unable to find a word to
describe Uncle John’s nephew.
Then, suddenly, he heard a peal of laughter.
“Ha ha! He haw haw haw!” it rang out.
Looking around, he saw a kookaburra sit-
ting on one of the posts that marked the


*?*■; ",£* '~ —■ **~ I.l - l MBy*«> '" ■». ~—fpriMii
'■*• I 1%
M 1 ffl < M‘. - j T* p
Jj 1 V
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
HE SAW A KOOKABURRA
boundary of Koala Station. In the bird’s
claws was a long snake.
“That’s it!” called Billee. “That’s it, you
laughing Jacko. That is the very word I
wanted. Uncle John’s nephew is an ungrate-
ful snake!”


CHAPTER II
THE PROMISE
Unknown to Billee, Joe had been resting
his horse under a tree fern only a short dis-
tance away. Now he joined the laughter of
the kookaburra.
“Mr. Snaith! Mr. Snake!” he roared.
“My word, Billee! Ido believe you’ve found
a name for our American.”
“I say, Joe!” cried Billee. “He won’t sell
Koala Station. He and his daughter are com-
ing to live in the homestead.”
“Coming to live in the homestead, are
they?” And immediately Joe’s face took on
a worried look.
“He’s going to be the boss,” Billee went on
anxiously. “But it isn’t because he likes to


look after the sheep. It’s only to make
trouble. Aunt Harriet said so.”
“Your Aunt Harriet is a keen woman and a
keen cook,” Joe said, eying the billy and the
basket which had been slung over the back of
Red Prince. “Suppose we talk this thing over
while we have our tea?”
Billee agreed at once. He often brought
out the older boy’s lunch and listened to his
advice while they ate. Although Joe’s ad-
vice was not always good, it was freely given
and Billee felt that any sort of advice might
help.
When they had reached Billee’s favorite
picnic place near the north boundary of Koala
Station, the two boys dismounted. Here,
deep in a fern gully, was the head of a little
stream that grew larger and larger, empty-
ing into other streams until it finally flowed
into the ocean. The spring at the head of
this stream provided water for making tea.


No Australian ever eats in the open coun-
try without carrying* along a billy for boiling
water. It is spoken of affectionately as
though it were a person although the beloved
billy is really nothing but a tin pail.
“Unhook the billy, Billee,” Joe directed
him, pronouncing the two words quite dif-
ferently, “and I’ll take care of the basket.”
“There are two mutton bones in it, one for
your dog and one for Jet,” Billee confided.
“They won’t want them,” said Joe, for the
two dogs had already raced off in pursuit of
a rabbit.
Rabbits are not really Australian animals.
They were brought to Australia as pets, but
soon overran the country. They eat the roots
as well as the grass and Billee knew that if
they were not destroyed they would soon eat
the sheep runs quite bare.
“Rabbiters”—men whose sole duty is to rid
the sheep runs of rabbits —are employed on


many of the stations. Koala Station had no
such rabbiter and so all the men were ex-
pected to help rid the countryside of the
pests. Joe carried a shotgun on his trips
along the boundaries. His dog hunted with
him and the sight of a rabbit always sent Jet
flashing after it. If its hole was found, the
air would be filled with flying dirt. Billee
sometimes joined, digging with a sharp stone.
He had been told to dig out every rabbit bur-
row he found.
While the dogs were chasing rabbits, Billee
was busy gathering dry sticks for a Are. He
arranged them in the shape of a cone and
then reached into his pocket.
A few pieces of string were there, a bird’s
nest for his collection, and several cocoons
which he intended to save. But there were no
matches.
“Couldn’t we rub sticks together the way
the abos used to?” he asked.


Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
AN AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINE
The abos, or native blackfellows of Aus-
tralia, once roamed the bush and hunted with
spear, stone axe and boomerang. But now
there were only a few of them left although
their customs and legends have given the
country much of its enchantment.


Uncle John had once believed that the na-
tives could be civilized and had hired one of
them as rabbiter. But old Mulga Jim did not
take kindly to civilization. He often disap-
peared for months at a time and returned gib-
bering native chants about the debbil-debbils
that had pursued him through the bush. But
in one thing he did excel. He knew how to
kindle fires in the manner Billee had sug-
gested.
‘Tm afraid sticks won’t work any magic
for us,” Joe said, shaking his head. “But
perhaps rubbing a fence staple on a flinty
stone will do the trick.”
“I’ll get a fence staple,” Billee offered, and
away he darted toward the fence.
To his surprise, several of the staples had
been pulled and the wire was quite loose. Joe
thought it possible that an emu had done it.
These great Australian birds often eat
hard things, just as chickens do, to help them


grind their food. They are unable to fly, but
they run very swiftly. Once Billee had seen
one running. Her flock of striped chicks had
followed, trying to keep up and tumbling over
one another in their haste. They were indeed
strange birds, but Billee thought fence
staples made shocking food, even for an emu.
Using a stone for a hammer, he drove the
staples back in place, keeping out only one in
case they needed it to make a fire. While he
was doing this, however, Joe discovered his
own package of matches.
“I knew I had them somewhere,” he said,
half to himself. “Must have slipped through
the hole in my pocket. With a kid to take care
of, I suppose Aunt Harriet will have even less
time to mend my clothes.”
“Will Aunt Harriet have to look after the
American girl?” asked Billee.
“I don’t know who else would do it,” Joe re-
plied. “I shall probably be moved out of my


-- \ >#£ 1 ,» £ Jfa. k %-: { jf-'W
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
EMU WITH STRIPED CHICKS
room so the kid can stay there. I say, Billee,
we have got to do something about this.”
‘Til have a try at anything you suggest,”
Billee answered. ‘That is, anything on the
square.”
“Is it on the square what they are doing to
us?” Joe demanded. “From what I hear Mr.


Snake is as lazy as a lizard. He is probably
only settling down for the sake of this kid.
And if you really want to help your father,
Billee Ellis, you’ll see to it that she doesn’t
like it here.”
“You mean I am to make her dislike Aus-
tralia?” asked Billee in a tone that suggested
the impossibility of such a plan.
“She is an American, isn’t she? They why
shouldn’t she go back to America where she
belongs?”
Billee was a little doubtful about this. He
ran to the gully for water still thinking it
over. Mr. Snake and his daughter would be
giving up nothing close to their hearts if they
did leave Koala Station. They didn’t want to
live there, as he did, because they loved it.
And they could settle down almost anywhere
with the money his father would pay them.
“Right-o,” he said as he set down the billy
full of water. “I agree to the plan.”


“It’s a bargain/’ declared Joe, holding out
his hand.
Billee took it, feeling that he was making a
solemn promise which he could under no cir-
cumstances break.
They were silent for a long time after that.
The billy, now bubbling over the fire, seemed
to be saying:
Bubble! Bubble!
Look for trouble!
Billee tried not to hear it. He turned his
back toward the fire and began laying out the
sandwiches. Some were made with cold mut-
ton; others were made with egg. And there
were two pieces of delicious cherry pie. There
were also some ripe red tomatoes and two
stalks of celery that had been purchased
from the Chinese vegetable man or hawker
who came regularly to the station.
Before long everything was ready. Joe set


out the mugs for the tea. Billee had brought
them in the basket along with a small jar of
milk and a bag of sugar. There were no
spoons and so Billee stirred his tea with a
clean gum stick. On another stick Joe broiled
a few pieces of bacon over the fire.
As they ate, bright-colored birds flew
down to pick at the crumbs. A little wagtail
came quite near. Off in the distance a bell
bird sang its musical song. And all the time
thousands of locusts kept up their continual
drumming.
“I don’t see how anyone could live here and
not like it,” remarked Billee after a moment.
“We’ll have to be careful about taking Mr.
Snake and his daughter out in the bush.”
“No picnics,” declared Joe.
But this was too much for Billee. “Not
even on Christmas? Joe, we’ve got to do
something to make them leave right away.
We can’t give up our Christmas picnic.”


'IC -
i*-~ : t? i- -‘f.v ' J Mf iBPmSSr**
■F > ■WfB >* j©
f#i k V Jl
(ifV/Tiai '•
.y-
m ifi i J 1 m fw T*
• jr ST S - _ ,
Courtesy Australian Xational Publicity Assn
A SULPHUR CRESTED COCKATOO
“Can’t! Can’t!” screeched a cockatoo over
their heads.
Joe looked up. “You’re right, Cocky. We
can’t do that. We’ll have to think of some-
thing else.”
Billee tapped the gum stick thoughtfully
against his empty mug.


“We might make them afraid to go out in
the bush. All girls are scare cats, and, if you
aren’t used to it, the noises are spooky.”
“Make her think the bush is haunted.”
“I’ll tell her about the bunyip,” Billee de-
cided. “You know the song made over from
a native chant that goes:
‘This shadowed pool, so dark, so deep,
The banks so slippery, so steep;
What hidden monsters in it creep?
The slimy weeds your limbs ensnare
To drag you to the bunyip’s lair.
The bunyip’s lair. Beware! Beware!’ ”
“The very thing,” Joe agreed, “but what-
ever you do, don’t tell her it is only the name
of a sheep.”
“But, Joe, it isn’t. Mulga Jim believes in
it,” Billee said.
The native blackfellow, Mulga Jim, had
given Billee the strangest look when he heard
that he had called one of the sheep Bunyip.


Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
A NATIVE CORROBOREE
He believed in the bunyip, although Billee
could never get him to talk about it. But
often, when he returned late from his riding,
he would meet Mulga Jim and the black man
would say, “Run, Billee, run. The bunyip is
out tonight.”
The chant about the bunyip which Billee
had sung was from one of the native cor-
roborees. These were ceremonies intended to
ward off evil spirits or “debbil-debbils” as


Mulga Jim called them. Billee had an idea
that the bunyip was really the head spirit—a
sort of native bogey man. Surely, if any-
thing could frighten the American girl away,
it was the bunyip.
“But will it be a sporting thing to do?”
asked Billee. For the more he thought about
it the more doubts crept into his mind.
“Sporting or not, you’ve got to do it,” Joe
said as he stamped out the fire and they pre-
pared to leave the picnic place.
Billee poured what was left of the tea over
the ground to make sure the fire was out. A
bush fire always caused trouble, and there
was trouble enough, Billee felt, without that.
The low wire netting fences crisscrossing
the paddocks kept the rabbits out quite suc-
cessfully. But they meant nothing to the
kangaroos. As he continued his ride, Billee
saw dozens of them rise up out of the fields
like so many stumps and then leap away. A


’’ '' & ii -
■pp$Tr Jv
#» I : *'■■■
Spr I* <|L
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
THE BABY KANGAROO POKED ITS HEAD OUT OF THE
MOTHER’S POUCH
mother kangaroo stopped almost in his path.
She was busy nosing about and did not see
him at first, but her baby poked its head out
of her pouch and stared with bright, curious
eyes. Billee wished he had his camera along
so that he could take its picture.
Taking pictures was one of Billee’s many
hobbies. His father subscribed to a photo-
graphic magazine which was always offering


prizes for snapshots. Some day Billee in-
tended to try for a prize. Perhaps he would
send in a picture of the sheep.
It was Billee’s duty to watch the fences and
bring in any sheep that might have broken
through. Sometimes he would sight them
from a hillock. A whistle to Jet and off the
dog would bound. Running around and
around, he would soon drive the sheep within
bounds. But Jet was a well-trained sheep
dog. He knew he must never run between the
sheep and the boundary or they would scatter
and become lost.
Often some careless sheep would make its
way into a clump of thorns. Then Billee
would have to dismount and lead the animal
out himself. He broke off any burs he found
growing near the fences, for they would catch
in the thick coats of the sheep. “Burry” wool
caused endless trouble to the shearers, and
meant lower prices when it was sold.


*
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn
A RIDER AT THE WARWICK RODEO.
QUEENSLAND
Today the sheep were very quiet. Scat-
tered groups of them had found shelter under
the shadiest trees. Occasionally Billee
caught sight of Joe or one of the other men
riding from one group to another. But there
were no disturbances, no running into bram-


bles or burs. Nothing but an all-pervading
peace which Billee had never quite experi-
enced before.
The sun shone out of a clear blue sky. A
lazy wind blew gently over the coarse grass.
Flowering bushes flamed in the distance.
Spring was drawing to a close and the sheep
were beginning to feel the weight of their
wool.
“There’s one thing,” Joe remarked when
they were riding home together, “it will soon
be shearing time and when Mr. Snake sees
how much work there is to it, he may be glad
to turn the station over to your father and go
back to America.”
“That’s right,” said Billee. “Nobody but a
real sheep man could stand the racket at
shearing time.”
“The sheep will feel better, too,” Joe went
on, still hunting for something to be cheerful
about.


KWjpM^^L .>L. g jB. • rf * wp/Ma
U1
£
<
(—I
H-*
<
PS
H
cc
h-'
<
<
£
C


Billee was already cheered. There were
few things he enjoyed more than helping
round up the sheep for shearing. Even if
their plan didn’t work, he had that much to
look forward to before Mr. Snake took
charge.


CHAPTER 111
THE JOURNEY
Before long everyone at Koala Station was
calling the new owner “Mr. Snake” and
dreading his arrival.
At school the children were told of Billee’s
plan and had a few ideas of their own.
Only Edith, who was ten years older than
Billee, protested that it wasn’t quite fair to
blame the new owner simply because he was
coming to claim what was legally his. And
the more the others talked against him, the
more she took his part.
“If Dad really wants to be an owner,” she
said, “we can always move.”
But the thought of moving was so unbear-
able to Billee that he doubled his resolve to


make the two Americans dislike Australia.
And while all this was going on at Koala
Station, the owner and his daughter were just
stepping off the big liner that had landed in
Fremantle.
Fremantle is the port of Perth on the west-
ern coast of Australia and so liners coming
through the Suez Canal and over the Indian
Ocean usually land there. If they come over
the Pacific they are more apt to sail into Syd-
ney harbor. But Mr. Snaith had stopped off
in England and so had come by the longer
route from America.
The voyage had been rough, and both Mr.
Snaith and his daughter, Nancy, were glad
that it was over.
“I won’t care if I never see a ship again,”
sighed Nancy.
“Pm afraid you shall see one again very
soon,” her father told her. “We’ll spend the
day in Perth, see the sights and rest up in a


k - Jllf ’ w- J
mfm x
•>i - •**
NANCY AND HER FATHER
good hotel. But tomorrow we sail around the
coast for Adelaide. That is, unless you’d
rather take the train across the desert.”
“Oh, I would! I would!” cried Nancy ex-
citedly. “Daddy, is the ranch near Ade-
laide?”


“No, child,” her father replied. “From
Adelaide we take another train to Melbourne.
A man from the sheep station has promised
to meet us there.”
“If the sheep ranch is a station, why doesn’t
the train go there?”
“Because it doesn’t,” Mr. Snaith answered
a little crossly. He had heard nothing but,
“When will we get there, Daddy?” ever since
the voyage began. This was particularly an-
noying to him, since he was undertaking the
trip without being at all sure there would be
anyone at the station besides himself to look
after the motherless Nancy.
The little girl saw that her father was
vexed and tried not to ask so many questions.
He often asked her to be quiet when he was
busy with his books and papers. But it was
impossible not to squeal with delight at the
many new things they saw on their sight-see-
ing tour of the city of Perth.


Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn
PERTH, AS SEEN FROM KING’S PARK
All the sidewalks were covered as a protec-
tion against sun rather than rain. Some were
covered with awnings. Over others were
queer corrugated iron arcades which made
Nancy feel like shouting to see if it would
echo as it does in a tunnel. She felt like
shouting anyway. It was so exciting to be on
her way to a brand-new home in a brand-new


country where everything seemed to be done
backwards. When she left America the
leaves were just beginning to fall. Here
everything was in full bloom. And she had
never seen such wonderful flowers as those
that her father pointed out to her on their
walk through King’s Park.
Strangest of all the new flowers was the
kangaroo paw on its tall stem. The long, flat
buds give it its name for they are the shape
of a kangaroo’s foot. They are the state
flower of Western Australia and many of
them bloomed in the parks of its capital city.
Nancy forgot her resolution and asked
question after question as she and her father
continued their walk. She learned that Perth
was “a city that gold built,” although her
father said the golden wheat fields of Aus-
tralia were more wonderful than the gold.
“Why are they more wonderful?” she
asked.


“Because most of the land was unfit for
raising anything/’ he answered, “until the
Australians developed a special kind of
wheat. When we take the train tomorrow
you’ll see some of the wheat fields as well as
Western Australia’s two great gold mining
towns, Coolgardie and Kalgoorlie.”
“What funny names!” giggled Nancy.
“You’ll find a great many strange names in
Australia,” her father said. “They are native
names, just as we have queer Indian names
for some of our American towns and rivers.”
“Is Koala Station a native name?” she
asked.
“It’s named for a native bear,” he told her.
“When we get there perhaps you’ll see some
of them.”
Nancy gave a little jump of delight. “Oh,
Daddy! I can hardly wait. Let’s go to the
hotel right now so it will be morning sooner
and we can take the train.”


Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
THE GOLDEN MILE, KALGOORLIE, WESTERN AUSTRALIA
The following day Nancy decided to listen
for queer names when the conductor sang
them out on the train. She heard Kellerber-
rin, Burracoppin and Noongaar, but long be-
fore they had reached “the golden mile” at
Kalgoorlie she was fast asleep.


When she awoke the train was still speed-
ing along. But it might as well have been a
ship on the ocean, so deserted was the flat
country that Nancy saw through the window.
“Where are we?” she asked her father.
“I believe this is the Nullarbor Plain,” he
answered. “You said you’d like riding
through the desert.”
“But what are those ghostly blue bushes?”
“That’s just what they are,” he laughed.
“Bluebush.”
“I don’t like them,” she decided. “Daddy,
when will we get there?”
“That depends on whether or not you’d like
to stop off for a while at Adelaide.”
“Is it as nice as Perth?” she asked.
“They call it the garden city of Australia,”
he answered. “I don’t think you’ll be disap-
pointed in it.”
“Is it warmer there?” she asked. A south-
erly buster, as the Australians call their


strong south winds, had made it a little chilly
on the train during the night.
“Of course not. It’s south. You must re-
member that here it grows cooler toward the
south and warmer toward the north. But the
whole continent is warm enough for lovely
gardens.”
Long before they reached Adelaide, Nancy
began looking for the gardens. She found
vineyards and orchards as well, for South
Australia is noted for its fruits and wine.
The city, when they finally reached it,
seemed to be built within a vast garden.
Nancy could hardly believe ferns could grow
as tall as those she saw while she and her
father were walking down North Terrace
where the library, the museum and govern-
ment buildings were. She couldn’t decide
whether they were ferns or trees until her
father called them tree ferns. Then she knew
that they were a little of both.


Courtesy Australian Trade Commissione
NORTH TERRACE, ADELAIDE, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
“I hope they have tree ferns at Koala Sta-
tion,” she said. “Daddy, when will we get
there?”
He put an end to her questions for the eve-
ning by taking her to a movie. They went
into the theatre with a great mass of hurry-
ing' people. It was almost eight o’clock.


Everyone had to hurry in order to be there on
time, for there were no continuous shows as
there are in American movie theatres. The
show began at eight and ended at eleven.
Nancy and her father rode to their hotel in a
crowded tram.
The trip from Adelaide to Melbourne took
all the next day. First the train climbed up
the mountains and then down into the plain
where it crossed the Murray River near its
mouth.
The river was filled with fishing boats and
barges where many fishermen lived with their
families. From Queensland to Tasmania,
there is excellent fishing in all of Australia’s
bays and rivers. There are swordfish, mack-
erel, tuna fish and many others. Here the
men were fishing for the famous Murray cod.
There was also a showboat which Nancy
pointed out excitedly.
“Look, Daddy! It’s just like the movies.”


“You may miss the movies,” he remarked.
“You won’t be able to go as often as you did
at home.”
“That won’t matter,” she told him cheer-
fully. “There’ll be the sheep to watch and
that will be just as good. Maybe there’ll be
kangaroos and other animals as well.”
“And perhaps a few koala bears,” he
added.
After crossing the Murray River, the train
went through a stretch of flat, dry country
covered with mallee scrub or small gum trees.
Nancy gazed at it in dismay.
“Daddy, are we in the desert again?” she
asked.
“It may have been that once,” he answered,
“but the Australians are industrious people.
That was my trouble,” he added ruefully. “I
wasn’t.”
“Oh, yes, you were,” she contradicted him
quickly. “Uncle John didn’t understand you.”


r. a. .a<; ‘jv*«f ‘tiwir ' rr^^1?fc»' 3 r VHi
” 5 ! ?. " , T>* J^~~
Courtesy Australian Rational Publicity Assn,
VINEYARDS, SOUTH AUSTRALIA
And Mr. Snaith had to smile at this quaint,
grown-up speech from the little daughter who
understood and loved him so well. Then, en-
couraged by her eagerness to listen, he went
on explaining how much of the dry land in
Australia is being irrigated and made pro-
ductive. Wheat fields, orchards and rich


'/ ' ■■•±' '. ,' zJ.j94kJtVT * > > C -taj w / * TB * ■ -
Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner
IRRIGATING, SHEPPARTON. VICTORIA
grazing’ country are now to be found where
once there was nothing but baked soil and
mallee scrub.
There was a twenty-minute stop at Ballarat
where Nancy’s father told her gold was once
so plentiful that people found it in great
heaps, lying on the ground. Nancy just had


time for a meat pie at the railway restaurant.
It tasted so good that she felt sure Ballarat
would always remind her of pie rather than
gold.
Mr. Snaith, however, seemed determined
that his daughter should learn as much as
possible on this journey. He kept talking
about gold mining and the great gold nuggets
found in the Ballarat and Bendigo mines.
One of these nuggets was named “Welcome
Stranger,” which seemed to Nancy an amus-
ing name for a lump of gold. There was
never any doubt about gold being welcome
and, at first, little golden-haired Nancy never
doubted that she and her father would be
equally welcome at Koala Station.
The train was already crowded, but at each
stop more and more cars were added. Nancy
wanted to know why.
“Didn’t I tell you?” her father asked in sur-
prise. “I planned this whole trip so that we


would be in Melbourne for the Cup races.”
“What are the Cup races? I didn’t know
cups could run.”
At this Mr. Snaith tipped back his head and
roared. “The cups don’t run, child! The
horses do. It’s called ‘The Cup’ race because
the first prize is ten thousand pounds and a
gold cup. You’ve seen pictures of them
plenty of times. But this is one time we won’t
have to go to the movies to see the world’s
best thoroughbreds run.”
“But that means we won’t get home until
the day after tomorrow,” sighed Nancy.
“So you’re calling it ‘home’ already? I
hope it will be home —and a real one. Poor
little Nancy!” he said more gently. “I’m
afraid I haven’t taken very good care of you
since your mother died. Of course you want
to get home. But,” he added, “we can’t get
there any sooner. There won’t be anyone to
meet us until after the races.”


At last the train pulled into Melbourne —
“Marvelous Melbourne” as the people who
live there like to call it. Nancy could easily
see why. Such broad streets, such clean
buildings and such spacious parks would
make any city marvelous.
“You would never think, to look at it now,
that it was once bought for only a few trin-
kets,” said Mr. Snaith as they rode to their
guest house in a cab.
“Was it?” asked Nancy. “Tell me more.”
“It was very much like the Manhattan pur-
chase. You know, Nancy, that Manhattan
Island was purchased from the Indians. Well,
Melbourne was purchased from the blacks in
much the same way. John Batman from Tas-
mania—”
“Where’s Tasmania?” she interrupted.
“It’s an island off the coast of Australia, but
it’s really part of the commonwealth —one of
her states. Hobart is the capital and has a


1 ■ * '* K "
I
Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner
JOHN BATMAN’S VILLAGE AND THE MELBOURNE OF TODAY


fine harbor. Well, as I was saying," her fa-
ther continued, “this John Batman from Tas-
mania bought the site of Melbourne and
wrote down in his diary, This will be a place
for a village.’ You can see how his village
has grown. Today it is the second largest
city in Australia. Only Sydney is larger, but
both have more than a million people.”
Nancy was impressed. Beyond the city
were miles and miles of curving beaches. The
entire coast of Australia is lined with such
beaches. They are washed by warm ocean
currents, and swimming and surf-canoeing
are popular sports. The guest house where
they stayed was near one of the beaches and
Nancy went for a swim in the morning.
The beach was crowded. The whole city
was crowded with people who had come there
for the races. Nancy realized that it was one
of the world’s great sporting events but to
her going home was more important. She


1
„*. i - :i -f*
v : ' e W ‘ ' *
/■I a- f il. T --^—*>> SS ;
s*»2# ■ ~
>%•;»-.>; *f - '‘ v-.r?'- : " v *_^ ; .'-.
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn
SURF CANOEING ON THE AUSTRALIAN COAST
thought about it at the beach and later at the
beautiful flower-lined race track.
Nancy loved the races. She stood up and
shouted for her favorite as loudly as anyone.
But still she could hardly wait for them to be
over. Somewhere, in the dense crowd, was
the man who was going to meet them. What
would he be like? How would he welcome
them?


'Wmm -
68 A SHEPHERD BOY OF AUSTRALIA
“Daddy,” she asked suddenly, “are there
any children at Koala Station?”
“I believe the manager has a son only a year
or so older than you,” he answered.
“Oh, Daddy!” she breathed, clasping her
hands and not even seeing the horses that
were just being led out on the track. “Oh,
Daddy! I hope he likes me.”
Courtesy Australian \ational Publicity Assn.


CHAPTER IV
THE ARRIVAL
The day of the Melbourne Cup races pre-
sented quite a different scene at Koala Sta-
tion. Billee felt as though it were the begin-
ning of the end of the world for him. He
didn’t see how things could ever be right
again if the plan didn’t work and the nephew
and his daughter decided to stay.
“Suppose they do like it here,” he grumbled
to Edith.
“Well,” she said, “suppose they do.”
It was plain that he could get no sympathy
from his sister and already his father had the
car out ready to start for Melbourne. He
would see the races and then —and then he
would meet Mr. Snake at the guest house and


. • '* -v ”
:> .jjifljffft-iSteMw ,J N jT y|fc
-. ■
Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner
DRIVING INTO MELBOURNE
everything would be over. Billee closed his
eyes trying to imagine how it would feel to
have home be somewhere else when it had al-
ways been here.
“Dad,” he asked, standing on the running
board of the car to say good-bye. “You’ll
still be manager, won’t you, so we needn’t
move right away?”
“That’s for the new owner to decide,” his


father said. “But your mother and I have
talked it over and we thought perhaps it
would be better for us to buy a station of our
own somewhere else. I’ve been saving for
years with the idea of becoming an owner.
Then, when you’re a man, Billee boy, the new
station will be yours.”
“And will it have different horses and dogs
and sheep?” asked Billee anxiously.
“I’m afraid it will, my boy. Mr. Snake
might let us have Jet. But I doubt even that.
He’s one of the best sheep dogs on the sta-
tion.”
“And Red Prince? Couldn’t we have Red
Prince either?”
“Not unless we bought him,” Mr. Ellis said.
“Then isn’t anything ours? Is it all his?
That isn’t fair!” Billee cried out angrily.
“You’ve built up the place, you and all the
men who work here. Something ought to be-
long to you. 1 '


“You forget, Billee,” his father reminded
him, “that we have all been paid regularly
every month.”
“But what’s that?” cried Billee. “What’s
all the money in the world if we have to give
up our home?”
Mr. Ellis shook his head and turned to his
wife who was also standing beside the car.
“You’d think, to hear him talk, that Koala
Station was the only sheep station in Aus-
tralia.”
“To him it is,” Mrs. Ellis replied, “and it’s
the same to Edith. But she is older and more
ready to give it up. I’m afraid, even as an
owner, you would not find as fine a home as
this on any station that we could afford to
buy. But let’s not talk about it now,” she
added. “You’re ready to start for Melbourne
and may good luck go with you.” And her
look told him that she meant more than sim-
ply good luck at the races.


Billee turned to Jet and said bravely, “I
say, fellow, we’re supposed to look after the
sheep.” Then he called Red Prince in from
the paddock and threw himself over the
horse’s bare back, for he was used to riding
without a saddle.
“Our plan must work! Our plan must
work! They mustn’t like it here!” he said
over and over to himself as he rode along.
He knew each separate sheep. There was
old Rameses who looked so fierce, and foolish
Coco who was always getting herself in some
kind of trouble. But Bunyip was his favorite.
Bunyip was one of the orphan lambs he had
raised. She was nearly a year old now but
she still followed him whenever he came out
to the paddocks.
Today Billee lunched alone and when Bun-
yip came nosing about, he pressed his face
next to the sheep’s thick wool. She always
expected something when he had his lunch.


i
BUNYIP WAS BILLEE’S FAVORITE
SHEEP
“I won’t give you up, Bunyip. I won’t! I
won’t!”
Jet, who was sometimes jealous of this fa-
vorite sheep, licked Billee’s face.
“Or you either, Jet old fellow,” he added,
“or you, Red Prince.” And he stroked the
horse’s velvet nose.


When he had been as far as the twin gum
trees beyond the fern gully and the shadows
were beginning to lengthen, Billee rode
home. He found the house closed and his
sister waiting to tell him that everyone had
gone up to the homestead.
“But why?” he demanded.
“Mother thought it was only right to have
someone there to welcome the new owner,”
Edith explained. “We are all going up there
for dinner.”
“I suppose, after this, I won’t know where
my home is,” Billee said, kicking his toes
against the gravel as he started up the path.
He knew how Edith used to love dining with
Uncle John. Going up there to welcome the
new owner was something neither she nor
Billee had dreamed of doing. And yet, when
Billee opened the door, he could see at once
that everything had been done to make the
homestead comfortable.


In the kitchen he found his mother arrang-
ing the best glasses on a silver tray. Aunt
Harriet was taking a deep dish apple pie
out of the oven. The kitchen smelled of roast
chicken and delicious sage dressing.
“Aunt Harriet!” he cried accusingly.
“You’re getting a very special dinner for
them. Have they come?”
“Not yet,” his aunt replied, her back still
turned. “Naturally we have to set a good
table.”
Billee looked into the dining room. The
table was all set with two extra places. Fruit
salad on crisp lettuce leaves was at each place
and in the center was a bowl of wattle blooms.
Edith confessed that she had cut them herself
from the trees along the pathway which were
heavy with golden blossoms.
The wattle, or acacia, was Billee’s favorite
flower. He always thought the fluffy round
blooms looked like little tufts of sunshine.


' V ** iD --<dfe fefe 1|»'
y jiPjI * -‘* •^I’fr*
WTv.'u. Bbb B^V
,yij^r* y w T -f*
IjV;* ’ %
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn
GATHERING WATTLE BLOOMS
But he loved them for another reason as well.
They are the Australian national flower,
named wattle because the branches were used
as wattle (or framework) for the mud huts
of the first settlers. But it wasn’t right to
welcome Americans with wattle blooms. The
plan was being spoiled already.
It must have been the bunyip, or one of
Mulga Jim’s “debbil-debbils,” that suddenly


took possession of Billee. He glared at the
table a moment. Then, seizing the salt
shaker, he shook out a good tablespoonful of
salt into each of the two extra fruit salads.
“There! That will jolly well fix them,” he
muttered as he banged the salt shaker back
on the table.
Just then he heard a car stopping before
the front door. He ran out, too curious to do
anything else. A thin young man wearing a
dark blue suit was sitting beside his father.
His hands were slim and white. “As if he’d
never done a day’s work in his life,” Billee
thought. And in the back seat, all by herself
between the suitcases, was a little yellow-
haired girl who seemed likely to fly at any
minute, so eagerly did she lean out of the car.
Billee’s father opened the car doors.
“Well, here we are,” he said pleasantly.
The little girl skipped and hopped along be-
side her father as they came toward the


house. Her eyes sparkled as though every-
thing she saw was new and wonderful.
“Mr. Snake, I believe,” said Aunt Harriet
in a dignified tone as she held out her hand.
She did not realize that she had mispro-
nounced the man’s name.
The little girl giggled.
“So that is what they call me,” said the new
owner. “I’ll have to remember that.” And,
to Billee’s amazement, he jotted it down in a
little notebook he carried in his pocket.
“Come, Nancy,” he continued exactly as
though nothing had happened, “shake hands
with the ladies.”
Nancy grasped Aunt Harriet’s hand so
eagerly that the woman’s stern look melted.
Then she shook hands with Billee’s mother
and his sister Edith.
“How do you do,” everyone said most cor-
dially. And Edith smiled a special smile for
Nancy, asking how she was.


-dMUr * .^'SasIhI!
; i:.« .„■- • EC ■ ' > r • * -vKjflSl ■■-
■** f ( . -' > t war. - i *> -«<I« «Wfim ■-
hEi ■ • * • » ,% *W*» hOk' i- : ” t 4 -
Ht;< -
“IS THIS OUR HOUSE?”
ASKED NANCY
‘Tm fine, thank you. Is this our house?"
asked Nancy running up onto the latticed
porch of the homestead where Uncle John had
lived, and viewing everything with delight.
A long path flanked by bright, flowering
gardens connected the homestead with the
manager’s house. Beyond the path were
wattles and gum trees with their branches
stretching far into the blue sky.


“Oh! Oh!” squealed Nancy, whirling on
one foot so that she could see in every direc-
tion. “Are there koala bears in the gum
trees? Daddy told me about them. He
knows everything about Australia. I'm go-
ing to love it here, I know.”
Billee scowled fiercely, still saying nothing.
But Edith replied in a sweet voice:
“I’m afraid you are going to be disap-
pointed in the bears, dear. It has been a long
time since anyone has seen a koala bear any-
where near the station. People used to shoot
them for their furs so they hid farther back
in the bush in order to be safe. But now that
there is a law to protect them, they may come
back. I certainly hope so. Koala Station
doesn’t deserve its name without them.”
“I think it does. I think it’s lovely,” Nancy
declared.
“I’m glad you like it,” said Edith in the
same sweet tone.


Billee winced at that. His sister didn’t usu-
ally say things she didn’t mean. In her heart
she probably disliked these Americans as
much as he did.
Mr. Snaith now turned to him. He was the
only member of the family who had not yet
been introduced.
“You are the manager’s son, aren’t you?”
he asked. “Perhaps you would like to show
my daughter around.”
Billee hesitated. Why must he be the one
to be asked? He hadn’t smiled and said
pleasant things as Edith had. Nor did he in-
tend to. But he supposed he could show
Nancy the gardens.
“Come along,” he said and the little girl
followed.


CHAPTER V
TWO WISHES
Until dinner time Billee dutifully pointed
out every plant and flower, telling Nancy the
names. There were many kinds of phlox,
white morning-glories, roses, azaleas, and
delicate freesias like baby Easter lilies.
Nancy leaned over to take a deep breath of
their perfume. Then Billee hurried her away
to his own rock garden.
At first she was fascinated by the moss and
ferns and strange semi-tropical plants that
Billee had succeeded in growing there. But
when a blue lizard crawled out from under the
rocks and flashed forth a fiery tongue, she
gave a little scream.
“Don’t you like him?” demanded Billee.


“Yes, I like him,” she said doubtfully.
“But he sort of —sort of surprised me.”
“He’s just a little fellow,” said Billee, hold-
ing him by the tail so that his four feet were
left waving in the air. “Wait ’til you see the
big ones. Then you will be surprised. Once
I saw two of them fighting and they almost
ate each other up.”
“How could they?” exclaimed Nancy.
“Just you wait and see!” Billee told her.
“This whole country is filled with lizards so
big they look like prehistoric monsters. The
goanna is the worst. But there are frilled
lizards and bearded lizards and lots of snakes
and ants and spiders as well. Our angle
worms are the largest in the world. You can
hear them make a gurgling sound as they
burrow into the earth. Anybody that didn’t
like crawly things couldn’t stand it here.”
“But I do like crawly things,” Nancy in-
sisted. “Let me take that lizard.”


,' jpj|p
Courtesy Australian Xational Publicity Assn
A GOAXXA AXD A FRILLED LIZARD EXGAGE IX
A BATTLE ROYAL
Billee had to admire the way she held it.
“There! Am I afraid?” she demanded.
“You’ll have to wash your hands before din-
ner,” he said, not answering her question.
“Lizards make them smell.”
Already he was beginning to feel sorry
about the salt in her salad.
While Nancy was washing, Billee ran to
his room and hurriedly changed his clothes.


There was no need of making the Americans
think Australians didn’t know how to dress,
and especially when Lucy, the house help, was
wearing her white cap to serve.
When the two children came in to dinner
together they both looked as neat as pins.
But Billee did not feel nearly as slick as he
looked. He was about to sit down at his usual
place next to Edith when his mother said,
“I’ve changed the places around, Son. I hope
you won’t mind. I thought Nancy might like
to look out at the garden.”
“But, Mother —” Billee began.
“That will do, Billee,” his father put in.
“You know you are not supposed to talk back
to your mother.”
Then Billee saw, with added horror, that his
father was sitting where he thought Mr.
Snake would sit. He had bowed his head for
a moment as it was the custom to give silent
thanks before beginning their meal. Billee


found it very hard to think of anything to be
thankful for.
“Dad,” he began when his father reached
for his fork. “There was a worm on your
salad.”
Mr. Ellis looked at his plate critically.
“I see he didn’t eat much,” he said and
forked a nectarine.
“But he’s still there,” Billee insisted, his
face growing very red.
“I don’t see him,” said Mr. Ellis and put the
piece of supposedly sweet-tasting nectarine
in his mouth.
By this time everyone was watching him,
expecting trouble. He swallowed the fruit
quickly and took a large gulp of water. “A
worm with a salt shaker in his hand, by gin-
ger!” he exclaimed, glaring at Billee.
Nancy giggled, little dreaming that the
salty salads were meant for herself and her
father.


“Billee likes to tease,” she said. “I guess
all boys do. But why didn’t you put the salt in
my salad? I like it. I can eat it clear.”
“I don’t think I’ll eat mine,” said Billee,
pushing his plate away.
His mother helped him to a large portion
of chicken. Nancy had already received hers.
“I’ve got the wishbone!” she cried out.
“Want to wish with me?”
“Save it and we’ll wish on it afterwards,”
said Billee, wondering why she had to be so
thoughtful of him. He had expected her to
be rude and bold like that boy in Sydney.
Neither she nor her father were at all as he
had expected them to be. He had imagined
Mr. Snaith as fat and sleepy. Instead he was
slim and wide-awake and rather handsome.
At least, Edith seemed to think so. But
Nancy, with her contagious laughter, was the
real surprise.
After dinner when they were sitting out on


—
%
*i4 - >"”d::>' : v : is*;v
WISHING
the porch and the locusts were trilling their
last sleepy song from the fields beyond,
Nancy thought of the wishbone.
“Let’s wish now,” she said, running to
get it.
Billee took one end and wished something,
whispering very determinedly to himself.
Nancy tilted her head, her eyes growing
dreamy as she wished.
Then they pulled.


Snap! went the center of the wishbone
straight up to the ceiling.
“That means we both get our wish!” cried
Nancy, jumping up and down in her excite-
ment.
Billee looked at the end of the wishbone
left in his hand.
“Are you sure?” he asked. “Both ends are
broken off. What did you wish?”
“If I tell it, the wish won’t come true.”
“Oh, yes it will,” Billee assured her. “If
you tell it, the wish is all the more likely to
come true.”
“Will you tell me yours?”
“Sure I will,” said Billee, only too glad of
the chance. “I wished that you would become
a great movie star.”
Nancy looked at him. Did he really think
she was that beautiful? Then, very softly,
she said, “And I wished that I could stay here
forever. If I were a movie star I couldn’t.


I’d have to go back to America and live in
Hollywood.”
“Well, why don’t you go back to America?
I would if I were an American,” Billee said.
Edith looked at him severely. Afterwards
she took him to task for his rude behavior.
“But, Edith, it’s a plan Joe and I have,”
Billee protested. “You see, we thought if
Nancy didn’t like it here she might coax her
father to go away. Then he would be willing
to sell the station.”
“Joe is a pampered mollycoddle,” Edith de-
clared. “He only hatched this plan because
he disliked giving up his room at the home-
stead. And you’re as bad as he is. But what-
ever plan you have in your heads, I intend to
be fair to Nancy. You know, Billee, I love
this place as much as you do. So do Dad and
Mother and Aunt Harriet. But if we have to
hurt anyone else in order to stay here, I’d
rather go. Do you see what I mean?”


■ y'i j|b«§^r,■- i>- -//jxg&
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn
SHE DISCOVERED A KOALA BEAR
“It isn’t going to hurt Nancy not to like
Australia, is it?” asked Billee.
Still Edith was suspicious of the plan and
would have no part in it. She had taken
Nancy under her wing and when, the very
next day, she discovered a koala bear sitting
contentedly on a limb of one of the gum trees


along the path, her first thought was, “Now
Nancy won’t be disappointed.’’
The bear was gone by the time Edith re-
turned with Nancy. But nothing could
dampen the little girl’s spirits.
“He’ll come back. I know he will,” she
cried. “Maybe he will bring his family and
I can see all the little bears riding pick-a-
back the way Daddy says they do. I never
thought I should have real live Teddy bears
to play with.”
“You can’t play with them,” said Billee
who had tagged along. “If you take them
away from their trees, they die.”
“But you can pet them in their trees, can’t
you?” Nancy asked anxiously. “I should
think you could pet them if you climbed up
and fed them gum leaves and stroked them
very carefully—”
“And if they’d let you,” Billee finished.
This gave Nancy something more to think


about. She spent nearly all day walking
about under the gum trees on her tiptoes,
watching for bears. Meanwhile Mr. Ellis
was showing the new owner all around the
station. He exhibited Rameses, the prize
merino ram, and showed him how long his
wool was. Rameses was the most valuable
ram on the station as wool is classified and
sold according to length. Thus the length of
wool fiber is spoken of among sheep growers
as “staple.”
“We expect the shearers toward the end of
next week,” Mr. Ellis said. “These sheep
ought to yield a good clip. It keeps a man-
ager busy, I can tell you, letting the sheep
into the yard in just the right numbers.
They can’t be crowded and the shearers
won’t wait for sheep.”
“You expect to continue here as manager,
of course?” the owner asked.
“Well, to tell you the truth,” answered Mr.


Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner
A MERINO RAM SHOWING STAPLE
Ellis, “I had thought of buying a station
somewhere else. I had my mind set on be-
coming an owner. I’ve been saving toward
it for years. It’s for the boy’s future, you
know. I want to have something to leave
him.”
“I feel the same way about my girl,” said
Mr. Snaith. “But, of course, the main ques-
tion is, will she be happy here? I have to be


sure of that before I can decide anything.”
At that moment Nancy herself jumped up
beside him. She was always popping up
from somewhere like a jack-in-the-box.
‘Til be happy, Daddy!” she said. “You
may be sure of that. Tomorrow is school and
Billee is going to take me. He’s going to let
me sit behind him on Red Prince. And,
Daddy,” she added, lowering her voice,
“we’re going through the bush and he says
it’s haunted. Isn’t it exciting?”


CHAPTER VI
TWO SCHOOLMATES
Billee’s school was on another station only
five miles away and he considered himself
very fortunate indeed to be able to attend.
If the family moved farther into the “out
back” district, he might have to study his les-
sons by mail as many Australian children do.
His school was what is known as a part-
time school. That is, the teacher taught one
group of pupils for three days a week and
then went to another station and taught a
different group for the remaining three days.
In the thinly settled parts of Australia this
seems the only way for the children to get an
education. Nancy liked the idea. It gave her
so many extra holidays


Her first ride to school was a great adven-
ture for Nancy. The path Billee took went
through the bush where all kinds of bird calls
and other strange noises actually did make
it seem haunted. But Nancy, being a sensi-
ble little girl, knew that it really wasn’t. She
felt the enchantment of the bush and at first
Billee’s stories about the bunyip failed to
frighten her.
“I’ll have to see it before I’ll believe in it,”
she declared.
“If you do see it,” Billee told her, “you’d
better shut your eyes and sing a native chant.
There’s one especially for scaring away bun-
yips. It goes like this:
“Bing-o, Bing-o, Carmoo, Caree —”
Nancy began to laugh.
“That wouldn’t scare anything. It’s just
like baby talk. I don’t believe it means a
thing.”


“It does too. Now I’ll sing it in English
and you’ll see.”
Saying this, Billee lowered his voice to a
hollow whisper and began singing the song
that he and Joe had agreed upon. He could
tell that it impressed Nancy. She shivered a
little and held on more tightly as they rode
along together on the back of Red Prince.
“Listen to that rustling noise behind you.
Watch out! It may be a bunyip,” Billee
warned ominously.
Nancy listened a moment and then an-
nounced bravely, “That’s nothing but the
wind rattling the loose bark on the trees.”
Billee had to admit that she was right.
Along the path grew many varieties of euca-
lypts, or gum trees as they are usually called.
These strange trees shed their bark but not
their leaves, so that often loose strips of bark
sound a weird tattoo against the white gum-
wood underneath. Smaller trees and bushes


add their rustling music while birds with gay
plumage flash through the queer, upside-
down foliage.
All these things fascinated Nancy. But
school itself was difficult. Nancy talked with
an American accent while the speech of the
Australian children was decidedly English
with a little original slang thrown in.
“Bonza” meant “swell.” Crazy meant color-
ful and pretty. And a busy person was said
to be, not on the jump, but “on the wallaby.”
Nancy’s new schoolmates laughed when
she tried to use their expressions. But the
little girl took it good-naturedly as she took
everything. All their teasing could not dis-
turb her. Even when one of the boys put a
locust in her desk and it chirped during class,
she would not “snitch.”
At recess the children played games that
Nancy had never heard of. The boys had a
cricket team. The girls played badminton.


And there was another game called “Bobbies
and Bushrangers’’ where they all chased
each other and said strange things about
gold and being put in jail.
Nancy spent a great many recesses behind
the big rock that served as a jail. She had
no idea why until Billee explained.
“We had to lock you up,” he said, “because
you were the Bushranger. We were the Bob-
bies. A Bobby is a policeman and a Bush-
ranger is a robber. There used to be lots of
them in Australia during the gold rush. You
would have believed the bush was haunted if
you could have lived here then. The bush-
rangers used to spring out at the miners just
the way we sprang out at you.”
“But you said I was the Bushranger,” pro-
tested Nancy.
“So you were. That means you were a rob-
ber who wanted to get rich without working.
Nobody has a right to do that.”


Billee’s voice was unexpectedly fierce and
Nancy, who had just been set free, looked at
him wonderingly. But he only turned his
head and continued telling her about the
bushrangers near Broken Hill and Ballarat
and all the other large gold mines.
“They were rough, wicked men/’ he de-
clared, “and the bobbies had to give them as
good as they got. They were regular snakes!
That’s what they were. They weren’t will-
ing to work for their gold so they hid in the
bush and robbed other people of theirs. We
all played you had robbed someone. That’s
why we took you off to jail.”
“And made me stay behind this horrid rock
every recess? I wish I had known it was just
a game,” sighed Nancy. “I thought maybe
they didn’t like me.”
“If they don’t,” Billee said shortly, “it’s my
fault.”
Nancy wanted to know why.


•; 'i " .
Hi i . y *
“DON’T YOU LIKE ME?” ASKED NANCY
“Because I told them about Americans. I
never liked them much,” he said.
“Don’t you like me?” asked Nancy
“You’re not much good in school,” Billee
answered bluntly.
Nancy thought he must be vexed because
she blundered so in her lessons. But every-
thing was different from what it had been in


America. Instead of Columbus in 1492 she
must now remember the landing of Gover-
nor Phillip in 1788. She had never heard of
any of the explorers except Captain Cook
who discovered and named Botany Bay and
took possession of New South Wales for Eng-
land in 1770. But as late as 1870 explorers
were still attempting to cross the continent.
One expedition was lost; the members of an-
other starved to death. Others were success-
ful, but Australia was not a federation until
1901.
All this made American history seem very
old. Why, when the Pilgrims and the Quak-
ers and all the others were landing in North
America, nobody knew anything about this
vast island continent on the other side of the
world. It was the last of all the continents
to be settled and yet Billee boasted that it
was the oldest. Nancy couldn’t understand
that either. Billee tried to explain it.


“Australia is really the forgotten conti-
nent/’ he said. “The plants and animals and
everything are just the way they must have
been millions of years ago. Scientists think
it used to be a part of Asia and got separated
in some mysterious way. Then it simply
didn’t grow up. The natives were living al-
most like animals when the white men first
found them. Their huts, or miamias as they
call them, weren’t much stronger than birds’
nests and they ate grubs too, just like birds.”
“You don’t mean they really ate grubs!”
gasped Nancy, unable to believe it.
“Well, they had to eat something. There
were no sheep in Australia then. Mac Arthur
brought them from Spain. There were no
horses or cattle or wheat and no pigs except
the wombat, and he’s really more like a bear.
You see, the natives had to eat what they
could get. I guess it kept them so busy look-
ing for food that they did not have time to


IflBtefc*.--, - * tv*-
t '.‘S . r >
ti. *''•.
j m t n j£* ; >JHbjj
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn
ANCIENT ROCK FORMATIONS IN
THE BLUE MOUNTAINS
become civilized. Anyway, that’s what the
teacher said and she ought to know.”
“Wouldn’t that make Australia the young-
est in civilization?” asked Nancy.
“I suppose it would,” Billee admitted, “but
it’s geologically the oldest.”


“Whatever that means/’ said the now thor-
oughly bewildered Nancy.
“It’s something to do with the way the
rocks are worn down. I can’t tell you ex-
actly,” Billee confessed, “but if we ever go to
the Blue Mountains then you’ll see for your-
self how high they used to be —”
He stopped, remembering that they weren’t
to go on trips or picnics and that he was to
make Nancy dislike Australia. But he had
given up trying to frighten her and they
must talk of something as they rode home to-
gether through the bush.
The plan was making school difficult for
Billee too. He did like to have people listen
to his explanations, especially people who
thought he knew more than they did. Espe-
cially Nancy. Why did she have to be the
new owner’s daughter? Why did there have
to be a new owner? If it weren’t for that, he
and Nancy could simply be good friends.


■y^kr'
Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner
FEDERAL PARLIAMENT HOUSE. CANBERRA
“Well, even if she is the owner’s daugh-
ter,” Billee told himself, “I can’t let her be
laughed at. I have to explain.”
This was after she had told the teacher
that the capital of Australia was Cranberry
and the whole class had roared.
“It’s Canberra.” And Billee made her re-
peat it several times on the way home.


' ■ yi. ~ Ijnu . \
; : '■ **- '- '
y : '
Courtesi/ Australian Trade Commissioner
OX AN AUSTRALIAN CATTLE STATION
“But how can I remember it?” she asked.
“I never heard of it before.”
“IBs a new capital to us too,” Billee told
her. “Melbourne was the first capital, but
the people in Sydney didn’t think that was
fair. They had to settle the argument some
way, so Canberra was made to order. It’s
just about halfway between Melbourne and


Sydney in the foothills of the Australian
Alps—”
“I thought the Alps were in Switzerland/’
Nancy interrupted.
“Don’t ever say anything like that in
school,” Billee warned her. “Our Alps are
called the roof of Australia and there is more
snow on them than there is in all Switzer-
land. Some day we may go there—but you
don’t know how to ski,” he stopped himself
quickly. “Anyway, we were talking about
Canberra. I didn’t tell you that it used to be
a sheep station.”
“Did it really?” she asked. “What hap-
pened to the sheep?”
“They were sold, I suppose.”
“And the people that lived on the station?”
“They went somewhere else —just the
same as we’re going to,” Billee said. “You
ought to know that Red Prince and Jet and
all the sheep really belong to your father.


Ai ' i ' 11 *
Courtesy Australian Motional Publicity Assn
WINTER SPORTS IN THE AUSTRALIAN ALPS
And he didn’t do a single thing to earn them.
My father has worked on this station ever
since he was sixteen years old.”
“As long as that?” questioned Nancy.
“Yes, and it was all wild around here. No
roads. No telephones. We have electric
lights, modern laundries —everything on the
station now. But then there was nothing.
Bullocks had to haul the wool for miles and
miles. That was before there were any
trucks. And the place was just filled with
koala bears. Dad says they crowded the


branches of the gum trees so that sometimes
the end bear would fall right down —plop!”
“Oooo!” squealed Nancy. ‘Td love to see
them. Maybe you could take a picture of one
falling down.”
“I’d need a movie camera for that.” Then
Billee added, “Do you look well in a picture,
Nancy?”
“Not very well,” she admitted.
“You should practice posing,” Billee told
her. “Perhaps you could get in the movies if
you went to Hollywood.”
“But I don’t want to be in the movies,” she
protested. “And wouldn’t it be silly for
Daddy and me to go back to America when
our home is here?”
“Why do you call Koala Station your home
when you’ve only been here a few days?”
asked Billee.
Nancy thought about it a moment before
she answered. Then she said, “Because I’ve


dreamed of living here ever since I can re-
member. Even when Mother was alive
Daddy used to talk of going home to Austra-
lia. He says once you’ve lived in a place like
this, you always come back. Even if you
don’t want to, it sort of pulls you.”
“Yes,” Billee agreed, swallowing hard. “I
suppose it does.”
Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner


CHAPTER VII
TELLING STORIES
“Australia’s sons, let us rejoice
For we are young and free.
Our golden soil is well for toil;
Our home is girt by sea.
Our land abounds in Nature’s gifts
Of beauties rich and rare—”
“Nancy!” Billee interrupted fiercely. “You
shouldn’t sing that song. You should sing
The Star-Spangled Banner. You are an
American.”
“I’ll sing it if I like to,” Nancy retorted
And, in a louder voice, she continued:
“In joyful strains then let us sing,
Advance, Australia Fair.”
“Well done! Well done indeed,” said


Nancy’s father coming out on the porch just
as Nancy finished.
It was early evening and the stars were be-
ginning to appear in the sky. It was really
the stars that had made Nancy want to sing.
They were so different from the stars she
used to see in America. There she never saw
the Southern Cross. Here it was in the sky
as well as on the Australian flag. In the cor-
ner, where the stars are on the American
flag, was the British Union Jack.
The Southern Cross is dear to the heart of
every Australian. Nancy’s father related an
old legend about it while Edith, who had
joined them, listened intently. The abos, as
he called the native blackfellows, had an odd
belief that women and children who were lost
in the bush became stars and looked down
from the sky.
There was the story of the seven gins (na-
tive women) who went out with their yam


sticks and dilly bags in search of food. But
food was so scarce that they wandered far
away and could not find their way back to
their own tribe. One of them was stolen by a
wicked chief of another tribe who took what
few yams she had gathered and then com-
manded her to peel the bark from a gum tree,
so that he might lunch on the grubs under-
neath.
But when Mr. Snaith came to the part
about grubs poor Nancy began to tremble.
“That’s one thing I don’t like about Aus-
tralia,” she said. “There are grubs all over.
I even found some horrid little worms in my
desk at school.”
Billee’s guilty expression immediately
gave him away and he was made to promise
that no more such tricks were to be played on
Nancy. Edith marched him to his room and
gave him a good scolding. Then, feeling that
her duty was done, she returned to the porch


and persuaded Mr. Snaith to take up his story
where he had left off.
‘The poor gin was nearly starved,” he said,
“and hadn’t strength enough to peel the bark.
So the tree took pity on her and lifted her up
in its branches. Then it began growing until
it touched the sky. There, as one of a group
of seven stars, called Pleiades, she joined her
lost sisters.”
A similar story explained the Southern
Cross. Two frightened black children, pur-
sued by a bunyip, sailed right out to the
edge of the sea. Here the ocean and sky met
and they were able to sail on until they had
entered the starry heavens. They can still
be seen, paddling their canoe. But some
stories say it was a shark that pursued them
and that he had the canoe in his jaws.
“But which was it really?” asked Nancy
when the story was finished. If her father
admitted that there was such a thing as a


bunyip, then she would know Billee’s stories
were true.
“It’s hard to say which is the correct ver-
sion. I may not have told it at all as the abos
tell it,” Mr. Snaith said. “You see, they used
to have their corroborees in which they acted
out their tribal stories. Naturally they be-
came a little mixed.”
“I’m a little mixed too,” Nancy confessed
in an uncertain voice. “I thought I wanted
to stay here, but I guess Billee is right. I’m
not a real Australian. If we sold the station
and went back to America, could we live in
the country, Daddy? Could we keep sheep
and chickens and maybe a dog or two? And
could we find someone to keep house who
would be —well, something like a mother?”
“My dear Nancy, you’re asking a great
deal,” Mr. Snaith replied. “Wouldn’t it be
much simpler to stay here where you already
have these things?”


dim
Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner
PEARL FISHING
“I’m afraid we haven’t made her very
happy,” Edith said softly. “But we’ll do bet-
ter from now on, won’t we, Billee?”
Billee hung his head, unable to answer. He
couldn’t keep his promise to Joe if he made
this new promise to Edith. He was glad when
Aunt Harriet came out on the porch and made


it unnecessary for him to promise anything.
Aunt Harriet had been housekeeper at the
homestead ever since Mr. Snaith and his
daughter moved in. She knew exactly what
to expect from both of them.
“What’s this? Telling stories?” she asked.
“Oh, Aunt Harriet,” cried Billee eagerly.
“Tell us the story about the mermaid, won’t
you?”
“Very well, if you want to hear it.” And,
unaware of any trouble, Aunt Harriet began
telling an old legend of the Queensland coast.
It was in Queensland and the South Sea
Islands that many mermaid stories were sup-
posed to have originated. Fishermen and
sailors often saw the mermaids sitting on the
coral reefs and combing out their long, sea-
green hair. They sang too.
“Oh, yes, they sang very beautifully,” Aunt
Harriet declared, “but nobody could ever dis-
tinguish the words. And if they were heard


singing' there would usually be a wreck at
sea.”
“I know a song about that,” announced
Edith and she began singing in a sweet voice
that was as much of a surprise to the new
owner as his story-telling was to her.
“Just off the coast of Queensland
On a rainbow-tinted isle,
A sailor saw a mermaid.
(He says he saw her smile.)
She smiled and then she vanished,
And who is there to say
Whether ’twas fish or woman
Sat on the rocks that day?”
“I think it was a woman,” said Nancy. “A
fish couldn’t sit.”
“I think it was a fish,” laughed her father.
“Didn’t you ever hear that it was our big
fish, the dugong, who started this whole mer-
maid business? They’re something like
seals, you know. Sometimes they hold their


be*
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
CORAL FORMATIONS OF GREAT BAR-
RIER REEF, NORTH QUEENSLAND
young against their breasts and, at a dis
tance, they appear to have the form of
women.”
“But what was the rainbow-tinted isle?”
asked Nancy.
“Oh, that was the Great Barrier Reef,”
Aunt Harriet said. She had once lived in


Brisbane, the capital of Queensland, and still
thought Australia’s tropical State surpassed
all her others.
“But what’s the Great Barrier Reef?”
Nancy questioned just as eagerly as though
she had not been thinking of leaving Aus-
tralia only a few moments before.
“It’s a very beautiful coral reef, my dear.
Some day you must see it,” Aunt Harriet told
her enthusiastically. “There are over a thou-
sand miles along the coast of Queensland
where living corals reflect all the colors of the
rainbow in the water. When the tide goes out
you can see the wonderful formations as plain
as day. The fish are all colors of the rainbow
too. It fairly dazzles your eyes. I say, it’s no
wonder a few frightened sailors think they
see mermaids when their ships go down.”
“But why do the ships go down?” asked
Billee who had always been curious about this
angle of the legend.


Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner
PINEAPPLES AND BANANAS IN QUEENSLAND
Mr. Snaith was able to answer that.
‘The corals rip holes in their sides/’ he said.
“It’s happened to plenty of fishermen just
after they’ve seen what they thought were
mermaids. There’s an idea in that,” he fin-
ished, half to himself. And again he took out
his notebook and pencil. But, instead of writ-
ing down anything, he merely tapped on his


fingers with the pencil and said, “Hm! Might
as well get busy on it now.”
Billee looked after him curiously as he left
the little group of story-tellers on the porch.
“Mr. Snaith seems to know a lot about Aus-
tralia, in spite of having lived in America so
long,” Aunt Harriet remarked.
“He knows a lot about a great many
things,” Edith agreed.
“Aunt Harriet,” asked Billee, “is that really
how the mermaid legend began?”
“I don’t know for certain,” she confessed.
“There are so many legends and one becomes
confused with another. But it’s true that the
dugong is the closest thing to a mermaid ever
seen by man. Brisbane is south of the coral
reef, you know, but we hear most of the sail-
ors’ stories. It makes me rather homesick to
think about it. If we leave Koala Station, I
think I should like to go back there. Your
father can buy another sheep station if he


Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner
EAGLE AND QUEEN STREETS, BRISBANE
likes, Billee, but as for me, I prefer to live in
the home where I spent my childhood. It
isn’t a good thing to change homes too often,
I always say.”
“Me too,” agreed Billee with a glance to-
ward Nancy.
Suddenly the little girl rose to her feet,


looking almost stately as she announced, “If
Daddy and I are really taking anybody’s
home away—if we really are, I shall have it
stopped. I assure you I shall.”
And then she sat down, leaving the rest of
them speechless. Her “I assure you” was
spoken in all earnestness.
Billee looked at her in dismay. It had oc-
curred to him that, if the plan worked and
Nancy really did go back to America, he
would be taking someone’s home away too.
“We won’t think about it now,” he said.
“There’s no use thinking about it until after
the shearing.”


CHAPTER VIII
SHEARING TIME
Billee was thankful that there was no
school the next day as it began the busiest
time of the year at Koala Station. The day
following the shearers were scheduled to ar-
rive and the sheep must be ready.
Every sheep station has its yards where
sheep are herded so that they can be brought
in, one after the other, for shearing. Some-
times an expert can shear as many as two
hundred sheep in a single day. This means
that a steady flow of sheep must be driven
into the shearing sheds, making plenty of
work for men, dogs and horses.
All the men were out in the paddocks early
rounding up the sheep. Some sheep had been


pastured in the open country beyond the pad-
docks. These, also, had to be found and
brought in. Bunches of twos and threes were
first chased out of shady grazing places.
These were joined by other bunches until tens
and twenties were driven together. Finally
more than a hundred sheep, nervous and
bleating, were on their way to the shearing
sheds.
Billee rode with the men while Nancy
stayed at a safe distance from the pens and
watched the sheep being driven in. Jet, his
tail wagging furiously, raced ahead of Billee.
“Over there, Jet! Here, Jet, here!” Billee
shouted as they gathered together the scat-
tered sheep.
“Hi, Billee! Like old times,” Joe shouted
across to him. “But aren’t you forgetting
your promise? You and the owner’s daughter
are pretty chummy lately. Have you given
up trying to help your father?”


' '' '' ' ' 4 .
DIPPING THE SHEEP
“Does this look like it?” asked Billee, indi-
cating the sheep he was driving ahead of him.
“Just give me time and everything will be
bonza.”
“Fm giving it to you.” Joe waved his hand
toward the apparently empty slope. “You
round up stragglers. I’ll drive these sheep
Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner


an; i■ #•« , ~$y.~;. r - •
jS8E^
Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner
SHEEP ENTERING THE SHEARING SHED
along to the pens. There’s all the time in the
world —after the shearing’s over. The kid
has probably had enough of the noise al-
ready.”
“It’s horrid for her, seeing nothing but the
unpleasant part of it,” Billee said.
“What do you think it is for me, turned out


of my own room and living with the hands?”
“Probably good for you,” Billee called back
unsympathetically. “Is Coco in your flock?”
“Sure. I Ashed her out of a mudhole,” Joe
answered. “She’ll need dipping. So will
some of the others. Is Bunyip in your flock?”
“Couldn’t And her,” said Billee, “but I’ll
keep on looking. She usually follows me
around.”
So, far away from the noise of bleating
sheep in crowded pens, Billee continued to
round up stragglers. Perhaps one of the
other men had brought in Bunyip, his favor-
ite. But there was always the danger of
dingoes. Jet knew them as enemies for, al-
though they look much like a police dog, it is
impossible to teach them not to kill sheep.
“If a dingo has found Bunyip . . .” Billee
thought. And then he added angrily to him-
self. “But that would be no worse than los-
ing her to Mr. Snake.”


r s
- *>.
w
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
THE DINGO. A SHEEP KILLER
The man was not interested in looking
after the sheep and there was nothing to pre-
vent him from selling the whole flock for mut-
ton —nothing at all. Perhaps he was jotting
down the number of sheep he intended to sell.
Surely he must be keeping a record of some-
thing in that mysterious notebook. Perhaps


Bunyip was already sold . . . Perhaps . . .
And all the while these frightening'
thoughts were haunting him, Billee kept on
looking for Bunyip—riding farther and far-
ther out. He was not afraid of getting lost
for he had learned to always keep some land-
mark in sight to direct him. He had also
learned to tell direction by the sun. It was
already low in the west when he drove the
few stray sheep to their pens.
Bunyip was not among them but, long be-
fore Billee reached the pens, he met his father
riding out to meet him. Perched in front of
him on his horse was Nancy.
“I couldn’t find Bunyip,” Billee called, for-
getting that Nancy had never been told the
sheep’s name.
“Bunyip!” she exclaimed and Billee saw
that his story must have really terrified her.
“Oh, I just named a sheep that,” he an-
swered as if it were nothing. “I’ve been


rounding up the sheep but I couldn't find
her.”
“It’s no wonder,” his father called back,
riding nearer all the time. “We’re off to res-
cue Bunyip right now. She’s fallen into the
gully if what Nancy says is true. I brought
her along to show me.”
“But what were you doing out in the pad-
docks?” asked Billee, hardly believing it pos-
sible that Nancy had found the lost sheep all
by herself. “I thought you were watching
the sheep being yarded.”
“I was,” Nancy replied, “but they were so
noisy. Poor things! They are just like me,
wondering every minute what is going to hap-
pen next. I couldn’t stand it any longer so I
came out here. I can ride, you know. And
Daddy found a gentle horse for me. Of
course,” she added, “he wasn’t like Red
Prince. But he was gentle enough. Daddy
said that if you could look for stray sheep, I


could too. And I have always wanted to help.”
“You could have helped any time,” Billee
said.
“But you wouldn’t let me. Anyway, I
found Bunyip and I guess that’s helping. I
tried to get her out of the gully, but she was
too heavy, so I went back and got your father
to help me.”
“And I rode right past that gully,” grum-
bled Billee. “Jet stopped and pricked up his
ears but I thought it was only a rabbit.”
“Well,” Nancy said, drawing a long breath,
“you found twelve sheep to my one.”
“But you found Bunyip. She’s my sheep—”
He stopped, remembering that Bunyip and
all the other sheep were really hers, that Red
Prince and Jet were too. They were hers and
her father’s. And yet Billee had to feel
grateful. Bunyip might have died in the
gully if Nancy hadn’t found her. As it was,
Billee and his father together managed to


sBl 1 A ■■ K
■r jHBLr *2sPm..
NANCY TIED THE BANDAGE
pull her out. But she had hurt her foot
Nancy noticed that it was bleeding.
“You hold her,” she told Billee, “and I’ll put
my handkerchief on for a bandage.”
So, while Billee petted and comforted the
hurt sheep, Nancy tied on the bandage.
“I guess I’m not such a bad sheep girl, am
I?” she asked after it was over and Bunyip


was safely yarded in a special pen by herself.
“You were all right/’ Billee answered. But
to him a promise was a promise and he felt he
had to add, “But sheep raising is no job for a
girl. If you think it is noisy today, just wait
till tomorrow when the shearers come.”
Nancy was prepared for almost anything.
For days everyone around the station had
talked of nothing but shearing time. Now it
was here. She flattened her body tight
against the wall of the shearing shed and
made not a sound, but watched with fasci-
nated eyes while Billee did errands for the
shearers and helped wherever he could.
Mr. Snaith was not helping, Billee noticed,
just watching and jotting things down in his
notebook. Again he wondered about it, but
he was no longer afraid that the new owner
would sell the sheep. Perhaps he was only
keeping a record of the number that were
sheared. This seemed hardly necessary,


■ ■ y
Bp Ji%* fl \J
nyPF ■'•■'I-'? • c-' '"’
■ \. Tm '“ ” C ' -*V
r *df 1 ■
* ?«
Courtesy Australian Xational Publicity Assn.
THE SHEARERS WORKED QUICKLY
however, as the talley boys kept count of that
By noon one of the talley boys began to
slow up and Billee took his place. It was just
for practice, but what an honor! First one
shearer and then another would shout,
“Fleece!” as the wool from a newly sheared
sheep would be gathered up, all in one piece
if possible, and taken to the wool rolling


table. It was then the shearers would shout,
“Fleece! ” This was a signal for Billee to drop
a metal counter into one of the tin cups that
hung at each shearing pen gate.
The shearers worked quickly, using motor
driven shears, an Australian invention. A
bleating, frightened sheep would be brought
in. In a moment the shearer would grasp the
animal and handle his shears so skillfully
that the sheep was quieted and the fleece fell
away unbroken. The picker-up would then
lift the fleece very carefully, keeping the
woolly side down, and shove it along the roll-
ing-table. Then the skirter removed fribby
ends and also any burs or seeds that had been
caught in the wool. After that it was rolled
into tightly bound bundles. But even this
was not the end of the work, for the wool had
yet to be pressed and bound into bales.
“It’s like a big show,” Nancy whispered as
Billee paused between shouts of “Fleece!”


“It is a big- show,” Billee declared, “but you
haven’t seen half of it. Dad says the real
show is at the public auction when buyers
from all over the world come to bid on the
wool.”
A cry of “Fleece!” interrupted him and
away he ran to drop his counter into the cup.
All afternoon it kept up, and all the next
day. Shearing-, picking-up, skirting, rolling
and pressing; then finally piling the big bales
on trucks to be hauled to the railway station.
Throughout the whole continent the big
show went on. Bullocks in Queensland, cam-
els in Western Australia and the Northern
Territory, wagons and trucks in New South
Wales, Victoria and South Australia. All
were being loaded with wool. And in all
these places happy sheep, free from the
weight of their winter coats, went leaping
and bounding back into their paddocks. In
Tasmania, the dismal Van Diemen’s land of


[j& * j? jk- m
* 9 *9% 7 A' •■' • ■• BE* dwfro#
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn,
WOOL ROLLERS “SKIRTING” A FLEECE
earlier times, there were now rich sheep sta-
tions instead of prisons. And so it went on
the pageant of the Golden Fleece.
Somehow the wool sweater Nancy was
wearing seemed doubly precious now that
she had seen its beginnings. She tried to
imagine the wool teams, the auction rooms,


S je
T" , ll ...S ■ ii i ©Si
iSBui-i ,£ ’ > a*■» <fc . »y P ••,
: -r? *^ i ** •~-W| , y~~. g-*j> 1 1 •
'• ■
,^ti
Courtesy Australian Trade Commissianer
SHORN SHEEP LEAVING THE WOOL SHED
the factories, and finally, the stores that
would sell Australia’s wool to people all over
the world. It made the work at Koala Sta-
tion seem very important.
“What a pity,” thought Nancy, “that we
have to leave the station just when I’m be-
ginning to love it so.”


CHAPTER IX
THE PLATYPUS
After the shearing was over the family
nearly always had a picnic. It was good to
be outdoors again after the close air of the
shearing sheds. It was good to sit quietly
around a fire after the bleating of sheep, the
shouting of men, and the thundering of the
wool presses. Besides, Mr. Ellis knew little
or nothing about the agreement Billee and
Joe had made. He had no idea that picnics
were on the list of things that shouldn’t be
done.
The picnic was all planned and Nancy and
her father invited before Billee even knew of
it. It was Joe who told him.
“I said no picnics,” he reminded Billee.


“I know that,” the boy returned, “but I’m
not the owner. How was I supposed to know
they were planning a picnic?”
“Mr. Snake and his daughter will both stay
home if you get her good and scared,” Joe
suggested.
“Nancy doesn’t scare easily,” protested
Billee. “I already tried the bunyip story, but
now that she knows about the sheep I don’t
believe it will work. There’s no need of scar-
ing her anyway. She says herself that this
may be her last picnic in Australia.”
“Then she does plan to leave? I say,
you’ve done right well, Billee. Let her go on
the picnic, if she likes, but don’t make it too
pleasant or she may change her mind.”
“I won’t,” Billee agreed shortly. In his
present frame of mind he would not make
the picnic pleasant for Joe, either. It was
a pity that Joe couldn’t forg’et about that
beastly promise.


Their plan was working but, somehow,
Billee was less happy about it than he had
thought he would be. It was nice to have
Nancy ride to school with him. There were
no other children at Koala Station, unless
you counted Joe who was nearly sixteen and
considered himself one of the men. Nancy
took part in Billee’s games and make-believe
plays, and now that she and her father were
living in the homestead, there was always
time for sitting out on the porch evenings
and telling stories. Besides, Billee knew
she was planning to leave, not because she
wanted to go, but because she wasn’t wel-
come.
Australians, as a rule, are noted for their
hospitality. The sundowners, who are really
nothing but tramps, are a proof of that.
These wanderers carry a billy and a blanket
and usually arrive at the stations just at sun-
down to avoid working for their keep. Thus


they are known as “sundowners’’ or “hump-
ing blueys.” Often one of them would ar-
rive, humping his blue blanket and billy and
beg for a bite to eat and a place to sleep. No
one at Koala Station ever thought of turning
him away. Surely Nancy and her father
deserved the same hospitality.
“Why so glum?” asked Joe when they were
all ready to start for the picnic. “This is a
holiday and a well earned one, I say. Every
sheep sheared and branded and back in the
paddocks—”
“They wouldn’t all be there if it hadn’t been
for Nancy,” Billee reminded him bluntly.
Then he turned his head and refused to say
another word to him until the picnic party
was well on its way.
The road they took brought them into a
dense forest where giant gum trees stretched
so far into the clouds that they could hardly
see their tops. These trees are among the


Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
A FOREST WORKER MAKING HIS WAY UP THE
TRUNK OF A GIANT GUM TREE
tallest in the world and, for this reason, lum-
bering* is one of Australia’s great industries.
Forest workers trim the branches before fell-
ing the trees. They passed one such worker
and Nancy caught her breath for fear he
would fall.
“Don’t worry,” Billee told her. “He’s safe.


His spurs and safety belt hold him fast to
the trunk of the tree.”
Nancy gazed at him, following his slow
progress up the tree. She was very serious
today, not at all the laughing little girl who
had first come to Koala Station. Billee, too,
was serious. He was beginning to realize
that the days would be very empty when she
was gone. He did wish she could stay on
without her father, but of course that was
impossible. And Billee still thought of Mr.
Snaith as a lazy man who wanted to live with-
out working. The sad part of it was that
Edith seemed really fond of him. She sat
beside him chatting away so happily that
neither of them noticed the children’s anx-
ious faces.
The children themselves forgot their wor-
ries as soon as they saw Mrs. Ellis bring out
the folding table and set it up for their picnic
lunch.


* tj jT-* r-
P r .
3k r
&■■** .:.... \
Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner
MANLY BEACH, SYDNEY, NEW SOUTH WALES
The billy was soon boiling over the fire
and everyone was eager for tea and sand-
wiches. Salad and apple pie completed their
lunch, for they had saved the chops to be
grilled over the fire for their picnic supper.
“We’re going to the falls,” Billee an-
nounced. His father had whispered the


news to him and he could hardly wait to tell
Nancy. “We’re starting right away.”
“Aren’t we going for a swim in the ocean?”
she asked anxiously. Today swimming ap-
pealed to her much more than going again
into the bush about which Billee had told so
many frightful stories.
“There won’t be time. The nearest beach
is sixty miles away, but you’ll be glad we’re
not going when you see the falls.”
“Do they ever have bunyips near water-
falls?” asked Nancy.
“As much there as anywhere,” laughed
her father as he swung her back into the car.
“Better watch out for any deep, dark
pools,” Billee added with a glance toward
Joe. He really didn’t want the older boy to
think he had forgotten his promise.
Neither of them noticed the worried look
on Nancy’s face as the drive continued along
a road flanked on either side by slim, straight


SSMIRW ■ U
Wi. •£ wCrfajp*
fF* 4 : «Ki'#> - t?/» rfMk8
Ht- M - viiWlffegF -f? 1' Jv J < !g^jill
$ w 1
v •#<.* £m.
| 'i||| sSbN&£j
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
A BUSHLAND ROAD, VICTORIA
eucalypts, such as must have grown up to
the sky with the lost gin in Mr. Snaith’s
story. Between the eucalypts were graceful
ferns and green undergrowth. This was one
of many lovely bushland roads throughout
southern Victoria.
Before they reached them, they could hear


the roar of the falls. By now they had left
the car. Each member of the picnic party
carried something as they hiked on until they
had come to a delightful picnic place just be-
low the falls. Billee wanted to explore it.
“You never know what you may find in
these streams/’ he said.
Nancy held back.
“I —I don’t think I want to explore,” she
protested.
“Nonsense!” her father ejaculated. “You
don’t mean you want to leave Australia with-
out ever having seen any of its bushland
creatures! You may even find a platypus in
a secluded spot like this.”
“What’s a platypus?” asked Nancy.
“It’s a little animal —” Billee started to ex-
plain.
“I say it’s a bird,” Aunt Harriet inter-
rupted. “It has the bill and webbed feet of
a duck.”


“Some people call it a duckbill,” Joe added
importantly.
“I think it’s more of a fish,” said Edith.
“You’re all right,” declared Mr. Snaith.
“It’s a little bit of all three. As a matter of
fact, it’s such a freak that when the first
specimen was brought before a group of
British scientists they thought that someone
had tried to play a joke on them by sewing to-
gether several parts of different creatures.
It was really nature that played the joke and
if you ever want to snap a picture of a platy-
pus, Billee, I’d advise you to keep watch near
a steep bank with plenty of hiding places
among the rocks. That’s where they usually
live. But you have to stay perfectly quiet if
you ever expect one to come out.”
“Did you ever see one?” asked Billee.
“Once, when I was a boy,” Mr. Snaith re-
plied, “I watched all day, but toward eve-
ning he came out of hiding, and I had a good


tBBBk? . Jf- Vi ,3mK ,
- .
\' v?5/ t
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
THE PLATYPUS, AUSTRALIA’S STRANGEST CREATURE
view of him sunning himself on a rock. I was
late for supper, of course, and Uncle John
gave me a good scolding for I had let several
sheep break through the fence. But some-
how, to this day, I have never regretted doing
it. Such experiences were my bread and but-
ter in America.”


Billee didn’t quite understand how seeing
a platypus could be a person’s bread and
butter. But then, there were lots of things
about Mr. Snaith that he didn’t understand.
Besides, he had been talking more to Edith
than to the children and now the two of them
had walked away.
“Maybe we could see a platypus now,”
Nancy suggested, almost in a whisper, as she
took Billee’s hand.
After tramping about for some time and
getting their feet thoroughly soaked, they
finally found a rocky bank such as Nancy’s
father had suggested. Billee had his camera,
ready to snap a picture at a moment’s notice.
Taking pictures of animals and birds was
what he liked to do best. The cockatoos, the
sheep, and even a kangaroo or two had posed
for him. But never had he even so much as
glimpsed a platypus.
Look!” cried Nancy, getting down on her


knees to show him. “Isn’t this what Daddy
meant? It looks like just the place for a
platypus to hide. I bet there’s a whole fam-
ily of them behind those stones.”
“Don’t dare move any of them,” Billee
warned her. “It’s against the law to disturb
a platypus egg.”
“Does it lay eggs?” she questioned. “Then
it must be a bird.”
“But it has fur and nurses its babies like
an animal.”
“It’s like the bunyip,” Nancy declared. “I
won’t believe in it till I see it myself. Couldn’t
we peek in behind the rocks if we lay down
flat on our stomachs?”
“No, you can’t do that,” Billee told her.
“The platypus seals up her nest so that no
one can look in. She’s awfully afraid of peo-
ple. A boy I knew tried to catch one once
and it was so frightened that it died right in
his hand.”


vv £* 3L' V. ’^
'j9K^I(? % : • . v '* 11
i*Kt. 4L-f i § S V r. i^»; , ’ iS^O
»■‘O' t -', tiny. gBH ' a s^^BKH
t » iK.'Cfc-Jff •>-.■» ‘i I v In^aBHbL/
*I16S^$
SOMETHING HAD JUST DISAPPEARED IN THE WATER
“I wouldn’t have that happen for any-
thing,” said Nancy. “But we wouldn’t
frighten it by just looking at it, would we?”
Billee was about to answer when a splash
and a series of little bubbles told him that
something had just disappeared into the wa-
ter. But it was impossible to tell whether it
was a platypus or only a frog. A little later,


however, there was a decided odor around
the stream. Billee had forgotten to tell
Nancy that the platypus gives off an unpleas-
ant scent when it is frightened. This made
her less eager to continue the exploration.
“Anyway,” she said with a little sigh, “I’m
glad it wasn’t a bunyip.”
Still Billee hadn’t courage enough to tell
her that the bunyip story had just been made
up to frighten her.
“I don’t believe I’ll get any good animal
pictures today. Come on,” he said. “Let’s
go back to the falls and I’ll take a picture of
you standing next to them.”
“I’d love that!” exclaimed Nancy, follow-
ing him eagerly. “I didn’t think you’d really
take my picture, Billee. I didn’t think you
liked me well enough for that.”
“I like you all right,” Billee admitted.
“I’m downright sorry about everything that
happened in school.”


“We’ll be friends and write to each other
when I’m back in America,” Nancy said hap-
pily, “and you’ll have this picture to remem-
ber me by.”
“I couldn’t forget you,” said Billee truth-
fully. He was all mixed up inside and knew
there was something* else he ought to say.
But he couldn’t think what it was.
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.


CHAPTER
THE PICTURE
“Oh, Billee, how nice!” Edith exclaimed
when she saw what her little brother was do-
ing. “It will be lovely to have a picture of
Nancy.”
“Pm going to take her and the falls
together,” Billee announced. “Sit here,
Nancy.” And he indicated a rock just above
the roaring waterfall. Behind it was a mass
of magnificent gum trees with an under-
growth of evergreens and lacy ferns.
“It’s a lovely spot, but are you sure it’s
quite safe?” asked Edith anxiously.
“They’ll be all right,” Mr. Snaith assured
her. “It’s good to see them playing so nicely
together.”


“It is, isn’t it?” Edith agreed as the two of
them walked away to watch a beetle race that
Joe was directing for the entertainment of
the others.
In Australia everything from beetles to
horses must run to satisfy the Australian’s
love of sports. Picnic races are common as
well as every other form of outdoor activity.
Hiking, sailing and fishing are enjoyed by all.
Often Billee’s father took a vacation from
his duties at the sheep station, leaving one of
the other men in charge, and went on a fish-
ing trip. Some of the largest fish in the
world are caught along the coast. And when
a fisherman finds he has hooked a swordfish
it sometimes takes the entire crew to haul it
aboard.
Fishing was Mr. Ellis’s hobby. Taking pic-
tures was Billee’s. He wanted his picture of
Nancy just right. But it was difficult to take
a good picture so near the falls where the


38P|j% WnD^<*
Courtest/ Australian National Publiciti/ Assn
THE LYRE BIRD
mistlike spray made it seem almost as if it
were raining. Billee stood to one side so that
he would not be taking the picture through
the mist.
“Hold that pose! ”he shouted. “Turn your
face a little more to the left. Don’t look at
me! Look at the falls! ”


For a moment everything was quiet. Billee
was about to snap the picture when an un-
expected trill interrupted him. Forgetting
Nancy, he crept out from behind the ever-
greens to watch and listen. But Nancy
thought he was still there and turned her
head to see.
Could it be Billee whistling those strange
bell notes, making his voice crack like a whip
and then tooting it like a motor horn? It
couldn’t be. No, it was another one of Aus-
tralia’s bird mimics and Billee was taking its
picture instead of hers.
Now the bird imitated the kookaburra’s
laughter. Now it screeched like a cockatoo.
Then followed its own wild, sweet song.
Billee parted the undergrowth and came
nearer, snapping picture after picture. He
used up one complete roll of film and loaded
his camera with another. Still the bird con-
tinued to sing.


Joe’s beetle race was forgotten and the
others came nearer too. Yes, there it was—
the beautiful lyre bird as large as a hen and
yet as sweet a songster as a tiny thrush. It
had spread its magnificent tail and was turn-
ing and showing off to some lady lyre bird
who must be watching from the shadows of
the bush. The females have no such splendid
plumage and it is hard to tell them from the
brown stems of ferns and bushes under which
they hide.
The birds derive their name from the two
long feathers which extend beyond the male
bird’s lacelike tail and are in the shape of a
lyre. To Billee the tail looked like a wide lace
fan. The lyre bird was so intent upon at-
tracting its mate that it seemed not to notice
that there were people watching it.
“Can you see it, Nancy?” Edith called
softly.
But all Nancy could see was the rushing


' 4BSpv >
Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner
AT THE FALLS
falls below her and something sitting up
there like a vulture. That couldn’t be the
lyre bird. It must be a bunyip. Yes, she felt
sure it was a bunyip. It probably hid itself
in the shadowed pool beneath the falls and
waited to spring out at people who came too
near.


“I can’t see anything but the bunyip!”
cried Nancy, pointing in terror.
And, in her haste to get away from the
hateful object, she stumbled and slipped. A
weed caught her foot just as it said in the
song and in another moment she felt herself
being dragged, she thought, to the bunyip’s
lair. Her terrified screams sent the lyre bird
squawking into the bush.
Billee dropped his camera and it went
crashing over the bank. But no one seemed
to notice it. They were all so alarmed over
Nancy.
“What’s happened to her?”
“Where is she?”
“She’ll be swept over the falls!”
These and many other cries went up as
Billee, ahead of all the others, scrambled
down over the bank. Nancy was not there!
She seemed to have disappeared completely!
Everyone was looking for her now, no one


daring to say what they all were thinking.
A tree had fallen across the water and
Billee, too frightened to think of the danger
to himself, crossed to the other side. Now he
could see the entire bank. A tree fern leaned
over it. Another tree had roots like arms
reaching down to form a tentlike cave. Billee
knew that, somehow, he must see what was
in the cave.
Crossing once more on the fallen tree, he
vaulted down. Something very close to a
prayer was on his lips.
“Save Nancy! Oh, let Nancy be safe! I’ll
give up my home—anything! Nothing else
matters so long as she is safe.”
“Watch your footing!” yelled Billee’s fa-
ther from above. “Hold on and I’ll get you.”
“Never mind me! I see her now. But I
can’t reach her. Nancy! Nancy!” Billee
shouted. “Can you hear me?”
The huddled form just inside the cave lay


«* _..- ■' •< - - '-v"- %!'*'* j&& j&c*
’i * / V- -t . *^j^vl, * ;' *Vf
Courtesy Australian Trade Commissioner
CANBERRA FROM THE AIR
still and motionless. Billee made one last
desperate attempt and would have fallen into
the rapids if Mr. Snaith hadn’t caught him.
“You’ve found her,” he said. “I’ll carry
her out.”
“But is she — Is she—”
“She’s all right. Perfectly all right,” said


Mr. Snaith as he lifted her up. “She proba-
bly only frightened herself into a faint.”
“You mean I frightened her.”
“Don’t take it so hard, boy. We all make
mistakes. Admitting them is something.
Come, give us a hand!” he called to Billee’s
father who was standing just above them
waiting to help.
He and Joe now lowered a stout branch
that served as a ladder, and up climbed Billee
followed by Mr. Snaith with Nancy in his
arms.
There was no picnic supper that day.
Packing their things together as quickly as
they could, they all hurried back to the car.
The men took turns carrying Nancy while
Billee walked along beside. Losing her, if
only for a moment, had made him realize
what a large place she had taken in his heart.
Nancy was still dazed from her fall and did
not move except to murmur, “The bunyip! I


saw him. And you didn’t take my picture.”
“I can’t now,” Billee told her. “The cam-
era’s smashed and I’m glad of it. It serves
me right for trying to scare you. There isn’t
any such thing as a bunyip. It’s just some-
thing the aborigines used to believe in. That
thing you saw was only a crooked stick.”
But it was not until after Nancy was home
again, sitting up on the porch swing wrapped
in blankets, that she really understood. Then
she laughed at her fears.
“My goodness!” she exclaimed. “Then it
wasn’t alive or —or anything. Come to think
of it, I didn’t see it move. But when I caught
my foot in a weed I thought surely I was be-
ing dragged to the bunyip’s lair. And when
I saw that cave you can imagine how scared
I was.”
“We carried our plan a little too far,” Joe
admitted, twisting his hat nervously in his
hands.


“It was a rotten idea to begin with,” Billee
declared fiercely.
“Only good fortune kept Nancy from go-
ing over the falls,” Billee’s mother reminded
the two culprits. “But she was spared to us.
There isn’t one of us who doesn’t thank God
for that.”
“Do you really?” Nancy asked, looking
from one anxious face to the other. “I
thought Daddy and I weren’t wanted around
the station. I thought it would be better if
we went back to America. I thought—”
“Nonsensei” interrupted Aunt Harriet.
“I’d like to know where a station owner and
his daughter belong, if it isn’t on their own
station looking after the sheep. We’re the
ones that are going to move.”
“But you can’t do that,” protested Nancy,
growing excited. “I’m to blame for every-
thing, really. Daddy wouldn’t have come
here in the first place if I hadn’t coaxed him.


’’rf it » ’ ’ X. — JgPr
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
SWORD FISHING IN AUSTRALIA
He was really getting along very well in
America. But when I read all his stories
about Australia I just couldn’t help longing
to come back home. But it isn’t fair to him
either. He will be so busy looking after the
sheep that he won’t even have time to write.”
“You’re wrong there, my dear,” spoke up


Mr. Snaith. “I consider Uncle John’s study
an ideal place for writing stories.”
He glanced at Billee whose open mouth
show T ed his surprise.
“But I see I have let out a secret,” he added.
“No doubt this young man thought-I was
writing with a poison pen.”
Billee hung his head. He had thought
something very close to that. Certainly he
had had no idea that Mr. Snaith was really a
hard-working writer and had spent most of
his life writing stories and articles about
Australia. He felt better after he had con-
fessed his mistake.
“So you thought I was a lazy good-for-
nothing, did you?” laughed Mr. Snaith. “I
imagine Uncle John had the same impression
until after I succeeded in selling my first
article. It’s odd he never told anyone about
it. But I suppose it was hard for him to ad-
mit he had been wrong.”


“It was hard for me too,” Billee said, “but
I’m glad I did it. I didn’t really mean to be
unkind. It was only because I wanted to help
Dad.”
At this his father patted his shoulder.
“Silly boy! ”he said fondly. “To think you
did all this planning and scheming when, if
you had only come to me, I could have told
you of a plan which solves all our problems.
Billee, did you ever hear of the famous Amer-
ican novelist, Zane Grey?”
“Of course,” Billee answered. “Every-
body has heard of him.”
“Well, then you must know that for several
years he lived and worked in a little fishing
village in New South Wales. It was here
that he wrote his great book on angling in
Australia. Now it happens that Mr. Snaith
also is at work on a book. But it is not on
angling. It is on Australian sheep. And
what better place could he find to write it than


on a sheep station? Now perhaps you see
why he wanted to live here.”
“And why he kept jotting things down in
his notebook. Yes, of course, I see,” Billee
murmured. “Edith was right. I should have
been fair and I suppose it was a fool notion
having Nancy pose for a picture right over
the falls.”
“It would have been a splendid picture if
you haa taken it. It’s too bad about your
camera, Billee. I know how you feel about
that.”
“I’m glad,” said Billee, pressing his lips
together. “I got what was coming to me.
But I do wish I could have saved those pic-
tures of the lyre bird —”
“Why, boy alive! You did save them!”
ejaculated Mr. Snaith. “Don’t you remem-
ber? You finished that roll of film and gave
it to your father before Nancy’s accident.
In fact, I have a notion that if they turn out


well I might write an article to go with them
and send them to your favorite photographic
magazine.”
Billee’s eyes were shining. His pictures in
a magazine! It seemed too good to be true
and he could not thank the new owner
enough.
“After this I won’t even care if we have
to move,” he said bravely. “But, Dad, it
won’t be before Christmas, will it? I really
shouldn’t like that for Christmas wouldn’t
be any good at all without Nancy.”
“So that’s the way it is. Well, I’ll see what
I can do,” his father agreed with a smile that
said as plainly as words that he and Mr.
Snaith had a secret.


CHAPTER XI
WHEN CHRISTMAS CAME
Billee saw very little of Nancy during the
next few days. But one day when he was
walking up the path toward the homestead,
she peeked around a tree and shouted, “Boo!
You thought you’d get rid of me, didn’t you?
Well, I’m staying. Daddy said you wanted
me to, but I don’t see how you’re going to
have Christmas in the middle of the summer.
It would be sort of silly to trim a tree when
everything is in blossom outside.”
“We have a tree,” Billee said, “but we don’t
cut it. It’s an enormous gum tree, much too
large to fit in any house. Lots of families
pack up everything they want to cook for
their Christmas dinner and drive out to a


v wtL**; iuT*^kW 'Jf&irm SvS^jAjjamJ^tsi\..f . -ci'ttJ; v
'‘Jk'Hn VOK ’ « * - < l fi T »-.? *jB >T> . r.. . p» y»7 V * »
« ’^ v /.' f ' 4k.
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
AN AUSTRALIAN CAMPING SCENE


camping place under a gum tree. Others eat
on the porch. It’s too hot to have dinner in-
side.”
“And is there turkey?”
“Sometimes. This year we’re going to
have one. And there’s always plum pudding.
We boil it in a billy and bring along the
sauce.”
“It sounds good,” said Nancy, “but what
do you do about presents? Daddy says he
has big ones for all of you.”
“Just wait and see,” Billee told her. He
didn’t dare guess what the big presents
would be, for fear he would be disappointed.
Christmas Eve came at last. Since there
was to be no tree, Nancy hunted up the larg-
est sock she could find. But all her socks
were anklets now that it was midsummer.
Even the largest of them was not very big.
Billee brought out a pillow slip and Nancy
began to laugh.


BILLEE BROUGHT OUT A PILLOW SLIP AND NANCY BEGAN
TO LAUGH
“I was going to hang up this little sock,”
she said, “but if there isn’t any tree for the
presents I suppose a pillow slip would be
better. Mine’s embroidered too.”
And she ran up to her bed and pulled it off
wondering, as she did it, why American chil-
dren had never thought of anything so clever.


Then, leaving their two pillow slips draped
over the front bannisters, the children said
good night.
Billee ran back to his own house, but he
would return again in the morning. The
manager’s family always spent Christmas at
the homestead. Perhaps the memory of
those other Christmases when Uncle John
was alive was one of the things that made the
homestead dear.
In the morning Billee awoke with the same
glad spirit in his heart that children every-
where feel on Christmas. He dressed him-
self hurriedly and ran for the front door. To
his amazement, there was a large Christmas
card hung on it. The card said:
MERRY CHRISTMAS TO THE ELLIS
FAMILY FROM MR. SNAKE
He yelled upstairs to Edith.
“Come down here! Uncle John’s nephew


has given us this house. I don’t know what
he means by that.”
“I do,” said Edith softly. “He explained it
all last night when he gave me this ring.”
“What ring?” asked Billee, gazing at his
sister’s finger in amazement. “Edith, you’re
not going to marry him?”
“And why not?” she asked. “I love him
dearly. I have loved him from the very first.
He needs a wife and Nancy needs a mother
and you know, Billee, I’ve always wanted to
live in the homestead.”
“But —but —” Billee stammered.
“And if you still think he’s lazy because he
works with his head instead of with his
hands,” Edith went on, “you can put the idea
out of your mind at once.”
“But I don’t. I don’t think anything of the
kind. I was just wondering if Dad would
keep on being manager now that the house
belongs to us.”


Court?*)/ Australian National Publicit;/ Assn
HERDING SHEEP
“You’ll have to ask him about that your-
self,” Edith said. “Either ask him or—or
John.”
And she blushed as she said it. Billee re-
solved that never again would he call the new
owner “Mr. Snake.”
It was not long before he discovered that


“the new owner” hardly fitted him, either,
for he and Mr. Ellis were now the joint own-
ers of Koala Station. That was how it hap-
pened that the house where they had always
lived was now their Christmas present.
“We talked it over some time ago,” Mr.
Snaith explained. “Naturally, I intend to
keep on with my writing and, since your fa-
ther knows so much more about raising
sheep, he prefers to take care of that end of
it. Koala Station is big enough for us all, my
boy. And if it isn’t, then we can make it
bigger. With more land and more sheep who
knows but what we may build up one of the
finest stations in Australia?”
“And I thought you were lazy,” said Billee,
staring at Mr. Snaith as though he were see-
ing him for the first time. But a moment
later he recovered himself and wrung his hand
so heartily that the poor man wondered if he
would still be able to carve the Christmas


turkey. Then the boy dashed off to empty
his pillow slip. He found Nancy in the midst
of such an array of presents that she could
hardly count them. Among them was a
beautiful new silk dress which she put on at
once.
‘Til take your picture in that/’ shouted
Billee.
Then, almost before he had finished speak-
ing, he realized that his camera was gone,
dashed to pieces over the rocks above the
waterfalls.
“I forgot,” he said, his face clouding.
“You forgot something else too,” Nancy
reminded him. “Your pillow slip!”
It was so heavy he couldn’t imagine what
could be in it. But when he pulled out his
gift from his father he recognized it at once.
A moving picture camera!
“Goody! Goody! Goody!” shrieked Nancy.
“Both our wishes did come true, Billee. They


did! They did! I’m staying here forever be-
cause my daddy and Edith are going to be
married and that makes us —that makes us—
What does it make us, Billee?”
“Good friends,” he declared. “And my
wish came true, as well, because with this
wonderful movie camera we can make our
own pictures. And you can be the star.”
“And the pictures will be in color,” Nancy
added, for her father’s gift to Billee had been
several rolls of colored films.
Bill could hardly wait to be shown how to
use his camera.
A picnic followed. A picnic such as only
the Australians know how to arrange. Billee
had everyone at the table, in turn, pose for a
picture.
After that they all piled in the car again
and drove to the Fauna Sanctuary at Heals-
ville, Victoria, and Nancy was introduced to
all the Australian animals.


Australians do not keep the animals in
cages but allow them to roam as they do in
the wild state. The animals were all gentle
and Billee took pictures galore, even one pic-
ture of the shy platypus.
A little girl about her own age showed
Nancy the wallabies and kangaroos. She
was feeding one of them when Nancy met
her, and the two became fast friends and
promised to see each other often. It turned
out that she lived only twenty miles from
Koala Station and that made them near
neighbors, according to Billee’s way of think-
ing.
“Nancy isn’t really timid,” he explained.
“But she’s an American and doesn’t under-
stand our animals.”
“An American!” exclaimed the child.
“How perfectly splendid!”
It pleased Nancy to hear that her country
on the other side of the world was favorably


* i
1 7 if jl TjMBk
. t,! gjfc \ - t, i
,^ r
Jf
4hM 4p BH^V*”
''45ft • Mftr ’ - ***“
t.. ji JSf vto* _
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.
AT THE FAUNA SANCTUARY,
HEALSVILLE, VICTORIA
thought of by most Australians. The two
countries were alike in so many ways. Both
were new and both regarded freedom as a
priceless possession. Nancy could love both
countries all she liked —America because it
had been her old home and Australia because
it would be her new one.


Christmas had been exciting. “And dif-
ferent,” Nancy thought, “because it comes
in the middle of the summer and because we
get our gifts in pillow slips instead of stock-
ings.”
But it was late that afternoon, when they
had returned from the picnic, that Nancy
discovered what she thought was the best
Christmas gift of all.
“The bears have come back!” she an-
nounced, rushing in from the garden. “There
are three of them right out here in the gum
trees. Hurry, Billee, and you can get a mov-
ing picture of them!”
After the picture was taken Billee’s father
watched him thoughtfully as he removed the
large reel of film.
“A photographer and an author living on
a sheep station!” he laughed. “Who would
have dreamed such a thing could happen?”
“I would,” said Mr. Snaith. “Anything


\ f -
mm Jt
' '■F* jflf -jME
can happen in Australia, the land of contra-
dictions.”
And Billee, who had never known a boy’s
heart could hold so much happiness, agreed
that the “American” was right.
Courtesy Australian National Publicity Assn.


y


When little Nancy and her father came
from America to take over the sheep
station that Billee’s father managed,
man\ complications arose. Complica-
tions made more involved by Billee’s
angry determination to do what seemed
almost impossible—make these unwel-
come strangers not like Australia and
so go home where Billee thought they
belonged.
But Billee s careful plans collapsed
one by one as he showed Nancy the
wonders of fascinating Australia.
Nancy’s eager interest and enthusiasm,
as well as their exciting adventures to-
gether, made Billee change his mind at
last when matters were arranged to
the eminent satisfaction of all.
Here is a delightful story —and an
exciting picture of a country in so
many ways like our own; yet different
enough, with its strange animals and
vegetation, its tropical heat in the
north and its snow and ice in the south,
to completely captivate the imagina-
tion for there is a kinship between
ourselves and this wonderful land
“down under.”


/I \ ' |
/W i
\
I OC-EAl\f VM i
I QX \ !
j^|
v ' Jfyjf ■> S/PHEY HARBOR
S»———^——^^^Si


A j
lioW+IEB.lNf i I
I /
TGLH\TOT£r ! I
i
fTOUT-H I BRISBANE®
3, i- —H 0
AUSTRALIA * i /[
NULLARBOR ® /? I i//I
plaits v I J/JJ
<? \ >/CW SOUT-H VALEff {/// Cj
M SIDNEY •£! T
a/nbepra
j VICTOtUA^^
BOURNE
TA5MAT\lfl^flJ
(^^HOBART
3 1508 02085494 4


*
