

Oi'
Profits to the Building Fund.
of tlu Miittara.
Price One Shilling.
JOSEPH COOK & CO., 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OP NEW SOUTH WALES.


ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL
WITH
Price One Shilling.
Profits to the Building Fund.
JOSEPH COOK & CO., 370, GEORGE STREET,
OPPOSITE THE BANK OP NEW SOUTH WALES.
\ a i


WEST
„ <$ caZ& vf-jF&eiy
f. f *f v J ? r *? *? *r y
G7y<?ztrve& J^Zccns.


ST. ANDREW’S CATHEDRAL.
The building, now (1866) rapidly approaching completion, is—for a
Cathedral, the principal Metropolitan Church in our communion,—
of very small dimensions ; * but, in appropriate decoration and internal
arrangement, it will when finished bear comparison with many Churches,
even in England, of better proportions and far greater size. This paper
is intended merely to convey to visitors, and others interested in its
progress, some account of the interior of the sacred edifice.
The Foundation Stone was laid in the year 1832, during the Episco-
pacy of the late Bishop ; whose name and then designation (before the
creation of the Metropolitan Bishopric) are inscribed on the North
Pillar next the Communion Bailing. On the corresponding Southern
Pillar, are the name and designation of our present Metropolitan. The
six Pillars in the Nave bear the name and designation, respectively, of
the then Metropolitan and Suffragan Bishops, in commemoration of
their meeting in this Diocese, in Conference, in the year 1850 —the
order being as follows. William Grant Broughton, Bishop of Sydney
and Metropolitan ; George Augustus Selwyn, Bishop of New Zealand;+
Francis Bussell Nixon, Bishop of Tasmania; Augustus Short, Bishop
of Adelaide; Charles Perry, Bishop of Melbourne ; and William Tyrrell,
Bishop of Newcastle.
The stained-glass Windows, (twenty-four in number when completed,
21 being already erected, and 2 others designed and ordered,) are with
* St. Andrew's is (within the walls) rather less than 160 ft. long, hy 62 ft. in
breadth; the Transept being 110 feet by 14 ft. only; whereas York Cathedral is
486 ft. by 105 ft.—the Choir alone being 212 ft. The Cathedral of Salisbury is nearly
as long as that of York; while Canterbury and Winchester Cathedrals, although
narrower, have each a length of 500 It. and upwards. The Great Hall of our Sydney
University is 135 ft. by 45 ft.
t Now Primate of tliat Province; having 4 Suffragans.
T5~ / q
7.101


three exceptions the gifts of individuals, and for the most part executed
in the highest style of modern art. The windows numbered 7,8, 9,
and 10, on the annexed engraved plan, represent the Miracles of our
Saviour. Nos. 15, 16, 17, and 18 are illustrative of our Lord’s Para-
Nos. 11, 13, and 14, represent His Transfiguration, Baptism, and
Temptation. The subjects of the smaller East Windows are, the Last
Supper and the Resurrection. Those of the North windows in the
Choir are events in our Saviour’s life before His ministry ; while the
South windows, opposite these, are devoted to events alter the Cruci-
fixion. Thus, a connected series of illustrations is given—in designs,
moreover, which harmonise in character with each other.
Of the three large Windows, the Western represents the Apostles
and Apostolic Men. Simon, James the Less, Andrew, Barnabas,
Matthias, and Jude, in the upper row ; Thomas, James, John the Bap-
tist, Stephen, Philip, and Bartholomew, in the middle row ; Peter,
Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, and Paul, in the lower. The Northern
Window (end of the Transept) lias the following subjects. Upper
row, Behold the Lamb of God, Call of St. Andrew, Call of St. Peter,
Middle row, Receive ye the Holy Ghost, Day of Pentecost, St. Andrew
preaching. Lower row, Crucifixion of St. Andrew, Crucifixion of our
Lord, Crucifixion of St. Peter. The great Eastern Window (now in
the hands of the manufacturer) will represent the following subjects,
in 21 compartments; there being three rows of 7 lights each. Two
Disciples following Jesus ; They came and saw where he dwelt; The
Ascension ; Andrew finding Simon : He brought him to Jesus ; Call-
ing of Andrew and Simon ; Feeding of the Five Thousand ; Ordination
of the Twelve Disciples ; Andrew and Philip with the Greek Worship-
pers ; The Good Shepherd ; Jesus foretelling the Destruction of Jeru-
salem ; The Day of Pentecost; Andrew crossing the Euxine; Christ’s
injunction Feed my Sheep.
The Eastern Window in the Transept (No. 21) is to be erected by
members of the Legal Profession, to the memory of the late Mr. Justice
Milford and Mr. Justice Wise. It will contain illustrations from the


Life of Samuel. The Window opposite, No. 19, is as yet (July) not
ordered. One of the upper Windows —that to the West, facing the
North side of the Choir —will be erected to the memory of the late
William Macplierson, Esquire, by liis son.
The toial expenditure on these windows, including the three ordered
hut not yet placed, (estimating the large Eastern Window at £700,)
will be £5,260. The cost of the Western Window was £576 ; and of
the Northern Window, in the Transept, £329. A table is subjoined,
stating particulars of all the Windows in detail.
The Font, presented by the Children of the Diocese not as yet Con-
firmed, will most probably be placed under the Window representing
Our Lord’s Baptism—as shown in the plan. The Organ, now being
built by Messrs. Hill and Sons, of London, under the superintendence
of Dr. Mont, Organist of York Minster, will be erected in the South
Transept. For this, and the expenditure connected with it, a sum of
no less than £2,400 has been raised, by donations from Ladies ; while
the amount collected for the Font, (the greater portion in very small
sums,) is £350 and upwards. The Pulpit, of carved oak, (estimated
cost £200,) will be at the Western-most of the large Central Pillars.
The Floor, throughout the Church, will be laid with encaustic tiles
—or, in the Chancel and at the raised steps there, with encaustic tiles
and marble. For the purchase of these, the sum of £l,OOO is con-
tributed by the Right Reverend the Metropolitan, out of funds at his
disposal; and the first shipment may be expected shortly. Much, of
course, in addition, still remains to be done. But enough has been
here stated, to show that the necessary funds when required will be
forthcoming. "
i
§


(Hath extra!
No.
on
Plan.
Donoks.
Hon. John Campbell and
Charles Campbell, Esquires.
Subscription. (Memorial to
Bishop Broughton.)
Severin K. Salting, Esq.
j Executors of Thomas Moore
Esq.
Subscription.
(Memorial to Mr. C. Kemp and
Mr. Ingelow.)
Family of the late Archdeacon
Cowper.
Mrs. Edward Aspinall.
Edve Manning, Esp, and
Sir'William M. Manning.
George Cox and
! Edward Cox Esquires.
1 Eobcrt Tooth, Esq.
Family of the late Deputy
Commissary General Laidley.
Utimtas; Donors and pitbjerk
Subjects.
The Last Supper.
{Stated ante p. 4.)
The Resurrection.
Woman at the Sepulchre.
“ Noli me tangere.”
Mary tells the Apostles.
Peter and John at Sepulchre.
Three Marys at Sepulchre.
“ They held him by the feet.”
Journey to Ennnaus.
Supper at Emmaus.
Thomas’s Unbelief.
His Adoration.
Sea of Galilee.
Charge to Peter.
Walking on the Sea.
Healing on the Sabbath Day.
Cure of the Leper.
Cure of Infirm Woman.
Casting out a Devi!.
Draught of Fishes.
Blind Man Restored.
Healing of Ten Lepers.
Centurion’s Servant cured.
Cure of Peter’s wife’s mother.
Cure of Dumb man.
Cauaanitish Woman’s daughter.
Man sick of the Palsy.
Calming the Sea.
Loaves and Fishes.
Miracle in Cana of Galilee.
The Transfiguration.


Windows ; Donors and Subjects.
Family of the late Sir James
Dowling, C.J.
Thomas Whistler Smith, Esq.
John Croft, Esq.
Major General Sir Edward
Macarthur.
The same.
The Hon. William Charles
Wentworth, Esq.
As yet (July 1866) not appro-
priated.
Hon. Charles Kemp, Esq.
Subscription.
(Memorial to the late Judges
Milford and Wise.)
George Macleay, Esq.
Sir Daniel Cooper, Bart.
Henry Osborne, Esq.
of the above, besides thosi
rs in that respect cannot
Noth. —Several of
at the particulars
The Sower.
accurately ascertained —and therefore none are here given.
The cost of the Windows is as follows:—Nos
23, and 24, each £206. Nos. 7,8, 9, 10, 15, 16,17
and 14, each £136. The cost respectively of Nos.
stated. Nos. 19 and 21 will he each £l2O only.
Window is £BO.
Baptism of our Lord.
The Temptation.
Pharisee and Publican.
The good Samaritan.
The Prodigal Son.
The unjust Judge.
The King’s Supper.
The unjust Steward.
The wedding garment.
The barren Fig Tree.
The Ten Talents.
The Lost Money.
Dives and Lazarus.
Rescuing the Lamb.
Good Shepherd rejoicing.
Go into my vineyard.
This is the Heir.
Stated ante p. 4.
Samuel judging Israel.
Samuel addressing the People.
The Annunciation.
Meeting of Mary and Elizabeth.
Birth of our Saviour.
Angel appears to Shepherds.
Magi seeing the star.
Journey of Magi.
Appearance before Herod.
Their Adoration.
Presentation in the Temple.
Flight into Egypt.
Yisit to Jerusalem.
Jesus in the Temple.
those indicated, are Memorial Windows;
nnot he at present in every instance
1 and 3, each £lB4. Nos. 4,5, 6, 22,
17, and 18, each £lBO. Nos. 11, 13,
os. 2, 12, and 20, has been already
The estimated cost of a Clerestory


