

A Sheaf of Sonnets
BY
A. J. ROLFE.


A Sheaf of Sonnets.
By
A. J. Rolfe.
PRICE, Is.


Bp bind .Tfcmission
to tho
IjiEBEiREBB &. Jjl. 8.8.,
Lord Bishop of Bcurcastlo.
Bccomhcr, 1802.


January.
Beneath each cloud is a silver lining.
LONGFELLOW.
8' VEE (lie peaceful earth the early dawn
) With tender tints breaks slowly, and the world
Again begins its toil with waking morn ;
E’en as a stately ship with sails unfurled
' Glides from the harbour to the seas’ unrest.
Morning wears on to noontide, and the air
Is calm and still: the Sun God from his breast
Shoots down his scorching shafts on flowers fair
Till they begin to droop; but soon the sky
Is overshadowed and the mighty rain
Falls, and the thunders roar relentlessly,
But early dawn brings peacefulness again.
So after toil and trouble in this life
The “ silver lining ” calmly ends the strife.


February.
Lonely and lovely, a single star
Lights the air with a dusky glimmer.
LONGFELLOW.
<l<r%Sv9 _
jrpxrj/ HE air is still, and as the golden Morn .
Starts on her journey, Nature’s flowers fair
yiHyf Waking from sleep, and fields of waving com
In serried ranks, give fragrance to the air.
And e’en as murmuring music slowly swells,
Then louder peals with overwhelming sound
Falling as slowly as it rose, and tells
Of joys and sorrows that our lives surround ;
So in the morn, from Zephyr’s gentle lips
Breezes are wafted, till the noonday sun
Scorches the plains : then flaming Phcebus dips
His fiery plumage, when the day is done.
And in the twilight, from the skies afar
In lordly grandeur shines the Evening Star.


March.
THOUGHTS AT EVENTIDE.
This world is but a rugged road
Which leads us to the bright abode
Of peace above.
LONGFELLOW.
TjTTHE hours of day are done, and from the skies
JJL There steals a stillness solemn and serene;
gfl? And as a weary war-worn veteran lies
"f; Freed from his toil, at rest from warfare keen,
I Nature exhausted sleeps. And silently
The glittering stars send down their pale cold light,
Turning our thoughts towards Eternity,
Where vulgar passions are unknown as night;
Where gates of pearl are ever open wide,
And he that overcometh shall receive
Eternal life : where sorrow’s rushing tide
Can never break ; where partings cannot grieve ;
And he whose heart by trouble is borne down
Shall for his cross receive a glorious crown.


April.
Nature turns her face
To every land beneath the skies,
Counts nothing that she meets with base,
But lives and loves in every place.
TENNYSON.
fHE night is past; the morn with flooding light
Tinges the cloudlets in the east with gold,
Nature, the minister of God, is bright
Jr With gladness, as the morning mists unfold.
) 0 Nature, ere Night’s shadows blot our view,
Show us the fulness of thy purity,
That we thy loving footsteps may pursue,
And bear the burden of humanity ;
That when the summit of our life is near,
And from the mountain brow we see the gloom
Along the downward road, we may not fear
The darkening path that leads us to our home.
And when at last we cross Death’s shadowy sea,
We shall unravel Life’s great mystery.


May.
The moon and its broken reflection
And its shadows shall appear
As the symbol of love in heaven,
And its wavering image here.
LONGFELLOW.
SHE dying light pales slowly in the west;
The shadowy silent presence of the night
ls stealing on to still the world’s unrest,
% And one by one the myriad stars shine bright,
I From her dim realm in calm serenity,
The goddess of the night with peaceful grace
Lifting her pallid, gleaming shield on high,
In regal grandeur silent takes her place.
And through the dimness vast, Night seems to say
In whispers low, “ Fear not my shadow, Death ;
For as from earth I bear thy thoughts away
To dreamland for a space ; so when thy wreath
' Of life is wrought, cold Death shall close thine eyes
And bear thee to eternal Paradise.”


June.
Like the swell of some sweet tune
Morning rises into noon,
May glides onward into June.
LONGFELLOW.
gloomy spell is broken, and the light
*1 lift I P a^e en^er le waiting East;
The sudden sun with splendour sails to sight,
The wailing night-bird’s weary note has ceased.
All, all rejoice as day and life return,
Bearing a song of gladness to the hearts
Of weary mortals who in patience yearn
For aught to salve the wounds of Life’s fierce darts.
0 weary ones, look upward to the Light
That guides our stumbling footsteps to the bourn
Where care-worn hearts are soothed, and where the
night
Is all unknown amidst eternal morn.
Where life shall spring from death, and joy from paid,
And earthly loss shall be a heavenly gain.


July.
Ah! if thy fate, with anguish fraught,
Should be to wet, the dusky soil
With the hot tears and sweat of toil,
Remember in that perilous hour,
When most afflicted and oppressed.
From labour there shall come forth rest.
LONGFELLOW.
IIE sun has set; over the purple hills
A golden streak of glory slowly dies ;
The rustling leaves and gently flowing rills
Murmur sweet music to the peaceful skies.
And as the last faint gleam of light departs
The sentinels of heaven peerless shine ;
Oblivion soothes the cares of aching hearts
That for a respite from their sorrows pine.
0 restful night, tear on thy silent wings
A song to soothe our restless souls with peace ;
A peace that in our weary wanderings
Shall lead us to the Land where sorrows cease.
And let thy gem-like stars, Faith, Hope, and Love,
Shine on our road to perfect rest above.


August.
" Joy shall overtake us as a
flood.”
MILTON.
LOWLY the mists of night arc rolled away ;
And with his retinue and pageant bold
The King of Light in glorious array
Bursts on the waking world all clad with gold.
( And as the Sun dispels the shades of Night,
Breaking a glorious entrance through the veil
That separates the darkness from the light,
Making, by his groat presence, Beauty pale,
So when Life’s weary night, that dawnless seems,
Draws to its close, at last thro’ shadows drear
A glorious perfectness of heavenly gleams
Will through our dismal darkness then appear ;
And, calmly radiant, joy will reign for aye
When morning breaks and shadows flee away


September.
. ... the tender buds
expand,
Emblems of our own great
resurrection,
Emblems of the bright and
better land.
LONGFELLOW
Golden radiance paints the western sky,
ijSSgjOja As slowly sinks tlie setting sun to rest,
A breath of prayer, like incense, silently
wggllpia Floats up and soothes the soul to slumber blest.
And sleep, night's fairest maiden, makes the night
The Sabbath for the day, while over strife
Peace reigns supreme, though with unconscious
might,
Stilling the aching brain with troubles rife.
And as the sun from out the eastern sea
Rises refreshed to start his work anew,
Or as the shrivelled seed, its bonds set free,
Springs from the dust a flower of beauteous hue,
So from this land of shadows shall we rise
To realms unshadowed far beyond the skies.


October.
AH things shall rise again in sweeter blossoming.
ANON.
NjTTkj FTER the night, the beauteous light of dawn
Shines on the waking world with smiling face,
The winter night has changed to spring’s fair morn,
The bursting buds and blossoms bloom apace.
Nature, revived, rejoices in her birth,
Clothing the hills and dales with freshest green,
And spreads her bounteous hand with gladsome mirth
To deck the fields with flowers of fairest sheen.
All things must' die to live : for every seed
That falleth to the ground, except it die,
Abides alone : and in earth’s bosom hid
Springs up from death to life and liberty.
So from the earth like morning larks on wing
Our souls shall rise to everlasting Spring.


November.
What a glory doth this world put on
For him who with a fervent heart goes forth.
LONGFELLOW
S' 4 "HE waves of golden light spread in the East,
Flooding the sky with glory : o’er the hills
The King of Day mounts slowly : and released
F From sleep, the world refreshed from toils and ills,
I Its round begins : fair nature’s lovely face
Smiles on the glorious handiwork of God,
Teaching her willing votary to trace
The Artist Hand in paths that few have trod.
The birds are carolling their joyous lay
The fragrance-breathing flowers lovingly
Send forth their grateful thanks : and far away
The mountains lift their heads in ecstacy.
All nature gladly shouts in one long strain
A song of love : and earth resounds again.


December.
Though the warrior's sun has
set
Its light shall linger round
us yet,
Bright, radiant, blest.
LONGFELLOW.
fITTHE year’s last milestone on the journey home !
Ah ! as we ponder o’er the toil worn road,
A road by winding paths made wearisome,
Jr Have we done aught to light another’s load,
) To cheer some heart in sorrow, or to calm
Some storm-tossed soul upon the sea of doubt,
To soothe some aching heart with healing balm,
To hold aloft Hope’s pennon streaming out ?
Then we can gaze along our path with joy
Knowing that bleeding footmarks, once impressed,
Have not been vainly trodden : this shall buoy
Our feeble footsteps on to perfect rest.
And when at last our rugged race is run
Our Master’s loving voice will say, “ well done.”


An English Chris tmas tide.
SHE dying year heaves out its last long breath
And drooping nature bows her weary head,
The wailing wintry winds betoken death,
$ The trees their summer glory now have shed.
1 Across the snow-clad fields, the bells peal out
The birth of Him, who brings us joy and peace.
Joy to the sad, peace to the heart in doubt,
With promises that sorrow sore shall cease.
True, ’tis the death of nature, but the gloom
Of death is brightened by the gladsome thought
Of pure primroses paling into bloom
At Nature’s second birth with beauty fraught.
The flowers of the earth, the birds on wing,
With countless joyful voices ■welcome Spring.


maitlnnfl, H.S.W.
T. DIMMOCK, LITIIO. AND GENERAL MACHINE PRINTER.
18 9 2.
