

A SHANTY
ENTERTAINMENT
BY "MILKY WHITE."




Free thought and
radical collection
bequeathed to the
National Library of Australia
by
Harry Hastings Pearce








A Sbanty Entertainment
By “MILKY WHITE.”
(Copyright;
PRIVATE EDITION.
FORD & TAYLOR, Melbourne.
1904.




. . H Shanty entertainment . .


TO PERCY LINDSAY,
By river bend and billabong
A pal of mine, at Wandalong,
Was won' tto ride, in othef days,
A pair of darkly dappled greys.
Week in, week out, with work to do.
One of them only bore him through ;
Quiet, staid, yet not too slow,
That was the gelding, Easy-go;
But when grown dull with labour done,
His blood rail riotous for fun,
Or when the quiet bush life failed
Ana restless imps of passion called,
He passed old Easy-go aside
A?id saddled-up the Rebel Bride;
(No man had ever broken her,
To touch of whip or prick of spur.)
And though she bucked him off at will
Some of their rides he dreams of still.


Well this my book of prose and song —
Written for you of all the throng—
(Oh J bell-birds back at Wandalong!)
Is no meek gelding Easy-go,
Broken some selling pace to show,
By bard r espectable and prim
Singing a marketable hymn ;
Rather an outlaw , rough to ride,
A sort of cloth-bound Rebel Br ide.
And I shall be indeed content,
Old friend in Art's habiliment,
If, when the weh hacked Easy-goes
Have tired you out with verse or prose ,
You mount my Rebel Brule to find
Some slight refreshment for the mind ,
And, ere the blazing sun be set,
See one /ling you may not forget.




NOTICE...
Of the verses in this volume . . .
“A Rain Song,” “The Native Born,”
“A Drought Item,” “The Lonely
Track,” “Jock McPhail,” “ Kate
M’Leeson,” “ Our Own Folk,” and
“The Drover’s Wife,” originally
appeared in The Bulletin and the
principals of The Bulletin Newspaper
Co., Ltd. are sincerely thanked for
permitting them to be thus repub-
lished. To Mr. W. E. Clare of the
one time Clare's Weekly , Perth, and
to the Editors of The Advance
Australia , Tocsin , and Brighton
Southern Cross the author’s best
thanks are also tendered.
The verses —“ How Grogan beat
the Champions,” “Boundary Riding”
and “ Keep White the Strain” are now
first published. “M.W.”




A Shanty entertainment.
It was the sun-set hour of an autumn evening, and the
chaps who had ridden from neighbouring stations for their
mail-bags were congregated under the verandah of “ The
Seventy Mile ” waiting. It was likely to be a long wait,
for the drought had broken up during the early part of the
week, and the mail track was six inches under water. Ihe
stage from the last changing place was a long and difficult
one, too, and there were doubts as to the coach getting
through at all that night. However, we were pretty good
hands'at waiting; most inland Australians are.
Others besides the station men were there —Micky the
Drover, just back from a starvers’ trip; old Charlie Den-
sham —better known as “ The Mad Actor —who, having
struck a solid and substantial jag, was sleeping the effects
of it off upon a rough, rustic seat, and a quiet-looking
electioneering chap who was canvassing the district in the
interests of the unpopular candidate. Somebody called
him Summers —old Watson, I think —and we followed suit.
Old Watson was the boss.
There was laughter and light-heartedness under that
verandah, and eyes which looked out into the cold, grim,
grey evening reflected no sadness. A sheet of water lay
upon the plains like a silver veil on the face of a withered
woman; but the veil was a magic one, and we knew,
when that it was charmed away, the face underneath


would be all fresh with youth. There was joy for us in
that. A few gaunt trees close at hand were brooding in
melancholy tearfulness. A gleam from the sun-set would
have turned their tears to pearls; but the west was
clothed in cloud, and we cared not how long we had to
wait for the transformation. Away at the back the Seventy
Mile Creek was drowning all its lignum fringes in silent
stretches of water. Silent ? Well scarcely that, for the rain
having ceased, thousands of crows cursed vigorously,
while ’hurras, magpies and galahs jeered at them as the
womankind of unionists jeer at defeated blacklegs.
For a while we sat talking of the rain and of the state
of the road. The/1 ‘ ‘ Sydney, ’ ’ proposed a pool —a bob in,
each one to guess what time the coach would arrive, the
nearest to do the needful. Everybody subscribed except
Micky the Drover, who had suddenly disappeared.
“ Oh! Micky’s got to go- in,” said Sydney. “ Can’t do
without him. Wonder where he is ?”
“ Com roun’ t’ave a word with Nell, I s’pose!” said
The Rat, wanking both eyes at the company.
He was right. The drover at that moment was in the
kitchen, looking very penitent.
Alas! poor Micky! Still, it was all his own fault, and
he deserved every bit of it.
Six months before he had been as light-hearted a lad
as one would wish to have a drink with, but, returning
from a cross-tempered trip to put in a three months’ spell
on his “ own place,” and thereafter becoming a more or
less constant visitor at the Seventy Mile, he had grown
suddenly dull and morose, and, at times, even fightable. It


wasn’t the beer; it wasn’t the whisky —though Micky
could hold his end up well enough at either on occasion ;
it was Nell, the newly-arrived Nell, saucy, black-eyed,
brown-haired Nell, whose face, in that drought-time, was
like an early flower, and who wasn’t half so Irish as her
name, and just about ten times more fetching than she
was Irish.
At first Micky had looked at her as if he were guilty
of some great offence and wished to make her his confes-
sor; but the girl had taken a fancy to him (he was an
eligible party in that region, with a nice selection and as
good a name for droving as any man between the Murray
and the Gulf), and, being a full-blooded young woman of
little sentiment but much affection, was not at all satisfied
to be so looked upon. She waylaid Micky one night, in
a dark passage of the shanty, and fell on his neck and
held her lips close to his so that he might not forget his
duty. Micky roused himself to the occasion; but, after
all, it was only a feeble kiss —the sort a young unmarried
man plants upon the cheek of his sister’s youngest baby
when its mouth is surrounded by jam and its little fists
are covered all over with butter. He got a smack on the
face for it (which he deserved), but for days after the taste
of that kiss was on Micky’s lips, and it was only the ex-
treme likelihood of death by hunger or thirst that pre-
vailed upon him to disturb it. Later, when he had re-
covered his equilibrium, he went up to the shanty again,
determined to make a name for himself or die.
Ah ! the kiss he had hungry intent for then! But Micky
in the presence of a woman was as shy as an old man


'roo. Still, he made half-a-dozen attempts to effect his pur-
pose ; that is, he strode resolutely up to Nell five several
times and when she looked round at him, pulled up and
passed remarks of no sense or consequence about the
weather. The sixth time Nell never so much as moved
an eyelid in his direction, but he thought she would, and
pulled up just the same. The girl called him a fool, then,
and told him to clear out, which he did, looking for all
the world like an old wrinkly ewe searching, wild-eyed,
for the lamb that was slain. He went straight to the bar
and got into a row with Bill Jackson of Bungaloo, and
finished off five whiskies and a fight in less than fifty
minutes, which struck him as being such a good record
that he had another whisky and went back to the kitchen.
Slightly pot and victory valiant he poked his head through
the door way.
“ Win yez come for a droive wid me on Sunday, Nell ?”
he cried.
“ Is that the way to ask?” replied the girl. “ Can’t you
come in?”
Micky went in, and Nell flung herself down on the sofa
with her brown hair all loose and tumbling and her arms
under her head for a pillow. She had her sleeves turned
up, and the pink, healthy plumpness above the elbows took
Micky’s breath away. A glimpse of a right trim ankle
cased in black was also exhibited for his delectation, but
he had no eyes for that then. “Will yez come?” was
all the voice he had left to say. And after a lot of finesse
Nell consented; but Micky went aw"ay without his kiss,
which made the girl say things about shyness that were


ever so much more amusing than just.
Well, on the Sunday they went for their drive, and at
first got on famously, for Micky eased his shyness off on
the horses. Indeed, before they pulled up to have dinner,
near old Foxcroft’sdam, he had held one of Nell’s hands
in his for quite half a minute, and had called her “ swate-
heart ” at least three times. Later, when the horses had
been unyoked and a fire started they stood close together
watching the water in the billy, and Micky, with a vast
amount of trepidation, slipped his arm about the girl's
waist. Nell just let her head fall upon his shoulder and
turned her black eyes up to his with that look of longing
few men ever mistake, but Micky’s heart started bumping
furiously; his breath came and went as though he was in
pain, and his face flushed so that he seemed to have
washed himself in the sunset. Nell’s lips parted, and he
bent over and kissed her—only once—that was quite
enough bliss for Micky at a time. He disengaged himself
then, and walked away, talking softly to the horses until
the choking sensation in his throat had left him and his
hands trembled no longer. When he went back to her
the billy had boiled, and Nell had made tea. She had
spread a nice clean cloth, too, and got out the cakes and
pies and things she had brought with her. They sat down
to the feast, side by side, chatting merrily. But, alas!
Nell had the bad luck to plunk down upon a hidden
rabbit-trap. She felt something move under her, and gave
a little excited cry, but instead of remaining seated on
the open jaws until she could grip the spring, she started
up, and the teeth caught on. She screamed like the


healthy young woman she was, and, scared almost out of
her wits, tried hard to break away. The chain of the
trap, however, was well secured, and she fell, struggling
almost frantically. She called upon Micky time after
time, but just then Micky’s shyness came between him and
action like a stroke of paralysis, and when, at last, the
girl had released herself the cakes and the buns and the
tea and the cloth were all kicked into an unrecognisable
mass, and there was a coldness between the couple almost
as pronounced as an iceberg. Micky made it still worse
afterwards by folding up his coat and placing it for her
to sit upon in the buggy. “ Faith, it ’ud be softer than the
cushun !” he said, stoutly, when she threw it at him; but
he had heart enough to dodge the ruts going home, for
which, if the truth were known, she mutely thanked him.
But the worst of it all was when they pulled up at the
Seventy Mile, for Bill Jackson, of Bungaloo, came and
helped Nell out of the trap, and she was very sweet and
very gracious to him, but went inside without so much as
a word of thanks or acknowledgment to Micky.
Now, on the Monday morning, Nell was sensible enough
to laugh over this little mishap, but Micky was quite crest-
fallen, and kept away from her. So, in a few days she
was longing for him to come to her, ready enough to
smooth matters over if she could only find the opportunity.
But days passed into weeks, and although Micky went
often to the bar he could not find courage enough to in-
vade the kitchen, and Nell saw “ the eligible ” slowly but
surely drifting away from her. It would have been all
right had Micky only gone to the kitchen. She would


have made it easy enough for him after that. And she
thought he would come sooner or later. But, at last, one
morning, the Boss told her that Micky was going away in
a week's time on a droving trip with a flock of starvers
to Victoria; then she knew something would have to be
done quickly. That night she singled out Bill Jackson,
and giggled and whispered and walked out in the semi-
darkness with him; and Micky saw them and waited for
Bill, and dealt with him in a manner suggestive of much
malice. He didn’t come off too well though, for Bid got
one home on his nose that painted purple and green and
yellow rings about both his eyes. The mill eased his
feelings very considerably, however, and by the night
before he was to go away he had made up his mind that,
funk or no funk, he would put the question to Nell
straight. “ She was only a gurrul afther arl; she couldn’t
ate him.” But, alas ! when he reached the kitchen Bid
Jackson was there, and Nell had tantalised him so that,
just as Micky opened the door, he had caught her in his
arms, and was kissing her passionately. He didn’t see
Micky, but Nell did, and she gave Mr. Jackson such a
swift back-hander under the ear that it almost dropped
him. But Micky didn’t see that; he was sneaking off to
the bar to say “ Good-bye ” to the Boss, which, when the
time came, he was quite incapable of doing, being too
unreasonably, solidly and unsociably drunk.
So Micky went off on his trip with a head like a hum-
ming top and a thirst on him that couldn’t have been pur-
chased for a pound. He was sullen and angry, too, and—
which was a good sign for the wayward girl crying her


eyes out in the kitchen, if she had only known it—about
as jealous as an auburn-headed Irishman knows how to
be.
Now, padding along behind or in front of his weak-
kneed starvers, far away from the lady who had played
such havoc with his heart, Micky, waxing valiant, made
up his mind that when he got back again she should hear
from him in no uncertain manner. She had deceived him.
She had egged him on, and then made fun of him with
another fellow. How Micky’s blood boiled as he dreamed
of revenge ! Ah ! the bitter things he learned to say !
With Nell at the Seventy Mile it was different. She
pined for her absent lover. She tried to console herself
with Bill Jackson, but it was a dead failure. She was
head over ears in love with the drover, and, in the slow,
sleepless hours of night, she told herself that when Micky
came back, if he ever did, she would be as kind and as
gracious to him as ever maiden could be.
So, on that autumn evening when Sydney proposed the
pool Micky had gone boldly into the kitchen and faced
Nell. She gave a little scream of surprise and delight,
but he opened out with eyes averted.
“ It’s a noice gurrul you ar’, Nell O’Shea, to troifle
wid a mahn’s afficshuns!” he said. It was a set speech
he had made up behind the starvers.
A smile 'flitted across the girl’s face. The game was
won already. He was hers as soon as she wanted him.
She saw it instantly. There was no need to be kind and
gracious so soon, she told herself.
“ Is that a compliment, Mr. Murphy ?” she asked, mock-


mgly.
The “ Mr. Murphy ” caught Micky just behind the
region of the belt much as the roll of a vessel catches a
longshoreman,
“ Because,” she continued, “ if it is, I suppose I ought
to thank you.”
“It’s the truth,” said Micky, with a great effort; “ye
knavv it is. Phwat wid yer moighty Mr. Jackson and
yer—yer —” Micky stammered and stuttered. The accu-
sation he had intended bringing so freely and forcibly
against her faded away from his tongue. He became un
comfortably conscious that he was making a fool of him-
self, but for the sake of his “ revinge ” he pulled himself
together, “ and yer coakwetting and yer kissin’—”
The girl bridled up instantly. She turned toward him,
a steaming pot lid in one hand. The action was almost
a menace.
“And a nice sort of man you are,” she said, scorn-
fully.
Micky looked up at her and quailed.
“If I cared for you,” she continued, “you red-headed
monster, you, I might trouble to ask what right you have
to talk to me like that. But there’s no need, you great
simpleton ! No woman in the world could make love with
you. You don’t know what to do with a girl’s hand when
you get hold of it, and you’ve got an idea that her lips
are only made for talking with, and they just are to those
who think so.”
Micky was looking on the floor now, twirling his hat
round and round and shuffling uneasily with his feet. It


was mostly true, he knew, but the “ red-headed monster ”
stuck in his throat. She had run her fingers through this
hair once and called it auburn, which it was.
The girl dropped the pot lid and continued, “ You talk
of coquetting and kissing. You don’t know what they
mean. You don’t know what anything about women
means (which was one of the chief reasons why she
wanted him). Women want to be loved, not worshipped.
Women want—a sly light crept into her eyes—women
want, when they’re caught in a trap, to be released. They
don’t want a man to go running round behind trees with
his hands over his eyes.”
“ But didn’t Oi see yer coakwetting ?” said Micky,
bravely. “Didn’t Oi see yez wid Jackson an’ him a-
kissin’ av yer in this viry room ?”
“ The more shame for you to say so,” replied Nell.
“ If you’d thought anything of me you wouldn’t have left
it to me to give him —to give him—she stammered
and blushed.
“ Phwat! did yez pass him wan ?” cried Micky, eagerly.
“If you’d been a man you’d have saved me the
trouble,” replied the girl, with great scorn.
And just at that moment, when Micky’s eagerness had
died down into great penitence and he was ready to flop
on his knees and ask forgiveness for a thousand things
he had been guilty of not doing (which was the trouble),
the Boss opened the kitchen door and said:
“We want yer fer a bob in, Micky. Are you coming ?”
The drover stepped out wdthout a word, not even look-
ing at Nell. If he had, he would have seen a gleam in


her eyes like that of a dog robbed of his lawful prey.
But it was only a momentary gleam. When Micky was
quite out of reach she sat down in a chair and smiled.
Then she took a little bit of string from her pocket and
fitted it upon a finger.
“By Jove!” she said, suddenly, “ I’ve a good mind to
make him get me a bracelet after that ” ■ but she shook
her head slowly, after a little pause, and said, quaintly,
“ No, I don’t think so. A ring looks ever so much better
when a girl’s got slender hands.” And Nell had hands
that no housework, howsoever rough, seemed able to dis-
figure.
Micky joined the party under the verandah, and sub-
scribed his shilling along with the rest of us. Being the
last to put in he was asked to start the guessing. He mut-
tered something absent-mindedly, something about a red-
headed monster.
“ What ?” asked Sydney.
Micky woke up to business. “ Phwat toime ?” he an-
swered. “ I’m tipping half-past elivin. Let’s mortgage
the drinks.”
The guesses ranged from ten o’clock to a quarter-past
twelve ; thus —the Boss, 10 ; Bill Jackson, 10.20 ; Big
Jack, 10.30 ; Sydney, n ; the present scribe, 11. 15 ;
The Rat, Micky, 11.30; Summers, 12; Old
Jim, 12.15. The old actor was too drunk to make a guess.
It was ten to one he didn’t have a shilling to put in,
anyhow, though that wouldn’t have mattered much. Syd-
ney would have stood him. It was a way Sydney had
with old fellows like Densham.


The Boss made a list of the guesses, and posted
it up in the bar; then we mortgaged the drinks,
Micky going in at the head of the procession and Bill
Jackson whipping in. Bill wasn’t taking any Micky
if it meant fight. The drover was a bit too solid.
It was almost dark by this time, and the verandah, even
though from it we could feast our eyes upon wide ex-
panses of water, seemed dull and uninviting. A game of
nap was proposed, but most of us were not silvery enough
for that, so, as soon as the dining-room was cleared, and
a fire set going, and the lamps fixed up, a six-handed
game of euchre was started.
Summers didn’t play cards. He went over to the piano
instead. He was a bit of a jack-of-all-trades, it seemed,
and during the afternoon had tuned the shanty’s old in-
strument so well that Dolly, the Boss’s daughter, when
she tried it, thought she was striking the wrong notes.
Probaby she was. Summers, however, made it say things
that were sometimes tales of storm and fire and slaughter,
sometimes just kiddies romping, laughing and shouting in
their glee. Dolly was almost convinced that she really
had no ear for music after listening to him.
He started off the evening service with a hymn that
all of us had heard. He didn’t sing it, just played ; but
even the Boss let go when the chorus was reached, and
the way the last line with its slurs—that’s what Dolly
called them—was finished off was something to remember.
I fancy I can hear it now —Big Jack tenor, old (cross-eyed)
Jim basso —•
“The pil-il-grim is long-ong-ing for ’ome, swe-eat ’ome '*


Then, before we had time to relish the holy taste in
our mouths, he rattled away with a bang and a clang and
a ring-ding-dong into “ The Man that Broke the Bank
at Monte Carlo.” He played only old things, it seemed,
things he had learned before the politics of the unpopular
candidate had got hold of him. Of up-to-date “ comics ”
he knew nothing. I don’t think he would have troubled
about them, anyhow, by the style of him.
Now, when The Rat heard the familiar strains of
“ Monte Carlo ”he smiled. The whichness of that effort
on his part will bear explanation.
The Rat was a weazened, withered, young Australian,
bearing about the same relationship to ordinary healthy
youth as a dried apple does to a show-case pippin. He
was thin and short, and his skin was as crinkly as a savoy
cabbage. He smoked sometimes, that was when he wasn’t
chewing, and he always had a lump on one side of his
face—a half-plug of Derby generally—which gave him
the appearance of suffering from chronic gum-boils. He
sometimes expectorated—when a fly was within range—
and it was odds on the fly every time, for The Rat was
minus one of his front teeth, swallowed in a row, and
it affected his aim. He looked weak, mean, almost
cowardly, yet he was the finest horseman anywhere within
challenge distance of the Seventy Mile, and he could be
trusted, under certain circumstances, to take on the big-
gest man in the district with the bare ’uns. Those cir-
cumstances mostly had to do with The Rat’s ability or
disability as a musician.
He had been known to sit on the edge of his bunk


at Bellatta, wooing a new piece to his old accordion, for
five hours at a stretch. The new pieces were always coy,
and always extremely maidenly in their modesty—which
means that The Rat got on very much better with them
in the dark. The consequence was that, many a night
when the other fellows had dowsed their slushes or blown
out their candle-lights, The Rat would climb out from
under his bed-clothes, seize his accordion, and wrastle
mournfully yet resolutely with the latest thing he had
heard. He always sat upon the rail of his bag and sap-
ling bunk when taken like that, and his gaunt, scraggy
legs, keeping time, time, time, in a moony sort of mime,
used to get covered all over with the goose flesh of
ecstasy. It was pretty rough on the other fellows, too,
especially when The Rat, after playing a bar or so, would
lose the place, or forget, or get boxed up, and have to
start all over again. And perhaps that sort of thing
would go on half-a-dozen times when, suddenly,
“ Bli’ me, Rat, give it a spell!” would be heard.
But the accordion would still squeal and squeak and
grunt, and the voice that spake next time would say
things peremptorily, such as;
“ Gor bli’ me, Rat! shut up that row and go to
sleep!”
But The Rat was resolute and untiring in his ambitio n
to conquer new pieces, and it would not be until he had
been verbally stricken nine several and distinct shades
of pink, and called everything from a son of a gun to the
son of something of no consequence whatever, and been
bombarded with every item of clothing heavy enough to


carry the distance, that he would desist, and, when he did
it would he with some such statement as this;
“ Yer a selfish lot er cows, yous are. How the ’ell d’
yer expect a bloke to leam new things if yer won’t let ’im
practice ?” And the other fellows might just as well have
let him alone, for The Rat had a nose that was every bit
as musical as his accordion, only in our company it was
never known as a nose. It was sheer insult to call it any-
thing less than a bugle.
So, hearing “ Monte Carlo,” The Rat smiled, for “ The
Man that Broke the Bank ” was one of his especial
favourites. As Summers rattled out the first bar, The Rat
dived under a chair and brought up his greasy, old, half-
bred concertina and started in. Gradually a dreamy, far-
away look of contentment floated into his features, and
he played, not like one who cares for applause, nor as one
who thinks of time or place or opportunity, but as one
who feels his soul melting into melody—liquid melody
that must either run out at the finger tips or flood the
frame with the tortures of the unexpressed. But the
worst, or best, of it was that when Summers was jaunting
over the last line of the chorus The Rat was just finish-
ing the first verse. And the bass of his old concern
was an absolute groan, and one note in the treble re-
fused to sound, and, as it was the chief one, the
mat who broke the bank went hobbling through his
dirge like a wooden-legged man at a funeral. Sum-
mers laughed and stopped, but The Rat’s eyes were fixed
upon a little glimpse of heaven somewhere beyond the
ceiling, and he took no notice, just kept on. By general


assent the cards were dropped, and we all looked at The
Rat and listened. When he got into the middle of the
second verse he started to sway gently from side to side
and to and fro, and he held the accordion off his knees,
playing it like a concertina. At the third verse he had
shut his eyes, but his mouth twitched and his nostrils ex-
panded until the insides of them looked like little drops
of blood. At the fourth he had quietened down and
looked like a miniature man rocking a baby to sleep, the
mournful, melancholy wail of his instrument suggesting
the kid as one far advanced in chronic bronchitis. But,
ah ! the grand finale ! The chorus for the last time 1 The
Rat opened his eyes and glared at the ceiling; his lips
twitched more than ever; the lump on the side of his
face stood out like a Brazilian nut in the mouth of a
monkey; his nostrils expanded almost to bursting point
took in breaths that wheezed through his lungs with
a sound like the creaking of a crazy lift. He had been
keeping time with one foot, but it had got the best of
him, and was hitting the floor frantically; the other leg
was trembling with excitement. One moment the accor-
dion would be high over his head, the next low down by
the floor, and he had gradually rocked himself to and fro
until the way he had got on was so overpowering that,
when the man was about to break the bank for the last
time, it carried him clean out of his chair and landed
him under the table. Ah! it was a grand performance,
and we all thanked him. But The Rat had missed two or
three notes at the finish, and he wanted to start all over
again to pick them up, but Sydney grabbed the accordion


and put it away, saying that another performance like
that would make him cry—it reminded him of home and
step-mother.
We didn’t start the six-hander again that evening.
Summers asked us all what we were going to have, and
afterwards, when the drinks were before us, he got up
and told us that the unpopular candidate was one of the
best fellows in the world; but that he (Summers) didn’t
believe in bringing business always under people’s noses.
What he would like would be for all of us there assem-
bled to join in a sort of free and easy. Judging by what
he had already heard, he didn’t doubt we would find an
immensity of enjoyment in it. What he proposed was that
the spare time until the coach arrived and the pool had
been won should be filled in just as members of lodges
and clubs in town fill many an evening in—each one in
the room to sing, recite or shout all round, and if nobody
reneged, a tarpaulin muster every half-hour for drinks, or
smokes, just as the company cared.
This idea was novel to most of us, and it caught on ;
so we settled down with the drinks in front of us to follow
the arrangement out to the end.
Summers said that as he had made the proposal it was
up to him to set the ball rolling. He went to the piano
and played an overture made up of many of Tom Moore’s
songs. A bright, lively, sham rocky performance it was,
that made Micky forget even Nell, for the time being,
and got into his legs and almost set him off on a jig. Sud-
denly Summers stopped, saying:
“ I think it ought to be all Australian to-night. What


do you say?”
“ All Australian!” we echoed, and in a moment or two
he started off again. He played a few bars of wild, gal-
loping music that died away into a pleasant murmur—
just the sort of murmur one hears on a summer Sunday
morning when one lolls in the shade, smoking, and the
wind is in the trees strong enough on'y to make the leaves
flutter. Then with a dash into a quick, joyous measure
he sang, in a pleasant baritone voice—
A RAIN SONG.
There is music in the Mallee,
Lilting music, soft and low,
Like the songs in vale and valley
Wnere the summer waters How;
But an anthem of elation
Wedded to a woman’s mouth
Is the message from each station
From the Mitchell River south.
For it’s raining! raining! raining!
How the iron roof tops ring'
How the waters, swiftly draining
Through the straining down pipes sing!
Every drop a golden rhyme is,
Every shower a stanza strong,
And each day of raining time is
Canto sweet of God’s great song.
Oh, the earth was dry as tinder,
And her lips were cracked with pain I
From the south to Thargomindah
Like a dead thing she has lain;
But, at last, the long drought broken
She —like Lazarus, the Jew,
When the Christ words had been spoken—
She shall leap to life anew.


For it’s raining! raining! raining!
Don’t you hear the merry din?
Don’t you hear the old earth straining
As she sucks the juices in?
And the swelling creeks and rivers—
Hark! their mellow madrigal!
Oh, the sweetest music-givers
Are the autmun rains that fall!
All the air is sweet with voices,
Sweet with human voices now;
And the anvil-tool rejoices
On the ploughshare and the plough;
Yea, above the joyous beating
Of the roof bass you can hear
All the choirs of Nature meeting
In an anthem loud and clear.
For it’s raining! raining! raining!
Over all the thirsty land!
Don’t you hear the old earth straining
As the sapless roots expand?
But her famine days are over,
And her smiles shall soon be seen,
For her old-time Autumn lover
Brings her back her garb of green.
It was an appropriate song, and to those of us who,
month after month, had done little else but drag dead or
dying sheep and cattle from the boggy waterholes and
tanks, it sounded like a hymn of thanksgiving. We
cheered the singer lustily when he stopped, and prevailed
upon him to repeat the last verse, together with the
chorus. The Rat wanted him to sing it over and over
again, for he sighted it as a new piece; and he asked
Sydney for his accordion so that he might strike the air
whilst it was still fresh in his memory; but Sydney was
not to be beguiled, which made the little fellow angry
and pugnacious. However, Summers soon put a stop to
any trouble by offering a copy of the words and the


music; the song could be learned at leisure then; and
The Rat didn’t like to say he knew no more about read-
ing music than a rabbit does about bee-farming, so he
accepted the offer and subsided. But there was blood
in his eye when he looked towards Sydney.
“ Well, who’s next ?” asked Summers, after a pause.
We all looked at Bill Jackson. Bill was a chap who
had travelled round a bit, and although all the school
education he had received could have been summed up
on one sheet of a copy-book, he was generally pretty close
up to the front when anything in the way of an argument
or a story or a recitation was wanted.
He was a nice-looking fellow, was Bill, with a sleeky,
black moustache that he kidded himself was a trap for
any suspecting or unsuspecting maiden who happened
along his way. None of the girls near the Seventy Mile
caught on to him seriously though. He was no man’s
friend, so it was scarcely likely he would be any good
woman’s lover—though, as to that, they take strange
fancies.
He had been a cocky’s boy as a kid, and had known
what it was to be kicked out of bed at four in the morning
to milk cows, and to be kicked right through the day till
nine and ten o’clock at night doing this, that and every-
thing for Mr. and Mrs. Cocky and all their numerous
family and friends, not to mention the poddies and the
pet lambs and the dogs. It wasn’t much of a school for
manliness, and to Bill’s credit, be it said, that one day
he turned round and kicked back again, and, having
kicked, faced the bush with no more personal or other


property than he stood up in. It was a rough life he led
afterwards, knocking about here, there and everywhere,
doing whatsoever his hand found to do for the sake of a
living. But there would have been hope for him had he
not, whilst attempting to educate himself, come across a
passage of one of Saint Paul’s epistles corrupted to read—
“ Be ye all things unto all men,” and laid the lesson to
heart. It made a sycophant of him, and although he had
a turn of luck and made money, the fellows he thought
most of, and the fellows about him whom the world held
highest in esteem, were just the ones who had no time
for him.
He went to Westralia during the boom, and added to
his store there, striking a reef that paid many ounces to
the ton, for a little while. He grew pompous then; but
with much money in his possession that corrupted passage
of Saint Paul’s led him astray again. He misapplied it.
He became all things to many women, and they took ad-
vantage of his ignorance, and one—well, Bill was bean-
less when she had finished with him. He drifted back to
the East, not so much a fool but that he had benefited
by experience, and got a billet at Bungaloo.
The other hands there knew him as an inoffensive sort
of fellow, mean amongst them, unfeeling towards animals.
He laughed sometimes, but it was generally at obscenities
or at other fellows’ mishaps. Still, he wasn’t a cur, for
he would fight when he thought he had a chance; yet he
lacked spirit and pluck and bravery, for he would take no
risks if the chances seemed against him. He had a fluent
tongue, and was something of a liar, but the infallible


memory necessary for success in that art was not his.
Bill’s chief attainment was a knowledge of bush verse;
he had read a lot and committed much to memory. He
said that he could write it if he cared. It was as easy as
falling off a horse. In fact, the only time he did trouble
to write anything up he was successful in finding a pub-
lisher. Now, I remember, one afternoon, years and years
ago, whilst coming home from school, a mate of mine
known familiarly as The Fat Rascal (he’s a full-blown
schoolmaster now) and some other youngsters made up to
have ten shots a-piece, with lumps of road metal, at one
of the cups on a telegraph pole. Well, we all lined up
and let go, and The Fat Rascal hit the cup first pop. He
dropped the rest of his stones then and stood off. We
jeered at him for being frightened; but he wasn’t. “You
couldn’t do better than once out of once,” he said after-
wards, “ and I wasn’t going to risk my reputation with
another rock.” Well, that must have been the way Bill
fe’t about his verses. He had sent his first to a Sydney
paper that dished up a Poet’s Corner every week, the con-
tributors to which were supposed to be so overwhelmed
with honour and fame and glory that they required no
cash, and the editor had printed them. That was enough
for Bill; he was an accepted bush bard. Nobody could
do better than “ once out of once,” and he wasn’t going
to risk his reputation; it was too sacred a thing for that.
Bill cut those verses out and pasted them on the fly leaf
of a very French novel which shall remain herein un-
named. And “Ah!” he would say sometimes, “ it’s won-
derful how many fellows want to read that poem !” for


Bill had a dry wisp of humour in his own way; it might
have been the remains of a stack that the cocky’s cows
ate out of his heart in the milking times before many a
gloomy dawn; it is not for me to say. The cows have
eaten the stacks of humour, and love, and good nature,
and honesty out of the hearts of far better men than
Bill Jackson could ever have hoped to be.
Now Bill, with his store of memorised verse, had en-
livened many an hour at Bungaloo, and the Boss there
had listened to him on several occasions, and had once
prevailed upon him to recite “ It was Chris-er-mas Day
at the Workhouse ” at a charity concert down the river.
Bill had received an encore there, and the local news-
paper man was so taken with him that he gave him a
whole paragraph to himself in the next issue.
Under these circumstances you will see that it was only
in keeping with things when Summers asked who’s next
that we should all look at Bill.
Bill cleared his throat, took a long pull at his liquor,
and rose to the occasion.
“ GenTmen,” he said, “ as the items on the programme
are to be all Australian, I will take this opportunity of
reciting to you a little thing I picked up when I was hav-
ing a look round in the West. A well-known amachewer
{Bill Jackson, of course) used to render it with great
effect at Coolgardie mining banquets. Perhaps none of
you have heard it before. It is called ‘Mac’s Half-
Caste.’ ”
It was evident that Bill was thoroughly wound up. He
struck an attitude and let go the spring with a jerk. Long


before he had quite run down he had given us this—
MAC’S HALF-CASTE.
Mac’s half-caste wife was all the talk
From Derby miles along the coast;
You wouldn’t meet in ten years’ walk
A fitter subject for a toast.
The daughter of a golden zone,
Where warm lights always seem to dwell,
She had a beauty all her own—
A tropic charm remembered well.
Her eyes were bright as “ Pomeroy ”
That sparkles in the cups we hold,
And pleasing as is to the boy
His first long-dreamed-of find of gold.
Her lips, a luscious deep-red rose.
Half opened to the morning air
That gentle sun-smiles might disclose
Her teeth—the dewdrops clustered there.
Her hair was “ crisp and black and long ” ;
Her skin a dusky shade of white;
Her figure, like a faery song,
All flowing curves and wondrous light.
And, altogether, she was just
A chunk of nature thick with charms;
A Venus chiselled out by Lust,
And birth-marked with the night’s alarms.
Well, Mac. (he was a cunning cuss,
A canny Scot who kept a store
Of things most miscellaneous,
And sometimes one “ wee drappie ” more) —


Well, Mac. had seen her in a crowd
Of other gins, and laid a claim,
And just as scon as things allowed,
Had hitched her up with his own name;
And, having deep experience
With gins and half-castes and that crew
In matters of concupiscence,
He knew exactly what to do.
No skirts of silk, no costly prints
She got to cloihe her nakedness;
He fixed her up in some old chintz
And one unsaleable old dress
For Mac. was certain that before
A month was up his sweet young wife
Would sicken of the grimy store
And go back to her former life;
Would go away, however dressed,
To wander in the hush again,
And, to some duskier bosom pressed,
Laugh at her cast-off lover’s pain.
And, knowing this, he made the best
Of his short time to bill and coo;
And, though an old 'un, ’twas contest
He knew a trifle how to woo.
And so the time went pleasantly
Till half the month had flitted past,
And even Mac. was charmed to see
Her patience likely still to last.
But, ah! one morning Fancy Fred
Dropped in as he was riding by.
And straightway lost his empty head
On catching Mac.’s young half-caste s eye


Now Fancy Fred was English and
A “Simon Pure” of Johnniedom—
The leader of a masher band
Before he left his friends “at home.”
And, even on our red-hot sands.
He never, by the worst mischance,
Forgot to glove his naked hands,
Or reef a half-mast on his pants.
And even when a crowd of gins
In native nakedness went by,
He’d summon up his sweetest grins
And ogle them—with eye-glassed eye.
But, all the same, the luckiest cuss
Who ever put a hand to pick
Was Fancy Fred, the amorous,
When mining-mates with Dead-Eyed Dick,
Well, on the morning Fancy Fred
Caught Mac’s young half-caste’s beaming eye,
His pathway to the township led
To bank a pile with old Mackie.
But that one soft, unconscious glance
Bound Freddy fairly to the store;
He couldn’t leave by any chance
Till he had seen a little more.
So Dick and he both went inside
To broach a demijohn with Mac.,
Fred, meanwhile, making for the bride
With quick and amorous attack.
But as the drink fumes filled his head
(’Twas Mac.’s own make and K.S.D.),
His scanty senses straightway fled,
And made him just a bit too free.


Now, Mac. could stand a real coarse jest
Where business skies were keeping fine;
But when his half-caste’s lips were pressed,
He thought it time to draw the line.
So with the strength of Hercules
(He stood six feet and rather stout),
He caught Fred up by neck and knees,
And rather roughly fired him out.
And Dead-Eyed Dick—he simply said—
“ Good ine, ole chap; it served him right;
Yew ought t’ave broke his blanky head,
He didn’ even show yer fight.”
******
Now though the sacred Scriptures say
That “ Thou shalt covet no man’s wife,”
In climates such as W.A.
Most people knock that out of life.
And so, as Fancy Fred did ride
With Dead-Eyed Dick from old Mac.’s store,
He wished the old ’un’s half-caste bride
Was his—and his for evermore.
And saying so to Dead-Eyed Dick,
The latter growled —“ Gor’ bli’ me, kid!
You’d make a bleedin’ feller sick—
You’ll buy her all fer seving quid.”
“WhatP Buy a wife! Bai Jove! haw—no!
You don’t do things like that out heah!
It’s simply awful—don’t-eher-know—
Just fancy! Weally? The ideah!”
But, all the same, the Johnnie thought,
And came to the conclusion clear—
If Mae.’s half-caste was to be bought
He’d buy her, howsoever dear.


And, turning round, be rode straight back
(The whisky fumes were in his brain),
And, galloping along the track, _
Was soon inside the store again.
He broached the matter in a trice
When greeted by Mac.’s fiercest frown,
And offered him Dick’s upset price,
Whereat Mac. brought the whisky down.
Just seven pounds! the tough old Scot
Looked at the deal in every light;
But, even adding value got,
Still thought the offer much too slight.
The Johnnie “sprung” another quid;
Mac. softly shook his shaggy head.
He wasn't taking any kid,
“It’s no enough,” he simply said.
Nine—ten —eleven—fifteen pounds.
Then sixteen —twenty —twenty-two—
Mac. thought he’d nearly reached the bounds,
But still hung out for all he knew;
And, when they got to thirty-three
He rushed the little half-caste in,
“Eh! mak’ it foorty, lad,” said he,
“ Ten oonces doon and she’s your gin.
“ The devil’s in a beaming eye,”
The Johnnie’s blood like fire-flames felt;
“Bai Jove! she’s mine!” he made reply,
And handed Mac. his gold-lined belt.
Mac. weighed the gold out rapidly—
A smile upon each shaggy cheek—
“l’d bet the half of it,” thought he.
“ She won t stop with him for a week.
******


Well, Fancy Fred bought dresses fine,
And, basking in the half-caste’s smile,
Spent near enough to float a mine
To rig her out in proper style;
But, when a week had flitted past
(The Johnnie, happier than a fay,
Still thinking it was sure to last
The same old ever and a day)—
A band of greasy, scant-dad blacks
Swift journey to the ranges made.
And Fred’s half-caste picked up their tracks,
Keen as a lover long delayed.
She left him there without a word,
For as she, panting, fled away
The low voice of the bush she heard
Calling her home—how could she stay?
And, lonely and disconsolate,
The Johnnie sought her near and far,
While Dead-Eyed Dick his quondam mate,
Laughed at his pain across each bar.
So, finally, when ne’er a sign
Of his lost darling could be found,
He sank his sorrows “ on the wine,”
And shipped at Derby—homeward bound.
And, just to put a finish on,
A story not untold before,
Three months could scarcely yet have gone,
When back the half-caste came once more.
The satin dress the Johnnie gave
Was thick with dirt and torn to rags;
But Mac., the grey, ungodly knave,
Just fixed her up with two old bags.


And now she’s putting in a spell
In her own lawful husband’s arms,
But Mac. himself can’t even tell
How long she’ll bless him with her charms;
For just as soon as she shall wake
To hear the great bush calling low,
Tracks of her own tribe she will take,
And back to her old wild haunts go.
During Bill’s recitation of this somewhat aggressively
life-like sketch of mixed matters and manners in the far
North-West the rustle of a woman’s dress in the passage
had been heard, and Summers had instantly risen and
closed the door. It was evident he w r as not pleased.
We, who knew Bill, had expected something in the same
style and strain as the stuff he had given us, for those
few months of riotous pleasure in the West lived in his
memory like a smoke-room yarn. Besides, he wasn’t a
young man of the city who could say at least twice a
week, Sunday excluded—
“ Side by side with Lady Mabel
Sat I with the sunshade down.”
There were no Lady Mabels at Bungaloo, no sable ladies,
even, and Bill never experienced any of the sweet offices
of womankind there. Week in, week out, he rode the
fences of a couple of ten-mile paddocks, filling in time
by talking to dogs and sheep and horses, and cursing the
cook, who was a Chinaman, and all the variety he found
in life was when he rode for the mail or put in an hour
or two at the Seventy Mile on a Sunday. Women were
th°re as vou know; but he had experienced only the


kindness that kills (some men) from Nell, and Dolly had
never talked more than tired nothings to him from a ham-
mock in the shade of the giant pepper. Under such cir-
cumstances, riding day after day on boundaries stretching
away into shimmering distance, was it any wonder that
imagination should fill up the gap of reality? Was it
any wonder, Bill thinking as most men in similar places
do think, that such imaginings were gross ? And, after
months and months of such living, was it any wonder that
his speech, and his habit of life, became tainted by such
grossness ? Ah, Bill! you were an unlovable man; was
it because of all the passion you wasted on creatures of
dreams and fancy? Perhaps so. Perhaps, too, you
cherished one dream, the dream of what a kind and duti-
ful and thoughtful husband you would have made one
girl—one girl you probably never met. Most men cherish
a dream like that, Bill—men far worse (and far better)
than you. It is one of the ironies of married life.
Old Jim listened to the recitation, sitting in his chair
in a shaded corner, looking like a stuffed owl that the
taxidermist had fitted up with uncompanionable eyes; at
least he would have so looked had it not been for his
beer. Jim only drank in sips, and, whilst listening, he
kept his glass moving from knee to mouth at fairly regular
intervals. When the beer was finished he was so absorbed
that he didn’t notice it, just kept carrying the glass back-
ward and forward as before. That he swallowed only
small draughts of nothing particular, tangibly scented with
beer, didn’t trouble him at all; but it was sincere praise
of Bill’s elocutionary powers—the sincerest Bill will


probably ever receive. When the item was finished Jim
sighed as one who had been awakened from a pleasant
dream. “Ah!” he exclaimed, “when we were young'."
Then the old vacant expression faded into his face again
and he subsided.
From the rest of us there was the customary and
effusive applause, applause that only subsided when Big
Jack reminded the company that one half-hour having
passed, and nobody having reneged, it was time for the
muster.
We mustered, and Dolly brought the drinks. Summers
shut the door after her again. Then he turned to us.
“ Do you call yourselves Australians to stand by and
applaud a thing like that?” he asked. “A story of Aus-
tralian dishonour! a story of the bartering of human
flesh and blood for purposes that one loathes to speak
about!”
“ There was humour in it,” said Sydney, somewhat
apologetically.
« The story came out in a divorce court,” asserted Bill
Jackson. “ It’s a phase of life as it is, an’ was, in the
North-West.”
“ Humour!” replied Summers. “ Aye, the humour of
hell! and as for it being a phase of life as it is, I say
shame upon those who made and make such a thing
possible.”
“ Well, shame on ’em,” said Bill, with a sneer. “It
won’t hurt them, and it’s not likely to affect me much.”
“ That’s the pain of it,” replied Summers. “ You don’t
care. You are a worthy descendant of the high-minded,


high-moralled white people who wrought the wrong in
the first place—the selfish sensualists!”
“ I don’t know what you want to pick on ter me for,”
said Bill, sulkily; but the other took no heed of him.
He stood with his head thrown back, deep—wonderfully
deep—lights in his eyes, his face a-flame.
“Ah!” he continued, “ I fancy I see them now! The
high-minded, the high-moralled ones ! ‘ A new country !’
they cried, ‘ a new country and gold! Riches beyond
dreams ! Let us go; let us win them, God helps those
who help themselves ! Let us go; let us work, and when
we shall return we shall be as lords in our native land.
We will take wives to ourselves then, the sweet pure
maidens we love and leave behind us!’ And they came to
Australia and debauched themselves with the blacks, and
those who were lucky returned to the pure white maidens
they loved, leaving their half-caste children to the mercy
of whomsoever fancied them. But some were not lucky;
some remained, always with the hope of home though,
and to ease their hours of longing they went out into the
bush, and the black man rotted in the wilderness, but the
black woman remained and grew big with child. The
new land had no links for those men; and what did a
thousand nameless half-castes matter? Did not they, the
white lords of creation, have sweet thoughts of home,
sweet longing for the pure white maidens far away ? What
did it matter? And the hordes of Asia that followed up
with their contamination, what did they matter either?
And your Mac.’s half-caste, and your Jap.’s half-caste,
and your Kanaka half-caste. What do they matter? I


tell you that rather than be the author of one of those
I would do as . .
He was quivering now. Every fibre in his body seemed
to be vibrating with emotion.
“ Half-castes ! coloured aliens !” he continued. “ Away
with them! Tear them out, leaf and branch, bole and
root. Ay! and every white man or white woman who
cohabits with them, deprive them and their children and
their children’s children of every right Australian. By
God!” he cried, “ I have seen something in this country.
I know what we suffer for the sins of our fathers, and,
God help us, of our mothers, too, and what we shall be,
what —but listen! Already you can hear the native-born
singing:
THE NATIVE BORN.
‘ My father was reared in the dens of the West
from an unknown cross with a Jap;
My mother was born in the camps of the East,
Of an English girl, by a Chinese priest,
But I don’t care a rap!
For I’m partly Briton and partly Chow and
partly the other chap.
‘ And who are my uncles, and cousins, and
aunts ?
Ah! that I may never tell;
But a Hindu strain’s in my veins somewhere,
And I’m certain that sugar-slave blood I bear,
And I can’t dispel
A lingering thought that my birth was wrought
In the heart of a northern hell!


‘ But the blood of the white keeps surging up
at the thought of a deep disgrace;
And there’s never a moment of peace within,
For I carry the weight of my parents’ sin,
And its hideous trace
Is found in the weakness of every limb and the
impish lines of my face.
‘Yet I am the young Australian, slow-born of
a sad mishap,
With hair as straight as the hair of a ’roo;
With skin half brown and with slant-eyes blue;
But I don’t care a rap!
For I’m partly Briton, and partly Ohow, and
partly the other chap.’
“ How many of that sort are there in the land to-day ?
a nation of half-castes! a nation of semi-slaves! Does
that make you care? From the low and the mean, the
thoughtless and the criminal, the disease is eating up and
up, and from the high and educated few it is eating surely,
slowly but surely, down. It may take long to reach the
great heart of Australia, but with that same I-don’t-care-
it-doesn’t-hurt-me spirit dominating us, how sure shall
the consummation be ! Ah!” he continued, the ardour
of his eyes, or the magnetism, eating into our being and
holding us almost breathless, “ there is a song that has
been sung since ever Phinehas, the son of Eleazer, the
son of Aaron the Priest, finding one of the men of Israel
transgressing with a Midianitish woman, smote them dead
at his feet. The children of Israel raised it then, raised
it as a song of warning, for the javelin stroke of Phinehas
saved them from a plague. Yea, the chosen of God
raised it, and nation after nation since has sung it from
weakness even unto strength. But, when luxuriating in


the wealth and power and the glory that that strength
had won for them, they scorned the teaching of this simple
song, the plague overtook them and they died. There is
an Australian paraphrase of that song, written from be-
tween the lines of many a native singer; you shall hear
it.”
He seated himself at the piano and broke instantly
into passionate song, passionate entreaty:
KEEP WHITE THE STRAIN.
“Keep white the strain!”
Oh! brothers mine, in bitter shame
Australia kneels and makes the prayer;
Wrench out the loathsome lusts and swear
To be men worthy of the name;
To hold your manhood with such pride,
Such love of lineage and race,
That, when the nations give her place,
She shall go forth all purified.
Keep white the strain!
Women upon the outer fringe,
Whence dearth, and pestilence and drought
Have driven every white male out,
When heated whips of passion swinge,
And lash you panting to desire,
Oh, pray that God be with you then,
To guard you and to save, as when
He lit Egyptian nights with fire!
Keep white the strain!
Women of that society
' Where yellow men, and bronze, and brown,
Bedaubled by some sceptred clown
With titles and distinctions, be,
Pause, ere the lips barbarian,
The wooing words have, hopeful, said,
And think—“ How shalt thou share thy bed
With the much-married coloured man.”


Keep white the strain!
Oh, maiden of the sunny south!
Slim maiden, trim and typical
Let not forbidden kisses fall
Upon your sweet love-drenched mouth;
.But, rather, teach the alien earth,
The Island and the Asian horde,
Thy body, by thine own accord,
Shall bear true witness of thy birth.
For this is our most sacred trust,
That ye shall in the full maintain,
Whether in simple love or lust—-
Keep white the strain!
There was no applause when Summers finished. He
didn’t look for any. ,His whole soul seemed to have been
poured out in that song, and he sat back limp, almost
shamefaced.
For a while we remained silent, the absolute sincerity
of the man holding us speechbound. But, at last, Bill
Jackson broke the spell just as Sydney walked over and
clasped Summers’ right hand in a strong, sympathetic
grip. Up to this time Bill had been attempting to speak
with quite toney correctness ; his feelings overcame him
now.
“ Gor bli’ me!” he exclaimed, with a sneer, “ I like
your bloomin’ sort. Y’ shut the door on my recitation. It
was’n’ fit fer wimmin’s ears, ’n’ then yer talk ’n’ sing that
sorter stuff. It’s a noutrage on decency. That’s wot 1
call it. A noutrage on yewman decency.”
The Rat, who had been blushing guiltily, chipped in,
too.
ff Sounds liker poultry adver-tise-ment.” he said. “ Pure


Peking on Hailsberry. Yew know, keep white the strain.
Aigs five shi'n’s a dozen, guaranteed fer-tile.”
Bill Jackson laughed, and the sneer worked down to
the corners of his mouth. “Bd me, if I’d ’a’ said as much
as ’im you’d ’a’ called it obscene language!” he ex-
claimed, as though looking for somebody to contradict
him.
Summers took no notice. Sydney and he were talking
together like old friends well met. But Bill got his answer
from Micky the Drover.
“Sure it’s right ye ar-r there!’’ said Micky. “There’s
manny a wor-rud the praists use in lissins f’r our good and
guidance that un the lips av a haythun loike you wud be
a curse iviry toime. (God forgive me!)”
“Y’ call ’im a priest!” sneered Bill.
“ Luk here now, Bill Jackson,” answered Micky, some-
what fiercely, “ it’s yaller-janders yev got, and yer state
av moind can be summed up in the wor-ruds av the im-
mortal bard, Thomas Moore, as rendered be Charlie Den-
sham the ould actor: “I feel loike wan who goes alone
and thin gits darn well euchred.’’
Bill didn’t see the drift of Micky’s answer, and laughed,
the tail end of the sneer still ornamenting the comers of
his mouth. He would have said more but for the aggres-
sive look on Micky’s face.
Just then Dolly opened the door. “ Oh! what a pretty
song, Mr. Summers! Won’t you sing it again ?” she ex-
claimed.
Poor Summers! He blushed, and stammered some
words out incoherently; but the rest of us laughed.


Pretty! Even old Jim couldn’t stand that. And it was
good to hear the old back-hut hatter’s laugh. It started
with a sort of basso smile that rumbled up from some-
where under the floor and made the glasses rattle and got
into our blood and made us respond whether we wanted
to or not, and it finished up with a roar that sent Dolly
away with her hands over her ears, and got so much the
best of the Boss that, when it subsided, he told us all to
finish our drinks, and asked us to have one along with
him. And he went on and made a little speech, saying
that it was pretty w.ell time for us to have something
humorous (besides the drinks). Life itself was a hard
enough reality in those parts without making trouble un-
necessarily. “ I vote for something humorous, gentle-
men, he concluded, “ and give it a name, will you ?”
We named, and as the Boss went to the bar Bill Jack-
son proposed that the old actor should be shook up.
“ Come on >” hessa d, jumping up, “ let’s have a time
with the old un. Es better than a pantermime when ’es
boosed.”
“ You leave him alone, Jackson,” said Sydney, authori-
tatively. “ How’d you like to be woke up with a load
like that on?”
Bill subsided—he never chanced arguing the point with
Sydney—and, as the Boss brought in the drinks, Big Jack
surprised us by offering to render a humorous item.
A few years before the offer would have surprised
scarcely anyone, for the big fellow in those days was
known near and far as the Joyful Bullocky—one who
could drink, ride or rollick with anybody this side of the


Murray and come out top dog pretty near every time. In
those days, indeed, a snatch of song was scarcely ever off
his lips, and you would hear him coming down the road,
punching his bullocks along, singing at the same time ; a
performance that would greet you something like this.
“ Then go it, Tommy Hales,
Come here , Star !
“ I’ll back on you.
Hold her in
Gee I Baldy I you white-faced loafer! (whip)—
“ Hold her in a little while,
And then let her through.
Gee off! Cyclops!
“If you only win this race
You’re the champion of the land;
He didn’t win the race—
Cyclops! you one-eyed , wall-eyed , unpublishable name-
less! (whip —crack! crack!) I'll warm your absolutely
original hide for you!
“ He didn’t win the race ;
He was beaten by Le Grand!”
But they were only snatches of song at the best; Jack
never troubled about learning even a hymn, outright in
those days. Since then, however, a change had come over
the big fellow. He had bought a bit of a place about
thirty miles up the road, and, one day, returning from a
Murrumbidgee wool trip, he called into the Seventy Mile
and introduced a little, fair-haired, sweet-faced woman not
much more than a child to the Boss.
“My Missus!” was all he troubled to call her; but he
left a quid to be cut up amongst the boys in honour of
his marriage.


It was wonderful the influence the little woman had
over him. He sang more than ever; but, on his next trip,
even the wall-eyed Cyclops could not woo a cuss-
word from his lips for fully fifty miles. He drifted back
into his bullock-idioms after that until fifty miles from
home again, then the cuss words were held in check once
more. You see the Missus was a Methodist, and language
made her shudder and look like a beaten child. The next
trip Jack did better still, and after twelve months he was
known as the only bullock-puncher on the road who could
shift his team without hurling chunks of purple-tinted pro-
fanity at their horny heads. He didn’t make up for it
with the whip either.
Just about twelve months after the marriage Little Jack
came home, and there was great joy and jubilation in the
bullocky’s house, great joy and jubilation also at the
Seventy Mile. The seasons were pretty bad even then,
but for a time life went very well with the little family,
so cheerfully and happily, in fact, that it was quite a back-
block idyll. But, alas! (there is always an alas hiding
itself somewhere behind the joys of life), Little Jack grew
suddenly and violently ill. It was just at the time of the
big flood, and Big Jack was away, far away, on a trip.
The Missus took fright at the seriousness of the malady,
and, acting on the advice of a neighbour, resolved to
seek medical aid, then just one hundred miles away on
the Murrumbidgee. The journey could only be done by
coach, and the driver tried hard to dissuade her.
“ The creeks and billabongs are all in flood now,” he
said, “ and the plains are like a glue pot. It will be an


awful journey for you and the kiddie, and, if these rains
continue, God knows what will happen,”
But Little Jack was in danger of death. She would not
be dissuaded.
It took the driver five hours to do the stage and a
half between Big Jack's place and the Seventy Mile
Creek, and when he got in sight of that, night was closing
in rapidly. Through the driving, cutting rain, however,
the lights of the shanty shone out invitingly, and although
the creek was fully three-quarters of a mile wide with
flood waters, the driver faced it without fear. He had
driven that track for ten years. He knew that the water,
although spread over such a wide expanse of country, was
not deep except at the centre of the creek, where the
bridge was. He was confident in himself that, with the
shanty lights to guide him, even if he could not see the
bridge supports, he could get across safely. He would
have wagered to do it with his eyes blindfolded if he
had been put to it.
He called out cheerily to the horses and the whip spoke
clearly, for, confident though he was, there was to be
no nonsense; they were to do their best. The horses
seemed to take heart from him, and ploughed steadily
forward. Darkness closed in. The little woman inside
the coach clasped her boy and uttered an re-uttered a
prayer. But she was very calm. Her faith, she felt, was
builded on a rock.
Suddenly from the shanty two horsemen rode out,
lanterns in their hands.
“ The damned fools,” said the driver to himself; “if


they’d only come out in the daylight and fixed the lamps
on the bridge, there would have been some sense in it.”
He took a tighter hold of the horses and peered out
ahead. The moving lights dazzled him.
Blarst them, he said, vehemently, as they veered to
one side, the fools are full up to the neck, and can’t
keep the track.”
He spoke to the horses again—“ Steady, boys, steady!”
The horsemen veered again, and drew up almost ahead
of him, fifty yards away.
“ Not drunk after all!” he said. “We ought to be
pretty close to it now !”
He gathered the reins together, shifting them from one
hand to the other, for he was numbed with cold. There
was a rapid movement @f one of the lights ahead, then it
suddenly disappeared, and the cries of a strong swimmer
in his agony were taken by the shrieking tempest and flung
far away into the boundless night, where help was not.
The driver spoke again—seeing the side supports of
the bridge—“ Steady, boys, steady! We’ll soon be there!”
But from the other side rang out—
“ For God’s sake, go back!”
It rang very clear, even above the roar of the water
and the wind, and the swish, swish of the driving, cutting
rain.
For a moment the driver hesitated.
“ Bah!” he laughed to himself, “ I’m on the bridge now.
A couple of feet of water, what’s that?” and he laughed
again. But during a momentary lull of the storm the
last wild, despairing appeal of the helpless swimmer


smote his ears, and a thought came to him —a ghastly
thought —and he strained back on the reins furiously.
At the same moment from the other side rang out again—
“ The bridge is washed away! Go back, for Christ’s
sake!”
It was too late. The leaders had already reached the
break. They stepped out into nothing but water, and the
swirling torrent took them and swept them around like
corks. Recovering themselves and swimming strongly
with the current, they pulled the polers after them. In
a moment the coach heeled over and disappeared.
The driver was thrown clear, but he hung on to the
reins, and, as the leaders broke away from their couplings,
he clung to one of them and was carried out of danger.
But the others? Ah, the night we helpless watchers
put in!
In the morning tackle and a team of bullocks were
procured, and after many attempts the coach —with two
dead polers still in harness —was dragged up from the bed
of the creek. When the door was opened little Jack and
his mother were found, side by side, on the floor, dead.
One of the chaps rode out and broke the news to Big
Jack, and he came, like one in a dream, and, when the
inquiry was over, buried his fair young dead out on the
rise at the back of the boree clump, about fifty chain
from the Seventy Mile. And close at hand was buried the
strong swimmer who had gone out to warn and to save,
but who had failed. Ah, Barrington, you were drinking
when the timbers of the bridge gave way with a crash
like thunder, and, a moment before, you were jesting even


as thoughtless, uneducated bushmen will jest; but you
did a gallant thing that night, so gallant a thing, indeed,
that though your grave in the boree clump may soon be
forgotten, the bushmen’s tribute to your bravery shall
never fade out of our speech.—“ As brave as Barrington.”
Ah, there can be nothing better than that.
Big Jack scarcely ever awakened from that dream after,
and the bright, mirthful eyes that, in other days, lit his
strong face with humour, cast over it now only the grim
shadows of sorrow.
After a time he sold his little home and his waggon and
team, and settled down as a bush contractor at the
Seventy Mile. It was the only place that he ever cared
to be near. Later on he took to living almost the life of a
hermit, and people thought that sorrow had turned his
brain.
With us that evening, however, the shadow seemed to
have lifted. Perhaps the mound on the rise at the back
of the boree clump had faded out of memory for a little
while.
There was a smile in his eyes as he rose and stood
beside the piano.
“ Humorous item,” he said, “ sometimes known as ‘ A
Drought Item,’ sometimes known as * Pat Dunn’s Last
Race.’ ” Then he started—


A DROUGHT ITEM.
Now, Paddy was known on Moama side
As a swimmer of great renown,
For he’d beaten “ The Pet” and “The Sawmill Pride,”
And most of the blokes in town;
But Paddy, whose subsequent name was Dunn,
Was slow as a ship on shore,
For he ran to flesh when he tried to run,
And, walking, he ran to more.
Now, things went crook with the Dunn folks’ biz..
So Paddy procured some stock,
And hawked his wares, where the Big Drought is,
With a cart and an old brown crock;
And over the great, grey, bleaching plains
He travelled without a pal,
Till he camped on the skirt of the devil’s domains
At the township of Booligal,
Now, Paddy had heard that the Lachlan flows
Quite close to the pub, just there,
And he’d dreamed of swimming without any clothes
As a luxury rich and rare;
But still, as a true-born Irishman,
He thought of his liquor first,
So he went on his prad. to the publican
And started to slake his thirst.
Uut when tor the fourteenth time he came
At a bottle of unknown brand,
A long, lean drover proposed a game,
And offered to take a hand;
And, alas! for Paddy, he played and played
'Till sobered he seemed to be,
Then he stopped dead short, and “me frind,” he said,
“It’s the lend yez are havin’ av me.


“And ye V bate me bad for a quid or so,
But mesilf, sure, has played the fool;
Now give me revinge at a game I know” :
And he wanted to play him pool.
But the drover smiled as he answered Pat,
Whose name at the end was Dunn—
“ I’m out of fettle, and rather fat,
But I’ll race, if you like to run.
“It’s the only game that I know, save cards,
And i ain’t done much for a while,
But I’ll give you a start of a couple of yards
In anything up to a mile.”
Then Paddy waxed wrath—he was dairy-fed,
And stood only five feet four—
And he called down a curse on the Booligal-bred,
As he waddled toward the door.
But, ah! with a glimpse of the river came
A thought of his prowess there,
And, “me frind,” he said, “ I will play your game
And I’ll wallop you fair and square.
We’ll race from that twisted tree in the bend,
’Cross the river and up to the ridge,
Then back to the tree, where the race will end,
But you mustn’t go over the bridge.”
And the drover paused ere he placed his stake
In the hands of the publican,
And he wondered a while if he’d struck a fake
As he gazed at the Irishman;
But he knew the river and knew the track,
And the doubt cleared away from his brow;
“ I’m with you,” he said “to the ridge and back;
Will you run the event off now?”
Well, the publican started them off with a “Go!”
With the drover away in the lead,
But Paddy just trotted on easy and slow,
Though the other went on at full speed ;
And Ireland was fully ten yards to the bad
As he came to the edge of the bank,
When, lo! with a shout of “Begorra! bedad!”
In the shade of a gum-tree he sank.


’Twas an easy race that the drover won,
And he lifted the stakes with glee;
And he told his pals that it took the bun
When they asked for the historee.
And they tell of it still at Booligal
When the drovers are out on the bust,
For what in the West a river we call—
Is mostly a streak of dust.
Big Jack finished to a perfect storm, of applause. He
took little heed of it, however, sitting down as one dazed.
Suddenly he cried, “ Bring in more drinks, Boss !” But
before they could be served he had jumped up and rushed
out on to the verandah.
A dry river and a flooded creek! Did any of us think
of what was passing through Big Jack’s brain that night—
the pain—the torture?
Only Summers noticed anything peculiar, and Dolly
told him, in an undertone, the story of the bullocky's
trouble. When she had finished Summers went out on to
the verandah, but the big fellow was plodding through the
darkness out to the boree clump then.
A dry river and a flooded creek! Ah, if we had only
thought! If we had only been a little less selfish ;
only followed him out to the lonely grave !We might
have saved him then. But it was not to be. Big Jack
returned no more to the Seventy Mile. And there
is one round of drinks for which the Boss will never be
paid, for, a few days later, a band of police came and
took Big Jack, struggling fiercely, to the nearest town.
And he will never see his lonely grave at the boree clump


again. He is a raving maniac, fighting forever against
•swirling waters.
When Summers returned, those of us who had not yet
rendered an item drew lots for our order of execution.
The Rat came out first.
“ Len’s me accordyon, Sydney,” he said, “ an’ I’ll finish
Monte* Carler for yer.”
Dolly having gone back to the bar, Sydney said things
vehemently.
“Don’t yer like Monte Carler?” the little fellow asked,
in a tone of surprise.
“ Not the way you play it,” said Sydney.
“ Well, len’s me accordyon,” replied The Rat, “an I’ll
give yers ‘ ’Ome, Sweet ’Ome,’ with variation* ”
“ No !” said Sydney, firmly.
“ Well, ’tain’t yours, anyhow. Gi’s it—see!” exclaimed
the weazened one, a bad light shining in his eyes.
Sydney shook his head, laughing.
“Go om! see!” repeated The Rat, sidling up to him,
Sydney said “ No ” again, this time with trimmings.
“ I s’pose yer think I carn’t ply it ?”
Sydney nodded.
“Yer not game to come outside and say so,” exclaimed
The Rat furiously.
“ Me size pertects me,” said Sydney, mockingly.
At which jibe The Rat rushed in and let out wildly.
Sydney caught him in his arms, and carried him, kicking
and swearing, out to the water trough.
But The Rat was valiant.


“ Y’ can put me in if yer can,” he cried, “ but by
I’ll ’ave me —— accordyon, you see, yer great big
cow!”
Sydney got a hold on him with one arm under his chin
and forced him back.
The Rat gasped and half choked. Sydney loosened
the hold.
“Go on !” spat out The Rat, “put me in! Yer not
gime!”
Sydney dipped the back of his head in.
“ Yer frightened!” cried The Rat, struggling vigorously.
Sydney sent his head down with a flop.
“ Oh, give him a chance!” cried Summers.
“Yes, let him alone, Sydney!” demanded the Boss.
Sydney laughed.
The Rat’s dial reappeared. He had taken in a great
mouthful of water, and now squirted it straight into
Sydney’s face. The swallowed tooth didn’t affect his aim
this time.
“ You little pig!” said Sydney, wincing at a stray bit of
The Rat’s quid that had landed in one of his eyes; but he
was still laughing. “ Look here,” he said, “ sing us ' Mac-
dougall’s Mare, ‘ and I’ll give you back your accordyon.”
“ Yes, do!” said Summers,
“ Ay ! that's the thing,” echoed the Boss.
And after being assured that singing for his accordion
didn’t necessarily mean defeat, The Rat agreed.
“ Now,” said Sydney to Micky, " you see what they’ll
get for interfering.”
We were soon settled down again, and Summers having


volunteered to vamp, The Rat took his place at the piano.
He whistled the tune over first, and Summers started
him off.
With his head cocked on one side, and his mouth
screwed up on the other, The Rat let go in a thin, raspy,
metallic voice that sounded like a small circular saw in a
“ shaky ” bit of wood. But he was too high at first, then
too low. At the third attempt he got going.
Now, “ Macdougall’s Mare,” as probably many of you
know, is one of that class of bush songs the writing of
which started many years ago, and has been continued
right down to this very day. Probably some lonely shep-
herd, in the early days, whittling a whip handle from a
branch of myall whilst keeping watch over his feeding
flock, manufactured the first verses, which start thus:
“Macdougall had an old grey mare which he turned
out for a spell,
And all about that old grey mare I sins? this sons'
for to tell.” 5
Now, this old shepherd probably wrote the description
of a mare as he thought she ought to be, and, having
elaborated it, sang it with much relish to other shepherds,
who, not to be outdone, probably added other horsey
charms to the ballad, and passed it on to some genius who
invented a story for Macdougall. Probably, again, Mac-
dougall having been supplied with a history, it was con-
sidered to be only fair that the mare should have one as
well—pedigree and all—and this, also, in the course of
time was supplied. Then a bushranger—clad in a red
shirt, corduroys, and a big flap hat—bounced boldly into


the ballad, followed by twenty-five policemen, followed, in
turn, by a judge, and a jury, and lawyers, and the ghost
of the fair, sweet young maiden (with a repulsive gash in
its throat) who had been so foully done to death. Sobs
and cries! a black cap ! a hangman! There is a sudden
drop and a sickening thud; but, alas ! when, the body is
cut down it is discovered to be the missing heir of a noble
earl. The wrong man had been hanged, and the whole
thing starts out a.gain. And this time it isn’t a bushranger
at all, but a parson who becomes enamoured of a girl.
And Macdougall goes out on, his old grey mare and finds
her selling beer and other luxuries in a back-country
bar. And so the weary thing goes meandering on and on,
and will until somebody strikes a brilliant idea to finish
it off with, and that will kill it.
Up to the present it is estimated that one hundred
and fifty writers at least have contributed to the building up
of “ Macdougall’s Mare,” with a computed average of
slightly over ten verses for each writer. Its metre, gene-
rally speaking, is the uncommon prose metre; but there
are twenty-seven variations, ten of which are classic. These
latter never cover more than a line or two at a time, how-
ever, so it cannot be said that they obtrude themselves
unnecessarily.
No artist has yet been found in the bush able to do full
justice to this song. Some there be who remember the
words faithfully, but who cannot make them fit the tune.
They start off, using up one syllable for every note, as is
usual, and, sometimes, at the end of the melody they
have half a dozen words of a verse left over. At other


times the verse will be all used up, and a hunk of melody
big enough to start an anthem factory remain. This is
disconcerting and apt to make any performer lose his pre-
sence of mind. Other artists there be, who, used in their
infancy to singing psalms in the Established English
Church, could fit the verses to the tune all right if they
could only remember them. But fifteen hundred verses
take a lot of remembering, especially when they’re punctu-
ated with drinks.
One man only was ever known to do “ Macdougall’s
Mare ” anything nearly approaching full justice. That was
a fellow nicknamed Misty Mick of the Condamine, who
had been known to sing “ Burke’s Dream ” through from
beginning to end without a break at least three times.
Misty had trained diligently for this occasion, which was to
decide a wager Eighty men assembled at Lacey’s
Bull and Pup to see fair play, and the performance started
at 8.30 on a Saturday night.
Misty’s method was to take the words as they came,
and to sing straight on. He made no bones about making
the verses fit the melody. If there were words left over
he just sailed on with the music, and if there were surplus
bars of music he sort of made an overdraft on the verse
account. Things evened up pretty fairly as he went along.
Well, Misty sang on till half-past eleven, and was then
allowed half an hour for refreshments. He was half way
through verse five hundred and thirty-seven at that time.
At twelve he resumed, the betting, which at the start was
five to one against him, then standing at evens. At three
o’clock he had another half-hour’s rest. He had reached


verse one thousand and forty-eight, and was going so
strong that odds of three to one would have been freely
laid on him had it not been that most of the audience
was too drunk to know what it was doing. At a quarter
to six on the Sabbath morning, with the bright sunshine
full on his face, and a holy calm hovering over all, Misty
sang the fourteen hundred and fifty-second verse, and,
with only forty odd verses still to go (“ Macdougall’s
Mare ” wasn’t as big then as it is now), he looked upon
himself as a sure winner. But, alas! a couple of drunks
awakened and started to quarrel. This awakened others,
who joined in the row without fear or favour. In a few
moments the place was a perfect pandemonium. Fists
started it, then feet joined in, then glasses went flying
in all directions, then bottles, then bits of furniture, and
at the fourteen hundred and sixty-seventh verse, Misty, who
had stuck to his business like a game ’un, was caught fairly
on the temple by a flying bottle and laid out. Ah, it was
hard luck ! He was taken up to his hut on a couple of
bags, and he lost his wager, though the chap who was
looking after him swore that as soon as he regained con-
sciousness he picked up the thread of the song where he
had left off, and finished it without !ro much as pausing
to ask what had become of the two days he had lost.
And this was the song that The Rat had to sing for his
accordion ! The little fellow adopted Misty Mick’s method
and sang straight on. Summers stood it for ten minutes.
Then he played with one hand for a spell. Then he
changed to the other. Then The Rat remembered that
he had forgotten a verse, and went back five minutes to


pick it up, going over all the intervening stuff again.
Micky the Drover went out and raised a false alarm
atout a coach being in sight, but it was no good. The
Rat still kept on. Summers stopped playing altogether
and listened and wondered. At verse one hundred and
thirty-eight Micky got the accordion from Sydney, and
giving it to The Rat, shoved him out into the passage and
locked the door.
“ Bie jabers!” he exclaimed, “ he’d droive yez mad, he
wud! Let’s have another taste, an’ t’ hell wid ’im !”
Sydney was smiling like one enjoying a rather subtle
joke.
A moment later there was a knock at the door,
“ Well, phwat’s the matter wid yez now ?” cried Micky.
“ Let ’s in!” cried The Rat. “ Let’s in, an’ I’ll play yer
‘ Mother Kiss Me In Me Dreams.’ ”
The Boss opened the door. “Look here,” he said.
“ you’ve had your turn. It’s up to me now. Dolly!” he
called, “Micky wants us to join him in a drink.”
Dolly took the order, which, to Micky’s disgust, was
mostly smokes, and The Rat fell grumblingly into a seat.
Then the Boss started. But The Rat could’nt keep quiet
even whilst the other was speaking. “The Rain Song”
was haunting him, and he played it over and over again
upon the accordion, just touching the notes, intending to
produce no sound. But, now and then, he would forget
himself, and a stray note would leak out and make Sydney
move threateningly.
But this is the Boss’s item, rendered in quite a taking
style :


HOW GROGAN BEAT THE CHAMPIONS.
Mr. Doran, boss of Dargo, which is on the road to Bourke,
Was the champion liquor drinker ever in or out of work;
Leastways, such was Doran’s statement, and his right to
make that same,
Scarce a man from Bourke to Nyngan ever ventured to
disclaim.
Still, the station hands at Marnock sometimes said there was
a doubt,
And they’d take the odds, they reckoned, if their boss would
have a bout;
He was just a freckled skeleton, a stingy little Scot;
But they knew him for a knock-out both with spirit-glass
and pot.
He could drink, they said to Doran, from the day before his
birth,
Till the angels up in glory trump the judgment call to earth.
Ay! and if through Peter’s gate they passed his satchel and
his trunk,
They might paint an aeon purple, but they’d never get him
drunk.
Doran said he’d like to meet him, and at last one night they
met—
Down at Billy Grogan’s shanty, called for short the Horse
and Vet.
“Ah!” said Doran, when they told him, “You are Mac of
Marnock, eh?
Glad to meet you! Have a whisky?” Would a lost foal
stop to neigh?


S ° t&f and talked ° f W6ather ’ for a dr ought was on thr
' T g st «d Ught ° f tte eigWie8 ' that the •«"" could
harfer t bi ' ly T fille l with ? ater “*>' “<• clear
’ <,s a hai der thing to purchase than a barrelful of beer.
b ° tS Sat and talked ° f weather > drinking hard at Doran’s
Tll wall C ° re ° f tW ° pounds seven faced his name upon the
Thet to S fLm? oran ’ Im the cham P ion hquor-drinker known
And game d ” mk y ° U ’ Ma ° ° f Maraock - for the title if you’re
Ay th’ r night ked the freckled Scotsman, “ but I’ll no deny
That oor wee bit dram thegither has awoke an appetite •
An to e drain- Cee ent established ”~ here he Paused, a glass
Ken ye no’ o’ Robert Dawrie an’ the whustle o’ th’ Dane.”
Dor m said he minded something told in verse by some old
va g)
S-aA 6 Ikou B ht the or gi e cited quite an ordinary jag •
and aw ” e were hut m ugs, he seemed
"°T Jri™k!”” Said he ’ “ to Darg °’ and 1,11 show you how
Burns a vag! oh, shade of Rabbie! Heart of Scotland throb-
bing rhyme!
\ T oice of democratic anger girding at the wrongs of Time'
But the Scot took up the challenge, though with scornful
lips he said,
‘ Ye ( fe a( p° l ° nyu1 ’ Muster Dooran, which is next tae being


Well, they drove across to Cargo, and they drank till morn
mg light,
Then right on without cessation all next day and all next
night;
But at dawn their free libations found a temporary stop,
For they’d drunk the Cargo storeroom out of every blessed
drop.
Coran then was looking seedy, face deep-lined, and fat, and
red,
And his blood-shot eyes kept turning longingly toward his
bed;
And the Boot, still unaffected, thought the issue out of
doubt,
So he said—“ Let’** gang tae Marnock till we finish tip the
bout.”
Now the drive across to Marnock Coran found was just
the thing,
For he landed there as thirsty as a soldier of the King;
And the pace he set the Scotsman is a by-word still near
Bourke,
For the chap who washed the glasses fainted twice from
overwork.
Oh, the bottles and decanters, and the demis they put
through!
Oh, the whisky of their fathers! and ye ale of olden brew!
But, at last, when Coran wanted just to wet the other
eye,
Mac announced wi’ muckle sorra—"Mon, ye’re drunk the
cellar dry!”
Ooran then seemed fresh as paint is on a widow not too
young;
And Macpherson wasn’t more than just the merest trifle
sprung,
But—the slight o’ Burns and Lawrie! oh, a full-blood Scot
was he!
“Let us gang,” he cried, “tae Grogan’s, and I’ll drink ye
doit or dee.”


Four-in-hand they went to Grogan, and they asked him for
the best,
And they finished all his spirits, drinking still with won-
drous zest;
Wine and stout, draught-beer and bottled, Grogan plied
they night and day,
But they hadn’t turned a whisker when they’d stowed it all
away.
Then he started them on snake-juice, known as Boot and
Blacking Rum,
Ah, the shearers and the drovers it had helped to Kingdom
Come!
“ But,” said Grogan, “ strike me sideways, it was mother’s
milk to them ;
Only made ’em talk of angels and of old Jerusalem.”
And Bill Grogan grew uneasy; there was just one demijohn
Filled with snake-juice left to finish, and the shanty’s stock
was gone;
And the shanty’s reputation as a place to have a spree
With a real good drunk in prospect seemed in hopeless
jeopardy;
But no fool was Billy Grogan, for he thought the matter
out,
And he struck an inspiration from the presence of the
drought,
And that night he travelled swiftly to the dam beyond the
pub.,
And with all the water left there, filled a little washing
tub.
This he bottled, labelled “ Sherry,” and when Doran called
for more,
Tliis he gave and watched proceedings through the keyhole
of the door;
And, alas!—the degradation—ere they drained one draught
of that
Down fell Doran and Macpherson, simultaneously, flat.


Twas a bitter disappointment neither thus to win the go,
And 1 m sorry it was water busted up that liquor show;
But we have the oath of Grogan—ere that dirty trap he set,
L»oran versus Mac of Marnock was an even money bet.
Most people’s religion teaches them that it is good to
applaud the boss. We were adherents of the popular
faith, and Bill Jackson followed up the ovation with the
statement that the Boss’s recitation was “not too bad at
all.” The Rat, however, held aloof. He said it was a
damned lie. “You couldn’t kid him that blokes could
drink as much as that.”
The Boss smiled. He could afford to.
Summers asked who was next on the list, and we found
that it was up to Old Jim. Sydney instinctively finished
off his liquor. He looked upon, the old hatter as a
sure drink.
As a matter of fact, Jim scarcely ever spoke in the
presence of others. Early in life he had become filled
with a desire to keep his unmanageable eye in obscurity,
lor Jim’s eye was not one of the ordinary crossed kind that
kept its perverse angle always in sympathy with the other
one—-rather a freelance working absolutely on its own.
Really, it was a wobble eye, only Jim himself couldn’t tell
which way the wobble would work. He could shake his
head a dozen times in the same direction, and ten times
out of every twelve the eye would look a different way.
He might have made a fortune with it on a racecourse
" Here you are, ladies and gentlemen! no fake, and better
than a spinning jenny! I shuts me eye and I shakes me


head, and it s five to one you can't tell which way it's
looking!” But Jim, didn’t have a turn for business.
Figuratively, he took the eye to heart and buried himself
in the bush.
He had worked on Boranna since ever anybody near
the Seventy Mile could remember. His camp was the
back hut by the big well, and he lived there, and had lived
there for many years, all alone; that is, if you except a
tame kangaroo, a cat, a dog, a cockatoo, the horse he
rode and the old horse that worked the whim. It was a
lonely little hut which, but for the tracks that led to it,
would have attracted the notice of no one, for it seemed
to shrink right into the deepest shadow of a clump of
stunted box. Jim boasted that the fire in it had burned
continuously for ten years, but that was only at night-
time, when he was sitting over it, with the dog on one
the kangaroo on the other, and the cat on his knee.
They, only, heard Jim’s boasts (the cockatoo was excluded
as being too talkative). They, only, knew the story that
had prompted him to exclaim;—“ Ah, when we were
young!” after Bill Jackson’s recitation. It was a story
that reflected no dishonour on Jim, and there was a woman
in it, and so much pain that it shall find no place here.
Jim raised water from a well for the Boranna sheep, driv-
ing a simple old horse round and round the raised track of
a crazy whim. There had been music in the lifting buckets
to him one time —music that had eased his mind of many
painful thoughts, but when the old horse had become so
used to the work that he would turn of his own accord,
the music faded out and sleep took its place. Basking in


the sunshine, or shade, Jim spent many a somnolent hour
then. But one day a branch of salt bush was blown up on
to the track, and the old horse stopped to eat it, and for-
got to go on again, and when Jim awoke the tank was
empty and the sheep were standing at the long troughs
waiting for the water that did not how, bleating piteously.
And that little incident taught the old horse so much that
time after time when Jim went to sleep he would stop,
prop himself up against the pole, hang his head ano his
forlorn nether lip, and sleep peacefully too. When Jim
awoke to this fact he remarked, casually, that life was
full of disappointments, and went on driving as before.
But the music he heard never again. And the only dif-
ference he made was to call the old horse Sluggard in-
stead of Hero, and to plait a strand of greenhide into
the whip he never used.
He lived his daily round serenely, almost thoughtlessly.
The ration cart had never failed to turn up at the ap-
pointed time; it was never likely to. He baked his
damper, and cooked his mutton, and made his tea, and
sometimes the cook at headquarters sent him out some
vegetables. Occasionally he had his spree. What more
did a man want?
He sometimes thought of death, seldom of life; the
only link between the present and the past being that he
called his pets by the names of people who had been
dear to him, even though they had thought lightly of
him. Thus the cat was Joe Tangly; the cockatoo, Milly
Thorn; the dog, Sam Davis; and the kangaroo, Freddy
the Nark. And the habit had grown upon him until he


had named, with Christian names, every utensil and
article of furniture in the hut. You can picture what
that meant when Jim held converse with them dur.
ing the long winter evenings.
Sometimes when the nights were very dark, and there
were no stars in sight, he would go to the doorway of the
hut and stand for hours, gazing up at the black sky. What
he thought about then no one knows; but the black sky
crept into his eyes—even into the wobbly one—and over
his face, and shut out all expression save that of vacancy,
ft was only after Jim had treated himself to several
liquors that he ever got the upper hand of the sky, and
even tnen the familiar spirits of the bush, called by manv
people ’oneliness and melancholy, did not wholly desert
him.
In the matter of literature the old hatter knew little.
He read only the tragedies and assaults in what papers
fell into his hands. But, from time to time, he lined his
hut with sheets from various weeklies, and with every
picture and many words upon those linings he grew
familiar. It was this fact, coupled with the drinks Jim
had already imbibed, that upset Sydney’s calculations, for,
when the door of the old back hut was open, a stream of
light fell obliquely upon a set of verses, in front of which
Jim had often stood. He had read them over once, and
something in them pierced through the shadow that
enwrapped his misty brain and attracted him. In a
little while he could repeat them to Freddy the Nark
with his eyes shut. It was these verses he got up to re-
cite now.


Closing the lid tightly over the unmanageable eye, fid-
dling with his fingers as if they did not belong to him,
he backed further into the shaded corner, and, in his deep
bass voice, but in the manner of a school boy reciting a
task, gave forth—
THE LONELY TRACK.
They were firm old friends in the days gone past—
Kind hearts of the olden school;
But the will grows weak when the drought holds fast,
And each of them played the fool.
’Twas a brutal word, and the word returned,
An oath, and an angry blow,
A fiery passion that fiercely burned
And—
“ Connors went out three days ago—
Went out on the Lonely Track,
Where the tanks are dry and the grass won’t grow
Oh, God! but I thought he was sure to know—
Come back, old Connors, come back!”
Yet Connors had paused when his swag was made,
And his dog stood ready to start.
And a nervous twitch on his thin lips played,
From the pain of his aching heart,
And with outstretched hand he had said “Good-bye!”
As one who is in disgrace,
But the other had risen with flashing eye,
And spat an oath in his face.
“ Oh, Connors went out three days agone—
Went out on the Lonely Track!
The scalding tears in his dim eyes shone;
I watched them fall as he faced the sun;
Come back, old Connors, come back!”


Night came and the day and the day again,
But Connors came there no more;
Only a kelpie that whined with pain
Crawled up to the humpy door;
And the other made oath as he journeyed out,
“By God, I will fetch him back!”
But he followed a trail that was laid in doubt,
For he trod on the Lonely Track.
******
There is horror now in the Far-out West,
Where the brown, bark humpy stands,
For the mice, unheeded, have built a nest'
Where the clock holds death in its hands;
And out of the corners where darkness lies
With the dust of the days gone past,
There comes the glitter of impish eyes
That grip you and hold you fast.
The birds keep clear of the open eaves
Where the wind makes endless moan,
For the rocking roof like a wierd thing grieves,
And the saplings strain and groan;
And under the bunk where Connors slept
A bat in the day-time clings—
And every incn of the floor is swept
By creeping and unclean things.
And just outside, by a fallen log
Where Connors was wont to rest,
The bleaching bones of a faithful dog
Grow white—with the skull turned west;
And over the whole is an eerie sense
Of something that nameless walks
When the spirit of Loneliness vague, intense,
With Death, as a demon, stalks.
For Connors went out long, long ago—
Went out on the Lonely Track,
And beyond the rise, where the sky hangs low
God heard the caw of a sated crow—
“ Come back! old Connors, come back!”


Poor, harmless, old Jim ! When his time comes I hope
that no liquor will have cleared the black shadows from
his brain. He will drop out of the hurly-burly then like
a tired child going to sleep. And when he spends his
cheque over on the other side of Jordan I hope some
cherubic shanty-keeper there will keep a dim corner for
him until the liquor clears the shadow' away for ever and
ever. And, if Canaan really is the happy land the old
hymn we used to sing at Sunday school years and years
ago made it out to be, I hope the angels won’t interfere
with the wobble eye. Jim will be able to see so much
more than ordinary people then; a fitting recompense for
what it lost him here.
But, accompanied by occasional dismal notes from The
Rat’s accordion, Jim’s recitation w r as not a pleasing one.
Bill Jackson yawned, and Dolly smiled commiserative
smiles upon Summers, and the Boss slipped silently out
to the bar; yet, when the old fellow sat down, there
was so much applause that he blushed like a girl, and
thereafter held his peace. For a while a star had been
faintly glimmering in the black sky. It had flickered out,
and he sat in utter darkness, not even Sydney, telling
with rugged force and intense feeling the story of Jock
McPhail being able to draw from him, afterwards, any
more expressive statement than the silent passing of his
empty glass.
But Sydney! How many times in dreams since then
have I stretched my hands across the miles and greeted
him! Ah ! I can see him now, just as I saw him that
night—the typical bushman—tall, deep-chested, broad-


shouldered, running light and lithe to the loin and legs.
There is a picture in a certain Adelaide book shop of
Lord Cochrane, the greatest sea dog Britain ever pro-
duced, whose deeds of valour were so many, so original,
and so heroic that the battles of Nelson or of Blake com-
pared with them seem to me but as chronicles of small
boys sailing toy ships in a cow pond. Well, Sydney in
feature was just like Cochrane, only he wore a moustache
that was crisp and short, and his hair was as black as a
sheep-brand. And in forcing upon you the following little
sketch of him I shall not apologise. He is one of the
few men who ever found place right home in my inmost
heart. And it seems to me that to write about a man
one loves is better even than to write of the woman who
holds one’s thoughts in thrall. She may be one of many
—probably is; he can be, at best, one only of very few.
There may be a kink in my nature respecting this, but the
world seems to me rather barren of really lovable men—
to men. They are rare birds; almost as rare as goannas
in the winter time. And, lest you should think I have
mixed this metaphor, let me tell you that many a man
has seen goannas flying. It’s a way those four-footed
birds have when the sheds are cut out, and the snake-
juice boils in one’s blood and simmers over into that
riotous fancy commonly known as the Joe Morgans, or the
D.Ts. There is nothing so naturally exhilarating as to
watch a good big buck goanna making love to a frill-
necked lizard on the wing.
Sydney’s real name was Jack —. —., but never mind the
surname just now. He was bom in the city of the beauti-


ful harbour, and his parents were workers—hard grafters
both of them. He never won a prize in any class at
school, though he was kept there until he was fifteen, but
he could hold his own with the head-master (who was
a local champion) at chess, and a year after leaving he
won an open boat race on the Parramatta. Under the
guidance of his father he started to learn a trade, and
worked solidly and well. He was a promising lad, people
said, and the father saw in him the boy he was years and
years before, and loved him, and his mother used to
creep into his room at night, and, standing over his bed,
think of the lover of her youth. “ Please God,” she
would say, thinking of the swelling account in the savings’
bank, “ he won’t have such a battle to fight as his mother
and father before him.”
But it pleased God to crush the mother’s hope and to
trail the father’s love in the dust, for one night Jack,
then little more than seventeen years o’d, got into a street
row, and in the heat of a wrongful accusation floored a
constable, and afterwards resisted arrest so earnestly that
it took three other constables all their time to land him
in the nearest lockup. Next morning a beak, who had
been out on the bend all night and was suffering a severe
recovery, declared, after many expressions of righteous in-
dignation, that such brutal assaults upon the police were
becoming so frequent of late that he must make an ex-
ample. So Jack was sentenced to six months’ imprison-
ment, without the option of a fine. And the example was
emphasised in what happened to his father and his
mother who loved him so, but I have not the right


to record that; it is enough that Jack never saw them
again.
He took refuge in the bush when his sentence had been
served, and thereafter was known by no other name than
“ Sydney.” But the gaol experience and a freshly-topped
mound in the Rookwood cemetery had made a difference.
He was the same hard grafter as before, but the money
that he earned was mostly spent in, sprees. And the
bitterness in his heart touched his tongue, so that with
scarce an exception he was no man’s friend. Law and
order were nothing more to him at times than a phrase,
and, socially, he was a warrigal, almost an outlaw. Bush-
men spoke about him as “ The Knockout,” for he never
refused fight, and never knew what it was to be beaten.
Yet, he was always found on the side of the weak. In
those days he had a command of language that filled many
a bullocky with the bile of envy —words! at times they
were whip-cracks of scorn. But for all his bitterness he
had a leaven of humour, and it is told of him how, one
winter, being hard up and sorely pressed for money, he
went to work for a Victorian cocky. It was his first (and
last) experience with that class, and he gained it with a
bad specimen. The cocky gave him a bunk in a bam,
and next morning, about four o’clock, went messing
around to wake him up. It was the same old gag.
“ It’s all right. I didn’t want ter disturb yer. I on’y
wanted some bags. It ain’t quite time to get up yet,
y’ know.”
Sydney let him make frequent statements to that effect
until six o’clock; then he got up, and, during the day,


worked so well that the cocky was never done bemoaning
the loss of those two morning hours. Well, in the middle
of the next night, as it seemed to Sydney, the cocky went
messing around again, but, groping in the darkness be-
yond the barn door, he caught his foot in something un-
familiar, and fell face forward into a large tub of water —
Ugh, the ice on it! He accused Sydney afterwards of
setting a trap for him.
“ Bah !” said Sydney, “ can’t a fellow bring in the water
for his morning bath overnight without being accused of
laying traps?”
Morning bath ! It was the first one the cocky had had
for years, and he resented it so much that Sydney was
on the track again before breakfast.
He was a shearer chiefly, and had “ rung ” at more than
one shed on the Lachlan and the Darling. In his earlier
bush days he had filled the time in between seasons pros-
pecting in Queensland and Victoria, where there were
dozens of old hands at the game glad to take him for a
mate. Only once or twice during his earlier career could
it be said that he was not absolutely “ independent,”
for, excepting shearing, he loathed working for others.
He could brook being at no man’s beck or call.
But it was only during the latter part of the big shear-
ing trouble and afterwards that the Sydney now so well
known and loved had being.
When the trouble started he was looked upon as a
firebrand and a fire-eater, and whatever dangerous work
had to be done he got more than a fair share of it. He
didn’t mind that. It gave him a chance sometimes of


having ago at his old friends the police. This, surely,
could have had only one end; but, luckily for Sydney,
during the heat of that bitter struggle one of the shearers’
leaders (a good man and brave with, alas! the one
great failing of many good and brave men) saw under the
outer cover of this wild, young, fighting reprobate a heart
of gold, nay, more, a strong, healthy human heart, whose
valves pumped blood with measured beat to the tune of
faithfulness and truth; and the leader saved him from
himself. It was not an easy thing to do, but the simple,
whole-hearted, unaffected labour champion accomplished
it at last, and when the trouble was over Sydney went
out to face the world, knowing and feeling that more may
be accomplished by love than by wrath, by reason than
by bitterness. He had been one of the unthinking fol-
lowers of the union, but he had learned that, although
union is strength it takes strength to maintain union
the strength that is knowledge, and he took an, oath that
that strength he would find. Thereafter Sydney became a
new man. In the language of the revivalist, he had been
converted, not to Christ, but to The Cause; and he was
no backslider, no silent follower. The language (all ex-
cept that which was merely picturesque, or in keeping
with the line of life he laid down for himself) faded off
his lips. He gave up wandering and became a student,
applying himself diligently to the gaining of such know-
ledge of the gospel of Labour as became a disciple of the
leader who had enlightened him. He saw visions of a far-
reaching, all-pervading Brotherhood, and bitterness left
him. Even whilst denouncing he could forgive; and he


found kindness so companionable that the name of The
Knock-out died a natural death. He raised his hand
against no man again; he found quite enough to do suc-
couring the needy and the helpless. The only thing he
could find time to combat with was Wrong, as he saw it,
and gradually he got to be known in the ranks of the
Workers’ Union as a whole-souled, big-hearted and
brotherly advocate. Still he was wholly and always the
bushman. No one could have picked him out of a crowd
by his manner, which, in his later work, was the secret
of his great success. He was just what he professed to
be —a worker; only he had a mission—a mission he
never obtruded. On the night of our entertainment he
was a temporary hand at Ravenna doing Labour’s pro-
paganda work in a district noted for its inertness. Some
day —I hope not far distant —he will fill a Labour seat
in the Commonwealth Parliament; then, perhaps, he
will write his name into this simple chronicle. It is not
one to be ashamed of for all that its owner was once so
wild.
Sydney prefaced his item with no statement of any
kind, just stood up, unembarrassed and easy, and let
go thus—


JOCK McPHAIL.
“Woolshed burned, and eight men injured in a most
unequal fight.”
That was what the papers stated
In a telegram undated,
When the blacklegs came to Brenda, thief-like, at the dead
of night.
And the inference accepted by the city journalists
Found expression in the headline, “ Outrage by the
Unionists ”;
But the gods’ ungarnished gospel is this bold and bitter
tale
From the Never-Never Classics, headed simply, “ Jock
MoPhail.”
###*♦*
Now the Brenda shed was Union when the Brownings held
the run,
Never shark or blackleg working under Browning sire or
son;
But, beneath the broker’s hammer, Brenda went to “ Angel ”
Gray,
And a stronghold of the Union with the freehold passed
away.
For the Angel was a mongrel with a sanctimonious air,
Who had earned a reputation by his aptitude at prayer;
And he spoke with ceaseless longing of the harp and of the
crown,
So it wasn’t any wonder that he cut the wages down.
But the men who shore at Brenda when odd Browning
bossed the board
Took a solemn oath and binding, every one in stern accord,
That unless the full agreement in the Union terms was
made,
Not a man on Brenda station should so much as sharpen
blade.


Never word they said to super., never threat made Angel
Gray,
Till up a notice at the shed one Saturday—
“B eru .i, e '..ring starts on Thursday. P.U. terms' Hiey
ro.it i,; ( t.'r-w’sj
Then I ■ .ed a deputation to make mann.-st their
a mws.
But that shearers’ deputation had no leader e’or : ,
And it simply kept repealing, when it lacked i argu-
ment—
“ Brenda shed has been a stronghold of the Union in the
past;
Brenda shed shall b® a stronghold while the bonds of Union
last.”
And the Angel heard and answered: “ I have taken this in
prayer
To the footstool of the Father, humbly wrestling with it
there,
And you have my ultimatum; take or leave it as you like.”
“We’ll announce the benediction,” said McSweeney: “Let
us strike!”
So they formed a camp at Brenda, and they picketed the
gates.
Picketed the route and roadways, watchful as the sleepless
Fates,
And the men the boss imported never entered Brenda died,
And the station hands he threatened joined the shearers’
camp instead.
And the Angel’s heart was troubled, for, although his ways
were deep,
Whatsoev 1 lug he ventured, lo! the shearers Laid him
cheap;
An (1. r cue Monday morning when a month had
passed a- 'ay,
Came a, no e f submission from the hands of Angel Gray.


It was posted at the woolshed, and the pickets farthest out
Caught the ringing exultation of the shearers round about
And the cheer that thrilled through Brenda, with its ferwd
euphony,
V, as the loud Amen of Labour loyal unto victory.
There was gathering of outposts in a wild confusion then,
•;°y, of , hard-won battle beaming in the eyes cf half-fed men •
And the sentiments of Logan were re-echoed far and wide''
When he said, “Let’s celebrate it at the ‘Cattle Drovers’
Guide. ’
So they ioumeyed to the shanty, and they drank like war-
riors bold
When he flagons of our fathers filled the board in days of
of old.
Dran iml feasted; but when midnight found them full of
maudlin glee,
Jock McPhail rode through the darkness Brendawards with
Red McGee.
Something crooked Jock was fearing, so they sought the
gloom of trees
In a wide half-circle northward of the tell-tale southern
b'oeze,
Ridi ug cautiously and quicklv till a broken shaft of light,
Shining from the shearers’ humpy, told them that McPhail
was right.
Spectre-footed, then, and eager to the humpy door they
crawled,
Peered through chinks, wild-eyed with anger, listening like
men enthralled ;
For they heard the Brenda super, to a stranger hoarsely
say—-
“There'll be bloodshed here to-morrow sure as God made
Angel Gray!”


Silently the door they opened, silently as shadows passed,
Seized the super, and the stranger, fought with them and
bound them fast;
Then they forced the Angel’s purpose from the super., and
McGee
Mounted horse to warn the others of the boss’s treachery.
But Red Mac. could scarce have reached them when along
the homestead track
Angel drove toward the humpy with the blacklegs at his
back;
“Open up!” he cried the super., “It is I! You need not
fear!”
Jock McPhail alone made answer—“ Never scab shall enter
here!”
But they broke the door and rushed him. Still McPhail
stood firm and true;
With his back against a door-post blood with every hit he
drew.
Right and left they fell before him, right and left on either
hand,
And the mark on Angel’s forehead is the Union shearers’
brand.
And, perchance, the Cause had conquered, but a “ scab ”
with blood a-flow
Climbed the hut and with a sapling struck McPhail the
coward’s blow,
And with one great cry of anguish dying out into a groan
Sank the man who fought for Brenda, single-handed and
alone.
And the Angel, watching grimly, shouted when he saw him
fall;
Shouted and, with hot blood-hunger, showed his baseness
then to all;
“ Hound of hell and spawn of harlot! this for you, and this!”
he cried,
And he struck the prostrate shearer, spurning him with
foot aside.


And he left him bleeding, senseless, seeking for him later
on
When the blacklegs’ swags were settled, but the Unionist
was gone.
Broken-boned and blind and feeble, maddened by his awful
pain,
Spitting blood in gurgling mouthfuls, Jock had striv’n to
rise—in vain.
But he crawled towards the woolshed, hand by hand and
knee by knee,
Blood-trailed in the dusty salt-bush crooning ever pain-
fully—
‘‘ Brenda shed a Union stronghold always was in years gone
past;
Brenda shed shall still be Union while the bonds of Union
last.”
Foot by foot he struggled onward where the silent darkness
lay;
Foot by foot, the hot blood flowing swiftly with his life
away;
Foot by foot, until—Eureka! he could feel the woolshed
door;
Then a thought of earth’s to-morrow troubled Jock McPhail
no more;
For beneath the woolshed creeping, coat and shirt and bark
in hand,
Only this his heart was crying as he slowly made a brand—
“ Brenda shed a Union stronghold always was in years gone
past;
Brenda shed ” —the brand was lighted —“ shall be Union till
the last.”
Gleams of light that grew and gathered; burst of flame
that winglike spread,
Smiting all the bush with terror, all the sullen sky with
dread!
What though Unionist and blackleg worked like heroes at
the well—■
Limned in flame and robed in glory Brenda shed to ashes
fell.


And the smoke-grimed Union shearers gathered mournfully
around.
Trending lightly o’er the ashes, for they trod on holy
ground;
And they swore on oath, bare-headed, by a slow and bloody
trail,
Still to fight and yet to conquer for the sake of Jeck
McPhail,
There was no interruption from The Rat. Instead,
when Sydney had finished, the little fellow rushed over
and got a grip of his hands, saying:
“ Bli’ me, that’s what I call a recitashun, that is!”
And looking at the Boss—“ That’s true; none er yer—”
But the remainder of the remark was swallowed up in
applause. Everyone of us joined in, and it was so hearty
and so irresistible, and was followed by such a sincere
demand for an encore that Sydney said he would be
pleased to give us another recitation later on. If the
next on the list would go on with the programme and give
him a rest for a time he would chip in then—if we were
all agreeable. And this pleased The Rat so much that
he put his accordion under his chair and shouted all
round, a really remarkable and memorable performance
for him. Not that he objected to shouting; but his limit
in general was two, and, even then, he “ made sure of his
mark ” first.
Now the next on the list was the present scribe, who,
having lubricated, pressed Summers into his service, and,
true to the occupation he then followed, sang this little
set of verses to the tune of one of Bums’ songs, the name
of which he is sorry to say he totally forgets;


BOUNDARY RIDING.
Round a five-wire bound’ry fence,
Riding our old station bay,
I, in dreamy indolence,
Often drowse the hours away.
******
Five wires stretching through the posts,
That is all some riders see;
Others people them with ghosts—
Ghosts of dread nativity.
Others curse them as a bar,
As with tightened rein they ride,
For they know earth’s riches are
Over on the other side.
Others still, with shaded eyes,
Trace them to the sky-line low,
And the hope within them dies—
Ah, the weary way to go I
But those posts and wires, to me,
Are the staves of many songs
Sweet with all the melody
That to love and youth belongs.
And I drowse beside them there
Till some dear vEolian fay
Brings a message, quaint and clear,
From a maiden far away:


“Lazy fellow, think of me!
How much longer must I wait P”
And I wake, surprised to see
Sunset and the homestead gate,
******
Round a five-wire bound’ry fence,
Riding our old station bay,
I, in dreamy indolence,
Often drowse the hours away.
Bill Jackson greeted the conclusion of this my song
with the remark that it was the best item of the evening;
but—Bill owed me fourteen and six. As a matter of fact
I noticed, whilst singing, that Micky got up and went
outside ; also that The Rat attacked his accordion onc«
more. It was to some foreign tune, too, that tangled
itself up on my tongue and nearly brought about the
first break down of the evening. However, when I fal-
tered, Summers let the bass go until it sounded like a reap-
ing machine in a heavy crop of wheat, and so gave me
time to recover the lost chord. Still I mentally promised
The Rat one to go on with for his interruptions—a pro-
mise that subsequent proceedings, however, caused me to
forget.
There was a short pause after I had sat down; then
Sydney, responsive to a special request made by the
Boss and one other, gave us Cnitchy Joe’s Farewell.
Now Crutchy Joe, otherwise Joe Sparrow, was one of
Sydney’s old-time shearing pals—perhaps the only one,
seriously speaking. Years ago he had had the bad luck
to meet with an accident so severe that it resulted in the


loss of one of his legs and a permanent injury to the
other one. A little while after this accident poor old
Joe got stranded in Melbourne, and Sydaey went to him
bearing with him a few quid the chaps had subscribed,
and with which he was to purchase for Joe “ a bit of a
start in business.” Sydney told us, half mournfully, half
humorously, how he had fixed his old pal up in a hand-
me-down establishment, and had stopped with him long
enough to get him going in his new line of life. And
with that, just by way of introduction, Sydney reached out
in his forcible way into the swinging measure of the Fare-
well. But the verses are better known as
BROKEN UP.
Let us ’ave another beer, Jack, now we’re left ’ere on our
own—■
I was scarcely flush enough to shout before—
But I like to click the glasses with a shearer leavin’ town,
An’ to wish ’im whips o’ fortune in the tar an’ eobbler war.
For it burns ’ere like an ember,
An’ I can’t well disremember,
’Gw we usier lip a chorus
As we stroked along the track—
When the world was all before us,
An’ we made our way out Back.
For a-ridin’—or a-rovin’—
Or a-shearin—or a d rovin’—
There were fiery spirits movin’
In the good oie days Out Back!


It’s a good while since we started, you and me, to get a
shed;
’Ow you harrowed that first year for Monty Kell!
An’ we cut out with a cut in when I punched a presser’s
head,
An’ ’e squelched me in a quarter with a hit that gave me
hell!
P’raps I was a bit too cocky, but it doesn’t matter now,
Since I’m beggared up fer battlin’ an’ fer work;
Still it makes us go one better when the stings re-touch
our brow
Of the taunts we wouldn’t suffer an’ the blows we didn’t
shirk.
Ah! they talk about the city, an’ its battles by the way—
It’s a trainin’ groun’ for spielers an fer cads!
If yer want a youngster manly—built to battle and to stay—
Let ’im train out on the never fer a long stretch with the
lads.
They may learn ’im lots o’ cussin’, an’ a bit or two o’ bluff;
They may learn ’im ’ow to hum an’ feel no shame,
But they’ll knock chips outer meanness, and they’ll nurse
the better stuff
mi ’e fears nor God nor devil, an’ a whiteman’s is ’is
name.
An’ I somehow ’ave a fancy when the red-hot battle
comes—•
Australia for Australians!—they’ll be there;
An’ when the banner’s planted, that shall wave o’er Austral
homes,
The Way-Out-Back Battalion will be the first do and dare!
»«•**•
Ah! we’ve ’ad some roarin’ times, Jack, an’ we’ve ’ad some
scurvy, too,
But we took ’em as they came an’ laughed at all;
For we only fell through boozin’—paintin’ matters red an’
blue—
An’ it wasn’t our religion, Jack, to cry about a fall.


But, I ve finished with it now, ole chap; with this game lee
o’ mine & s
I shall never ride again or pad the plain-
An ’ at Nolan’s by the side o’ Dick Devine
Will be eld by some damned stranger, an’ I’ll never ring
again! *
Ah! you’ll miss me in the hut at night when Billy Elton
sings;
You will muss me with the fiddle, brown and old;
An’ you’ll have to do yer waltzes an’ yer clogs an’ highland
flings
To only tune of Conky’s —“ Silver Threads Among the
Gold.”
An they 11 miss me at the Quandong, when yer ride roun’
with yer cheques—
For I’ve owed ’em ’alf a quid since last July
An the boss will add the bill up, lookin’ through ’is ole
green specs.,
An he ll swear to trust no others till his damned long
tongue runs dry.
But there’s one who’ll miss me sorely—miss me more than
all the rest —
You remember little Kate at Walker’s run?
Well, I promised her last winter that I’d travel at me best,
An’ we thought behind this sheann’ we’d ’ave made a
couple one.
But that blasted Abbott filly spoilt whatever chance I ’ad
When she threw me at the Ford an’ smashed me leg;
An’ I’ve slung up all idear of a-askin’ of her dad,
For a feller ain’t no champion when ’e swings a wooden
Peg-
You can smile, ole chap, an’ welcome, ’cause I know yer
heart’s alright,
But you’re hazy ’ow I cam© to play this game;
Well, there’s things in life’s philoserphy that knocks us
outer sight,
An’ I fancy yewman nature an’ its workings is the samel


Ain’t we seen two pals go paddin’ up the same sand hill o’
Time
Years an’ years, an’ years together, straight an true,
Juster part about a trifle, that perhaps led up t’ crime,
’Cause it touched some spring, long hidden, covered up
with scrub from view?
An’ you thought ’cause you went sailin’ down your quiet
bach’lor ways,
An’ ’ad perched yerself ’igh up upon the shelf.
Surely I was doin’ likewise, an a-spendin’ of me days
In a-judging other people just accordin’ to meself.
*#*♦*»
Ah! I’d like to travel with you round the Boree clump again,
Like to speak a word to Katie at the door; .
But I’ve gotter dwell the peter—what’s the use o’ givm
pain ?
I ’ave played a losin’ hazard, an’ shall sight the game no
more.
But I somehow think she’ll miss me, so, if you should see
her there,
Tell ’er somethin’ that will put ’er off the lay;
Say I’ve fairly gone t’ blazes, that the boozy city air
Must ’ave broken up me morals an’ ’ave worn me heart
away.
Yes, ’twere better that, ole feller, than to let ’er know the
truth—
What a brave young heart is ’em I, only, know—
An’ at mention of my trouble she would sling away ’er
youth <
In a double-harness journey with a crock that cannot go.
It may pain ’er for a little, but her pride will pull her
through;
An’ you’ll face the music for me, won’t you, Jack?
It’s a dirty bit of bisness fer a feller’s pal to do;
But you’ll do it in remembrance of the good ole days
Out BaokP


It’s a wager . . . never mind me—damn it! let the
matter slide—
There is time enough t’ have another wet.
An’ you're goin’ on a journey where you won’t get much
inside,
Till you’ve cut out at Koorohie an’ you strike the “Horse
an’ Yet”!
******
Ah! I’d like to travel, once again, around the TVirling sheds
’Long a-you an’ Monty Kell an’ Stringy Pick;
But Ivp joined the ploddin’ army of the wooden-legged
peds..
An’ I curse the closed-up city when I think o’ Crooked
Mick.
Just ’arf-past! Well, fill ’em up, boss! You can put this
couple down—
Oh, alright! I’ll settle up the other score.
For I like to click the glasses with a shearer leavin’ town
An’ to wish im whips o’ fortune in the tar and cobbler
war.
For it burns ’ere like an ember,
An’ I can’t well disremember,
’Off we lister lip a chorus
As we stroked along the track—
When the world was all before us,
An’ we made our way Out Back.
For a-ridin’ or a-rovin’—
Or a-shearin’ or a-drovin’—
There were fiery spirits movin’
In the good ole days Out Back!
And I might say, just here, that little Kate at Walker’s
run, when Sydney took the message to her, made up her
mind, without consulting her father, that the country was
no place for her. Ever since she had prevailed upon a
Syrian hawker to give her a (brum) necklet in exchange


for a piece of old dress material, which she could not
find time to make up, she had felt a call for dealing, so
to speak. And what scope was there for one of her
capabilities on a back country run? She went to Mel-
bourne, like the true-hearted Australian woman she was,
and, if appearance to-day goes for anything, Crutchv Joe
and his missus have one of the tidiest hand-me-down es-
tab i: 'hments in the Southern Capital; besides which
there’s a litt’e Joey coming on so well that it’s not ! ' dy
the business will pass into alien hands. And of that s >rae
hand-me-down establishment, or of the back of it, rather,
I might add that I have put in many a happy evening
hour there, for Joe the elder is not so old yet, nor has
he lost so much of the riotous blood of his old shearing
days but that he can shoulder his crutch and show how
sheds were won. While his wife—
But this is a digression which reminds me that, \vhen
Sydney had resumed his seat and the company had used
up all the app’ause its joint and several lungs w r ere capable
of expressing, there was a loud outcry for Micky the
L/rover, who either had to subscribe to the tarpaulin
muster that was impending or shout.
Micky’s name was called loudly and often, but no an-
swer came, and Bill Jackson, who seemed somewhat
jealous of Sydney’s reception and success, offered to fill
in time with another recitation. This offer, however, was
declined and a search for the drover instituted.
Now Micky, as a matter of fact, had drifted back to
the kitchen. He had gone out to the bar first; then,
after a period of great indecision, had sneaked around


to the back. It was Nell he wanted, of course. But when
he opened the kitchen door no Nell was there; only be-
side a low-turned lamp lay a little writing pad with a
bottle of ink and a pen, still wet, resting upon it. Micky
looked at the pad, then, with a sigh, shut the door and
went away. In a little while he returned; but the kitchen
was still empty—Nell was listening to Sydney’s recitation
from the vantage ground of Dolly’s bedroom. Micky
went into the kitchen, shutting the door behind him. He
crept cautiously up to the writing pad and gazed at it
lovingly, every now and then looking guiltily toward the
door. Nobody interrupted him, however, and at last,
grown bold, he picked up the pad and pressed his lips to
it. Hastdj dropping it, he went to the door and peered
out not a sound. His lips tingled. Ah ! if it had only
been Nell! He went back to the table again, and an imp
of curiosity itching at his fingers’ ends he opened the pad.
On the cover was written in a neat schoolboy sort of hand
“ EHen O’Shea, Seventy Mile Hotel.”
“ Arrah!” he said, softly, “ Ellen’s the short for Nell;
Oi’ll kiss Nell anyhow,” and he did. “ It’s the O’Shea it
is Oi don’t loike,” he added. “Faith, it ’ud be better
Murphy.”
He shut the pad again, for he had no idea of prying,
and was about to replace it when he heard footsteps out-
side the door. He dropped the pad hurriedly, and in his
awkwardness knocked the ink bottle over. Just for an in-
stant he saw a little black stream flowing over Nell’s
well-scrubbed table top, then the door was opened, and
Nell stood looking at him. Micky cowered like a child


caught stealing the jam. The girl took in the situation
at a glance, and, following her first inclination, laughed,
but in the twinkling of an eye she burst into tears, and
walking with her handkerchief up to her face to the chair
in front of the pad, she sat down, dropped her head into
her hands and sobbed bitterly.
Ah! Micky, if you had taken her in your arras then
and asked her straight out to be Mrs. Murphy you would
kave found those sobs to be nothing more than make-
believe after all. With her head buried there she was
laughing at you for all she was worth.
But Micky was seized with consternation.
“Oi didn’t mane anny har-rm, Nell! Be th’ Holy Vir-
gin in Heaven, Oi didn’t mane anny har-rm!” he cried,
crossing himself devoutly.
The girl sobbed on, but, all unknown to her, the stream
of ink flowed under her half-opened hands and formed a
little pool around the tip of her nose which was pressing
upon the table.
Micky pleaded again.
“Won’t yez listen to me, Nell? Oi didn’t mane anny
har-rm. Oi was only—” but Micky couldn’t bring himself
to tell her that he was only kissing her front name, so he
stopped, looking like one who would break things if he
were only let.
And Nell sobbed out without raising her head—she
didn’t da re, the little hypocrite.
“ You’re not satisfied coming back and insulting me to
my face. You come and pry into my letters.”
This was too much for Micky.


“ It’s a lie, by Jasus!” he cried, “ an’ ye knaw it.” The
pupils of his eyes turned red with anger. “ Insult yez,
is it? Oi’ll insult yez, just wanst, for the last toime, me
lady”; and, seizing her, he forced her head back that
he might take toll of her lips. But the ink had spread
and Nell’s face was a study in black and white. Afraid
of his anger she waited meekly for him to kiss her. In-
stead Mick burst- into a fit of laughter and rushed out.
“ It’s up t’ you fer a song!” cried The Rat, meeting
him in the passage.
“ Oi’m cornin’, ain’t Oi ?” exclaimed Micky, fiercely ; but
he laughed his way to the dining room with laughter
that was nearer tears than ever Nell’s sobs had been.
Pie was the wild Irishman when he entered the room.
“ Care kilt a cat!” he cried. “ Fill ’em up ag’in, Misther
Publichouse!” and, turning to Summers, “ Let her go,
Gallagher. ’Tis a rare ould Irish jig Oi’m wanting!”
Then Micky danced. The faster Summers played the
better he seemed to like it. Though his face was strained
and set, his eyes were like lights of hell, and his hands
twitched nervously. But one does not dance a jig with
one’s hands. His feet touched the floor swiftly, rhythmi-
cally, and every now and then with such a resounding
thump that the Seventy Mile shook to its stoutest plate.
Dust that had not been disturbed for years came down
upon us in showers. “Faster! faster!” Was there ever
a bhoy could show a better or a defter leg? “Ah, ha,
now !” he would cry, “ Whir-roo ! whiroo !” and his cries
reverberated through the shanty till the rats and the mice
shivered with fright even down in their deepest holes.


“Ah ha, now !” and “Whir-roo !’’ again and again.
Would anyone dare tread on the tail of his coat? Bill
Jackson became suddenly absorbed in old wobble-eyed
Jim ; and it was just as well, for Micky was dancing a
demon out.
And Doily went and brought Nell, who, having washed
her face, had cried in reality to look at the performance.
And Nell stood just inside the door looking so demure
and hurt and yet so fetching that Micky went almost mad
with mingled anger and iove and disappointment, and
longed, with a longing that got into his blood, that Sum-
mers would only play the Boyne Wather that he might
dale wid him.
And hew it would all have finished up, God only knows.
But The Rat, who had drunk more than was good for
him, meandered out on to the verandah with his accordion
in his hands to get rid of the swimming feeling in his head,
and the peculiar swelling in his throat which he put down
to the dust. He walked about for a time, until, feeling
refreshed, he sat down with the intention of wooing the
latest new piece to his old machine. But the seat he
picked was the very one upon which Charlie Densham
was sleeping, and The Rat, in his unsteady condition,
fell upon him with great suddenness. There was one
loud cry as the hoary-headed old actor upheaved, then
The Rat took a swift but gentle curve through space and
brought up violently in the wet and wooden embraces of
the water trough. And above the din of Micky’s dancing
The Rat’s cry was heard and answered.
“ Ah ! ah !” said Sydney to him, “ it’s where you ought


to have been hours ago. But he lifted him out tenderly,
and felt more hurt than if hit with a whip at The Rat’s
spluttering reply:
“ I would n’ ’a’ said that t’ you, Sydney.”
And alas! The Rat’s accordion was a limp and water-
logged wreck.
This little episode brought Micky’s dance to a sudden
stop, and when, having wrung The Rat out, we returned
to the dining room, we found that the last item on the
list had been rendered. But we felt that there was some-
thing still wanting to finish off the evening properly, and
greeted with much satisfaction an announcement made bv
Dolly that, after a lot of pressure, she had prevailed
upon Nell to sing.
It hadn’t required much pressure, let me tell you. That
was only Dolly’s politeness. Nell wanted to sing; for,
like many another girl, she found that she could say
things to Micky in song which she had no other maidenly
means of expressing.
Besides, Nell sang very sweetly, and her face was
pleasant to look at even when her mouth was wide open,
which is more than can be said for many a vocal artiste
of renown. Summers played the accompaniment for her,
and Micky listened, at first sullenly, then as one who
worships, lastly as one who loves and will not be denied.
Ah! the quaint emphasis Nell threw into that song!


THE DROVER’S WIFE.
By the droning mountain waters in the Spring-time of her
life,
On her little Tambo holding, lives the Western drover’s
wife;
And at evening, the river, when her bit of work is done.
You may often hear her singing to the setting of the
sun —
I am waiting for my drover—
For my drover laddie Jack;
I am waiting for my lover
To come down the homeward track;
And my heart for him is yearning,
And my cheeks are all aglow,
For the night of his returning
We’ll a-honeymooning go.
Oh! the poddies know her footsteps, and the horses know
her call.
And the lambs go frisking with her to the foaming water-
fall,
And it’s fun to see the turkeys stretch their necks as if to
hear
When she’s singing down the river and she thinks there’s
no one near—
I am waiting for my drover—
For my drover laddie Jack;
I am waiting for my lover
To come down the homeward track;
And my heart for him is yearning,
And my cheeks are all aglow,
For the night of his returning
We’ll go.


Ah! she told him, in the starlight, when her blushes didn’t
show,
She was glad she wed a drover, for each trip he had to go
Meant another home-returning and another honeymoon,
Which is just the inspiration of that Tambo River tune—
I am waiting for my drover—
For my drover laddie Jack;
I am waiting for my lover
To come down the homeward track;
And my heart for him is yearning,
And my cheeks are all aglow,
For the night of his returning
We’ll a-honeymooning go.
Without so much as a glance at any of us, Nell went
out, turning a deaf ear to all our compliments and ap-
plause. A few minutes later Micky followed her.
Sydney went to see if the coach lights were yet in
sight, and some of us followed him. There was no sign
of them, and the Boss, Bill Jackson, Big Jack, Sydney,
the p.s., The Rat and Micky were all out of the running
for the pool. The clock in the bar showed twenty-five
minutes to twelve. Only Summers and old Jim were left
in.
Sydney, Summers and I stayed out on the verandah
for a while, but the bleak midnight air set our teeth chat-
tering. “ Come,” I said, “ let us have another round in-
side. Bill Jackson is good enough for an hour yet, if we
have to wait that long.”
“ But what about Densham ?” asked Sydney. “ Have
you heard him?”
I nodded. “ Summers hasn’t, though,” I said.


“ Well let’s put a reviver into the old chap and see how
he is. It’s worth while listening to him if the rats aren t
gnawing too resolutely at his brain.”
The actor came to the door.
“Have a tiddley, Charlie?” asked Sydney, leading the
way to the bar.
“ Let him drink and forget his poverty. Let him par-
take of the three X’s and remember his misery no more,”
answered Densham, without, however, making the slightest
movement to join us.
“But what about you?” asked Sydney.
“ The race is not always to the swift, nor the long beer
to the thirsty,” he said, still holding aloof.
“ Well, but don’t you want one ?” persisted Sydney.
“ Even as a marker panteth for the pool, yea, even as
a milkman panteth for the water-bucket, so panteth my
heart for the juice of the hop,” was the answer, spoken
quite seriously.
“ Well, come in with us now,” said Sydney, standing
back to make room for him.
The actor hesitated for a while, then saying, slowly,
“ A feast is made for laughter, and wine maketh merry.
Why should I deal in dolefulness?” he joined us.
He was a peculiar old chap was Charlie, one of the
many peculiar ones the bush claims for its own. And
it is no respecter of persons this great, wild, weird, won-
derful bush of ours. The weak or the strong, the mean
or the heroic, the ignorant or the educated, when once
the silences and the loneliness and the damnable delusions
of life have touched them, it makes no distinction. Doc-


tors of medicine, of law, of divinity, political students,
ay! students of every line of life, it levels them all ;
gets the thirsty grip on them and holds them down, low
down, where the booze and the ’bacca and the miserable
food walks into their lives on the feet of Cadge. There
are exceptions, of course, but when once the educated
man goes ace high in the bush, the bush writes its own
odds against him. It is pitiful, but it is true; for in this
great Southland of ours we have a way of working all
around such social sores as this without ever attempting
to get right at the root of the trouble.
I remember whilst train-travelling one time, getting a
bit of soot in one of my eyes. Said my travelling com-
panion, “ Shut the other eye and work it about; the soot
will come out all right.” A fellow on another seat
laughed. “ Got a fester on the right forefinger, put a
poultice on the left,” he said; “it’s the best cure in the
world, eh ?” And it seems to me that in dealing with the
great sores which fester about the well-being of ourselves
as individuals and of ourselves as a people we religiously
refrain from applying the linseed meal and the dried
poppies to the wounds, and tell ourselves we are working
wonders by irritating some hitherto healthy portion of our
anatomy. Ah ! how many men with the makings of good,
decent, even noble citizens, in them, are we letting the
bush drag down to social damnation? Ah ! how many?
But this is mostly irrelevant, for Charlie Densham was
not of the highly-educated ones; and he wasn’t even cm
speaking terms with Cadge. He had been brought up
a craftsman, and, even at the time of which I write, could


have earned a good living at his trade but for his mental
twist. And of that same mental twist I don’t know very
much, but I will tell you what I do.
When quite a young fellow, with a deep, resonant voice
and a commanding presence, Charlie had dreamed of
leading his country out from the fiscal maze on to the
plateau of political honesty and straightforwardness. With
that end in view he studied elocution; but some enter-
prising Young Men’s Association of the day offered a
prize, and he won it, won it easily, and thereafter politics
were eschewed. The twist showed itself for the first
time then. He joined an amateur dramatic company —
hailed by his friends a heaven-bom histrion. Later he
threw up his trade connection and attached himself to a
travelling company, in between times of noble affluence
starving, as hundreds of others have starved, on many a
barren track. But he always had Shakespeare; he called
him an appetising dish, the while he drew his trousers’
belt tighter and dreamed of the banquet-days to be.
And he got his chance in a metropolitan theatre at last.
But the twist had got slightly tangled on the barren
tracks, and the momentary success knotted it and held
his mind in thrall. Religious mania overtook him. Then
came days of despair, violence, darkness. But he awoke
at last —a white-bearded, white-haired, prematurely old
man, at times with a keen appreciation of the poetically
beautiful, at others with a mind of mist (he was mostly at
others). The days on the barren tracks came back to
him then; he rolled his swag and faced for solitude.
All the Riverina and far West shed hands knew him,


for he visited them regularly —the star and only artist of
a little entertainment he had fixed up for himself which
he called Song and Story, and with which, at first, he
made quite a sumptuous living. But the mist gathered
until his mind rained madness, and the fellows ceased to
appreciate him and his little show. Some only tolerated
him; others made fun (poor fun) of him. He grew quite
simple and childish in many ways, and evil-minded curs
took advantage of his simplicity, and taught him things
he had forgotten the meaning of, obscene, loathsome
things mostly. They also fostered in him his love for
strong drinks.
In between shearing times he lived a lonely life, as a
rule mostly in the bends of rivers fishing. It was in one
of these bends—a bend of the Edwards—that I first met
him, I had bluey up then, and made his camp one wet
and windy nightfall.
“ Good-night,” I said to him, dropping my parcel and
gazing at him through the open flap-way of his tent. He
was on his knees at the side of his bunk, and answered,
without looking at me:
“Tord, he said in heaven that reigneth,
Who am I, that thus Thou deigneth
My old humpy to explore ?”
This greeting didn’t surprise me very much, for I
already knew “ The Mad Actor ” by reputation, and had
started my walk that morning with the intention of striking
his camp if possible.
“No lord at all,” I said; “just a common traveller
looking for shelter.”


“ Foxes have holes, and birds of the air have nests;
but the Son of Man hath not where to lay His head,”
he answered.
“I am like Him only in that one respect,” I said.
He got up and looked at me.
“ A live liar is better than a dead saint,” he said.
Then, after a long dramatic pause;
“Had’st thou fled I must have stayed,
Lonely as some poor old maid.”
I smiled at the ludicrous turn his twist had taken, and
asked again, “ How is it for a camp to-night, anyhow?”
Then he drifted into Hamlet. Taking me by the hand
and drawing me within the tent, he said, fearsomely:
“ But that I am forbid
To tell the secrets of my prison house,
I could a tale unfold, whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy soul; freeze thy young blood;
Make thy two eyes like stars, start from their spheres;
Thy knotted and combined locks to part,
And each particular hair to stand on end,
Like quills upon the fretful porcupine.”
An involuntary shudder froze the marrow of my back.
But the night was giving evidence of increasing boisterous-
ness, and his camp was so snug that I was loath to leave
it.
“Well, what about a shakedown?” I asked again, not
altogether without misgiving.
For answer he drew my swag inside, saying:
“I’ll love you as my brother,
And such welcome as I’d give to him,
After long absence, such is yours.”
And indeed, for all his madness, he made me very wel-


come. But at the dead of night I awoke with vague fear
at heart.
The slush lamp was still burning, touching projecting
edges with dull red light, throwing against the white walls
of the tent grim restless shadows and fouling the air with
smoke. Outside, the wind had risen and the river was
lashing itself from fury into spray. Densham kneeled at
his bunkside, praying. Most of his madness ran to prayer,
’twas said. I sat up and listened, trembling, spell-bound ;
for the words rushed from his lips like stinging thongs of
pain :
“ Oh, Thou, Who at the birth-throes of the world didst
change the infinity of chaos and of darkness into light!
Thou to Whom the sun is as a servant and the moon as
a smiling hand-maiden, and for whose armies of the night
the stars stand sentinel for ever and for ever! Almighty
One ! Omnisicent! Omnipresent! and All-powerful! if so it
be that my petition reach Thee, turn Thou the light of
Thy divinity upon me that I may see.
“ Have pity, oh, may God! for my eyes look inward
and my thoughts are thoughts of darkness.
“My heart throbs for the daybreak; yet for ever it is
night. Yea, even as a virgin for the groom, so yeameth
my heart for the dawning; but it cometh not.
“ Oh, God, have mercy 1
“ Thou knowest that I walked in sunny ways and did
no evil; but the clouds gathered, and the sunlight was
no more, and in my agony I cursed Thee.
“ Forgive, oh, God, and be merciful, I beseech Thee!
For in the sunshine is my heart’s desire; but the mists are


between us and I cannot see. Only through the darkness
comes her voice crying as a plover whose mate is dead.
“Have pity, oh, my God ! For when the light faded
she was big with child.
“Father! Almighty Father! have mercy! For the lips
of my laddie keep crying to me through the mist, and T
cannot see.
“ Oh, Thou Who bade the sea roll back! roll back the
heavy clouds that encompass me, that I may go to my
loved ones and succour them in their hour of need.
“God the Father! God the Friend! Lead me back
to my heart’s desire ! Lead me back! oh, lead me back!”
I could stand it no longer. Taking the poor broken-
hearted pleader in my arms I lifted him gently on to his
bunk. He was fast asleep. He had been praying so,
praying for the sanity that would be his no more, I
awoke him lest the pain should overcome him. He told
me he had walked through a vision of hell.
There was an interval of several years between that
night and the night of the shanty entertainment, and
Densham’s mists had grown thicker and heavier. But
he had found a friend in Sydney, a kindly guardian,
rather, whom he followed in a humble, dog-like way,
doing that which Sydney asked him without question,
almost without murmur. That was until the liquor got
into his head. After that the old actor was not to be held
accountable for anything for days.
Whilst we were having our drinks in the bar, Sydney
asked him if he would join the dining-room company
and recite.


The old chap shook his head.
“ Dead flies in the ointment of the apothecary cause it
to stink with the stink of ten thousand,” he said.
Sydney pressed him. “ Just for the love of it,” he
pleaded.
“ Stay me with flagons; comfort me with kilderkins,
for I am sick of love,” he said.
But Sydney would let him have no more liquor. In-
stead, he took him aside and talked to him gently, lov-
ingly.
Gradually a look of dog-like devotion crept into the
actor’s eyes, and a few minutes later he followed Sydney
to the piano,
“ Mr. Densham will oblige us,” the shearer said, check-
ing some scornful remark Bill Jackson was making. Then
the old white-haired actor, with wonderful power, gave
forth some verses which it had taken Sydney many weeks
to teach him, thus:
THE PARIAHS OF THE TRACK.
Where the tracks lead out to Hunger over blist’ring sun-
burnt plains,
And with solitude as regent drought-eyed Desolation reigns;
Where the rivers mock their Maker from a thirsty bed of
sand,
And the hot winds in their timber mourn some dead Aeolian
band;
Where the mirage—glist’ning symbol of a million thirst-lost
souls—
Breeds a naked-bodied madness in its mimic waterholes;


Where the bleaching bones of cattle under putrid bodies lie,
And the sun burns through the sapphire deeps like an ac-
cursed eye,
And the salt-bush desert’s paean is a long-drawn dismal
sigh—
With a wild despair out-reaching and the Cross of Christ
at back,
To the Midnight of To-morrow tread the Pariahs of the
Track.
Over sea a many travelled, over sea and first saloon,
With the hopes of youth quick-marching, homeward bound
in golden shoon;
Uver sea to sunny Southlands, where a fortune was for all,
And the moans of struggling masses never touched the heart
with gall—
Dreamers mostly, sons of weakness, poor, irresolute and
proud,
Borne from luxury to battle with the strong-bred newr-
world crowd;
But the grim experience taught them from the young
world’s bitter tale
That the fortune is for one man where a hundred thousand
fail;
And a host of anxious mothers in a far-off father-land
Dry the tears despair has brought them with a feeble,
falb’ring hand;
But their tears would leave a blood-stain, as they prayed
to have them back,
Could they see their last-born banded with the Pariahs of
the Track.
From our over-burdened cities others come by East and
West,
By the harshest laws of Mammon to the hopeless service
pressed;
Clerks and counter-servants mostly, offshoots of the middle
class,
Trained in youth effeminately through the rough-shod world
to pass;
Tradeless, strengthless, vain, some vicious, proud—the pride
of clothes,
And the knowdedge that their people live in fashionable
rows—


Finding, when the labour-battle drivas them outward and
alone.
That the kingdom of their manhood is a realm without a
throne;
For they cannot sink their status by the side of working
meoi— &
They, the scions of the measure and the wielders of the
pen—
So tlmy hang about for billets with a half a thousand more
till their fashionable people drive them, starving from
the door;
Then they curse the God that made them, down the lost
years looking back.
Take the Cross of Christ and hump it with the Pariahs of
the Track.
From our over-burdened cities from the workers come the
rest;
By p l r e eS gg , ( J lt of thoughtless parents to the hopeless service
B ° Ul ?oii aPPrentiCe their young days to some uncongenial
Dreary years of wasted effort in the battle for the spoil-
ley arrive at manhood’s station, slow and slipshod at
their trades,
And for ever, ever sinking, find the workman’s lowest grades
then the system overpow’rs them, for “the fittest must
survive,
drive W ° r^S^° P ** * Hades where the imps of Mammon
So they drift, and drift, and drifting, dream the dream of
younger days,
When the world was bright before them at the parting of
tflG W3>ySj
And a pang shoots through the present with “misfortune’s
keenest lance ”
As they see the crowds progressing where they had, them-
selves, “no chance.”
Thus thev find themselves forced outward by the iron laws
of lime,
And of 1 crime) 6 ° rOSS i ourney ( if th ey miss the sloughs
ith their “ no-chance ” song of sadness to the regions way-
out back,
join the swelling army of the Pariahs of the


Ah! grim creatures of grim circumstance, the weak ones
, journey out .
Through the autumn ways of sadness and the wxn.er mires
For of the city preach a gospel, wondrous, grand—
“ Take the track, old man, and face it, there s a living
on the land; . , ~ . , ..
There’s a living where the cockles and the Western staaons
And You’ve only got to battle, and you needn’t go that far.”
So they go, alas! and struggle, as the weak brave only can.
For the sake of an existence, for the soul that is the man;
And again they learn the lesson of Australia s later day
There’s a surplus crowd of workers, and the strongest get
the pay. ~ . . , ~
But they travel on, existing on an odd 30b now and then,
With the wages of an infant for the heavy work of men,
Keeping life and soul together at the dreary sunset hour
With the beggar’s dole of mutton and a pannikin of flour.
And the bushmen watch them passing, touched at times
with subtle pain .
As they answer, looking sadly out across the burning
“ there ain’t no work near here, mate, but there might
be further back
Ah. further back!—
That’s a sweeter hope than heaven to the Pariahs of the
Track.
So it’s onward, ever onward, to the realms of God knows
In the mind a growing madness, in the heart a dumb
despair; .. ,
For the curse of many a “whaler” follows down the dismal
With an’echo trav’ling outward from each crowded country
“What* are we, oh, city fathers ?—loafers, beggars, forced
to crime, .
We who laboured for the country ere the country saw its
prime; .
But you sent your blood’s off-scounngs, sent the sons ye
could not keep,
And the strongest of them beat us with a labour thrice as
cheap.”


And the weak ones, trav’ling onward, catch the echo and
the scorn,
Head the tale of suff’ring written on the faces aged and
worn,
Read the tale of good men ousted by the cheap hordes gone
before,
And they tread the same curst pathway; can they ever hope
for more?
And it’s onward, ever onward! Some out on the desert lie
Where the crows drone fun’ral dirges as they watch them
rave and die;
Some drift back into the cities, some in dungeon-durance rot
Driven there by taints of madness or of crime their blood
begot;
Some, a few, by fortune favoured, rest a while from labour
done;
lint of all the hopeless others—What of them, oh weeping
one? v
There are places off the back tracks that are spoken of with
fear,
Lest the women and the children of our homes should
chance to hear;
That the strongest only think of with a shudder born of
shame,
And a prayer, with bated breath, to God to justify His
name;
Places where there never entered one bright ray of living
truth,
Where the weak-kneed sons and daughters know each other
from their youth,
Where the father with the daughter, and the mother with
the son
Work a curse upon the nation that is calmly looking on;
And you’ll find these grim Gomorrahs, if you care to trace it
back,
Are the homes of former hopeless, lun-daaed Pariahs of the
Track.
Now, before the actor had started on this grim sample
of bush realism, Micky had followed Nell to the kitchen.


He found her, with her sleeves tucked up, mopping up
the ink from the table. He stopped at the door for one
moment and looked at her; but all the bashfulness had
left him. He felt that she had been playing with him,
and it would not have been a far step from fierce love to
fierce resentment. He walked right up to her.
“Nell,” he asked, “did yez mane it?”
The girl smiled at him archly. “Mean what?” she
queried, in reply.
“ Phwat yez sung in the song ?”
“Look out!” said Nell, giving the cloth she held a
quick jerk, “ you’ll get ink on your trousers.”
A bad light crept into Micky’s eyes, and he shifted
away from her irresolutely. He walked slowly to th e
door.
“ Oi’ve bin a fool and yev played wid me, jist as yev
played wid manny a mahn,” he said, bitterly.
He paused at the door. If you wus a mahn,” he added,
“be the holy mother of God, Oi’d say things to yer; but
yer onH r a shhp av a gurrul, and—and—Oi can’t.”
He turned to go but the girl’s voice reached him, full
of sweet appeal.
“ Micky,” she cried, “ Micky, I want you !”
He went back instantly. She held open upon the table
the writing pad Micky had kissed. The open leaves were
scored with writing that was still fresh and bright. Every
inch of the pages bore one or other of the legends, “ Mrs.
Ellen Murphy,” “ Mrs. Michael Murphy.” She showed
them to h : m innocently, and lied womanfully:
“ I thought you had seen it, and I was ashamed.”


Micky crushed her in his arms, and the fierceness of
his caresses took her breath away.
“And yez wrote that yersilf, did yez, Nell?’’ he asked
at last. But he held her so tight that she couldn’t even
nod an affirmative. Ah ! Micky was a gallant lover once
he got going.
The drover troubled little more about the of
the coach that night; but to us in the dining room, when
the old actor’s tale was finished and he had departed,
came listlessness and fatigue. The old back-hut hatter
snored serenely in his corner, and others of us were al-
most nodding with sleep. Only Dolly and Summers kept
up a conversation, and Dolly spoke in undertones, which
made us feel uncomfortable and out of place. Summers
treated her in a very matter-of-fact manner, however, and
kept constantly appealing to us upon any point raised or
opinion asked. That kept us there. He didn’t want to be
left alone with Dolly, a fact which struck me, at the time,
as being somewhat more than peculiar.
At last she asked him to sing something that she had
heard him singing in the morning, something about a
country girl. It was very pretty, she thought and said.
With a look of great relief Summers complied. It was a
simple ditty, sung to soft, caressing music, the words being
just these—•


KATE M‘LEE SON.
Oh! wand’ring down the smoky ways
Of suburb and of city,
The pale girl-faces through the haze
Touch all my thoughts with pity;
For I have camped by Goulbum side
Right through the summer season,
And been for many a starlit ride
With bonnie Kate M‘Leeaon.
Oh, Goulbum side! green Goulbum side!
From Trawool to Maroona gate,
I long to cross the reaches wide
That lead the way to bonny Kate.
Her brown eyes beam with winsome light,
Her eyebrows arch to match them;
Her neck and forehe cl, warm and white
Have red-gold han to thatch them.
She dresses in a frc < of snow—
That flaunts not s ot nor speckle,
But on her cheeks f *ll well I know
The taste of man: a freckle.
She is no wee thing, sad and lone,
That fears the changing weather;
Her head is level with my own
When we stand close together;
Yet she is sweet as harvest-time
Before the hay is carted,
And homely as the nights of rime
When winter fires are started.


She la too modest to be shy,
Yet, ah! so captivating—
No city maid that I pass by
Seems riper for the mating;
For she hath mould like Eve of old—
Blood hot for primal pleasure—
All joy of motherhood to hold
With grace to fill the measure.
So Goulburn side, green Goulburn side!
I’m coming back at lover’s gait
To claim from you my river bride.
My bonny, bright-eyed, buxom Kate.
When the chorus for the last time died out, Dolly said
to Summers:
“ You sing that song just as though Kate M’Leeson
had ex i.stence.”
Summers blushed. “ She has!” he answered.
The clock in the bar struck twelve.
“Ah !”
“Yes,” continued Summers, softly, “she is one ideal
woman who is real. She has promised to be my wife
some day.
Dolly rose and walked to the door.
“Oh ! here’s the coach!” she cried; “ I can see the
lights!”
But she didn’t see them very distinctly. There was
mist in her eyes. She was wondering, with a painful
little heart-throb, how long it would be before her Sum-
mers happened along; for she, too, had mould like Eve
of old; but she was of clay all too conventional, was
Doily, which spoilt her.


At the announcement of coach lights in sight there was
stir and bustle in a moment. Everybody but the old
hatter went out on the verandah.
“ It’ll take her five minutes, at least, to reach us” said
the Boss, looking toward the bar. But Summers chipped
in. “ Let us go inside,” he said. “ There is one song T
want you all to sing before we break up.”
He led the way in and handed us a leaflet each with
the words of a song printed upon them. Then he sat
down to the piano.
“We usually join hands in the company where that
song is mostly sung,” he said.
We joined hands, and as he played and sang followed
him with all our might. Who would not render of their
best to
OUR OWN FOLK.
Tnough all the tuneful hours are sped,
And all the lamps are low,
Though heart to heart sweet lips have said—
“ Dear, it is time to go!”
Fill up again, oh, comrades mine,
For there remaineth yet
One toast to drink in red South wine,
One simple canzonet—
Our own folk! our own folk!
Blooded of whites, though tanned!
Our own folk! our own folk!
Folk of our own South land.


Oh! north and east o’ Leuwin lights,
Deep in the morning glow,
southward by the island heights
Where Derwent waters flow,
The Homeland calls them to her shrine—
Folk we may not forget!
So, pledge them deep in red South wine
And chant the canzonet—
Our own folk! our own folk!
Blooded of whites, though tanned!
Our own folk! our own folk!
Folk of our own South land.
The coach took just ten minutes to reach us, so old
Jim won the pool. We cut it out as was expected.
The only one of the station hands to return that night
was The Rat. From the verandah Summers, Sydney and
I watched him ride away. Sitting loosely, side-saddle, and
just walking his mount, he disappeared slowly; but long
after we could see him no more, nor hear the steady
splosh, splosh of his horse’s hoofs, a strain came from
his cranky, water-logged, old accordion, and we heard his
cracked voice shouting:
“ The Homeland calls them to her shrine—
Folk we may not forget!
So, pledge them deep in red South wine
And chant the canzonet
Our own folk! our own
Said Sydney, “ That’s the gamest handful this side of
paradise!”
“Ay,” added Summers, “but he’s a horrible pest for
all that.”


“ Ah,” replied Sydney, “ there’s no man in the world
much good, 'uiyway, who isn’t a bit of a pest in something
—even in ‘ a Shanty Entertainment!’ ”
Ford & Taylor, Print, Collins Street, Melbourne.








