

A SHORT ACCOUiNT
OF P
WEOBLEY. a,A3 - **
4-3*3
Weobley—the WIBELAI of Domesday, was granted
to Walter de Lacy by William the Conqueror with a hundred
other manors, of which Weobley was the “ honour ” or chief.
Here the de Lacys built a strong Norman Castle, a link in
the chain of fortifications against the marauding Welsh.
The castle was held for Queen Maud, and taken by King
Stephen.
After the pacification of Wales, the Marcher Lords
neglected their castles, and Leland, temp. Henry VIII, notes
Weobley Castle to be a “ a goodlye building, but somewhat
in decayed’
PRICE THREEPENCE.


The ancient borough grew up in the middle ages under
its protection. Two members for Weoblev were returned
to the first Parliament of Edward I. This right was revived
in 1640 and continued to the passing of the Reform Act
in 1832.
Weoblev passed through the families of de Lacy,
de Verdon, Devereux, and others to the Marquis of Bath,
who in 1921 sold the last of his Weoblev estates, the Throne
Farm, to the present owners and occupiers, Mr. James Hope
and Miss Hope. The site of the Castle had been sold earlier
to the owners of Garnstone ; neither castle nor farm had
been bought or sold before.
Weoblev was for many years a pocket borough of the
Marquis of Bath, who sent colliers from his Shropshire
estates to occupy the old “ votehouscs ” at elections, when
they made fires all down Broad Street, on which they boiled
huge kettles. For this reason they were called “ pot-
wallopers ”. According to old custom they could vote next
day if they had boiled their kettles in Weoblev overnight.
Among the distinguished members of Parliament for
Weobley were Col. John Birch (1651), and the Earl of
Eldon, Lord Chancellor (1783).
At the old Unicorn Inn—now the Throne Farm—
Charles 1 supped and slept on the night of Friday, September
sth, 1645. He was on his way to Presteign, after his
triumphant entry into the City of Hereford, which had been
besieged for five weeks by the Scots under the Earl of Leven.


The Ley is a beautiful timbered house a mile from
Weobley, built and formerly owned by the ancient family
of Brydges. Here there was found, under the rafters, only
a few years ago, during repairs to the roof, a pass signed by
Lord Leven. It begins : —“ These are to require all officers
and souldiers under my command not to trouble nor molest
the person or Family of Thomas Bridges of the Ley, nor
plunder horses, oxon, kine, nor intermeddle with his hey,
comes, household stuff, or other his goods whatsoe’er.” A
valuable possession, when the Scots were living on the
country, which they plundered in all directions. Bridges
seems to have been on the side of the Parliament.
Garnstone (originally Gerner’s-ton) was always a separate
Manor. At the time of the Civil War it was owned by
Thomas Tomkins, who was impoverished through his loyalty
to King Charles and received a pension of £3OO a year at
the Restoration. His daughter sold Garnstone to Col. Birch,
one of Cromwell’s generals, from whom it descended to the
Webb-Peploes. The estate, which now includes the Ley,
was purchased in 1900 by the late Sir Joseph Verdin, Bart.,
whose brother, Mr. W. H. Verdin, now lives there. The
family are descended from the de Verdons of Staffordshire
and Weobley.
It was Richard Tomkins of Garnstone and King’s Pyon,
with his son and grandson, both named Benjamin, who first
founded, 200 years ago, the breed of Hereford Cattle now
famous throughout the world.
. M. Leather
NJOTOWfffi IffIBARY AU«m*»A
