

ABEL
HOW TO WELD
USING AN
ABEL WELDER


TRADE ABEL MARK
ELECTRICAL ENGINEERS
Manufacturers of
ABEL ARC WELDERS and WELDING ACCESSORIES


A SHORT
INSTRUCTION MANUAL BOOKLET
WITH HINTS
ON ARC WELDING FOR BEGINNERS


CONTENTS
What is Arc Welding? 4
The Arc Welding Process 4
Power Source 5
The Machine Controlling the Arc 5
Electrodes 7
Welding Current 8
Preparing for Welding 9
Striking the Arc 10
Running a Bead 11
Welding Two Pieces of Metal Together 12
Welded Joints 13
Indications of Trouble 15


INTRODUCTION
The instructions laid down in this booklet have been
written by welders for welders and are intended as an
introduction to help operators of Abel machines
familiarise themselves with the processes involved in
arc welding.
The operating manual is also set out in a way which
will clarify welding techniques to amateurs in the field.
Welding is, of course, a process that is vitally important
in manufacturing and maintenance practices, and the
sections listed in this instruction manual will explain
what arc welding is, how it is applied, and how to avoid
errors and mishaps in its use.
Although it is impossible to cover all phases of welding
in such a compact instruction manual, the booklet
presents all the pertinent factors necessary to assist the
welder to a better understanding of the materials and
techniques of welding.
How skilful the beginner may become depends largely
on himself. This manual shows the way; but continued
practice is an essential ingredient of success.
Abel offers, in addition, the services and facilities of
its technical representatives and research staff who are
readily available to give their advice on any welding
problems which may arise.
The Company invites all Abel welding machine users
to avail themselves of this service at all times.


WHAT IS ARC WELDING?
Although welding is an ancient craft, the science of
arc welding is comparatively new. It is a method of
joining metals together by fusion using the electric arc
as a source of heat.
Britain’s Sir Humphrey Davy, in the year 1800 A.D.,
discovered that an electric current would form an arc
when forced across a gap. However, the now familiar
electric arc was not used for welding until 1881, when
French inventor, De Meritans, joined lead plates in a
storage battery with the carbon arc.
Even the Russians took a hand in early welding experi-
ments. Bernardos improved on the carbon arc, then
Slavianoff discovered that a bare metal rod, called an
electrode, would melt off by the heat of the arc and
act as a “filler metal” in a weld.
In 1910, Kjelborg, a Swede, found that a better weld
resulted if a chemical coating, called a flux, was coated
on the metal electrode. The flux not only cleaned the
metal, but assisted in mixing the filler metal with the
base metal. Within less than 20 years, researchers
developed an efficient mass production method.
The two World Wars gave welding techniques a tre-
mendous impetus and afforded arc welding an
unexampled opportunity to prove how quickly and
cheaply the tools of war, such as aircraft, warships,
guns and submarines, could be fabricated.
Bridges, buildings and the like, previously riveted, are
now welded because arc welding permits metallic parts
to be joined without the need for a third connecting
piece, such as required in a riveted or bolted construc-
tion. The use of welding is still expanding rapidly.
THE ARC WELDING
PROCESS
In arc welding, the pieces of metal to be welded (called
base metal) are placed in position and the intense heat
of an electric arc is applied at the junction, melting
the metal.
At the same time, additional filler material may be
added to the joint and mixed with the melted base
metal.
Upon cooling, the metal becomes one solid piece. This
mixing and solidifying of metal is called fusion.


A consumable electrode is used, connected to a welding
transformer, to provide the arc to heat the two metals
to be joined.
As- the electrode is consumed, it is fed in continuously,
thus providing metal to replace that part of the base or
parent metal melted away by the arc.
The electrode is coated with a “flux” which also melts,
helping to make a clean, strong joint.
The weld metal itself, as it is deposited, has a cast
structure, the composition of which is determined by
the melting core wire and flux coating of the electrode
and by the amount of pick-up of parent metal during
the welding process.
For example, a deposit of alloy steel, such as stainless
steel or mild steel, no longer possesses the original pro-
perties of that alloy. This is because of dilution with
the parent metal.
POWER SOURCE
Naturally, before any welding can be carried out a
suitable source of power is necessary.
The electric power used for arc welding may be either
D.C. or A.C. The essential difference between these
two sources of power is that in D.C. the current remains
constant in magnitude, flowing always in the one
direction.
Similarly, the voltage at any point in the circuit remains
constant in magnitude and polarity (i.e., either positive
or negative).
With A.C., the current flows first in one direction then
in the other. Similarly, the voltage at any point in the
circuit changes from positive to negative with the change
in direction of current flow.
Welders, therefore, are of two basic types: those that
provide direct welding current and those that provide
alternating welding current.
THE MACHINE-
CONTROLLING THE ARC
In order to control the arc so that too much or too little
heat is not applied, it is necessary to use a welding
transformer with proper control of the welding current,
such as the Abel range of welders.
A number of low-priced arc welders which are avail-
able only have tappings for each electrode size and


difficulty is often experienced in making a good weld
because the operator cannot make corrections to his
welding current which may be necessary for variations
in voltage supply, different kinds of welds, and different
sizes of materials.
In Australia, most work on mild steel, for instance, is
done using A.C.
A.C. welding machines have several advantages over
D.C. machines. Among them are: (1) Lower purchase
cost. (2) Higher operating efficiency. (3) Negligible
maintenance. The quality of welds produced using
A.C. is as good as with D.C., but A.C. is limited in that
it will not satisfactorily run some of the non-ferrous
types of electrodes.
The open-circuit voltage of an A.C. welder is important,
because some electrodes need a fairly high voltage to
prevent cutting-out of the arc during welding.
The Abel Mk. 3 A.C. Arc Welder, using a special dual
secondary transformer winding, has a “square wave
form output” which produces a smoother welding
characteristic and substantially reduces the need for a
pilot arc.
The square wave form introduced in the Abel Welder
virtually eliminates instability and spatter —faults which
are frequently associated with other transformer
welders, particularly when low welding currents are
involved.
By use of the special dual secondary transformer wind-
ing, as designed by Abel electrical engineers, the peak
voltages are suppressed at their normal point of develop-
ment, then fed back to maintain an almost constant
value up until the actual instant of reversal.
Similarly, the rise in voltage is precipitated in the
reverse direction, then again suppressed as it commences
to exceed the optimum average value. This results in
the wave form being distorted.
This square wave generally eliminates any need for a
pilot arc and assists in striking an arc by virtue of the
more constant voltage it produces, and for the same
reason, it sustains a more stable arc during welding
operations.
SPECIFICATIONS
The specifications covering the Abel Mk. 3 Arc Welder
are as follows:


The welder is a single-phase or 2-phase 7.5 kva machine
designed to operate from 240, 415 and 480 volt A.C.
supplies. When operating on 240 volts it has a maxi-
mum output on an intermittent rating of 225 amps, and
on 415 to 480 volts this is increased to 275 amps. The
continuous rating for both voltages on a 60 per cent,
duty cycle rating is 225 amps. Maximum primary
current requirements are 29.4 amps, at 240 volts and
28.2 at 415 volts.
SPECIAL 15 AMPS. TAPPING
For those areas where the 240-volt supply current is
limited to 15 amps, rated power points, the welder has
a special tapping which limits the input current to this
value. Using this tapping, the maximum welding cur-
rent available is 115 amps, and electrodes ranging from
16 to 10 gauge can be used.
TWO ELECTRODE LEAD CONNEC-
TIONS
Two connection points for the electrode lead are pro-
vided on the welder, one for low current-high voltage,
and the other for high current-low voltage. Using the
low current terminal, a welding current of 50-150
amps, can be obtained with an open circuit voltage of
80. This enables electrodes of 16 to 8 gauge to be
deposited, and the combination of low current and high
voltage makes it particularly suitable for work on sheet
metal and non-ferrous materials. The high open circuit
voltage assists towards sustaining a stable arc at low
welding currents.
The hUh current terminal has an output current range
from 90 to 275 amps, which meets the requirements of
10 to 6 gauge electrodes. Open circuit voltage on this
connection is 50 volts.
The Abel Mk. 3 can be used for welding and cutting
mild steel, sheet metal, cast iron, stainless steel, copper,
bronze, brass, aluminium with argon gas, soldering with
carbon arc, and for hard surfacing.
The machine’s overall dimensions are 18 x 15 x 26 in.
high. Its weight is 180 lb.
ELECTRODES
An electrode is, as has been said, a metal wire or rod
covered with a baked chemical coating, called flux.


The electrode is used to sustain the welding arc and
to provide filler metal for the join.
Electrodes are manufactured in different diameters, of
different metals, and with varying chemical coatings.
The size of electrode needed is determined mainly by
the thickness of the metal to be joined. In other words,
the thinner the material, the lighter the rod.
The diameter of the core wire determines the size of
the electrode. This is expressed in standard wire gauge
such as 16 s.w.g., 14 s.w.g., 12 s.w.g., 10 s.w.g., 8 s.w.g.,
6 s.w.g. and/or 4 s.w.g.
Smaller diameter electrodes require less current and
deposit a smaller quantity of filler metal than large
ones. They are used for welding thinner base metals.
Bigger sizes require more current, deposit more filler
metal, and are used for thicker base metals.
The type of electrode best suited for a particular job
depends on the kind of base metal and sundry other
welding conditions that may be present.
For instance, low carbon or mild steel requires a mild
steel electrode. Cast iron, aluminium, and brass require
different types of electrodes. (Refer to Electrode
Guide.)
By using a special hard surfacing electrode, a hard or
tough surface layer of metal may be applied to softer
metals to make them wear longer.
However, as a general rule, the selection of an electrode
is straightforward, in that it is only a matter of choosing
an electrode of the same or similar composition as the
metal to be welded. (See Electrode Guide.)
The following table will indicate the correct electrode
to use for various material thicknesses, together with
their normal application:
For light gauge mild steel x / in. and under—use 12,
14 or 16 gauge electrode.
For mild steel up to i in. thick—use a 14 or 12 gauge.
For mild steel up to i in. thick—use a 12 or 10 gauge.
For mild steel up to i in. thick-—use a 10 or 8 gauge.
For mild steel over i in. thick—use an 8, 6 or 4 gauge.
WELDING CURRENT
The question of selecting the correct current for a par-
ticular job is of vital importance in arc welding.
With too low an amperage, difficulty will be experienced


in striking and holding an arc, penetration will be poor,
and a bead with a distinctly rounded profile will be
deposited.
Excessive current is accompanied by overheating of
the electrode, and this will cause undercut and burning
through of the material. There will also be excessive
spatter.
It follows, then, that normal current for a particular
job may be calculated as the maximum that can be used
without burning through the work, overheating the
electrode, or producing a rough, spattered surface.
The welding current required for each electrode size
varies considerably, and is dependent on the material,
the operator, the type of weld, the length of arc and
also the type of machine used.
All electrodes sold today usually have the welding
currents printed on the packages, but, if this is not
available, the following table will indicate the average
current to use:
16 gauge electrode 20-50 amps.
14 gauge electrode 60-80 amps.
12 gauge electrode 70-100 amps.
10 gauge electrode 100-150 amps.
8 gauge electrode 150-180 amps.
6 gauge electrode 180-230 amps.
4 gauge electrode 230-300 amps.
PREPARING FOR WELDING
Before using the arc welder, the operator should
familiarise himself with some important points about
operating and handling the equipment.
Elementary precautions should be observed if a welding
job is to be done safely and properly.
• Use a shield with proper filter glass because sun
glasses or gas welding goggles do not give adequate
protection.
• Caution persons who may be anywhere in the vicinity
before striking an arc.
• Wear gloves and protective clothing to guard the
skin against arc rays, heat and spelter.
• Remove inflammable materials, such as petrol,
grease, and oily rags from the welding area.


• Remember that zinc, tin, brass and lead fumes or
dust are dangerous to breathe and should be ven-
tilated or blown away.
• The floor or ground around the welding area should
be dry. If the floor is wet, or even damp, stand on
a wood platform or rubber mat.
• Hold the palm of your hand over any piece of
metal to see if it is hot before carelessly picking
it up.
• Avoid welding any container or tank until you can be
certain of what they have held. Explosive fumes
may be present; so either steam clean the container
or fill with water during welding.
STRIKING THE ARC
The beginner will almost invariably find it difficult to
strike an arc and hold it.
He should not be discouraged, therefore, if the electrode
sticks to the work because it requires practice to develop
the skill needed to strike and establish the arc.
Try striking the electrode across the work just as if
striking a match. This burns off impurities on the tip
of the electrode, allowing easier starting. It also pro-
vides a few flashes of light, thus permitting the operator
to see where he is welding.
Once an arc has been struck, the electrode immediately
begins to burn away and it is necessary to keep feeding
it in, otherwise the length of the arc will become too
long and it will extinguish itself.
If the electrode persists in freezing to the work the
welding current is probably too low. Use of a higher
current will generally rectify the trouble.
For downhand welding, it will be found that an arc
length not greater than the diameter of the core wire
will be most satisfactory.
Overhead welding requires a very short arc, so that
a minimum of metal will be lost.
LENGTH OF ARC
The best welds are made with a constant arc length of
X V in. to i in., and this can only be obtained with
practice. If the arc length is too short, the electrode
will stick to the work. However, the securing of an arc
length to ensure a neat weld before long becomes almost
automatic.


If the arc is too long, it will produce more heat, but the
metal will not flow regularly, and it will be almost
impossible to lay down a neat, even weld.
A very long arc also produces a crackling or spluttering
noise and the weld metal comes across in long, irregular-
shaped blobs. The weld bead is flattened and spatter
increases.
A short arc is necessary if a high quality weld is to be
obtained, although, if it is too short there is a danger
of it being blanketed by the slag and the electrode tip
being frozen in.
Should this happen, give the electrode a quick twist
back over the weld to detach it.
RUNNING A BEAD
Before welding two pieces of metal together, it is advis-
able to spend some time running practice beads on a
flat surface.
To do this, position the metal pieces and strike and
establish an arc.
Maintain a normal i n - t 0 » in- arc length and
move the electrode across the plate at a uniform rate
and inclined 60 to 80 degrees in the direction of travel,
which is left to right with a right-handed welder.
The feeding motion may be kept constant by steadying
the elbows against the body or a table.
Study the back of the molten metal as the arc builds
up the bead, then allow the arc force to penetrate the
base metal and deposit filler metal.
Correct speed will be indicated by proper shape and
size of the bead which, after chipping, should be clear,
evenly rippled, slightly higher in the centre, and tapered
off evenly to fuse with the base metal on either side.
Run a short bead and extinguish the arc by withdrawing
the electrode, then continue to restrike the arc and run
short beads, moving over the plate and increasing the
length of beads until you are able to stop and start as
desired.
Remove the slag off each bead by chipping with the
hammer after the weld has been allowed to cool for a
short time, then brush clean with the wire brush. Always
brush away from the body.
Run long, parallel beads, consuming a whole electrode


in one bead. Then run beads from the right and left,
towards and away from you.
Chip off the slag and inspect the bead for shape, pene-
tration and uniformity. There should be no overlapping
or undercutting along the edge of the deposit.
WELDING TWO PIECES OF
METAL TOGETHER
First strike an arc as described previously and watch
the pool of molten metal closely. It is essential that
metal be melted from each work piece and the electrode
ALL AT THE ONE TIME.
Do this by directing the arc so that it will melt both
pieces together. The pool of molten metal MUST
contain parent metal and filler metal to form a strong
weld.
If you find it difficult to see the work through the dark
lens it is a good idea to run a chalk line along each
side of the weld to be made.
This will then be seen quite distinctly through the lens
and will enable you to lay down an accurately positioned
weld.
Always hold the electrode slightly off the vertical (about
25 deg.) and weave it slowly in a slightly circular
movement to assist the mixing of the molten metal.
Do NOT weld over slag left from a previous weld.
Remove this slag first, otherwise a porous and weak
ioint will result.
For heavy work, grind a bevel on each edge to be welded
and fill the groove with weld. This permits better
penetration and forms a stronger joint.
If the work is too heavy for the machine to handle with
one large run, lay down several smaller ones, one above
the other.
To stop or reduce warping, always securely clamp the
work pieces and make short runs as far away from each
other as possible. Oppose weld deposit, whenever pos-
sible, to equalise contraction from cooling weld metal.
This reduces the concentration of heat at any point, the
worst cause of warping.
For welding sheet metal, it is essential to provide clean-
cut, straight edges and to apply too many tack welds
rather than too few. After tacking, hammer joint flat,
then complete welding in the shortest possible time to
prevent warping.


WELDED JOINTS
When reasonable skill has been attained in handling an
electrode, the operator can then proceed to the stage of
making up welded joints.
BUTT WELDS
Place two plates with their edges parallel, but allowing
about i in. between them and tack weld at both ends to
prevent contraction stresses from the cooling weld metal
drawing the plates out of alignment.
However, plates thicker than i in. should have their
welding edges bevelled to a 70-90 deg. angle (included
angle).
This assists complete penetration of the weld metal.
Then deposit a run of weld metal in the bottom of the
joint. Do not weave the electrode, but maintain a con-
stant rate of travel along the joint sufficient to produce
a well-formed head.
If there is any tendency for undercut to form, make sure
the arc angle is kept short, with the angle of the elec-
trode at about 60 to 80 deg. from vertical. The rate of
travel should not be too fast, yet speedy enough to
prevent the slag pool from getting ahead of the arc.
To finish the joint in thin plate, turn the whole job over,
clean the slag out of the back, and deposit a similar weld.
Several runs will be needed to complete a joint in heavier
plate. After finishing the first run, chip the slag out and
clean the weld with a wire brush so it will not be
imprisoned or trapped by the second run. Further runs
are then deposited by using either single beads or a
weave technique (a weave bead is made with slow,
oscillating movements of the electrode).
When the joint is completely filled, the back is either
machined, ground, or gouged out to eliminate slag which
may be trapped in the root (the zone on the side of the
first run farthest from the operator), and to prepare a
suitable joint for depositing the backing run.
FILLET WELD
A fillet weld is one of triangular cross-section and is
made by depositing metal in the corner between two
faces meeting at right angles.
The operator should begin with a piece of angle iron.


Position the angle iron so that the two legs are at 45
deg. to the workbench and run in a weld bead, using
the same technique as for a butt weld.
When familiar with this process, position another piece
of angle iron, with one leg horizontal and the other
vertical. This is known as a horizontal-vertical, or H.V.
fillet.
Strike the arc, and at once bring the electrode to a
position perpendicular to the line of the fillet and about
45 deg. from the vertical. Do not attempt to build up
more than i in. leg length with an 8-gauge electrode or
the weld metal may tend to sag towards the base, and
undercut may form on the vertical leg. Weaving in
H.V. fillet welds is not desirable.
VERTICAL WELDS
For vertical welding, tack weld a 3 length of angle iron
to the work bench in an upright position. Strike the
arc in the corner of the fillet, with the electrode about
10 deg. from the horizontal to enable a good bead to be
deposited. A short arc should be employed, with no
attempt to weave on the first run.
On completion of the first run, de-slag the weld deposit
and begin the second run at the bottom. A slight weav-
ing motion is needed to cover the first run and obtain
good fusion at the edges.
When each side motion is completed, pause briefly to
allow weld metal to build up at the edges or undercut
will form and too much metal will accumulate in the
centre of the weld.
OVERHEAD WELDS
Overhead welding is little more difficult than downhand
welding, except for the slightly awkward position
necessary.
Set up a specimen for overhead welding by first tack-
welding a length of angle iron at right angles to another
piece of angle or a length of piping.
Attach this to the workbench or clamp in a vise, so that
the specimen is positioned in the overhead position.
Hold the electrode at 45 deg. to the horizontal and tilted
10 deg. in the line of travel. Touch the tip of the
electrode lightly on the metal to ensure a steady run.
Deposit the first run by simply drawing the electrode
along at a steady rate and do not attempt a weave tech-
nique for overhead fillet welds. The weld deposit will be


rather convex because of gravity action before the metal
freezes. The second run is deposited parallel to the
first and above the site of the third run.
In welding there are many pitfalls for the beginner, and
here are some brief hints which may help to iron out
initial troubles;
INDICATIONS OF TROUBLE
(1) If the weld is lumpy and high, the welding
current is too low.
(2) If it is semi-flat and undercutting the work,
the welding current is too high.
(3) If it is thin and uneven, the rate of travel is
too fast.
(4) If the metal is piling up and sticking to the
electrode, the rate of travel is too slow.
(5) If welds are weak and result in failure, the
trouble could be:—
(a) Too much welding current resulting
in crystallisation.
(b) Insufficient welding current gives lack
of penetration.
(c) Insufficient reinforcement of weld
joint.
(d) Wrong open circuit voltage.
(e) Wrong electrode for material being
welded. Always check electrode guide
for correct rod to use, having ascer-
tained the nature of material to be
welded.
ARC CUTTING
It is possible to cut metal with the arc. Although this is
ai very fast and fairly economical method of cutting, it
leaves a rather ragged and unsightly edge. It is quite
possible to attain a fairly good cut, but here, again,
considerable practice is needed.
Special electrodes are available for arc cutting, but if
these are not obtainable, dip your mild steel electrode in
water and use it wet. Considerable heat is needed for
arc cutting, therefore, use currents for the next biggest
size of rod. First, blow a hole in the work, then lay the
electrode fairly flat and “poke” at the metal, blowing it
away from you and gradually elongating the first hole.
This is a process which must be done quickly to achieve
good results, so always practise on pieces of waste
metal first.


MARK 111 PRODUCTION
UNIT: 225 amp. continuous
welding with smooth arc
stability, stepless control, 220-
250 or 400-480 volt Primary.
With an electrode range of 16
s.w.g. to 6 s.w.g., the air-cooled,
low-operating-cost Abel Mark
111 portable unit is suitable for
the welding of mild steels and
non-ferrous metals.
Economically priced at only
£63 plus accessories £10.10.0
Dimensions: 18" x 15" x 26".
Weight: 180 lbs.
MARK I MAINTENANCE
UNIT: 30-130 amp. continuous
welding with smooth arc
stability, stepless control, 220
to 250 volts single phase. This
unit has an electrode range of
16 s.w.g. to 10 s.w.g. The Abel
Mark I will cut maintenance
costs and avoid breakdown
losses. Weld, cut, braze, solder
and hard surface with this
portable unit for only £33.0.0,
plus accessories £6.10.0.
Dimensions: 15i" x 10" x 15".
Weight: 89 lbs.
WELD IT YOURSELF
equipment you can rely on


ABEL ARC INDUSTRIES^
Buckland Street, Alexandria
Phone: 69-6961
