

nJ oto P^M
V SI wo. f* fx 9
<*w
A SHOET ACCOUNT
MISSIONARY LABOURS ON ONE OE THE
ISLANDS OF NEW HEBRIDES GROUP.
A MISSIONARY’S WIFE.
WITH APPENDIX,
CONTAINING AN APPEAL FOR MORE MISSIONARIES.
EDINBURGH: A"
FEINTED FOE PRIVATE CIRCULATION.
1876.


1508 00214067 6


' : ' ' M
~ i(\C\L
xv j.. 0 no
£> v 1
l/g
OFT til W
S[mrt |Uromtt of IRxssronar# labours
Emerald Hill, Melbourne,
November 3d, 1875.
My Dearest Sisters and Brothers, —
If I could only put one of the earthquakes
we’ve had in this, it would be a sensational
journal—descriptions seem so very tame after
one has experienced the awful feelings they
produce; but I must begin and go on the best
way I can, as there is no possibility of grati-
fying you in that way.
You know it was not till very near the
time of the vessel’s sailing that we decided
last year to remain, and I sent my last journal
on board with an aching heart. We had been
so nearly going to see our precious boys, and
till I saw the “ Day Spring ” slowly disappear
in the distance, I did not know how intensely
my heart had been set upon seeing them;
and instead, we were left with the tidings of
their illness which had reached us that day.


Our work too that evening was rather sad, for
not being able to purchase nearly enough
biscuits and rice from the vessel for our
natives (some three or four casks were all the
captain Could spare), we had to dismiss a lot
of our boys. They offered to stay without
food, but we knew that would not do ; and
not having the heart to say which were to go,
we left it to themselves to settle, saying we
could only keep three ; so after some consulta-
tion, they told us they felt that the newest
comers had the best right to remain. To crown
all, John got very ill, and sank so low that
we feared he might not live to see the return
of the “ Day Spring ; ” but all the time I had
an inward conviction that God had not kept
him on in Anewa just to die after giving us such
encouragement to remain, and we had waited
so confidingly upon Him to show us the way,.
And He did not keep us long in suspense, for
one event transpired after another to show
how wisely we had been guided.
The first of these happened about a month
after the vessel left, and as John was slowly
recovering from his illness, we heard one lovely
day, when I was setting the copies for after-
noon school (I managed to keep it on all the
time), a cry of “ Sail 01” which set us all into
a fine pitch of excitement. School was the
last thing thought of, and the natives scampered


off to the other end of the island where the
vessel lay. John was unable to walk so far,
hut you may be sure we were quite on the qui
mve for news, and I way-laid the first return-
ing native, who shouts out in Anewan:
“ Missi! what do you think has happened !
A whole ship-load of Tanese, men, women, and
children, have been driven off their own island
by war, and come over to live on this little
island, because the worship is strong, and they
know they are safe. They are more in
number than the people of Anewa, and where
are we to get food for them, Missi, for they
had to escape at night with what little
baggage they could bring in the vessel.”
Another native soon after came with letters
from Mr and Mrs Neilson confirming the report,
and we were rather dumbfoundered at this turn
of events, and like most of the other mission-
aries when they heard of it, deeply impressed
with God’s ways of working.
Tana was the island John’s whole heart was
set upon, and it was one of the bitterest dis-
appointments of his life when the Missionary
Synod would not allow him to return there
instead of coming to Anewa nine years ago ;
but we both felt we were following God here,
and now He had brought the Tanese to
Anewa, for those who had come were from
round Port Resolution, some of them John’s


old friends.* Some of tlie different islanders
were as struck with the event as we were,
and at last Missionary Synod Mr Neilson
amused all the missionaries, giving the outline
of a speech made upon the occasion by one
of the Anuteumese teachers on Tana,
who are apt (all the natives are) in drawing
illustrations from daily life, to point their
addresses on Sabbath. He took the history
of Joseph for his subject, and made “ Missi
Paton ” out to be Joseph driven from Tana
by his wicked brethren, the Tana-men,
but that God had gone with him to Egypt,
alias Anewa, and prospered him and the land
for his sake, and prepared it for them to go
and live upon, and thus save much people alive I
Our natives behaved admirably, the chiefs
and church members coming to consult John
about it that evening; and they agreed to
* About thirteen years before, Mr Paton had been
driven from Port Resolution, Tana, he being obliged to
escape by night, after having laboured on the island for
several years, and having buried his wife and her child
there. This was previous to his visit to the Colonies
and Britain to raise funds for building the missionary
schooner “ Dayspring.”
t Anuteum, one of the first of the New Hebrides
group on which the missionaries settled. The natives
upon this island have been Christians for a number of
years, and it is from this island that almost all the native
teachers are procured.


meet next morning, and go in a body to offer
homes and land to the refugees among thejuc
different villages. They just pled with John
to accompany them, offering to carry him on
their backs (no cabs, you know); but as he
doesn’t care for that mode of conveyance, and
being unable to walk so far, he sent me in
his place. I did not like the business, and
tried hard to get out of it; but John and the
natives insisted, they were so anxious to let
the poor things see they were welcome ; so I
got through the performance, grinning and
shaking hands with all the women, and
patting every child on the head, some of
whom set up frightened screams at sight of a
white woman, which made me feel rather
awkward, though my heart did go out to
those bonny little curly brown pates and their
poor mothers sitting nursing their babies
in a strange land. Most of the men I
skipped (there were exactly one hundred of
them altogether, men, women, and children,
nearly half the population of Anewa), they
looked so thoroughly bold and impudent, and
what John has so often described the New
Hebrideans to be in heathenism, “ naked,
painted savages,” whom I never do pretend to
admire. I must except two or three of the
men, however, and dear old “ Nowar ” at their
head, who looked like a gentleman, with his


short hair—so grey now—no earrings, and
respectable clothing. His fine old face just
beamed when he saw me, and told me to tell
John he had come to live and die with his dear
old Missi. He applied vigorously for baptism,
which J. however could not consent to
without first consulting his missionary, Mr
Neilson ; and besides, the rule on Anewa is
that candidates for baptism first attend the
communicants’ class for twelve months. His
conduct on Anewa has been that of a Chris-
tian, but as for all the others, instead of getting
good themselves, their influence upon our
natives, has been dragging down , especially
upon some of our wilder rogues, who have
only given in to the changed state of Anewa,
because they are obliged to, Christianity
having become the law of the land.
You can easily understand how a lot of
vigorous fellows, with nothing to do, away from
their own island, and their own missionary
influence, and full of heathen superstition, never
having attempted to learn either reading or
writing, could influence those whose hearts are
not changed, and who are impatient of the
outward restraints Christianity imposes upon
their heathen preachers.
John immediately set to work, revising his
Tanese, which he had well nigh forgotten, so that
when the Tana gentry declined to come to


church, he was soon able to go to them and
first read his addresses, and then preach to them
in Tanese. How it did remind us of the early
Anewa days, when our worthy parishioners
used to enjoy a pipe or a nap, as they lay on
their backs listening to the sermon ! Their
curiosity led them to make a fine turn-out the
first Sabbath after they came; and I was
touched to see the marks of care and pains
bestowed upon the women by Mrs Neilson, for
some of them had dresses put on so neatly;
and I know from experience how much has
to be done ere one can get them to wear
clothing even to church; and it must have
been so trying to have them run off* when
the labour and instruction were beginning to
tell.
'We took good care to make work for
them—weeding waste bits of ground, getting
reeds for fences, &c., —so that they might earn
clothing, and several of them took advantage of
it. J, also requested the men to make banana
plantations, as it was past the yam planting
season, and they were likely to be a while
here. He gave them all the young bananas
he could spare for them to plant, and mean-
while all the Anewans contributed to their
support, which was no light matter for this
barren little island ; but it is wonderful how
they have all managed to subsist, for a month


after they came we had the most terrific hur-
ricane that ever swept over Anewa.
It begun in earnest about noon on the 14th
January, after a heavy thunderstorm which black-
ened the air all morning. The wind suddenly
became furious as we were at dinner, and we
had to jump up and make preparations, as the
house was shaking and creaking, the thatch
standing on end and rain pouring in. Almost
immediately, trees, fences, &c., began to
occupy a horizontal position, so the children
and I took refuge in the study, which seemed
to stand firmer than the rest of the house, and
from the windows watched the progress of the
storm. A magnificent sight to see tall trees
bending and falling before the awful force of
the wind. John came in quite dejected, say-
ing if it continued much longer the church
would go, as it was already bending, notwith-
standing its being so strongly propped. There
was a lull just then in the storm which
cheered me, but his more experienced eye led
him to pronounce it the stillness that proceeds
a greater storm, it was so black and ominous
looking, and sure enough just before dark a
terrific blast sent us all flying down to the
cellar, our usual place of refuge.
J. and a couple of the girls made a final
attempt to get into the house for one or two
loaves and whatever else they could grab. We


were awfully hungry, being so unceremoniously
interrupted in our dinner. My faithful little
cook was precipitated into the cellar before a
great blast, puffing and panting, clutching on
to a kettle of boiling water, which was an
unexpected luxury in the circumstances, so we
managed to make a very jolly meal off the top
of a box. And all our stores being in the
cellar, we got hold of a tin of salmon, and if
you will not be shocked, brought to light a
bottle of wine just to give a flavour to the hot
water ! The girls had thoughtfully brought a
good basin of milk for the children, and when
Frank found we were all to eat the salmon out
of one plate, his joy knew no bounds, and he
stuck his fork into the biggest bit in the dish,
which proved too large for his wee mouth,
causing great merriment.
The storm raged till midnight, when we
were thankful to get up to our beds, and
found our own room fortunately the only
habitable part of the house. But ah, what
utter desolation the morning light revealed !
Our fine large church a mass of ruins with
one great pillar standing solitary and up-
right through the rubbish against the clear
blue sky; the school-house in the same
condition at the other side of the “ Imrai ”
(meeting-ground). With the exception of the
cook-house and printing-office, not an out-


house was left standing on the missionary pre-
mises, hut oh how thankful we felt that our
dwelling-house stood secure, as J was in no
condition to have attempted building another,
—not even a pane of glass broken, though of
course the roof could not escape, and conse-
quently everything was soaked. The day for-
tunately proved very hot, and we got all the
mats lifted, mattresses, blankets, &c., washed
and dried. The pigs were in their glory, run-
ning out over all the plantations, and I’m sure
if they could have spoken they would have
said, “It’s an ill wind that blows nobody
good.”
Almost every native on the island was at
work before day-light at his fences, dwelling-
houses (and there were not a dozen left
standing on the island) being left till the
plantations were secured, and school studies
were not even thought of. It was so sad to
see the destruction of food—fine large bread-
fruit and cocoa-nut trees torn up by the root—
bananas with the fruit half-formed lying useless
on the ground, but the greatest lamentation
seemed to be about the “ Jafare Mord ”
(house of worship) though the general public
were complacently viewing it as a judgment
from “ Trapolo ” (his satanic majesty) for their
being so “ strong for the worship.” This is a
popular error, and John guarded them against


it, next Sabbath, preaching an impressive
sermon from the text, “ Labour not for the
meat that perisheth,” rather a propos to the
occasion 1 We worshipped under a very wide
spreading banian tree, however, was no
shade, the hurricane having left the trees
leafless, with the ruins of the church on one
side and school on the other. J— told them at
the close that we would not speak of a new
church for a week or two, till they had got
their own plantations, &c., in order ; but after
that they did set to with a will, and oh I wish
you could have seen sometimes forty or fifty of
them bending under the w T eight of a huge tree
they had carried two or three miles over a
precipitous path, and drenched in perspiration,
We could hear the joyous noise a long way off,
and it ended in a triumphant shout as they laid
it down at the church. I could not settle to
anything for running out to watch the progress,
and as for J— he had to be everywhere at
once, directing and working as hard as any of
them.
The villages all took it in turns to
provide a feast for the workers at the close of
each day, and as the food was brought in in the
morning, the women came to cook it, and those
who could be spared were busy plucking sugar-
cane leaf to thatch the roof, so you may ima-
gine what a bee-hive appearance the “ Imrai ”


presented, and sometimes great roars of
laughter getting up at some woman indig-
nantly pitching a cocoa-nut shell at a man who
was slyly running off with a choice morsel!
My girls used to get through with their work
in the morning and run to help, and I often
contributed to the entertainment by an enor-
mous bucket of tea. One day when a lot of
Tanese were helping they had as many as
fourteen pigs cooked and eaten ! They
wrought so hard that after five Sabbaths in
the open air, we again assembled in a new
building where the old one had been, and
though by no means finished it was rendered
sufficiently comfortable to worship in. The
roof nicely thatched and finished, and the
framework of the walls covered in with
plaited cocoa-nut leaves, until they could make
lime, as they resolved to have a w T ood and
plastered building this time. Of course the
whole of the work and material was given
gratis, but John promised them a large cow
for a feast when all was finished, and which
was often held out as an inducement to the
lazy ones to work. After a week’s rest they
began again to collect coral to burn for lime,
which is great labour, as the coral has all to be
dug out of the sea with crowbars three miles
off at “ Tiara ” and boated round. “ Tiara ”
is a lovely little island adjoining Anewa, where


the children and I took advantage of the boat
to do a little pic-nicing, their papa being al-
ways with us, as he had to superintend a good
deal and see that they did not smash, bis,
right up among the reefs.
All were getting on with great glee, wdien
a sudden stop was put to everything and the
whole island thrown into a ferment, by two
wilful cold-blooded murders which took place
on the morning of the 2d March. No one
had any suspicion of what was going to
happen, and the murdered man was one of
the most active the day before, diving for
coral for the church. He was the son of such
good respectable church members, though not
one himself, —a fine fellow, attending church
regularly with his children, and young Tana
wife whom he had lately married, and was mur-
dered along with him. It is supposed she was
the ground of jealousy which must have led to
the awful deeds. Poor “ Palesa” and his wife
went to bed as usual, and just as the day be-
gan to dawn, the two murderers—an Anewan
and a Tana man —crept quietly to their
house and removed the cocoa-nut leaves at the
door, which caused Palesa to stir in his sleep,
but he was shot through the heart before he
awoke to consciousness. His poor wife tried
to hide, but was shot down by the other
villain, and hardly spoke during the few


moments she lived. “ Palesa” called to his
brother and mother and told who the
murderers were, while the blood was spouting
out at his heart, and then died, and both were
buried in one grave before breakfast. The
news spread like wildfire, but not correctly at
first, and we were in hopes the wounds were
not mortal, so J— hurried off to the village
with bandages and everything he could want,
but was met half way by a native teacher, who
told him they had just been buried. The
chiefs and people assembled in the “Imrai”
full of consternation, to consider what was to
be done. The scoundrels were tried, of course,
and the punishment they got (the destruction
of all their property, except the food, which
was divided among the people), was no more
than they could afford to laugh at, as any
one can pick up a living of some sort either
in the bush or the sea. Oh how an event of
this kind does make one admire British Jaw.
The injured party were afraid to stay in their
own village, not knowing what might happen
next, and one of the murderers being a Tana
man, the whole Tanese were ready to back
them. I sent for the friends and collected
every scrap of black I could find for mourning,
for which they were very anxious, and John,
in consideration of his speedy return to the
Colonies, parted with his scufiy blacks. The


old mother looked twenty years older, and her
hair had turned quite grey with the shock,
and she was perfectly worn out with grief.
It was altogether a sad time that, for we had
been so tried with Hutshi, the girl I had last
time with me in Australia, and who has turned
out a complete vlxcti —the first of my girls, I
am thankful to say, who has not turned out
well. She was married to one of our best
young lads, and went quite gracefully through
the whole affair. I think I wrote you all
about it before—but all the while she was
dying for my handsome young cook, who is
engaged to my little table-maid. She began
soon after her marriage to persecute her hus-
band and flirt with the other, going from bad
to worse notwithstanding all we could say to
her; and one day she behaved so frightfully,
that when we were told of her guilt, J. and
I sank down on the nearest seats perfectly
overpowered with disappointment and horror.
I could hardly have believed that any woman,
either black or white, could have so deliberately
planned to lead others so young and innocent
into sin.
The young chief came to ask J— how she
ought to be punished, as something would
have to be done, but he could give no
advice, never having been called upon to
legislate in a similar case, and was too vexed


to be able to collect his thoughts, only he for-
bade them to shoot her, as one or two of the
enraged fathers proposed, and advised them to
be guided by the Anuteumese teachers, two
wise Christian men from Mr Inglis station.
They said that the punishment inflicted on
Anuteum by the chiefs was to tie the guilty
parties, collect all the goods of those most
deeply involved, and distribute them among
the people at the other side of the island, so as
not to tempt those round to bring false accusa-
tions against each other for their property.
This was accordingly done in the case of
Hutshi, and we had an invitation to be
present at the ceremony, which we declined,
as J. told them it was better he should not be
mixed up in these things. The only way in
which he did interfere was to shorten the
time to three instead of the twenty-four hours
they were determined to keep her tied, and
which she richly deserved in my opinion.
Two or three Tanese happened to arrive at
her village before she was unloosed, and ex-
pressed their disgust at the consequences the
“ worship” entailed, saying they could have as
much “fun” as they liked on Tana without
being punished for it, but one of our Anewans
answered, with a sly wink at his neighbours,
that bad as the “ worship” might be, it had not
driven them from their own land ! We were


awfully vexed about it happening with one of
our girls, as everything in any way connected
with the missionary station is so talked of, and
the worst characters are generally the most
sensorious.
The father of one of my little girls—
a wild, greedy fellow, who wanted to be
paid for letting me attend and nurse her
through an illness—came with a grand face
expressing his horror of Hutshi’s conduct, and
saying he must take away his little girl, as he
could not think of letting her remain to follow
such an example. I was both amused and
indignant, but took care to show neither feel-
ing, and jumped up pleasantly, saying, “ I
would let her go at once, and give her one or
two of her dresses home with her (I took care
to ma,ke no mention of her blanket box, &c.,
which they most value), as she had been an
attentive girl.” The man looked rather dis-
mayed at being taken so sharply at his word,
and muttered something to the effect that his
daughter might not wish to leave, whereupon I
expressed my horror at allowing the girl to dis-
obey her father for a single moment! The fact
is, it suited me to make an example of her, for
I knew that, owing to her mother’s health, she
would soon have been taken away at any rate,
and she was the boldest and least grateful of
all my girls. My heart smote me, however,


when she looked up at me with the big tears
in her eyes as I was taking her hand in mine
to say good-bye after giving her her little
bundle. Yet I felt I could not do anything
else, and comforted the little woman, telling her
I would always look upon her as one of my
own girls, and that she was not to hesitate to
ask me for anything she wanted —a piece of
advice which I have since found was unneces-
sary ! I did not take time to consult John,
as I had them off in less than ten minutes ;
but he said I acted perfectly right, and he
heard the natives tease the poor man most un-
mercifully as he crossed the “Imrai” on his
way home, shouting out that they were glad to
see he was able to set up his village as a pat-
tern even to the Missi’s (it never was dis-
tinguished for morality), and if he would in-
form them when the change took place, they
would send their children to him ! A few
minutes afterwards the guardian of my next
youngest girl appeared at the window with a
rueful face and asked if his child might be
allowed to remain! I told him I was too
glad to keep them all, and had not- asked the
other girl to go, and reminded him besides
that so long as Hutshi lived on the missionary
station, her conduct was irreproachable.
I wish I could say that was the last of the
trouble we had with Mistress Hutshi, for she


professed great penitence, and sent one of the
girls two or three weeks afterwards to say she
wanted to tell me all her badness, as it would
make her feel better (she had not been allowed
to come near the mission premises, nor had we
taken any notice of her). We had very little
faith in the young lady’s repentance, but
feared to crush any yearning after amendment
if it did exist, and I thought God might give
me a word for her, so we had a long inter-
view ; but I felt all the time there was no
change in her, as was proved, for she went
back tossing her head and telling the others
they might sulk as much as they liked, she
didn’t care, for the Missi was quite satisfied
with her now ! She did not improve, but the
church members round kept such a watch
upon her that she did not do anything very
flagrant. She did , however, lead her hus-
band a miserable life, and I never believed
a native could have borne with patience what
he did, till, being able to stand it no longer,
he came to bid us good-bye, saying he was going
to live about three miles distant (it was as far
away almost as he could get on Anewa, either
in one direction or the other, as his lady-love
lived close to us in the centre of the island !) ;
and that he freely bestowed her upon any man
who might be fool enough to take her, as hence-
forth he would have nothing to do with her.


She had, out of pure bravado, professed
to have eluded their vigilance, and implicated
a Tana man, as well as “ Rangi, the wildest
man on Anewa, who both proved their inno-
cence. Perhaps “ Rangi ” agreed with me
that he had enough sins of his own to account
for without being blamed for what he really
did not do ; and being an out-and-out savage
in his disposition, we feared trouble when he
came with all the Tana men at his heels to
inquire about it one morning a few days after
her husband had left her. We little expected,
however, the scene there really was, right out-
side our gate too, for it was there Rangi caught
hold of her. She gave one spring to John for
protection, but the gate was between them,
and Rangi wrenched her from it, and the
savage yells that got up nearly sent me fran-
tic with terror. J— stood leaning carelessly
against the gate viewing it all, the calmest
person there ! He felt his presence would be
a check, though it would have been folly to
interfere. My girls were groaning and crying,
and “ Yawaci ” (the girl I have here) was
unconsciously doing her best to wrench the
handles off the dining-room door in her des-
pair, groaning oat “Missi! blood will be spilt,
while I was on my knees, in the middle of the
floor, calling upon God to interfere ; but little
Frank stopped me, saying, “Mama! Mama! I


don’t like to see you look up and talk like
that; are you ill ?” So I tried to be myself
again to the wee man, and felt comforted in
having left the case with the Lord, only I
must see “ Rangi,” though I had very slender
hope of influencing him, and put my careful
husband into a fine consternation, as he would
rather have seen an apparition than me coming
to witness such a scene. I had only a very
dim notion just then of his gestures and en-
treaties, being deaf and blind to everything
except “Rangi,” who came nearest my idea of
a demon of anything X had ever seen.
The poor girl was tied with her arms back-
ward to a cocoa-nut tree, 'pale, with terror, and
a hundred muskets bristling around her. The
Tanese were in full heathen costume, which,
you know, means paint instead of clothing j
the church members stood calmly, like J—,
looking on, except two or three of them, who
kept guard round her with loaded muskets
for her defence if necessary. Her life was all
they or we wished, for she richly deserved any
punishment short of death.
I caught Rangi’s eye at last, and at a
sign he came quietly forward, and I began
to tell him he should not dare to shoot
my girl, but being too excited, I ended in
sobs, and was marched off, but not before
Rangi earnestly assured me he would not


touch a hair of her head or let any one
else do it; only, he said, she deserved to be
tied, and ought to be well beaten for blacken-
ing his character ! We could hardly keep from
smiling, even in the excitement, at Rangi s
care for his reputation, which was as black as
it could well be.
Well, here was Mistress Hutshi up for
public sale, for, according to native law,
whoever dared to unloose her from that tree
had to take her for his wife, her husband
having renounced all claim to her. Rangi
reminded them of this when he tied her up,
saying the Missi only could alter that law
if he wished. The Missi did not feel in-
clined to do any such thing, having devoutly
wished her at Jericho ever since she com-
menced her pranks, as she was proving a curse
to the place, and now only hoped the most
tyrannical unmarried man in the island would
take her off bodily as far away as the limited
circumference of Anewa would admit (so did
the church members), but for J— to say so
would only be the beginning of mischief. He
was so anxious they would not appeal to him
for advice, for we both felt that for her native
law was the best. But though a score of young
men would have gone down on their knees for
her before she was married, there she stood
for about three hours without a single bidder 1


J— had got the whole crowd dispersed to go
and cut wood for the lime pits (you know he
is of rather a practical turn of mind, and likes
to utilize the most unlikely occasions), which
they did with great energy, having the steam
up, so she was left alone, as the women had
all to run and cook food.
I had a grand donation besides the tea
that day, as we had a calf killed the
evening before, and was giving orders about
it, when I saw J— waving me to the study
with such an amused face. It seems Hut-
shi’s old sweetheart had rushed to him in
eager haste, saying:—“ Missi, I never will
have such a chance for a wife, will you
marry me to Hutshi if I untie her?” John
said he certainly could not, and that if he took
her it must be d la native, and that he would
have to discontinue his attendance at the can-
didates’ class, of which he was then a member.
He explained, at the same time, that it was
not like running away with another man’s
wife, as her behaviour (which in Britain would
have divorced her) had led her husband to
give her up, only that, for the sake of example,
he could not countenance such proceedings on
the part of intending communicants. “ Sara ”
said in that case he would have nothing to do
with her ; but alas, female influence prevailed,
and he unloosed her an hour or two after amid


the hurrahs of the passers-by and our intense
though secret delight; for though “Sara” is
obliged to confess he has “ caught a tartar,”
yet he manages to keep her in tolerable check,
being a determined fellow. We heartily re-
echoed the sentiments of one of our church
members when speaking of Hutshi, viz. :
“ That it was awful what a woman could do
when she was bent upon mischief 1 ” Indeed,
according to the natives, we have her, along
with the two murderers, to thank for those awful
earthquakes which nearly frightened us out of
our senses, though on Anewa very little damage
accrued from them. The first —at least the
first to speak of —occurred near midnight on
the 28th of March (the second anniversary of
our Linas birth*), and woke us up with a ven-
geance, being the worst we ever had, the earth
heaving so awfully that we expected every
moment to be swallowed up, and were almost
paralysed with terror, but Minnie and Frank
slept through it all. After it a tremendous
rush of the sea seemed to take place, from the
noise it made, and which we found next morn-
ing was the case, carrying our boat from where
it lay high and dry about 100 yards inland ;
also canoes, two of which were smashed. I
lay in awful terror after the earthquake till &
* Their youngest child, which died about eighteen
months before.


o’clock, and was dropping off to sleep, when
another terrible one sent ns flying out of the
house in our night-gowns, J— dragging the
children out of bed, and the girls rushing out
from their house. There was not a breath of
wind, and it was awful to see, in the bright
moon-light, the great trunks of the trees sway-
ing back and forward, and feel the ground going
to-and-fro with such force. We had one or two
slight ones after that, and then, just at day-
break, an awful repetition, every one of us
simultaneously rushing out of doors. This was
number five , and before breakfast we went to
see the damage done to the boat (but it was
uninjured), and had two more violent ones
ere we got home, making seven in all before
breakfast. After which we had a commotion
of another kind. John felt so exhausted, and
had just got fast asleep on the study sofa (the
most unusual occurrence with him), when I
heard high words between “ Taia,” one of our
church members, and “Nalihi,” an Erru-
mangan. I knew not what to do, for natives
never waste time in high words—they always
rush to their arms : and I was unwilling to
' o
wake J— to more excitement, as it was
exactly that day two years since he had been
seized with that awful fever; * and I had
* This was the fever which so nearly cost Mr Paton his
life, and compelled them to leave the island for a time.


been in fear of its return, as people predicted
it would, about the same time of the year.
Well, I actually made up my mind to show
my wifely devotion, —and it was a good test
f or me —l beg leave to say, I always had
such a foolish terror of a loaded musket
anywhere, and infinitely more so in the hands
of an enraged savage —by going between the
combatants myself. To make matters woise,
all the men about had gone that morning to
bring some coral, and only a few women had
collected, and one or two timid fellows who
stood at a safe distance. “ Nalihi ” was
flourishing his musket in “ Taia’s ” face as an
ace unpaniment to an eloquent harangue he
was delivering in Errumangan, not being able
to speak Anewan ; and “ Tala,’ who under-
stood and could speak it perfectly, seemed to
be paying him back with interest. They
subsided for a few moments when it was
whispered the “Missi” was there, but on
finding it was only the “Missi fine, they
went at it with renewed vigour. I took no
notice of the Errumangan* knowing my only
chance was with “ Taia,” so I went over to
him, and whispered him not to utter another
word whatever provocation he might receive,
and though reluctant at first, he behaved
* Errumanga, the island on which John Willians and
the Messrs Gordon were murdered.


nobly, and stood what I think few white men
would have done in the circumstances. I
kept close beside him all the time, and though
for three-quarters of an hour that villain stood
heaping insult upon him, and at last in his
rage cut down his bananas and fences before
his eyes, he never spoke, though his muscles
twitched and he clutched at his great club
sometimes —one that I knew had done good
(or had !) service in heathen days under the
great brawny arms that wielded it, for “ Taia 5>
is a perfect Hercules, and a great big man,
such a contrast to the little treacherous, sharp-
nosed Errumangan who was dying for an
excuse to get a shot at him. When I thought
Taia was going to give way, I put my cold
white hand (it did feel so cold) on his black
arm, and every time I did so, he turned and
looked down at me with a grim smile, saying,
“ Don’t fear, Missi, I’ll not speak.” Now I
maintain that though J— sometimes fears
Taia’s Christianity is not of the highest type,
yet he is undoubtedly a perfect gentleman, or
he would not have stood there—the greatest
living orator on Anewa—silent at the bidding
of any woman. When I saw the good food
being discharged, and so little left from the
hurricane, indignation mastered every other
feeling, and I felt it was high time John
interfered with “Nalihi,” as no one else


dared to speak to him except Master Frank,
who, by the way, found us out just then, and
proceeded without hesitation to deal with him
in plain terms. His little figure heaved with
indignation, and he drew such a long breath
before calling out, “Oh you naughty!
naughty man ! you’re a wicked man 1 Jehova’s
so angry at you !! ” Everyone was so amused,
and a general titter went round, while
“Nalihi,” with whom Frank had been a
favourite, began vigorously to defend himself
to the child in broken English, and at the
same time wielding his axe to some purpose
among Taia’s bananas; so feeling my own
strength would not hold out much longer, I
sped off and brought J—, who quietly went
up to “ Nalihi ” and relieved him of his
musket and axe (oh I was glad to see that
musket in dear old J—’s trusty paws, for
Nalihi held it in a horizontal position, and it
always would point at me the Whole time I
stood there !) clapped him on the shoulder, and
had him sobbing like a child in a minute, and
offering payment to Taia for the damage done,
which, however, Taia was too seriously
offended to receive, and I do not wonder at it.
The crowd began to disperse, and J. was
taking Nalihi off for a day’s work under his
own eye (in case of him coming in contact
with Taia again), when I put a graceful finish


to the proceedings by going off into a fainting
fit under the cocoa-nut trees ! J— said I
managed bravely, all except that; but I do
think that after seven earthquakes and such a
scene I had a good right to get up some
demonstration, and it was the first I ever
perpetrated for public benefit!
We had three more earthquakes that day, but
slight, making ten in all, and I took care at night
to provide for emergences by putting a supply
of blankets outside on the verandah, as there
is not a moment to snatch clothes when they
come, and we had felt chilly the night before.
I got laughed at for what was termed my
needless precaution ; but we had hardly got
into our first sleep when another violent
earthquake turned us out, and we were thank-
ful for them. It was not so bad as some,
however, and we got a sleep till morning
without further disturbance, as the grand
performance did not come off till next evening
at nine o’clock. John was busy in the bath-
room with the girls damping paper for next
day’s printing, and I was in the dining-room
jotting in my journal the events of the day,
when we all had to rush out with the most
frightful earthquake that had yet taken place.
The house danced, and the windows rattled
awfully, and Frank woke up with the first of
it, screaming with terror, but Minnie took it


more quietly, telling him it was nice . It
might have been nice to feel ourselves rocked
on the bosom of “ mother earth (we lay down
on the ground at a safe distance from the
house, which we expected to fall every
moment), could we have been sure she would
not open up and receive us into a closer
embrace. The heaving must, I think, have
continued nearly five minutes, and we had
just got into the house again still trembling
with agitation, when a terrible gust of wind
and roar of the sea half prepared us for the
shouting of the natives, who called to us that
the sea had actually come close to our gate I
and we went out to find natives up to the
waist in water where it had been bush two
or three minutes before ! We heard some-
thing flapping, and Yawaci picked up a
large fish about twelve feet from our gate,
and as the tidal wave receded, they were
left in hundreds, which the natives spent most
of that night and next day in gathering. An
enormous turtle was found, too, among a lot
of debris “ Jehovah’s turtle,” the natives
called it, owing to the way in which it was
found.
No serious accident occurred from the
wave in our island, as in most of the others,
though some natives fishing at “ Tiara ” were
nearly carried away, and our boat, which lay


at anchor there, was lifted, anchor and all, and
carried a long way inland, but to a sandy
place where it got no damage ; yet not a
canoe, if I remember rightly, was left whole.
From that time we had a constant succession
of earthquakes, and were kept in continual
dread, though none of them so violent as those
I have mentioned. We had to sleep with our
doors open, and at last J— went to bed in his
clothes, to be ready to run.
I suppose you have heard that the tidal
wave swept right through Mr Inglis’,* doing
terrible damage, and half-drowning them,
and the earthquakes kept knocking down
his walls and chimneys as fast as he could
rebuild them. Dr Geddie’s fine church, too, is
all but destroyed; but I think the greatest
damage done is to the nerves of the poor
missionaries’ wives (the missionaries them-
selves would be indignant if you accused them
of having any), it is such an awful sensation
to feel the very earth trembling and heaving
beneath one, and such an eerie feeling comes
on at night.
I ivas thankful to bid good-bye to Anewas
for a while, though vexed to part with
the natives, poor things. I am so proud of
.* Mr In S lis and Dr Geddie were two of the first mis-
sionaries settled on Anutuem. Dr Geddie being dead,
he is looked upon as a father among the missionaries.


their progress (the women and girls) in hat-
making, which has been quite a success this
year; and now they are quite independent in
this respect of the outer world, and begin to
take them on board the “D.S.” and trading
vessels for sale. They are just simple round
straw hats, with narrow rims for the men, and
broader for the women, neatly plaited all in
one like Leghorn, with the pandanas leaf,
which grows plentifully on the islands. Minnie
and Frank are wearing them to school in
fashionable Melbourne, and don’t look a bit
outlandish ; indeed, the islands are not so far
behind the age after all, for neither the chil-
dren nor I have needed to go near a dress-
maker, or get a single new garment since we
came (J — hasn’t either), and we look just
like our neighbours —a great deal better than
some I have no doubt! !
I had nice time for sewing on Anewa,
having no seams to prepare for the women ;
we devoted our whole attention to the
hats, and they prepare the material
for that themselves. Eosana, the Eastern
teacher’s wife, taught them, and I superin-
tended, but came down greatly in their esti-
mation when they found I really could not
plait myself! One oldish woman said :
“ Missi, how had you the assurance to make
such a fuss, and insist upon hunting us out of


our villages, to come here to do a thing you
can’t do yourself! ” I told her I knew how to
make up hats of “ Budama,” with the material
there, only it would be no use teaching them
that, as they hadn’t it ; but they had the
pandana tree, and it was right they should
learn to make use of what they had. The
lady was satisfied, smiled graciously, and said,
“ You’re quite right, Missi, we must each use
the material we have, and you could not learn
to do our hats, when the pandana tree didn’t
grow there !” Nearly 200 hats were plaited
at school, and I trimmed them for the women
with bright calico, and the men’s with a narrow
band of Turkey-red. While they plaited, we
got through the singing of thirteen new hymns
J— printed, and added to the little hymn-book,
two or three of them translations from San-
key’s, which the natives sing so heartily, often
attracting a poor Tana invalid we had, who
would come slipping round the verandah to
listen. I always have my school on the ver-
andah. His was a sad history, poor man. He
was out one day fishing in his canoe, about
five years ago, and was run down by a trader’s
boat (he had no idea they were chasing him,
or he could have escaped), dragged out of his
canoe, which was sent adrift, taken on board,
and put in irons, till he became reasonable,
and soon found himself in a Fugu plantation,


where he was not badljy treated, and had plenty
of food, till he got ill ((he was brought to us in
the last stage of consmrnption), and then they
kicked him to make him work ; but as he
could not, and neithen would he die—which
was so inconsiderate cof him—they were ob-
liged to bring him horaie, at least as near home
as suited their conveniience. They landed him
on Tana, at Port Resolution, thirty miles or so
from his own village,, and among the most
deadly enemies of tribe, who began to
smack their lips over tlhe prospect of a cannibal
feast the moment he w/as landed. But our old
friend “ Nowar ” camie to the rescue, and
showed them how vewy little picking they
could get off his bones,, and offered them a fine
fat pig in his stead, wlhich they were gracious
enough to accept. Curiously, this was the
means of saving No war’s life afterwards, for
the poor man gave him his box as a little re-
turn for his kindness (Ibeing all he had), and
it was this box which received the bullet in-
tended for Nowar in the late war which sent
them to Anewa, when he happened to be
carrying it on his shoulder from his own house.
“ Nisei ” (the sick man) came over with the
refugees in December, and was brought to us
one day for medicine, and we kept him alto-
gether, as he was unable to walk back. He
was evidently dying, reduced to a perfect


skeleton, and in agony sometimes from his
breathing. It made our hearts ache to see
him, and he clung so to John, telling him all
his story at intervals, as his cough would
allow him. His tears fell thick when he saw
Minnie and Frank playing and tumbling over
their papa, for his own two were about the
same age when he left them. He said, if the
white man had only let him say “ good-bye '■'
to them before he left, he would not have felt
it so much, and he was very anxious to be kept
alive till the “D. S.” came, J—having pro-
mised to try to get her to land him at his
own village, about ten miles from Mr Watt's
station. I gave him the most nourishing food
I could think of, but it was so little he either
could or would take that it was a difficult
matter to sustain him. He was very fond of
sponge-cake, and I charged J— and the natives
not to let him know it was made of eggs, but
he found it out one day, and would eat no
more. He felt the natives were tired of him,
and was so grateful to us, for we always took
care, either J. or I, to take his meals to him
ourselves. His mind was so dark, but he was
yearning to know something of the world to
which he felt himself hastening ; and I felt it
so hard to be tongue-tied, for I can't speak
Tanese, and it was impossible, with all the
multiplicity of work John had to attend to.


that he could be mucch with him. I could da
little more than memtion that blessed name,
which is above every name, and point upward,
and oh, how eagerly he would look up with
his great wistful eyess, and then at me, as if
he would fain drinlk in more. He had a
violent attack of hemiorrhage one evening, and
after that, was afraiid he might die in the
night, and wanted J — to go and sleep in his
house, which was ratftier awkward, but he de-
cided to give him up the study—a great
privation for John —Ibut he was not put to the
test, as “Nisei” could not think of dwell-
ing in a ‘'big house,” though he was
told J— would sleep in the same room on the
sofa, but insisted on lying on the verandah
—I had given him warm blankets and cloth-
ing— outside our bed-room window, which
O
opened on to it, and J— went to him two or
three times in the night. We were amused
at his calling him “ Gap evidently in-
tending it as a great compliment to J— who
would scorn to put even the title of king on
a par with that of missionary
“Nisei” was still alive when we where ready
to goto the missionary synod and was put ashore
at Mr Watt’s, who promised to get him sent in
his boat to his own village. He heard when
he got there, however, that his wife was
married to another man, and his children


either dead or stolen away, so he lost heart
and said he would die where he was, as he
had friends in a village five minutes’ walk,
from Mr Watt's. I stayed to keep Mrs Watt
company when our husbands went on to the
missionary synod, and we visited him to the
end, Mrs Watt speaking and praying with
him every time. J— always managed to
have a little worship with him once a day,
and he used to cling so to that poor man and
send for him if he were late in going. The
last day he was in life Mrs Watt asked him
if he knew the Lord Jesus and he said so
sadly and earnestly,—l don't know him,
Missi,” —and listened so intently as she spoke
of His love. When we went back next day
with more little comforts in the shape of tea,
etc., he was in his grave.
Mrs Watt and I felt rather lonely after our
dear ones left, the more so, as they had been
detained with us for some days owing to a
storm, and we were such a large and pleasant
party, with the exception of Mr Robertson,
whose wife was at Port Resolution keeping
Mrs Neilson company and the vessel had to
run in there for shelter, while Mr Robertson
was left to be teased by the other missionaries
who were snugly enjoying themselves with
their “ better halves !” The four sailors who
brought the boat ashore were also left, and


Mrs Watt’s pretty new drawing-room had to
be covered with beds for them at night, and
she must have been put to her wits’ end to
get changes for them all, as they were drenched
to the skin in their vain attempt to get back
to the vessel, and of course no one but I
brought any luggage on shore as they ex-
pected to return on board in an hour or two.
Our husbands were very anxious about leav-
ing us behind, owing to the disturbed state of
the island, but Mr Watt took the leaders of
the fighting parties to Anutuem, and God dis-
appointed all our fears, giving us such a nice
quiet time—only two slight earthquakes—all
the three weeks I was there, and our “ good
men ” returned invigorated and cheered with
their mutual intercourse, having had one of
the most harmonious and delightful meetings
possible.
After bidding adieu to our dear friends,
the Watts, we got to Port Resolution again
the same afternoon (we had spent a night
on shore there on coming to the Watts,
so that I got to and from Anewa this year
without being a single night on board, or even
downstairs, a great triumph for such bad
sailors as Minnie and I are. She was very
ill, poor child, and roused me out of bed before
daylight the first night we slept at the Neil-
son’s—to pray that God would not let her be


sick again on her way to the Watts’),—and
spent such a pleasant time on shore from the
h rid ay till the Monday morning, when a fair
but furious wind blew us across to Anewa in
two hours, and we found it looking charming
as ever, and my girls quite up to the mark in
their preparations for our reception. Beautiful
fresh sponge-cakes, so light they might be
blown away with a puff of wind, the visitors
declared, and we had a nicely packed table at
dinner, for all the missionaries’ families came
on shore, it being such a lovely day for a visit.
Indeed they were nearly all in the boat before
I had crawled up from my cushion on deck,
and shouted back that they would be delighted
to see me on shore, and not to be bashful
about bringing the children ! We persuaded
Mr M'Kenzie to leave dear little Jessie with
us, to Minnie and Frank’s great delight, as
her mamma had stayed behind for a month
to nurse dear Mrs Murray who was ill.
I must pass over everything else that
happened until we turned up in civilization
as it is dose upon mail time. I would like
to have told you about our pretty new church
with its snow-white walls, which was finished
just before our beloved friends Mr and Mrs
Inglis * paid us their farewell visit, which was
* Mr Inglis has gone to London to get the whole
Bible printed in the Anutuemese language.


like to break our hearts, for they been a
father and mother to ns and to the mission.
Our parting with our darkies too was intensely
trying, as we are to be away from them a
longer visit than last, but the society of our
dear friends the Murrays, was an unexpected
treat, and made the voyage so pleasant not-
withstanding the sea-sickness.
And now I have our grand joy to tell
you of, and which, I often feared, was too
good to be realized. Our precious sons.
Bob and Fred* have been given back to
us again after a nearly two years’ absence.
From the time we got the telegram saying
they had left Adelaide till we folded them
in our arms, our hearts thumped most
unmercifully, and all was fever and pre-
paration. Even Yawaci, who always goes
on in the even tenor of her way however
others may be burning with impatience, got so
excited when the “lightning message came,
that she kept tramping up and down stairs
without in the least knowing what she was
going for ! The shipping office people must
have come to the conclusion that people of
note were in their vessel from the many in-
quiries made regarding it. The three days
did pass, however, and on Saturday night.
* The two oldest children were left in the Colony for
their education.


after seeing the childrens room as pretty as
howers, hooks, and their little home box
presents could make it, I went through the
ceremony of going to bed myself, though not
to sleep, for our boys were to arrive on Sabbath
morning, and long before day-break I was up
and dressed with such fastidious care that J.
came to the sage conclusion that a mother s
love was the most intense feeling human
nature was capable of, as he had never known
me get up in the night and spend as much
time over my own and the bairns’ appearance
for any living being ! ! He had to submit to
a thorough inspection himself before I sent
him off at day-break, for I didn’t see why
our little men should not see us looking our
best. He steadily refused to let me go with
him, fearing the result of over-excitement, but
was glad to change his mind, finding the
steamer would not be at the wharf till after
ten o’clock, and he could not bring them here
and be back at E. Melbourne to preach at
eleven, so he came tearing back in a cab for
me and we got to the wharf a quarter of an
hour before the steamer. As it came in sight
I learned, if I did not know it before, that
grief can be more calmly borne sometimes
than joy, for I parted from them without a
tear, feeling as sensible of God’s presence
carrying us through it as if I had seen His


glorious person in the room. I can’t say that
-about the meeting. The dear boys broke
down at sight of their papa (he had to cross
another steamer to get to theirs), and sprang
into his arms sobbing, unable to utter a word.
They were a great deal taller and much the
better for their stay in Adelaide, but the same
dear old fellows still. Their papa came a bit
in the cab with us, and then turned off to his
pulpit duties (he must have given the people
,a grand sermon, I should think), leaving us to
encounter the meeting with Minnie and Frank,
who were as excited as two little mortals could
be, but Yawaci’s black face was decidedly the
best of the whole affair. It was perfectly
radiant with joy, and with what a loving voice
she said—“ Tareddy” and kissed him, a
tremendous demonstration of affection from
a native ! They have been with us over a
fortnight now, and how delightful it is to tuck
them all under the clothes with my own hand
at night! All four are at school, and like it.
The Home mail closes in the morning, and I
must close, with fondest love from your loving
sister, — Maggie H. Paton.


APPENDIX.
AN APPEAL TO THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH
OF VICTORIA.
Dear Brethren, — In accordance with the resolution
of your Assembly in 1874, the New' Hebrides Mission
Synod has sent me up for rest, and if possible to awaken
a deeper interest in our mission in you and your Sabbath
Schools, so as to raise funds for more missionaries. We
now greatly need twelve or fourteen more missionaries
to place in new stations, among heathen tribes and on
heathen islands of our group, where thousands are
perishing and crying to you and the churches in these
colonies for help. Therefore we now entreat you to
make a great effort to increase the number of mission-
aries you support on those islands. As you are already
pledged to the support of the mission on this group, and
as God has so wonderfully blessed the labours of your
agents in it, we confidently hope you will. Within three
years, on Efate, you have brought six savages to be
members of Christ’s church, and many more under
Christian instruction ; and within nine years, on Aniwa,
you have brought the whole population from being
cannibals of the most degraded character to be wor-
shippers of God, and forty-five of them to be members
of the church. Now as the field there to be occupied is
yet so very large, and as its many thousands are now
looking to you for help, and have none else to look to
(as the large churches at home are pledged to do all they
can for the larger fields of India, Africa, and China), if
you do not send them help they must perish. God has
brought you so near to them, and entrusted them to


your care, and by what He has done through you on the
islands occupied, He promises to do for you on all the
islands to which you extend your mission. Surely, then,
they have great claims upon your trying to bring them
all to seek and serve Jesus !
As I hope soon in person to enjoy the pleasure of
pleading the claims of our mission before you and your
Sabbath Schools, I would not have sent this now had it
not placed you and our branch of your mission at a
great disadvantage, by having the claims of the new
field in China brought before you so as to lead you to
decide regarding it at your coming assembly, in the
absence of any claim or appeal on behalf of the urgent
wants of our mission on the New Hebrides; and also of
your mission to the Chinese in this colony. As you are
already pledged to both of these, they have the prior
claim on your support.
Do you ask if the results in our mission justify our
past expenditure and our present appeal? My reply is,
Within the last 25—1 may say 20 years, we began our
mission, and though we have now twelve European
missionaries, nine .of them joined it within the last nine
years, yet we have now 100 native teachers and evan-
gelists at work in our group, trained by those mission-
aries. We have eighty-six schools, with about 2500
native scholars in attendance. We have fifty mission
stations and out-stations, 3000 natives attending church,
and 900 of them church members. Now if you remem-
ber that all these were lately the lowest savages, without
a written language, you will see what a great work has
been done there. And if these results do not justify our
past expenditure and our present appeal for more
missionaries, I know not what will.
I rejoice as much at hearing of the conversion of a
Chinamen, or of an Aboriginal of this colony, as of a
South Sea Islander. I pray for, and rejoice in, the
prosperity of all missions, and would help them as far as
possible; but I would have your church to act wisely
in doing all she can in her present fields till they are
occupied, arid after that to extend her work as far and
as fast as possible.
By God’s blessing my health has so improved that all


the rest I hope I now require imight be got visiting the
€hurch and Sabbath Schools ; and as time is precious, I
long to see the work done, witlh its results.
I entreat you to read andl consider the claims set
forth in this letter, when yoou consider those of the
other; and may God guide y/ou to the best conclusion
for all concerned. I also entresat your prayers on behalf
of our mission and my work ifor it here, and that you
will give every facility and aissistance possible in your
Assembly, Congregations, and. Sabbath Schools; so that
by God’s blessing our visit may awaken a deeper interest
in missions, especially in ours con the islands.—l remain,
dear Brethren, yours faithfully, John G. Baton,


