

Cys
A SHORT ACCOUNT
ST. SAVIOUR’S CATHEDRAL
GOULBURN,
rattf) tfje Subjects of tlje MUtirtrotoa.
AND A
DESCRIPTION OF THE PULPIT AND
OTHER GIFTS.
PRICE SIXPENCE.
PROFITS TO THE BUILDING FUND.
GOTXLBURN :
PRINTED BY W. R. RILEY, HERALD OFFICE, AUBURN-STREET.


TIZUOOOA TFIOHB A
'MMMfI.d S'fIUOIYAS .TS
.wrjajuoo
.&crfotTmKss 3(it lo Yflt (ftiKss
a oxa
CtfA TRJUB 3HT 30 k!o:TqifloB3G
BT3fO fIBHTO
arjza‘izi« aoiH‘l
X/U3 0/IQJIUa BHT OT STROfR
: x:nm.r;oy
y .-yaaa - ! (Somo <ijah3h ,ya sih si w 'is. aai'niffi
C .^BBl


Hl*'
April 1884.
The object of the following statement is to convey
to visitors a brief account of the sacred edifice and
its contents :
The design for the Cathedral was prepared by the
late eminent architect, E. T. Blacket Esq. of Sydney,
after constant consultation with the Bishop of
Goulburn and others. It is of the style architecturally
called the "Decorated,” and is in every respect a
handsome structure, of freestone from the district,
with pillars of Pyrmont freestone from Sydney.
The carvings of the capitals, the bosses, &c., are
from the skilful hand of Mr. Tinkler of Sydney.
The contractors have been Messrs. R. and J. Turner,
Duncan, Nelson, Le Breton, Stone and Brigdale, H.
Langley, A. A. Marshall and Co., and F. C. W.
Richard.
The Corner-stone was laid on the 15th of January
1874 by the Bishop of Goulburn, aided by the
Hon. John Campbell M.L.C., and the Bishops of
Newcastle and Bathurst, in the unavoidable absence
of the late Metropolitan,


The dimensions of the building are as follows :
Internal length east to west, inclusive of the West
Porch, 150 feet; width of Nave and Aisles, 54 feet;
length of Transepts north to south 96 feet; width of
Transepts 54 feet. Of the Stained Glass Windows
(23 in number), 10 are the gifts of individuals, 8 are
erected by special subscriptions in commemoration
of friends, 3 are not yet assigned, and 2 will soon be
erected by individual friends. The annexed statement
will furnish in detail particulars of all the windows
and of the sculptured medallions.
Since the lamented death of Mr. Blacket the
building has been completed under the superintend-
ence of his sons, A. and C. Blacket Esqs. of Sydney.
The total cost of the actual building, independently
of the spire and of the special gifts, will when
completed amount to about' £25,000. Of the gifts
the following deserve special notice The Font, the
Pulpit, the Brass Lectern, the Chancel Tiles, the
Bishop’s Throne, the carved oak Communion-Table,
th. -Rived o k Chairs, th Crimson Velvet Cover for
the Holy Tables, the Vessels for tun Communion and
the Kneeling-Mat for communicants, and 12 Carved
Stone Medallions on the face of the walls.
The Font, presented by the late John Marshall
Esq. J.P. of the Red House, Staffordshire, and other
friends of the Bishop, is placed under the North-
Western Arch of the Nave. It is exquisitely designed
by Mr. Chatwin, architect, of Birmingham, and suc-
cessfully carved in Caen stone by Mr. John Roddis of
Birmingham. It is a square with canted angles. In
these angles niches are sunk, containing statuettes
of the four Evangelists. The four sides exhibit sunk
panels with sculptured groups, representing the


Baptism of Our Lord, Our Lord Blessing Little
Children, the Baptism of the Centurion, and the
Baptism of the Eunuch. Around the basin and
above these panels and niches are the words :
" Baptising them in the Name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.” The body of the
Font rests upon a richly-carved capital, supported by
shafts of polished marble. The Font is a master-
piece of the sculptor’s art. A brass font-ewer has
also been presented by the Rev. Pelham and Mrs.
Maitland.
The Pulpit, from a design suggested by the Bishop
of Goulburn, has been admirably executed by the
same sculptor, Mr. John Koddis of Birmingham. It
is a gift from the Bishop’s English friends in
Warwickshire. Like the Font it is of Caen stone,
and is supported by five marble pillars. The central
figure, within a sunk panel, is that of Our Lord, on
the right of which is a figure of Elijah, and on the
left figures of Moses, St. Paul, and St. Peter. Our
Lord is represented on a throne, seated with the
feet resting upon clouds, and surrounded by emblems
of the four Evangelists—viz., a lion, an ox, a man,
and an eagle. (Rev. 4-7.) The right hand is elevated
in the act of blessing.
The Eagle or Lectern of polished brass is the gift
of Frederic Tooth Esq. of England, from the firm of
Messrs. Jones, Willis, and Co. of Birmingham, and
is a bold and finely-executed work of art.
The tiles of the Sanctuary and of the Chancel are
very ornamental. The first row represents the Lamb
upon Mount Zion, bearing a flag. The second row
represents the Pelican feeding its young with its
own blood, surmounted by a Latin legend" Thou


has redeemed us in thy blood.” They are from the
manufactory of Messrs. Minton and Co. of Stoke-
upon-Trent.
The Holy Table is of beautiful carved oak, the gift
of the late S. Hanson Esq. of London. The front is
ornamented with carvings of the grape-vine and of
wheat.
The Two Communion-Chairs of carved oak and of
antique pattern, with crimson velvet fittings, are
the gifts severally of Mrs. Gray of Nareeb Nareeb,
Victoria, and the Misses Hadden of Guildford,
England.
The Crimson Velvet Cloth for the Holy Tab.e,
with appropriate emblems, is exquisitely wrought
by the hands, and is the beautiful gift, of the Misses
Campbell of Clunes, Sydney.
The Vessels for the Holy Communion are the
handsome and costly gift of Mrs. O’Brien of Douro,
in memory of her son.
The Bishop’s Seat or Throne is being constructed
of oak, from a design of the late E. T. Blacket Esq.,
who made several efforts to simplify the same, but
without success. It was therefore deemed right to
leave the original design unaltered.
The Thick Kneeling-Mat for Communicants is of
beautifully-executed needlework, twenty-eight feet in
length, and is the gift of Miss Fanny Campbell.
Cathedral Windows—Donors and Subjects.
1. Subject, Prodigal Son ; donors, Executors of
the late T. Gale; from Ashwin and Co. of Sydney.
2. The Sower, Pharisee and Publican, Wedding
Garment; Mrs. Woore, memorial to Lieutenant
Woore R.N.; Ashwin and Co.


3. The Widow’s Mite, the Good Shepherd, the
Lost Piece of Money ; Mrs. Phillips and children,
memorial to the late N. C. Phillips R.N. ; Ashwin
and Co.
4. The Good Samaritan; by subscription—to Hon.
John Campbell M.L.C.; Lyon aud Cottier.
5. Paying Labourers in Vineyard, Rich Man and
Lazarus; by subscription as memorial to Rev. John
Graydon ; Ashwin and Co.
6. To be given by the family of the late T. S.
Mort Esq.
7. Casting Net into the Sea, certain Greeks desire
to see Jesus, our Lord’s Public Entry into Jerusa-
lem ; not yet assigned.
8. The Ten Lepers ; not assigned; Hardman.
9. Peter and John at the Sepulchre, our Lord
Appearing to Mary ; not assigned ; Hardman.
10. Thomas Doubting, Thomas Believing; the
Bishop’s Shrewsbury school-fellows (viz. the Bishops
of Manchester, St. David’s, Bedford, &c.)
11. To be given by the family of the late W«
Bradley Esq.
12, The Raising of Lazarus; also the Bishop’s
Shrewsbury school-fellows; Hardman.
13. The Apostles Sent Forth ; subscriptions by
the Clergy—memorial to the late Dean Sowerby;
Lyon and Co.
14. Solomon Building the Temple; the sons of
the late E. T. Blacltet Esq., architect of St. Saviour’s
Cathedral ; Ashwin and Co.
15. Healing the Man Born Blind, Woman Touch-
ing Hem of His Garment; subscription—memorial
to W. F, Hayley Esq., M.8.C.5.; Lyon and Co.


16. Subjects from the Acts of the Apostles ; Mrs.
Gibson —memorial to Dr. Gibson and his two Sons ;
Lyon and Co.
17. Jesus Walking on the Water, Peter Sinking ;
subscription—memorial to Mrs. R. Conolly ; Lyon
and Co.
18. Marriage at Cana, Miracle of Fishes, Figtree
Withered; subscriptions from laity—memorial to
the late Dean Sowerby ; Ashwin and Co.
19. The Tribute Money, Healing the Withered
Hand, Healing the Paralytic ; the family of the late
Rev. C. Betts—as a memorial; Lyon and Co.
20. Feeding the Five Thousand ; by Mrs. O’Brien
of Douro—memorial to H. O’Brien Esq. and his
only son ; Lyon and Co.
21. Healing the Infirm Woman, Calming the
Tempest, Healing the Infirm Man; the Hon. James
Chisholm M.L.C.—in memory of his son, Robert
Chisholm ; Lyon and Co.
22 and 23 in West Porch. The Good Shepherd;
the gifts of Judge McFarland and the parish of
Albury.
Inscriptions on the Windows.
1. "In filial remembrance of Thomas Gale: this
window is erected by his children, 1883.”
2. "In loving remembrance of Thomas Woore
R.N.: this window is erected by his widow, 1883.”
3. "la loving remembrance of N. C. Phillips
R.N.: this window is erected by his widow and
children, 1883.”
4. " Hon. Johanni Campbell: Senatori, Ecclesi®
Dei Fautori Di«c. Riveriu. Fundatori, in Gloriam
Dei animo gratissimo hanc fenestram posuerunt
amici, 1883.”


5. " To the Rev. John Graydon, who died 30th
May 1872 : by clergy and laity, 1883.”
6.
9.
10 and 12. "In Gloriam Dei Salvatoris Reverendo
Admodum Mesaco Thomas. S.T.P. primo hujus
Diceceseos Episcopo. Reg. Schol. Salop. Alumni hanc
fenestram posuerunt, 1883.”
11.
13. " Hanc fenestram Decano Gulielmo Sowerby
Sancti Salvatoris parochire pastori suis sumptibus
pingendam curaverunt clerici amici, 1883.”
14. " Laus Deo.”
15. "In memory of William Foxton Hayley
M.R.C.S.: This window is erected by his friends,
1884,”
16. "In loving remembrance of Andrew Gibson
of Tirranna, and his two sons William and Septimus :
This window is erected by his widow, Alice Gibson,
1883,” —Above this inscription, and at the bottom
of the window, runs the legend: " The glorious
company of the Apostles praise Thee Lord God of
Sabbaoth.”
17. "In grateful remembrance of Harriet Anne
Conolly: This window is erected by her friends
and the members of her Bible Classes, 1883.”
18. " In remembrance of William Sowerby,
and for thirty-seven years Incumbent of St. Saviour’s
parish, Goulburn : Erected by subscription, 1883.”
19. "In affectionate remembrance of the Rev'
Charles Marsden Betts, who died at Goulburn 28th
July, 1857, aged twenty-four years : This window is
erected by members of his family, 1884.”


20. "In affectionate remembrance of Henry
O’Brien of Douro, and his son Henry : This window
is erected by his widow, Elizabeth S. O’Brien,
1884.”
21. " In memory of Robert Chisholm : This win-
dow is erected by his father James Chisholm
M.L.C., 1884.
22.
Subjects of the Medallions carved in Omaru stone,
affixed to the walls, of the Nave , Transepts , and
Chancel :—
1. The Nativity.
2. The Magi
3. The Flight into Egypt.
4. Christ Blessing Little Children ; donor, a Lady.
5. The Woman at the Well.
6. Christ in the House of Martha and Mary.
7. The Return of the Prodigal ; donor, S. A.
Stephen Esq.
8. The Transfiguration; donor, the Hon. John
Campbell M.L.C.
9. The Betrayal.
10. The Scourging.
11. The Crucifixion; donor, the Misses Hadden.
12. The Ascension; donor, Mrs. Thomas of
Bishoptliorpe.
The above medallions have been carved within
the building by a promising young artist, Mr. W.
P. Macintosh.




