

H Slioxi TVccmnt
of a
Canonisation at fet ipefrts,
at i\omr.
gtrom an of TEcio,
J. HENNIKER HEATON.
lonian:
Cassell, Fetter, Galpin & Co.
Australia:
George Robertson.
[all rights reserved.]




g>§oxt Jlccount
of a
(Eanoniscifion af §>f. IJfcfcv’s,
af




. F *Ol4-1
y*} \ C, Ik. OcC cC
A SHORT ACCOUNT 1% % ,
OF A y
CANONISATION AT ST. PETER’S,
AT ROME
From an Unsectarian Point of View.
J. HENNIKER HEATON.
lonian:
Cassell, Fetter, Gal pin & Co.
Australia;
George Robertson.
[all rights reserved.]
i* 1 % *0 SL


This letter was written originally to a friend in England,
and it does not aim at giving anything beyond a simple account
of a great ceremony. The painter has taken some liberties with
the costumes, giving only those ordinarily worn when the prelates
perform their episcopal functions. White and gold were the
prevailing colours at the Canonisation.


A CANONISATION AT ST. PETER’S,
AT ROME.
Rome, December , 1881.
My deae F ,
To you, who have so often been in Italy, it would
be superfluous to give a description of its cities, cathe-
drals, picture-galleries, or the gardens, fields, mountains,
hills, and valleys that break in upon our astonished vision ;
but it strikes me that we enjoyed a rare treat which you
may not have seen, and a description of which may
interest you —I mean a Canonisation at Rome.
c?«?. <7 . <7 2^


The Roman Catholic Church, whose organisation,
says Macaulay, is the most perfect of any institution in
the whole world, has on her calendar a list of five or six
hundred saints and martyrs. Many of these had the
gift of working miracles. Fourteen years had passed
since the last “batch” of saints were enrolled, and his
Holiness, Leo XIII., resolved to add to the list, and
accordingly he canonised four faithful servants of the
Church on the Bth December instant.
The ceremony was conducted with all the pomp and
magnificence of the Roman Catholic Ritual. From every
quarter of the earth Leo summoned his Cardinals, Arch-
bishops, and Bishops, to assist in the solemn festival.
Tickets of admission were most difficult to procure, and,
as we had arrived in Rome only one day before, we were
told it was utterly useless our trying to get admission.
“ The Austrian Ambassador has been refused a
ticket for a friend of his sovereign master,” said a
dignitary that lat first consulted. “ Every inch of space


lias been allotted to nobles and other distinguished
visitors three weeks ago,” said another official. At
length Leo himself was applied to by good Dr. Smith,
the President of the Propaganda, and my letters of
introduction from Archbishop Vaughan, of Sydney, here
proved valuable.
u The Australian gentleman and lady should have
places ” were the orders, and accordingly the Secretary
of State to his Holiness, Cardinal Jacobini, was in-
structed to provide seats for us in u Tribuna A.” While
we were at dinner at the Hotel de Eomc the messenger
from the Vatican arrived with the orders or tickets,
marked personal, for u Signor and Signora Henniker
Heaton,” and on our tickets it was expressly stated that
gentlemen should appear in evening dress and white
cravat, and ladies in black, with dark veils, but no
bonnets. Preparations had at once to be made. A long
black veil, such as Spanish ladies wear, had to be pur-
chased at that late hour, and I also had to obtain the


white cravat, to complete my evening dress. The intel-
ligent Italian ladies’-maid was next summoned to our
CARDINAL JACOBINI.
rooms, for she alone understood how to fit on in proper
fashion the black veil; and, after all this, you can


understand how very late it was before we retired, eager
for the events of the morrow.
The ceremony of Canonisation was fixed for eight
a.m., but we were advised to be at the Vatican not later
than half-past seven o’clock. It was hardly light at six
o’clock when we breakfasted in our rooms, and by seven
o’clock carriages commenced to roll into the courtyard
of the Hotel de Rome for the nobles staying there.
The Hotel de Rome, I should tell you, has a great
reputation, and was formerly the palace of Cardinal
Antonelli. Punctually at half-past seven we arrived at
the Bronze Gate of the Scala Regia, or Royal Staircase
of the Vatican, and were confronted by an array of
Swiss Guards. These soldiers are specially attached to
the Pope. Their picturesque costumes were designed
by Michael Angelo. Their duties are to guard the
Vatican, and on this special morning they were told
off to see that no person entered the precincts but such
as held personal orders of admission to witness the great


ceremony of Canonisation. This was to prevent u scenes,”
or insults being offered by the ill-disposed.
A SWISS GUARD.
Having passed the Swiss Guards, and ascended the
Scala Regia, we encountered the Palatine Guards, and


by these soldiers and officers ourselves and tickets under-
went a second examination. The crush was fearful, and
PALATINE GUARD.
PALATINE GUARD.
we were fully an hour passing from the foot of the first
staircase to the first landing. The examination of the


tickets took a considerable time, and it was half-past eight
before we reached the ante-room, and our progress was
GUARDIA NOBILE.
GUARDIA NOBILE.
again intercepted, this time by the Guardia Nobile, or
Noble Guards, who had formed in double rank and file


at the entrance to the Hall of Ceremonies, or Hall of
Canonisation. However, we had here more air, or
breathing room, and after a little rest we at length
entered the magnificent saloon above the portico of St.
Peter’s. The Hall of Canonisation was splendidly de-
corated. In length it is about 300 feet, and about 100
feet wide. The walls are of a gold ground with coloured
borders in imitation of mother of mosaic. The hun-
dred Corinthian pillars are striped with gold, as if they
were fluted. Beside the richly-painted windows, there
are ten recesses, which were transformed into galleried
tribunes with a balcony above each. In Tribuna A, as I
have already stated, seats were allotted to us, and from a
magnificent u coign of vantage,” immediately above the
papal chair, we surveyed the gorgeous scene below,
above, and around us. Four thousand wax candles were
lighted, encompassing the hall, and formed into circles
and crosses, like thousands of stars; garlands of flowers
stretched from point to point, and window to window;


banners, richly painted, containing representations of
the miracles worked by the new saints, filled the vacant
spaces, while festoons of lilies and stars (the arms of the
Pope) also had their place in the design of ornamenta-
tion. The pontifical throne was gorgeous; it was
reached by five steps covered with scarlet cloth.
Beautiful emblematical paintings, and the shield of
the Pope, with angels as bearers, were displayed round
about, whilst in large letters over the arch above the
throne were the words u Übi Petrus ibi Ecclesia.” But
even more striking than this was the altar of his Holi-
ness in the centre of the Hall of Canonisation. It was
of marble, gold, and old greenstone, while the canopy
protecting it was borne by four large-sized angels in
gold, one at each corner supporting a pillar also of gold.
Shortly after we had taken our places, the Ambas-
sadors from France, Austria, Belgium, Russia, Holland,
Bavaria, Spain, and other countries, filed in, and entered
the Tribuna reserved, and they looked very striking and


attractive in their court dresses, their breasts being
covered with decorations of various orders. The
CARDINAL IN GOWN AND ROYAL MANTLE.
Ambassadors’ wives, wearing veils and sparkling with
jewels, accompanied their lords. German, Austrian,


Spanish, and other nobles were ushered in by some
high dignitaries connected with the Vatican. Just
before ten o’clock two officers of the Noble Guard took
their places to the right and left of the Papal throne.
The Noble Guard, I should have stated, consisted of the
noble or royal families of Rome who still remain loyal
to the Pope. The picture shown on the left on
page 12 is a portrait of Count Camilla Pecci, the
nephew of the present Pope, and who formed one of
the Noble Guard on the morning of the Bth December,
and who stood on the right of the throne.
At half-past ten o’clock the Swiss, the Palatine, and
Noble Guards, to the number of two hundred and fifty,
filed in and made a passage up the centre aisle, and
presented arms to their commanding officer. Then the
magnificent choir of St. Peter’s struck up an anthem of
welcome. The silver trumpets sounded for the first time
in fourteen years, and a long line of Cardinals, Arch-
bishops, and Bishops, fully mitred, entered the Hall of


Canonisation. The grandest-looking of these Cardinals
was an Englishman, Cardinal Howard. Each dignitary
LATIN BISHOP.
ARMENIAN BISHOP.
was attended hy a chaplain. Among the Bishops were
several Chinamen, Greeks, Armenians (which surprised


me), and Indians, in addition to German, French,
English, Spanish, and Irish prelates.
GREEK BISHOP.
ATTENDANT ON PRELATE.
After the long line of dignitaries, to the number
of two hundred and fifty, had marched in, a murmur


arose, and then, amidst breathless silence, his Holiness,
Pope Leo XIII., entered. A signal was given, and every
ARMENIAN BISHOP.
A GREEK BISHOP,
soldier fell on his knees and presented arms. All eyes
were strained to catch sight of the great ruler of men’s


minds, and whose sway over the spiritual welfare of
two hundred millions of human beings excites the
CANONICAL PRELATE.
AFRICAN BISHOP.
wonder of England. Borne aloft on a Sedia Grestatoria,
or Chair of State, on the shoulders of eight men (sediari),


his Holiness entered in the exact fashion here illus-
trated, waving his wan thin hand, bestowing his blessing
POPE LEO IN CHAIR OF STATE.
on the right and on the left to the kneeling multitude.
He wore his tiara, or triple crown. Haying arrived at


the pontifical altar, the chair was lowered, and the Pope
POPE LEO XIII.
was conducted to his throne, and the ceremonies com-
menced. Thirty-two princes of the Church, or Cardinals,
first approached, knelt before the throne, and kissed the


Pope’s ring of office. Fifty Archbishops then approached
and kissed the Pope’s knee, and two hundred Bishoj)S
followed in quick succession, knelt and kissed the Pope’s
right toe, in token of their fidelity and obedience to the
successor of Peter.
The ceremony of Canonisation then commenced.
The tiara was removed, and his Holiness knelt before
the altar and prayed. Then followed the formal demand
for the Canonisation of Joannes Baptista Rossi, Canon
of St. Mary in Cosmedin, who was born in Liguria in
1698 ; Laurentius di Brindisi (Capuchin), who was born
in 1559 ; Joseph Labre, a mendicant, who was born in
1748, at Amettes in France; and Clara de Montefalco
(an Augustine nun), who was born in 1268. The decree
was read, and, after the third demand, the Pope cele-
brated High Mass, and was served or waited upon by
some Roman nobles and Cardinals. After mass, or
before its completion, the oblations were presented to
the Pope. About fifty or sixty Bishops, Priests, and


Franciscan brothers approached the throne, and pre-
sented Leo with gilded bread on plates of silver, wine
CAMERIERE, OR FAN BEARER.
CHAIR BEARER.
and water in gold and silver barrels, and a number of
cages containing live doves, pigeons, and smaller birds.


Then the Cardinal-Procurator offered to his Holiness a
document in a purse of white silk embroidered in gold,
ROMAN FLOWER-GIRL.
and it was ordered that the news of the Canonisation be
sent abroad, and be proclaimed in all parts of the earth.


It was three o’clock before the ceremonies and grand
music had concluded, and the sediari and porta flam-
EOMAN FLOWBE-GIEL.
belli re-entered —eight of the former to carry the chair,
and the two latter—one on each side of the chair—


bearing these enormous fans to keep his Holiness fanned,
and supplied with cool, fresh air. To the strains of
solemn yet joyful music the Pope and Bishops passed
out again in procession, and the Canonisation was
completed.
Seven hours had been exhausted, and we were indeed
glad to taste fresh air again. Outside the Vatican, in
the piazza of St. Peter’s, we found an immense crowd of
sightseers, and not the least interesting were those pic-
turesque Roman girls who smiled on us very sweetly.
Later in the afternoon we again drove to the Vatican,
and, passing over the bridge of St. Angelo, we met
hundreds of students, and pilgrims from Prance and
other parts of Italy, who had visited Rome hoping to
take part in the ceremony which was destined to honour
their respective towns —the birthplaces of the newly-
canonised saints.
The most numerous of the religious orders are these
Friars, Capuchins chiefly, who are to be met in almost


every street of Rome. They go bareheaded, and are
said to be active in relieving distress among the poor.
FRIARS IN ROME.
At the rear of the Vatican we were shown the Pope’s
carriage of state, used before the occupation, but now


idle. It is a magnificent equipage, and the franc we
paid for inspection was well expended.
With the hope that this letter may interest Mrs. F.
and yourself, I conclude with high regard,
Yours very sincerely,
J. Henniker Heaton.
THE POPE’S STATE CARRIAGE.


•f
4t
