









A SIMPLE GUIDE TO BETTER HEALTH




A SIMPLE GUIDE
TO BETTER HEALTH
EVA HILL
G. W. MOORE LTD
1 97 6


© Eva Hill 1976
Printed by Wright & Carman Ltd, Trentham, N.Z.


CONTENTS
Chapter 1 Dreaded Modem Diseases 1
Chapter 2 Correcting Faulty Eating Habits 11
Chapter 3 Cleansing Programme 18
Chapter 4 Over-Eating 25
Chapter 5 Dangers of Cooked Food 31
Chapter 6 Grain Food 38
Chapter 7 Health Without Drugs 46
Chapter 8 The Sugar-Baited Trap 53




CHAPTER ONE
DREADED MODERN DISEASES
What are the dreaded modern diseases that provide the title
for this chapter?
Their name is legion. The Killers: particularly heart and vas-
cular disorders. The Cripplers: arthritis, rheumatism in various
forms, muscular and nervous degenerative troubles. General re-
curring incapacitating diseases such as asthma and migraine,
stomach, bowel and kidney disorders. Skin diseases, diabetes,
and many other ailments that cause so many lost working hours.
My message is as up-to-date as tomorrow, and as old as the
hills. Over 2,000 years ago Hippocrates said: “It appears to me
necessary for every physician to be skilled by nature and to
strive to know, if he wants to perform his duties properly, what
man is in relation to what he eats and drinks, and to his way of
life; he needs to know the effects of each of these factors, and
whoever does not know what effect these have on a person can-
not know the consequences that result from them; therefore
nothing is more important or necessary than for a physician to
know these things.”
Isn’t it strange that though those words were written so long
ago, it is only comparatively recently that we have begun to pay
attention to man’s relation to his food and drink, to learn the
effect of these, and to study and understand the diseases that
befall a man as a result of wrong diet.
Indeed, to many medical men this subject is still a closed
book, and many tend to regard patients who ask advice about
diet as cranks and fanatics.
Some 30 years ago Alexis Carrell, a Nobel Prize winner,
author of the world famous classic Man The Unknown and one
of the leading brains of the medical profession of that period,
wrote:
“Unless the doctors of today become the dieticians of tomor-
row the dieticians of today will become the doctors of tomorrow.”


His warning and prediction are now being proved correct
as more and more people become disillusioned by the failure of
the medical profession to halt the steady increase in the de-
generative diseases of today.
The fear of these hangs over the community like a dark
cloud.
About two years ago a well-known Sydney man came to
New Zealand to consult me. Twenty years before he had a
very severe coronary thrombosis—so bad that the doctors said
he would never get out of bed again, much less walk. He refused
to accept that sentence. Instinctively he resorted to raw food.
He recovered remarkably, and launched some very interesting
projects that have benefited thousands!
And then we have the example of Sir Francis Chichester, who,
in his middle age, was diagnosed as having lung cancer.
He told the story in one of his books; how it was by resorting
to strict natural diet for a long period that his health was
restored. Subsequently he sailed solo across the North Atlantic,
and later round the world.
So those who want to restore or to preserve their health by
resorting to natural methods should no more be afraid of
being dubbed ‘cranks’; they are in very good company.
Let me, while on the subject of the late Sir Francis Chichester,
give you an extract from his book How to Keep Fit by one who
is never as fit as he would like to be:
“I would like to be as fit as a tiger in the prime of life,” he
wrote, adding “I don’t mean that I want to be able to carry
a full-size bullock in my jaws without it touching the ground for
miles, but I would like to have a tiger’s agility, endurance, speed,
sight and hearing, and, I might add, its grace of movement.
“Alas, that species of animal, Man, with all its brains, ingen-
uity, and vaunted superiority over the ‘animals’, seldom succeeds
in producing a member of his species as healthy as an average
cat or dog. This is due to generations of unhealthy living, sit-
ting still for hours at a time, stuffing ourselves with a lot of
unsuitable foods we don’t really need, and enraging our livers
with alcohol (as I enjoy doing, I must confess!!).”
At the close of this book Sir Francis wrote: “I prefer to
eat vegetarian food because I believe I keep more healthy when


I stick to it, and I am quite sure that it has severed times been
the major cause of my recovering from illness,
“I believe this is because a man’s inside, with its 30 feet of gut,
is designed to digest fruit, nuts, and vegetables, but is not well
suited for meat, especially if it is not fresh when it starts on its
long voyage through man’s interior.”
Talking of meat, many people have proved for themselves the
great benefit to be derived from giving it up. For example, Pro-
fessor Chittenden in the U.S.A. was experimenting on the
effects of reducing protein intake. He gave up eating meat, and
to his surprise, at age 67, and suffering from chronic arthritis
in his knee, found that this was getting better. After several
months it was healed. After dieting continuously for a year he was
able to take walks of three-hour duration in hilly country with
no pain.
Reverting to our main theme, what causes all this suffering?
As a medical practitioner for over 50 years I have watched
the steady decline in our nation’s health. I have also noted the
same phenomenon in many countries overseas.
Surely we must ask ourselves if there is not some basic under-
lying cause for this. Nor is this confined to humans; animals
are affected too.
The answer must surely lie somewhere in the fact that during
the present century we have seen dramatic changes in our way
of life. Rapid growth of large cities has drawn, and con-
tinues to draw, people from the land and rural areas where
previously they had grown or raised much of their own food by
‘old-fashioned’ farming methods.
Since then the increasing use of artificial fertilisers has upset
the mineral balance in the soil, so producing stock and crops
with various mineral deficiencies. This minerally-deficient pro-
duce is then robbed of more of its remaining store of essential
nutrients by intensive milling and other manufacturing processes
largely designed to extend the shelf-life of the product for
commercial gain. Little consideration is given to its health
preserving or promoting properties.
Many prominent investigators have shown the detrimental ef-
fects of such a ‘dead’ diet on the health of its consumers, which
have usually been rats, since it is not permissible to experiment


on human beings. However, sometimes, by accident, such an
experiment is done.
One is the case of the World War I German sea raider, Kron
Prinz Wilhelm, which had some success against our shipping
during a long cruise at sea. However, after being at sea continu-
ously for 250 days crew members developed a malaise (beri-beri)
and several of them died.
The Kron Prinz Wilhelm was obliged to put into Newport,
Rhode Island, U.S.A., to seek help. They got none from medical
men ashore who confessed themselves baffled. It was a news-
paperman, named McCann, a student of natural nutrition,
who solved the problem. By radically changing the ship’s diet
and adding fresh vitamins in ‘live 5 foods, the mysterious epidemic
was ended and the surviving sufferers rapidly recovered.
The lesson to be learned from that unintentionally large-scale
demonstration should have been taken to heart by the medical
profession and impressed on subsequent medical students; it is
that man can continue for a long time on devitalised food and
‘appear 5 to be healthy but sooner or later he is bound to suffer.
Put another way: we cannot with impunity disobey nature's
laws. If you want to live in full health you must eat ‘live food 5 .
Another example from World War I came from Denmark
where, during its hardships, the death rate of the population
fell by 3 percent to 10.5 per 100,000 after an enforced natural
diet had been current for one year. From this Dr Hindehede,
who had guided that nation's health, concluded that the
principal cause of death lies in food and drink.
In view of such evidence and such unequivocal proof it
would be foolish to disagree with the conclusion drawn.
Another case, that of the Hunza people who live in the
Himalayan fastnesses and enjoy remarkably good health while
they stick to their traditional diet of minerally-rich whole food,
should be cited.
In our case, added to the fact that most of our basic food
stuffs are deficient in one or more vital factors, the devitalised
produce is further degraded by the addition of many chemical
substances.
This is alleged to be necessary to preserve and replace some
of the lacking elements!


Then add to all this artificial sweeteners, emulsifiers, colouring
agents, etc., to improve shelf life and add eye appeal. Think of
all the other ‘marvellous “improvements” ’ —instant this, that,
and the other, to entice and trap the uneducated housewife!
The cumulative effects of all those toxic additives have
never been investigated. Almost every week we read of some
sweetener or other food additive being banned, having been
found to be toxic after many years of use. Many of these ad-
ditives are derived from coal tar products, and we have long
been warned that these are carcinogenic (cause cancer). Do
you wonder at the steady increase in the incidence of cancer?
It will not lessen until all these additives are removed, and people
learn the simple rules of healthy living.
Add to these dead chemicalised foods the fact that we have
the further insult of toxic chemicals being arbitrarily added
to municipal water supplies in many places where common sense
does not prevail. Water is essential to us all. And now, besides
those chemicals added for alleged medical betterment, most water
sources are daily becoming increasingly polluted with industrial
and domestic wastes.
Similarly the air in many cities and towns is charged with
noxious fumes from cars and factories.
When one contemplates the synthetic environment in which
most people in this nation live, and the other factors cited here,
is it any wonder that our general health is deteriorating?
Then when we consider the usual eating habits of our fellow
citizens it becomes more and more obvious why our hospitals are
overflowing and doctors cannot cope with the hordes of people
who complain they’re sick.
Yet I am convinced that Man’s birthright is good health. We
should not be sick. Our present national ill health is a disgrace
to our much-vaunted ‘advanced’ civilisation and its technology!
It will take a long time to re-educate our people to more
natural ways of life, and we cannot, as individuals, do much to
alter the system, but it is possible—even in this poisoned world
of devitalised and chemicalised living—to maintain a reasonable
degree of health, to avoid many modern diseases, and even to
restore an affected body to a higher degree of well-being.


That is as much as the modern city dweller can hope for at
present.
But here we are up against the ignorance of ordinary people
regarding the rules of good health. It is here, I think, our medical
profession has so largely failed.
The word ‘health’ means ‘wholeness’, and the word ‘doctor’
means ‘teacher’, but how many of my profession try to educate
their patients as to how they should live that they may overcome
a present disease or prevent its recurrence?
Unfortunately there seem to be very few. Why? I believe be-
cause during the whole of their medical training many students
never see a standard of health, and all they learn of nutrition is
very rudimentary.
Stress is laid on calories, proteins, fats and carbohydrates,
whereas when one learns the actual simple facts of life these
things matter very little. What does matter is the vitamin and
mineral content of the food. This is very rarely taken into
consideration.
How then can the ordinary citizen help himself to overcome
disease? And, of course, in the long run it is only the individual
who can help himself. The human body is naturally very
tough and will heal itself if given a chance. Acute disease, usually
accompanied by some degree of fever and various local symptoms
is really an expression of a natural healing power. Helped by
judicious nursing, abstinence from food, plenty of rest and fresh
air, local hot or cold application to affected parts as necessary,
acute diseases usually will settle down when the toxins have been
dissipated by the fever. But rarely today are these feverish com-
plaints allowed to take their natural course. The patient’s main
concern is usually a speedy return to work. This can often be
achieved by a course of antibiotic treatment. The result appears
miraculous for the time being.
But what happens in fact? The toxins the body was trying so
hard to eliminate by the feverish condition are retained in the
body. The healing power is quelled and the cleansing of the body
is interrupted. Sooner or later, however, the load on the body
again mounts up and another acute illness arrives—to be treated
in the same way again.
So the story commonly goes on until, at last, one attack fails


to respond to the antibiotics—the patient has become immune
to them!
After a series of similar episodes the patient develops a chronic
disease—appendicitis, arthritis, collagenosis or disseminated lupus
erythematosis or other so-called incurable complaint for which
more and more drugs, some with disastrous side effects, are used.
I have become convinced that there are few ‘incurable’
diseases but many incurable patients.
You don’t want to be like that or you would not be reading
this. What is my advice, then?
First of all, you must learn the basic rules of common-sense
eating. Think for yourself and you will realise that Man is the
sickliest animal on earth. Then reflect; he is the only animal that
tampers with his food.
Figure it out for yourself; obviously the ideal would be to eat
all our food in its natural state, unprocessed in any way. Indeed,
of this I frequently quip: “Eat your food as God made it, not as
Man has mucked it up.”
Alas, modern society being what it is, and organised as it is,
it is almost impossible for most people to achieve this ideal.
Nevertheless, by a simple correction and adjustment of your
social habits, you can live comfortably and yet avoid most
diseases.
Most of us have unquestionably followed the eating habits
of our parents, and have developed a strong dietetic pattern.
Where necessary you must break that pattern for, to keep
healthy (providing one starts in reasonable health), we must
observe a few basic rules.
Diet, then, should always be at least 75 percent fruit and
vegetable. Of this half or more should be eaten raw, for it is
only raw food that sustains health.
Next; there are certain foods we should consume very
sparingly, if at all. This category may shock you as it is contrary
to most dietetic advice of nowadays. Nevertheless, it can be
proved in practice by anyone anxious to improve his or her well-
being.
So, please go without or eat very little:
(a) Animal protein—meat, fish, cheese, eggs, and milk.
(b) Cereals.


(Even best wholemeal should be eaten sparingly. As for
processed grains such as white flour and many breakfast
cereals which have been subjected to excessive heat by
manufacturing, they are all ‘dead’ foods which should be
scrupulously avoided.)
(c) White sugar.
(d) Salt.
Both the latter are unnecessary and both are bad for you.
Of course, if your health has been impaired you will need to
learn how to restore it. The time this takes will depend on your
previous habits of medication in the form of drugs.
This healing course, in most cases, can be effected by repeated
(and longer or shorter) periods of what I call ‘eliminative diet’,
repeated as often as necessary until the unhealthy symptoms no
longer appear.
Each eliminative period is followed by two or three weeks
on a balanced daily diet which can be adapted to suit any
household.
Breakfast :
Fruit, fresh and/or dried. Honey, Nuts.
Lunch :
A salad with a good green basis and varied selection of raw
vegetables. Two slices of wholemeal bread with butter, honey,
or vegemite.
Steamed unpolished rice may be used instead of the wholemeal
bread.
Dinner or evening meal :
Raw salad, potato baked in skin followed by 2-3 cooked
vegetables, steamed or baked. If not a vegetarian,
Meat twice a week.
Fish twice a week.
Cheese twice a week.
Egg once a week.
Between meal snacks :
Fruit and/or fruit juices (untinned).


Cut out tea and coffee altogether. Drink fruit juices, or
one of the many herbal teas available.
NEVER DRINK WITH MEALS.
Use honey for sweetening.
Do not use aluminium ware for cooking.
Never overeat. (Many people eat four or five times too
much.)
The longer one follows these rules the more one realises that
one of the most important rules is to eat little and masticate
thoroughly.
Get plenty of outdoor exercise. Walking and swimming are
hard to beat. For those who are disabled in some way there are
various manipulative or physiotherapeutic measures which can
help.
However, basically a proper living style as recommended here
encourages the body to rehabilitate itself, and any active exercises
done by the patient himself are more valuable than any passive
treatment undertaken.
Cultivate a habit of positive thinking. This in fact becomes
easier as you body becomes cleansed. A healthy body is essential
for a healthy mind. The cleaner your body becomes the clearer
your mental and spiritual perceptions.
These dietetic rules I have outlined can be followed anywhere,
even if you have no control over how or where your food has
been grown. As long as you get sufficient variety during the week,
you undoubtedly get from one thing what might be lacking in
another, and so the deficiencies are overcome.
Of course, if you are fortunate enough to be able to get your
vegetables from an ‘organically grown’ source, so much the better
for these have wonderful health promoting factors as it were
built-in.
We really derive our health from the soil. I would like to
quote the words of J. Andre Voisin from his wonderful book
Soil, Grass and Cancer :
“Man, remember that you are dust and will return to dust.
This is not merely a religious or philosophical doctrine but a
great scientific fact which should be engraved above the entrance
of every faculty of medicine throughout the world. We might


then better remember that our cells are made up of mineral
elements which are to be found in our soils, and if these ‘dusts’
have been wrongly assembled in plant and animal or human
cells the result will be imperfect functioning of the latter.”
At the end of this book he further states: “The great task of
protective medicine is to discover such changes and to remedy
them. Only thus will the increasingly rapid development of the
diseases of civilisation, namely cancer, nervous disorders, throm-
bosis, be halted. Only thus will the premature aging of the cells
of certain organs be arrested.”
He quotes the work of the late Professor Bauer of Heidelburg
University, one of the greatest cancer specialists of Germany,
who said: “The role of nutrition in protection against cancer
has recently been confirmed. We are justified in concluding that
nutrition, whatever its nature, can favour cancer, or, on the
other hand, protect against it.”
Surely our primary aim must be to protect our health; that
is, to grapple with the causes, rather than to wait and then
try to cure the disease. Until true protective medicine is taught
there will be no early dimunition of the occurrence of these mod-
ern dreaded diseases.
In the meantime what should the thoughtful do?


CHAPTER TWO
CORRECTING FAULTY EATING
HABITS
For a long time I have wanted a Health School of some kind,
but could never decide how I might achieve it.
However, a series of particularly distressing cases seeking
help in quick succession decided me to try to educate at least
a few people who might wish to avoid similar horrible results,
if possible.
I am convinced that we were never meant to be sick. Our
human body is the most intricate and perfect ‘machine’ ever
made. It was designed to work according to strict laws, and is
naturally self-healing, if given a chance.
Disease of any kind arises from our disregard of natural laws,
in many aspects and for varying periods. Indeed, often we suffer
from the ‘sins of the fathers’ over two or three generations.
While we lived a simpler life, nearer the land, and were not
harassed by all the modern pollutants that now ruin our environ-
ment —in food, air, and water —we escaped many of the crip-
pling degenerative modern diseases mentioned in the last chapter.
Unfortunately, before you can begin to avoid future diseases
you must learn how to remedy the faults already obvious. This
can only be done by a period of cleansing, which must be re-
peated at intervals until the required improvement has occurred.
Your ability to undergo this elimination programme depends
on your present state of health and your occupation—for most
of us have to work for our living!
The average person can usually undertake the prescribed
period without too much discomfort, but for those who have been
chronically ill and who may have been taking tranquillisers or
some other drug or drugs, it is often advisable to make haste
slowly.
In any case I usually advise those in weekly employment to
start the elimination programme on a Friday to give themselves


the weekend to carry out its first three days. These occasionally
make the patient feel a bit upset in one way or another but, after
the three day start, the ordinary patient can cope with his or
her job.
Having seen that most have already laid a rather ‘shaky’
foundation for future health, we then attempt to clear out the
offending toxins and build a more stable base for health without
delay.
If we study animals (which still retain their natural instincts)
we observe that a sick or injured animal refuses all food and
finds a sheltered comfortable spot in which to rest. There it
will take only water while it gradually recovers.
The human species, alas, has lost most of these natural instincts
and, misguided as we have been by many of our medical men,
we feel we must ‘keep up our strength’.
However, when we have learned our lesson through periods
of suffering we should at last realise the foolishness of that advice,
and decide to stop taking the drugs that have been prescribed
to suppress the symptoms, and return to natural curative methods.
It is here, of course, that many patients encounter the
active hostility of well-meaning friends and relatives who, clearly
are completely ignorant of the rules of health.
For this reason I usually warn patients not to discuss their
symptoms or to talk about their treatment. After all, it is nobody’s
business but your own.
Persevere; you will teach the ignorant by example.
As I said in my first chapter, few members of the medical
profession consider wrong food to be the basic cause of disease.
Why, then should I dare to disagree so emphatically?
To understand why, you’ll have to know something of my own
clinical history, more fully set out in Cancer and Cure, the
story of my life by John Barrett, published recently.
In 1955 I developed a rapidly growing basal celled carcinoma
on my right cheek. It was surgically removed and its nature as
a malignant growth proved by our most eminent pathologist.
As it recurred very rapidly the surgeon advised X-ray therapy,
the very thought of which now makes me shudder. However,
not knowing any better at the time I phoned to make my ap-
pointment for X-ray treatment.


Luckily for me the machine was out of order, and before I
could make another appointment I received in the mail a news-
paper from the United States. I knew no one in that country, and
have never found out who sent it, but that newspaper changed
and indeed doubtless saved my life.
It told of a clinic in Dallas, Texas, where many so-called in-
curable diseases, including cancer, were treated without surgery,
radium or X-ray with marked success.
After checking with the clinic and some of its patients I went
there in 1956. I stayed seven months. My face was successfully
treated; no scar and to this day no recurrence.
This new approach, which I studied at the clinic while I was
there, led me to a study of the literature on the subject from
many countries; and feeling compelled to try to help many
distressed patients from all over New Zealand—and abroad—who
sought my help, I gradually learned that there is in fact no
mystery about disease. Basically we are what we eat and drink
and otherwise absorb.
Food particularly. So, as the nutritive value of our food has
steadily deteriorated, particularly during the last two decades,
along with the decline in the quality of stock and crops following
the indiscriminate use of artificial fertilisers and chemicals, so our
national health has steadily worsened.
It is a depressing sight to watch the crowds on any city street.
If you ask for scientific proof from me of the connection be-
tween food and health, there is plenty available from many emin-
ent authorities, and it is being added to all the time.
Let me quote from Nutrition and Health by Sir Robert Mc-
Carrison and H. M. Sinclair. The latter is or was professor of
nutrition at Oxford University, and Sir Robert was noted for his
great nutritional studies in India.
“During the last 18 years of my experimental work in India,”
the latter wrote, “I used many thousands of animals—rats,
pigeons, fowls, rabbits, guinea pigs, and monkeys—feeding them
on diets not synthetically prepared from purified foodstuffs,
but from foodstuffs in common use by the peoples of India;
my purpose, as previously hinted, being to leam what relation
the food used by the people had to the diseases from which they
suffered.


“At the risk of being tedious I shall now enumerate the
maladies I have encountered in these improperly fed animals,
leaving out such manifestations of ill-health as weakness, lassitude,
irritability and the like, which are commonly met with in ill-
nourished animals.
“Here is the list:
“Skin Diseases—loss of hair, gangrene of the feet and tail,
dermatitis, ulcers, abscesses, oedema.
“Diseases of the eye—conjunctivitis, corneal ulceration, xero-
phthalmia, panophtalmitis, cataract,
“Diseases of the ear—otitis media, pus in the middle ear.
“Diseases of the nose—rhinitis, sinusitis.
“Diseases of the lungs and respiratory passages —adenoids,
pneumonia, bronchiectasis, pleurisy, pyothorax, haemothorax.
“Disorders of the alimentary tract —dental disease, dilation of
the stomach, gastric ulcer, epithelial new growths in the stomach
(two cases of cancer), duodenal ulcer, duodenitis, enteritis,
colitis, stasis, intussception, and a condition of the lower bowel
suggestive of a pre-cancerous state.
“Diseases of the urinary tract —pyonephrosis, hydronephrosis,
pyletitis, renal calculus, dilated ureters, vesical calculus, cystitis,
encrusted cystitis.
“Diseases of the reproductive system —endometritis, ovaritis,
death of foetus in utero, premature birth, uterine haemorrhage,
testicular disease.
“Diseases of blood—anaemia, a pernicious type of anaemia.
“Diseases of lymph and other glands—cysts, abscesses, enlarged
glands; diseases of endocrine glands, goitre, lymph-adenoid
goitre, adrenal hypertrophy, atrophy of thymus, haemorrhegic
pancreatitis (very occasionally).
“Diseases of the heart —cardiac atrophy, cardiac hypertrophy,
mycerditis, pericarditis, hydropericardium.
“Diseases of the nervous system —polyneuritis, beri-beri, de-
generative lesions.
“Diseases of bone—crooked spine, distorted vertebrae (no
work done on rickets, a known deficiency disease).
“General diseases—malnutrition oedema, scurvy, pre-scorbutic
states.
“All these conditions of body, these states of ill-health, had


a common causation: faulty nutrition, with or without infection.
They are the clinical evidence (the signs and symptoms) of the
structural and functional changes in organs or parts of the body
that result directly or indirectly from faulty nutrition.
“It will be noted that local infections and maladies of a chronic
and degenerative kind are conspicuous among them.
“These maladies are, in short, the symptoms of malnutrition,
as observed in animals fed on faulty diet—some of them ad-
mittedly very faulty—in use by human beings, or on food
material in use by them. It is reasonable, then, to expect that
maladies of a similar nature are likely to result from malnutrition
in human beings.”
I have given you this long list to help you see clearly the
connection between cause and effect. Sir Robert McCarrison
proved during his years of experimentation that the level of
physical efficiency of the various Indian peoples was, above all,
a matter of diet.
The vast differences observed among the various peoples of that
subcontinent were shown to depend almost entirely on the value
of the food they ate, with respect particularly to the quantity
and quality of its vitamin content and its mineral content, and to
the balance of their diet as a whole. This rule obviously applies
to all of us, whatever our country.
The word ‘health’, as I have said before, means literally
‘wholeness’; therefore to produce and maintain optimum health
we must have ‘whole’ food.
This, alas, is becoming more and more difficult to obtain
owing to the increasing practice of commercial processing and
packaging it undergoes before put out on sale.
Everyone who can should try to keep a small vegetable plot
in order to be as independent as possible for their vegetable
supply. Also, most small house sections can accommodate
one or two dwarf fruit trees.
Quoting McCarrison again: “Familiar as I am with the
chapattited races of northern India, I have little patience with
those who would have us believe that ‘white flour’ is as good
an article of diet as ‘wholewheat flour’.”
With this I most certainly agree, but our people are still
frequently told otherwise by those who should know better.


There’s an old saying, obviously based on sound observation, that
‘the whiter the bread, the sooner you’re dead’.
Most of the sickest people who consult me are large consumers
of white bread and ‘dead’ foods. So I say again: it is becoming
increasingly apparent that our dietetic habits needs remodelling,
and that the re-education of our people as to what, when and
how much to eat is urgently needed.
In case you may still have some doubts as to the basic causes
of our deteriorating national health, and that the greatest single
factor in obtaining a higher level of health is natural food as
it comes to us from uncontaminated soil, and that it must not
be so processed and fragmented that it is no longer ‘whole’, let
me cite some research reports. They should be of particular
interest to our athletes.
The following are quoted by Dr Bircher of Zurich.
“Professor Karl Eimer of the Medical Department of the
University of Marburg picked out a number of outstanding
sportsmen among his students and required them to undergo
two weeks’ physical training along conventional lines. When they
had reached peak condition he suddenly and without warning
switched them to a diet of pure raw food.
“There was no transitional period. For these athletes it meant
a diet they were not accustomed to, and it meant a reduction
of protein intake from 100 grams to 50 grams.
“The conventional diet was, as you may guess, mainly animal,
and the new diet was almost wholely vegetable protein. I suspect
that the good professor expected a sharp deterioration in their
well-being and a disastrous decline in their performance.
“Nothing of the sort happened. They grew stronger, speedier,
and more supple. Here was startingly demonstrated the economy
and efficiency-raising effect of raw food in metabolism. It was,
you will agree, a remarkable result.
“Another experiment was carried out in 1951 by Dr Kurat-
sune, head of the Medical Department of the University of
Kyushu, Japan. This experiment was actually carried out on his
wife and himself.
“He imitated the under-nourishment conditions of a Jap-
anese concentration camp as far as food quantities were con-
cerned. This he did for three relatively extended periods: (a)


120 days in winter, (b) 32 days in summer, and (c) 81 days in
spring,
“He did this while fully occupied with his professional work
and while his young wife was preoccupied with the feeding of
their baby as well as her house work.
“The participants continued in good health and in good
working condition, and the young lady was even better able
to breast-feed her infant.
“What was the reason for this? The answer must have come
to you immediately. The food, though grossly insufficient, was
fresh and raw. It consisted of whole grain rice, soaked and
shredded greens, and a little fruit. There was no animal
protein whatever.
“But take note of this: during the third experiment Kurat-
sune switched to cooked food—exactly the same food, but this
time boiled. As a result the dreaded hunger disease seized them.
Collapse and hunger oedema occurred, only to disappear when
he switched back again to the uncooked diet.”
Dr Bircher mentions many other results of nutritional research
which all further demonstrate the superiority of raw foods for
promotion of health and stamina.
Two New Zealanders who made their mark as long-distance
swimmers were John Marshall and Bill Pickering. The latter,
after swimming the English Channel, was able to run up the
beach.
Both trained on a meatless diet, but a diet rich in raw food.
More recently we have the example of Murray Rose, the
champion backstroke swimmer of Australia. He had been a
vegetarian from birth. It would hearten you all to read his
book describing his upbringing and the reasons for it. Its title
is Faith, Love, and Seaweed, perhaps a strange name but not
so crazy when you consider what he has to say.
The great value of this teaching and the benefits it brings in
mental, moral, and physical health have to be experienced to
be enjoyed.
But now you yourself are seeking practical help. Let me be
your guide.


CHAPTER THREE
CLEANSING PROGRAMME
Let us now discuss your cleansing programme.
As a period of ‘rest’ is needed by any organ overburdened
with food toxins this is begun by the preliminary 11 -day elimin-
ation course which, as I have stated, can be carried out by the
average patient—and I remind you: begin at a suitable time.
For three days you take only fresh citrus juice (orange or
grapefruit as available). Take a glass of this every four hours,
and as much water as you feel you need. If you have fluoridated
water in your taps do try to find an alternative. Install a
small tank if you cannot buy distilled water. This is particularly
important for persons with arthritic tendencies, nervous troubles,
or a skin disease.
After the three days are up, continue the juice and water,
but add fresh raw fruit of any kind available, and perhaps a
baked apple for your evening meal.
Continue this for two days, then for the next six days take
the following diet:
Breakfast :
Fresh raw fruit of any kind.
Lunch:
A vegetable salad with three to six raw vegetables. If going
to work a cut salad is evidently unsuitable but you can take
the ingredients in a plastic bag—a green of some sort, with
portions of carrot, spring onion, tomato, celery, etc. Also
take a thermos flask of potassium broth, and drink this at
morning and afternoon tea breaks instead of tea or coffee and
biscuits. (Potassium broth is made from a good selection of
green vegetables, onion, parsley and an unpeeled potato. Sim-
mer for half an hour in a quart of water, strain, and add
a little vegemite, if liked, on serving.)


Dinner (evening meal ):
Two or three steamed greens and a cup of vegetable broth.
During this elimination period most people lose some weight,
often from five to seven pounds; sometimes (if grossly overweight
and unhealthy) a bit more. But even if you’re thin don’t worry
about this initial loss; as your condition improves you will
stabilise at your optimum weight.
After the elimination course is over adopt or resume the
basic daily diet. If you get sufficient variety in your fruits and
vegetables during the course of a week you will usually get
your necessary vitamins and minerals. The fact is that they
are usually found together in most foods.
You will have noticed by this time that I am not stressing
proteins, carbohydrates, and fats as most dieticians do. I am
sure this terminology only confuses the average layman.
If you ask at this stage, as most people do: “Where then do I
get my protein?” I ask you please to think: where do the
elephant and the bullock get their protein? Surely only from
herbs and grasses. When we eat meat we are only eating second-
hand grass, and no good workman ever willingly uses second-
hand materials if he can get them new.
Here is the diet:
BREAKFAST
Cut out the usual bacon and eggs, and/or cereal of which latter
I must emphasise that ‘dead’ foods, attractively packaged and
prepared as they may be, carry with them the seeds of future
arthritis or worse crippling diseases.
A little while before eating, drink a glass of fresh orange or
grapefruit juice. Your breakfast should then consist of some raw
fruit (one or more varieties as you may wish) with some raisins,
or dates, and/or nuts (and these must NOT be roasted or sal-
ted).
If you have been accustomed to a large cooked breakfast you
may feel that the above is not enough, but please stick to it. I
can assure you that you will soon begin to appreciate the im-
provement in your health that follows.
However, if you do heavy work, and still feel dubious, you may


have one slice of wholemeal bread, toasted if you wish, with a
little butter and honey or vegemite.
Unless wholemeal is available do not eat any bread. You
cannot be warned too often that white bread is not good for
you.
‘The whiter the bread the sooner you’re dead.’
Then, if you’ve been accustomed to several cups of tea or cof-
fee you will soon learn not to miss them if you cultivate a taste
for dandelion coffee or one or other of the pleasant herbal teas
that are available.
If you need a sweetener in your beverage use honey. On no
account use artificial sweeteners such as saccharine or glucose,
and I’ve already warned you against white sugar.
ELEVENSES
Cut out that cup of tea or coffee and biscuits. Try some slices or
pieces of fruit, or munch some raisins.
LUNCH
Your luncheon should consist of a salad of mixed vegetables such
as lettuce, celery, carrot, onion, etc. As I said before, if you
cannot take a salad ready mixed to work, you can always take the
ingredients in a plastic bag, and eat them with two thin slices of
wholemeal bread spread with a little butter and honey or veg-
emite, This may be followed by a little fruit.
MID-AFTERNOON TEA
Skip it. If you need refreshment eat a little juicy fruit.
DINNER OR EVENING MEAL
Your evening meal should always begin with a small raw salad,
fruit or vegetable, it doesn’t matter which. For your main course
a plate of two or three cooked vegetables (steamed or baked)
and, if not a vegetarian, small serving of some animal food, but
in small portions only as follows:
Twice a week—lean meat (never bacon or pig meats).
Twice a week—fish, steamed, baked, or grilled.
Twice a week—cheese.
Once a week—an egg.


Be warned. Anyone suffering from arthritis or rheumatism
in any form should cut out animal protein for at least six months,
while persons suffering from cancer should not eat meat at all
and must have individual advice according to their condition.
Half an hour before lunch and your evening meal drink a glass
of fresh fruit juice or a cup of hot potassium broth, for you
must not drink with meals.
This appetiser may be varied to other vegetable soups later,
and of course the hot broths may be taken to work and drunk
at your usual breaks.
After about a month you should repeat the 11-day elimination
course. Indeed this should be repeated every month for three
or four months. Thereafter repeat it when some unfavourable
symptom manifests itself, such as early warning signs of influenza,
stomach or bowel upsets, headache, and so forth.
By so doing you give your body a chance to eliminate the ac-
cumulated waste products that are causing the unpleasant
symptoms.
Remember, a sick animal instinctively stops eating! We have
to regain these lost natural instincts.
Never overeat. That is one of our worst dietetic crimes. Many
people eat four or five times too much. Too much food, mostly
cooked, leads to the faulty elimination that troubles a great many
people nowadays. If one’s system is working properly then waste
products from one day should be evacuated within 24 hours, but
a great many people carry around in their intestinal tracts the
waste products of several days, and in bad cases, of several weeks
is not unknown.
Such sluggish evacuation is the root cause of most chronic
illnesses. The continued use of purgatives and laxatives does no
real good as a corrective; it is like flogging a dying horse. Re-
move the cause by correcting the faulty eating and living habits.
Learn the rules and your naturally self-healing body will grad-
ually rehabilitate itself.
Stop taking drugs of any kind. This is very important. We
are inflicting unnecessary insults on our bodies when we treat
them with these modern synthetic horrors, the inter-action among
which has never been properly investigated. They resemble
nothing God ever made. When you have studied sick persons


as I have you cannot help realising after awhile that nothing
made by Man has any place in the human body.
That realisation makes it obvious that synthetic drugs must be
discarded, yet many patients bring me long lists of these that they
are taking. It is horrifying when their possible side effects are
considered. Stopping their use is one obvious way to reduce
the colossal drug bill which at present is causing so much con-
cern.
In the earnest hope that you are already trying to correct your
daily eating habits along the lines so far indicated, I will now
instruct you concerning the chief mistakes most people make.
There are twelve main ones, and lots of lesser ones. But before
doing so let me give you extracts from two letters from patients.
These will show you what the simple instructions I am giving will
accomplish, if diligently followed, by so-called ‘incurable’ patients,
as these two had been diagnosed.
The first is from a woman who consulted me in Sydney.
Briefly, her history told that five years previously she developed
severe back pains with some collapse of vertebrae. The trouble
was diagnosed as ‘osteoporosis’. For this she had to wear a steel
surgical corset. Also, three years previously she was found
to have diabetes for which tablets were prescribed.
She had no energy and easily tired. An x-ray showed some
deterioration in the spine. Her doctor said the condition was
due to some hormone imbalance and that there was no treatment
known that could overcome this. She was given a synthetic hor-
mone and advised that a high protein diet might help.
Now read what she reported in her letter a few weeks after
consulting me:
“My doctor to whom I go about every three months for a
diabetic check is amazed at my appearance, the progress I have
made, and my energy which is nearly back to what it was years
ago. He asked what diet I was following so I showed him your
paper, and he asked if he might keep it to have some copies taken
off for himself. He also had four more typed out for me.
“He (Dr J. W.) is a very understanding fellow. My back is
much improved, free from pain though still a bit weak from
wearing the surgical corset for seven years, and which I do not


wear now. I’m in a much lighter one and hope in time to leave
that off and be able to swim again.
“You will be very pleased to hear that I dropped my first
diabetic tablet on New Year’s Day (I was determined that the
New Year should really be a New Year) and I have since drop-
ped my second and last tablet. I am thrilled about this. So is
my husband and also Dr J. W. I control it all by diet now.”
I certainly was pleased at the report for that patient had
appeared so weak when we first met. In a period of only seven
months the change of living habits had already shown its
worth. I was convinced that it would not be long before she was
able to swim again, and note that swimming is excellent exercise
for helping to restore any weakened body. It is interesting to
note that this patient had been drinking artificially fluoridated
water for several years. This, of course, I banned.
The second letter was from a man aged 44 who had not felt
well for years. Not long before coming to see me he felt so de-
pressed and out of sorts that he went to a doctor, who found
that he had a very high level of cholestorol in his blood.
For this he was given some drugs and put on a ‘diet’. That
diet, from my point of view was quite useless—four slices of
bread a day, and meat and vegetables. No sugar. The result was,
of course, no improvement at all. Indeed his dietary history
was shocking: it was no wonder to me he felt so ill.
He consulted me and was given my usual kind of advice. Now
read his letter, dated four months after that:
“You will probably recall my seeing you regarding the high
cholestorol level in my blood, and I thought I would drop you a
line to tell you the latest results. Since seeing you I stopped taking
drugs and went on the diet outlined, and I have just received the
result of a blood sample from my doctor. It is now quite nor-
mal. .. .”
That is an interesting report, particularly in view of the short
time since correcting his dietary regimen. It should encourage
anyone with similar troubles to persevere with the plan—that
same one I have already outlined here. Why go on with a
high cholestorol level when it can so easily be reduced, so les-
sening your chances of incurring an attack of thrombosis?
As you have no doubt heard, high level blood cholestorol is


usually its forerunner. This is one of the serious heart troubles
that so often strike apparently fit middle-aged men. Remember
the patient from Sydney I mentioned earlier. He now lives a full
life after having nearly died many years ago. What one has done
others can surely try to do.
After that little encouragement to you to persevere, whatever
your present condition may be, let us get on to the next topic
on our agenda —common errors in our modern nutrition.


CHAPTER FOUR
OVER-EATING
Probably the worst dietetic crime, but perhaps the easiest to rem-
edy (if you have the will-power or rather won’t-power) is that
of over-eating. A great many people eat four or five times as
much as they really need.
The human body—l say it again—is the most wonderful
machine ever made. It is quite beyond man’s power to copy or
improve on it. Like all machines, however, it has to have the right
treatment if it is to function properly. It is very tough and will
tolerate a lot of maltreatment, but sooner or later its mechanism
begins to break down under strain.
Then, unless the cause of the breaking down is removed,
chronic degenerative disease starts to develop.
Now, we have all been so brainwashed with false teaching
that most people firmly believe that to keep fit and well we
should all have substantial meals three times a day.
Rather than argue the point let me give you some scientific
findings to demonstrate the fallacy of this teaching. First, I will
cite perhaps the most famous of treatises on the subject of health
and longevity. It was written 400 years ago. It is the story of an
Italian nobleman, Luigi Cornaro, who at the age of 40, was told
that his days were numbered and were few unless he changed
his ways —the doctors could not help.
Cornaro decided that he must try to make his daily foods
conform to the needs of his body. Moderation in eating and
drinking became his routine, and after much trial and error
he found that the daily ingestion of 12 ounces of food with 14
ounces of wine kept him in excellent condition, but any small
increase had disastrous results.
Let me quote his own words:
“I conclude, especially from the late trial I have had, that
excesses in eating and drinking are fatal. Of this I convinced
myself four years ago, when by the advice of my physicians, the


instigation of my friends and the importunity of my own family,
I consented to such an excess which, as it will appear hereafter,
was attended with far worse consequences than could naturally
be expected. This excess consisted in increasing the quantity of
food I generally made use of, which increase alone brought on
me a most cruel fit of sickness. And as it is a case so much in
point to the subject in hand, and the knowledge of it may be
useful to some of my readers, I shall take the trouble to relate
it ... to corroborate my arguments, I alleged these two natural
and very true proverbs;—one: that he who has a mind to eat
a great deal must eat little, which is said for no other reason
than this, that eating little makes a man live very long, and
living very long he must eat a great deal more; the other
proverb, that what we leave after making a hearty meal does us
more good than what we have eaten.
“But neither of these proverbs, nor any other arguments I
could think of, were able to prevent their teasing me more than
ever. Wherefore, not to appear obstinate, or effect to know
more than the physicians themselves, but above all, to please
my family, who very earnestly desired it, from a persuasion that
such an addition to my usual allowance would preserve my
strength, I consented to increase the quantity of food, but with
two ounces only; so that, as before, what with bread, meat, the
yolk of an egg and soup, I ate as much as weighed in all
12 ounces, neither more nor less.
“But I now increased it to 14, and as before I drank 14
ounces of wine I now increased that to 16. This increase and
irregularity had, in eight days’ time, such an effect on me that,
from being cheerful and brisk I began to be peevish and
melancholy, so that nothing could please me, and was constantly
so strangely disposed that I knew neither what to say to others
nor what to do with myself.
“On the twelfth day I was attacked by a most voilent pain
in my side, which held me 22 hours, and was succeeded by a
terrible fever which continued 35 days and as many nights,
without giving me a moment’s respite; though, to say the truth,
it began to abate on the 15th. But notwithstanding such
abatement I could not, during the whole time sleep a quarter of


an hour together, inasmuch as everyone looked on me as a dead
man.
“But, God be praised, I recovered merely by my former
regular course of life, though then in my 78th year and in the
coldest season of a very cold year, and I reduced to a mere
skeleton. And I am positive that it was the great regularity I had
observed for so many years, and that only, which rescued me
from the jaws of death.
“In all that time I never knew what sickness was . . . Hence
I concluded that orderly living is no other than a most certain
cause and foundation of health and long life; nay, I cannot
help saying that it is the only and true medicine, and whoever
weighs the matter well must also conclude that this is really the
case.”
I would like to quote much more from this delightful essay
on Health and Longevity written by Cornaro when he was 83
years of age, and from his last treatise, written at the age of 95,
but I think I have shown you how moderation in quantity of food
is important. Sir Francis Chichester, whom I quoted earlier,
found the same, and added some advice to his readers—“eat
little and chew it much”.
A French medical authority some years ago, after stating that
we all eat and drink too much, said: “Take the Trappists for
example. From September 14 to the first Saturday of the
beginning of Lent (February-March) these Trappists eat but one
meal within the 24 hours. This meal is set for about 3 o’clock in
the afternoon-—twelve hours after rising, for they rise from
sleep at about 2.30 a.m., and engage in labour, prayer, and
religious exercises before partaking of a mouthful of food. They
enjoy perfect health. Dyspepsia, indigestion, or disease of the
digestive organs are very rare occurrences. For 28 years past
there has been practically no cause for alarm by their physician,
no dropsy, no gallstones, cancer, appendicitis or colic ....
“Their diet consists mainly of farinaceous soups, containing
no animal fats, with bread made from coarse flour, vegetables
cooked in plain water, roots, and potatoes. Meat, fish, butter
and eggs are absolutely forbidden. Even oil is only used in
salads. For drink, a pint of fruit juice is allowed. For dessert
they use fruits, either dried, raw, or cooked.


“On this food they thrive, keep robust, and reach an ex-
ceptionally old age. Of course they are kept busy at work and get
plenty of exercise and good wholesome air,
“Weak and invalid persons joining their order soon begin to
pick up and become strong healthy brothers. It must therefore
be admitted by physicians that disease results from the neglect
of fasting.”
I am not suggesting that you need all become as abstemious as
those monks, but their notable good health was undoubtedly the
result of their frugal living habits, and their example can, with
great advantage, be followed by anyone in poor health who has
derived no benefit from ordinary medical treatment.
Indeed the beneficial effects of so doing have been demon-
strated to me. Let me briefly tell about Mr C. whose troubles
dated from 1946 when he was in the Congo, where he had a
severe attack of some undiagnosed fever. Following this his
weight suddenly increased from 9 stone to 20 stone. He
developed partial paralysis in one arm. He spent three months
in hospital, but lost only 21 pounds. He had remained in a
very miserable state since.
When he first visited me his diet was trerrible—large servings
of breakfast cereals, at least eight slices of white bread, meat and
cooked fruits with custard or icecream followed by many cups
of coffee. His daily fluid intake was about three and a half pints.
His weight was 16 stone 8 pounds. He looked and felt deplorable.
Three weeks later he called on his second visit. He looked a
different man and was delighted with his improvement. His skin
had cleared and his weight was down by more than 14 pounds.
But it was his increased energy that thrilled him most, and had
astonished his workmates.
His original condition had been so bad that I had not started
him on the elimination diet, fearing that it might have produced
too severe an initial reaction. Therefore, I had started him on the
daily diet I have already outlined, and I reduced his daily fluid
intake to one pint.
With that reduction in his total daily intake of food and
liquid (not to mention the improvement in its quality) he had
made that dramatic improvement and had felt capable and
able to cope properly with work for the first time in years.


Anyone else who tries and follows these simple rules can
similarly improve the quality of his or her life. Why not try? It
may take a while longer in some cases than in others but if
you persist you will eventually succeed.
During his service in India Sir Robert McCarrison wrote, of
the Hunza people, that they were never sick. During his nine
years in that region there were no cases of indigestion, constip-
ation, appendicitis, etc. In fact no sickness of any sort that was
brought to his attention. He might as well not have been
there, except for the illness and surgery needing his ministration
within the army garrisons.
His conclusion was: “It is possible these people live so long,
and are so free from disease, because they live almost entirely
on natural foods.”
It has been demonstrated experimentally that great danger
lies in excessive eating of artificial and prepared foods. Professor
C. M. Child, Chicago University, showed by experimental tests
on flat worms the effect of fasting and of gluttony (excessive
eating).
He wrote: “Experimental investigations carried out through
a number of years in the Department of Zoology of the University
of Chicago have shown these flatworms, when well fed, grow
old just as the higher animals do, but that they may be made
young again in various ways. When they are deprived of food
they do not die of starvation. They are able to live for months
upon their own tissues.
“During the time of fasting they become smaller. When fed
again after such fasting they show all the physiological character-
istics of young animals. With continued feeding they go again
through the process of growth and of becoming old, and may be
made young again by fasting.”
Professor Sir Julian Huxley, a few years ago, performed a
similar experiment on earth worms. He fed a ‘family’ as they
usually ate, except one worm, which he isolated. He fed it as he
fed the others but now and then he made it fast. The isolated
worm was still alive and vigorous after 19 generations of ‘rela-
tives’ had been born, lived their usual span and died. Huxley
explained the phenomenon by stating that heavy eating clogs the
life channels and hastens death.


Surely we can learn much from these simple tests. We are not
quite worms but the Life Principle is the same; and by applying
similar short periods of fasting many people have been known
to improve their bodily condition, even when they have been
suffering from some advanced disease.
How much more sensible, surely, it would be if we all learned
the rules of moderation and applied them in our daily life.
We would be spared all the miseries of the various unnecessary
and unpleasant diseases that so commonly affect modern man
despite the large amounts of money poured into medical
‘research’.
Learn the rules of sensible living, apply them, and teach
your children how to be healthy, even in this present poisoned
world.
This chapter has discussed one of the most prevalent dietetic
faults. It can easily be remedied by anybody with sufficient
strength of mind to discipline him or herself.
Do not forget the value of fresh air and active exercise. I
shall deal with these more fully later on. What we have been
concentrating on so far is advice on how to correct faulty
dietary habits that have in many cases been the cause of un-
pleasant symptoms of ill health.
I stress again; these cannot be corrected much less cured
by drugs. The only way to remedy any trouble in your body—
as in your car-—is to remove or rectify the underlying cause,
and thereafter treat your car or body with respect.
In the next chapter we shall deal with other common dietary
errors, such as the folly of eating too much cooked food, as well
as those foods which have been artificially ‘treated’; the excessive
consumption of animal protein; the consumption of too many
cereal foods.


CHAPTER FIVE
DANGERS OF COOKED FOOD
A very common fault in our daily dietary habits is our habitual
consumption of too much cooked food.
We have become so accustomed to this that many people eat
very little natural food on any given day. I teach my patients
that, to keep healthy, we must make our daily diet consist of
at least 75 percent (three-quarters) fruit and vegetables, of which
half or more should be eaten raw. From my observations during
the past decades I have concluded that it is only raw food that
keeps us fit.
I will go further. If we lived entirely on raw food there would
be a great reduction in sickness.
Most modern dieticians have interested themselves mainly
in the chemical theories of nutrition and have devised various
diets to supply various necessary chemical factors, but seem to pay
little regard to the very real qualitative changes in foodstuffs
when they are subjected to varying degrees of heat.
This does not affect the proportion of protein, carbohydrate
and fat, which is all that seems to concern some dieticians who
are apparently imbued with the idea that ‘cooking’ (boiling,
roasting, baking, frying) is an advantageous exercise whereby
‘indigestible’ components of the food (such as cellulose, etc) are
made more digestible. Also that food by this process is made more
‘palatable’ and ‘attractive’ to the taste.
How wrong these ideas are has been proved and demonstrated
many times.
Sir Robert McCarrison proved this by his work on monkeys.
He fed them food cooked in an autoclave. They developed
lingering disease and died. They all suffered from colitis, and
in 30 percent of them the post-mortem examination showed
gastric and intestinal ulcers.
Dr O. Steiner, of the Swiss Ministry of Health, some years ago
fed guinea pigs on their usual diet but had it cooked. The


animals developed caries in their teeth, degeneration of the
salivary glands, goitre, anaemia, and scurvy, while some of them
developed cancer of the lungs.
He found that if 10 cc of pasteurised milk were added to
the cooked food the animals developed arthritis as well.
Thus it appears that food when cooked undergoes some
qualitative changes which destroyed the health of these animals
in a disastrous way.
Another Swiss professor, Abelin of Berne, compared the effect
on rats, feeding some on Swedish crisp-bread made of wholemeal,
others on ordinary wholemeal bread. He found that the rats fed
on crisp-bread wasted away in the same manner as do rats fed
on white bread, while those fed on wholemeal bread showed
normal development and growth.
The greater heat had altered the nutritive property of the
wholemeal in the crisp-bread so that the growth of those rats
eating it was stunted, and they had no resistance to infection.
Abelin suspected that not only vitamins but proteins also were
damaged by the heat.
I remind you of the story of the German raider, Kron Prinz
Wilheim. I need not repeat it.
Another interesting fact arises from the consumption of
cooked food. It is that it leads to over-eating, perhaps our worst
dietetic sin.
With ordinary cooked food the appetite for large quantities
seems insatiable. On the other hand, with raw food the need for
large amounts declines. I have noticed this with many patients.
When starting them on a diet of largely raw food I have
been amazed to see the quantities they eat. It seems their bodies
crave something, and they must get it quickly.
This, I think, must be because of their long starvation of
vitamins, for once their health begins to improve their daily
intake lessens so that they themselves express amazement at
how little they truly need, and yet how greatly improved is their
vitality.
Murray Rose, already cited, proved this to himself and to the
amazement of athletes from other lands. Sir Francis Chichester
likewise has been cited as knowing the value of raw food as a
life restorer. Another was Dr Barbara Moore, the Russian-born


physician in Britain who surprised us all some years ago by her
remarkable physical capability, and became a featured headline
stealer in the British press.
She demonstrated it by a remarkable recovery (from leukemia,
I have read). Her cross-continental walks were undertaken for the
purpose of making people realise the value of raw food in
meagre quantities. But few apparently had the sense to learn
the lesson.
Another woman physician who by this dietetic means, in part,
recovered from cancer (of the breast) was Dr Kristin Nolfi, a
Dane. She was advised on diagnosis by the famous Dr Hindhede
(already cited) to refuse surgery, to rest in plenty of fresh air
by the seaside, and to eat raw food.
All this she did, and after some months she began to re-
cover her lost energy, and the growth gradually disappeared.
After one year, however, thinking she was cured, and with the
—I hope — reluctant permission of Dr Hindhede, she added some
cooked food to her diet—and this proved a bad mistake.
Within six months the growth had reappeared.
Since reading her account of these events I have always
warned my seriously ill cancer patients that they must stick to
their entirely raw diet regimen for at least two years. Many of
them, have been thankful to do so.
Advanced arthritis cases, also benefit greatly from a mostly
raw diet. Let me tell you about one.
This man, in his middle forties, was a picture of misery
when he first shuffled into my consulting room. He could only
drag his feet, not lift them. His back was bent like that of an old
man, and he wore a heavy steel surgical corset. He had been
the rounds of the leading physicians and orthopaedic surgeons
seeking help. He had been told sympathetically that he would
never be able to discard the brace, and was heading shortly
for life in a wheel chair.
After enquiring about his early history, a physician’s routine
questioning, I realised that there was no mystery about the
cause of his condition. It was, like most diseases, due to con-
tinued over-eating of the wrong foods, mostly cooked of course.
I took him in hand. He had a lot of ups and downs as he
passed through various healing crises. These occur in most cases


at some stage, but in varying degree. However, he bravely
persevered, and the result was a wonderful recovery of a full
range of movement in his spine and limbs—so much so, in fact,
that he became as he now is, one of Auckland’s foremost Yoga
exponents.
His experience and testimony have since helped many others
in similar apparently hopeless condition to regain their health.
I would now like to quote from another letter, written 15
months after the writer came to see me:
“I called to see my doctor here because he had met my
husband by chance and enquired for me—and you were quite
right when you said he would not believe his eyes.
“He asked just exactly what I had been doing and I told him,
giving as complete a picture as possible of my daily diet. I also
told him that I had been under your care, and that you had
recommended another year of the strict food regimen. He then
asked about my weight, and upon hearing that I had put on
some weight, he said ‘I think you are now out of the woods
because if you had been going to have any trouble you would
have done so long ago’.
“He took notes of my diet and said he would phone my
surgeon in R— as he knew he would be delighted at my progress.
By his facial expression I could tell he couldn’t believe that I was
there. He mentioned the sparkle in my eyes. A couple of months
ago, he said, my surgeon had found an ‘inoperable condition’
when he operated. He removed all he could—the womb and
ovaries—but even so they did not expect that I had a chance.
“You know, Dr Hill, I thought surely they would have got into
touch with you and enquired further into the treatment so that
others could benefit likewise. But I feel that, due to the training
they undergo in their professison, they are just unable to com-
prehend the effectiveness of the simple raw food treatment. I feel
that they are unable to really credit it because of its utter simp-
licity. This at least seems my impression.”
There you have the words of my grateful patient. Her
regimen is completely raw except for a potato baked in its
jacket and two cups of potassium broth. And these are what I
call ‘pandering to human weakness’. But in her cold locality
she appreciates the warmth that they provide.


I do not suggest that you all go at once on to such a strict
routine but I hope I have told you enough to make you realise
that, even if doctors have pronounced your case hopeless, there
is still a different approach which has helped numerous patients
of all kinds. Not all such serious arthritic cases as I instanced
have enough recuperative power to make so complete a recovery,
but a more bearable state may at least make their life worthwhile
again.
Now let us discuss another common dietetic error. Most pat-
ients of mine are guilty of this one, and many do not like to
have to mend their ways, but having done so for awhile they
do not return to their bad habits as before.
This common error is excessive consumption of animal protein.
Having swallowed all the prevailing conventional wisdom
about the need for plenty of daily protein many will find this
hard to believe. However I have cited plenty of authority, and
testimony. I’ll go on from there.
Dr Birch-Benner, in his most useful book, The Prevention
of Incurable Disease, gives a vivid example of the structural
damage caused by excessive meat eating. Discussing disorders
of the circulatory system, he writes: “The part played here by
infection is of minor importance compared with faulty nutrition,
which induces lowered immunity, and is thus again connected
with nutritional errors. It starts with the capillaries succumbing
to attacks by poisonous nutriments. Two microscopical diagrams
show how the capillaries of two young students became severely
damaged by excessive meat eating for ten days.
“The famous experiment was made by Professor Gansslen
(Tubigen). He fed them on 1500 grammes of meat, 30 grammes
of white bread, and lemon water. After ten days the capillaries
had become thicknened, cork-screw like, twisted, dilated, and
some of them burst, the blood entering the subcutaneous tissues.
Their skin looked red (butcher’s skin), the gums were in a
scurvy-like condition, swollen, and bled easily.
“The vessels needed more than a month of strictly meatless
regimen to regain their normal shape. What has been demon-
strated here as happening with exaggerated meat eating in ten
days happens to millions of people in ten years.”
When you consider the great meat eaters we have become


in this century is it any wonder that coronary disease with its
frequent sudden deaths in apparently healthy men in early
middle age has become so common. If you want to be more sure
of avoiding these definitely avoidable incapacitating and some-
times fatal diseases, take my advice and reduce your meat
eating to reasonable limits—say twice a week.
Dr Birch-Benner also reports capillary distortions in cases
of high blood pressure patients. In his book he publishes a
picture showing sections from the lip of a woman aged 37
suffering from obstinate constipation, headache, high blood
pressure, and failing mental power.
The capillary knots are twisted and kinked many times, so
slowing down the flow of blood.
Another picture shows the result of three weeks of strict dieting.
A distinct stretching of the capillaries is seen, while it is noted
in the text that by then the bowels were functioning normally,
the headaches had disappeared, the blood pressure was down,
and mental alertness restored.
The illustrations of the small capillaries are most instructive,
I have myself seen similar symptoms disappear in many patients.
A great French heart specialist laid great stress on vegetarian
food as a means of curing heart and circulatory diseases, while
another was even stricter. After experimenting on himself he
began to call for rigorous exclusion of all animal protein in
high blood pressure.
From my own experience I am sure that he is right. Most
seriously ill patients benefit from the meatless regimen for a
shorter or a longer period, while migraine sufferers, I have noted,
are usually quick to respond to reduction of meat in their diet.
A student of comparative anatomy will find good reason for
some of the ill effects of excessive meat eating, for man’s intestinal
tract, as such a student knows, differs in many respects from that
of any carnivorous animal. The latter have intestinal tracts
three times the length of the body (from head to end of trunk)
whereas the alimentary canal of the frugivorous animal is about
twelve times that length.
Also, the short colon in a carnivore is smooth and thus
adapted to ensure the prompt evacuation of the putrefying
remains of flesh foods. When man eats flesh food it begins to


putrefy when it reaches the small intestine, and from there until
it is evacuated from the lower bowel it continues to putrefy and
to generate various harmful waste products.
If evacuation is delayed, a not uncommon occurrence with
‘normal diet’ nowadays, the seeds of future disease are sown.
Moreover, a large meat meal has been shown to increase the
rate of heart beat considerably. If this lasts very long you
can surmise how much unnecessary strain is thrown on the
vital organ.
Do we here, incidentally, see some relationship to the new
reports of sudden death among speakers at public functions?
One of our New Zealand leaders suffered such a fate. Also the
deaths we read of during sports activities.
Another very unpleasant effect of eating too much meat can
cause embarrassment to a sensitive individual: 8.0. (body od-
our). We hear it referred to in advertisements. But no amount of
glamorous deodorants, applied externally can remove the cause.
An unpleasant odour often emanates from the body of an
excessive meat eater; it can be detected by anyone with a keen
sense of smell (most usually to be found, ironically, though
naturally enough, in those who are aware of the meaning
of true health).
Some heavy meat eaters also suffer from chronic halitosis,
and their urine too may have an offensive odour.
So, even if not primarily interested in good health, should
you want to be certain of being ‘wholesome’ socially, you will
certainly find it to your own advantage to follow my dietetic
rules at least in part.


CHAPTER SIX
GRAIN FOOD
Let us now discuss the ill effects of eating too much grain
food. From what I see in my patients I think these are almost
worse than the effects of too much heat.
Speaking in San Diego before the 69th annual meeting of the
American Anthropological Association, Professor R. D. Mc-
Cracken, an assistant professor of anthropology, blamed the
carbohydrates in grains, potatoes and refined sugar for many of
the diseases that afflict modem man.
He was addressing Americans, of course, but since, from many
years of studying the diets of my patients here, I have become
convinced that those of them who eat too much starchy food —
particularly the bread and cake eaters —are among the unhap-
piest chronic sufferers, I will quote his address at length:
“Ancient man was a lot healthier animal than modern man,
according to University of California anthropologists. Man took
his first fateful step towards becoming the victim of many
degenerative diseases 10,000 or so years ago, when he discovered
how to cultivate grains ... .”
Professor McCracken said he blamed the carbohydrates in
the grains for many of the diseases that afflict us now. He
said that man was basically a meat and fruit eating animal. The
carbohydrates or starches are an unnatural diet for him. Among
the degenerative diseases for which starches are a large extent
to blame are some forms of diabetes, heart disease, stroke,
schizophrenia, alcoholism, and even possibly some forms of cancer.
Not all, he said, but a large percentage of these troubles have
come on man because he gave up the low-starch diet of a hunting
and gathering animal. Professor McCracken stated that sugar is
the ultimate energy provided by foods, and it is the rate at
which it is absorbed by the body that determines whether it
there causes metabolic disturbances. The faster the rate, the
greater the number of abnormalities.


Sugar, he said, is absorbed slowly from man’s natural food, but
quickly from the starches and carbohydrates. Pure, or almost
pure sugar is therefore the worst food of all. It is a far worse
culprit in human disease than the saturated fats that have been
bearing the brunt of bad publicity in recent years. It is precisely
during the last century or so that almost all the degenerative dis-
eases have assumed such devastating importance in the morbid-
ity and mortality statistics.
“The first coronary,” Professor McCracken declared, “was
not medically described till early in this century.”
My experience has led me to agree with most of his remarks.
The classic case of an acute coronary attack was not mentioned
during my years at medical school, but I well remember the first
case I met in general practice a few years later.
I could not then name it, but luckily had the sense to recog-
nise that it was a serious heart condition, and treated the man
concerned accordingly. That patient is, I believe, still alive but
in many such attacks the first is frequently the last, being
often immediately fatal. And if not actually fatal it oftens
leaves a permanent weakness of the heart muscle.
Many new operative techniques are being developed to trans-
plant arteries to overcome the residual effect of a thrombosis,
but without removing the cause of the trouble, so it usually
recurs sooner or later. The attending physician rarely, so it
seems to me, questions the patient’s dietetic habits in the terms
of which I write, though to be sure he may well urge a reduction
in body weight and advise the patient to avoid fats.
It is usually found in my experience that the victims of acute
coronary attacks are avid meat eaters, often active businessmen,
who appear to be in good health. They are absolutely flabber-
gasted at being struck down without warning.
If you wish to escape this unhappy fate, then study this book;
learn the basic rules of healthy living and then apply them
to yourself.
Each year there is an appeal for the Heart Foundation. This
is mainly to collect funds. One such appeal I heard on the radio
was for a special ambulance for urgent treatment of the victim
of an acute coronary attack. The sensible intention is that the
special vehicle should reach the stricken patient in the earliest


possible moment of his attack. This is the most lethal period as
a rule. The sooner the patient can have proper care the better
his chances of an ultimate return to useful life.
Splendid. But in the whole course of the radio talk to promote
this aim no mention was made at all of the need for a complete
change in such a patient’s mode of life. True, it was vaguely
mentioned that such a patient should avoid anything that would
raise the cholesterol level in his blood, and take more exercise,
but nothing radical.
Research, it was stated, was to be continued by teams of
‘heart specialists’ into these attacks. But it is extremely unlikely
that any progress can be made towards the restoration of such
a patient’s real health, as opposed to merely getting him back to
his desk, by the present therapies. Unless there is a radical change
in life style the recovered patient is at constant risk of recurrence.
If you feel or know yourself to be in this class of person and
are anxious to avoid a calamity then please follow my instruc-
tion for an elimination course, and then stick to the daily diet I
have set down.
I now turn briefly to another physician working on the same
lines.
‘The Mucus-less Diet Healing System’ is expounded by Pro-
fessor Arnold Ehret in his book of that name.
It was this book that found many of the clues to good health
ignored or overlooked by ‘orthodox’ medical school teachers.
Ehret divided the different food substances into two main
classes according to their ‘mucus forming’ properties. He found
that the mucus formers are the cause of most of our diseases,
particularly when used to excess and accompanied by faulty
elimination.
Foods in the ‘mucus forming’ class are those I have already
advised you to avoid or use very sparingly.
They are:
Animal protein.
Cereals.
Refined sugar.
So much for Professor Ehret, who has given us his classifi-
cations. Now let me refer to Dr Alexis Carrel, quoted by me
before, this time on cereals.


He wrote: “Our life is influenced in large measure by com-
mercial advertising. Such publicity is undertaken only in the
interests of the advertisers and not of the consumers. For
example, the (American) public has been made to believe that
white bread is better than brown. Then flour has been ‘bolted 5
(sifted) more and more thoroughly and thus deprived of its
most useful components. Such treatment permits its preservation
for longer periods and facilitates the making of bread. The
millers and bakers can earn more money. The consumers eat an
inferior product believing it to be a superior one. And in
countries where bread is the principal food the population
degenerates.
“Enormous amounts of money are spent for publicity. As a
result large quantities of alimentary and pharmaceutical prod-
ucts, at the least useless and often harmful, have become a
necessity for civilised men. In this manner the greed of individuals
who are sufficiently shrewd to create a popular demand for the
goods they have for sale, plays a leading part in the modem
world.”
We can surely see for ourselves (if we want to see) how this
has brought many families to the sad state where the children
usually eat far too much of the much-advertised cereal foods
of the day. Increasingly, incidence of avoidable sickness—asthma,
rheumatism, enlarged tonsils and adenoids, skin eruptions—are
the common result. Also, I might add, bad temper, irritability,
mental dullness, and numerous other vague symptoms which
can often be traced back to the victim's habitual consumption
of these ‘dead 5 foods.
Turning his attention to his own profession Alexis Carrel
writes: “Still more harm is done by the extreme specialisation of
the (modern) physician. Medicine has separated the sick human
being into small fragments, and each fragment has its specialist.
“When a specialist, from the beginning of his career, confines
himself to a minute part of the body, his knowledge of the rest
is so rudimentary that he is incapable of thoroughly under-
standing even that part in which he specialises.
“The more eminent the specialist the more dangerous he is. It
should be understood that such a division is only a method


ological expedient, created by ourselves, and that Man remains
indivisible.”
He also says: “Important facts may be completely ignored
. . . evident facts having an unorthodox appearance are suppres-
sed . . (but) Man cannot be separated into parts. ...”
It is appallingly true that evident facts are indeed suppressed
in the medical world. For example, to return to bread, it is
frequently asserted that white bread is nutritious, despite the over-
whelming evidence that the reverse is much more nearly true, as
I hope you have been convinced by reading the authorities I
have cited here.
It is, of course, up to the individual to test all these assertions
(or the contrary assertions) for himself. Use your God-given
commonsense, and you will quickly realise (as I have said before)
that as ‘health’ means ‘wholeness 5 so therefore does your body
need ‘whole food 5 . But use all grain foods sparingly, keeping
to only two slices of wholemeal bread a day.
As for the children and their ‘breakfast cereal 5 , a much
better breakfast for them consists of a couple of slices of whole-
meal toast spread with some honey or vegemite, with some raw
fruit and perhaps a few dates or raisins. Most children learn to
enjoy this simple meal.
If any of your children, incidentally, have suffered from ear
troubles this may be traced back to continued consumption of
too much mucus-forming food such as cereals and milk and sugar.
This could also be the cause of your own muscular rheumatism
(if you s re a martyr to that), to say nothing of your shortness of
breath on exertion and dormouse tendency to fall asleep at
awkward moments, if you s re prone to that.
So watch what you eat for breakfast in your family, just as
you should watch what you s re wrapping up for luncheon snacks
for your family to take to work or school.
Have you ever thought how great a proportion of the average
daily diet is of bread, and mostly white bread? And cakes, bis-
cuits, pastries and so forth? If you wish to improve the health
of your family you should switch to wholemeal bread and
cut entirely or markedly reduce the availability of biscuits in the
home.
Encourage, rather, the use of fresh raw carrots, apples and


other fruit in season. Raisins and dates are appreciated by most
children, and a small packet of raisins will satisfy the craving for
sweets. The sugar thus obtained is in its natural form. Dr
Birch-Benner points out that with each gram of sugar eaten
in such a natural form carrots, grapes, other fruit, a well-bal-
anced amount of nutritive substances such as mineral salts,
vitamins and so forth are absorbed.
Preserving the ‘natural unity’ of our food (as in this manner)
is most important nowadays. When devitalised, fractionated
foods are consumed daily over long periods the health of the
consumer slowly deteriorates, though often, because the resultant
injury to the body goes unnoticed for some time, it is difficult
to decide the cause. One of the commonest ‘faces’ of ill-health
today is shown by those numerous patients who complain that
they always ‘feel so tired’. Every medical practitioner has many
such patients, but I’m afraid prescribing for them ‘buck-you-up-
pers’ of some sort, or pep pills, won’t do them any good at all.
What I’m prescribing will.
Still on bread, I turn now to that interesting and educative
American magazine The Plain Truth and specifically in an
issue in my file an article by Charles V. Vinson, headlined
‘Bread—the broken staff of life’. He writes;
“As the ‘have’ nations grow richer their national state of
health grows poorer. Persons in less developed areas with a
simpler life often experience comparatively better health, even
with inferior medical facilities.
“The difference is often diet. Read in this article about the
disastrous result of one of modern man’s attempts to ‘upgrade’
his food supply—his tampering with bread, the traditional staff
of life.
“Medical scientists have begun to piece together a new pat-
tern of disease in Western Europe and America—in fact in all
the ‘have’ nations from Canada to South Africa to Australia.
Infectious diseases such as tuberculosis, plague, etc,, used to be
the main causes of lowered average life expectancies.
“Today’s life expectancy statistics are barely improved. Mod-
ern man is now being tortured by the degenerative diseases
which strike mainly in the second half of life. Doctors now refer
to the ‘twenty years abuse’, meaning man can abuse his natural


good health for that period of time before the effects begin
to catch up with him.
“Paradoxically, the Western nations have the most advanced
medical science in the world —and the most disease. Yet in
Africa, even with lower standards of medicine, people who
continue to eat their traditional foods do not develop the ‘new’
diseases. If however, they switch over to ‘refined’ modern foods
they begin to become ill from ‘Western’ diseases. They begin
to experience tooth decay, stomach ulcers, high blood pressure,
and all other ‘civilised’ diseases.
“Our primary culprit is DIET .... It has become painfully
obvious that our declining state of nutrition is directly linked
to our declining state of health.
“So-called foodless foods have borne the brunt of the strong
attack on the falling state of nutrition during the past years.
Foodless foods of the obvious type —like candy bars and the
maligned diet of soft drink —are, however, not wholly to be
blamed. The prime offender is the basic food we eat and every
day—the food we consider to be STAPLE.”
Even when food is considered staple the emphasis seems
to be on the chemicals inserted into foods. But what about the
‘non-foods’ —the natural foods which have had precious vitamins,
minerals, and other essential nutrients taken out of them?
Here is a magazine, widely read in the English-speaking
world, underlining all I’ve said, and going even further. When
Mr Vinson writes of ‘chemicals being inserted into foods’ he
will have had in mind the present denatured white loaf after
it has been what is euphemistically called ‘enriched’.
How misguided those ‘food-scientists’ were. Why remove the
essential husk and germ of the grain placed there by nature, and
replace them by artificial ingredients? Doubtless employees of
some great milling corporation, the tame scientists are not likely
to say other than what they’re told to say, but I’m not, and I can
therefore argue for them that just as Man cannot artificially
produce Life so also can he do nothing that can improve natural
foodstuffs.
After long study of the matter I have come to the conclusion
that nothing made by Man should have any place in the human
body, and therefore I agree with Hippocrates who said, over


2,000 years ago: “Let your food be your medicine and your
medicine your food.”
He was talking about natural foods of course; there were no
others then, but Truth never changes and therefore I try to get
each of my patients to understand the simple facts. True, white
flour in its refined state will keep almost indefinitely, but I note
that insects will not touch it; they know better than the millers’
tame food scientists.
Not being Marie Antoinette I’m not now going to exclaim,
“Oh, if you must not eat white bread, then try some cake.”
On the contrary. It constantly surprises me to see otherwise
intelligent people, who would not dream of eating white bread,
tucking in on snacks and scones and biscuits made of the same
dead flour.
Avoid them all. I have talked mostly about the effects of
the starch in the grain foods, but it is appropriate here to men-
tion that, beside any ‘enriching’ agent, other chemicals are added
to bread for various commercial reasons —for ageing, to prevent
it getting stale, to inhibit mould, etcetera. I doubt very much
that these have been properly tested for long-term effects, for no
one seems to know what these may be.
I do know that Dr R. S. Harris of the Nutritional Research
Bio-chemical Laboratory of the Massachusetts Institute of Tech-
nology fed a certain anti-stale agent to a group of rats and most
of them died within ten days.
When we realise (as has been amply established experimen-
tally) that the continued ingestion of repeated doses, even
minutes doses, of a drug can often be more harmful than a large
single dose (and remember there’s not only one but several
additives in bread, not to mention the fluoride added in the
water if from a fluoridated source) we should reflect grimly
that our ‘daily bread’ has in many cases become ‘our daily
poison’.


CHAPTER SEVEN
HEALTH WITHOUT DRUGS
I read in the New Zealand Herald, our premier daily newspaper,
a good article headlined aptly ‘Lessons which must be taken
to heart 5 . It dealt with heart disease, particularly coronary heart
disease before the age of 60. It remarked that for a quarter of all
middle-aged men who suffer a first heart attack it is also their
last—they die within three hours. A further 10 percent die
within the first few weeks of such attacks.
What a cheerful prospect if you are looking forward to retire-
ment and haven 5 t read this simple guide to staying or becoming
healthy.
As I was writing this, coincidentally, I was interrupted by a
patient, aged 39, who first consulted me six weeks before. He
had told me then that he came in despair; other doctors he had
consulted had agreed they could do more for him but alleviate
his discomfort with prescribed drugs.
These, he said, had only aggravated his misery.
I gathered in our first talk that he had consistently done all
the things Fve been warning you against; large quantities of
white bread sandwiches, many cups of tea, much meat, eggs
and cheese. As a result of all this he had developed mastoiditis for
which he underwent operations that had left him permanently
deaf in one ear. Then he 5 d developed sinus trouble which
had been treated by more surgery. He suffered chronic indiges-
tion with continual discomfort and belching.
What a life for anyone.
All his symptoms were consistent with long-continuing wrong
diet, plus the added insult of 18 cigarettes a day and all those
prescribed drugs.
When he popped in to interrupt my writing after six weeks
of the simple rules for health as set down here, what a difference.
I saw a lively young man full of energy and ‘bounce 5 . He said
at once he was delighted with the ‘almost unbelievable difference 5


in his condition in so short a time. True, he had his moments
of discomfort, but having been warned that these might occur at
first, he had persevered with the regimen and had overcome
them.
So can you, if you haven’t yet done more than read this
book.
Just reading it won’t set you right, or, if you seeem all right,
won’t prevent your health going wrong. On which I now remark
the usual run of patients with all kinds of diseases that have been
present in their system for varying lengths of time.
Many have arisen simply from ignorance of the simple rules
I have outlined, and then frequently been aggravated by the
drugs ‘tried’ on them by the overworked doctors they had visited.
Several children were among them, chronic asthma sufferers.
Among them were three who had started treatment by drugs at
age about three months. As the attacks recurred the drugs had
been changed, without however having any effect on removing
the cause. One of the patients, then aged eight, had had
seven different drugs prescribed, and had used an inhaler since
the age of 18 months.
Whether as a result of a change to a new drug, or as the
result of the cumulative effect during several years, this child
had developed a very acute form of leukemia.
This child’s diet had been shocking. Far too much animal
protein, two eggs every day for years, large servings of meat
daily, lots of white bread, plus, of course,-tinned fruit, fruit
juices, and milkshakes.
Killing him with kindness, for all these are known ‘mucus-
formers’ and should be strictly avoided by asthma sufferers. You
might not expect parents to be aware of this, but physicians
ought to be, yet none, I was told, had ever questioned his diet.
The body, as I said earlier, is naturally self-healing, if given
a fair chance, but when it is trying, by the extrusion of waste
products such as mucus, to rid itself of a toxic overload, this
healing reaction can easily be suppressed by noxious drugs, so
that eventually it gives up the struggle, and as in this case, leuk-
emia was the result.
Leukemia is commonly called ‘cancer of the blood’, and, like all
forms of cancer, is often the end result of a prolonged period


of faulty diet plus the added insult of drug therapy for some-
thing else.
Two other young children about the same age, who were
brought to me, had similar histories of drug therapy for asthma
from the age of a mere three months. Their diets, too, had con-
tained far too much ‘mucus-forming’ food; milk, cheese, eggs
and meat (but perhaps more fresh fruit than the first child
cited here) and they had not developed such serious conse-
quences.
I took them under my treatment, and after several weeks
without drugs, and on a more satisfactory diet, they both
showed considerable improvement. One had two acute attacks
of tonsilitis which were allowed to run their course unhampered
by the usual antibiotics, though this was difficult for his mother
to see through to finality.
She was under continual harassment from well-meaning friends
and relatives to ‘call in the doctor’. But she bravely persisted
despite their pleadings, and the child got over it, and was
afterwards in better health and showed more vitality than he
had in years.
The discharges produced by the inflammatory process had
helped rid his little body of much of its accumulated load of
food and drug poisons. He was, I told her, probably due for
one or two more reactions of the sort before his body was
cleansed, but since his anxious relatives had seen for them-
selves the undoubted benefit of not interfering with the body’s
self-healing power, those further attacks should not cause undue
anxiety,
I would say in general that if loving parents were guided along
these lines there would be much less recurrent illness of any kind
among our children. This is the approach the Ministry of Health
should apply, but I wonder how long it will be before that
institution sees the light.
Meantime, I hope all readers of this book will spread the gospel
of ‘natural health by nature’s means’.
Much the same as those recurring attacks of asthma are those
annoying bouts of ‘hay fever’ which afflict certain people at
different seasons of the year. Although the injection of an


antihistamine of sorts is often given with apparently miraculous
results, this does nothing to remove the cause.
From long observation I have concluded that the so-called
‘allergic conditions’ occur mainly in those who have not pre-
viously watched their diet particularly carefully. It is the body
which is overloaded with accumulated food toxins that most
commonly suffers from these ‘allergies’. ‘Allergy’ and ‘virus’ are
two glib words often heard on the lips of sophisticates to cloak
their ignorance. They sound impressive but really do not diagnose
a thing.
Among other recent cases, I have had more than usual num-
bers of skin troubles. All these said they’d had a long period of
trying many different ‘medical’ treatments. One sufferer from
psoriasis had been told by a doctor that there was no cure for
that affliction and that there was a fortune awaiting anyone who
could devise a cure.
I don’t claim the fortune but during the past years I have had
many patients suffering from this irritating skin condition, and
they all without exception improved remarkably when they fol-
lowed the elimination course for several weeks or months.
They have all expressed themselves as most grateful to have
been relieved of this so-called ‘incurable’ disease.
One patient came with a very scaly rash on his face, hands
and body that had been recurring for five to she years, and had
made his life a misery. He gave a history of having led a very
active life some years before. He had been an athlete and a
weight-lifter. During his training he had eaten three large meals
a day with meat of some sort at each —bacon and eggs, sausages,
garlic sausages, steaks, lamb’s fry, etc. Added to this he ate
practically no raw food.
While leading his very active life he managed to eliminate the
excess toxins fairly well, but when he adopted a less strenuous
existence, though continuing his over eating and now smoking
heavily, his dietetic sins caught up with him. Hence the scaly
and unsightly rash.
The overdose of animal protein I instanced from the experi-
ment of Professor Gansslen was compounded in this case by the
60 cigarettes a day the man was smoking latterly. Dr W. J.
McCormack of Toronto showed that one cigarette a day des


troyed in the body as much Vitamin C as would be obtained
in one orange. So what hope could a smoker of 60 have of avoid-
ing serious disease? This man was lucky that his skin disease drove
him to seek help before he succumbed to something much more
serious.
I must now instance several more cases of arthritis, first of
a girl aged 16 whose knee joints had begun to stiffen, followed
by others of her joints. She had been sent to a local doctor who
referred her to the base hospital for her area. There she was
given an appointment six weeks forward.
After many tests she was told she had slight arthritis which
would be present for the rest of her life, or, on the contrary, it
might disappear. She was advised to take aspirin to relieve the
pain ... up to 20 tablets a day depending on its severity.
What a prospect for a young girl. Of course her condition
could be improved, I said, and what a disgrace to imply or state
that her condition was incurable. I cited my Yoga exponent who
had been so badly crippled that he could hardly walk, to give
her courage and self confidence.
Next on my list was a woman of 53, a sufferer from rheu-
matoid arthritis on and off for 17 years. At first the joint pains
varied from time to time and she controlled them by aspirin.
But four years before she came to see me she had a more severe
attack and was admitted to hospital. There she was put on gold
injections and another commonly used drug.
This drug is known to have serious side effects at times, and
from that date her condition steadily worsened. At one stage
she had haemorrhage from her bowel. This, the surgeon frankly
said, was probably due to that drug, yet its administration was
not stopped.
I am particularly bitter about that drug for it caused such
severe haemorrhage in my eldest sister, at age 86, that she had
to spend several weeks in hospital and have 28 pints of blood
in transfusion —all to overcome the effects of a drug that should
never have been prescribed to her.
Reverting to my rheumatoid arthritis patient it turned out on
questioning (needless to say) that for years she had been eating
far too much animal protein and far too much grain foods. Both
are notorious offenders in the production of arthritis in any form,


but I seldom hear a member of my profession concede that diet
plays any part in its etiology.
Accompanying this patient was a woman who told me she
had suffered for years from recurring bouts of frontal sinusitis.
This at times, she said, made her very sick and left her with a
chronic nasal discharge of large quantities of yellow-green
thick mucus. A constant cough caused her great distress.
Sure enough her diet proved to be the underlying cause —large
meals containing too much grain in the form of porridge, with
quantities of bread (mostly white) and the usual biscuits,
shortbreads and so forth. x\ll mucus forming.
The medical treatment prescribed for these two patients before
they came to me had evidently made no attempt to reform their
diet, but to both had been prescribed what I consider noxious
drugs. The result in each case had been an intensifying of their
symptoms, and the development of a chronic condition.
Many people have very little idea of the extent to which
contamination of common foods has advanced. In the super-
markets a great variety of packaged foods have had preservatives,
artificial colouring and flavouring, etc., added to enhance their
sales appeal or prolong their shelf life. But they may well ‘shorten’
your life by undermining your health if consumed regularly.
This, I regret to say, sometimes applies to the vegetables and
fruits, which, in their bins, appear to be ‘natural’ enough. In
many cases they will have been dosed with pesticides while grow-
ing, and traces of these poisons will remain in them. So, again,
I advise you to grow as many fruits and vegetables as you can.
By so doing you will save money, enjoy some outdoor exercise,
help to maintain your own and your family’s health, and avoid
ingestion of trace poisons—on the vegetables and fruit you eat.
The beneficial effect on health of eating ‘uncontaminated’
foods is well exemplified by the Abkhasian, people, who live re-
motely between the Caucasian Mountains and the Black Sea in
the Soviet Union. Sula Bennett, a professor of anthropology at
Hunter College, New York, confirmed this in a paper on this
community.
He wrote: “The long life of the Abkhasion people is legendary.
They work in the fields till well over 80. It is difficult to tell
a person of 70 from a person of 107. Many still live at 110


and there have been some reports of persons aged 120 and 130.
The Abkhasian eat well, with a predominance of vegetable and
fruit, and have an elaborate folk medicine.
“Most Abkhasions work regularly. To a great age they are
still blessed with good eyesight and most have their own teeth.
“Their posture is unusually erect, even in advanced age;
many take long walks and swim in the mountain streams. They
look healthy and are a handsome people. There was no reported
cases of either mental illness or cancer in a nine-year study
of 123 persons over 100.”
How different here, and throughout ‘our’ world. Even many
young people have poor posture, and mental disease and cancer
are all too prevalent. The Abkhasians eat relatively little meat —
perhaps once or twice a week. Other staples in their diet include
fresh fruits, especially grapes, and fresh vegetables, as green
onions, tomatoes, cucumbers and cabbage. And not a single
droplet of pesticide on any of them. Nor artificial fertiliser in their
fields.
Large quantities of garlic are consumed, about the social
aura of which on the breath of the eater there are two opinions.
I can only assure you that garlic is very good for you.
Few Abkhasians smoke (pipes) and they drink neither coffee
nor tea, these ‘luxuries’ not being readily available.
As a side issue (in both senses) Dr Samuel Rosen of New
York, a prominent ear surgeon, went there in 1970 with a
team of Soviet physicians. He compared their hearing with
that of Muscovites, and concluded that the Abkhasians’ diet-
very little saturated fat but a great deal of fruit and vegetable—
helped account for their markedly better hearing than that of the
citizens of Moscow.
This once again confirms what I have written on the point.
How many of your friends and relatives are afflicted with
poor eyesight and/or failing hearing? The value of predomin-
antly fruit and vegetable diets in these regards cannot be denied.


CHAPTER EIGHT
THE SUGAR-BAITED TRAP
Let us now discuss refined sugar.
We should realise that when we eat raw carrots, grapes and
other sweet fruits, we obtain sugar in its natural form, balanced
by other nutritive necessities —mineral salts, vitamins, and so
forth. But what do we get when we sweeten dishes with white
sugar? Industrially refined sugar lacks completely those natural
elements, and instead contains chemicals which are very detri-
mental to human health.
A well-known Japanese writer has said; “I am confident that
Western medicine will one day admit what has been known in
my country for years; sugar is without question the Number
One murderer in the history of humanity. . . .”
After that somewhat sweeping judgment he goes on: “Every
year the giant sugar trust devises new ways of unloading the
huge over-supply of industrial sugar on the hapless people of
the world. And today the average American child [and New
Zealand child, and neither, of course, object] consumes sugar at
an appalling rate compared to the children of 50 years ago.
“Is it any wonder,” he writes, with what authority I do not
know, “that leukemia and other cancers take the lives of more
‘innocent’ children in the United States than any other disease?
Western science admits the havoc wrought on the teeth of young
children by sugared drinks, candy, ice creams and pastries . . .
cancer of the blood appears in those who glut themselves with
sugared drinks, ice cream, sugared milk, coffee and tea.
“Interesting is it not,” he concludes, “that those who are
greedy for the sweet things in life perish automatically?”
Interesting indeed, but tragic that such irresponsible folly
goes almost unchecked in our so-called enlightened age. We have
all been warned about this danger for years, but our Health
Department seems helpless against our society’s sweet tooth,


abetted and encouraged by an endless flow of come-on sweet
and lolly ads on TV, on radio, and in the press.
Instead, against tooth decay, our medical authorities press
the ridiculous and potentially dangerous fluoridation of tap
water wherever this is possible to them. That this has been
proved useless for its alleged purpose has been demonstrated
overwhelmingly here, there, and everywhere, is totally ignored.
I may remark, on the fluoridation issue, that a fuss in New
Zealand because a certain imported pesticide was alleged to
cause foetal abnormality in humans made headline news for
several days; what did not, but is known to anti-fluoridation
lobbyists is that fluoride, not only can but does cause foetal
abnormalities. Mongolism and other sad results have been
attributed, not to mention congenital deafness.
Why we should be asked to tolerate this to try to protect
children’s teeth from decay, when the obvious course should
be to reduce their sugar intake is a question every adult ought
to ask him or herself, and then go on to consider feeding children
on a sensible diet of natural foods conservatively prepared. Not
only would tooth decay be much reduced but general health and
well-being among children and their parents greatly enhanced.
Another—and most serious—result of eating too much sugared
foods could be cancer of the bowel.
I was deeply shocked at the number of advanced bowel can-
cer cases drawn to my attention in a two-month span. They
were mostly in comparatively young men aged between 30 and
50. And then a district nurse of my acquaintance told me there
had been seven new colostomies in her district within two months,
four of them in women.
It then occurred to me that recently a retired Royal Navy
doctor, Surgeon Captain Cleave, who had studied diet in relation
to disease during 30 years of service, had challenged his medical
colleagues yet again with an hypothesis that diabetes, coronary
thrombosis, and other serious ‘degenerative’ conditions are often
a consequence of modem Western man’s habit of consuming
at least eight times more sugar than did his forebears 150
years ago.
His challenge was completely ignored but, in a book he has
had published, there are two chapters contributed by Mr Denis


Burkett, a surgeon. He won acclaim for his work on a rare
form of cancer now known as Burkett’s Lymphoma, for which
research he won several international awards. An acknowledged
expert he did not hesitate to implicate sugar as a cause of the
second commonest form of cancer in the Western world—
cancer of the bowel.
“In my opinion,” he wrote, “the discovery of a possible re-
lationship between the consumption of refined carbohydrates and
the degenerative diseases is one of the most important of this
century.”
But there is nothing new or startling in this discovery. Along
with much dietetic information it has been known for years.
Alas, such is the power of commercialism (and human greed
of both sorts, gluttony and avarice), that the facts remain
ignored.
These degenerative diseases, besides those graver maladies
I’ve previously listed, include extremely common conditions such
as piles, varicose veins, peptic ulcers, and many other prevalent
complaints which were almost unknown (certainly undiagnosed)
in the ages before large-scale carbohydrate refining began. To
support my contention it is established that they are still largely
unknown in ‘primitive’ societies in which unrefined foods remain
the major source of nutriment.
In his Food Guide For Health Surgeon Captain Cleave, to-
wards the end of that book, enunciates two rules. One: Do not
eat any food unless you definitely want it. Two: Avoid eating
anything made with white flour and white or brown sugar.
After the second rule he comments: “This means avoiding
white bread, pastry, cakes, biscuits and other confectionary and
jams, ices, chocolates, sweets and sweet drinks. Substitute a true
wholemeal bread and wholemeal flour for the first group and
raw or dried fruit for the second group.”
By following this simple instruction we would avoid upsetting
that essential ‘unity’ or ‘wholeness’ of our foods. That great
nutritionist, Dr Birch-Benner, whom I have quoted previously,
declared: “As part of the prevention of incurable disease
we must cease to disregard the ‘unity’ in our food. We therefore
demand reverence for ‘unity’, which is Nature’s wisdom. Eat only


wholemeal bread, restrict sugar consumption, pay more attention
to vegetable cooking and the totalities of diet.”
This leads me to make some remarks on cooking, and two
almost universal faults—in my own country anyway; overcooking
and the discarding of the vegetable water.
Learn conservative methods of cooking such as baking in a
covered dish, steaming in a special vessel or cooking in as little
water as is possible.
In circumstances where your tap water is not contaminated by
methods are important so that you absorb as little of the polluted
water as possible. In such circumstances baking or steaming
in a covered vessel contained within your saucepan is best.
In circumstances where your tap water is not contaminated by
fluorides always save your cooking water from the vegetables and
add it to your vegetable broth, or drink it. This fluid contains
most of the valuable mineral elements from the vegetables so
don’t be foolish and pour it down the sink.
The undoubted importance of such vegetable water was
dramatically demonstrated half a century ago by Ragnir Berg
and Otto Steiner. The result of their enquiry (in 1925-26)
concerning goitre in Swiss army recruits showed the great diff-
erence between those from Latin Switzerland and those from
German Switzerland, which Steiner explained as being due to
the different methods of home cooking.
The German Swiss squandered their vegetable cooking water
down the sink, and had a common occurrence of goitre; the
Latins didn’t, and goitre was almost unknown among their men.
The fact, now well known, is that thyroid disturbances, like
other endocrinal disturbances can usually be traced to nutritional
deficiencies.
It was of course, iodine which the German Swiss lacked.
Research along these lines has since demonstrated the influence
of faulty diet on the reproductive organs. As the general standard
of nutrition has worsened so has increased the occurrence of
sexual abnormalities, and behavioural patterns away from natural
modes ... or so can be deduced. Medical specialists in these
socio-medical fields never, to my knowledge, enquire into the diet
of such patients so little progress is made in correcting their
abnormalities.


Although I urge you to drink your vegetable water, rather
than throw it away, I must also counsel you not to drink it,
or any other fluid, with your meals, A common fault, I fear.
Liquids are best taken about half an hour before and/or about
two hours after eating.
There’s a good reason for this. Liquids on their own pass
rapidly out of the stomach and so the gastric juices are able
to work better on the solid foods when they enter the stomach.
Incidentally, by following this good digestive rule you will avoid
any indigestion ‘pain’ or flatulence. Incidentally again, once
you’ve broken yourself of what is a bad habit you’ll discover that
you will never willingly return to swilling liquids with your meals.
These, I hope you are convinced by now, should consist of
whole fresh foods undebauched by chemicals. I cite Professor
Peter Beaconsfield of London on the point.
He wrote: “There is a dimension to the pollution problem
which few people have yet considered. By eating and breathing
products of our already polluted environment, by daily ingestion
of all kinds of additives introduced into food to improve its
colour, taste or storage; by vast numbers of medicaments with
which we dose ourselves—often unnecessarily—we pollute our
bodies.
“The tremendous upsurge in the use of medication and food
additives since the 1940 s has not been matched by a comparable
evolution in our testing techniques to establish their safety,
particularly in the long term”.
This confirms authoritatively what I’ve been warning you
against, yet our City Fathers, with the acquiescence of the
medical profession, allow the addition of an acknowledged poison
to our municipal water supplies. There are ample proofs for its
toxicity but the scandalous situation continues.
Sheer ignorance. Here is an extract from a communication
from the Union Trade Commissioner’s office in London to
D. G. Steyn, professor of pharmacology and toxiocology at
Pretoria Medical School: “The United Kingdom’s Ministry
of Health takes a most serious view of the use of fluoride on food.
No tolerance in respect thereof is allowed and even the minutest
quantity on fruit would cause the entire consignment to be con-
demned.”


That was written in 1936. Has the toxicity of fluoride lessened
since?
If you value your health try to make some arrangement
to get drinking water from some other source.
Now let us discuss your digestion. One very common error
starts in the mouth with insufficient mastication. It was Mr
William Ewart Gladstone, several times Prime Minister of
Britain, who was known to advise everyone to chew everything
32 times before swallowing. Certainly all food should be well
masticated. Digestion of starchy food begins in the mouth and it
is essential for it to be thoroughly mixed with saliva before it
enters the stomach.
This does not happen when pre-prepared breakfast cereals or
other ‘mushy’ foods, usually drenched in milk, are eaten, and
therefore a habit of eating such pap paves the way for flatulent
indigestion and constipation.
This in turn leads to another complaint I find very prevalent.
Insufficient elimination of the bowel contents which in turn is
often the forerunner of such dangerous complaints as chronic
liver trouble, appendicitis and, worst of all, cancer of the bowel.
This last disaster is to be avoided at all costs so pay attention
to the rules I have enunciated and follow them regularly. But
remember, there are no short cuts to health; you cannot expect
to undo the errors of a lifetime in a few days.
Remember too that you must exercise. The use of motor
transport to and from your work or shops as a routine adds to
your difficulties, particularly as regards the proper working of
your bowels and their correct elimination, and then, of course,
there’s faulty posture as you sit reading this, by inhibiting the
full use of your respiratory organs, and posture conspires against
your efforts to reform. Good lung capacity is essential to good
health.
In an address delivered some years ago, Professor Clive Mc-
Cay, Ph.D., Professor of Nutrition, Cornell University, Ithaca,
New York said:
“The writings of Ellen G. White have been cited because they
provide a guide to nutrition that comprehends the whole body.
Much of this wisdom of the past is not understood today, and
we attempt to attain miracles by eating vitamin tablets, mixtures


of trace element or protein concentrates. Ellen White died
(1915) before modern biochemistry had unfolded many of the
mechanisms of the chemistry of the body and the composition
of foods, but if people followed her plan even today they would
be far better fed than they are in their attempts to eat bad
diets and then compensate by miracle foods. She advocated
simple natural diets, low in fat, low in salt, and well-prepared
and modest in amount.
“Nutrition is in somewhat the same position as early medicine.
We have learned much about the biochemistry of living matter
and foods, but we do not comprehend the whole either in relation
to food composition or the body of man.
“As Dr Fred Miller says, we do not know how to put Humpty
Dumpty together again. In fact we understand very little about
the inter-relationship between Humpty Dumpty as a whole and
the food he eats.
“Finally, in nutrition we are faced with the same dilemma
which afflicts the whole Western world. Our physical-chemical
sciences have progressed faster than our knowledge of physiology,
morals and sociology. Hence, on the pretence of improving man’s
welfare, we are attempting to dump chemicals into the water, the
food, and the air we breathe. The primary motive in moving
these chemicals into the body of man is because it makes
dollar profits for special groups. These parasites hope that the
host can stand it and they can become rich.
“As one of my friends in psychology wrote me after I had
shown him the list of allowances for pesticides: ‘lf the physicists
don’t eradicate the white race, the chemists will. ..’ One problem
that is never resolved is that concerned with the interplay of
toxic residues. Regulations usually set a limit in parts per million
upon the amount of residue that can be contained in a fruit
or vegetable. Never have I seen an attempt to evaluate the
effects of ten or twenty toxic compounds contained in as many
different foods . . . One of the greatest menaces is the presen-
tation of half truths in journals devoted to popular science. One
may ask what can an individual do to protect himself. In the
first place, all of us can read critically. We must be more and
more informed, not only about foods but about the activities of
the psychologists who force us to buy given products or accept


certain philosophies. For many years Switzerland has had an
excellent law to control chemical additives. For many years
Switzerland has taxed refined white flour and paid the money
to dark flours. Hence, white bread is dear and dark bread is
cheap. Our nation can very profitably study the laws and
activities of some of the smaller countries.”
In 1957, at the annual meeting of the American Association,
Dr Tom Spies was awarded the Distinguished Service Award. He
is regarded as an authority in the field of nutrition, and this is
what he said: “All diseases are caused by chemicals and all
diseases can be cured by chemicals. All the chemicals used by the
body, except for the oxygen we breathe and the water we drink,
are taken in through food. If we knew enough, all diseases could
be prevented, and could be cured, through proper nutrition.
As tissues become damaged because they lack the chemicals of
good nutrition, they tend to become old.
“They lack what I call ‘tissue integrity’,” said Dr Spies, and
concluded by remarking, “There are people of 40 whose brains
and arteries are senile. If we can help the tissues repair them-
selves by correcting nutritional deficiencies, we can make old
age wait.”
Dr Joe Nichols, founder and president of Natural Foods
Associates in the U.S.A., further asks: “What is proper nutrition?
Natural Foods Associates believes that the answer to that is
simple. It means natural food grown on fertile soil, eaten fresh
and poison free.”
He then asks: “When will our scientists learn that the answer
to our nutritional problems is simple natural food grown on
fertile soil. Of one thing we can be certain . . . natural food
grown on fertile soil and poison free won’t hurt anybody . . .
(but) during the past 20 years medical gains have produced
several types of man-made disease. The daily consumption of
stilboestrol and the degermination of our cereals with the result-
ing loss of the reproductive vitamin E, plus fluoridated water
which (at least in rats) prevents oestrus, is too much. Put all these
factors together for long enough and we may end up a medically
castrated nation.”
Dr W, Coda Martin (U.S.A.) wrote: “Man is a living
dynamic organism. He is a three-fold being consisting of body,


mind and spirit. He is not a machine. Scientists cannot produce
food for livings organisms, plants, animals or humans by methods
applicable to dead or inanimate machinery. Only life produces
life.
“We have added to our poor quality food some of the most
toxic insecticides. It is accepted fact that these interfere with the
important body enzyme reactions. If these chemicals are present
during the foetal life they will interfere with the normal develop-
ment of the foetus and cause congenital deformities.
“Today, for the first time in history, babies have cancer and
certain metabolic diseases at birth . . . everyone has the right to
demand the highest quality food, free of poisons, for themselves
and their children.”
These quotations support what I have tried to teach. Study
and apply these disciplines, and avoid your old errors. If you
can thus help yourself to a more healthy life, as of course you
can, my efforts will have been worthwhile.
As your bodily health improves so will your mental health, and
you will begin to realise the truth of the old Latin saying:
“Mens sana in corpore sano” (a healthy mind in a healthy body).
Let the last words be those of the late Andre Voisin:
“The soil must be kept in good health if the animal is to
remain in good health. The same is true of Man. Soil science
is the foundation of protective medicine, the medicine of to-
morrow.”










