

A SIGNAL OF DISTRESS
FROM
THE BELGIAN BISHOPS TO
PUBLIC OPINION.
THE STORY OF THE BELGIAN
DEPORTATIONS.
London :
Etre & Spottiswoode, Limited,
1916




THE BELGIAN BISHOPS TO
PUBLIC OPINION.
THE STORY OF THE BELGIAN
DEPORTATIONS.
London s
Etee & Spottiswoode, Limited,
1916.
1




Mechlin,
November 7, 1916.
A Signal of Distress from the Belgian
Bishops to Public Opinion.
Every day the military authorities deport
thousands of inoffensive citizens from Bel-
gium to Germany, and there condemn them
to forced labour.
As early as the 19th of October, we ad-
dressed a protest to the Governor-General, a
copy of which was handed to the representa-
tives of the Holy See, Spam, the United
States, and Holland, in Brussels ; the
Governor-General, however, replied with a
refusal to entertain our cause.
At the date of our protest, the decrees of
the occupying Power threatened only the
unemployed ; but at present, all able-bodied
men are being carried off indiscriminately,
;c (37)1843 A 2


packed into open trucks, and sent away, we
know not where, like a gang of slaves.
The enemy is taking the districts in turn.
We had heard vague rumours of arrests
having been made in the zone of the Depots,
at Tournai, at Ghent, and at Alost, but we
did not know under what conditions. Be-
tween October 24 and November 2 raids
were carried out in the district of Mons,
Quievram, Saint Ghislain and Jemappes, from
800 to 1,200 men a day being seized. To-
morrow, and on succeeding days, the blow
is to fall upon the district of Nivelles. The
following is a sample of the proclamations
posted to announce the outrage :
“ By order of the Kreischef, all persons
of the male sex over 17 years of age are called
upon to present themselves at the Place
Saint Paul, at Nivelles, on November 8,
1916, at 8 o’clock (Belgian time), 9 o’clock
(German time), bringing their Identity cards,
and, in case of necessity, their cards from the
Meldeamt.


The only luggage allowed will be small
hand-baggage. Any person who fails to
present himself will be forcibly deported to
Germany, and will further be liable to a heavy
fine and a long term of imprisonment.
“-Priests, doctors, lawyers and school-
masters are not to present themselves.
1 Burgomasters will be held responsible
for due execution of this order, which must
be immediately brought to the knowledge of
the inhabitants.”
An interval of 24 hours is allowed to
elapse between the posting of the placard
and deportation.
Under the pretext of public works to
be carried out on Belgian soil, the occupying
Power had made an attempt to obtain from
the Communes lists of unemployed workmen.
The majority of the Communes proudly re-
fused to furnish these.
Three Orders of the Governor-General’s
were designed to make ready for the blow
that falls upon us to-day.


On August 13, 1915, a first Order im-
posed forced labour on the unemployed,
under penalty of imprisonment and fine ; but it
declared that the labour in question was only
to be applied to works on Belgian soil, and
that any infringement would be tried in the
Belgian Courts.
A second Order, dated May 2, 1916,
reserves to the German authorities the right
of giving work to the unemployed, and
threatens any person causing work to be
executed without the sanction of the Governor-
General, with three years’ imprisonment and
a fine of 20,000 marks.
By virtue of this same Order, the juris-
diction which had been conceded to the
Belgian Courts passes into the hands of the
German authorities. A third Order, dated
May 13, 1916, “authorises Governors, military
commandants, and heads of districts to order
the unemployed to be removed by force to
the places where they are to work.” Thus
forced labour was already introduced, but it
was in Belgium.


To-day, it Is no longer a question of
forced labour in Belgium, but in Germany,
and for the benefit of ibc Germans.
To give an appearance of plausibility
to these violent measures, the occupying
Power Insisted in the German press, both
in Germany and Belgium, on these two pre-
texts : The unemployed constitute a danger
to public order, and a burden on official
benevolence.
The letter we addressed to the Governor-
General and to the head of his political
department on October 16, replied to this
as follows :
“You are well aware that public order
is in no wise threatened, and that all influences,
moral and civil, would support you spon-
taneously were it in danger. The unemployed
are not a burden on official benevolence ; it
is not from your funds that they receive
assistance.”
In his reply, the Governor-General no
longer urges these two considerations, but


he alleges that doles to the unemployed,
from wherever they may come at present,
must finally he a charge upon our finances,
and that it is the duty of a good administrator
to lighten such charges ; he adds “ that pro-
longed unemployment would cause our work-
men to lose their technical proficiency, and
that, in the time of peace to come, they would
be useless to industry.”
True, there were other ways in which
our finances might have been protected. We
might have been spared those war-levies
which have now reached the sum of a thou-
sand million francs, and are still mounting
up at the rate of forty millions a month ;
we might have been spared those requisitions
in kind which represent several thousands of
millions, and are exhausting us.
There were other ways of providing
for the maintenance of professional skill
among our workpeople, such as leaving to
Belgian industry its machinery and accessories,
its raw materials and its manufactured goods,
which have passed from Belgium into Ger-


many. And it is not to the quarries and
lime-kilns to which the Germans themselves
declare they will send our unemployed, that
our specialists would think of going to com-
plete their professional education.
The naked truth is that every deported
workman is another soldier for the German
army. He will take the place of a German
workman who will be made into a soldier.
Thus the situation which we denounce to the
civilised world may be reduced to these terms :
Four hundred thousand workmen have been
thrown out of work by no fault of their
own, and largely on account of the regime of
the occupation. Sons, husbands, and fathers
of families, they bear their unhappy lot with-
out murmuring, respectful of public order ;
national solidarity provides for their most
pressing wants ; by dint of a generous par-
simony and self-denial, they escape extreme
destitution, and they await with dignity, and
in a mutual affection which our national
mourning intensifies, the end of our common
ordeal.


Bands of soldiers break into their peaceful
homes, snatch youths from their parents,
the husband from his wife, the father from
his children, guard with fixed bayonets the
doors through which wives and mothers
attempt to pass to bid a last farewell to those
who are leaving them ; marshal their captives
in groups of forty or fifty, and hoist them
forcibly into open trucks ; the engine stands
ready under full steam ; as soon as the train
is full a superior officer gives the signal for
departure. Here we have another thousand
Belgians reduced to slavery ; condemned, with-
out previous trial, to the severest penalty in
the penal code save the death-penalty—
deportation. They know not where they are
going, nor for how long. All they know is
that their work will benefit no one but their
enemies. From some of them, by bribes or
threats, an engagement has been extorted
which is shamelessly called “ voluntary. ’
Moreover, though the unemployed are
certainly enrolled, a very large number of
those recruited —one-fourth in the district


of Mons —are men who have never been out
of work, men of a great variety of callings :
butchers, bakers, master-tailors, brewers’ assist-
ants, electricians and agriculturalists; even
quite young lads have been taken, students at
university colleges or other higher schools.
And yet two high authorities of the German
Empire formally guaranteed the liberty of our
compatriots to us. After the capitulation of
Antwerp, the distracted population was asking
what would happen to Belgians of military
age, or such as would reach that age before
the occupation had ended. Baron von Heune,
the military Governor of Antwerp, authorised
me to reassure the distressed parents in his
name. However, as there were rumours in
Antwerp that at Liege, Namur, and Charleroi,
youths had been seized and forcibly carried
off to Germany, I begged Governor von
Heune to be so good as to confirm in writing
the oral assurances he had given me. He
replied that the rumours of deportations were
baseless, and gave me, without hesitation, the
following written declaration, which was read


aloud on Sunday, October 18, 1914, In all
the parish churches of the Province of Ant-
werp : “ Young men need have no fear of
being carried off to Germany, either to be en-
rolled in the army, or to be subjected to forced
labour.’’
Immediately after the arrival of Baron
von der Goltz in the capacity of Governor-
General at Brussels, I went to ask him to
ratify the guarantees given by Governor von
Heune to the Province of Antwerp, extending
them to the whole country, without any time
limit. The Governor-General retained my
petition, in order to consider it at his leisure.
The following day he was good enough to
come in person to Mechlin to express his
approval, and, in the presence of two aides-
de-camp and of my private secretary, to
confirm the promise that the liberty of Belgian
citizens would be respected.
In my letter of October 16 last to Baror
von Bissing, after reminding him of the under-
taking given by his predecessor, I concluded :
“ Your Excellency will understand how painful


the burden of responsibility I should have
incurred towards families would be, if the
confidence they placed in you through me and
at my earnest entreaty should be so lamentably
disappointed.”
The Governor-General replied : “ The
employment of the Belgian unemployed in
Germany, which has only been Initiated after
two years of war, differs essentially from the
captivity of men fit for military service.
Moreover, the measure is not related to the
conduct of war properly speaking, but is
determined by social and economic causes.
As if the word of an honest man could be
cancelled at the end of a year or two years
like an officer’s lease !
As if the declaration confirmed in 1914
did not explicitly exclude both military opera-
tions and forced labour !
Finally, as if every Belgian workman
who takes the place of a German workman
did not enable the latter to fill a gap in the
German army !


We, the shepherds of these sheep who
are torn from us by brutal force, full of an-
guish at the thought of the moral and religious
isolation in which they are about to languish,
impotent witnesses of the grief and terror in
the numerous homes shattered or threatened,
turn to souls, believing or unbelieving, in
Allied countries, in neutral countries, and
even in enemy countries, who have a respect
for human dignity.
When Cardinal Lavigene embarked on
his anti-slavery campaign, Pope Leo XIII.,
as he blessed his mission, said : “ Opinion
is more than ever the queen of the world ;
it is on this you must work. You will only
conquer by means of opinion.”
May divine Providence deign to inspire
all who have any authority, all who are masters
of speech and pen, to rally round our humble
Belgian flag for the abolition of European
slavery !
May human conscience triumph over all
sophisms, and remain steadfastly faithful
to the great precept of Saint Ambrose:


Honour above everything ! Nihil prcejerendum
honestati!
In the name of the Belgian Bishops.*
(Signed)
D. J. CARDINAL MERCIER,
Archbishop of Mechlin.
*We have been unable to communicate
with the Bishop of Bruges.


