



PLANNER’S
ETNA GLASS AMD CHINA STOEE,
136, BOURKE-STREET EAST,
Filters of all sizes, porous Water Monkeys, porous Wino
Coolers, porous Butter Coolers, Pearl White American Dinner
and Breakfast Ware. Rich Cut and Pressed Glasses, in Claret
Jogs. &c., China Breakfast and Tea Sets, Table Sets for laige op
small families. Toilet and Kitchen Ware in great variety, &c.
Store and Hotel-keepers well supplied. English Stone Ginger-
beer botttles, and Glass Lemonade bottles in any quantity.
Leicester’s Patent Pleating Bail
WASHING MACHINES,
A RE calculated to wash from six to twenty-four dozen
j3_ clothes per hour, with a saving of half the soap,
water, and firing. Boiling clothes may also be dis-
pensed with.
Purchasers can test the machine daily at twelve
o’clock, on the premises, 202, Bourke Street, East, hot
water being provided.
Melbourne Hospital. 14th November. 1857.
I consider it for all purposes of cleansing linen everything that
can he desired. J. Williams, House Steward.
The Lady for whom I purchased one of your Patent Washing
machines, informs me, that it acts admirably, saving a great
amount of labour, water, soap, and coals, and that she will recom-
mend them to all her friend?. ChaKLeS Vaughan, M. L.A.
Melbourne, Bth January, 1858.
Melbourne, 22nd December, 18-57.
1 have much pleasure in testifying to the very efficient manner
your Patent Washing Machine has washed every description of
dirty cl othing at my house. John Miscamble, Yet. Surgeon.
24, King William Street, Collingwood, 7th January, 1858,
Mil. Leicester, —Sir, I feel hound strongly to recommend
the use of your Patent Washing Machine. On our first trial,
nnd in about three hours, we turned out the fortnight's wash,
cleaner than could have been effected hy the most skilful hand-
washer, and when fully accustomed to the operation, i am sure
the same amount of work can he despatched in much loss time. —
I am &c , Til OS. RkiO.


SPURGEON'S SERMONS.
THE SPURGEON CHRONICLE
AUSTRALIAN MISCELLANY,
Will be Published Weekly.
Ho. 2 Profit and Loss.
IT is intended this Periodical shall contain one of the
Choicest Sermons of this wonderful and popular
Preacher, attached to which will he extract of various
Critiques by some of the most competent judges of
Religious Literature of the present day, which have
appeared in all the leading Journals throughout the
world.
Local Hews, Home Hews, Eeligious Intel-
ligence, Anecdotes, Poetry & Miscellanies
Never in the history of the world has one man com-
manded such a vast congregation of all classes—the
rich and the poor, the learned and the ignorant, have all
met together, under one roof, to hear the word of God
so faithfully, energetically, and powerfully expounded.
The Publishers intend publishing, a series of Quar-
terly volumes, containing 12 numbers, at Cd. each; the
whole of which, together with his portrait, will be hand-
somely hound. Those persons who enter their names
a; Subscribers, will have them forwarded regularly,
and be entitled to the Portrait free, and if they choose
can have a handsome cover for Is. When complete,
it is intended this little Messenger shall form a hand-
some addition to the drawing-room table or the library.
Orders recived b} r the publishers, Smith, booksellers,
next Rank Victoria Melbourne; Huggins, SO, Swan-
ston Street, Melbourne, and 58, Young Street, Col-
lingwood, and all booksellers.
All Communications duly acknowledged.


Silks, Shawls, Mantles, Dresses, Millinery,
Parasols, dc. Ladies’ Hosiery and Underclothing.*
m bi
f?o
? o
>-i
s >-a.
• hrt
m r"*“i
g*
ss % SP jg
B ?
£- O c*
O Inrf s?*
1- tdi
iw >►?
W on £•
2- K* i i ■
M
;
p hH
£L
ot->
£ HH
? td
V 4»
tn
. □
S “7
co
SgDQ
h 3 vj C-
aiO
>gT
t-«g X
t^T 3
sgl
ad
0
cd 5®
m y J
0)
m
visa
Gentlemen’s Department,
Newest Styles in Coats, Trousers, Neck Ties, Hats, Caps, &c
Shirts, Hosiery, & Gloves,


SPURGEON CHRONICLE
AH ST KALIAN MISCELLANY.
No. 1.
JANUARY 30th, 1858,
Vol. I.
A. SKETCH
OE THE LIEE OE THE HEY. C. H. SPHHGEON.
A CANDID EXAMINATION, ETC.
It is a rare thing, now a-days, to meet with that
vciy inportant and honorable individual, an unbiassed
and discriminating Critic. He does, however, occa-
sionally, present himself to the notice of the public ; and
whenever we find him it surely becomes us to acknow-
ledge his merit and to appreciate his work. At the
same time there never was a period, perhaps, when what
passes by the name of criticism more extensively pre-
vailed than now. There is nothing on the one hand so
low or on the other hand so high as to he necessarily
exempted from the strictures of those gentlemen who are
the occupants of editoral chairs. We do not object to
this, but on the contrary, are the subjects of a firm con-
viction that the national mind is thereby improved and
strengthened. It is not a very general custom in England
however, for Newspaper writers to make any exten-
sive incursions upon the domains of the pulpit either to
censure or applaud. Hut this circumstance arises probably
from the fact that ministers of the gospel are not in the
habit of exhibiting those individualities of character and
that originality of speech which commands the attention
of the public and calls forth the comments of the critic.
With the Eev. C. H. Spurgeon the case is different.
Many and diverse are the crucibles through which that
gentieman has been put since his advent at Park-street;
by one party pronounced to be the purest gold, but by


another to be little if anything better than the veriest
dross. But at length there has appeared in the metro-
polis a critic of a different stamp, at whose hands Mr.
Spurgeon has received a judgment that is just. The
Patriot newspaper is not only the oldest journal but one
of the most respectable organs of the Protestant Dissen -
ters of Great Britain. Its editors are well known to be
possessors of first class literary ability, profound sagacity,
and a judgment which is rarely at fault. All these
qualities it will be readily admitted are exhibited in the
following article which appeared in the editoral columns
of the Patriot on Friday, the 21st of September, 1855.
Although the name of the Eev. C. H. Spurgeon has
been frequently mentioned in the columns of this jour-
nal, we have not introduced him to our readers by any
formal description of his preaching. Such, however,
is its effects, that curiosity cannot but have been
awakened by intelligence of the immense crowds col-
lected to hear him while occupying Exeter Hall from
Sunday to Sunday, and also when he returned to his
enlarged chapel in New Park Street, over Southwark
Bridge. There must surely be something extraordinary
in a mere youth who couldcommand an attendance of
from ten to twelve thousand persons in the open .field,
and who, on visiting the North, ' though received with
cold suspicion at first, soon compelled the fixed and ad-
miring attention of the reluctant Scotch; though he says,
“they seemed to be all made of lumps of ice fetched from
Wenham Lake.” Those who go to hear Mr. Spurgeon,
inquiring “ What will this babbler say ?” are not long
left in doubt as to either the manner or the matter of
his discourses.
The history of this youthful preacher is soon told.
Bom at Kelvedon, in Essex, on the 19th of June, 1834,
he is consequently but just 'entitled to write himself a
man. His father, and grandfather, both living, are both
also Independent ministers; the latter, the llev. James
Spurgeon, being pastor of a church at Stanboume, in


Essex; and the former, styled Mr. John Spurgeon, (be-
cause in business,) pastor of a church at Tollesbury, in
the same county. The subject of this sketch received
his early education at Colchester, and also passed a year
in the Agricultural College at Maidstone, where he
added to his previous knowledge some insight into
natural science. Thus equipped, he began the business
of life as usher in a school at Newmarket; whence he
removed to Cambridge, where he held a similar appoint-
ment in a day school, employing the ampler leisure thus
secured in improving his own mind. While at New-
market, he began to address the Sunday school children,
and that in such a style as attracted grown-up hearers.
At Cambridge, the practice was continued, with the ad-
dition of Sunday evening sermons in the surrounding-
villages. The Baptist church at Waterbeach called this
young Timothy to be their pastor. He accepted the
invitation; and, while the chapel was crowded, the
church was doubled under his ministry. On week-days
eleven villages shared the advantages of his sermons,
which, in one year, amounted to as many as there are
days in the year. In January, 1854, Mr. Spurgeon
was invited to undertake the pastorate of the Baptist
church in New Park Street. Not content with dis-
charging the duties of that office, he preaches in many
other places during the week.
Prom Mr. Spurgeon’s published sermons, which con-
tain occasional notices of his own life and experience,
we learn that, notwithstanding his religious training
and early dedication to the ministry, there was an in-
terval of partial alienation from Christian doctrine. “I,
too,” he says, in reference to a free-thinker, “ have been
like him. There was an evil hour in which I slipped
the anchor of my faith ; I cut the cable of my belief;
I no longer moored myself hard by the coasts of
Revelation ; I allowed my vessel to drift before the wind,
I said to Reason, ‘Be thou my captain I said to my
own brain, ‘Be thou my rudder; and I started on my


mad voyage. Thank God, it is all over now. But I
will tell you its brief history. It was one hurried sail-
ing over the tempestuous ocean of free thought.” The
result was, that, from doubting some things, he came to
question everything, even his own existence. Thus,
“ the Devil foileth himself.” Faith came to the rescue
of bewildered Reason, and, from that perilous voyage,
brought back the wanderer “ safe to land.” She who
had nursed him in infancy, like the grandmother of
Timothy, is pictured as exclaiming before the throne of
God in heaven, “ I thank Thee, 0 thou ever-gracious
One, that he who was my child on earth, has now be-
come Thy child in light! ”
We have ourselves heard Mr. Spurgeon but once;
and on that occasion, not having succeeded in gaining
an entrance to the chapel, we squeezed ourselves into a
side vestry, from which the speaker could be heard, but
not seen. We found him neither extravagant nor ex-
traordinary. His voice is clear and musical; his lan-
guage was plain ; his style flowing, yet terse; his method
lucid and orderly; his matter sound and suitable ; his
tone and spirit cordial; his remarks always pithy and
pungent, sometimes familiar and colloquial, yet never
light or coarse, much less profane. Judging from this
single sermon, we supposed that he would become a plain,
faithful, forcible, and affectionate preacher of the Gospel
in the form called Calvanistic ; and our judgment was the
more favourable because, while there was a solidity be-
yond his years, we detected little of the wild luxuriance
naturally characteristic of very young preachers.
Our opinion of Mr. Spurgeon as a preacher, has been
somewhat modified by a perusal of his published dis-
courses, which, issued in a cheap form, appear to be
bought up with great eagerness. These show him to be
a more extraordinary person than we supposed, and not
to be quite so far from extravagance as at first we thought
him. But it is more for the sake of information than
with a view to criticism that we refer to the subject.


There would be little use in pointing out the faults and
errors of a public speaker so absolutely independent of
opinion. “lam not very scrupulous,” says Mr. Spur-
geon, “ about the means I use for doing good. I told
the people of Scotland, when they said I preached in
such an extraordinary way, that they really did not un-
derstand me, ‘ Why, bless your hearts, I would preach
standing on my head, if I thought I could convert your
souls, rather than preach on my feet.’ I am not very
particular about how I preach.” “My motto,” says
he, “is Cedo nulli, I yield to none. I have not courted
any man’s love; I ask no man to attend my ministry;
I preach what 1 like, when I like, and as I like.” This
language is explained by complaints of the persecutions
endured by some of his hearers because they tvill hear
“that ranting fellowand, while he claims for such
the right to hear him if they like, “ without asking the
lords and governors of the present day whether he is
really clerical or not,” he insists for himself on the right
to preach as he pleases.
It would be lost labour to try one who holds this view
of the matter by the rules of art. We must he content
to take him as we find him, and to value him for what
he is. It were a mistake, however, to conclude that he
is self-conceited. “ llecollect,” he says, “who I am
and what I am—a child, having little education, little
learning, ability, or talent.” “Without the Spirit of
God, I feel lam utterly unable to speak to you. I have
not those gifts and talents which quality men to speak ;
I need an afflatus from On High; otherwise I stand like
other men, and have nothing to say. May that be given
me, for without it I am dumb!” Give him the polite
aud the noble, —give him influence and understanding;
and he should fail; hut give him his own praying peo-
ple, “meeting in such multitudes to pray to God for a
blessing,” and he will “ overcome hell itself.” When,
moreover, invited to ascend the pulpit from which Ward-
law used to preach, he “ dared not recollect what classic


words had once been spoken there, or what sweet must*
cal tones had once been heard from the lips of that emi-
nent minister.”
From whatsoever cause it springs, whether from force
of native character, or from a vigour superinduced upon
that basis by the grace of God, there is that in Mr. Spur-
geon’s reported sermons which marks him a superior man.
Models of different styles of preaching are so numerous
that originality must be of rare occurrence; but he
appears to be an original genius. To the pith .of Jay
and the plainness of Rowland Hill, he adds much of the
familiarity, not to say the coarseness, of the Hunting-
tonian order of ultra-Calvinistic preachers. “It has
been my privilege,” he says, “to give more prominence
in the religious world to those old doctrines of the
Gospel.” But the traits referred to present themselves
in shapes and with accompaniments which forbid the
notion of imitation, and favour the opinion of a peculiar
bent. Neither in the style and structure, nor in the han-
dling, is there any appearance of art, study, or ela-
boration. Yet, each discourse has a beginning, a middle,
and an end; and the subject is duly introduced and
stated, divided and discussed, enforced and applied,
But all is done without effort, with the ease and freedom
of common conversation, and with the artlessness, but
also with the force of spontaneous expression. “ This,”
he says, “I am sure of: I tell you all I know, and
speak right on. lam no orator, but just tell you what
springs up from my heart.” “Speak, my heart!” he
exclaims in another place, “ for heart thoughts are the
best of thoughts.”
Mr. Spurgeon waits for nothing which requires what
we understand by composition, and he rejects nothing
by which attention may be arrested, interest sustained,
and impression made permanent. The vehicle of his
thoughts is constructed of well-seasoned Saxon speech ;
and they are conveyed to the hearer’s mind in terms
highly pictorial and often vividly drapiatic. Great go^


verning principles are freely personified;; and religious
experience, past, present, and future., appears in life-
like action upon the scene. Tried by such tests as the
unities, Mr. Spurgeon might sometimes he found wanta
ing; but it is enough for him, that, as face answers to
face in a glass, so do his words elicit a response in the
hearts of those that hear him. This ; end secured, what
cares he for a mixed metaphor or a rhetorical anachron-
ism ? Were it his aim to rival the Melvill’s and
Harris’s of the day, he lacks neither the talent nor the
taste ; and, with these, he has the faculty of gathering
what is to he learned from men or from books, and of
turning all to account. But his single aim, is to preach
the gospel; and he depends for success, not upon the
enticing words of man’s wisdom, hut upon the influence
of the Spirit of God, and, with a view to that, the
prayers of the people.
We meet with numerous characteristic references to
his personal history, feelings, and experiences. “ When
I hear sweet syllables fall from many lips, keeping
measure and time, then” he exclaims, “ I feel elevated,
and forgetting for a time, every being terrestrial, I soar
aloft towards Heaven.” He represents himself as having
“ delighted in the musty old folios which many of his
brethren have upon their library shelves,” and, “ as for
pew books, he leaves them to others.” To the Bible,
he ascribes the discipline of his mental faculties, as well
as his knowledge of Divine Truth. Once, he declares,
he put all his knowledge together in glorious confusion ;
but now he has a shelf in his head for everything, and
whatever he reads or hears, he knows where to stow it
away. “ Ever since I have known Christ, I have put
Christ in the centre as my sun, and each peculiar science
revolves around it as a planet, while the minor sciences
are satellites to their planets.” He can learn every-
thing ; and, from his own experience, he exhorts thus —>
“Oh ! young man, build thy studio on Calvary ! There
raise thine observatory, and scan by faith the lofty things


of nature ! Take thee a hermit’s cell in the garden of
Gethscmanc, and lave thy brow with the waters of
Siloa! ”
Mr. Spurgeon evinces much aptitude in borrowing il-
lustrations, not only from the pages of antiquity, and
from modem life and literature, but also from the most
familiar incidents, as well as from public events. Thus,
the War suggests to him the idea, that even the believer
“ carries within him him a bomb-shell, ready to hurst
at the slightest spark of temptation.” In like manner,
the fatal exposure of the officers to the sharp-shooting
of the enemy, furnishes him with a comparison by which
to illustrate the peculiar liability of Christian ministers
to hostile attack, though with a great difference to the
result. “ Some of us,” he says, “are the officers of God’s
regiments ; and we are the mark of the rifle-men of the
enemy. Standing forward, we have to bear all the shots.
What a mercy it is, that not one of God’s officers ever
falls in battle ! God always keeps them.”
Sometimes, no doubt, he lapses into a rude colloquial-
ism, bordering upon coarseness. “ If,” he observes, “I
were to preach nothing but what would please the whole
lot of you, what on earth should I do?” The question-
able colloquailism in the second clause, occurs more
than once or twice; and, what is worse still, such appeals
as “Good God!” and “By Heaven!” At same
time that he insists upon preaching that only which he
believes true and fit, he declares himself to have no fear,
that “ an honest British audience will turn away from
the man who does not stick, and stutter, and stammer
in speaking the truth.” In citing the following as a
specimen of his sayings, justice requires the acknowledg-
ment, that appropriations so little felicitous are extreme-
'ly rare “ I should like to take you this morning as
Samson did the foxes, tie the firebrands of prayer to
you, and send you in among the shocks of corn, till you
r burn the whole up.”
It must be admitted, that, if he rivals the pith and


point of the old Puritans, he now and then is betrayed,
into their conceits. In preaching from the words, “I
have exalted One chosen out of the people,” having an-,
nounced his divisions, he says, “you see I have chosen
three words, all commencing with the letter E, to ease
your memories—Extraction, Election, Exaltation.” This
may be tolerated; but not so some of his abominable
puns.
Many instances might easily be given of a force and
beauty of language indicative of a high degree of
eloquence. “Bright-eyed cheefulness and airy-footed
love, are fine phrases. Winter is described as not kil-.
ling the flowers, hut as coating them with the ermine
of its snows.” Again, the sun is not quenched, but is
behind the clouds, “brewing up summer; and, when
he cometh forth again, he will have made those clouds
fit to-drop in April showers, all of them mothers of-the .
sweet May flowers.” Saul is depicted as “ bespattered
with the blood of Stephen.” God “put our prayers,
like rose-leaves, between the pages of his Book of remem-
brance ; and, when the volume is opened at last, there
shall be a precious fragrance springing up therefrom.”
“Thereis one thing.” the sinner is told, “that doth
outstrip the telegraph : ‘ Before they call, I will answer,
and, while they are yet speaking, I will hear.’ ” The
memory, infected by the fall, is described as “ suffering
the glorious timbers from the forest of Lebanon to swim
down the stream of oblivion; but she stopped all the
draff that floated from the foul city of Sodom.” With
quaintness, yet with force and truth, the caste feeling
of society is hit off: “In England, a sovereign will not
speak to a shilling, a shilling will not notice a sixpence,
and a sixpence will sneer at a penny.” A singular
quaintness and vigour may bo remarked in Mr. Spur-
geon’s diction : as when he speaks of the lightning
“splitting the clouds and rending the heavens ; ” of,;
“the Mighty Hand wherein the callow comets are brood-
ed by the sun;” and of “the very spheres stopping their.


music while God speaks with his deep bass voice.”
Sometimes, as is manifest, he attains to a pitch of eleva-
tion and grandeur, as when he exclaims, “Did you ever
walk the centuries, and mark the rise and fall of variou s
empires of unbelief? ” or, when supposing the extinction
of Christianity by infidels, he would “ hang the world
in mourning, and make the sea the great chief mourner,
with its dirge of howling winds and its wild death-march
of disordered waves.”
His sermons abound with aphoristic and pointed
sayings, which often atford a striking proof of his genius.
Non multa sed multum, meets us in a neat form, applica-
ble to the Bible student: “ The man of one book is often
more intelligent than the man of fifty.” With equal
truth and beauty, he says of the Christian, not exempt
from trouble, that “ he wears a charm to counteract evil,
not a scapula to prevent it.” “ Besides, troubles are
what the believer is taught to expect ; when they come,
therefore, let him say : “Ah! this is what I looked for;
it is marked down in the chart to heaven ; the rock is
put down; I will sail confidently by it; my Master has
not deceived me. Wherefore should his lot be better
than the martyrs ? Mnst we swim through seas of blood,
and shall I hope to ride to heaven wrapped in furs and
ermine ? Did ye fight and then reign without a battle ?”
In recommendation of pointed preaching, he observes
(and the figure recurs in the course of the volume that
has been published), that “ it is not the sheet lightning,
seen in all places, that takes effect ; but it is the forked
flash that smites the temple, or scorches the tree.” Re-
ferring to the imputation of the righteousness of Christ
to the believer, as incompatible with the least remains of
self-righteousness, he describes our Lord as “stripping
before He clothes.” But there would be no end to enu-
meration, where apt thoughts in apt words so greatly
abound. Let, then, the following specimens selected at
random, suffice to show of what this youthful preacher
is already capable ;


“ There is much virtue which is like the juice of the
grape, which has to be squeezed before you get it; not
like the generous drop of the honeycomb, distilling wil-
lingly and freely.”
“The Christian ought to live up to his income, and
not below.”
“While the shepherds find Christ, the wise men miss
him.”
“ There is a dignity about manhood —a dignity lost
one day in the garden of the Fall ; but regained in the
garden of the Resurrection.”
“ The tomb is the royal chamber of the ransomed race,
the closet where they lay aside the garments of labor,
to put on the vestments of eternal rest.”
“ Man always looks for a yet-beyond; he is a mariner
who never gets to port, an arrow which never reaches
the target.”
“A Homan once said, he wished he had a window in
his heart, that all might see what was going on there.
I am very glad I have not; if I had, I would shut it up
as closely as Apsley-house used to be. Most of us would
have great need of shutters, if we had such a window.”
“Nothing makes a man have a big heart like a great
trial.”
“If you are the children of God, you will have the
whip; and, when you have that whip, you will run to
your Father.”
“It is a fine day, and the child walks before its
Father. But there is a lion in the road; now he comes
and takes his Father’s hand. He could run half a mile
before him, when all was fine and fair; but, once bring
the lion, and it is ‘ Father ! Father! ’ as close as he can
be.”
“ The only discharge possible is pardon by God; but
then, it is the only pardon necessary.”
“ There is such a thing as making a weight lift you ;
if I have a weight chained to me, it keeps me down ;
but give me pulleys and certain appliances, |and I can


make it lift me up. Yes, there is such a thing as making
troubles lift one towards heaven.”
“But God sometimes clogs his people, because He
would rather clog them than lose them ; for, if He did
not clog them they would leap the hedges and be gone.”
“ Take the advice of the common people, and ‘ never
cross a bridge till you get to it; ’ to me it [seems quite
enough for the Bather to lay the rod on the child, with-
out the child chastising itself.”
“ The Epistles of John are perfumed with love.”
“ Somehow, God does choose the last men ; He does
not care for the diamond, but He picks up the pebble-
stones ; for He is able, out of stones, to raise up children
unto Abraham.”
“‘Why did you crucify him?’ ‘Because Babbi
Simeon gave me a shekel to help the clamour. So the
multitude were much won by the money and influence
of the priests; but they were glad to hear of Christ
after all.”
“Tie will give heaven to the chief of sinners, as well
as to the chief of saints,”
“ The carnal mind is enmity against God; and the
young crocodile, I have heard, when' broken from the
shell, will, in a moment, begin to put itself in a posture
of attack, opening its mouth as if it had been taught
and trained.”
“If you were to write your own history, it would be
little better than that of Belzoni’s toad, which existed in
the rock for three thousand years; you may have lived,
like it; but you have done nothing.”
“ I will cast thy sins into the depths of the sea,-—not
into the shallows, where they might be fished up again.”
“He will build a strong ship, without subjecting it
to mighty storms; He will not make you a mighty
warrior, if He does not intend to try your skill in battle.”
The manly tone of Mr. Spurgeon’s mind might be
illustrated from the admirable thoughts which he ex-
presses on the connexion between the diffusion of the


Gospel and the increase of civil liberty. His graphic
skill in delineating character, might he demonstrated
from his life-like pictures of the prejudiced Jew and
the scoffing Greek of modern times; his unsparing fidelity
from the sarcastic severity with which he rebukes the
neglect of the Bible by modern professors ; his powers
of personification and dramatic representation, from the
scene which he paints between the dying Christian and
death, or between Christ and justiqe, and the justified
sinner; his refined sfcill in the treatment of a delicate
subject, in the veiled yet impressive description of the
trial of Joseph; the use that he can make of a single
metaphor, by his powerful comparison of the sinner to
“ Mazeppa bound on the wild horse of his lust, gallop-
ing on with hell’s wolves behind him,” till stopped and
liberated by a Mighty Hand. The sermon entitled
“ The people’s Christ,” contains a very striking de-
scription of the resurrection of our Lord. In that on
“The Eternal Home,” the contrast between the dying
thief before and after his conversion, is powerfully
drawn. The rage of Satan on the rescue of a sinner
from his grasp, forms a picture of terrific grandeur. In
the sermon on “ The Bible,” the respective character-
istics of the holy penmen are sketched with a masterly
comprehension of their peculiarities, and command of
words. But we can make room for only two examples.
The beautiful sermon and the words, “And so He giveth
his beloved sleep,” exhibits a variety of force which
stamp the master. It opens with the following truly
eloquent introduction :
“ The sleep of the body is the gift of God, So said
Homer of old, when he described it as descending from
the clouds, and resting on the tents of the warriors
around old Troy. And so sang Virgil, when he spoke
of Padinurus falling asleep upon the prow of the
ship. Sleep is the gift of God. We think that we lay
our heads upon our pillows, and compose our bodies in
a peaceful posture, and that therefore, we naturally
c


and necessarily sleep. But it is not so ? Sleep is tlie
gift of God ; but not a man would close bis eyes, did
not God put bis fingers on bis eye-lids, did not tbe Al-
mighty send a soft and balmy influence over bis frame,
which lulled Ids thoughts into quiescence, making him
enter into that blissful state of rest which we call sleep.
True, there be some drugs and narcotics whereby men
can poison themselves well nigh to death, and then call
it sleep; but the sleep of the- healthy body is the gift of
God. He bestows it. He rocks tlie cradle for us every
night; He draws the curtain of darkness; He bids the
sun shut up his burning eyes; and then he comes and
says, 1 Sleep, sleep, my child ! I give thee sleep.’ Have
you not known what it is at times to lay on your bed
and strive to slumber 1 and, as it is said of Darius so
might it be said of you,—The King sent for his
musicians, but his sleep went from him.’ You have
attempted it, but you could not do it; it is beyond your
power to procure a healthy repose. You imagine, if
you fix your mind upon a certain subject until it shall
engross'your attention, you will then sleep; but you
find yourself unable to do so. Ten thousand things
drive through your brain, as if the whole earth were agi-
tated before you. You see all things you ever beheld,
dancing in a wild phantasmagoria before your eyes.
You close your eyes, but still you see; and there be
things in your ears, and head, and brain, which will not
let you sleep. It is God alone, who alike seals up the
seaboy’s eyes upon the giddy mast, and gives the mo-
narch rest; for, with all appliances and means to boot,
he could not rest without the aid of God. It is God who
steeps the mind in Lethe, and bids us slumber, that our
bodies may be refreshed, so that for to-morrow’s toil we
may rise recruited and strengthened. 0, my friends,
how thankful should we be for sleep! Sleep is the best
physician that I know of. Sleep hath healed more pains
of wearied bones than the most eminent physicians upon
earth. It is the best medicine; the choicest thins: of all


the names which are written in the Pharmacy. There is
nothing- like sleep.! What a mercy it is that it belongs
alike to all! God does not make sleep the boon of the
rich man; he does not give it merely to the noble, or
the rich, so that they can keep it as a peculiar luxury
for themselves; but lie bestows it upon all. Yes, if
there be a difference, the sleep of the laboring man is
sweet, whether he eat little or much.”
The death-bed of the believer has never been more
touchingly painted than in the following case.
“ There on that death-bed lies a saint ; no gloom is
on his brow, no terror on his face; weakly but placidly
he smiles; he groans perhaps, but yet he sings. He
sighs now and then, but oftener he shouts. Stand by
him. ‘My brother, what makes you look in death’s
face with such joy V i Jesus,’ he whispers. ‘ What
makes thee so placid and so calm V ‘ The name of
Jesus.’ See, he forgets everything! Ask him a ques-
tion ;he cannot answer it—he does not understand you.
Still he smiles. His wife comes, inquiring, ‘Do you
know my name ? He answers, 1 No.’ His dearest friend
requests him to remember his intimacy. 1 1 know you
not,’ says. Whisper in his ear, I Do you know the
name of Jesus? and his eyes flash glory, and his face
beams heaven, and his lips speak sonnets, and his heart
bursts with eternity; for he hears the name of Jesus.”
But Mr. Spurgeon is himself a picture which con-
tains shades as well as lights. No one can blame him
for plainly declaring, and boldly and firmly vindicating,
his own conscientious opinions. This, however, ought
to be done with a more tolerant spirit towards those
who differ from him, than he displays, lo be censori-
ous in judging others, would be unbecoming in a more
aged man: in one so young and inexperienced, it is at
once unlovely and presumptuous. If asked, who is for-
tunate enough to escape his sarcasm and invective, we
should really be at a loss to answer. All, in turn, come
glider the lash of the precocious tyro. He alone is the


consistent Calvanist; all besides are either rank Armi-
nians, licentious Antinomians, or unfaithful professors
of the doctrines of Grace. College training 1 does hut
wean young men’s sympathies from the people; and
“really ploughmen would make a great deal better
preachers.” The doctrine of Election is, in our age,
scorned and hated.” “ The time-serving religion of the
present day,” is “only exhibited in evangelical drawing
rooms.” “How many pious preachers are there on the
Sabbath day, who are very impious preachers during
the rest of the week!” He “never hears” his brother
ministers “assert the positive satisfaction and substitu-
tion of Our Lord Jesus Christ.” These fishers of
men “have been spending all their life fishing with
most elegant silk lines and gold and silver hooks; but
the fish will not bite for all that; whereas, we of the
rougher sort,” adds the self-complacent censor, “ have
put the hook into the jaws of hundreds.” Still “rough-
er,” if possible, is Mr.SpuRGEON’s treatment of theolo-
gians not of his own especial school. “ Arminian perver-
sions,” in particular are to “sink back to their birth-
place in the pit.” Their notion of the possibility of a
final fall from grace, is the wickedest falsehood upon
earth.” Mr. Spurgeon was quite at liberty to uphold
the comfortable and Scriptural doctrine of the final per-
severance of the true believer, with all his might; but
this was possible, without indulging, as he has indulged,
in vituperation of opponents, more gross than any
words we have quoted. Nor, to any right-minded man,
Arminian or Calvanist, will it be a compensation that he
has dealt with Antinomians just as bitterly. To the
erring professor who conceives himself to be a child of
God because he is in trouble, he replies, “ I know a
great many rascals in the same condition.” He is too
charitable, however, when he ascribes Antinomian licen-
tiousness to a profession of the Gospel; for it is attri-
butable more correctly to the substitution of “another
Gospel.” But these are subjects on which we cannot


enlarge, or we might point out several mistakes into
which Mr. Spurgeon’s doctrinal zeal has betrayed
him. We, therefore, take our leave of him with this
admonition- to cultivate more assiduously the modest
spirit of which, after all, he is far from destitute; to
remember his own youth and inexperience; to reflect
upon the inconsistency of complaining that he is him-
self subject to hostile animadversion, when he deals
wholesale in sweeping censure of ministerial brethren,
older and more experienced than himself; and, in fine,
to bear in mind his own very just remark, that “John
Knox did much, but he might perhaps, have done more
if he had a little love”~ that love which “thinketh no
evil.”
IS SPURGEON A BIGOT?.
“To see a creature launched into eternity, is not a fit
sight ior our eyes : nevertheless, there is one individual
I should like to see hung! and that is old Mrs. Bigotry.
If I am a bigot, as some people say I am, I dont like
my race, and I hope I shall be the last of them. There
are and have been men in all the churches, whom all
will love, though we may not love all their tenets. One
of the finest and best of our ancient poets was Herbert
-—yet he was a strict churchman, and commanded the
observance of rites and ceremonies we cannot counter-
nance. —He wrote
“As Amber giveth a rich sweet unto the taste,
So do these words a rich content, —
An Oriental fragrancy.—-
My Master.
and I love him. Then of the Presbyterians, who in all
the world doth not love Rutherford; sweeter music ne-
ver flowed from mortal lips than from him when he was
in prison. We love both as they loved Jesus. Give
me any man if he put the crown on Jesus’ head alone,


though in doctrine we he as distant as the poles, we can
take each other by the hand and say, Here we are
agreed, and shall he through all eternity.
IS SPURGEON AN ANTINOMIAN ?
“Oh ! that Antinomianism,which administers opiates
to the ungodly; which brings men together in the
House of God', and tells them that if they are lost, it is
not their fault. Lulls them off to sleep, lets them go to
hell blindfold, with the conviction that if they are to he
damned, they shall he damned : Horrible beyond ex-
pression ! ” —Extract from the Holy War.
HaMASa Hl§.
LAYING THE FOUNDATION STONE OF THE NEW
WESLEYAN CHAPEL, BALLAARAT.
The scene at the site was really interesting. The platform had
been erected on the slope of the hill, and immediately below, m
the large garden, about 1,000 or 1,500 children were assembled :
those were the children connected with the various Wesleyan
schools in the district. On either side was an immense concourse
of people, numbering, we should think between 4,000 and 5,000.
In the midst of this crowd, the Cornish band, which had headed
the children throughout the day, were stationed, and played ap-
propriate airs during the ceremony.
A very handsome trowel, was presented to His Excellency,
made of ’Ballaarat gold, with an ivory handle set with some very
handsome specimens, and bearing the following inscription ;
Presented to
Sib Henry Barely, K. C. 8.,
Governor of Victoria,
Op laying the Foundation-Stone of the Wesleyan Church,.
Lydiard-street, Ballaarat,
19th January, 1858 v


His Excellency, on receiving the trowel, spoke nearly as
follows :
“ Ladies and Gentlemen, —I have much pleasure in accepting
this trowel, which, if anything, is of too magnificent and costly a
character. I know that in presenting me with it you mean well,
and I have much pleasure in receiving it, not only as a proof of
the golden resources of this most important district, but also as a
memento of the sacred ceremonial about to be performed, and of
this day’s proceedings” (Cheers.)
His Excellency then proceeded to place the bottle, &c., in the
cavity of the stone ; mortar was brought up on a polished cedar
tray, and His Excellency spread a layer with the trowel, under-
neath the stone, which was then lowered into its place. The level
was then applied, and giving three taps with the mallet, His Excel-
lency declared the stone to be “ well and truly laid,” amidst the
cheers of the assemblage.
The uprights and tackle were then removed, and His Excel-
lency mounted the stone and spoke as follows :
“ Ladies and Gentlemen, —Independent of the very magnificent
manifesto of this day’s proceedings which you have just presented
to me, 1 shall always look back with much pleasure upon my pre-
sent visit to your district. That the present sacred ceremony
should have taken place upon such an occasion is a matter of pe-
culiar interest to me, having known the respected pastor for whom
this church is being erected, many years ago in the West Indies.
He was then labouring in the same cause, in a much more un-
healthy climate, and to a much less intelligent class of people than
those among whom he is at present located. lam happy, there-
fore, to find him occupying so exalted a position as he at present
holds. lam quite aware that no one is more deserving of such
a position than he, and I am quite sure that he must win the re-
spect of all those with whom he comes in contact as a faithful
and sincere preacher, second to none in zeal and Christian single-
mindedness. I am truly happy that this ceremony should have
taken place on my first public introduction into Ballaarat. In
rearing up churches and chapels the inhabitants of Ballaarat are
not only providing for themselves, but they are also providing for
the spiritual welfare of future generations. I know that other
gentlemen are to address you on the present occasion, and I there-
fore will not tresspass further on your time. But I hope this edi-
fice, when complete, will be the means of promoting that right-
eousness which exalteth a nation ; and that it will always be
found filled with earnest congregations worshipping God in the
heauty of holiness.”
His Excellency concluded his speech amid great cheering.


Wesley Church, Melbourne. —We have noticed with consider-!
able interest and pleasure, the rapid progress of this beautiful
structure, and trust that while it will form an ornament to our
town and a valuable addition to its architectural beauty—it will
also be distinguished in its members for everything which beauti-
fies and adorns the Christian life.
Church of England Assembly. —The fourth session of the
Church of England Assembly, opened yesterday, in the school
room attached to St. James’s Church William-street.
Church of England Mission to the Aborigines. —The fourth an-
nual meeting of the friends and supporters of the Church of Eng-
land Mission to the Aborigines, was held last evening, in the
St. Paul’s School-rooms, Swanston-street. His Excellency the
Governor arrived and took the chair at 20 minutes past 7
o’clock, upon which the Rev. Mr. Chase opened the proceed-
ings by giving out a hymn, and by an appropriate prayer.
His Excellency said, “Twenty-five years ago, on that spot,
surrounded by the buildings of the rising metropolis of an infant
nation, in all probability some of the aboriginal inhabitants of the
country might have been seen roaming about, building an occa-
sional miami, or engaged in hunting and fishing. It was far from
his intention to express any regret at the great change, or to la-
ment over the days gone by—
“ When wild in woods the noble savage ran”—
believing as he did that it was entirely consistent with the designs
of an all wise Providence that first America and afterwards Aus-
tralia, should have been discovered just at the time when it be-
came necessary for the relief of the overcrowded population of the
old world. But, while fully sensible of the glories of modem
civilisation, they should not be forgetful of the duties and re-
sponsibilities which came with it, and were in no case more
prominent than with regard to the aborigines of this country—in
looking after their welfare, and taking an interest in those whom
we had dispossessed of the inheritance of their ancestors. In
such a case they were not to plead to the claims of a selfish civi-
lisation.
Presbyterianism, North Melbourne. —The members of the
Presbytery of the connexion and other clergymen met, the
object being the induction of the Rev- George M‘Cullagh
Reed, as pastor, and the ordination of the Rev. Robert Hogg,
recently arrived from England. The Rev. Peter Gunn, the
Rev. Irving Hetherington, the Rev. Hr. Cairns, the Rev.
William Fraser, of the Free, and the Rev. James Ballantyne, of
the United Presbyterian Churches, took part in the ceremony
of induction and ordination. Mr. Hogg was then appointed to
the district of Horsham, on the banks of the Wimroera,


Wesleyan Grammar School. —A meeting was held a few days
since in the Wesleyan Chapel, Collins-street, for the purposeof mak-
ing arrangements for the forthcoming bazaar in aid of the above in-
stitution, to be held in the Exhibition Building in March next.
Several ministers and other gentlemen, and about sixty ladies,
were present. Several elegant articles, selected from those lately
received from London, Paris, <?j'c., were exhibited.
Mil.
THE INDIAN EELIEF FUND.
We are pleased to observe, that not only in England, hut in
almost all parts of the world a warm sympathy exists for the poor
sufierers in India, as is evidenced by their generous contributions
to the relief fund. We sincerely hope that Victoria will not be
behind in exemplifying by the amount of her contributions, the
sympathy which we know she feels ; but that in this as in many
other respects, she may be an example to the world. We subjoin
a few extracts which we hope may be read with interest.
The Lord Mayor of London has received through the Mercan-
tile Bank of India, London and China, a cheque for £' < fro»r
his Highness Meer Ali Morad, of Kheersford,’Upper 1 ; Je, as
his subscription to the fund for the relief of the suffer- -in ndia.
The sum of £832 has been remitted to the Lord Mayor oi
Dublin, as the amount of collections in churches of the united dio-
ceses of Down, Connor, and Dromore.
On Thursday week a meeting of English residents was held at
Missirie’s Hotel, Constantinople, for the purpose of raising a sub-
scription for the surviving widows and orphans of the Indian vic-
tims, and a considerable sum was subscribed.
The Committee of the Indian Relief Fund have transmit fed
£IO,OOO to the local committee at Calcutta, for distribution among
the sufferers ; and a farther sum of £I,OOO to Sir John Lawrence
in aid of the funds of the Indian Asylum. This institution which
was founded by Sir H. Lawrence, who annually subscribed £I,OOO
to its support, is situated at Kussowlee, on the lower range of the
Himalayas, and has for its object the support and education ®f
the orphans of British soldiers.
While imperial and princely donations are flowing into the fund
for the relief of the distressed Indian sufferers, it may not be un-
interesting to hear of a touching offering from widows and or-
phans. At the close of the sermon on the Day of Humiliation, a
few words were spoken by the chaplain to the inmates of a small


union workhouse in the county of Dorset, to the effect that it was
possible for very poor people to make, in one sense, a more costly
offering than the wealthy. This was laid down rather as a gene-
ral principle than with the expectation of any result following
from it. However, it was responded to in a far different manner
to what had been anticipated. On the following day the master
of the union received as free-will offerings no less a sum than
£1 16s. A large proportion of the amount was collected
in pence, halfpence, and farthings—in one case a small hoard was
brought forth, to the amount of one shilling, by a young who
had saved it in pence and halfpence which had been given him
the only source from which these poor people could have acquired
any money ; and there is good ground for believing that in
nearly every instance the gift was all and all.
The Fast Day in the Provinces. —We gather from the country
papers that the Fast-day last week was generally observed with
profound respect in the provincial districts of England and Scot-
land. In Dublin, we are told, the Fast-day was well The
principal houses in the city were closed, and the congregations in
the several Protestant churches were extremely numerous. Here
and there, and at long distances, a few Roman Catholic shop-
keepers refused to acknowledge the solemnity of the occasion, by
keeping open their places of business as usual; but all, or nearly
a.', the respectable members of that communion, heartily joined
'V'th their fellow-citizens in paying due deference to the Queen s
proclamation. The collections made in the various churches and
chapels in Liverpool, on Wednesday, amounted to £7OO, which
brought the amount furnished by that town in aid of the Indian
Relief Fund to £15,000. The amount raised in Bristol and the
.adjacent parishes on the Day of Fast and Humiliation exceeds
£I,OOO, making with the previous subscriptions, between £3,000
and £4,000. The Bristol Times states that the men employed in
Fie coal-works of Messrs. Long, Keeting and Chick, St. Philip s,
had each a ticket given them by the manager, which ticket they
W ire to hand to the sexton of the church or chapel they attended
on the Day of Humiliation. On its being redelivered to their
employers, they allowed the bearer his full day’s wages. This
was a security that the men did not abuse the day, and spent it
properly at prayers instead of in the public-house.
Coleshill Church, Warwickshire, a beautiful old fabric, and
beautiful also for situation, is about to be restored, at the joint
cost of the Vicar and his brother, Mr. Digby, of Sherborne Castle,
in Dorsetshire, at an expense of £6OOO. There are to be no gor-
geous pews for the rich, nor sittings near the door for the poor,
but the pews are to be open and free, with cushions and hassocks
in each.


siMmus ixmßbMwsm*
The Church Missionary Society has published a long minute on
the Indian mutiny in its connection with Chritian missions and
the future government of India upon Christian principles, the
substance of which is embraced in the following resolutions.—
1. That this committee recognise the great and anxious impor-
tance of the question, whether missionaries labouring in the dis-
turbed districts of India should remain at their posts as long as
other Europeans, or European troops are on the spot, as well as
whether missionaries now in England should proceed to such
districts ; that, adverting to the case of the native Christians,
and the great encourgement which they will derive from the pre-
sence of missionaries, as well as their need of increased spiritual
support and instruction at such a time as the present ; adverting
also to the extraordinary and urgent need for additional spirit-
ual ministrations for our own countrymen in India ! adverting
also, to the reflections to which the missionary cause would be
exposed at home, if, while civil and military officers and chap-
lains are proceeding to India under Goverement orders, mis-
sionaries should be held back : believing, also, that missionary
work will not be long impeded, and that unprecedented oppor-
tunities for missionary labour will shortly arise, this commit
tee cannot but express its earnest hope that no missionary will
withdraw from India except under medical certificate that his health
requires it, and the missionaries not otherwise prevented from re-
turning to India or having been appointed to Indian stations
will be prepared to go forth at once in reliance upon the Lord.
2. That this committee will afford every facility in their power
for the removal and comfort of families separated from the
missionaries in consequence of the present circumstances of
India
We rejoice in the anticipation of the arrival within a few weeks,
of the Rev. Thomas Binney, from London; the well-known
preacher of Weigh House Chapel, and hope that the leave of ab-
sence which has been granted him by his Church, may in the high-
est sense be beneficial, and that his visit to Melbourne may be
blest.
Cyprian , when on his road to suffer martyrdom, was told by
the Emperor, that he would give him time to consider whether
he had not better cast a grain of incense into the fire, in honor of
Idols, than die so degraded a death; the martyr nobly answered
“ There needs no deliberation in the case.”


IP®MIB¥ O
HUMILITY.
O ! learx that it is only by the lowly
The paths of peace are trod ;
If thou wouldst keep thy garments white and holy.
Walk humbly with thy God.
The man with earthly wisdom high uplifted,
Is in God’s sight a fool ;
But he in heavenly truth most deeply gifted,
Sits lowest in Christ’s school.
The lowly spirit God hath consecrated
As his abiding rsst ;
And angels by some patriarch’s tent have waited,
When kings had no such guest.
The dew that never wets the flinty mountain,
Falls in the valleys free ;
Bright verdure fringes the small desert fountain,
But barren sand the sea.
Not in the stately oak the fragrance dwelleth
Which charms the general wood,
But in the violet low, whose sweetness telleth
Its unseen neighbourhood.
Bound lowliness a gentle radiance hovers,
A sweet unconscious grace !
Which even in shrinking, evermore discovers
The brightness on its face.
Through the straight gate of life she passes stooping,
With sandals on her feet ;
And pure-eyed Graces, with linked palms, come trooping
Their sister fair to greet.
The angels bend their eyes upon her her goings,
And guard her from annoy ;
Heaven fills her quiet heart with overflowings
Of calm celestial joy.
The Saviour loves her, for she wears the vesture
With which He walked on earth ;
And through her childlike glance, and step, and gesture,'
He knows her heavenly birth.
He now beholds this seal of glory graven
On all whom He redeems,
And in His own bright City, crystal paven
On every brow it gleams.
The white-rohed saints, the throne-steps singing under,
Their state all meekly wear ;
Their pauseless praise wells up from hearts which wonder
That ever they came there.
London. JAMES D. BUENS, M.A.


TtrllAT Contributes most to the Preservation of
W Health? —BATHING! When can you obtain
the best accommodation on the shortest notice and at
the most moderate charges?
EVE’S
NEW HAIE-DEESSING & BATHING
Establishment
171, BOURKE STREET, EAST,
Opposite Eastern Market,
which lias just been fitted up with every convenience,
regardless of expense.
The Proprietor of this establishment respectfully
solicits the patronage of the ladies of Melbourne and
suburbs, and assures them that nothing shall be want-
ing on his part to render his establishment all that
they could desire. J. S. Eve flatters himself that,
from a lengthened and intimate acquaintance with every
branch of his profession, as acquired in first-class*
houses in London and Paris, that he can guarantee the
completest satisfaction to all who favor him with their
patronage. Branch Establishment —Swanston-street,
near the Police Court.
To the Trade. —Largely importing from the best
markets, J. S. Eve would call the attention of the
trade to recent consignments of choicest goods of every
description in connexion with the business, which he is
prepared to offer at the most reasonable terms.
Observe the address—l7l, BOURKE ST. EAST,
opposite Hay Market, and
42, SWANSTON STREET, near Tow* Hall,
Melbourne.


BOOKS AND STATIONARY.
/IHEAPEST house in Melbourne for Books, Paper, Account
Books, Copy Books, Slates, Pencils, &c.
SMITH, from Kendrick’s, London, 30 Swanstonston-street,
next Bank of Victoria. Schools and Trade liberally dealt with.
J. HUGGINS,
HOUSE, LAND, & COMMISSION AGENT,
ALSO
PUBLISHING AND ADVERTISING AGENT,
30 Swanston-street, Melbourne, & 58 Young-street, Collingwood.
Established 1855.
COLLINGWOOD Circulating LIBRARY, James
Macon'OClUE, Bookseller and Stationer, 87, Smith
Street, opposite the “ Grace Darling” Il.nel.
TERMS OF SUBSCRIPTION REDUCED.
Prom and after the first day of January, 1853, the terms for
reading will be as under ’ —
Annual subscription 80s.
Quarterly do. Bs.
Monthly do. 3s.
Weekly do. Is.
A deposit required in all cases, and all subscriptions paid in
advance.
DOOKBINDING of every description neatiy done to order, by
W. DETMOLD, 163 Swanston-streeet, Melbourne.
JOHN BELLSfJ,
AUCTIONEER;
House, Land, and General Commission Agent.
Mortgages negotiated. Money advanced upon Deposit of
Deeds. Rents and Debts Collected, &c.
Life Assurance.—Agent for the Australian Mutual Provident
Society.
Eire Insurance.—Agent for the Victoria Fire Insurance Com-
pany.
Oflic 3, —Corner of Gertrude and Young-street, Collingwood,
TOSEPH RUDD, Linen Draper and Ladies’ Out-
el fitter, “ Compton House,” 75, Moorabsol Street,
G Belong 1 .
Millinery, Baby Linen, and Straw Bonnet Warehouse


STEVENS’
olesale, retail, & family grocery
£d OUSE,
SS, Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.
consequence of the presure of the times, and the great influx
iods in the market, A. T. STEVKNS is determined, on and
■ Saturday next, to make an
ii-vffiviEN-sa KisiDTjaxioisr
In every article sold at his establishment.
VS3~ OBSERVE —96, Elizabeth-street, Melbourne.
Carts and Vans.
lilies waited on for orders, and the Goods delivered punctually
by A. T. Stevens' Carts & Vans, as under :—
MONDAY. i THURSDAY.
;li Melbourne : Park Side
■bran Flemington
unswick
Pascoevai
St. Kilda
Brighton
Collingwood
•k Side
-utli Yarra
TUESDAY.
iwthorone
FRIDAY.
n-oondara
Kilda
Emerald Hill
Sandridge
Richmond.
•ighton
>rth Melbourne
unswick
SATURDAY.
Collingwood
Flemington
Park Side
WEDNESDAY.
icliraond
mth Yarra
“ah ran
Pascoevai
Emerald Hill
idridge
.0 Express Carts to all parts of Melbourne and its Suburbs
every day.
As all goods are marked at the very lowest Prices, A. T. S.
ler the necessity of strictly observing the fulfilment o£ hia
nns which are CASH ON DELIVERY


Australian Mutual Provident Society. Important Notice.
THE Books of the Society close on the 8th day of February, 1858, for the current year’s expenses.
All proposals made through this Agency before the 1st of February will be entitled to participate in the profit*
•f the year, in terms of the rules ot the Society,
At the last investigation the Bonus Additions averaged considerably more than 3 per cent, per annum on all
policies then entitled to participate.
Comparative View' of Bonuses accruing to a Policy of Life Assurance of £500, if
effected at the Age of 40 in different Offices.
NAME OF OFFICE.
ANNUAL
PREMIUM.
DURATION.
OF POLICY,
BONUS
ADDITIONS
It will thus
Proprietary 0;
Bonuses mat
member at his
the Legislature
operation of
ried women ar
saved the expe
Principal Ol
Agents for
beth-street, M
street, Melbou.
Medical Refer
An English Propriet iry Company . . .
Scottish .Vidows’ Funds (Mutual As- )
surance) Society )
Australian Mutual Provident Society . .
£16 7 1
16 11 3
6 2 1
10 years
7
5
£60 16 8
70 0 0
1 81 13 7
he seen that the profit to the assured in this Society is more than three times that of a first clan*
lice, and nearly twice that of one of the most successful of all European Mutual Offices,
be applied to the extinction of future Premiums, or their vtlue in cash will be handed to the
option. The attention of Assurers is requested to the following important privileges granted by
to the members of this Society, and to them only.— All its Policies are protected against the
the Insolvent Laws after a certain term, on a gradually increasing scale. Policies effected by mar-
protected against the debts and control of their husbands. The Families of small Assurers ars
nses of letters of administration. Robert Thomson, Actuary and Seretary.
Bee, Sydney, N.S.W. December 29th, 1857.
Victoria. —Henry Jennings, solicitor, 83, Queen-street, Dickson & Lawrence, merchants, 4, Lhza-
dbourne ;John Berlin, Auctioneer, Gertrude-atreet, Collingwood ; John Maund, M.D., La Tro bo-
rne, Mediceal Refers. Agents fob Geelong — J. S. Hill, Moorabool Street; James Kilgour, M.i .,
ee.
