

SKETCH
B 0 ROONDARA.
JAMES BONWICK,
Is
- ?
SIR
P
m
H
TZZ rr.cr.ii3 to bf unvoted to church extension
iii so:igc:tdaea.
MELBOURNE; j-
I & CO.. COLLINS STREET WEST.
1858.
J. J. BLUNDELL & CO., COLLINS STREET WE T. «
te 1858.
'■ tN £ iicji






lr 2 /^HwwthoJf
RICHMOND 8RI0CB
/tl > / 1
j|6
A OF
SEC.
1
— — 120119J18
\il7Ul5
i« j
99
\
k 8
8 & 9
66
10®
»0J N^
115
119
i2«
=¥
R 1 c
12
\
103
102
rwnU H
.
... i
_j
5 4 r i'
1
Tl
*
IO
%H4
HS\
120
127
| loJ
150
SEC
4-
✓
/f^
j
OFSEC
*r
B
ta
121
126
49 B
B
Of SEC
m j
»w;
1 J
5
10
5
12^
N? 1
A OF SEC.
s t>*-
f '■.**/»>** 1 1
Ta*'"' y 1|
ft * \1 ! C
A
B
lii
k>j
uX\
cc
SEC 3
.
10
6
oT w
1
4»
10 7 n
108
no
192 A
xJ l6/
TojdhRA
K
i
v\
i
n<
109
123
A
IJ3
is
/I46
147
-7
SEC. 1
A
1
y
*
r AlA
145
144
--O
135
14 %
143
140
'P
RES
136
14-1
~-y
BR/DC-e.*
1
..
]l48
11^9
*
OF
SEC 1
137
1
1
"N.
*
/y
C' (_
'P /
s
f~ I
A of5EC2
1 f
Jj
Xi
\ llason^itK
_/
MU LOR* V £
N Ni U H


J /
' A
A
y /#
f**
*/
/
R R A
*
't
y a h p
L/\
K=>
.
(Ji
l>
<. /
L-^
£ >9
*x
53
J)
5a
|/u' /
/
/ X-
/y™' 1 Ay&t
Y*oorU h ° "
—-X
<?
o
-53
r
r
)
■" V
,
5?'
58
))M
57 1
68
V-
89
/
of £ri
j
1
E L 0
A R S
i
L
Vl.
C
84
r—
========—
(SX
<78 ?
y to
5 r
87
1 /
X
H ES :
Sp ecial
Survey
c 4
CMOQ^.
s
S3
B H i
—]
flOP
CM*
95
79
<*x^r 6
<M^V_
HAM
ELM Lif Q
il
I
77
J^80?«£ L
81
02
—
BBIOOe fN "" r=
76 -
J
:
>
/
7z -ip
ft 7 ' Z'
Inti ar
A.
c
\rS^
VI?
//74
O .
J£i9
C9 "
70
Ll
\a V
7V




» -




SKETCH
BOROOND ARA.
JAMES BONWICK,
Author of “ Discovery and Settlement of Port Phillip
<fc. fyc.
THE PROFITS TO BE DEVOTED TO CHURCH EXTENSION
IN BOROONDARA.
MELBOURNE:
J. J. BLUNDELL & CO., COLLINS STREET WEST.




DESCRIPTION OF BOROONDARA.
Entering Boroondara by the bridge at the termina*
tion of the Richmond Road, we exchange the dull,
swampy, and treeless flat for the charming and wooded
heights of Hawthorne.
The present wooden bridge is only six years old, and
as long ago as three years it assumed the decrepitude of
age, and had to be tied, repaired, and secured. The
Yarra will soon receive a nobler span in its place.
Already four large stone abutments, of admirable work-
manship, arc standing on either side, like strong Dan of
old, prepared to sustain their burden. How different a
scene was presented in that primitive era when an occa-
sional bullock-dray came thundering down that craggy
steep, and the driver shouted “ Punt, - ’ ahoy !
Our worthy speaker, Sir Frederick James Palmer,
the aforetime Dr. Palmer, has the honor of first con-
structing a punt for the convenience of Boroondara
settlers. This was in 1840. The machine was en-
trusted to the trustworthy care of Mr. Trainor, now of
the White Horse, ISTunawading. An old settler told us
he used to dislike paying 4s. 6d. for the passage of
his dray. But even that was poor return for the man
who waited half a day for it with an idle rope. Once
over the stream, the unhappy Whip had to plunge
through that fearful passage of horrors, lying between
the Punt and Richmond Hill. They who bowl along
so merrily into town upon that fine road now have little


conception of its rutted condition formerly. After a
few years the punt was purchased by Mr. Mclntyre for
£3OO. It was private property only, and the proprietor
simply paid to Government an annual rental of £lO, in
the form of a Squatting License. How would the old
puntman stare to be told that the turnpike by the
bridge was taken last year at £6OOO ! Tolls have in-
creased indeed since his day.
But we have tarried long enough at the river. Front-
ing us, upon the gravel hill, stand the picturesque
Hawthorne Church, the Parsonage of the much esteemed
clergyman, the Rev. W. Wood, and the educational
ornament of the district, the well conducted National
School. The roads here branch off ; that to the left
toward Kew, Bulleen, and Anderson’s Creek ; that to
the right, through Hawthorne to Camberwell, Nuna-
wading, Dandenong, Ac.
We take the latter path. The Speaker’s really noble
Old English mansion, with its extensive grounds, will
be the first object of attention. They who recognize the
past labours and the public services of the titled occu-
pant, must surely delight in the success of honourable
industry, and sympathize with Her Majesty’s act of
grace, in conferring the honour of Knighthood upon the
man whom, above others, Boroondara should delight to
honour.
The Government township of Hawthorne is but of a
few acres in extent; most of the houses of the so-called
Hawthorne being upon private land cut up into allot-
ments. Leaving examination of public buildings and
institutions until another opportunity, let us stroll on-
ward. What charming little rural homes are dotted
about! “ Love in a cottage !” Aye, there’s love in
many a cottage thereabouts. Else, why is that creeper
trained so carefully, and that garden walk maintained
so clear of weeds ? Behind the one, two bright, laugh-
ing faces may be caught in view ; and oft along the
other, in the summer eve, may the entwined pair bo
seen, entwined in heart and linked in arm.


It is idle to particularize amidst such a crowd of
beauties, else we might speak of the villas of Messrs.
Power, Walsh, Mason, Orr, &c. A German settlement
rises above the Sir Robert Nicol. What a funny look-
ing body that is in the field there, using the hoe so
vigorously ? Why, it is the good old man’s Frau,
anxious to do her part in the garden by which they
make their bread. Did she not do the same for him
some thirty years ago in the German Fatherland ?
While plucking her grapes at Hawthorne, do her
thoughts never travel Rhineward ? Does the heart, which
never grows old, still love to dwell upon the courting
days among the vines and linden trees of the Land of
Song 1
Walking round to the southward, and catching many
a varied glance of nature, we look across to the high
bank of Prahran, and the embowered embattlements of
Toorak. The junction of Gardiner’s Creek with the
Yarra was the paradise of wild fowl, until ruthless
destroyers drove the remnant to other and more peace-
ful retreats. Mr, John Gardiner, after whom the creek
is named, was the first settler on that side of the Yarra,
as he was the first overlander with stock from Sydney,
being in company with Mr. Hawdon. Punch made a
little merry sketch about our Boroondara crossing into
Prahran over—a bridge ? a ford ? a something between,
a creature partaking of the qualities of both. The
bridge (?) was represented by our witty friend as the
tops of four posts in- the midst of rushing water. On
two occasions we ourselves rode down to cross the
bridge, and found it buried out of sight beneath the
stream.
A remarkable ruin is in its neighbourhood, one of the
very few of which this district can boast. Dream not of
the marble fountain of the Alhambra, the Sphinx avenue
of Thebes, the winged bull chambers of Nineveh, the
grotesque halls of Yucatan, the airy colonnade of Palmyra,
the—the anything that stirs up the antique blood of an
archeologist. It is only the shell of a Boiling Down
Establishment. In the name of sweet Arcadia, and the


Yale of Tempo, let us protest against the vulgar, mur-
derous act of first cutting off the legs of bleating inno-
cents, and then casting their bodies into the boiling
cauldron, converting the tended pet of some fair Phyllis
of the South into —tallow candles !
The romance of the thing is simply this. Fifteen or
sixteen years ago, in one of the many monetary catas-
trophes to which these colonies are epidemically sub-
jected, sheep fell down in price to nowhere. In 1843
Mr. 0 Brien, a Yass settler, hit upon the expedient of
boiling down animals, cattle and sheep, to procure tallow
for England. It was a happy thought. Stations soon
lose in value, until mutton became of more consequence
than tallow, when the Melting Downs went out of use,
and shared the fate of many an outgrown invention.
The following specimen of historic verse, from the brain
ot some ancient Port Phillip Troubadour, may not be
uninteresting to those invaders of our soil—the New
Chum tribe.
THE BOILING DOWN.
At Melbourne some few months ago,
When stock was selling very low,
Our Settlers hurried to and fro,
And looked and talked despairingly.
But Melbourne showed another sight,
When through the thickest gloom of night
Forth burst a voice “All will be right,
Build Melting Down Establishments.”
Then all at once on Yarra’s banks
Vast numbers rush’d with beams and planks.
And cauldrons, boilers, tubs and tanks
Were piled on heaps promiscuously.
And now on Yarra’s banks a scene
Of fearful carnage may be seen,
And bloodier work than e’er has been
At Linden, Prague or Waterloo.
Prostrate beneath those awful sheds
Ten thousand he on gory beds.
Hide, butchers, your diminished heads,
In blaze of our Establishments,
Juvenis, P. P., April, 1814.


In Upper Hawthorne stands the estate of Gavau
Duffy, Esq., M.L.A., the love gift of his Victorian ad-
mirers, and his Qualification Clause to a seat in Parlia-
ment. When looking down upon the Pied Gum Flat,
its huts, gardens, and brickfields, how little must the
Irish Patriot be reminded of Tara’s halls. The emerald
green we have in pasture and foliage ; but he must miss
the rags, the wan faces, the oppressed peasantry, and
the bogs of Ireland. He would be rather bothered for
a grievance here, where he espies some old sixpenny a
day labourer become the owner of many acres, and
dropping a cheque of fifty pounds for his own qualifica-
tion and the honour of Quid Ireland.
Several private townships are scattered throughout
eastern Boroondara, as Camberwell, at the junction of
the two great roads. The soil is made productive by
the aid of town manure ; but prices now are not like
those golden ones, when the many were at the cradle,
and hay in Melbourne rose to <£so a ton. The W.
creek drains most of that part to the eastward and
southward. The country generally is deficient in scenic
beauty compared to that in the neighbourhood of Kew
and Hawthorne.
The Survey, as it is called (of which more hereafter),
occupies 5,000 acres of that end of the parish. The fine
hill, belonging to the Hon. John O'Shanassy, M.L.A.,
looks down upon it, while it is bordered also by the
section of the present Dean of Melbourne, the Rev. Dr.
Macartney. To the south of the Survey is the land of
one of the Boroondara Fathers, and a neighbourly
settler, Mr. Delaney. The residence of our member,
Patrick O’Brien, Esq., is more to the westward. His
colleague, Mr. Ricardo, is found in the adjoinhm parish
of Bulleen.
Resuming our position by the bridge, we turn to the
left and enter Red Lion lane, on the way to Kew. The
Red Lion is a formidable looking beast on the sign-
board, and has, we fear, played sad havoc among the


simple ones, who confidingly toyed with the relentless
monster. It is even thought that he attempted to
devour his old keeper. The house was erected by an
honest man, who by sobriety in service accumulated
money, and whose luck at the diggings enabled him to
pile up the bricks. Opposite was the residence of
the late George Annand, Esq., M.L.C., a wealthy and
yet a benevolent man. Nearer the river is the proud
mansion of - Creswick, Esq., the son-in-law of the
Mayor of Geelong, and one of the most active and
intelligent citizens of Melbourne. Our good tempered
Boroondara lawyer, Mr. Atkyns, is one of his neigh-
bours.
Leaving 1 to our left, overlooking the river, the garden
of Mr. Mclntyre, another original of the district, and to
our right the grounds of Mr. Brooks, we approach the
cross road, at the corner of which is Colvin’s Bee-Hive,
where bees, attracted by the sweets, may revel in sensual
pleasures, but sometimes neglect to carry enough food to
their offspring in the cells at home. One end of the
cross road terminates abruptly at the Yarra, at the
place where a bridge must be some day, and the other
end runs into the Dandenong Ranges. Sir J. F. Palmer
erected a magnificent mansion, for this part of the world,
over against the Bee-Hive, It was subsequently sold to
G. S. Henty, Esq., M. L. C., one of the founders of Portland,
and, with his brothers, the first settler in Port Phillip.
Passing this, and the valuable section of Mr. Bakewell,
we are confronted with a large wooden building, which
is a store and butchery, conducted by a thorough ener-
getic and honourable American. It was formerly an
hotel, the “Woodman,” where wood carters were wont
to stop to contemplate an ancient Forester over the door.
Right opposite is the substantial brick “ Kew Hotel,”
boasting of the only public room, or assembly room,
for the pleasure hunters or politicians of the village.
Kew is unquestionably the prettiest place out of the
dust of Melbourne. Its elevation is considerable, com-


manding a view of the vessels in the bay, and affording
a noble sweep of vision over the Plenty and Dandenong
Ranges. North-easterly the land suddenly falls, and
presents a lap of beauty, and so exposes more easily to
view the distant and almost unequalled panorama.
North-west the prospect is, if possible, even finer. Old
Macedon comes into sight; cultivation in all luxuriance
lies before one, and the busy haunts of men are beheld
across the river. Kew property is rising rapidly in value.
Land 3 or 4 years since worth but £3 or £4 an acre cannot
be bought for less than £3OO or £4OO. Rural retreats are
springing up on all sides. These are not like the St.
Kilda residences, —four walls, with half-a-dozen yards
of sand to the road-fence, but are sheltered in the midst
of cultivated grounds. His Honor the Chief Justice has
just laid out a charming garden at Kew.
Kew Proper consists of a, section of 122 acres, cut up
into half acre lots by N. A. Fenwick, Esq., who pur-
chased in 1851. Our first impressions of the locality
were gathered in an attempt to find a block of land upon
which we were to erect our tented home. The forest
was dense, and the Wattle underwood so thick as to be
quite obstructive to the rays of the sun. As far as
prospect was concerned, we might as well have been in
a jungle. The drayman was naturally anxious to know
the whereabouts of settlement, as the “ shades of eve
were falling fast.” A light in the bush disclosed to us
the interesting fact that there was a hermit in the
solitude. Thence gathering fresh compass power, we
tracked on to a pretty grassy knoll, beautifully dotted
with lively Wattles, and more heavily timbered with
broad spreading Peppermints.
Hoisting our canvas, a repast was taken, and the
children were stowed away in their novel chamber for
the night. No accident occurred beneath the starry
gaze, excepting that an unmannerly bullock brushed
against a tent line, nearly overwhelming us in a falling
dwelling, and awakening terrors of attacking bush-
rangers. The Opossums screamed to their own delight,


and one dropped down upon our house, as if to resent
the intrusion of man into his tranquil retreat. Night
birds added to the diversion by their melancholy moans.
The Laughing Jackass awoke us early with his merry
note. The world was up, and we rose from our slum-
bers refreshed indeed by the soft airs and sweet odours
of charming Boroondara.
The Village of Kew is a favourite resort for Melbourne
merchants, and Government employees. It can boast,
also, of an aristocracy as well as St. Kilda, having the
seats of His Honor the Chief Justice and others of
colonial standing. It is well supplied with stores, and
the usual tradesmen of a township. Mr. French was
the first storekeeper of Kew, opening his repository of
groceries, etc., somewhere in August, 1853. His shop
is now kept by Mr. Kirwood. Opposite is the Kew
Post-Office, ,a store of Messrs. Kellett and Co., at the
corner of Gotham Koad.
Gotham Eoad, so called after a village near Clifton,
by some western neighbours, is now virtually considered
part of Kew, though not of the original Kew section.
In that eastern direction are the residences of Mr, Bayne,
solicitor; Mr. Charlwood, bookseller; Mr. Lewis,
chemist; and Messrs. Judd, Bonwick, Sinclair, Bell,
Shaw, Denbigh and Ritchie. Holt’s garden is at the
top of Gotham Road, by the Survey. The forty acre
Reserve is over the hill, on the north side of Gotham
road. The “ Harp of Erin,” on the Bulleen road, is
beyond the beautifully situated section of Dr. Mother-
well’s. On the Yarra side of that road is the model farm
wrought by Mr, Wade, one of the most judicious and ex-
perienced of farmers, as he is one of the most upright of
men. Land upon the Gotham road, purchased by C.
V r aughan, Esq., at £3 an acre, has, in subdivisions, been
sold by him as high as £l5O in three years' time.
The original Kew section, 87, of 122 acres, was pur-
chased by N. A. Fenwick, Esq., for £4 6s. an acre. It
was advertised for sale in the beginning of 1853. A
road branches off from the southern corner of the village,


and leads on to tlie Yarra. Over the river there are
four means of passage. There is first the original
Hodgson’s Punt; then the Boat Ferry into the Upper
Simpson’s road, up an almost perpendicular bank ; then
the Studley Park Bridge ; and, lastly, the new Govern-
ment Bridge at the end of Johnston street. In our way
thither we pass the Italian villa of Mr. Stevenson, the
charming garden of Mr. Gregory, the well ordered grounds
of Mr. Carson, the ornamental cottage of Mr. Wrede,
the spacious residence of Sir Wm. F. Stawell, and the
estate of the Hon. John Hodgson, M.L.C.
The Studley Park Bridge is a great convenience to
the Northern Boroondara residents, saving them a mile
into town. It runs into Simpson’s road at Church street,
which is continued from Prahran by Richmond Church.
It originated in a private company, consisting of Messrs.
Murphy, Carson, Ac., and owes much to the energy of
the secretary, Dr. Clarke. There are 10,000 shares of
£1 each. All the money was not called for, as the ex-
penditure was not £9,000. The length of the bridge
from bank to bank is 485 feet, but the span over the
Yarra is but 125 feet. The abutments are wooden,
resting on a platform, upon piles. There are three abut-
ments on the southern side, and seven on the northern.
The latter side requires more support, from its sloping,
earthy character, than.that of the perpendicular basaltic
■wall of the southern bank. There are three arches
above resting on the two first abutments; these are on
the American principle. The abutments are of hard
wood • the other parts are of pine. The engineer was
Mr. Austin, and the contractor was Mr. Grant, who
threw the bridge over the Niagara. The bridge was
opened on 6th June, 1857.
The New Bridge, erected by Government over an
upper bend of the river, at the end of Johnstone street,
Collingwood, is more substantial and imposing. The
stone abutments are splendid specimens of masonry, and


are of great strength, as they have to hear the weight
and lateral pressure of the whole structure. The span
is 55 feet more than that of Studley, being 180 feet, the
noblest in the colony. There is an arched bar of sixteen
thicknesses of American deals, with a half inch layer
between of white lead and sand, and the whole is
trundled together with iron rods to give it thorough
solidity and stedfastness. The planks used are of 18,
20 and 22 feet lengths. The mere bridge itself has
cost about £30,000, and the approaches, before being
completely finished, will cost nearly £20,000 more.
The Boroondara side is so lofty, that a long and curved
cutting had to be made through the hill, adding much
to the picturesque effect of the scene.
The Park PtESERVE of Boroondara is situated rather
to the north-west of the district, and is separated from
Colling'wood East by the waters of the Yarra. It con-
tains nearly 150 acres. Fears of invasion of Govern-
ment Surveyors were lately entertained. The Acting
Governor, General Macarthur, pledged himself that no
interference should be suffered with this most delight-
ful suburban retreat. Upon a renewal of alarm about
sales, the Government intimated last August that they
had no intention to deprive the public of the full enjoy-
ment thereof. This reserve extends eastward from Mr.
Hodgson’s land to the Punt, and southward from above
the Falls to the Ferry of Upper Simpson’s road.
What charming little dells are scattered about it !
How comfortably the Wattles shade where the straggling
and nude branched Gums fail to screen from the sum-
mer’s sun ! How fantastically the rocks figure round
about ! How all the soft and genial emotions of hu-
manity rise within one, and do homage to the spirit
of rural peace and beauty ! And how, too, in suitable
society, we do enjoy a ramble along its tortuous paths,
or a lounge on its grassy, flowery banks, within sound
of rippling waters, whose musical cadence blends with
the choral songs of birds, and the sweeter notes of


human sympathy. Many a time have we there caught
sight of a pair of absent-minded ones, smiling in each
other’s faces, without a word to say. Hurrah for the
Park Reserve !
Occasionally, through the density of foliage, one gets
some pretty peeps at the Jika Jika territory. The
Yarra Bend is nestled in woods, and looks like a sleep-
ing- scene of beauty, rather than the dwelling-place of
raving men. The Falla was formerly a favorite place
of Native Corrobory. Friendly tribes assembled at the
full moon, and shook their limbs in unison to the turn-
turn of swarthy charmers. The Darkies’ ancestors, now
jumped up into Whitefellows, are great admirers of the
spot for their corrobories. The contents of civilized
hampers may be witnessed scattered over the soft sward,
while gay-hearted youth are footing it merrily o’er the
green, and tinier ones are dabbling- into the stream that
laves the joyous shore.
Mile after mile of almost interminable beauty lead
one round by the winding Yarra. Now and then, in a
secluded nook, is seated some patient being engaged in
angling; which mystery, according- to Dean Swift, con-
sists of “ a stick and a string, with a worm at one end
and a fool at the other.” The New Bridge opens to
view, at the end of Johnstone street. Few sketches
would surpass in natural attractions that taken from the
Reserve hill, commanding a prospect of this bridge at
the end of a most delightful turn of the river, with the
grim head of Old Macedon in the distance, as if the
Past were contemplating the Present. Boroondara is
indeed fair in the rudeness of nature, but is fairer still
in the culture of her charms.
Arriving at the Punt, we gaze upon mimic battlements,
shaded by some noble willows. Passing thence round
by Studley Park Bridge, we enter upon one of the very
gems of Boroondara, —a lovely walk by the Yarra, op-
posite the celebrated Walk of Willows. These most
admired trees border the garden of the lately deceased
eldest daughter of John Batman, the founder of the


Port Phillip Settlement. Well shall we ever remember
the stroll we had with that lady beneath that famous
arch of foliage, listening to stories of the past, of her
own Ben Lomond home, of her father’s treaty with the
Blacks, and of that father’s last hours of suffering in
Melbourne eighteen years ago.
Let us not be thought too indulgent in praise of our
Boroondara, the a shady land” of the Natives. We
have long loved it. We are the first to publish its
glories ; and we are now obliged to quit its peaceful
shades. We cannot but regard it as the most salubrious,
agreeable, and beautiful spot for a home. Within half
an hour’s reach of dusty Melbourne, it is supplied with
the conveniences of civilized life, and amply provided
with educational and moral appliances. All hail to
Boroondara!
“ There is a quiet Spirit in these woods.
Jfc * *
Its presence shall uplift thy thoughts from earth, —
As to the sunshine and the pure bright air
Their tops the green trees lift. Hence gifted hards
Have ever loved the calm and quiet shades.”
HISTORY OF BOROONDARA.
Although Mr. Fawkner did not arrive in Port Phil-
lip till October, 1835, others of his company located
themselves on both sides of the Yarra some six weeks
before. The sheep and cattle station of Messrs. Bat-
man, Swanston, &c., were chiefly along the Bay from
the Yarra round to Geelong. The first person who
settled upon our side of the river with stock was Mr.
John Gardiner, after whom the creek is called. His
run extended over the places now known as Brighton,
St. Kilda, Prahran, Boroondara, and Bulleen.


At first his homestead was near the junction of the
Yarra and Gardiner’s Creek. Here occurred a stirring
incident, illustrative of the very early days of Boroon-
dara. The story we had from the squatter himself.
One Sunday afternoon, while engaged reading a chap-
ter to his men, the stockkeeper rushed into the hut
in great excitement, and breathlessly cried out, “ The
Blacks ! the Blacks !” In two minutes the whole
darted down the hill, armed with muskets, in full cry
after the offenders. ■ On the way the following par-
ticulars were picked up ; —The stockman caught sight
of some Aborigines engaged in the civilized process of
extracting potatoes from a small garden in the bend of
the river. Attempting to rescue the apples, he en-
countered such looks and threats of fury, that he was
induced to wheel round in double quick time, dream-
ing of flying- spears.
Arrived at the river, there, sure enough, was the
garden trodden by an industrious mob of Blackfellows,
all eager in pursuit of the roots. Some were on bended
knees, plunging their fingers into the soil in search of
treasure. Others, were filling a sack with the
spoil. Witli a hue and cry down came the avengin'*-
Whites. The bandits at first threw themselves into
an attitude of defence, but quickly exchanged that for
one of flight as the}* glanced at the guns. The dense
scrub favoured their escape, excepting two, who were
captured. Another plunged into the Yarra, and dis-
creetly ducked his head in time to avoid a shot sent
after him.
Others soon got ten pound depasturing- licenses.
Mr. Connell, an ex-British warrior, had sheep grazing
over Hawthorne. Messrs. Walpole and Gogs occupy-
ed the country thence to W creek. Mr. Allen went
beyond that boundary. Mr. Balfour resided near
where Mr. Oswin now is, and, while running GOO head
ot cattle, managed to break up and cultivate 100 acres
of land, and all for his £lO a year license. Mr.
Power, though early fixing a home in Boroondara,


was a Melbourne merchant in the primitive times.
Sir James Frederick Palmer was also engaged in mer-
cantile pursuits about the same period, subsequently
turning his attention to pastoral engagements.
John Hodgson, Esq., M.L.C, the first elected peer
of Victoria, became a merchant on his first arrival in
Melbourne in 1888. In about 1842 he turned a
Boroondara squatter, and erected substantial country
quarters on the banks of the V arra, near what has
since been known as Hodgson’s Punt, at the end of
Johnstone street, Collingwood. Though thus situated
but two and a half miles from town, he was obliged
sometimes to make a circuit of nearly a dozen miles.
When in a great hurry he has made his horse swim
the Yarra. In the summer, even drays could find a
crossing below the Falls, by Eights Mills, throngh
the shallow, pebbly bed. A punt was subsequently
established by Mr. Hodgson. It is somewhat singular
that the two Boroondara Punts should have been
established by two such important legislators as the
Speaker and" the Chairman of Committees of the
Council. Hodgson’s Punt was bought up in 1852 by
the Government, together with the settler’s house, for
£2500. It was intended for the site of a Police Bar-
racks. Governor Latrobe took a great fancy to the
locality, and had some intention of having a Govern-
ment House ejected there ; he had a gardener em-
ployed for a long time in laying out grounds by the
Yarra.
It was in 1841 that the selection of Surveys took
place. The Home Government had declared that any
man, by paying down £6,000 in London, should have
the right of selecting 5,000 acres where he pleased m
Port Phillip. The Melbourne Press were highly in-
dignant at this order, especially when one gentleman
was deliberating about taking his 5,000 acres some-
where about Emerald Hill. Ultimately Mr. Bendy
fixed upon what is now known as Brighton. But two


Surveys were marked out on the Boroondara side of
the Yarra. One is known as Unwin’s Survey, in
Bulleen; the other is that of Elgar’s, North-East
Boroondara.
Elgar’s Survey was originally more southerly,
but permission was afterwards given to have it ex-
tended to the Yarra for water frontage. Capt. Kane
was the first agent of the property. Mr. Arundel
Wright succeeded him in the appointment, and was
permitted to take out his percentage in running sheep
free over unoccupied portions. Land was let for pas-
toral purposes at from Is, to 2s. an acre per annum.
Agricultural farms were leased as high as 4s. Mr.
Elgar had been an old West India merchant. Becoming
involved in some commercial crisis, and being consider-
ably indebted to Mr. Brooks, the great shipowner, he
conveyed his Port Phillip property to that gentleman.
It was in 1853 that Mr. Octavius Brown, as agent for
Mr. Brooks, sold the Survey (less some 1,700 acres of
it, belonging to Mrs. Uyce, widow of one of the ori-
ginal partners of Mr. Elgar) to Mr. Power, and two
others, for the sum of fifteen guineas an acre, payable
over a period of several years. A large portion of this
is now let in farms at 20s. to 40s. per acre. Most of
Mrs. Dyce’s portion has been recently sold by auction.
The Carlton Estate, extending from the Bulleen
road to the Heidelberg Punt, wms once the property
of Mr. Atkinson, the lord of Belfast Surve} r . He
leased it to parties who were unable to comply with
the terms of their agreement, and it was then sold to
Tertius Campbell, Esq., of Sydney. The farms were
rented at a cheap rate; one, of 340 acres, paid but
,£3O a year. The lessee subsequently, in 1854, pur-
chased 120 acres of it for £5,000. The difference of
times made a great difference in the value of the pro-
perty. In primitive days great difficulty was ex-
perienced in getting purchasers at the following prices


for produce; —Hay, £2 a ton ; potatoes, £1; wheat,
2s. Bd. a bushel; oats, Is, Gd. Butter was sd. a
pound, and eggs were Gd. a dozen. No wonder men’s
heads were turned at finding- ready sale tor hay at
£4O and £OO a ton, wheat at 255. a bushel, and butter
at 4s. a pound.
One Boroondara resident told us of having- been a
whole week with his team of bullocks, cutting-, draw-
ing-, and conveying- to Melbourne a log- of timber, for
which he received the magnificent sum of thirty shil-
lings. For a ton of Wattle bark, got with some trou-
ble, another only obtained one pound. A load of
wood brought four shillings. Messrs. Maloney and
Logan used to supply town from Boroondara by wmy
of boats upon the Yarra, their friend Mr. Delaney
being salesman. The wood was nicely prepared. A
ton of loose stuff measured 48 cubic feet, and one of
solid timber measured 40. The cost was 3s. Gd. into
the boat, and the sale on the wharf was ss. a ton.
Though much slower in growth than any other ot
the Melbourne suburbs, from being off any of the great
routes, Boroondara has been less subject to vicissitudes.
The progress has been steadier, but firmer. But it is
only within the last two years that it may be said to
have got under weigh. Future historians will have
ampler materials* than the writer of the present sketch
to compile the Chronicles of Boroondara.
The Land Bales will afford the intelligent reader a
g-ood criterion of the progress of the district.


Upset. Cash.
Lot,
Section.
Acres. Purchaser.
s.
s.
58
15
62 John Wm. Cowee
. 25
35
6!)
15
62 Ditto
. 25
47 6
55
15
91 Horatio Spenser Wills
40
69
60
14
53 Thomas Wills ..
. 20
28
61
14
— No offer ..
. 20
—
LAND SALES OF BOROONDARA.
The first sale of Boroondara land was field in Mel-
bourne, December 13tfi, 1843. Tfie lots were small
and in tfie best situation; but of the eighteen allotments
offered at the upset of £3 and £4 an acre, only four
were purchased. Those put up were 6,7, 8,9, 10,
11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 20, 21, 23, 24, 60. Lot
11, of 16 acres, w T as bought by Alexander Davidson,
of Melbourne, for £4 2s. an acre, or 2s. over the upset
price; lot 12, of 14 acres, by the same, at £5; lot
13, of 13 acres, by the same, at £7 ; and lot 14, of 18
acres, at £4. These front the Yarra.
The second sale was in April 24th, 1844, when lots 1,
2,3, 4,5, 25, 26, 28 got no offer, and Mr. Thomas
Mclntyre got 27, of 15 acres, at the upset of £3 an
acre. This beautiful section on Hawthorne Hill,
beside the Yarra, is now exceedingly valuable. The
first five lots front the Gardiner’s Creek.
In 1844, March 20th, the first sale of Bulleen land
took place, or, rather, was attempted ; for of the lots
1,2, and 5, no one bid the upset of £1 an acre.
Boroondara came forward again January 22nd,
1845. Some of our present colonial aristocracy appear
as buyers, as will be seen in the list: —
21 6 17 James Frederick Palmer 40 ICO
25 C 15 A. R. Cruickshank .. 40 70
6 6 17 James Durham Pinuock 40 55


Upset. Cash
Lot.
Section.
Acres
Purchaser.
s.
s.
15
C
21
Thomas Budd Payne
.. 40
100
1G
0
19
E. C. Hobson ..
.. 40
63
17
G
13f Thomas Herbert Power 50
126
49
C
Hi Thomas Patton ,.
.. 50
60
50
G
28f Michael Woodlock
.. 40
CO
18
G
13
T. B. Payne
.. 50
99
19
G
15J J. F. Palmer
.. 40
70
20
C
10 i Ditto
.. 40
95
56
15
77
Thomas Wills ..
.. 30
75
57
15
72
T. Wm. Cowell ..
.. 30
44
23
6
8
James D. Pinnock
.. 80
125
23
G
lOf Ditto
.. 80
105
By reference to the map the reader will observe
that several of these are in the choicest situations of
Boroondara. Dr. Palmer did not settle immediately
upon his purchase.
In June 25th, 1845, no offer was made for 17 of 6.
In August 20th, 1845, we have other Yarra frontages
sold higher up. Mr. Oswin buys 52 of 16, 133 acres,
for £3 an acre; and 53 of 16, 146 acres, at 425. The
purchaser of 54 of 15 and 16, 99 acres, was George
Annand, at 70s. The last is leased to Mr. Wade, the
farmer, and is very valuable. In October 22nd, 1845,
A. Davidson, the first Boroondara buyer, takes sec-
tion 3, of 13 acres, at 635. an acre; and 8, Ilf acres,
at 51s.
The sale of March 11th, 1846, appears thus ;
Mr. Creswick resides on Mr.Pinnock’s lot 23 by the
Yarra. Bought at £6 65., some of it has realized
£6OO and £BOO an acre.
At Melbourne, June 3rd, 1846, section 37, of 24
acres, w'ent to Thomas Hague for 385., with upset of
305.; 38 of 24 acres, to Michael Lynch, for 305. ; and
6, of 6 acres, was forfeited by Michael Lynch being
deemed much too dear at above £7 an acre. In ten
years it would have realized some thousands per cent.
August 12th, 1846. Lot 3, of 351 acres, was sold
to John Werge Howey at 465.; 5, of 391 acres, to


Charles Hobson, at 46§. also; and 48, of 19 acres, to
T. B. Payne, at 555. Michael Lynch, in November
lith, 1846, gets 39, of 21 acres, at 50s.
In February 24th, 1847, are the following sales re-
corded :
Upset. Cost.
Lot. Acres. Buyer. s. s.
1 57* Charles Robinson ..30 30
2 40 Ditto .. • • .. 30 30
4 84j David Power .. .. 40 48
35 10 John MeAley .. .. 40 42
36 19 Forfeited.
6 Ca A. Davidson .. .. 50 150
In July 2nd, 1847, are—
Upset. Cost.
Lot, Acres. Buyer, s. s.
32 18* Thomas Brooks .. .. 40 68
33 18* Matthew Hughes .. .. 40 52
46 19 i Ditto 40 60
47 19* T. B. Payne .. ..40 80
In October 6 th, 1847, the prices were low; —
Upset. Cost.
Lot. Acres. Buyer. s.
43 191 a No offer .. .. ..40
44 19* Ditto 40
AK Kli TVTo+.fhAW TTncrVIPS . . 40
45 10* Matthew Hughes .. 40 40
34 20 Thomas McCarthy .. 40 40
40 21 Michael Lynch .. . 40 40
42 191 Ditto 40 40
In December Bth, 1847, we have James Colvin, of
the “ Bee Hive,” purchasing 29 of 14, 10 acres, for
595. an acre; John MeAley, 36, 19 acres, for 445. •
Thomas Wills, 61 of 14, 50 acres, for 595.
In the year 1848 but few lots were sold. They
were all choice pieces in excellent positions. The first
four were sold on March Ist, and the other two in
December 13th. Most of the land is in the original
owners’ hands.


Upset. Cost.
Lot. Acres. Buyer. s. s.
41 17J Michael Lynch .. .. 40 40
28 16| Thomas Mclntyre .. 40 55
30 11| Thomas Brooks .. .. 50 52
31 16 J Ditto 40 40
43 19J Thomas Lavidge .. .. 40 53
44 19J T. B. Payne .. ..40 60
Things greatly improved in 1850, the district was
getting better known, and prices improved.
September 4th, 1850 :
Upset. Cost.
Lot. Acres. Buyer. s. s.
62 32i Thomas Lavidge.. • .. 40 85
63 40i W. S. Urquhart .. .. 30 60
64 304 Nehemiah Guthridge .. 40 75
65 30J h, W. W. Liddiart .. 40 190
66 38i Ditto 40 140
67 44J Db to 40 105
68 50i T. B, Payne and J. .
McDonnell •. .. 30 90
69 40J Ditto 30 112 6
A 5 150 Nehemiah Guthridge .. 20 91
A 1 100 G. C. Downing and A.
Haines .. .. 20 35
B 1 273 Thomas Henderson .. 20 26
A3&4 150 Patrick Maloney and Mi-
chael Logan .. .. 20 30
AB&9 150 Ditto 30 35
On September sth C 3 of 50 was sold to John
Conran and Denis Delaney at 80s. 83, of 100 acres,
was forfeited at 465. On this day the first sale of
Nunawading land took place. William Kerr bought
lot 1, of 4 7 acres, for 80s.; Arundel Wright, lot 3, of
54 acres, for 80s. ; John Crimp, 10, 55 acres, for 315.;
and G. and W. Bennett 11, 66 acres, for 80s, There
was no offer for 2,4, 5,6, 7,8, 9.
The year 1851, the outbreak of the diggings, was a
happy time for buyers. Commercial matters were in
a sad state, property had greatly fallen in value, and
the people were rushing to the Sydney diggings, or
scattering about our bush in search of gold. Even


after Ballarat and Mount Alexander burst forth,
Melbourne folks were in a panic, for flocks were de-
serted of their shepherds, and the town was stripped
of labourers. There were many, also, who feared that
the country would never he settled, hut that men
would dig 1 g'oid only to carry off with them to England,
their home. Fortunately for capitalists, whether
squatters or others, drunkenness will always supply
them with hireling' labour.
September, 18th, 1851:
Upset. Cost.
Lot. Acres. Buyer. s. s.
70 1241 John Robert Murphy .. 20 72
71 101 Hussey Burgh Macart-
20 56
ney .. .. .. 20 Ob
72 fli Ditto 20 80
73 00 Pat. Morn an e .. .. 30 125
74 20| Chai’les Payne .. .. 40 200
75 32| John Bakewell .. .. 40 400
76 1261 Ditto 20 260
77 491 Ellen Miller ~ .. 30 480
78 Withdrawn.
79 113 Fairfax Fenwick and
Edward Bell .. .. 20 182
Much of this land sold for -£lOO and even £3OO an
acre in three years after the purchase. 77 fronts the
Yarra and the Park Reserve.
October IGth, 1851: —
Upset. Cost.
Lot. Acres. Buyer. s. s.
80 74 Charles James Whyte .. 30 123
81 811 Peter Davis .. ..30 84
82 110 Edward Dumeresq .. 20 65
83 1451 Charles Vaughan ..20 61
84 146 Reid and Motherwell .. 20 69
85 84| C. Vaughan .. .. 30 71
88 32 Samuel Watt .. .. 40 125
87 1221 Nicholas Alex. Fenwick 20 86
88 190 Catherine Cowell .. 20 80
89 133 George Annand.. .. 20 92
90 351 William Oswin .. .. 40 162
91 89i Edward Glinn .. ..30 106
A 2 198 John Sullivan .. .. 20 56


-Some of this land, bought at a few pounds an acre,
sold for even hundreds of pounds an acre within four
years of the Government sale. Kew Village, and the
land on both sides of the Gotham Road, were included
in that day’s purchase. The original purchasers were
nearly all speculators.
The first township land sold at Boroondara by Go-
vernment, the Hawthorne township, was upon June
16th, 1852. The lots were half acres, the upset price
of which was £4.
Cost per
Lot. Acres. Buyer. Lot.
1 2 Michael Gallagher .. .. 4100
2 2 Ditto .. .. ~ .. 155
3 2 John Mason .. .. .. 100
4 2 Ditto .. .. .. .. 100
5 2 John Lee Smith .. .. 115
0 2 Michael Gallagher .. .. 120
7 2 C. Newman .. .. .. 75
1 3 R. Morris .. .. .. 185
2 3 James White .. .. .. 100
3 3 John Connell .. .. .. 150
4 3 G, H. Warren 155
5 3 Ditto 175
0 3 Ditto 175
7 3 R. Newstead .. .. .. 170
8 3 Logan and Maloney .. .. 180
9 3 John Connell .. .. .. 205
The last sale, the heaviest of all, took place in Mel-
bourne on March 24th, 1853. The faith in the land
had risen, and the lots, distant and comparatively un-
important as they were, realized much improved prices.
The buyers, as usual, were speculators, who, in many
cases, made cent, per cent, for their money within a
few months. The upset was £2 an acre:—
Cost per
Lot. Acres. Buyer. Acre.
92 30| James Smith .. .. 443
93 31 William Perry ~ ~ 32
94 26j John Dane .. .. .. 47
95 26 j James Gill .. ~ 58
96 21 Ditto 75


• Cost per
Lot. Acres. Buyers. Acre.
97 21 J. M. Smith .. .. A'Cl
98 21 Pat Mornane .. .. 38
99 21 J. Le M. Winter .. .. 40
100 28 A. F. A. Greeves .. .. 32
101 28 John Allen .. .. 28
102 J 2l£ James Gill .. .. .. 44
103 22 R. Macarthur .. .. 42
104 A Pat. Mornane .. .. 45
104 B 821 Ditto 40
105 A 36| John Hodgson .. .. 31
1058 40" T. L. De Winter .. .. 33
106 A 36 J J. C. Cole .. .. .. 33
106 B 40 Campbell and Creswick .. 31
107 76 James Gill .. .. .. 45
108 87 Joseph Anderson .. .. 33
109 75 Michael Lynch ~ .. 30
110 48i Ditto .. .. .. 27
111 43 Peter Davis .. • • 19
112 42 i Robert Cain .. .. 21
113 16 G. S. Durie .. • ■ 27
114 16 James Fowler .. .. 40
115 35i John Dane.. .. .. 25
116 341 James Gill.. .. 87
117 46 John O’Shanassy .. .. 26
118 931 Oliver Russell .. .. 19
119 411 Alfred Sykes .. .. 20
120 401 James M. Connell .. .. 26
121 261 Edward Malhy .. .. 31
122 1231 James Orr .. .. .. 22
RELIGION IN BOROONDARA.
The Wesleyans, as usual, were first in the field.
The population was then very small and very scattered.
The first preaching was on Mr. Smith’s ground, not far
from the present Fletcher’s Hotel, though more to-
ward Gardiner’s Creek. This was in 1848. It was
in a wattle and dab room, occupied during the week


as a small private school. The Government having
granted two acres at Hawthorne to the body, a wooden
chapel was erected thereon in 1853. The services were
not long continued.
A flourishing Wesleyan Society, with a large Sab-
bath School, exists near the Red Gum Flat, east of
Upper Hawthorne. The first preaching in 1853 was
under a tree. In three months a tent was obtained,
and used for eighteen months. Through the activity
of Mr. Chambers and others funds were obtained for
a brick building on the hill, which was opened in
August, 1855. The land and chapel cost £430, which
is all paid. It is gratifying to notice the heartiness of
the humble worshippers in this outpost of Methodism.
The Wesleyan Association were next in the
order of time. Mr. Morgan, of Kew, opened his house
for worship in January, 1853. The preacher on the
occasion was the distinguished and eloquent temper-
ance advocate, Mrs. Thomas. For a long time only
afternoon service was held. Subsequently land was
purchased, and a chapel erected at Kew, at a total cost
of £3OO. The room was opened, free of debt, in Sep-
tember, 1857.
A Baptist friend, Mr. Joseph Foy, most laudably
commenced Sabbath morning and evening service at
his house in the then wild bush, south of Gotham Road,
in March, 1853. Ko place of worship existed within
two miles of it. The form of service was a Prayer
Meeting, followed by an address from Mr. Foy; who,
without much literary ability, had a fluency of speech,
and an honest desire to do good to his neighbours. A
Baptist Chapel was opened in the Gotham Road in
September, 1854. Its neat appearance, surrounded
by Wattles, is attractive to the passer by.
A Baptist Chapel, supplied first by Mr. Ceiling's and
then by Melbourne friends, has existed at Upper Haw-
thorne for above four years. It was originally a pri-


vate wooden dwelling’. The residence of Gavan Duffy,
Esq,, is opposite to it. We had the pleasure
there of listening' to an eloquent appeal upon temper-
ance from David Blair, Esq.
The Independents of Kew were originally repre-
sented by Messrs. French and Day. Desirous of esta-
blishing a congregational cause, they wisely appealed
to their rich brethren in Melbourne, and found liberal
assistance from Messrs. G. Annand, R. Smith and
others of the Collins Street Church. A brick chapel
was opened in April, 1854, by the Rev. J, Morrison
and by the Rev. E. Day, now pastor at Castlemaine.
Well do we remember the forest of trees, and dense
underwood of Wattles, through which we passed to
reach this sanctuary in the wilds.
Dependent upon occasional preaching helps, the
friends at last secured the alternate ministrations of
the Rev. John Allen and Mr. George Bell for a
lengthened period. The free-will offerings of these
gentlemen were duly appreciated by a people who
benefitted by their instruction, A church of eight
members was organized by the Rev. R, Fletcher, Rev.
T. Odell, and the Rev, J. L. Poore, in February, 1866.
About Christmas, 1866, Richard Connebee, Esq., who
had become a resident at Kew, was requested to preach.
The church and congregation were so struck with the
manifest superiority of style and matter in his dis-
courses, and their hearts were so impressed by the fer-
vour of his appeals, that they constrained him to
assume the regular occupancy of the pulpit. Gladly
would they have acknowledged him as their pastor had
it coincided with his views to have assumed that title.
Increased attendance necessitated a movement for an
enlargement of the building. At a meeting addressed
by the Rev. Dr. Cairns, who expressed his appre-
ciation of the talents and character of Mr. Connebee,
a considerable sum was promised towards improve-
ments. The ladies of the congregation formed them-


selves into an association, to get up the first Bazaar in
Boroondara to raise funds for the object. In the be-
ginning of January, 1858, the chapel was enlarged to
twice its original size. A flourishing Sunday School
is attached to the church. A Sabbath afternoon ser-
vice is conducted by some of the friends at the brick-
field in the Pai’k Reserve.
Another Independent Chapel was opened by the
Rev. R. Fletcher on December 20th, 1857. It is situ-
ated in East Boroondara, about four miles from Rich-
mond Bridge. As a structure, it boasts of consider-
able architectural interest. Its stone walls were raised
some three years ago, through the agency of the Rev.
J. Dewhurst. Bad times, and the removal of that
minister, led to a suspension of the work. Now,
through the zeal of Mr. Kemp, the building is com-
pleted, and out of debt.
The Church of England, though last upon Bo-
roondara, gave evidence of their superiority in wealth
and influence by the noble and spacious edifice which
they have raised on Hawthorne Hill. Undertaken in
the dear times, above four years ago, it progressed
very slowly from want of funds and difficulty of pro-
curing artizans. It is true there was not, as in the
case of a Melbourne church, a placard posted on the
walls of Melbourne, entreating the compassionate aid
of those lords of toil, masons and carpenters, and pray-
ing that they would, for the love -of God and his
church, be willing to labour upon the half finished
walls. No episcopal petition to the independent sons
of labour helped the Hawthorne Church, and it was
not till December, 1854, that it was ready for opening.
The whole cost of the building was £5,000, now paid.
The Rev. W. Wood was appointed the clergyman.
Possessed of more than ordinary pulpit capabilities,
and of an amiable spirit, he has attracted and secured
a large and a most respectable congregation.


The Roman Catholics met for worship in the
little wooden building- on the Survey. The congrega-
tion now assemble at the Nunawading School-room.
Their priest formerly ministered to a district extending
from Heidelberg to Dandenong-. They are now under
the pastoral care of the Rev, James Madden, of Rich-
mond. The new school-room of Hawthorne is ex-
pected to be opened for worship shortly.
EDUCATION IN BOROONDARA.
The principal and oldest school in the district is the
well sustained National School. Five years ago a
few children were gathered together in a wretched hut
opposite the site of the u Bee-hive ” Hotel, on the
Bulleen Road, These were subsequently removed to
as rude an edifice on the other side of the road. A
couple of holes, about a foot square each, in the wall,
disclosed to view a score or so of pupils. The next
movement was to the Ovens, a couple of low-roofed
little zinc houses, on the Hawthorne Road, near the
Post-Office. Two experienced teachers, Mr. and Mrs.
Goodwin, were engaged to instruct the youth under
such trying circumstances. Nothing but thorough
devotedness, and a high sense of duty, could have sus-
tained their efforts. The Hon, the Speaker took a
lively interest in the school, subscriptions were raised,
the National Board was liberal, and a substantial stone
school room and teachers’ residence were erected on
the Reserve of Hawthorne, near to the church. This
was accomplished in 185—. With a sensitive and
weakly frame, the labours of the school pressed heavily
upon the health of the master. His heart was in the
school-room, and he would not retire from his work


even when urged by friends and the pangs of disease.
He died in harness, and left behind him a name to be
loved and an example to be followed.
The school has since been conducted by his widow
and his stepson, Mr. William Bryant, a man who com-
bines with firmness of discipline a kindliness of feeling,
and with a zeal for his office an aptitude to teach. At
the present time 150 children are receiving a practical,
and even an accomplished education. With enlarged
accommodation, and ample appliances, the school has
increased facilities for progress.
A Wesleyan School was established at Haw-
thorne in 1855. When the services of the Sabbath
were closed, the pupils generally diminished, until the
school died a natural death. An attempted resuscita-
tion proved a failure.
Soon after the time of the establishment of the Na-
tional School in 1562, a Mrs. Knight obtained a few
children near the northern part of the Park Reserve.
Her hut was on the Reserve, in the neighbourhood of
the newly erected lodges of the proposed Lunatic
Asylum. Mrs. Simpson, the Lady Bountiful of
Northern Boroondara, took the mistress under her
protective care. By her benevolence a number of
poor orphan children were placed at the school. Such
was the affection of these little ones towards their friend
Mrs. Simpson, that they invariably saluted her as their
mother. Tents were erected on the Reserve for their
accommodation. The number increased, benefactors
came to the help of the foundress of the institution,
and subsequently there arose on Emerald Hill the
splendid establishment of the Orphan Asylum, whither
the poor children were removed.
Mr. Joseph Foy opened a school in the Baptist
Chapel about three years ago. The commencement
of the Kew School, and other causes, so lowered the


numbers in attendance that Government aid was sus-
pended.
The Kew Church of England School has been
conducted nearly three years by a very able teacher
with considerable success. The building 1 is a substan-
tial structure, and of a size more than sufficient for the
present wants of the villag’e. Few schools can exhibit
such a display of thorough discipline, combined with a
superior system of instruction.
The Roman Catholic school was long held on a por-
tion of Mrs. Dyce’s leased land in the Survey. The
accommodations were sufficiently rude, because of the
uncertainty of tenure. The master was in his own
quiet way an enthusiast, devoted to his young charge,
and not unsuccessful in his efforts. The land being-
put up for sale, the school-room was sold for £lO, and
the scholars were removed to Nunawading, where
they have now a new and very handsome edifice.
A Roman Catholic School at Hawthorne lapsed
for awhile, but has since been resuscitated with hopeful
vigour by an experienced colonial teacher. A suitable
building of some architectural pretensions is now con-
structed to receive the pupils.
Several Private Schools have been established in Bo-
roondara.
GEOLOGY OF BOROONDARA.
Upon passing Collingwood Flat, and crossing the
river, the traveller lands upon the floor of schistose, or
slate rocks. Some geologists have ventured upon the
statement of an approximate depth of this formation,


which they imagine to he not less than thirty thousand
feet. No one has yet driven through to certify the
same.
Just over Richmond Bridge the slate stands out
boldly before one. The first rise of Hawthorne Hill
is but the beginning of a series of elevations to the east-
ward, leading on to the loftier ranges of the same
mineral characteristic, and evidencing their connection
with that vast continuity of hills stretching from west
to east through the centre of Victoria, and onward
for hundreds of miles through New South Wales, —
the very richest range of mountains in the known
world.
We have, in some parts of Boroondara, slate soft and
workable as freestone ; in others, it is so full of quartz
veins as to be impracticable. At the Yarra side, below
the estate of the Chief Justice, the rock is inclined
60 deg. to the south, and abounds with ferruginous
quartz seams, which, exposed by the wear of the softer
mineral, assume the aspect of iron lace-work, with
varieties enough for ladies’ crochet patterns. Some
really pretty party-coloured stones are near, the hue
being occasioned by the mixture of the ferruginous
element. Not far from the grounds of John Hodgson,
Esq., M.L.C., in the vertical semi-crystalline bands of
slate, the decomposition of the softer constituents has
left some singular parallel ridges, like the cicatrices
upon a Black’s chest.
In the Reserve Park the parallel and meridional
bands are seen as strongly marked as upon the dig-
gings. There are quartz reefs in the slate running
nearly north and south in the orthodox manner. In
very truth Boroondara is an Auriferous District, a to
he Gold Field !! Gold has been found already in
various places. In the writer’s own ground children
have picked up specimens in quartz. The same have
been gathered elsewhere. In digging of foundations
of houses gold has turned up. How very agreeable
for the loungers about town, the future unemployed,


to walk out three or four miles to digging's ! The
same character of country about Anderson’s Creek can
be traced downward along- the Yarra through Boroon-
dara and a part of Prahran. The extraordinary penin-
sular promontories, jutting- out from the Reserve into
the Yarra, remind one of the huge straggling limbs of
the Cuttle fish, fabled to grasp the sailing bark of the
Indian Seas.
The detritus, as has been mentioned, is not generally
extensive. We have not the sands of Brighton or the
deep clays of Prahran. The eastern portion is more
sandy than the western. Our deepest beds of clay
are in Red Gum Flat, the north of the Park, and the
low portions of Hawthorne. For brick earth we have
the advantage of our neighbours in Prahran. Gravel
occurs in two particular localities, on the hill above
the Punt, and on Church Hill, Hawthorne. It con-
sists of quartz pebbles from one inch to two inches in
length, connected by ferruginous sand and smaller-
rounded grains of quartz. It is so hard in some places
as to require more powder for blasting- than even blue-
stone. The thickness of the bed is from a few inches
to eight and ten feet. The base is pipe clay upon
slate. At Kew the small shot-like quartz forms one
extensive and indurated conglomerate. The varieties
of debris are owing to the different materials washed
into the ancient bays of the ocean, exactly as we per-
ceive it on our coasts at the present day, being shingle
beaches, sandy beaches, and muddy beaches • all neur-
one another. The high and dry situation of such beds
in Boroondara has been owing to the gradual elevation
of land by volcanic or magnetic agency.
We have evidence of more movements than one of
the surface of Boroondara. Even within the historical
period, if aboriginal traditions are to be respected, the
land has risen. And although the present population
of Victoria may give place to another and wholly dif-
ferent race in physical features, manners, and ideas,


yet the time will come when the increased elevation
may place the spot, now recognized as Williamstown,
some thirty miles from the shore inland, and remove
the cause of any further discussion about the Geelong
har: a new port will he formed, peihaps, in the
vicinity of Point Nepean extension. Or, contrary wise,
a subsidence will happen, to place Melbourne as a
convenient sporting place for fishes, convert Boroon-
dara into a sort of Venice with floating_ homes, and
bring Ballaarat within an easy stage of its watering
T)lclC6.
The river Yarra has altered in depth and relative
height of surface above the sea level. At the Punt
the rambler sees considerable deposits of fine, silt-like
earth, rising 30 feet from the water. Looking across
at an angle to the Collingwood side, he notices the
same kind of alluvium there, and resting, as in Boroon-
dara, upon the slate bottom. It is but reasonable to
believe that, though the river now rushes through such
banks, it once deposited them, and the bottom of the
stream was where the top of the earthy rampart now
is • that is, that the Yarra was formerly some 40 to 60
feet higher than at present. The period of such must
have been posterior to the elevation of Collingwood
Flat, as its alluvial deposit is very different from the
one described. . . „
Such a sedimentary deposit has not the character of
that produced by a sudden and extraordinary flood,
denuding distant lands, and carrying their spoil down-
ward and onward. Within a recent period there have
been some remarkable inundations of the A arra. Lie
Puntman will point out a log, placed 20 feet high
among the branches of a tree beside the river. On
Christmas day, in 1839, the flood did little mischief in
the almost unknown and uninhabited region of Boroon-
dara, but at Melbourne the ancient brick-fields, near
where the south end of Prince’s Bridge is, were swept
away, and several lives were lost. In the flood of
1848 our district suffered considerably. Mr. Wade


speaks of having- 80 acres, out of 100 acres of his cul-
tivated paddock, covered with water.
The geology of Boroondara is obviously different
from that of Collingwood. Our flats are not covered,
like its low grounds, with the basaltic lava. The two
places, so contiguous, were subjected to different ele-
mental actions, though Collingwood, like Boroondara,
has its hills of slate, and is not without auriferous
manifestations. Boroondara rose in a mass in time to
escape that fiery flood which desolated the low country
near; whether from Mr. Blandowski’s Melbourne
Swamp Crater, or not, it is hard to determine. It is
highly probable that it was from a submarine volcano,
and that the burning stream hissed through the waters
along the shallow ocean bed; the Eastern Hill of Mel-
bourne, Carlton Hill, &c., appearing like islets in the
sea. The rock could not have been long submerged
before the lava current came, as little or no deposit is
observable between the slate and basalt. This was
before the advent of the Yarra.
As the land rose again, a partial dislocation took
place at the point of junction of basalt and slate ; that
is, when the trappean current terminated against the
slate walls of Boroondara—and in the rent chasm
the overflowing of the upland region found vent, and
the natives called the flowing waters by the name of
“ Yarra Yarra.” In several places this junction of
formations may be seen to great advantage, as at the
Falls of Bight’s Mills. There the water rushes over
the hard basaltic ridge in rolling volumes in winter,
and gently glides down the steep in summer. On our
side the slate rock rises to a considerable height, and
the stone is softer than usual, and well adapted for
general building purposes. The stratification is dis-
tinctly determined. A ramble along the Yarra in that
quarter will well repay the lover of nature as well as
the student of geology.
The only place in which we have detected the vol-
canic rock in Boroondara is in one spot in Hawthorne.


On the hill near it, upon which rest the Church and
National School, the contorted hands of slate bears
north to the east, and dip from 70 degs. to 90 degs. to
the east. On the eastern side of the hill a small creek
is seen, known by the name of Connell’s so
called after one of the early settlers in the district.
The creek is crossed by a bridge in the Hawthorne
Road, and runs down to the Yarra between the estates
of Sir J. F. Palmer and T. H. Power, Esq., M.L.C.
In the bottom of the creek a small bed of trappean
basalt is to be observed, as though the lava current
had run up that low chasm from across the Colling-
wood and Richmond Flats.
Since the rock of Boroondara first shook off its
mantle of waters, and rose to receive the beams of a
primeval sun, what wondrous changes have occurred
in the world of matter ! What long continued and
extensive elemental fury has raged from Pole to Pole !
What floodings of volcanoes ! What throes of mighty
earthquakes ! What dissolution of whole continents !_
What submersion and reconstruction of vast masses of
the earth’s crust! What toppling, and crushing, and
levelling of towering mountains. Much of our own
mother country has risen and sunk repeatedly since
the time Boroondara first appeared. At one time it
was a jungle forest of tropical foliage. Then its waters
were moved in the play of monster Saurians, the real
dragons of the old world, while its woods shook with
the tread of the gigantic Iguanadon, as it covered
yards at a stride. Then all was silent in the womb of
the ocean. Vast icebergs floated over the land of
Britons, striking against a few rocky islets, and de-
positing boulders from another and a distant shore.
Slowly it rose again to smile in flowers. Again and
again did old Chaos return. Untold myriads of ani-
malcule sported in its watery shroud, fell in heaps
upon the calcareous muddy bottom, with comminuted
shells and corals, forming the chalk bulwarks of Albion.
But we weary in dwelling upon the dislocations,


changes, and transformations of the island home, while
Boroondara was dreaming in placid security, unhurt
amidst the storms, and beyond the fatal circle of the
Cycloid. It slept on in peace, and long in peace.
When it sunk at last beneath the surge, it remained
not for any lengthened period before its resxirrection.
Here it received an accumulation of sandy mud, and
there a deposit of clay, or of rounded shingle. There
was no time for the consolidation of strata. It rose
with its spare Tertiary beds, one of the numerous
islands then comprising the continent of Australia.
By and by elevating influences brought these islands
together in compact bonds of brotherhood, and Flora
and Fauna spread alike through all. Boroondara
received its share of the general good, and to this day
shows the family face of Australia.
Goodhugh and Hough, Printers, Flinders Lane, East.


s) frr jo




}
■- S Hll.l
■
