

w
Commander of Ship
Capt. H. W. N. Evans.
C.O. Troops
Lieut.-Col. A. T. Paterson, D.5.0., M.C.


-WjpERGUSON CoLLECTIOI^\W


P" '
I
A WORD IN ADVANCE.
I have much pleasure in commending Sapper Harding's
verses to the members of 48th Quota and the troops 011 the
"Main.'' Sapper Harding has a keen sense of the ridicu-
lous, and if he chooses to exercise his wit sometimes at the
expense of the military, it is because the military gives him
ample scope, and is fair game. Sapper Harding's satire
passes readily into humour, and he would be a very thin-
skinned person who would l take offence at it. The good
ship, "The Main," also suffers, because "The Main" has its
weak points, being German. Sapper Harding has the gift of
showing us the laughable side of things, and that is a gift
not to be despised on a troopship
R. S. WALLACE.
(LCfo, lAs'yi (t/ *■» t (


,
■
t ,
L
*


TO THE HEADER.
T feel it is my duty ere you read
The following pages of this doubtful screed
To try in rhyming couplets to explain
How this small booklet came aboard The Main.
A proverb that keeps coming to my mind,
Repeats that Satan will some mischief find
For idle hands, perhaps he is to blame;
Yet I'm not authorized to sign his name.
I take the blame for all this book of verse;
Xo doubt it could be better or be worse.
I don't aspire to write to those so wise.
Who sniff and sneer as they would' criticise.
Perhaps, like sauces, verses lose their zest,
When taken to digestion not the best.
And, furthermore, my conscience I would ease
To state at once: I have not tried to please
All men at once; such would be time to waste
In different men with such divergent taste.
This hook makes not the slightest claim on brains,
Xor has it cost the author any pains.
J
tl
3 1
£ <
There may be morals to these tales attached ;
My pen had no such notion when it scratched.
There may be wisdom here to dfc> some good,
In- years to come, when it is understood 1 .
My sole ambition was within these lines,
To banish serious thought away sometimes.
There are some people nothing could entice
To smile, be sociable or even nice.
For these no merry note will ever chime—
For misanthropes I do not try to rhyme;
But if one joke or one poor faulty line (
Will make one man to cheerfulness incline;
One verse or sketch perform the slightest good,
Or forge the smallest link of brotherhood;
Bring one good thought to someone's mind again;
This little booklet will not live in vain.
WM. C. HAHDING.
H.M.A.T. Main. -it s t' , f 0
August, 1919. Coy by,
---
f\-V^


D«NN*UTMC OocnT &
/ iM


" DINNA LET ME BOON. - '
The good ship Main from Devonport,
Nosed out towards the sea;
But no one gave a passing thought,
How much her speed would be.
Some thought they heard the engines croon:
' The boys they winna let me doon."
The lazy gulls flapped by our beam,
Or slept within our shades;
The dolphins rubbed their teeth to gleam,
On our propeller blad'es.
The jelly fish all afternoon
Ate grass all from our plates hung doon
We floated from the northern clime
Across the tropic zone;
While many a half-fledged bird had time
To have new feathers grown.
The knowing stars winked at the moon;
The Major couldna be took doon.
One morn the gulls and fish awoke
To' rub their sleepy eyes j
And wonder how that patch of smoke,
Darkened' the southern skies.
The rising sun flashed back the tune:
The Major's in the engine room.
Speed dolphin, porpoise, shark and gull;
The Main is far ahead.
Race for that distant fleeting hull,
That funnel flaming red.
You cannot get up pace too soon,
The Major's in the engine room.


By tearing fin and lashing tail,
The fish bored through the sea.
Those feathered comets cleft the gale
With mad velocity.
The rushing maelstrom's fierce typhoon,
Screeched back: " They winna let me doon."
Day after day that awful race
Bird, fish and ship maintain.
No bird nor fish could make the pace
To catch up with the Main.
As well they try to catch last June,
As hope to run our transport doon.
Before the mad ship's homeward line,
The ocean split in two;
The stars like streaks of light did siting
As spider webs with dew.
The Captain and his crew did swoop
The Major pulled the dampers doon.
Exhausted seagulls on the tide,
Gasped with their dying breath.
The sweating porpoise sunk and died,
In agonies of death.
And, sinking like a silver spoon,
Doon, doon. they sank, and deeper dope:
The Main tore on her daily run;
Twice round the earth we turned;
And twice a day we passed the sun,
Till all our coal was burned.
The Major in the first saloon,
Pulled oft" his specs and sat him doon.
This is a dream my tired mind
Drew on my vacant brain;
And I am puzzling hard to find
Its meaning on the Main.
Perhaps I've sketched a poor cartoon ;
But as I dreamt I wrote it doon.


REPATRIATION.
" Go on to the Land ,Young Man."
O give me a grant of land at home, where the dingo lays
her eggs,
Where goannas climb the prickly pears when combing their
hairy legs.
The emu sings in the blue gum top as she suckles herhungry
young.
The carpet snake in his downy nest licks his fur with his
forked tongue.
The mosquito picks his canine teeth with bones of his night's
repast,
And ducks his head as the fluffy wings of a black snake
brushes past.
The native bear wags his spiny tail in depths of the blue
lagoon;
The flying fox on her reedy nest hides low from the burning
moon.
When the bull dog ant at the close of day hears the sing
tailed 'possum sing;
He canters down to the billabong to temper his well-worn
sting.
And high o'erhead in the sun's last rays with their weird and
lonely cry,
To distant roosts in the stringy barks death adders are
sailing by.
When the sand' r worm jumps the stock-yard fence as she snaps
her blood-stained jaws,
And the whip-snake cleans his bristling spines with one of
his hairy paws;
On moonlight nights in the tea-tree tops, when the air is.
calm and still,
The wallaby chants his mellow notes or whistles them through
his bill.


To her'hollow limb of spotted gum the native catfish springs,
In the topmost branches in the wind the platypus dries her
wings,
In the sheoak scrub the curlew climbs, his claws in the scaly
To watch for alligator tracks as they hop by after dark.
Get on to the land at once, young man, as soon as you. draw
your pay,
Get into the bush, where the wild birds sing and the beasts
keep holiday;
Get far from the politician's tongue, and far from the
Bolsheviks;
Their company's worse than grubs or flies, far worse than
the cattle ticks.
On to the land, where Nature smiles, and 1 your life is pufle
and clean,
Where swamp oaks sigh as the fresh air moves on the waving
grasses green;
Where your feathered mates will sing to you as when all the
world was young,
And the beasts and trees will speak to you when you learn
Old Nature's tongue.
William Wattlebark.
He came from the Queensland mountain scrub, you see, from
the coast far back,
The old slab hut beside the creek by the cedar-getters' track,
Where the scrub hens tell the stilly night to waken the early
mom,
When the flapping foxes homeward fly from the eastern
streaks of dawn.


Where the poddie calves for breakfast wait their heads thro'
the calf-pen rails;
They're watching the cows let down their milk, and dbze in
the open bails.
The white clover patch around the yard fills many a sweetened
comb,
And the mountain slopes of waving corn are part of Bill's
scrub-land home.
Bill learnt to walk on the mountain sides as a boy amongst
the blacks,
And his sinews grew among the pines when swinging his six-
pound axe.


He could split and square keep pit saws true, or climb for the
honey bees,
Strip a sheet of bark, or make a spear from the shafts of the
tall grass trees.
He could tell each tree from chip or bark, by the flowers or
the fruit,
And never a beast that hops or
runs that he could not trap
or shoot.
Such a lad was Bill some years
ago, when he rode down to
the store.
The Recruiting Sergeant spoke
went to war.
to him; he signed on and
From England on to the muddy trench, he took all that came
by chance.
As time went by from a Sergeant's rank he put up two stars
in France.
When all the Peace terms had been signed Bill started for
home again;
He married an English factory girl, and' they came aboard
the Main.
Now Bill was rough, as the Diggers knew, at a meal or in a
In the first saloon his manners grew, he became a polished
chap.
He talked of the men he would employ, he spoke of his
father's run,
Of the fats they sold', the stores they bought, the wool they
sold by the ton.
The girl he married now longed to reach the land where the
wattle blooms,
With the motor cars and racing stud, Bill's jockeys and all
his grooms.
Bill's cultured voice was now stiff and strained, not the same
he used to speak;
He spoke in the bottom of his neck with the slightest nasal
squeak.


Mr - - \(-
,'iVl/ ',
0> r r W/^ !
And his wife had learned to make up smart, she could smoke
her cigarette,
Or swear and flirt in that idle style like the smartest English
set;
And thus they came from the good ship Main from Brisbane
to Heathwoods Pub,
Where Dad had brought the old horse and dray to take them
home to the scrub.
Bill came from the train, shook hands with Dad, and he intro-
duced his " Dear,''
Asked of the "Mater" and
half a sneer—
You've brought your wife in
right handy now
The logs and stumps are all
how to plough.
all at home, Dad replied with
the right time Bill, she will be
burned off—l hope she knows


48 QUOTA.
We came from Jeumont at the Toot
To catch the early boat —a;
By train and steamer and by boot,
They hurried up our Quota.
Our number and our name and rank
Upon a card they wrote —a;
While every one his stars did thank,
That forty-eight's his Quota.
The first of June we sail away,
The transport all afloat —a;
" Don't overstay your leave,'' they say,
" Or you will miss the Quota."
The first of June has gone—July
Finds us without a boat —a;
But still we swallow every lie
They put up re our Quota.
The pth, the ioth, the i6th now,
To think we don't endeavour,
Let Quotas come and Quotas go
But we stop here for ever.
We're glad before we cameUrom France
They took the Workshop's phot—a;
Our next of kin now have a chance
To memorise our Quota.
The remnant's sailed aboard the Main,
And when the engines broke—a,
They settled down to wait again,
Home seemed far more remote —a.
Long 3*ears have passed since History
With many a man of note —a.
Were puzzled with that mystery
To find that long lost Quota.


] f
W f
3 D
ft ./- 1 CfjpTfitii fit&'Gds I
CODFORD.
I'm on a Codford Quota, there's hundreds here like me
That dope in ones or batches in abject misery;
I've tried 1 to find the mad house, where lunatics are nursed
The Quotas all are coming, I want to get in first.
Why we are going ratty—l feel I really must
Explain it at the outset—l think it only just.
At times I'm almost normal, 'tis better now
To put it down in writing before my long relapse.


I've done with spinning pennies, with anchor and the crown,
They're like the blanky Quota, I feel they did me brown,
I don't walk out with Tabbies the same I did in France,
Perhaps I'm growing moral—perhaps I get no chance.
I've argued with my cobbers from Bibles to the war.
Heard funny yarns, some new ones, and some I heard before;
From Darwin's evolution we've argued everywhere,
And why were Aussies moral and why the diggers swear.
How officers would like it when back in civvy clothes,
Can they knock out a living, and what else goodness knows.
The notice board I've read it, I know it all by heart,
Which quota has its boat roll, ..and when the next will start.
I've filled a book with figures on ships that come and go,
To find out when we're going, but I shall never know.
I gather all the Furphies that fly about the camp,
I know the Cook-house gossip and others of that stamp.
I tried to form a theory how long in camp we stay,
The mental strain is awful, my brain has given way.
Now seated on my mattress, I talk in gibbering tones,
While from the hut around me come sympathetic moans.
My mate is putting Ki-wi upon his pants behind.
Another's tearing paper to occupy his mind.
I think the rest are dilly j I neither know nor care,
I hear them say I'm going—I have forgotten where.
Last night past midnight's hour, I thought I heard the quack,
Proposing vivisection on poor Hellfire Jack.
And it was in a stoke hole it seemed I knew the place,
The concert party singing, and many a well-known face.
The Remnants fervid singing, the doctor's bloody knife,
Revived me as I muttered Now this is more like life."
I watched the voltage rising, I heard the 4-foot saw,
When Cookie from the doorway was wanting voltage more.
Old Bertha steamed and rattled, the air was stifling hot,
I looked around and noted' the Jeumont Workshop lot.
I watched the voltage rising up, up and ever higher,
Nick and his imps in dozens were stoking up the fire.
Yet, on those impish faces I recognised too well,
■The Army Corps from Jeumont were meeting me in Hell.
I said "'Tis nice in Sheol," I felt it did me good
'To be away from Colford—the diggers understood.


J 5
lid wa.
id sometime \
the crown and a.
. —dll oav day comes ag t .
"
I've stood about the ringside and watched the'pennies spin,
My last pay lost in no time, and sometimes scored a win.
Now two up's stale and rotten, the crown and anchor's gain,
Has faded from mv memory—till payday comes again.
And all the air was sparking, I felt my fingers
When Winter's wooden pincers put on the Froggie's switch.
Ten thousand Volts of Lightning were tearing through our
The white-hot flames of Hades shrieked thro' old Bertha's
She moves! We're off and going—" O Lord with me abide,"
I, pulled Old Bertha's drain-cocks wide open either side,
For Hell had started moving with sparks and hissing steam,
The world shone round about us in phosphorescent gleam.
Down thro' the Codford river in places not too wide,
Our white-hot bulwarks fusing the banks on either side.
Across the English Channel we left behind the sea,
In angry clouds of vapour waves hissed as we went free.
We fused our way through pastures, and past familiar scenes,
We shimmered past the Tabbies we saw at Erquelines,
Past many a raging Froggie, demobilised to find
The Workshops Corps had left them some souvenirs behind.
Thro' many a thick-set forest, thro' plain and mountain top,
Our track we melted onward, we travelled without stop.
And right above our bowsprit, in heat and glare and roar
Two Bolgers white hot, melting, were gulleting a saw.
Amidships Welsh is steering with goggles on his eyes,
He's thinking of the pictures the landscape here supplies
Deep down below in class-rooms instructors by the score
Were photographed by flash-light-—perhaps did something
Oh! Life was well worth living, and every day was gay,
The Codford camp behind us, where young men's hair turn
We felt so young and happy to Aussie drawing nigh,
Our mind's were keen as mustard, we'd soon be home and
Home! No more dopy Codford, far worse than any war—
I listened—bugles sounding " Come to the Cookhouse door."
I thought I smelt the salmon that left his hungry sea,


1
\ ■ ,, f V J
w($ & > '<■"
* " f- S?-. K t v. !.»/
j \ J>»- w ! U. '<S~ ■
M&dfc— M_
/- { ' < i ?// \
fixate} Vri
1' —SSSfr ''i j \ sT l> £\^
/f' fhidTnt Pi*RHitdHurt
Wqs P7w<td Wishes H£ nfos 3"0^i£
To camouflage potatoes for breakfast with the tea.
Some called it tea, some coffee—What's in a name they said;
And ate their Codford breakfast—survived, and some are
Their over-loaded stomachs with salmon and with stew,
Dried beans and rhubarb pudding had far too much to do.
Again the bugle sounding, and waking did I curse,
I dream't—l'm still in Codford, and writing raving verse.
12/7/19-


i
I
.
i fcfirfliUCi
r, \ if*'« s /
I'iiaJ
i wj 1
M I
Wffifo-i r--"\
ffj •
/\ f^j 1
WI
W #"
BTT.T, WRITES HOME TO HIS BROTHER JACK IN
AUSSIE.
Dear 'brother Jack, I've got to write how this here voyage
begun,
Of all the rummy goes I've seen, this Main she takes the bun.
You mind I wrote five months ago, we're coming home in
May;
Now when I get to Stringy Bark, I'm hanged if I can say.
A month ago we started out, she seems to limp to me,
But jogged along in decent style till we got out to sea.
Now, Jack I don't know what she saw —a light-house or a
rock;
She played up like a two-year-old, not like a worn-out crock.
She shied, she swerved, she reared on end, and 1 then began
to ring;


I think she smelt our dying spuds, or heard the Padre sing.
The skipper tried to twist her tail, and hold her by the head.
The engineers got down below—l'm thinking what they said.
You mind the time in Half-way Creek we had the cattle ring;
When in the water half a day we couldn't do a thing?
Well, that was like the Main played up for half a day or So,,
Then with her tail jammed hard one side the skipper let her
The stokers raked her innards out. she foamed along her ribs,
But when she got near Plymouth Wall she stopped like other
Nor would she budge another inch, they hung three balls on
This meant we'd pawn our German ship if anyone would buy.
But no one buys a jibbing ship no more than jibbing horse,
So with a pair of willing tugs we dragged along our course.
Now what they did at Devonport I never quite could learn,
The Main lay sulking at the wharf, and never did a turn
The purser said they threw the spuds that made her ring
But what's that smell still in the hold, T do not like to say.
At any rate, we moved again, kicked water out behind,
The Captain told the ship's C.O. he thought she'd changed
her mind.
And so she did first once a week, then changed it once a day;
She has not jammed her tail again, that's something I can
And so we jog along a bit, or stop to take a spell;
The lookout man upon the mast shouts twice a day " All\s
Now, Jack, of all the beasts that run or swim or fly or hop,
I thought I'd seen some funny things, but, strike me pink, this
Has shewn me things I never saw, and more, I never knew.
There's animals aboard this ship worth thousands in the Zoo,.
There's blokes in white, fine gentlemen with towels on their
They stand behind the Heads at meals to see they get enough.
They bring them funny little scraps of stuff upon a plate,,
And watch like hungry dogs behind at everything they ate..


The toffs have better grub than us, their jellies and their
sauces,
And long new tangled names in French —oh ! half a dozen
courses.
Now, if my mouth is full of bread I take a drink of te,a
To wash around my hollow teeth to let it slip down free.
These blokes they nibble at their grub, or take a sip of tea;.
They're like a beetle eating wood, they're not like you and me.
Some blokes get through the menu card' —this is a printed,
sheet
The gents in white keep in their hands to tell how much thejy
eat.
The toff who eats first through the bill sits back and folds,
his hands.
I 'spose he wins; the gent in white goes off. he understands!
Now Jack, when I have done my meals I most times blow my
nose,
And rub my hand across my mouth, gets up, and off I goes.
These chaps all seem to want to go when they have done their
feed,
But this is where they're not like us —it shows a better breed.
They sit about and wait until the Colonel leaves his chair,
Then rise like curlews from the grass, and sneak away from
there.
I left this part, the first saloon more animals to find
Went to a place they call the poop—that is the part behind.
I've seen the turkeys making love around their leafy mound,
I've watched the love-sick carpet snakes in loving coils around,
I've seen the 'possum squeeze his mate, and whisper in her
ear.
The sighing catfish making eyes beneath the waters clear*
I've seen the Wonga pigeon call and find his' lady mate.
And most the things that's in the bush when in this funny
state.
But here I've seen such funny things by day and half the
night;
I'll tell you when I'm back at home; there's things one canjnof
write.
There's other things that's not so bad when dull one wants a
change.


Tho' if you saw them on this ship you'd think them rather
strange.
There's blokes that stand upon their toes, and stretch their
crooked neck,
And throw their arms and legs about all over half the d;eck.'
You've seen a goanna round a tree, he's lying very low,
Screwing his neck the other side to watch the dog below.
You've seen the hen behind the barn, you thought her neck
would break;
She twists and turns and stretches out, she thinks she sees a
snake.
If you could see these blokes at jerks—l have not told you
half,
You'd wonder what they're looking for, I hardly think you'd
laugh.
There's games on deck the women play, I don't know that I
should
Write much about this yam-stick game with little bits of wood.
There's circles on the deck in chalk, they go from ring to
rings,
Round coils of rope and under boards and lots of other things.
They poke that wood, and stoop and bend, and giggle round
the shop;
If you could only see them. Jack —but I had better stop.
There's chaps with voices like a bull and something like a
crow:
They roar and squawk from morn till night, and everyone
does know
Their different names all off by heart, "John Dillon:," " Sandy
Macks,"
And one like " Deena-in-the-gutz "—worse name than any
blacks.
A bloke called " Sidey " says a lot, another "Come-in-spinner, :
He comes in sometimes for a thud, and sometimes comes a
winner.
There's plenty more aboard this ship, I have too much to do
To write, about the blessed lot, so picked out just a few.
There are some more I can't leave out, they live down by the
Clink ;


They print and sketch on sheets of wax, and sometimes try to
They run a paper on this ship, 'tis sad to see a bloke
Who really is convinced that he can crack a half-grown joke,
But they're a harmless lot of 'coots, they keep well out of
So long they do not bite the crew, in time they may come right.
Well Jack, the old ship pushes on, I think she stops at dark;
If all goes well some time next year I'll be in Stringy Bark.
You know the scientific chap collecting bugs and things,
He put in; bottles full of grog, screw top and rubber rings.
If he should come to Stringy Bark—he said he'd come again—
Tell him for brand-new specimens to come aboard the Main.
So long, old chap, I'll bottle this and throw it in the sea,
And you shall get this letter home a month ahead of me.
BERTHA.
A Memory of Jeumont
I never will forget her the first time that I met her
In Jeumont workshops where the Aussies run the show;
We called her German Bertha, whoever did unearth ber,
Ask Hell-Fire Jack or Welsh, for I don't want to know.
We looked well round outside her, and thought before we
tried her
We'd have a look inside to see if she was hosed;
But she was full of water, and tho' we felt we oughter
Inspect her thro' the manhole, but we found it closed.
So after close inspections of joints and her connections
Bob crept in underneath to see her firebox.
T plainly heard him speaking, a blister here is leaking,
While 1 felt round her big ends and the different cock
T really ought to mention, it was my first intention,
That Bertha is our Hun steam traction engine here;
Twin drive and super heater, we wondered how to treat her,
No governors to work and pressure-atmospheres.


We started Bertha turning wet wood and slack were burning,
Whilst winter's drifting snows were stacking round my
She rattled and she spluttered, 220 volts we muttered,
As Cook and Winter watched the voltage and amperes.
For many days we ran her, and from each driver's manner
Old Bertha knew each driver from the shift before;
So when her valves were spoiling from want of proper oiling
Old Bertha stopped, and grunted that she'd do 110 more.
Then Welshie did some swearing to stop for much repairing
A week saw Bertha moving round her oily way;
She pulled around her belting until her plug was melting,
Iler crown was getting red and thirsty, so they say.
A new plug soon was fitted (with all the swears omitted) ;
Again that week she ran with most outrageous thirst.
We stop without regretting, the fire was black from wetting
The patch upon her leaking blister now had burst.
Again was Bertha idling till Cameron from the siding
Connected with the Locos boilers for our steam;
When fourteen kilos pressure gave us no sport or pleasure.
But made our life one long and horrid nightmare's dream.
Tho' dry and cold, her boiler cold oil pumped from her oiler
With half a link she runs the voltage to the top,
To go as devils sent her, by this new power lent her,
Ahead or back like hell, but never, never stop.
Xo matter how you nurse her past centre you reverse her.
She never stops a moment for a swing or spell,
But disregarding centre she goes as if you meant her
To tear 10,000 voltage backwards out of hell.
Her valves may be misleading, it may be German breeding,
She may be feeling nervous for the way we curse;
And now she has no throttle, I seek the brandy bottle,
And close this ryhme before I'm writing something worse


STIWESIKTHE STORES iw lire j


IN MEM OKI AM,
FALLEN LEAVES,
[ saw them in the Springtime, when life was young and gay,
The woodlands decked with flowers,,and sweet the scent of
The meadows bathed in dewdrops, the early dews of life;
1 saw their unstained bayonets, the dawn of bitter strife.
1 saw them in the summer, the days Had:grown so long,
Life vigorous and growing I heardiTjjeiijfbattle song ;
The landscape's stormy surface rolled waves of angry grey.
■ To beat against the trenches the coming qi.A. The Day."
1 saw the leaves of Autumn, in purple,.,brown drjd red,
So many leaves were falling, and falling 'sopn yvcre dead ;
The chilly blasts of Autumn blew cojd .wijth callous-vbreath,
. Green leaves of early Springtime A-cre shrivelling in death.
1 saw cold Winter's harvest Death laid so many low,
Soft leaves of early Springtimeystaincd red the covering
And older leaves had withered before that Winter's blast—-
Died struggling with the Tempest, the Day. had come and
passed.
I saw again the Springtime, when verdure decked the trees,
Green meadows, happy sunshine, the drowsy hum of bees;
The leaves that fell in Winter, deep covered tho' they lie,
Keep green within our memory, their lives can never die
Let every Springtime coming, and every Summer sun
Remind us of their falling and what their falling won.
The fallen leaves of Autumn, by winter's snows o'erspread,
Will bloom in Memory's Springtime, immortal, never dead.


■
-
*
'
.
■
.


,
\
t
i
*
k
\
.
. :•
.
I *■ i if
