

A ,
Np
Asai
8 1&
A Song of Australia
and Other Verses
Fred C. Riggers
Copyright.


A Song of Australia
And Other Verses
Fred C. Biggers
Copyright.




contents.
"A Song of Australia” 5
“T.he Light Horseman” 6
"The Soldier’s Lament” .. 7
“Isobel” 8
“Elegy on the Death of a Friend” 9
“Scenes Revisited” 10
“The North Wind” 10
“Illawarra” 11
‘‘City Loneliness” ' 12
“The Spirit of Nature” 12
“The Singers" IS
“Life ia Good When Love Is Sweet” 13
“Love’s Last Tribute” 13
“Little Irene” 13
“The Spirit of the Wind” 14
“Lovers’ Lament” 14
“The Inmost Truth” 15
“Orange Blossoms’’ 15
“The Laughter Girl" 15
•'The Shadow Before the Light” 16
“XJlc Rile Hopr T T f r * ♦ Tf. t • t t t • t • !T t • it t • !! * * t * n




A Song of Australia.
O sweet ’tis to sing of the land of my birth!
Pair land of bird 1 -songsters 1 with radiant plumes;
Of lissoirn young girls ever smiling with mirth:
The land where the wattle and the flannoi-flowor blooms.
CRi'/nson--ripped
On high coastal ranges, tree-studded and stern;
Or out oa the plains that roll westward away:
In tangle of frondage of wild flower or fern:
The beauty of Nature is spread in array.
The land where the horses are truest of breed.
And where the young toot-bloods, adventuresome, ride;
They fear not the dash of a daredevil speed,
Por they are as brave as our country is wide.
O give me a horsei and I’ll not ask for right,
To ride on the ranges or ride on the plain;
The blood in my veins would respond with delight.
And throb to the gallop, when giving him rein.
’Tis .here live the jackass l , the wombat and ’roo:
The land where bird-echoes through ranges resound:
And, mingling with axe-strokes of settlers that hew:
Make music for women l —strong, cheerful and browned.
Australia—the name that Australians all love!
The name stands for Liberty, Justice and Peace:
Fair land of bright days, and of blue skies above:
The land that Is well and true-named, Golden Fleece.


fhe LighthorsenUili.
Galloping mad with delight,
Urged by the zest in, the ride,
On with a whoop, sped the thundering troop.
Dashing With military pride
Under the glare of the sun.
Glittered each stirrup and lance;
Eager, each steed, with a fresh buret of speed.
Strained every nerve to advance.
God! but the phantom of death
Rode in the van of the race:
On! On they sped, with the ghost at their head;
Flustered by eagle-speed pace.
Wilson was well to the fore,
Riding like something from hell;
And as they swayed, from the swift Cavalcade,
Up rose a deep-throated yell.
Right in the track of the horde,
Toddled a curly-haired child 1 ;
Knowing no fear, as the horsemen drew near
Sweetly she looked up and smiled 1
Quicker than hawk at the swoop,
Wilson, like something possessed;
Leapt to the ground with a dare-devil bound,
Shielding the child' with his breast.
Over them galloped the troop,
Yelling a loud warning cry:
Strained they each nerve in attempting to swerve
But it was useless to try.
Round the inanimate form.
Learned they the trutl), in alarm:
Wilson was dead; but the child’s curly head.
Peeped from beneath his young arm.
Night after night ’neath the stare.
Riderless; silent and white;
Gallops a steed with a lightning-like speed
Plunging along through the night


The Soldiers Lament.
My soul is seared by fate’s remorseless flrei,
My greatest hopes are shattered —in the mire
Of hopelessness; I drift, while every day
Brings black despair to crush out sweet desire.
A derelict, I float towards the shore
Prom which life’s drifting wrecks return no more:
I who returned' in pomp from bursting hell:
The carnage of the red-fanged dogs of war.
O I have heard the roar of mighty guns.
That whirled to death the nation’s stalwart sona
I’ve buried comrades, whose (lead, staring eyes
No longer saw the onslaught of the Hums.
O tell me! tell me you who flung the patriot darts!
What good has come of war’s Inhuman arts?
The world yet seeks the still elusive goal:
The Promised Peace—we’d Visioned in our hearts.
When ever I backward glance upon those years.
The myriad sounds of war assail my ears:
The beat of drumsi —the tumult of the crowd: “
The deep loud roar of twice ten thousand cheers.
The glamour now is gone—the cheers are dead;
And so-called Peace around the earth is spread.
Ah! little peace knows he who nightly lays
His war-wracked frame on poverty’s poor bed.
Spectre of Want now haunts me night and day,
And why O God, must I for peace now pay
With torn and shattered limbs and half-starved frame
And every pang of grief to dog my way?
O once my heart aspired to love’s sweet bliss!
A home and little ones! but no fond kiss
Will ever bind a woman's heart to me
For I am on the brink of Death’s abyss.
When I am dead, and all my trials cease,
Remember ’tis to me a Sweet release;
And, should you wander near my quiet grave,
Break not the silence—let me rest in Peace.


Isabel.
The silence of the dusk is over all,
A deep and melancholy red:
The sunset glows; while great dark shadows
Where rest the long departed dead.
Within God’s Acre in the gloom, I see
In silhouette, a weather-worn old stone:
It stands beneath a spreading cedar tree,
Erect, neglected and alone.
It marks the spot where rests a little maid.
Who knew each mountain path and tree:
And blithely sang throughout each forest glade,
In Innocent simplicity.
Her hair hung far below her shapely waist
In thick rich coils, soft, fine and fair.
Upon her face a virgin look was traced.
For she of love was unaware.
As springs concealed the bud of forest flower.
High in the rocky cleft —secure,
’Till roving man, in thoughtless idle hour,
Crushes it, ere it blooms mature.
So grew the mountain maiden, Isabel;
Till one with cold Inhuman heart,
Won her and left her when she, trusting, fell
To vlllianous designing art.
Girl-like, afraid, she secret kept the name
Of him who could her heart ensnare:
A broken-hearted maiden she became.
And l fell to depths of black despair.
One day the village people missed her —there
Beneath a cliff, her face o’erspread
With half her flowing lustrous hair,
They found her —battered, torn, and dead.
’Tis there she lies beneath the cedar tree,
No more she roves the mountain Wood;
No more her voice’s trilling melody,
Will cheer the village neighbourhood.


Elegy on the Death of a Friend
SERGEANT FRANK MADDEN, KILLED 4N ACTION
One August evening I remember well,
How, climbing on a coastal country hill,
The moonbeams, with a calm enchanting spell
Had steeped the hills —while distant, came the bell
On some loiie beast that browsed on grasses green at will.
Sauntering soon I saw some posts and rails.
The remnants of a rustic roadside fence.
There in the night I stood, where calm prevails
Save when the mournful curlew softly wails
Mixing his note with mopokes moping note intense.
Balgownje’s twinkling lights were far below.
Shimimering lay the moonlit, sullen sea:
'The dull, deep boom of breakers beating slow,
Came faintly falling—making music low.
That brought a mood of sad reflection unto me.
The same white tree-fringed road that I reviewed.
Had echoed oft with Francis Madden’s trend:
But ah! upon the sylvan solitude 1 .
The sound of his firm step will not intrude,
For each wind whispered—He is dead. .Ah he is dead.
In childhood, on Balgownie’s beauteous hills,
In search of reckless sport he often played:
Or listened to, the mountain magpie’s trills,
While watching water winding in the rills:
A care-free country youth—of danger unafraid.
He often stood upon Balgownie’s height,
Listening to the soft, low rustling leaves perchance:
Or watched the full moon burst upon the night,
The same resplendent moon whose radiant light,
Eioods blessedly upon his soldier grave in Fiance.
O my beloved, happy, native land!
Let every little wayward wind that blows:
Bring fragrant thoughts of that heroic band,
That suffered pain and death that we might standi
As free as when upon us Freedom’s star arose.
Forget them not —their sacrifice —our dead.
Whose hearts were fearless for the great emprise.
Though war-wolves snarled, their dauntless 1 hearts were led
To where the verdant fields were stained with red:
And ah! amongst them gallant Francis Madden lies.
He went not out in search of empty fame,
Nor for adventuresome desire to kill;
But for ideals which, once instilled, became
A great impulse to fan the leaping flame ,
Of patriot-pride that leapt from valley, plain, and hill
Where France’s grass, upreardng, lifts the spear,
A dauntless true Australian takes bis rest.
His heart could harbor not a thought of fear,
Sergeant Frank Madden —modest and sincere;
He leaves us memory of a man—his one bectuast.


Scenes Revisited,
Sweet has lured me back to these
Flair scenes' —to me so dear;
The limpid stream and clustered trees.
"VVlhich, rustled by the Autumn breeze,
Breathe welcome in my ear.
The gnarled old mangroves drooping, keep
Their watch upon the brink
Of placid waters cool and deep,
In which, in thirst, I’d kneeling, steep
My hands'—and deeply drink.
These thickets I have often viewed;
In strolling leisurely,
To court in pensive, rhyming mood,
The Muse, which, from the solitude,
Beckoned and called to me.
Again I walk the path that leads
To where the mangroves grow;
Hidden by rustling river reeds,
Or waving, wanton marsh-land weeds,
That droop when zephyrs blow.
O every green-clad forest glade,
And every rock and tree,
Revivifies the spirit-shade
Of friends who, rambling here, have made
This hallowed earth to me.
’Tls many years since first I came
Amongst these scenes to dwell:
The Georges River! Ah, the name
Rekindles memory’s flickering flame,
To things too sweet to tell.
The North Wind.
The north wind rustles the lofty pines,
As I throijgh the pinewoods lonely.
Ride to the place where my love reclines,
And waits for my coming only.
A sweet low murmur I hear to-night,
The wind in the trees above me;
It echoes the song of my heart’s delight.
And' tells me—dear love —you love me.
To-night I ride to the sweetest girl.
The fairest of Eve’s dark daughters;
Her kind are rare as the ocean pearl,
Which lies in the deep-sea waters.


lUawarra.
I’ve heard the wintry south Wind pass,
A-rustllng through the mountain gmss;
Where coach bird’s whip-like cadence rings
In numberless sweet echoings.
’Twjas in the south where hills possess
The best of rural loveliness:
So primitive! So eloquent
Of powers of the Omnipotent.
Majestic Kembla rears its peak,
Over the lake and Mullet Creek:
And, from its beetling', craggy crown.
In storm, the torrents hurtle down.
O who regrets the mountain climb
To reach the rock at Point Sublime,
To look below upon Thirroul
Fanned by the sea-blown breezes cool.
Here, in my retrospective mood',
By fancy led —I rove each wood:
And, through my sweet imaginings,
The kookaburra’s laughter rings.
I see each rugged mountain ridge,
Bach winding road and rustic bridge:
And even see the corals, shed
Their winter blooms of purest red.
Haunt of my tender, early years.
Ever to you my heart endears:
And Pate’s brdkd stream as on it flows.
May bear me back —who knows? —who knows


City Loneliness.
Alone, I watch with gaze intent,
Tbei mighty throng—on business bent:
An endless stream, the people go,
The sprightly young—the aged and slow.
The little ragged bootless boys.
Who have not known the countless joys
Of climbing on the mountain peaks.
Or plunging deep in shaded creeks.
Girls with young faces pinched with strife.
Have never known the country life;
Chattering lightly, on they trip
With powdered face andi painted lip.
The strident call of paper boys.
Mixed with tram cars’ whirring noise.
Comes to my car; as, here unknown,
I stand unnoticed, sad, and alone.
Amid the bustling, city throng.
For bushland quietude X long—
There where the moss and fern-trees grow,
And sparkling, dashing runnels flow.
I’d sooner forest solitude^
Than this, a lonely city .mood;
For, standing here is loneliness
Too deep for words to now express.
The Spirit of Nature.
Deep in the gloom of the forest’s green places,
Nature’s sweet spirit eternally dwells.
Every fair scene her rich mantle embraces;
There where the runnel swift splashingly races.
Or where the ferns grow in green woodland dells.
There where Lianas to myrtles are clinging,
Shading great boulders, by moss overgrown;
Sweetly the wild birds soft tremulous singing;
Down through the gorges goes ringing and rlnging-
Out from the cliffs that re-echo the ton®.
Ever the spirit of Nature is calling;
Rousing the primitive thoughts of mankind;
Strong is the lure that is ever enthralling,
In the soft splash of the waterfall falling
Mixed with the rustling of leaves in the wind.


The Singers.
Lon® here I stand where the tranquil clear stream
Shimmers resplendent beneath the moon’s beam:
Over the water comes floating to me,
Voices of lovers wiho sing in their glee.
Ah'! ’tis delightful to list as they sing;
Out on the night air the mellow notes ring.
Happy are they who are singing to-night!
Cupid’s their coxswain, and young loves delight
Stirs them to sing; as they gracefully float
Out on the breast of the stream in their boat.
Long may they drift on the river of life!
Free from deep sorrow and burdens of strife.
Long may their hearts be through love intertwined!
Free from life's folly—by virtue refined.
Long may they mix such melodious song
Into their lives, as the years creep along.
Long may they live, as in union they float
Out on Life’s ocean in Love's little boat.
Life is Good When Love is Sweet.
The soft, low murmurous melodies
Of Autumn winds that etir the trees.
Now seem to whisper—Time may fleet;
But is good when Love is sweet.
'Love’s Last Tribute.
This stone, inanimate, yet eloquent
Of thoughts unuttered, breathing like a scent
Of unseen flowers in this great solitude
Is memory’s tribute—sad love’s monument.
Little Irene.
Tempestuous years of life she left untrod
But Ah! there blows no wind across this sod
But whispers- This angelic innocent
Will reach the vast eternal realms of Go<J,


Lovers * Haunt.
The Autumn eve's nocturnal shades
Around majestic pine trees fall:
The rust-red flush of sunset fades,
And soft night-silence spreads on all.
In pebbled channels flows the stream;
■Rippling melodious —soft and low;
Its waters clear reflect the gleam
Of sunset’s red, resplendent glow.
The spot is steeped in solitude.
The crescent moon is in ascent:
White lovers in ecstatic mood,
The still, enchanted spot frequent.
Perchance they, in those pine groves green,
Attune their hearts to melodies
Of Nature lone, and all unseen
In 1 passionate love’s sweet ecstasies.
’Tis “Haunt of Lovers” each green pine
Affords a rest for fluttering doves:
And is a secret, hallowed shrine,
For each whose true heart deeply loves.
The Spirit on The Wind.
1916.
From overseas the whistling eastwinds blow,
Across a hell-struck continent;
Following a horror-smitten trail of woe;
Where War, on ghoulish carnage bent.
Lays emerald crop and peaceful village low:
And where the blood of men is spilt and
Upon the wind a spirit seems to say
Who made the base inhuman law
That men should murder thus: whose band
The bloody avalanche of War?
An answer comes from mountain, plain and
When men send Mammon hurtling from


The Inmost Truth.
O riddle me the truth of thing’s
The Gods inscrutably withhold!
A host of vain imaginings,
Confusing, deep and manifold.
Flock like a brood within my mind.
O is there no alternative
But Death, to help us now to find
The inmost Truth while yet we live!
The Laughter Girl,
Chasing melancholy ills,
Hearts with happiness She fills,
With her rippling laughter trills.
Merriment unbounded lies.
In the twinkle of her eyes
’Tls but laughter in disguise.
None but God could so design,
Laughing eyes and heart divine:
Ah, how lucky!—they are mine.
Orange Blossoms.
Orange blossoms of July,
Nature’s garden beautify.
Sweetly scented, they outvie,
Buds- of other trees.
To and' fro by breees tossed,
With the morning dew-drops glossed,
Sparking in the morning frost.
Haunt of busy bees.
Who so blind but cannot see,
Beauty on the orange tree,
There are others fair to me,
Never as rich as these.


The Shadow Before the Light.
Time flies away with his swift fleeting’ wings,
Everything earthly decays:
Little we know of the scheme of all things,
Short is the length of our days.
Seek a fond lover—be true to Love’s kiss,
Kiss while fair Youth is in bloom.
Soon we are whirled to oblivion’s abyss,
Soon are wo mute In the tomb.
Let us be happy, for Lifes’ but a span;’*
Changes may come in a night:
Death in his dungeon must stealthily plan.
Leave him —his shadow but covers the light,
The Idle Hoar.
I seek some cool secluded, spot
Where hum of cities dweiletfi not:
And greet my friends, the lot of birds
Which, restless, flit: and, flitting, twit
Their rythmic tunes unset to words.
’Tls pleasant spending leisure hours
In shaded nooks and woodland bowers,
And gather pretty fragrant flowers which bloom
And breathe a scent where merriment
Of bushland birds but breaks 1 the gloom.
FINIS.


Eagle Print
Cessnock.
