

COMMONWEALTH ° F AUSTRALIA
Council for Scientific and Industrial Research
BULLETIN NO. 177
A Soil Map of Australia
J. A. Prescott, D.Sc., A.A.C.I.
MELBOURNE, 1944
Registered at the General Post Office, Melbourne, for transmission by post as a Periodical.
H. E. Daw, Government Printer, Melbourne
C.1274/44.


'


A Soil Map of Australia
INTRODUCTION.
The assessment of the natural resources of Australia
is a prerequisite of any Intelligent planning of the use
of these resources. The use of the land of Australia
depends primarily on the two factors: soil and climate
these between, them determine the native vegetation, which
is the basis of pastoral occupation or forest management
and the choice of crop, trees, or pastures which may be
grown. The period of exploitation of the best soils in
the best rainfall regions is rapidly drawing to a close,
and increasing use must be made in the future of soils which
are deficient in one or more respects,providing the rainfall
is adequate and these deficiencies can be overcome. Where
water conservation is possible and irrigation practicable,
the water must be used on appropriate soils where there is
a reasonable chance of irrigation husbandry being maintained
on a permanent basis.
Since the Division of Soils of the Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research Was founded in 1929, considerable
attention has been given therefore to the survey of soils
under irrigation or Intended for Irrigation, particularly
in the valleys of the Murray and Murrumbidgee Rivers, Else-
where attention has been mainly directed to the study of
deficient soils in regions of assured rainfall, and more
recently still to the study of good soils in both pastoral
and agricultural regions that have become subject to or
threatened by losses due to erosion by wind and water.
In addition to this' detailed work following the standard
procedures of soil survey, an effort has been made to collect
and interpret all the information available concerning the
soils of Australia, taking the broadest possible point of
view. Such information was first presented as a tentative
soil map in 1930 and again in 1931. In 19h1 a map of
tropical Australia was published revising very materially
the information previously presented.
In 1939 C., G. Stephens (19hl) compiled a new soil map
of Tasmania as a result of several years* close observation
of the soils o‘f that State.
The map now presented on a scale of 1 to 10,000,000 is
the result of a reinterpretation of data previously considered
and of many new personal observations made in the course of
traverses made for this purpose in many parts of Australia,
The interpretation owes much to the work of my colleagues
at the Waite Institute, to Dr, L. J. H. Teakle (1938) in
Western Australia and to the interpretations of Western
Queensland by Mr. S. T, Blake (1938) and Dr. F, W.
Whitehouse (19h0, 19hl). The explorations of Mr. Michael
Terry, Dr, C, T, Madigan, and the anthropological
expeditions of the University of Adelaide have provided
much new information with respect to boundaries and have
been productive of many useful soil samples from the arid
interior. Professor J. B. Cleland has made available
* Typescript received January 7, 1944.


the logs of numerous traverses noting the types of vegeta-
tion in these regions. The work of the Mackay Aerial
Survey Expeditions of 1 93°, 1933, 1935, and 1937' (Bennett
1935, Mackay 1938) has provided new information concerning
the boundaries of the sandhill country in the western deserts.
The surveys of the Division of Soils within their
special fields have made possible accurate interpretations
with respect to distribution and description of the major
soil groups.
In the compilation of the vegetation and soil maps of
Bulletin 52 (Prescott, 1931) of the Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research, much use was made of the records
of exploration and of official surveys. In compiling the
new map all the information has been replotted from the
official journals, and in the case of the interior of South
Australia the original records of land survey and classifica-
tion have been consulted.
It is not the purpose of the present bulletin to do more
than explain the 1 map. The fuller discussion of the soil
zones and their climatic, geological, and vegetational
relationships must be left for a more extended study. The
principles outlined in Bulletin 52 have, however, been found
to maintain their usefulness in interpreting the nature of
the soils, and this publication should be consulted for
these principles. The value of the study of the morphology
of the soil profile, due originally to the Russian school of
workers, has been abundantly confirmed both in the broader
exploration and in the formal and detailed soil surveys.
In Bulletin 52 emphasis was placed on the. leaching
factor in determining•the process of soil formation, Explora-
ation of tropical and desert Australia has revealed the
necessity for the consideration in addition of the '’normal’*
erosion factor —— a factor which has been emphasized notably
by E, P. Gautier in his studies of the Sahara (1928) and of
French West Africa (1935). It will be seen from the legend
of the map that eighteen soil groups oi^formation are now
The soils of major true soil groups are the
result of an equilibrium between the leaching factor of the
climate and the parent material from which the mature soil
profile is developed.
Another group may be related to the desert formations.
In these soils the leaching processes are at a minimum.
Further, owing to the sparseness of the vegetation on land
of any degree of slope, soil erosion is a characteristic
sequel to heavy rainstorms, resulting in bare rocky ranges
or tablelands. The products of weatheringwhich would in
other circumstances have remained to form soil, are
deposited as broad alluvial plains. In the tropical
monsoonal regions a similar set of circumstances is assoc-
iated witn the commencement of the summer rains after the
long period of winter drought. The soil material washed
from the ranges is deposited eventually in the broad deltas
and tidal marshes of the tropical rivers. This feature is
further accentuated by the high tidal range in the estuaries
of the rivers of the north and north-west.
The influence of parent material is to be recognised
in three soil groups, the terra rossas, the red loams, and
the rendzinas. The red loams are derived from highly
ferruginous material, frequently of basaltic origin, and are
thus buffered against the process of podsolization. Prom


___.AL SOILS iiix.. --ARENT MATERIALS IN EQUILIBRIUM WITH
-n? LE/
observations in New Zealand, rainfalls of the order of 200
Inches per annum are required to induce podsollzation in such
material. The terra rossas and rendzinas are both derived
from highly calcareous materials; the terra rossas occur
mainly on hard limestones while the rendzinas are black
soils derived from marls or soft limestones. These calcareous
parent materials also buffer the soils against podsolizatlon,
and in the zones of the podsols and red-brown earths such
soils have many of the characteristics of the black earths.
In the final construction of the map, an attempt has
been made to secure uniformity of presentation over the whole
geographical range of the continent. For some areas much
more detail is available than for others. In some cases
the detail is on too elaborate a scale for presentation other
than by a system of alternate banding. In others the detail
has been left out for the sake of uniformity. The wide
belts of calcareous sands characteristic of certain coastal
regions represent probably the most serious of such omissions.
THE MAJOR SOIL ZONES OF AUSTRAL
In all, eighteen soil formations or zones have been
recognized. In the following enumeration they are given
the same numbers as on the map, and an attempt is made at
some general classification.
A. STONY AND ROCKY AREAS RELATIVELY FREE FROM SO
1. Tablelands and ranges of the desert and tropical
regions.
B. DESERT FORMATIONS.
2, Desert sandhills,
3, Stony deserts,
h. Desert loams.
5, Desert sandplains.
C. ZONAL SOILS WITH Pi
THE LEACHING FACTOR.
IRIALS IN EQUILIBRIUM WITH
6. Brown soils of light texture.
7. Grey and brown soils of heavy texture,
8, Solonized brown soils (mallee soils),
9, Mallee sandhills.
10, Solonetz soils.
11, Red loams.
12, Red-brown earths and terra rossas
13. Rendzinas and black earths.
H4., Podsols.
18. High moor.
D, LOW LEVEL TROPICAL FORMATIONS.
16. Low country subject to periodical flooding.
17, Tidal mapshes and deltaic formations.
E. SOIL RESIDUALS.
15. Residual podsols and lateritic sandplain.


1• Tablelands and ranges.
In the tropitcal regions subject to marked seasonal
drought and in the desert regions, the erosion factor plays
a very Important part on areas with any degree of slope or
which are at such a level above the drainage system of the
country as to permit of the rapid dispersal of run-off water.
This factor has been noted for tropical West Africa by
Gautier (1933) and in tropica:. Australia by Voisey (1939).
Both in desert and tropical regions at the end of a long dry
spell with intense heat, the vegetative cover is insufficient
to prevent erosion during periods of torrential rainfall
immediately following the break of the drought.
Under these conditions, two types of couritry may be
recognized in Australia— steep sided ranges, and table-
lands associatedswlth either horizontally bedded rocks or
with cappings of 'laterite. The soil material so eroded
away is deposited as broad alluvial plairis in the desert
and semi-desert regions or in the deltas and marsh regions
of the tropical coasts. The most important of such denuded
areas include the Nullagine, Hamersley, and Ashburton country
of Western Australia, the Kimberley region of Western
Australia between the King Leopold Range and the Carr Boyd
Range with an extension towards t*he Victoria River country
of the Northern Territory, the eastern section of Arnhem
Land with an extension into Queensland as far as Cloncurzy,
and the mining country of north. Queensland including the
eastern half of Cape York Peninsula and an area south-west
of the Atherton Tableland, In the desert regions, the
Devonport, Macdonnell, Musgrave, Warburton, Barrier, and
northern Flinders Ranges are important. There are many
tablelands in the western parts of Queensland. These
tablelands and ranges have so far proved to be of little
or no pastoral or agricultural value. Here and there
amongst the ranges there occur small valleys of some
potential future value, but their extent, number and dis-
tribution are not known. The first step in the evaluation
of the potential land use of tropical Australia would be the
exploration of the areas in order to separate with some
degree of detail and accuracy the ranges and the true soils.
2, Desert sandhills.
The sandhill country of the Australian deserts occurs
in the three main localities, The so-called Great Sandy
Desert, named by Warburton, south of the Kimberley region
of Western Australia, the Victoria Desert, named by Giles,
north of the Nullarbor Plain, an,d the Arunta or Simpson
Desert in the south-east corner of the Northern Territory
and the adjacent jparts of Queensland and South Australia,
A smaller area occurs between Tennant Creek and Tanaml in
the Northern Territory. These sandhills are all vegetated
with spinlfex {Triodia) as the characteristic grass. The
Australian desert sandhill country is essentially one of
parallel sandrldges with alternating flats, and its general
features have been described by Madlgan (1936). The
distance apart, height, and direction of the ridges varies
in different parts of Australia. The trend in the western
deserts is in general east and west. In the eastern desert
area the trend is somewhat to the west of north.
3. Stony deserts.
The three important areas of stony deserts are


the Gibson Desert in Western Australia named by Giles, the
South Australian areas to the west of Lake Eyre, and the
stony deserts usually associated with the name of Sturt in
south-western Queensland, The original "Sturt’s Stony
Desert" actually lies in the area between the Dlamentina
River and the Cooper Creek in the north-east corner of South
Australia,
These stony deserts are of three main types. The
Gibson Desert consists of rolling plains of ironstone gravel
and is obviously part of the great laterite peneplain which
covers so much of the higher levels of Western Australia,
The South. Australian and Queensland occurrences are character-
ised by "gibbers", fragments of the siliceous duricrust
characteristic of many of the desert tablelands. The
relationship between the stony deserts and the tablelands is
such that South Australian surveyors and paetoralists refer
to the stony deserts as tableland country. Some of the
Queensland tablelands have lateritlc rather than siliceous
cappings. A third type of stony cover is less specialized
in character, it consists of quartz or even of broken country
rock when the denudation of the ranges has proceeded almost
to base level.
These stony deserts owe their permanence to the pro-
tective action of the stones and gravels following the
erosion of loose sand and soil by wind and water. In the
Gibson Desert the soils to a depth of 20 to 30 Inches have
been found to contain as much as 70 per cent, of ironstone
gravel associated with sandy loams. Prom the vegetation
point of view the Gibson Desert appears to be a splnifex
desert.
The soils associated with gibber country are; usually
quite heavy in texture. The vegetation may include desert
scrub dominated by mulga (Aoacta aneura) , but in South
Australia towards the Queensland border and in Queensland,
Mitchell grasses {Aetrebla spp.) become increasingly
important.
I+, Desert loams.
This is perhaps the least satisfactory of the subdivision
of the desert and semi-desert regions in so far as it includes
a wide range of formations dominated in the main by mulga
and other acacias. The soils also include the calcareous
loams associated with the shrub steppes.of saltbush ( Atriplex
spp*) and bluebush (Koohia spp.) and the saline, shallow
calcareous soils of the Nullarbor Plain, The western
formations differ from the eastern ones in the presence of
laminated cemented horizons, a feature characteristic of
much of the goldfield country of Western Australia. This
character has been described and the boundaries of the area
defined by Teakle (1936). These cemented horizons suggest
a process of accumulation rather than denudation and are
probably associated with extensive level areas receiving
the run-off from the tablelands and ranges. The cementing
material appears to be siliceous.
A practicable subdivision would probably be along the
following lines when further detailed geographical knowledge
is available.
Soils with cemented horizons.
b) Soils without cemented horizons.
c) Soils derived from calcareous parent


5, Desert sandplalns.
The most important of these areas are in the Northern
Territory in the country centred at Tanaml with a smaller
area between the country of Tennant Creek and Barkly Table-
land. Although these areas are relatively_accessible, they
have proved impossible of pastoral occupation even for
cattle owing to their general lack of fertility and the
absence of edible grasses and shrubs. The Tanami region is
undoubtedly one of soil residuals, since Ironstone gravels
are characteristic arid the soils are acid. The area is a
high level peneplain characterized by a vegetation associa-
tion which includes Triodia as the dominant grass, with
acacias, mallee, eucalypts, and hakeas.
The area of desert sandplain to the south-east of
Tennant Creek is one of the least known areas in Australia.
Outliers of it on the Barkly Tableland have been recognized
as having affinities with the podsolic residuals of Queensland,
6. Brown soils of light texture.
Two major textural subdivisions may be recognized in
soils. These are the light textured sands and the heavier
textured loams and clays. The division is sufficiently
important in determining both,the character of the native
vegetation and the behaviour of these soils towards rainfall
penetration for it to be found practicable to separate
the important group of brown soils of the semi-arid regions
into these two subdivisions. The brown soils of light
texture are characteristic of much of the country of the
De Grey River in Western Australia, in Teakle s Warralong
province. They are associated with the Pindan country to
the east of Broome and Derby in the west Kimberley region,
the light country in the vicinity of Daly Waters, and the
country between the north-west w downs* l of Queensland and the
Croydon mining areas. In southern Qxieensland and north-
western New South Wales these are the lighter textured soils
between the western slopes of the Dividing Range and the
more arid country of the interior. These light textured
brown soils have surface horizons which are usually some-
what acid in reaction (pH 5.8 - 6,8) and show little evidence
of the differentiation of subsoil honizons of heavier
texture. In the tropical regions no evidence of calcium
carbonate in the profile has been found to depths of 36 inches,
but there is evidence that the southern members of the group
in the semi-arid regions of Queensland and New South Wales
have calcareous subsoils.
The vegetation carried by these soils is generally a
low tree savannah. The soils occur in the region of pre-
dominantly summer rainfall, although this is not the factor
which divides them from the mallee soils which continue the
succession of light textured brown soils in south-western
New South Wales.
7, Grey and brown soils of heavy texture.
These soils form the most important pastoral soils in
the semi-arid regions of Australia. They are members of
Marbut's great group of Pedooals, that is they are
characterized by the presence of calcium carbonate in the
lower horizons. They are related to the Russian group
of Sierozems or grey soils in which the characteristic
presence of gypsum in the lower horizons is typical. In a


characteristic profile of these soils the surface few inches
will have a nutty or crumb structure with a cloddy subsoil.
Calcium carbonate may be present as small concretions or
flecks from the surface or subsoil horizons down. In the
deeper illuvial horizons gypsum is often present. In colour
the whole profile is usually uniformly grey or brown.
In Australia these soils occur in a great arc starting
in the Wimmera of Victoria and forming the bulk of the plain
soils of the Riverina, the western Darling Downs, the Rolling
Downs of north-western Queensland, the Darkly Tableland and
Victoria River Downs in the Northern Territory, and the
heavier alluvial soils of the Ord and Pitzroy Rivers in the
Klmberleys. They are characterized by an open grassland,
frequently treeless. In the northern areas Mitchell
(Astreblo, spp.) and Flinders {leeilema spp.) grasses are
dominant. In the south they come within the zone of
saline influence which is characteristic of the mallee
soils. The treeless plains of the Riverina and the Murray
River flats may also be saline and are associated with such
shrubby plants as cotton bush and bluebush {Kochia spp,) and
dlllon bush (Nitraria Schoheri),
These soils also extend into the more arid regions as
the so-called "channel country” of the inland rivers. These
alluvial plains are flooded only occasionally and .the
occasional flood waters behave as would an increased rainfall
in determining the character of the soils. The Roy Hill
country on the Portescue River in Western Australia, the
plain of the Sturt Creek south of the Ord River, and the
braided channels of the plains of the rivers of western
Queensland are included. Along the Darling and Murray
these plains extend as far as Lake Bonney in South Australia,
and many characteristic soils have be n described in the
soil survey reports dealing with the irrigated areas along
the River Murray,
Agriculture on these soils has only been practised
until recent years in the Tatlara district of South
Australia and the adjoining Wimmera district of Victoria,
Under irrigation in New South Wales many of these soils
have proved useful for rice growing and, on the more fertile
types, for pasture production.
8. Solonlzed brown soils.
The word solonized is derived from the Russian word
”solonetz” which is used to describe the soil in section
10. The process of solonlzation may be described as the
replacement under natural conditions of part of the
replaceable calcium in the soil by sodium through reaction
with common salt ultimately derived in most cases in
southern Australia from the cyclic salt brought in from
the Southern Ocean on the wind and in the rain. The zone
of brown soils in southern Australia is characterized by
the presence of salts in the soil approximating in composi-
tion to those of the sea and probably reaching a maximum
concentration in the soils of the Nullarbor Plain. In the
eastern wheat belt of Western Australia, such concentrations
of salt reach economic importance in reducing soil fertility
for arable husbandry. In the irrigation areas of the
Murray valley these salt concentrations are equally important.
Solonized clays are more readily dispersed than the
original clay of the soil, and in consequence the clay is
readily washed downwards through the soil with the consequent


formation of Illuvial horizons, although the rainfall may
not be particularly heavy.
The soils carry a characteristic scrub of mallee
eucalypts on the lighter textured members, and the heavier
soils in Western Australia are associated with a sclerophyll
woodland in which the salmon gum (Eucalyptus salmonophloia )
is the most characteristic dominant.
In South Australia and Victoria the topography associated
with these soils takes the form of parallel sandridges with
an east-west trend separated by flats of heavier texture.
Calcium carbonate is present in varying, amounts and may
constitute in some cases a substantial proportion of the
parent material. The topography results in* the association
of the soil types into well recognized catenas.
Many soil series, in this group have been described
in the soil survey reports of the Council for Scientific
and Industrial Research dealing with the irrigated settle-
ments along the River Murray in Victoria, New South Wales,
and Australia,• A general description of the mallee ,
soiJ's of South Australia has been given by Prescott and
Plpsr. (1932). The Western Australian group is described
by T’eakle and his associates (1939, 19U0),
9. Mallee sandhills.
Where the parent material of the mallee soils is
arenaceous and of sufficiently great extent, there occur
large masses, of sandhill country in which the characteristic
trend of .parallel ridges may be absent. Such country has
been described as "jumble” in Victoria, The characteristic
vegetation is an association of dwarf eucalypts with
Triodia (mallee with spinlfex).
In some localities in South Australia bordering this
sandhill country, agriculture has been attempted but
considerable trouble has been experienced with sand drift.
In general, however, no attempt is made to develop this
type of country for agricultural purposes. Extensive
units of this type of country occur to the north-west and
north-east of the NUllarbor Plain in what are essentially
semi-desert areas.
10, Solonetz soils.
The original solonetz soils were described from Russia,
where the characteristics were recognized by Gedrolz (1912)
as being due to the effect of the replacement of the
reactive calcium in the soil by sodium as a result of
chemical exchange in the presence of naturally occurring
salt solutions. The name is in fact derived from the
Russian word for salt. The most characteristic feature of
these soils is the development of a heavy clay subsoil
with a columnar structure underneath a grey sandy surface.
The most closely related normal soil in Russia is the
chernozem or black earth. In Australia such related soils
occur probably also in the black earth belt of Queensland,
particularly amongst those which carry a vegetation
association Including brigalow (Acacia harpophylla) , but no
field work has been done in this direction. On the
climatically wetter side of the mallee soils, however, such
solonized soils showing the characteristic subsoil structure


are very common,and an excellent example from Western
Australia has been described by Burvill and Teakle (1938),
An early Australian description of whqt is probably a
solonetz is by Mullett and Sco'tt (1923) of a soil at Goroke
in Victoria, The Mankoora sand described by Taylor (1933)
has all the chemical and field characteristics of a solonetz.
11. Red loams.
Red loams are deep soils showing little or no evidence
of differentiation into horizons in the profile. The red
loams of Australia are relatively restricted but they are
sufficiently characteristic and of sufficient economic
importance to be separated from 'the other red soils. They
are generally derived from basaltic parent materials in
which the process of weathering of the silicates has resulted
in the formation of free iron oxide and kaolinite.
The soils owe their character essentially to the
presence of these iron oxides. Some of the red loams ape
derived from ferruginous deposits, others have been .
recognized by Bryan (1939) as red-earth residuals associated
with older land surfaces. The majority derived from basalt
have a high level of fertility but have also high fixing
powers for phosphates. The most important localities are
the Atherton Tableland in north Queensland, certain
localities in Victoria, the north-west of Tasmania, the
Darling Downs in Queensland, and the Dor rigo Tableland, the
Camboyne district, and other areas in New South Wales.
Some of these soils hatfe* been described by Prescott and
Hosklng (1936), Stephens (1937) and Parbery (1939).
12, Red-brown earths and terra rossas o
Red-brown earths are with a characteristic
development of horizons with the accumulation of clay and
the presence of calcium carbonate in the illuvial horizons.
The leaching is npt sufficiently active., however, to mobilise
the iron oxide of the soil independently of the clay. The
presence of free calcium carbonate is not invariable,
particularly if the parent materials are deficient in lime.
The soils occur in the zones'of seasonal rainfall,
whether of the Mediterranean type with the rain in winter
or the tropical type with the raiii in summer. At the height
of the wet season, however, conditions are such that leaching
is effective for a limited period. It is suggested that the
relative stability of the iron oildes of these soils is due
in part to the effect of the annual drying out of- the soil
associated with the season of drought. The most important
occurrences of the soils are in the wheat belts of Western
Australia, South Australia, and New Scjuth Wales. In the
tropics the main occurrences appear to be in the neighbour-
hood of Charters Towers, Queensland, and south of Darwin
in the Northern Territory. The chemical and physical
characteristics of the red-brown earths of South Australia
have been described by Piper (1938).
The terra rossas are soils which have been recognised
in the Mediterranean region and which are characteristically
derived from hard limestone. The processes which direct the
formation from limestones of red soils and of black soils


in the same regions ar*e at present obscure. Terra rossas
have been recognized by Stephens and his associates (19tt-1)
in the south-east of South Australia,
13, Rendzinas and black earths.
Soils bearing affinities with the black earths of
Russia and North America on the one hand andwith the
Regur of India on the other are to be found in the eastern
part of Australia between Burdekin River of Queensland^ in
the north and the Liverpool Plains of New South Wales in
the south.
No detailed soil survey work has been done on any of
the black earths of Australia and only some broad scale
.reconnaissance work in the Callide Valley by the Cotton
Branch of the Queensland Department of Agriculture.
Geographically, the black earth region of Australia is
restricted to a broad ecotone with a relatively uniform
distribution of rainfall efficiency throughout the year.
Parent materials are frequently basaltic or consist of
carboniferous limestones. The presence of calcium carbonate
in the lower horizons of the soil profile is an important
characteristic of these soils.
The rendzinas are black soils derived from calcareous
marls and the name is of Polish peasant origin. In Poland
the name, which is of doubtful meaning, is given to soils
derived from calcareous or gypseous parent materials and
may be derived from a Polish word meaning ”to tremble”
indicative of the sounds heard when cultivating. The soils
are black in colour and remain well supplied with lime
even under reasonably wet conditions. 'Rendzinas may be
recognized on limestones in many parts of Australia.
114.. Podsols.
The name podsol is a Russian word of peasant origin
which has become recognized internationally as descriptive
of an important group of soils associated with hard—leaved
forests in the wetter parts of the world. Literally the
word means ”just like ashes” and refers to the ashy grey
sub-surface eluvial horizon which immediately overlies the
yellowish grey clay subsoil of the characteristic podsol.
In Australia the soils, are associated with the wetter
climates and with eucalyptus forests, heaths, and sclerophyll
scrubs. In transitional areas podsols_develop most
readily on sandy parent materials. Variants that have been
recognized Include those with red or yellow subsoils and
those with humus hardpans. In the less humid regions the
type tends to a transitional form which is usually called
a podsolic soil with a grey-brown or brown surface horizon.
In the true podsol, iron oxide is leached from the surface
horizons. The podsols are important in the eastern coastal
regions, the south-west and south-east of the continent,
and in Tasmania. The podsolized soils are represented on
the tablelands of New South Wales and in much of Victoria.
13, Residual podsols and lateritic sandplain.
It was suggested in Bulletin 52 that the many occurr
ences of laterite in Australia should be related to_a_
previous humid cycle and that the massive and plsolitic


ironstones technically known as laterite could best be
regarded as residual illuvial horizons of soils formed
during such a cycle. The sandplains of Western Australia
were also regarded as being survivals of former podsolic
soils. The concept of the "fossil" nature of these soils
as parent materials for new soils has received increasing
acceptance, and corresponding types have been recognized
notably in Queensland by Whitehouse (19*4-0) and Bryan (1939).
The pattern of soils which are being formed currently and
those which show evidence of survival from a past geological
age is very complex in Western Australia, and until detailed
field work is done over the whole south-west of that State
an exact mapping will not be possible. In parts of the
solonlzed brown soil zone there is a triple complex of brown
soils, solonefz soils, and laterltlc sandplain.
Extensive occurrences of such soils are also found in
Queensland. In the traverses inland from Townsville these
occurrences were usually noted by the author as "Inland
podsols" until the work of Whitehouse further south confirmed
their lateritic character. It' is probable that the soil of
much of the area described as desert sandplain in the
Northern Territory should be classed as a podsolic residual.
16. Low country subject to periodical floodin
It has been pointed out earlier that a necessary out-
come of erosion under tropical seasonal rainfall is a de-
position of the eroded material at the lower levels. Round
the shores of the Gulf of Carpentaria and in the western
parts of Arnhem Land large areas of low level country merging
into the deltaic formations of the tropical rivers appear to
be characteristic. It is possible that the annual flooding
results in a degree of podsollzation, but the areas are
relatively inaccessible and need further study.
17. Tidal marshes and deltaic formations.
These are essentially of the same origin as the group
of soils in the previous section but represent the heavier
textured soils subject to long periods of flood or tidal
influence. In some cases, as at the mouth of the McArthur
River near Booroloola in the Northern Territory and between
the Ord and Victoria Rivers astride the boundary between
Western Australia and the Northern Territory, the coastline
is quite indeterminate and deep fringes of mangrove swamps
line the coast. Much of the southern and eastern shore of
the Gulf of Carpentaria is of this character. Near Darwin
the deltaic sections of the Adelaide and Alligator Rivers
are somewhat better known. On the Queensland coast the
tidal marshes at St. Lawrence and the delta country of the
Burdekin are relatively well known. Part of the latter is
used for irrigation.
18, High moor.
The group of soils known as high moors are well known
in the cooler regions of the world. They occur where _ the_
evaporation and temperature are sufficiently low to maintain
the soil wet over long periods of time and to reduce the
rate of decomposition of plant remains. They are character-
ized by a peaty surface overlying clays on a shallow water-


logged soil. In Australia the high moors are represented
by the high country of the Australian Alps, the "High
Plains"*of Victoria, and the plateaux of Tasmania,
iKNOWLEDQMMTS.
The construction of the map would not have been possible
but for the interest, help, and companionship in the bush of
many people whom it is impossible to mention /individually.
In the early years of the work.the Surveyors-General of the
several States made available a great deal of information.
Those who have supplied maps, soil samples,or other informa-
tion include Mr. Michael Terry, Dr. C. T. Madigan, Mr. K. M.
Durack, and Mr. d, W, Deeper, ‘All my colleagues in the
Soils Division and particularly Mr*. C. G. Stephens and
Mr. R, L. Crocker have helped in the collection of soil
samples and the discussion of pedological and ecological
principles. In the final stages of the map, much constructive
criticism was received from Dr, L. J, H. Teakle and Mr.
G. H. Burvill of Perth, Dr, W, H, Bryan of Brisbane, and
Dr. N. H, Parbery of Sydney. To Mr. P. D. Hooper I am
indebted for the cartography and for the search through the
records of the Lands Department of South Australia.
REFERENCES.
Bennett, H.T. (1935). - Aust. Geographer. 2(8): 3.
Blake, S.T, (1938), - Prod, Roy. 300, Qld. Lj.9- i 5Z4.,
Bryan, W.H. (1939). - Proo. Boy. So o. Qld. 50; 21.
Burvill, G.H., and Teakle, L.J.H, (1938). - J. Agrio, V.Aust.
15: 97.
Gautier, E.P. (1928). - "Le Sahara", Paris.
(1935). - "L'Afrique Noire Occidentals", Paris.
Gedroiz, K.K, (1912), - Zhur Opit. Agron, 1 3 : 363,
Mackay (1938), - Mackay Aerial Reconnaissance Survey Expedition,
1930» 1933, 1935, and 1937. Map, Sydney,
Madigan, C.T. (1936). - Geogr . Bev, 26; 205.
Mullett, H.A. , and Scott, P.R, (1923). - J • Dept . Agrio, Viet.
21: 583.
Parbery, N.H, (1939). - N.S.W. Dept. Agric. Regional Soil
Series Nos, 1 and 2,
Piper, C.S. ;(1938). - Trans. Boy * So c. S. Aust. 62; 53.
Prescott, J.A. (1930). - J. Couh. Sot. Ind. Res. (Aust.)
3: 123.
,(1931). - Coun. Sci, Ind. Res. (Aust.) Bull. 52.


Prescott, J.A. and Hosklng, J.S. (1936). - Trans. Boy.
So c. S. Aust . 60; 35.
Prescott, J.A. , and Piper, G.S. (1932). -Ibid. 56: 118,
Prescott, J.A., and Skewes, H.R. (191+1). - ibid. 65: 123,
Stephens, C.G. (1937). - Coun. Scl. ind. Res. (Aust.)
Bull. 108.
(191+1). - Coun. Sci. Ind. Res. (Aust.) Bull. 139.
Stephens, C.G., Crocker, R.L,, Butler, 8.E,, and Smith, R,
(19h1). - Coun. Scl. Ind. Res. (Aust.) Bull, 11+2,
Taylor, J.K. (1933). - Coun. Scl. Ind. Res. (Aust.) 8u11.76,
Teakle, L.J.H. (1936). - J. Agrio. W . Aust . 13: I+Bo,
,(1938). - J • Boy. So o. W . Aust . 2l+: 123,
,(1939). - J • Agrio. W. Aust. li 6: 202.
Teakle, L.J.H,, Southern, B.L. , and Stokes, S.J. (191+0),
J. Agrio. W. Aust. 17; 251,
Volsey, A.H. (1939). -J • Proc. Roy. Soc. N.S.V. 72: 156.
Whitehouse, P.W. (191+0). - yniv. Qld. Papers. Dept. Geol.
2 (N.S.) No. 1.
(191+1). - Proo. Roy. Soc. Qld. 53; 1,


115° 120? ~ . 130° 135° ~ 14U C —• - J5 (f ]
I GREY A BROWN SOILS RENDZINAS &. &,
TABLELANDS & RANGES.—1 OF HEAVY TEXTURE....iroB8SB BLACK EARTHS... ■■■■■ . / jdSSllK
: SOLON I ZED BROWN SOILS g ~] _ 14 . JICviSION^
DESERT SANDHILLS (MALLEE SOILS). PODSOLS \[ * , Wf^0F»4t]
[IIIIIIIMIIIIIIHl residual poosols & I / m soils Jm
STONY DESERTS ..Millie MALLEE SANDHILLS jpilllillllll LATER IT IC SANDPLAIN.JK«B|! ) , k
LOW COUNTRY SUBJECT TO s I P | 4U
DESERT LOAMS .1 I S0L0NET2 SOILS MIllMlgffl PERIODICAL FLOODING.—L— ,.J / r < n „
7 tidal marshes si \^^fM H0BAPfr / JJ±± J rescott.
DESERT SANDPLAINS—.1 RED LOAMS - DELTAIC ‘ / 1943
BROWN SOILS 6 RED BROWN EARTHS 12 n k .___ 18 /
OF LIGHT TEXTURE I - -1 & TERRA R0SSAS...1 I HIGH MOOR Del j> eterIf Hooper j I I /,
1 110 o ~ 115° K0° 12? 13QP ~ 135° 140° 145 jjg !•>!)_____ _J
TF. E.MOOfIE.GOVERNMENT
