

1875
DonW through
the years.
1925




A Souvenir of the Golden Jubilee
of Marsh and Webster
Mackay
1875 - 1925


T N the Old Country a Jubilee affords
'I an opportunity to make interesting
JL comparisons of existing conditions
i @ with what prevailed fifty years ago,
7 and to complacently reflect upon the
J advance made by civilisation in that
L J time. After all, fifty years is but
half-a-century, and very short, when the ancient
traditions and history of the Homeland are con-
sidered. A Jubilee, however, in North Queens-
land, is a unique and vastly interesting event.
Fifty years ago the country North of the
Marsh & Webster’s Store, Mackay, 1875.
The original Store in Bowen, where Mr. Marsh first started
in business in Australia-1863.
Tropic of Capricorn was to a great extent,
unexplored, and the hunting ground of benighted
Aboriginals. Over what are now cultivated areas,
tribes of naked savages were roaming, perpetually
at war with nature for the right to exist and, not
infrequently, at war with each other for the right
to destroy. In those days life beyond the close
proximity of Settlements, was a series of conquest,
adventure and sometimes tragedy. The develop-
(w!
luMim
\t /


merit of North Queensland by the stout-hearted pioneers of half-a-century ago, is a story of romance.
It is only sixty-five years ago since John Mackay travelled up from Rockhampton, and crossing
the range in the direction of the coast, discovered what is now known as the Pioneer River, and the
site where the city of Mackay, called after him, now stands. Mackay started off with six white men
and a black boy. It was at Armidale, N.S.W., his journey began, but at Rockhampton two of his men
dropped out. One of them had only been married two years. He turned back for New South Wales,
and home, and was never heard of again. The expedition was one of great hardship. Natives dogged
their footsteps and on occasions, they were met with showers of spears. The ominous cooeys in the
bush, and the smoke signals in the distance, made it necessary for a watch to be kept night and day.
Their rations were soon exhausted, and they lived on ’possums, goannas, or whatever they could find.
All the party got fever and were weak because of starvation. The black boy fell from his horse and
was buried where he lay. So miserable was their plight, that they became indifferent to the danger of
attack by the natives, and simply took their chance. Four months after leaving Rockhampton, they
returned there, weary, weak and physical wrecks; but, at least, they had the triumph of achievement.
Within two years Mackay returned, and settled at what is now Greenmount.
To stock cattle in those days required, in a special degree, the fine British characteristics of
courage, endurance, and fortitude. The daily risk of human life, the anxiety concerning the safety of
women and children, the appalling loneliness, the increasing hardships, and the frequent discovery of
Stock speared by the blacks, were simply circumstances of existence. Nothing daunted, those brave
men and braver women, created and held their homes in the unknown places of the North.
The explorations and discoveries of John Mackay stimulated what was already a rapidly increas-
ing interest in North Queensland. The accounts of the quality of the soil and the grazing possibilities,
were quite sufficient attraction for the adventurous and the enterprising, so a steady flow of settlement
soon followed in the track blazed by this determined Scotchman.
(Si
unrw
\y


Photo, presented by the Staff to the late Mr. Marsh on the completion of his 70th year—l907.
J —s
M
Ngn,
UMITTO
V/


It was a far cry from London to the unexplored creeks, scrubs, forests, and aboriginal camps of
North Queensland, but at the time when Mackay, with axe and rifle, was penetrating the unknown,
there were three young men employed in the welhknown London firm of Leaf, Sons £•? Co., Old Change,
who had their thoughts turned to the land of Australia. The names of these three friends were Seaward,
Marsh, and Genge. They left London in December, 1862, with a letter of introduction from the Hon.
H. Jordan, Agent'General for Queensland, to Mr. Warry, a merchant of Brisbane. The voyage lasted
75 days, and was considered a quick and good passage.
The new arrivals lost no time, and bought land from Mr. Warry, at Port Denison, now known
as Bowen. They built a store, and traded as Chemists and Druggists, and General Storekeepers, with
wines and spirits. “ The three friends,” as they were commonly called, were full of enterprise and a
flourishing business soon developed. The site was the corner of Herbert and William Streets, where
the Burns, Philp building now stands.
Bowen was the port of supplies for the great pastoral properties which were opening up in the
West, consequently, it was a wise move to begin business at that place. A branch was opened at the
township of Dalrymple, on the Burdekin, and the firm purchased a schooner, which they named “ The
Three Friends.” This vessel plied regularly up the Burdekin River, taking up general supplies and
returning with wool. Another branch was opened at Ross River, Townsville, under the name of
Clifton 6? Aplin.
It was at this early stage of their career there happened a tragedy which is so often associated
with pioneering work in a country inhabited with hostile natives. Genge set out on a business expedh
tion on the Burdekin Plains, and never returned. The riderless horse arrived at an outlying store. A
search was made, and some clothes were found in the bush, but of Genge there was never a trace. It
was commonly believed that he was murdered by the blacks. Soon after this, Mr. Seaward severed his
connection with the firm, and went to Sydney, where he acquired an interest in the business of
Farmer 6? Co. This was the end of Seaward, Marsh 5f Genge. Mr. Warry, coming up from Brisbane,
ffll
iunrm


fiSr
i mrk
luMmn
\ ? J


entered into partnership with Mr. Marsh, in the Bowen business, and traded under the name of Warry
6? Marsh. It is at this stage that Mackay comes into the history, for in 1869 Warry 6? Marsh opened a
Branch in Mackay, and sent out of their staff, Mr. Webster there as Manager. Mr. Webster purchased
the Mackay business in October, 1872.
In 1874, Mr. Marsh sailed for England in the “Leichhardt,” and, early in 1875, he returned in
the “ James Paterson.” He negotiated for a business in Grafton, but as terms were not mutually arranged
he returned to North Queensland. In response to glowing reports from Mr. Webster regarding Mackay
and its prospects, the partnership of Warry 6? Marsh was dissolved, and Mr. Marsh came to Mackay,
and entered into partnership with his former employee. The firm of Marsh 5? Webster was registered
on Ist July, 1875.
To-day, one wonders what was in the minds of those two men when they chose Mackay as their
future home. Did they have a vision of the wonderful development which was to take place in the
district, and in which the business they founded was to have its share ? In the Directors’ office is a
stone axe which fulfils the homely function of a paper weight. It was unearthed by a plough a few
months ago at Mount Pelion. It is quite possible that the man who fashioned it, did so after Marsh 6sf
Webster had put up their signboard and, that while the new firm was prosecuting the daily routine
of business, our unknown dusky friend was applying his newly-made stone implement to the shaping of
his spears, the hollowing of his canoe or possibly, in a very definite manner to the skull of his enemy.
Right at the very beginning of things did the firm of Marsh & Webster become an institution
in the community. On 16th January, 1860, the Pioneer River was discovered. In 1862, John Mackay
returned to Greenmount with cattle. On Ist June, 1865, John Spiller planted the first cane on the
North side of the River. In 1866, T. H. Fitzgerald obtained plants from Spiller, and planted his cane
on what is now the site of the Wilson, Hart timber yard. At the end of 1867, Spiller erected a wooden
horse-mill, with which he crushed his cane. He boiled the juice in an ordinary copper boiler, and thus
was sugar produced for the first time in Mackay. In 1869, Warry 6? Marsh opened their branch, and
■ W"
1 unrm


JAMES CHRISTIE.
Born at Rothiemay, Banff-
shire, Scotland. Arrived at
Mackay in the “ Hannah
Landells,” in September, 1883,
and entered the service of
Marsh & Webster. He was
appointed on the first Board
of Directors in 1900. Died at
Walkerston on 22nd January,
1524, with tragic suddenness,
when returning from a busi-
ness trip in the country in
company with a co-Director.
Past Directors
WILLIAM MARSH
Founder of the Firm, and
first Chairman of the Com-
pany. Born at Crewkerne,
Somerset. In 1866 married
Miss Seaward, sister of his
former partner. Died on 28th
June, 1909, after an illness of
a week, which overtook him
while he was busy in his
office.
CHARLES WEBSTER
Founder of the Firm. Bom
at Royal Leamington, War-
wickshire. Married Miss Julie
Garcia, whose father was
captain and owner of the
“ Wave of Life,” which traded
to Mackay, and was lost with
all hands off the coast in the
vicinity of Maryborough. Mr.
Webster died on 31st March,
1895.
JAMES VIVIAN BROWN
Born at St. Austell, Corn-
wall, His early life was spent
in Maryborough, He joined
the Postal Department, and
became one of the best known
and most popular officers in
the State. He was Postmaster
at Mackay and Charters
Towers. Married Miss E. L.
Marsh, the eldest daughter of
the late Mr. Wm. Marsh. Mr.
Brown joined the firm of
Marsh & Webster in 1897, and
was appointed on the first
Board of Directors of the
Company in 1900. Died on
9th November, 1919.


EDWIN WADE SILVESTER
HORSEY
Born at Bowen. A son of the late
Mr. T. K. Horsey, who was a school-
mate in England of the late Mr. Wm.
Marsh. Began his commercial career
in the employ of the late Mr. W. H.
Paxton, in September, 1882. In 1885
he joined Messrs. Aplin, Brown & Co.
Ltd., and worked for them in Bris-
bane. Townsville, Port Darwin, and
the Seymour River. In 1894 came
as Accountant for Marsh & Webster;
was appointed Secretary of the Com-
pany at the time of its incorporation,
and a Director after the death of
Mr. Marsh.
ANDREW MITCHELL MILLAR
GALLETLY, A.F.I.A., F.A.A.
Bom at Tillicoultry, Scotland.
Worked with Messrs. J. & D. Paton,
Woollen Manufacturers, in 1894, and
with Messrs. I. & R. Morley, London,
in 1898. He joined the staff of
Marsh & Webster Ltd. on 25th
November, 1901, and was appointed
a Director after the death of Mr.
Brown.
Dr. HAROLD SEAWARD MARSH
A son of the late Mr. William
Marsh, practising at Macquarie Street,
Sydney; appointed a Director on the
death of Mr. Christie.
fw
[unnrvD
\t /
Present Directors


Early photo, of the premises. Note bullock team drawn up
in front.
in 1875, it became Marsh 6? Webster. From what
we see to-day, their judgment was apparently
sound, and their faith in this district was not
misplaced.
The first year was unpropitious, for, owing
to a heavy wet season, and unsuitable varieties
of cane, “ rust ” attacked the crop, and the sugar
industry, such as it was at that stage, got a serious
set-back. Better varieties of cane were selected for
Mackay, and the industry became established on
a surer basis. In 1879, there came a rush for sugar
lands and capital came pouring into North
Queensland. Mackay very soon became Sugar-
opolis, and the firm of Marsh & Webster found itself in Mackay to stay.
Sugar plantations were coming into existence all over the district, and the power was supplied by
horses and bullocks.
The early plantations were Alexandra and Meadowlands, where primitive machinery was used.
Mills were erected at Pleystowe, The Cedars, Glenalbyn, Nebia, River Estate, Habana, Palmyra, The
Palms, Tekowai, and Foulden. Other estates were Inverness, Miclere, Balmoral, Farleigh, Victoria,
Richmond, Nindaroo, Mount Pleasant, and Beaconsfield. In 1882 the Colonial Sugar Refining Company
built an up-to-date mill at Homebush, and in 1895 a large mill was built at Pleystowe, and another at
Marian. In that year fourteen mills were in operation, with a crushing capacity of 60,000 tons of cane.
To-day, there are seven mills in the district with a crushing capacity of over 600,000 tons.
The enterprise which had characterised the firms of Seaward, Marsh 6? Genge, and later, Warry
£s? Marsh, was abundantly evident in the firm of Marsh 6? Webster. With the development of the
"


sugar industry, the partners, Mr. Marsh and Mr. Webster, by assiduous attention to their
business of maintaining adequate supplies, laid the foundation of a business which has since grown into
one of the oldest and largest commercial houses in the northern part of the State.
As the town grew in si?e, and the sugar industry increased in magnitude, so Marsh fe? Webster
continued to progress, and the volume of business kept pace with the steady development which was,
and always has been, the characteristic of Mackay and district.
The policy of the firm was to help the man on the land, and there are many farmers to-day,
who can, and do loyally testify to this fact. Long credit had to be given, and great risks undertaken;
while the firm, to a great extent, was banker, as well as storekeeper, to its clients. It is precisely this
policy of assistance towards his clients, adopted by the country storekeeper throughout the length and
breadth of the land, that accounts, in a large measure, for the development which has already
taken place in the open spaces of this vast Continent.
In 1900, the firm was incorporated in a
limited liability company, and the first Directors
were Messrs. William Marsh (Chairman), J. V.
Brown, and James Christie, with Mr. E, W. S-
Horsey as secretary. This year therefore marks
the jubilee of the business since its inception, and
the semi-jubilee of its existence as a Company.
The law of evolution has applied throughout
the history. The waggon and bullock team that
once pulled up in front of the doors to load
supplies for the far distant stations over the range,
gave place to the team of twelve or fourteen
horses. The advent and subsequent extensions of
Victoria Street, Mackay, in 1883.
Si
MW 1
(untidJ


LONG SERVICE RECORD.
JOHN WENTFORD is 70
years of age. He has carted
goods for Marsh & Webster
for 43 years, and is still on,
his job. He has served the
House longer than anyone else
living, and is well worthy of
his photograph in this souvenir.
the railway system brought about a further change, and now to-day the
transit is done by train and motor lorry. Even the smart buggy and pair
has not been much in evidence in recent years, for customers now come
to do business in high-powered motor cars.
In 1907 when Mr. Marsh completed his seventieth year, the
employees, who numbered thirty-two, presented him with an address and
a photograph of the staff. A photograph of the staff taken for the purpose
of this souvenir, presents a group of sixty-eight persons. The original build-
ing, built in 1875, became obviously too small for the amount of business
transacted therein, and a fine two-storey brick building was begun in
July, 1914, and completed in May, 1915. In the new premises the business
rapidly expanded still further, and now, in 1925, plans are being prepared
for a very considerable enlargement. Customers’ requirements were not
so varied in 1875 as they are now. To meet the demands to-day from
House, Station, Farm and Sugar Mill, supplies are drawn from the sources
of manufacture throughout the Commonwealth, Britain, America, Europe,
and the East, It is perhaps, an appropriate climax that before the expira-
tion of this Jubilee Year, the Company opened a Wireless Department,
where Radio Sets are stocked that represent the last word in this latest
and most marvellous discovery in the realms of Science
®1
Kmirn)


CUSTOMERS SINCE 1872.
These three gentlemen were clients first with Warry 6? Marsh, and then with Charles Webster,
in 1872, and since 187? have dealt continuously with Marsh 6? Webster, and are still loyally adhering
to the old House.
Mr. JOHN SHANNON,
Saltbush Park
Mr. Shannon is 84 years of age. * .
1872 he employed Carrier Muggleton
to call at the Corner Stores for the
first loading for over the Range. Mr.
Shannon has a large family who now
have big interests in this district, and
are all valued clients of the firm.
Mr. R. D. DUNNE.
Mackay
Mr. Dunne is 83 years of age, but
mentally and physically is compara-
tively young. He has a keen under-
standing regarding the economic con-
ditions affecting sugar, and is a
vigorous apostle of a White Australia.
As station manager and farmer, he
has retained an unbroken connection
with Marsh & Webster.
Mr. OLE MATSEN,
Mackay
Mr. Matsen is 75 years of age. He
has a wide experience of sugar-
growing, and his sons now take the
burden of the work, Like father, like
son, the family still keep up the
happy relationship with the House.
Si


After fifty years of service, the House of Marsh 5? Webster Limited, conveys through the
medium of this little Souvenir, warm and sincere greetings to the whole community of Mackay and
District, with whom it has shared the anxious times of adversity, and the glad periods of prosperity;
also to the business houses of the greater world beyond, in the Commonwealth and Overseas, with
whom it has had so many years of cordial and happy relationship.
Another view of the present premises, 1925.
J —s
1 *SP- '
JWTB
\y


The present Premises, 1925,
®1
irm* ■


With the Compliments of
Marsh & Webster Ltd.
M A C K AY
192 5
®|
UirirraJ
\f /


Besley & Pike, Ltd.,
Alfred Street* Valley.
Brisbane.
